International Series in 
Operations Research & Management Science
Tsan-Ming Choi Editor
Stochastic and Deterministic 
Models and Applications
Handbook of EOQ 
Inventory Problems

International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science
Volume 197
Series Editor
Frederick S. Hillier, Stanford University, CA, USA
Special Editorial Consultant
Camille C. Price, Stephen F. Austin State University, TX, USA
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/6161

Tsan-Ming Choi
Editor
Handbook of EOQ Inventory
Problems
Stochastic and Deterministic Models
and Applications
123

Editor
Tsan-Ming Choi
Institute of Textiles and Clothing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hung Hom, Kowloon
Hong Kong SAR
ISSN 0884-8289
ISBN 978-1-4614-7638-2
ISBN 978-1-4614-7639-9
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9
Springer New York Heidelberg Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013943716
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or
information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief
excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the
purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the
work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of
the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must
always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the
Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Preface
Inventory management is a critical factor which accounts for the success or failure
of modern businesses in all kinds of industries. By far the best known inventory
model is the classical ‘‘square root formula’’ of the economic order quantity (EOQ)
model. The widely recognized ﬁrst piece of research on the EOQ model appeared a
century ago in Harris (1913) which describes ‘‘a very simple deterministic
inventory planning model with a tradeoff between ﬁxed ordering cost and
inventory carrying cost.’’ Despite being simple, this model does capture the
essence of inventory management and lays the foundation for all kinds of exten-
sions and real-world applications (see Axsäter 1996; Huang et al. 2003; Khan et al.
2011; Pentico and Drake 2011). Nowadays, a search in the major research portals
will ﬁnd at least a thousand papers which carry the key words of ‘‘EOQ’’ in the
paper title. In fact, tens to hundreds of related papers are still being published in
major journals in operations research and management science every year. Despite
the abundance of both classical and new research results, there is an absence of a
comprehensive reference source that provides the state-of-the-art ﬁndings on both
theoretical and applied research on EOQ and its related models. As a result,
I organize this Springer’s handbook with a goal of consolidating many latest
research ﬁndings and applications of the EOQ model into an edited volume.
I believe that this handbook will be a pioneering text focusing on the EOQ
model-related inventory and supply chain management problems. It also celebrates
the EOQ model’s 100th anniversary.
The handbook contains papers which explore both the deterministic and the
stochastic EOQ model-based problems and applications. It is organized into three
parts: Part I presents the introduction and review papers. Part II includes technical
analyses on single-echelon EOQ model-based inventory problems. Part III consists
of applications of the EOQ model for multi-echelon supply chain inventory
analysis. I am very pleased to see that this handbook has generated a lot of
important insights and new research results on the EOQ model-related problems.
I would like to take this opportunity to show my hearty gratitude to Fred Hillier
and Matthew Amboy for their kind support and advice along the course of carrying
out this book project. I sincerely thank all the authors who have contributed their
interesting research to this handbook. I am indebted to the anonymous reviewers
who reviewed the manuscripts and provided me with very constructive and timely
v

review comments. I also acknowledge the editorial assistance of my Ph.D. student
Ms. Hau-Ling Chan, and the funding support of the Research Grants Council of
Hong Kong under grant number PolyU 5424/11H (General Research Fund). Last
but not least, I am grateful to my family, colleagues, and students, who have been
supporting me during the development of this important research handbook.
April 2013
Tsan-Ming Choi
References
Axsäter S. Using the deterministic EOQ formula in stochastic inventory control. Management
Science 42: 830–834, 1996.
Harris F. How many parts to make at once. The Magazine of Management 10: 135–136 152,
1913.
Huang W, Kulkarni VG, Swaminathan JM. Optimal EOQ for Announced Price Increases in
Inﬁnite Horizon. Operations Research 51: 336-339, 2003.
Khan M, Jaber MY, Guiffrida AL, Zolfaghari. A review of the extensions of a modiﬁed EOQ
model for imperfect quality items. International Journal of Production Economics 132: 1–12,
2011.
Prentico DW, Drake MJ. A survey of deterministic models for the EOQ and EPQ with partial
backordering. European Journal of Operational Research 214: 179–198, 2011.
vi
Preface

Contents
Part I
Introduction and Review
A Century of the EOQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Matthew J. Drake and Kathryn A. Marley
Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary Demand:
Extension to Forecast Horizons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Suresh Chand and Suresh Sethi
EOQ Models with Supply Disruptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Zümbül Atan and Lawrence V. Snyder
Part II
Single-Echelon Problems
Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation: Some Cases of Stock Blow
Down Dynamics Depending on its Level. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Alessandro Gambini, Giovanni Mingari Scarpello and Daniele Ritelli
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog
Cost Rate Functions in EOQ-Type Inventory Models . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
J. B. G. Frenk, Murat Kaya and Behrooz Pourghannad
Economic and Environmental Performance of the Firm:
Synergy or Trade-Off? Insights from the EOQ Model . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
Jack A. A. van der Veen and V. Venugopal
EOQ Models with Two Modes of Freight Transportation
and All-Units Quantity Discounts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
139
Abraham Mendoza and José A. Ventura
vii

Part III
Multi-Echelon Problems
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
157
Brecht Landrieux and Nico Vandaele
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price Uncertainty,
Carbon Emission Cost, and Product Return. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
179
S. Paul, M. I. M. Wahab and X. F. Cao
Coordinating a Supply Chain with an EOQ Model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
201
Jing Chen and Genevieve Mushaluk
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation . . . . . . . .
221
Burcu B. Keskin and _Ibrahim Çapar
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item
System Under Vendor-Managed Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
247
Fidel Torres, Frank Ballesteros and Marcela Villa
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
279
viii
Contents

Contributors
Zümbül Atan School of Industrial Engineering, Eindhoven University of Tech-
nology, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands, e-mail: Z.Atan@tue.nl
Frank Ballesteros Department of Industrial Engineering, Universidad de los
Andes, Bogotá, Colombia, e-mail: frank.ballesteros@polymtl.ca
X. F. Cao Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada, e-mail:
xiangfeng.cao@ryerson.ca
_Ibrahim Çapar Information Systems, Statistics and Management Science, Uni-
versity of Alabama, Box 860227, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0226, USA, e-mail:
icapar@cba.ua.edu
Suresh Chand Krannert School of Management, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA, e-mail: suresh@purdue.edu
Jing Chen Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Winnipeg, Win-
nipeg, MB R3B 2E9, Canada, e-mail: je.chen@uwinnipeg.ca
Matthew J. Drake Palumbo-Donahue School of Business, Duquesne University,
Pittsburgh, PA 15282, USA, e-mail: drake987@duq.edu
J. B. G. Frenk Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University,
Istanbul, Turkey, e-mail: frenk@sabanciuniv.edu
Alessandro Gambini Dipartimento di Scienze Statistiche,
via Belle Arti 41,
40126 Bologna, Italy, e-mail: alessandro.gambini4@unibo.it
Murat Kaya Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University,
Istanbul, Turkey, e-mail: mkaya@sabanciuniv.edu
Burcu B. Keskin Information Systems, Statistics and Management Science,
University of Alabama, Box 860227, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0226, USA, e-mail:
bkeskin@cba.ua.edu
Brecht Landrieux Research Center for Operations Management, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Naamsestraat 69, 3000 Leuven, Belgium, e-mail: brecht.
landrieux@kuleuven-kulak.be
ix

Kathryn A. Marley Palumbo-Donahue School of Business, Duquesne Univer-
sity, Pittsburgh, PA 15282, USA, e-mail: marleyk@duq.edu
Abraham Mendoza Department of Industrial Engineering, Universidad Pana-
mericana, Zapopan, Jalisco 45010, Mexico, e-mail: amendoza@up.edu.mx
Genevieve Mushaluk Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Win-
nipeg,
Winnipeg,
MB
R3B
2E9,
Canada,
e-mail:
genevieve.mushaluk@
hotmail.com
S.
Paul Ryerson
University,
Toronto,
ON
M5B
2K3,
Canada,
e-mail:
suborna.paul@ryerson.ca
Behrooz Pourghannad
Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci
University, Istanbul, Turkey, e-mail: behrooz@sabanciuniv.edu
Daniele Ritelli Dipartimento di Scienze Statistiche,
via Belle Arti 41, 40126
Bologna, Italy, e-mail: daniele.ritelli@unibo.it
Giovanni Mingari Scarpello Via Negroli 6, 20136 Milan, Italy, e-mail:
giovannimingari@yahoo.it
Suresh Sethi Naveen Jindal School of Management, The University of Texas at
Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080, USA, e-mail: sethi@utdallas.edu
Lawrence V. Snyder Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Lehigh
University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA, e-mail: larry.snyder@lehigh.edu
Fidel Torres Department of Industrial Engineering, Universidad de los Andes,
Bogotá, Colombia, e-mail: ftorres@uniandes.edu.co
Jack A. A.van der Veen Center for Marketing and Supply Chain Management,
Nyenrode Business Universiteit, P.O. Box 130, 3620 AC Breukelen, The
Netherlands, e-mail: j.vdveen@nyenrode.nl
Nico Vandaele Research Center for Operations Management, Katholieke Uni-
versiteit Leuven, Naamsestraat 69, 3000 Leuven, Belgium, e-mail: nico.vandaele
@kuleuven.be
José A. Ventura Harold and Inge Marcus Department of Industrial and Manu-
facturing Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA
16802, USA, e-mail: jav1@psu.edu
V. Venugopal Center for Marketing and Supply Chain Management, Nyenrode
Business Universiteit, P.O. Box 130, 3620 AC Breukelen, The Netherlands, e-
mail: v.venugopal@nyenrode.nl
Marcela Villa School of Industrial Engineering, Universidad Pontiﬁcia Boliva-
riana, Bucaramanga, Colombia, e-mail: marcela.villa@upb.edu.co
M. I. M. Wahab Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada, e-mail:
wahab@ryerson.ca
x
Contributors

Part I
Introduction and Review

A Century of the EOQ
Matthew J. Drake and Kathryn A. Marley
Abstract When Ford W. Harris published his short three-page article developing
the Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) model in 1913, he likely did not foresee that
it would still be discussed and used 100 years later. Harris’ EOQ model was one of
the ﬁrst applications of mathematical modeling to guide managers in making
business decisions, and it has spawned thousands of related studies over the past
century that have built on its major foundations and insights. In this chapter we
present a short history of the EOQ model by discussing the model itself, some
practical issues about implementing the model, and major extensions to the basic
model grouped by the dominant foci of each subsequent decade.
1 Introduction
Every organization must determine the number of items or units to order every
time it acquires stock from its suppliers. Perhaps it is this universal application to
every type of business that has kept the Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) model
relevant for 100 years. First published by Ford W. Harris in 1913, the EOQ model
prescribes the optimal order quantity for organizations that minimizes the total
ordering and holding cost under a relatively restrictive set of assumptions.
Even with these restrictions, it is impossible to overstate the inﬂuence that the
EOQ model has had on a century of researchers and practitioners in the ﬁelds of
operations management and operations research. This is largely because the model
is the foundation for literally thousands of later studies that relaxed a subset of its
M. J. Drake (&)  K. A. Marley
Palumbo-Donahue School of Business, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA, 15282 USA
e-mail: drake987@duq.edu
K. A. Marley
e-mail: marleyk@duq.edu
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_1,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
3

assumptions to create a modiﬁed model that better ﬁts a particular decision
environment. The remaining chapters in this book highlight cutting-edge research
in the ﬁeld by including today’s contemporary extensions of the original model.
The EOQ model is also an essential part of the history of operations research
because it represents one of the ﬁrst published applications of a mathematical
model to business decision making.
In addition, the original EOQ model in its unadjusted form remains relevant
because it is widely used in practice. Undoubtedly, some organizations apply the
model incorrectly to situations where it is not the best practical solution, but it still
works well in practice because of its simplicity and robustness (Ptak 1988), which
are discussed in detail in the next section of the chapter. The model is also taught
in a majority of academic courses that cover inventory control to even a small
degree. It proves to be an effective method to expose students and practitioners to
the major cost trade-off in inventory control—ordering costs versus holding costs.
The remainder of the chapter is organized as follows. The next section discusses
the original EOQ model itself along with its assumptions and the practical issues
with implementing the model in a business setting. The subsequent ﬁve sections
detail the development of EOQ-based research decade by decade from the 1950s to
the present. Concluding remarks are provided in the ﬁnal section of the chapter.
2 The Original EOQ Model
2.1 Model Assumptions
Harris’ original EOQ model in 1913 was established to provide a guideline for
managers to use when ordering items from their suppliers. Technically, his article
says that it determines manufacturing quantities, which is evident in the refresh-
ingly straightforward title of the paper (‘‘How Many Parts to Make at Once’’);
however, his model really only applies to batch manufacturing where all units
become available to satisfy customer demand all at once in contrast to items
produced one at a time on an assembly line. The Economic Production Quantity
(EPQ) model, which determines the optimal batch size for this one-at-a-time type
of production where the ﬁrst units in a batch can be used to fulﬁll customer orders
while the rest of the batch is still being produced, is one of the ﬁrst examples of
extensions to the original EOQ model (Taft 1918). The assumption of simulta-
neous availability of the entire order quantity is appropriate for situations where
organizations purchase items from suppliers because they usually arrive in com-
plete transportation batches, but the EPQ model is more applicable to single-unit,
assembly line production environments.
4
M. J. Drake and K. A. Marley

In addition to the simultaneous availability assumption, the original EOQ model
assumes the following conditions. The notation used in the model is also deﬁned in
the list below.
• Annual demand for the item, D, is deterministic and occurs at a constant rate
over time. This assumption is especially problematic in situations where demand
varies from month to month or from season to season throughout the year. Silver
et al. (1998) argue that if the variation of demand from period to period is
sufﬁciently low (i.e., the squared coefﬁcient of variation is less than 0.2), the
original EOQ model with constant demand can be used without a large degra-
dation in results; when the variation in demand from period to period is high,
ﬁrms should utilize a model that considers this variation such as the Wagner-
Whitin algorithm discussed in Sect. 3.
• The unit cost of the item, p, is known and ﬁxed over the length of the planning
horizon. This is a reasonable assumption in practice when ﬁrms have negotiated
a long-term, ﬁxed-price contract for the item. Extensions of the original EOQ
model exist for quantity discount situations or items subject to signiﬁcant
inﬂation. Many of these models are discussed in the subsequent sections of the
chapter.
• Lead times for receiving orders, L, are known and constant. This assumption
applies in practice when the ﬁrm has a high-quality supplier that fulﬁlls orders
consistently within the same period of time. This situation becomes less
applicable in practice when suppliers are located far away from the company
because the shipments spend more time in transit and are subject to more
uncertainty with respect to transportation conditions and customs scrutiny at
international borders.
• The ﬁrm’s ordering cost, S, is ﬁxed and independent of the size of the order
quantity.
• The ﬁrm’s annual holding cost rate, r, is ﬁxed and independent of the size of the
order quantity. Thus, the cost of holding a unit in inventory for an entire year, H,
can be computed as H = r*p.
• No capacity or ﬁnancial limitations apply for the ﬁrm or its supplier. This is
especially applicable for make-to-stock products that are available immediately
in a supplier’s distribution center as well as for cheap items for which the ﬁrm
has ample cash reserves to pay for orders.
• No stockouts are allowed; that is, the ﬁrm orders enough items to satisfy all of
the demand when it occurs. It can be shown, however, that if the cost of
backordering is sufﬁciently low, the ﬁrm can reduce its total cost by planning to
backorder some of the demand (Zipkin 2000).
2.2 Model Derivation
In light of these assumptions, the ﬁrm seeks to determine the optimal order
quantity, Q*, which minimizes its total annual relevant costs. No quantity
A Century of the EOQ
5

discounts apply to the original model; as a result, the amount that the ﬁrm must
pay the supplier for the annual supply of the item, p*D, is irrelevant to the order
quantity decision. Similarly, stockout costs are not relevant either because the ﬁrm
is assumed to satisfy all of the demand when it occurs. The two remaining com-
ponents of the total annual relevant cost are the annual ordering costs and the
annual holding costs. We can set up the following function representing the total
annual relevant cost as a function of any order quantity, Q.
TARC Q
ð Þ ¼ SD=Q þ HQ=2
The ﬁrst term above represents the annual ordering cost by multiplying the cost
per order, S, by the number of orders per year, D/Q. The second term is the annual
holding cost, which is the product of the cost of holding a unit in inventory for a
year, H, and the average Inventory level, Q/2. The holding cost is applied on the
basis of the average inventory level because the number of units in inventory is
constantly changing; some units spend a long time in inventory while others spend
only a short time.
The total annual relevant cost function above is convex (meaning that the
second derivative is positive for all values of Q); thus, the cost-minimizing value
of Q can be found by setting the ﬁrst derivative equal to zero and solving for Q*.
While Harris (1913) used this calculus-based approach to determine the optimal
quantity, subsequent researchers have used other methods to derive the same
optimal solution (e.g., Minner 2007 and Teng 2009). Each of these solution
approaches yields the following optimal order quantity, which is commonly
referred to as the EOQ.
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2DS
H
r
2.3 Model Implementation
A quick scan of the EOQ model’s foundational assumptions suggests that they are
so restrictive that this model would only apply to very few, if any, products in
practice. Additional criticism has been levied upon the EOQ over the years due to
the fact that many of its parameters are difﬁcult for companies to estimate exactly
(Woolsey 1988). Holding costs are often particularly nebulous because they
include elements such as obsolescence and pilferage that must be estimated from
historical inventory control performance statistics. Burnham and Mohanty (1988)
also criticize the EOQ model because it considers items independently and sep-
arate from their logistics and distribution operations throughout the supply chain.
They propose that ﬁrms should instead utilize a Uniform Order Quantity that
determines the best integrated order quantity for all parties in the entire supply
chain.
6
M. J. Drake and K. A. Marley

These scathing criticisms of the original EOQ model may lead some readers to
think that the model is never used; and if it is used in practice, companies are
making a signiﬁcant mistake in doing so. The criticisms are valid, but their focus is
misguided. Just because some (or all) of the EOQ model’s assumptions may be
violated in a technical sense, there are still many situations where the model’s
performance is good enough to help companies reduce their inventory costs. We
are reminded of the classic quote, ‘‘All models are wrong. Some are useful.’’ This
is certainly the case for the original EOQ model in practice.
The major reason that the original EOQ model is still used so often in practice
is the difference between the added cost that ﬁrms incur by applying the EOQ
model to situations instead of more complex models that better capture the cir-
cumstances in the particular business setting and the increased cost of imple-
menting one of the more complex models compared to the original EOQ.
Everyone agrees that the EOQ formula itself is relatively straightforward to
compute and implement. Studies (e.g., see Fulbright (1979)) have shown that the
EOQ model is relatively robust to errors in estimating the model’s cost parameters
(which was one of Woolsey’s 1988 major criticisms of the EOQ). This is due to
the fact that the total annual relevant cost function is relatively ﬂat around the
optimal quantity. Therefore, using an order quantity that differs from the EOQ by
X% yields an increase in total cost that is less than X%.
It is also important to note that every item a ﬁrm keeps in inventory is not
necessarily very important to the ﬁrm’s overall performance. Many items can be
classiﬁed as insigniﬁcant from a competitive standpoint; as a result, they do not
warrant application of more complex models even if they can generate a large cost
savings percentage. For example, consider a product that costs a ﬁrm $1.50 each,
and the ﬁrm’s customers order 50 of these products, on average, each year for
$3.00 each. If the ﬁrm had no units of this product in stock at any point in the year,
it loses out on, at most, $75 in gross proﬁt. Even if the ﬁrm managed inventory of
this item perfectly, the beneﬁts would be minimal at best. Organizations should
apply more complex models to their most important products. Simple methods
such as the EOQ are appropriate for the rest of the items, which for most com-
panies represent the vast majority of their items. In fact, even calculating the EOQ
is probably more work than some of these products warrant!
Practitioners should be cautioned if they believe that the EOQ formula derived
above provides the one single order quantity that they must use when they place
their orders. The EOQ formula instead provides a guideline for a reasonable order
quantity that balances the ordering and holding costs for the item. Wilson (1977)
discusses many instances including batch size capacity restrictions, obsolescence
risk, and production scheduling coordination where the EOQ model provides a
good starting value but requires modiﬁcation to be appropriate for practice in light
of the pertinent real-world constraints. Cannon and Crandall (2004) note that many
of the more sophisticated methods that outperform the EOQ in practice were
developed with the same goal that is at the foundation of the EOQ—balancing the
ordering and the holding costs. They echo Wilson’s opinion that the EOQ provides
a good ﬁrst-pass solution to this inventory cost trade-off. Even Harris (1913)
A Century of the EOQ
7

himself did not envision the original EOQ model as a panacea for control of all
inventories when he wrote, ‘‘In conclusion, it may be well to say that the method
given is not rigorously accurate, for many minor factors have been purposely left
out of the consideration…. The general theory as developed here is reasonably
correct and will be found to give good results.’’
Cannon and Crandall (2004) make the following suggestions about when it is
beneﬁcial to use the EOQ directly, when it should be modiﬁed, and when it should
not be used at all. The EOQ is useful for make-to-stock products with stable
demand and when ordering and holding costs are relatively stable, conditions that
largely mimic the underlying model assumptions. The EOQ provides a good
starting point and should be modiﬁed under conditions of quantity discounts and
when the organization’s order must be split into multiple shipments in light of
production and/or transportation constraints. The EOQ should not be used in a
make-to-order environment that requires the ﬁrm to ship orders complete in a
single shipment.
Academics and researchers have spent a century modifying the original EOQ
model by relaxing one or many of its underlying assumptions to develop models
that address particular business situations more appropriately. Many published
studies compare the new model’s performance to that of the original EOQ and
determine the conditions whereby the new model improves performance signiﬁ-
cantly. In the next ﬁve sections of this chapter, we discuss the major developments
in EOQ models from the 1950s to the present day.
3 The 1950s and 1960s
In the late 1950s, research on the EOQ started appearing more frequently in
academic journals. One of the earliest works emphasized the scheduling difﬁculties
that may arise when using the EOQ as the economic lot size. Vazsonyi (1957)
addressed this issue and suggested a technique to take into account the available
production hours on each machine and labor hours available, when the holding
cost, setup cost, and production time are known. The formulation also allowed for
the ability to plan parts separately in the case that labor and machine capacity were
available. Nonlinear mathematical programming was used to solve this problem.
Research on the EOQ model with quantity discounts began appearing in
journals in the early 1960s. Crowther (1964) was the ﬁrst to consider this issue
from both the buyer’s and seller’s viewpoint. His formulation was based on the
EOQ model as the breakpoint quantity prior to receiving a quantity discount.
Through his formulation, cost reductions to the buyer and seller were determined.
During this decade, others began to address the limitations of the EOQ by pointing
out its shortcomings under conditions that were more complex than its simplest
assumptions. These conditions included situations when there is an overlap in time
between production and demand as well as an allowance for inventory and
backorders (Diegel 1966) or dollar stockout penalties and desired service levels
(Herron 1967).
8
M. J. Drake and K. A. Marley

This decade also marked the beginning of a research stream devoted to com-
paring the performance of the EOQ to other methods of inventory control. Kai-
mann (1968a, b, 1969) wrote a series of articles addressing questions regarding the
traditional EOQ formulation. He pointed out a ‘‘fallacy’’ of the EOQ—that it is
often used in situations that are not appropriate, which lead to suboptimal policies.
He introduced a new methodology that uses the Wagner-Whitin dynamic pro-
gramming algorithm and contrasted his results with the traditional EOQ. He
believed the Wagner-Whitin methodology was more representative of a typical
production scenario where demand widely changes between periods. When
compared with the EOQ, the total cost was signiﬁcantly lower, and he urged
readers to be more selective of using the EOQ in situations where its underlying
assumptions may be violated (Kaimann 1968a, b, 1969).
Additional research on the EOQ during this time period focused on developing
extensions to the original EOQ model to make it more applicable in different
production or service settings. Philips and Dawson (1968) addressed how retailers
could use Bayesian statistics to calculate their order quantities and reorder points
more accurately. By using a priori probabilities of inventory factors, rather than
averages, managers could address the impact of upcoming events in their inven-
tory management strategies. Hoffmann (1969) addressed the optimal interest rate
useful in determining EOQ values using exchange curve and optimal policy curve
concepts. Schussel (1968) expanded on the EOQ formulation in his development
of an Economic Lot Release Size model by determining the least expensive lot
sizes for repetitive parts and subassemblies. This decade marked the beginning of
an overwhelming amount of research dedicated to using the EOQ as a foundation
of lot sizing.
4 The 1970s
4.1 Analysis of EOQ Performance
Research studies comparing the performance of the EOQ and other inventory
models continued throughout the next decade. Kaimann (1970) continued his
research on addressing the impact of demand ﬂuctuations on the EOQ model by
examining three types of variation—random, cyclical, and seasonal. In his results,
he concluded that as variation increases, the Wagner-Whitin method is superior;
however, he conceded that the EOQ still has the advantages of being easy to
compute and comprehend, and robust even as variability increases. Others arrived
at a similar conclusion when comparing the two methods, ﬁnding the Wagner-
Whitin algorithm superior and more representative of reality (Phillippakis 1970;
Gleason 1971). Kaimann (1972) also performed a similar comparison of approa-
ches while addressing lead time variability resulting in safety stock. Bechtold and
Nast (1978) compared performance of the EOQ to the ROQ, a model developed by
A Century of the EOQ
9

Schroeder and Krishan (1976) that maximizes return on investment and found that
the EOQ was appropriate for inventory decisions related to both ﬁnished goods
and work-in-process inventory.
4.2 Development of EOQ Extensions
This decade marked the beginning of research on the extensions of the EOQ model
that grew exponentially over the next 40 years. Researchers used the EOQ model
as a foundation and then relaxed a subset of assumptions and added costs or
constraints to apply the model to a variety of situations. Some examples of
extensions of the EOQ model include the consideration of multiple setup costs
(Lippman 1971), an all-time requirement which takes into account the cumulative
demand to improve forecasting in replacement part items (Moore 1971), the
development of a present value formulation of the EOQ that takes into account an
inﬁnite time horizon (Trippi and Lewin 1974), inclusion of a working capital
constraint (Ram Mohan 1978), and consideration of the EOQ under stochastic lead
time (Liberatore 1979). Langley (1976) discussed the implications of relaxing the
assumption of certainty for the EOQ model parameters. He considered the opti-
mistic, likely, or pessimistic alternatives of the EOQ by using maximax, maximin,
and minimax regret strategies as well as the Laplace criterion as a way of enabling
decision-makers to make more appropriate decisions dependent on workplace
conditions. In contrast, others discussed their issues with models that relax
assumptions of the EOQ which create unrealistic production scenarios and urged
researchers to make their EOQ extensions more compatible with present condi-
tions and readily available production data (Soyster and Enscore 1975).
4.3 EOQ and MRP
Research on the relationship between Materials Requirement Planning (MRP) and
the EOQ model became more prevalent in the 1970s as the performance of the
EOQ within an MRP system was examined. Chamberlain (1977) referred to MRP
as the ‘‘salvation of production and inventory control management’’ and cautioned
on using the EOQ as an ordering policy due to its creation of inventory and
inability to respond to plans aimed at reducing inventory. Others examined how
the EOQ lot sizing rule compares to other methods (e.g., L4L, POQ, FOQ, LTC,
etc.). Yelle (1978a, b) examined this issue in the context of a multi-level lot sizing
problem and suggested which lot sizing sequences utilizing these rules should be
used to achieve the lowest inventory costs as demand patterns differed (i.e. lumpy,
increasing, decreasing, etc.). Kropp et al. (1979) suggested that the EOQ was one
way to deal with MRP nervousness due to the fact that it is relatively unaffected
when cost and demand estimates are incorrect but found that a dynamic lot-sizing
method was preferred due to its ability to strike a balance between all relevant
inventory costs.
10
M. J. Drake and K. A. Marley

5 The 1980s
Research on the EOQ in the 1980s can be primarily classiﬁed into three areas of
interest: (1) the performance of the EOQ against other lot-sizing rules, (2) the
introduction of additional extensions of the EOQ model, and (3) the role of the
EOQ in logistics. In addition, the number of articles devoted to the EOQ increased
signiﬁcantly during this time period, which is evidence that the formulation
maintained its position as a robust and relevant lot sizing method even under
changing environments.
5.1 Analysis of EOQ Performance
Evaluation of the performance of EOQ versus other lot sizing rules continued in
this decade under different contexts. Choi et al. (1984) examined the EOQ versus
eight other rules in multi-echelon MRP systems using FORTRAN, with the EOQ
performing in the lower third. Rubin et al. (1983) compared the classical EOQ
approach to the total setup lot sizing model (T-S) developed by Kuzdrall and
Britney (1982) in the case of quantity discounts and found that a modiﬁed EOQ
performed better than the T-S method. The performance of the EOQ was also
examined by Boucher (1984), and this study found that a modiﬁed EOQ (GTOQ)
was superior in the context of group technology systems. Melnyk and Piper (1985)
examined the effects of lead time errors on different lot sizing rules. Similar
comparisons were made with a ﬁxed charge heuristic (Bahl and Zionts 1986) and
the incremental part-period algorithm (Patterson and LaForge 1985) and under
conditions of serially correlated demand sequences (Williams et al. 1985) and
linear and increasing demand (Ritchie and Tsado 1986).
5.2 Development of EOQ Extensions
Some of the extensions of the EOQ that appeared in this decade included the
consideration of a temporary one-time price discount on the EOQ model (Tersine
and Price 1981), the addition of nonlinear (increasing) holding costs (Weiss 1982),
the consideration of discounting rates (Gurani 1983; Clarke 1987), the addition of
multiple setup costs (Aucamp 1984), and the inclusion of constant inﬂation and
simple interest (Kanet and Miles 1985). Others included the consideration of future
price increases (Markowski 1986; Tersine and Tersine 1986), increasing step-
function ordering costs (Bigham 1986) and all units price discounts (Gupta 1988).
Another set of models addressed the impact of variation in the sizes of production
loads when determining the EOQ, considering the impact of overtime when reg-
ular capacity is exceeded (Axsater 1980, 1981; Goyal and Evans 1981).
A Century of the EOQ
11

Other researchers extended the EOQ model to different contexts including Dyl
and Keaveny’s (1983) application of the fundamentals of the EOQ model to a
human resources problem in an effort to minimize the costs associated with hiring
and training, as well as managing an excess or shortage of labor. Also, the impact
of EOQ systems on deteriorating items was ﬁrst examined by taking into account
variations in deterioration rates and product shortages under probabilistic and
deterministic demand conditions (Elsayed and Teresi 1983). Das (1984) suggested
modiﬁcations to the traditional EOQ under conditions inherent in developing
countries (e.g., changing rates of price and supply, capacity expansion issues, etc.).
Lee and Rosenbatt (1986) addressed the signiﬁcance of the EOQ model
developed by Subramanyam and Kumaraswamy (1981) that took into account the
effects of advertising and the impact of price elasticity, along with potential
damages among ordered items and economies of scale. They expanded on the
earlier work and developed three different EOQ formulas to account for the dif-
ferent cases that may arise. The impact of learning on setup costs was addressed by
Replogle (1988). He developed a modiﬁed EOQ that takes into account the impact
of reducing setup costs to gain competitiveness.
As research on JIT became more prevalent in this decade, authors began to
initiate discussions on how an inventory system based on the EOQ differed from
policies in a JIT environment. Schonberger and Schneiderjans (1984) addressed
the fundamental differences between JIT and EOQ ordering and pointed out the
strengths of JIT ordering over EOQ ordering. These included an ability to cut
holding costs and lessen setup costs through process improvements and the
importance of factors such as quality rework and work motivation. Fox (1984)
compared EOQ fundamentals to the Optimized Production Technology (OPT)
rules developed by Goldratt, particularly focusing on the EOQ notion of a single
uniform batch size versus the OPT idea of multiple batch sizes or varying
quantities.
In contrast to the signiﬁcant number or articles that attempted to make the EOQ
more complicated, Banks and Hohenstein (1981) prescribed a simpliﬁcation of the
EOQ by dividing it into two parts: (1) the value ‘‘2’’ and the ordering/holding cost
ratio and (2) the demand to cost ratio. The ﬁrst part was to be considered a
‘‘constant’’ or ‘‘index number’’ that would be applicable to a group of similar items
in inventory for a ﬁrm, while the other constant would ﬂuctuate. This enabled
managers to choose an index number and utilize this over a variety of different
items to simplify the inventory management process.
5.3 Application in Transportation and Logistics
Research that addressed the use of EOQ models in transportation and logistics ﬁrst
appeared in the 1980s. Tanchoco et al. (1980) considered the impact of material
handling and the transportation of unit loads on lot sizing. They modiﬁed the EOQ
model to include the transportation cost which was dependent on the quantity of
12
M. J. Drake and K. A. Marley

unit loads necessary for a speciﬁed production lot. Burns et al. (1985) examined
the optimal lot sizes using different types of distribution strategies—direct ship-
ping (direct from supplier to customer) and peddling (more than one customer per
load)—and found that the EOQ value was the optimal shipping size for direct
shipping. In addition, Landeros and Lyth (1989) studied the impact of lot sizing in
purchasing and logistics management decision-making.
6 The 1990s
In the 1990s, researchers continued to address EOQ performance (e.g., Gupta and
Brennan 1992; Ho 1993; Toklu and Wilson 1995), to compare and contrast the
method with JIT strategies (e.g., Chyr et al. 1990a; Grant 1993; Baker et al. 1994;
Fazel 1997; Fazel et al. 1998), and to study the transportation implications (e.g.,
Russell and Krajewski 1991; Tersine and Barman 1991; Ha and Kim 1995). In
addition, new methodologies to solve EOQ problems and technologies that use
EOQ models were introduced here. For example, Stockton (1993) used a genetic
algorithm methodology to solve EOQ problems by capitalizing on the method-
ology’s ability to ‘‘generate populations of solutions,’’ giving managers the ability
to choose from among the batch sizes (even those that are non-optimal) if they
provide a better ﬁt for the current operational environment. Also, Pullin (1995)
discussed the importance of the EOQ model to Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
to improve supply chain coordination.
However, the area of research that received the most attention continued to be
extensions to the EOQ model. These extensions included an application to retail
cycle stock inventories (Bassin 1990), the addition of cost changes under a ﬁnite or
inﬁnite time horizon (Lev and Weiss 1990), the inclusion of storage size consid-
erations (Rao and Bahari-Kashani 1990), and the addition of damage costs (Chyr
et al. 1990b). Others addressed pricing considerations (Cheng 1990), inspection
delays (Porteus 1990), supplier credit (Wilson 1991), cash ﬂoat (Bregman 1992),
conditions of a temporary sale for a buyer (Chen and Min 1995), and supply credit
using a discounted cash ﬂow approach (Carlson and Miltenburg 1996).
In the 1990s, several streams of research that would continue throughout the
next decade began to surface. These include research on continuously deteriorating
products (Fujiwara and Perera 1993), forgetting and learning effects along with the
time value of money (Chiu and Chen 1997), permissible delay in payments (Chung
1998), and deteriorating and ameliorating items (Hwang 1999). Researchers used
the EOQ model as a basis while they considered situations of cyclical demand
(Specht and Kagan 1994), multiple stocking points (Meller 1995), random ﬂuc-
tuations of demand (Bill and Chaouch 1995), product substitutions (Drezner and
Gurnani 1995), obsolescence for fast moving spare parts (Cobbaert and van Ou-
dheusden 1996), conditions of variable capacity (Wanga and Gerchak 1996),
imprecise estimation of parameters (Vujoševic´ et al. 1996), random supplier
capacity (Hariga and Haouari 1999), and dollar cost averaging (Khouja and Lamb
A Century of the EOQ
13

1999). In addition, Tersine (1996) developed a composite EOQ model that could
be broken down into separate deterministic models. These extensions are repre-
sentative of the decade, although not exhaustive. However, they illustrate the
importance of the EOQ model not only to inventory management but also to
supply chain management. Research in many of these streams continued in the
twenty-ﬁrst century.
7 The 2000s to the Present
Moving into the new millennium, the number of articles dedicated to the EOQ
model more than doubled. In this time period many authors continued to focus on
extensions to the original EOQ model, speciﬁcally to those presented in the 1990s,
(e.g., variations in parameters, inﬂation, JIT, deteriorating items, effects of
learning, supplier credits, Quantity discounts, capacity constraints). Other research
streams that were studied extensively during this time include using the EOQ
model for items of imperfect quality (e.g., Salameh and Jaber 2000; Maddah and
Jaber 2008; Khan et al. 2010, 2011; Hsu and Hsu 2012) and a renewed interest in
using the EOQ under conditions where partial backordering occurs. Pentico and
Drake (2011) provided an exhaustive summary of the research on EOQ models
that handle partial backordering, and some even more current models with partial
or full backordering include those by Zhang et al. (2011), Toews et al. (2011),
Chung and Cárdenas-Barrón (2012), and Taleizadeh et al. (2013). However, the
two areas of research that became more prominent during this time period were
EOQ models and their impact on supply chain applications, performance, and
coordination and the EOQ’s role with respect to sustainability applications. We
highlight these areas below.
7.1 Supply Chain Models
As companies looked to consolidate warehouses and other stocking locations to
increase competitive advantage, research in this area became more prevalent. For
example, Lim et al. (2003) determined the cost savings of warehouse consolidation
by modeling each warehouse as a single-stage EOQ system. Ng et al. (2009) also
approached this issue by treating the capacity of the warehouse as a decision
variable. They also included in their model the condition that the warehouse cost is
greater than other relevant holding costs. In his comparison of continuous and
periodic review systems, Cachon (2001) found the EOQ model to yield the min-
imum order quantity in his study of retailer shelf space availability using different
transportation dispatching policies. Balakrishnan et al. (2004) extended the EOQ
model to the context of a retailer to understand how inventory levels can stimulate
demand. EOQ and inventory models were also used in facility design decisions by
14
M. J. Drake and K. A. Marley

Miranda and Garrido (2004) to solve a distribution network design problem. Zinn
and Charnes (2005) compared Quick Response (QR) models and EOQ models and
concluded that the EOQ was superior to the QR under many conditions including
low-risk conditions and when demand or product value is low. E-commerce
inventory decisions were examined by Bhargava et al. (2006). They developed an
EOQ-based model to determine the impact of offering customers compensation
when they have to wait for products due to stockouts.
Supply chain models relating to perishable items were also examined in recent
years. Li et al. (2007) examined postponement strategies of perishable items using
an EOQ model, while Ferguson et al. (2007) applied Weiss (1982)’s nonlinear
holding cost model in the context of perishable items. The use of EOQ models in
determining how contracts in Vendor Managed Inventory (VMI) systems can
improve system performance was discussed by Nagarajan and Rajagopalan (2008).
Battini et al. (2010) compared EOQ lot sizing to a consignment stock approach of
managing inventory. Lau et al. (2008) examined supply chain performance using a
computer simulation of four different lot sizing policies—EOQ, POQ, Silver-Meal,
and Part-Period Balancing. Supply chain performance was measured in terms of
costs and service levels. Their results showed that the EOQ costs were lowest for
the retailers and for the supply chain as a whole. Lastly, the importance of
coordination among supply chain partners continued to be an important area of
research (e.g., Sucky 2005; Jain et al. 2006; Chiou et al. 2007). Some examples
include Chan et al. (2010), who considered this issue under the context of delayed
payments, and Chan and Lee’s (2012) examination of supply chain coordination
with incentive schemes that entice partners to alter policies in order to achieve
monetary savings.
7.2 Sustainability
Although research on waste and repair models appeared in the previous decade
(e.g., Richter 1996; Richter and Dobos 1999), this area of research expanded
greatly due to the importance of sustainability to ﬁrm performance. Teunter (2001)
built off of Schrady’s (1967) original work on reverse logistics by adding in a
disposal option and using different holding cost rates for recovered and manu-
factured items to determine the optimal batch quantities for both manufacturing
and recovery. Extensions to the original model were presented by Dobos and
Richter (2000) along with new perspectives using the EOQ model as a foundation
in the context of production recycling models (Dobos and Richter 2003, 2004,
2006).
Other extensions included determining optimal lot sizes for the recovery of
items that were returned (Teunter 2004) and the consideration of entropy cost
(Jaber and Rosen 2008) and switching costs (El Saadany and Jaber 2008). Gou
(2008) modiﬁed the EOQ model to ﬁnd the optimal delivery batch size in his
research on open-loop reverse supply chains including one centralized returns
A Century of the EOQ
15

center and multiple local collection points. Alinovi et al. (2012) developed an
EOQ system for a mixed manufacturing/remanufacturing system as a framework
to aid managers in how to effectively use EOQ policies in other reverse logistics
environments. An excellent summary of the integration of the EOQ model into
sustainability research was provided by Bouchery et al. (2012).
8 Conclusion
This chapter merely scratches the surface when it comes to chronicling the evo-
lution of EOQ-type models over the past century. A truly comprehensive effort
would likely span the length of this entire book (or even longer!). We have
discussed the major developments in EOQ-type research speciﬁcally since the
1950s, and we have classiﬁed the types of extensions by their major foci in each
decade.
In light of a century’s worth of extensions and applications, the impact that
Harris’ little three-page article has had on an entire ﬁeld of management is truly
staggering. The model, even in its original restrictive form, is still presented in
every book and every course that introduces inventory control concepts to new
generations of students. Criticisms aside, the EOQ model’s longevity can likely be
traced to its fundamental goal that still holds true today—illustrating the trade-off
that exists between ordering costs and holding costs in inventory control. Like all
models, the EOQ is a simpliﬁcation of reality, and many times it performs well
enough in practice. But like all models, one single formula should not necessarily
be immune to the managerial modiﬁcations that can adjust its recommendation to
apply more directly to a given business situation. After all, Harris (1913) knew this
better than anyone when he wrote, ‘‘The writer … does not wish to be understood
as claiming that any mere mathematical formula should be depended upon entirely
for determining the amount of stock that should be carried or put through on an
order. This is a matter that calls, in each case, for a trained judgment, for which
there is no substitute.’’
References
Alinovi A, Bottani E, Montanari R (2012) Reverse logistics: A stochastic EOQ-based inventory
control model for mixed manufacturing/remanufacturing systems with return policies.
International Journal of Production Research 50(5):1243-1264
Aucamp DC (1984) A solution to the multiple set-up problem. International Journal of Production
Research 22(4):549-554
Axsäter S (1980) Economic order quantities and variations in production load. International
Journal of Production Research 18(3):359-365
Axsäter S (1981) Economic order quantities and variations in production load: Interpretation of
capacity costs for regular capacity and overtime. International Journal of Production Research
19(4):439-449
16
M. J. Drake and K. A. Marley

Bahl HC, Zionts S (1986) Lot sizing as a ﬁxed-charge problem. Production and Inventory
Management 27(1):1-10
Baker RC, Chang R, Chang I (1994) Switching rules for JIT purchasing. Production and
Inventory Management Journal 35(3):13-17
Balakrishnan A, Pangburn MS, Stavrulaki E (2004) ‘‘Stack Them High, Let ‘em Fly’’: Lot-sizing
policies when inventories stimulate demand. Management Science 50(5):630-644
Banks J, Hohenstein CL (1981) Simpliﬁcation of the Economic Order Quantity equation. Journal
of Purchasing and Materials Management 17(2):19-22
Bassin WM (1990) A technique for applying EOQ models to retail cycle stock inventories.
Journal of Small Business Management 28(1):48-55
Battini D, Grassi A, Persona A, Sgarbossa F (2010) Consignment stock inventory policy:
methodological framework and model. International Journal of Production Research
48(7):2055-2079
Bechtold SE, Nast DA (1978) A comparison of two inventory decision models. Journal of
Management 4(1):85-95
Bhargava HK, Daewon S, Xu SH (2006) Stockout compensation: Joint inventory and price
optimization in electronic retailing. INFORMS Journal on Computing 18(2):255-266
Bigham P (1986) Economic order quantities for systems with step-function ordering costs.
Production and Inventory Management 27(4):119-127
Bill PH, Chaouch BA (1995) An EOQ model with random variations in demand. Management
Science 41(5):927-936
Boucher TO (1984) Lot sizing in group technology production systems. International Journal of
Production Research 22(1):85-93
Bouchery Y, Ghaffari A, Jemai Z, Dallery Y (2012) Including sustainability criteria into
inventory models. European Journal of Operational Research 222(2):229-240
Bregman RL (1992) A note on optimal order quantities for credit purchases. International Journal
of Production Economics 28(2):203-210
Burnham JM, Mohanty BB (1988) Requiem for EOQ—But Uniﬁed Order Quantity is alive and
well. Production and Inventory Management Journal 29(3):80-83
Burns LD, Hall RW, Blumenfeld DE, Daganzo CF (1985) Distribution strategies that minimize
transportation and inventory costs. Operations Research 33(3):469-490
Cachon G (2001) Managing a retailer’s shelf space, inventory, and transportation. Manufacturing
& Service Operations Management 3(3):211-229
Cannon AR, Crandall RE (2004) The way things never were. APICS—The Performance
Advantage 14(1):32-35
Carlson ML, Miltenburg GJ (1996) Economic order quantity and quantity discounts under date-
terms supplier credit: A discounted cash ﬂow approach. Journal of the Operational Research
Society 47(3):384-394
Chamberlain, WW (1977) Is there an EOQ for all seasons or can we make current system more
responsive? Production and Inventory Management 18(1):25-34
Chan CK, Lee YCE (2012) A co-ordination model combining incentive scheme and co-
ordination policy for a single-vendor-multi-buyer-supply chain. International Journal of
Production Economics 135(1):136-143
Chan CK, Lee YCE, Goyal SK (2010) A delayed payment method in co-ordinating a single-
vendor multi-buyer supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics 127(1):
95-102
Chen C, Min KJ (1995) Optimal inventory and disposal policies in response to a sale.
International Journal of Production Economics 42(1):17-27
Cheng TCE (1990) An EOQ model with pricing consideration. Computers and Industrial
Engineering 18(4):529-534
Chiou C-C, Yao, M-J, Tsai, J (2007) A mutually beneﬁcial coordination mechanism for a one-
supplier multi-retailers supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics
108(1/2):314-328
A Century of the EOQ
17

Chiu HN, Chen HM (1997) The effect of time-value of money on discrete time varying demand
lot-sizing models with learning and forgetting considerations. Engineering Economist
42(3):203-221
Choi H, Malstrom EM, Classen RJ (1984) Computer simulation of lot-sizing algorithms in three-
stage multi-echelon inventory systems. Journal of Operations Management 4(3):259-277
Chung K (1998) A theorem on the determination of economic order quantity under conditions of
permissible delay in payments. Computers and Operations Research 25(1):49-52
Chung K-J, Cárdenas-Barrón LE (2012) The complete solution procedure for the EOQ and EPQ
inventory models with linear and ﬁxed backorder costs. Mathematical and Computer
Modellling 55(11-12):2151-2156
Chyr F, Tsong ML, Chin-Fu Ho (1990a) Comparison between Just-In-Time and EOQ system.
Engineering Costs & Production Economics 18(3):233-240
Chyr F, Tsong ML, Chin-Fu Ho (1990b) An extension of the EOQ production model based on
damage costs. International Journal of Operations and Production Management 10(5):71-76
Clarke HR (1987) Economic order quantities with discounting. Engineering Costs and Production
Economics 11(4):215-221
Cobbaert K, van Oudheusden D (1996) Inventory models for fast moving spare parts subject to
‘‘sudden death’’ obsolescence. International Journal of Production Economics 44(3):239-248
Crowther JF (1964) Rationale for quantity discounts. Harvard Business Review 42(2): 121-127
Das C (1984) A uniﬁed approach to the price-break Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) problem.
Decision Sciences 15(3):350-358
Diegel A (1966) A linear approach to the dynamic inventory problem. Management Science
12(7): 530-540
Dobos I, Richter K (2000) The integer EOQ repair and waste disposal model – further analysis.
Central European Journal of Operations Research 8(2):173-194
Dobos I, Richter K (2003) A production/recycling model with stationary demand and return rates.
Central European Journal of Operations Research 11(1):35-46
Dobos I, Richter K (2004) An extended production/recycling model with stationary demand and
return rates. International Journal of Production Economics 90(3):311-323
Dobos I, Richter K (2006) A production/recycling model with quality consideration. International
Journal of Production Economics 104(2):571-579
Drezner Z, Gurnani H (1995) An EOQ model with substitutions between products. Journal of the
Operational Research Society 46(7):887-891
Dyl EA, Keaveny TJ (1983) Cost Minimization in Stafﬁng. Human Resource Planning
6(2):103-114
El Saadany AMA, Jaber MY (2008) The EOQ repair and waste disposal model with switching
costs. Computers and Industrial Engineering 55(1):219-233
Elsayed EA, Teresi C (1983) Analysis of Inventory systems with deteriorating items.
International Journal of Production Research 21(4): 449-460
Fazel F (1997) A comparative analysis of inventory costs of JIT and EOQ purchasing.
International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management 27(7/8):496-504
Fazel F, Fischer KP, Gilbert EW (1998) JIT Purchasing vs. EOQ with a price discount: An
analytical comparison of inventory costs. International Journal of Production Economics
54(1):101-109
Ferguson M, Jayaraman V, Souza GC (2007) Note: An application of the EOQ model with
nonlinear holding cost to inventory management of perishables. European Journal of
Operational Research 180(1): 485-490
Fox RE (1984) Main Bottleneck on the factory ﬂoor? Management Review 73(11):55-61
Fujiwara O, Perera ULJSR (1993) EOQ models for continuously deteriorating products using
linear
and
exponential
penalty
costs.
European
Journal
of
Operational
Research
70(1):104-114
Fulbright JE (1979) Advantages and disadvantages of the EOQ model. Journal of Purchasing and
Materials Management 15(1):8-10
18
M. J. Drake and K. A. Marley

Gleason JM (1971) A Computational Variation of the Wagner-Whitin Algorithm: An Alternative
to the E.O.Q. Production and Inventory Management 12(1):15-22
Gou Q, Liang L, Huang Z, Xu C (2008) A joint inventory model for an open-loop reverse supply
chain. International Journal of Production Economics 116(1):28-42
Goyal SK, Evans AG (1981) A Note on ‘Economic order quantities and variations in production
load by S. Axsäter.’ International Journal of Production Research 19(4):437-438
Grant MR (1993) EOQ and Price Break Analysis in a JIT Environment. Production and Inventory
Management Journal 34(3):64-69
Gupta OK (1988) An Improved Procedure for Economic Order Quantity with All-Unit Price
Discounts. International Journal of Operations and Production Management 8(4):79-83
Gupta SM, Brennan L (1992) Lot Sizing and Backordering in Multi-Level Product Structures.
Production and Inventory Management 33(1):27-35
Gurnani C (1983) Economic analysis of inventory systems. International Journal of Production
Research 21(2):261-277
Ha D, Kim S (1995) Optimal contract quantity versus optimal shipping quantity. Production and
Inventory Management Journal 36(4):79-80
Hariga M, Haouari M (1999) An EOQ lot sizing model with random supplier capacity.
International Journal of Production Economies 58(1):39-47
Harris FW (1913) How many parts to make at once. Factory, The Magazine of Management
10(2):135-136, 152
Herron,
D
(1967)
Inventory
management
for
minimum
cost.
Management
Science
14(4):B219-B235
Ho C-J (1993) Evaluating lot-sizing performance in multi-level MRP systems: A comparative
analysis of multiple performance measures. International Journal of Operations and
Production Management 13(11):52-79
Hoffmann TR (1969) EOQs for aggregate inventory management. Production and Inventory
Management 10(3):71-77
Hsu J-T, Hsu L-F (2013) An EOQ model with imperfect quality items, inspection errors, shortage
backordering,
and
sales
returns.
International
Journal
of
Production
Economics
143(1):162-170
Hwang H (1999) Inventory models for both deteriorating and ameliorating items. Computers and
Industrial Engineering 37(1/2);257-260
Jaber MY, Rosen MA (2008) The economic order quantity repair and waste disposal model with
entropy cost. European Journal of Operational Research 188(1):109-120
Jain K, Nagar L, Srivastava V (2006) Beneﬁt sharing in inter-organizational coordination. Supply
Chain Management: An International Journal 11(5):400-406
Kaimann, R (1968a) A fallacy of ‘E.O.Q.ING.’ Production and Inventory Management
9(1): 82-87
Kaimann, R (1968b) Revisiting a fallacy of ‘E.O.Q. ING,’ Production and Inventory
Management 9(4):12-19
Kaimann, R (1969) E.O.Q. revisited. Journal of Purchasing 5(2):62-72
Kaimann, R (1970) Choosing between E.O.Q. and dynamic programming for purchasing. Journal
of Purchasing 6(1): 44-51
Kaimann, R (1972) A comparison of the EOQ and dynamic programming inventory models with
safety tock considerations. Production and Inventory Management 13(3):72-88
Kanet JJ, Miles JA (1985) Economic order quantities and inﬂation. International Journal of
Production Research 23(3):597-608
Khan M, Jaber MY, Wahab MIM (2010) Economic order quantity for items with imperfect
quality with learning in inspection. International Journal of Production Economics
124(1):87-96
Khan M, Jaber MY, Guiffrida AL, Zolfaghari S (2011) A review of the extensions of a modiﬁed
EOQ model for imperfect quality items. International Journal of Production Economics
132(1): 1-12
A Century of the EOQ
19

Khouja M, Lamb RP (1999) An optimal schedule for dollar cost averaging under different
transaction costs. International Transactions in Operational Research 6(2):245-261
Kropp, DH, Carlson RC, Jucker JV (1979) Use of dynamic lot-sizing to avoid nervousness in
Material Requirements Planning systems. Production and Inventory Management 20(3):49-58
Kuzdrall PJ, Britney RR (1982) Total setup lot sizing with quantity discounts. Decision Sciences
13:101-112
Lau RSM, Xie J, Zhao X (2008) Effects of inventory policy on supply chain performance: A
simulation study of critical decision parameters. Computers and Industrial Engineering
55(3):620-633
Landeros R, Lyth DM (1989) Economic lot size models for cooperative inter-organizational
relationships. Journal of Business Logistics 10(2):146-158
Langley CJ (1976) Determination of the Economic Order Quantity under the condition of
uncertainty. Transportation Journal 16(1):85-92
Lee HL, Rosenblatt MJ (1986) The effects of varying marketing policies and conditions on the
economic order quantity. International Journal of Production Research 24(3):593-598
Lev B, Weiss HJ (1990) Inventory models with cost changes. Operations Research 38(1):53-63
Li J, Cheng TCE, Wang S (2007) Analysis of postponement strategy for perishable items by
EOQ-based models. International Journal of Production Economics 107(1):31-38
Liberatore MJ (1979) The EOQ model under stochastic lead time. Operations Research
27(2):391-396
Lim W, Ou J, Chung-Paw T (2003) Inventory cost effect of consolidating several one-warehouse
multiretailer systems. Operations Research 51(4):668-672
Lippman, SA (1971) Economic order quantities and multiple set-up costs. Management Science
18(1):39-47
Maddah B, Jaber MY (2008) Economic order quantity for items with imperfect quality:
Revisited. International Journal of Production Economics 112(2):808-815
Markowski E (1986) EOQ modiﬁcation for future price increases. Journal of Purchasing and
Materials Management 22(3):28-32
Meller RD (1995) The impact of multiple stocking points on system proﬁtability. International
Journal of Production Economics 38(2/3):209-214
Melnyk SA, Piper CJ (1985) Leadtime errors in MRP: The lot-sizing effect. International Journal
of Production Research 23(2):253-264
Minner S (2007) A note on how to compute economic order quantity without derivatives by cost
comparisons. International Journal of Production Economics 92:197-200
Miranda PA, Garrido RA (2004) Incorporating inventory control decisions into a strategic
distribution network design model with stochastic demand. Transportation Research: Part E
40(3):183-207
Moore, JR (1971) Forecasting and scheduling for past-model replacement parts. Management
Science 18(4):B-200-B213
Nagarajan M, Rajagopalan S (2008) Contracting under vendor managed inventory systems using
holding cost subsidies. Production and Operations Management 17(2):200-210
Ng CT, Cheng TCE, Kotov V, Kovalyov MY (2009) The EOQ problem with decidable
warehouse capacity: Analysis, solution approaches and applications. Discrete Applied
Mathematics 157(8): 1806-1824
Patterson J, LaForge RL (1985) The incremental part-period algorithm: An alternative to EOQ.
Journal of Purchasing and Materials Management 21(2):28-33
Pentico DW, Drake MJ (2011) A survey of deterministic models for the EOQ and EPQ with
partial backordering. European Journal of Operational Research 214(2):179-198
Philips, JD, Dawson, LF (1968) Bayesian statistics in retail inventory management. Journal of
Retailing 44(2):27-34
Philippakis, AS (1970) The cost of using EOQ with variable demand items. Journal of Purchasing
6(4):65-73
Porteus EL (1990) The impact of inspection delay on process and inspection lot Sizing.
Management Science 36(8):999-1007
20
M. J. Drake and K. A. Marley

Ptak CA (1988) A comparison of inventory models and carrying costs. Production and Inventory
Management Journal 29(4):1-3
Pullin J (1995) Just in time for whom? Management Services 39(4):14-15
Ram Mohan RV (1978) EOQ and increasing variable inventory carrying costs. Industrial
Management 20(6):13-16
Rao SS, Bahari-Kashani H (1990) Economic Order Quantity and storage size – Some
considerations. Engineering Costs and Production Economics 19(1-3):201-204
Replogle SH (1988) The strategic use of smaller lot sizes through a new EOQ model. Production
and Inventory Management Journal 29(3):41-44
Richter K (1996) The extended EOQ repair and waste disposal model. International Journal of
Production Economics 45:443-447
Richter K, Dobos I (1999) Analysis of the EOQ repair and waste disposal problem with integer
setup numbers. International Journal of Production Economics 59(1-3):463-467
Ritchie E, Tsado A (1986) The penalties of using the EOQ: A comparison of lot-sizing Rules for
linear increasing demand. Production and Inventory Management 27(1):12-18
Rubin PA, Dilts DM, Barron BA (1983) Economic Order Quantities with quantity discounts:
Grandma does it best. Decision Sciences 14(2):270-281 27
Russell RM, Krajewski LJ (1991) Optimal purchase and transportation cost lot sizing for a Single
Item. Decision Sciences 22(4):940-952
Salameh MK, Jaber MY (2000) Economic production quantity model for items with imperfect
quality. International Journal of Production Economics 64(1-3):59-64
Schrady DA (1967) A deterministic inventory model for repairable items. Naval Research
Logistics Quarterly 14(3):391-398
Schonberger RJ, Schneiderjans MJ (1984) Reinventing inventory control. Interaces 14(3):76-83
Schroeder RG, Krishnan, R (1976) Return on investment as a criterion for inventory models.
Decision Sciences 7(4):697-704
Schussel, G (1968) Job-shop lot release sizes. Management Science 14(8): B-449-B472
Silver EA, Pyke DF, Petersen R (1998) Inventory Management and Production Planning and
Scheduling, Third Edition. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons
Soyster AL, Enscore EE (1975) An EOQ model when production standards are assumed to be
normally distributed. International Journal of Production Research 13(5):507-517
Specht J, Kagan A (1994) Inventory valuation under cyclical demand: A modeling approach.
Journal of Applied Business Research 10(4):97-103
Stockton DJ (1993) Identifying economic order quantities using genetic algorithms. International
Journal of Operations and Production Management 13(11):92-103
Subramanyam ES, Kumaraswamy S (1981) EOQ formula under varying marketing polices and
conditions. American Institute of Industrial Engineers Transactions 13:312-314
Sucky E (2005) Inventory management in supply chains: A bargaining problem. International
Journal of Production Economics 93-94:253-262
Taft EW (1918) The most economical production lot. Iron Age 101:1410-1412
Taleizadeh AA, Pentico DW, Jabalameli MS, Aryanezhad M (2013) An EOQ model with partial
delayed payment and partial backordering. Omega 41(2):354-368
Tanchoco JMA, Davis RP, Wysk RA (1980) Economic order quantities based on unit-load and
material handling considerations. Decision Sciences 11(3):514-521
Teng J-T (2009) A simple method to compute economic order quantities. European Journal of
Operational Research 198(1):351-353
Tersine RJ (1996) Economic replenishment strategies for announced price increases. European
Journal of Operational Research 92(2):266-280
Tersine RJ, Barman S (1991) Economic Inventory/Transport Lot Sizing with Quantity Freight
Rate Discounts 22(5):1171-1179
Tersine RJ, Price RL (1981) Temporary price discounts and EOQ. Journal of Purchasing and
Materials Management 17(4):23-27
Tersine RJ, Tersine MG (1986) EOQ modiﬁcation for future price increases: An extension.
Journal of Purchasing and Materials Management 22(3):33-34
A Century of the EOQ
21

Teunter RH (2001) Economic ordering quantities for recoverable item inventory systems. Naval
Research Logistics 48(6):484-495
Teunter R (2004) Lot-sizing for inventory systems with product recovery. Computers and
Industrial Engineering 46(3):431-441
Toews C, Pentico DW, Drake MJ (2011) The deterministic EOQ and EPQ with partial
backordering at a rate that is linearly dependent on the time to delivery. International Journal
of Production Economics 131(2): 643-649
Toklu B, Wilson JM (1995) An analysis of multi-level lot-sizing problems with a bottleneck
under a rolling schedule environment. International Journal of Production Research
33(7):1835-1847
Trippi RR, Lewin, DE (1974) A present value formulation of the classical EOQ problem.
Decision Sciences 5(1):30-35
Vazsonyi A (1957) Economic-lot-size formulas in manufacturing. Operations Research 5(1): 28-
44
Vujoševic´, MM, Petrovic´, D, Petrovic´, R (1996) EOQ formula when inventory cost is fuzzy.
International Journal of Production Economics 45(1-3):499-504
Wanga Y, Gerchak Y (1996) Continuous review inventory control when capacity is variable.
International Journal of Production Economics 45(1-3):381-388
Weiss HJ (1982) Economic order quantity models with nonlinear holding costs. European Journal
of Operational Research 9(1):56-60
Williams WW, Peters MH, Raiszdeh ME (1985) Time-dependent demand in requirements
planning: An exploratory assessment of the effects of serially correlated demand sequences on
lot-sizing performance. Journal of Operations Management 6(1):69-85
Wilson GT (1977) When not to use the square root rule for the EOQ. Production and Inventory
Management Journal 18(4):1-6
Wilson JM (1991) Supplier credit in the Economic Order Quantity model. International Journal of
Operations and Production Management 11(9):64-71
Woolsey RED (1988) A requiem for the EOQ: An editorial. Production and Inventory
Management Journal 29(3):68-72
Yelle LE (1978a) Material requirements lot sizing: a multi-level approach. International Journal
of Production Research 17(3):223-232
Yelle LE (1978b) Lot sizing for the MRP multi-level problem. Industrial Management 20(4):4-7
Zhang R-Q, Kaku I, Xiao Y-Y (2011) Deterministic EOQ with partial backordering and
correlated demand caused by cross-selling. European Journal of Operational Research
210(3):537-551
Zinn W, Charnes JM (2005) A comparison of the Economic Order Quantity and Quick Response
inventory methods. Journal of Business Logistics 26(2):119-141
Zipkin P (2000) Foundations of Inventory Management. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill/Irwin
22
M. J. Drake and K. A. Marley

Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary
Demand: Extension to Forecast Horizons
Suresh Chand and Suresh Sethi
Abstract This chapter considers the multi-period lot-sizing problem with sta-
tionary demands in the initial few periods and possibly dynamic demands in the
subsequent periods. Both the average cost and the discounted cost problems are
considered. Also, both ﬁnite and inﬁnite-horizon problems are considered. The
results presented in this chapter include properties of optimal solutions for these
problems, efﬁcient algorithms for solving these, and the forecast horizon property.
Most of the results in the chapter are based on the research done by the authors of
this chapter and their co-authors over the past three decades. An attempt has been
made to make the review in the chapter largely complete and self contained and
proofs have been simpliﬁed where possible.
1 Introduction
The models we present in this chapter are related to two classical inventory
models: The EOQ model of Harris (1913) and the dynamic lot size model of
Wagner and Whitin (1958). In relation to the EOQ model, our models depart in
three different ways: (1) the EOQ model assumes that the problem horizon is
inﬁnite whereas we consider both ﬁnite and Inﬁnite horizon models, (2) the EOQ
model assumes that inventory is continuously monitored and an order to replenish
the inventory can be placed at any time, whereas our models assume that the
problem horizon is divided into discrete time periods and an order can be placed
S. Chand (&)
Krannert School of Management, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
e-mail: suresh@purdue.edu
S. Sethi
Naveen Jindal School of Management, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX
75080, USA
e-mail: sethi@utdallas.edu
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_2,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
23

only at the beginning of a period, and (3) the EOQ model assumes stationary
demand over an inﬁnite horizon, whereas we assume stationary demand in the
initial few periods and allow the demand to be time varying in the subsequent
periods. It is assumed that the demand within a period occurs continuously at a
constant rate and must be ﬁlled immediately; it means, shortages are not allowed.
The cost parameters for procurement and inventory holding are assumed to remain
constant over the problem horizon. For precise assumptions and a rigorous treat-
ment of the EOQ model viewed as an average cost inﬁnite-horizon problem, see
Beyer and Sethi (1998).
This chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a mathematical for-
mulation, several properties of the optimal solution, and an efﬁcient algorithm for
determining an optimal order policy for the case when the demand rate is sta-
tionary over the entire problem horizon. Section 3 considers the case when
demand rate is stationary only in the initial few periods and could be time varying
in the later periods, and provides ‘‘forecast horizon’’ results for the problem.
Sections 2 and 3 consider the undiscounted cost model where the objective is to
minimize the sum of the costs over the periods in the problem, or equivalently, the
per-period average cost. In Sect. 4, we consider the discounted cost model where
the objective is to minimize the net present value of costs over the problem
horizon. The chapter is concluded in Sect. 5 with a summary. Throughout the
chapter, we assume for simplicity that the lead time is zero.
No attempt is made in this chapter to have a comprehensive review of the vast-
related literature. Rather, the chapter is a personal journey that focuses on the EOQ
model, the dynamic lot size model, and forecast horizons.
2 Model Formulation and Analytical Results
The formulation and results in this section are based primarily on Chand (1982)
and Chand et al. (1990). The section also provides some new results not previously
reported in the literature. In the model formulation here, the demand occurs
Fig. 1 A Zero - Inventory Plan
24
S. Chand and S. Sethi

continuously over the problem horizon and is assumed to be stationary. We need
the following notation:
Z
the set of non-zero positive integers {1, 2, …}.
T
the problem horizon (i.e., the prespeciﬁed terminal period), T [ Z.
D
the constant demand rate per period.
K
the ﬁxed cost of placing an order.
h
the cost of holding one unit for one period.
Ut
the amount of production at the beginning of period t, Ut C 0 for t = 1, 2, …,
T.
It
the ending inventory in period t, It C 0 for t = 1, 2, …, T.
Without any loss of generality, we can assume: (i) I0 = 0, otherwise we can just
adjust the initial demands to reﬂect the initial inventory; (ii) IT = 0, since we are
interested in minimizing the total cost over the horizon and the cost goes up with
IT, and (iii) per unit variable production cost can be assumed to be zero, because
the total amount of production is equal to the total demand over the problem
horizon which is ﬁxed, and any constant variable cost of production will not enter
into the speciﬁc solution.
The production cost in a period is K if there is a setup in the period, and zero
otherwise. The average inventory in period t is ðIt1 þ Ut þ ItÞ=2; and the holding
cost charged to period t is hðIt1 þ Ut þ ItÞ=2: Given that I0 = IT = 0 and
PT
t¼1 Ut ¼ TD, it is easy to show that the total holding cost in T periods is
h PT
t¼1 It þ hTD=2. Ignoring the constant hTD=2; the T-period problem for a ﬁnite
T can be formulated as
Problem P1
Min
U1;U2;...;UT
X
T
t¼1
½KdðUtÞ þ hIt
such that
I0 = 0,
It = It-1 ? Ut-D for t = 1, 2, …, T,
It C 0 for t = 1, 2, …, T and IT = 0.
Here the production cost function in period t is deﬁned by
KdðUtÞ ¼
0 if Ut ¼ 0
K if Ut [ 0
n
o
:
The objective function in the above formulation minimizes the sum of procure-
ment and holding costs in T periods. In Sect. 4, we will consider the net present
value of costs. We next present properties of the optimal solution of Problem P1.
To rule out trivial solutions, we assume K, h [ 0. First we deﬁne the well-known
zero-inventory property.
Zero-Inventory Property A solution U1, U2, …, UT satisﬁes the zero-inventory
property if It--1 = 0 whenever Ut [ 0 for any t = 1, 2, …, T.
Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary Demand
25

Property 1 (Zero-Inventory) An optimal solution to Problem P1 satisﬁes the
zero-inventory property.
This is a standard result in the literature going back at least to Wagner and
Whitin (1958).
An implication of this property is that production batch size in a period is equal
to the sum of demands in a block of consecutive periods starting from the period of
production. The optimal solution has several order cycles each covering demands
in a block of periods; see Fig. 1 for an illustration. When we say an ‘‘n-period
cycle,’’ it means the order cycle that covers demands in n periods.
We next present an alternate formulation that takes advantage of the fact that
the demand rate is constant. With constant demand rate of D units per period, it is
easy to see that the sum of the end-of-period inventories in an n-period order cycle
is ðn  1ÞD þ ðn  2ÞD þ    þ D ¼ nðn  1ÞD=2 for any n [ Z. The total cost for
an n-period order cycle is K þ nðn  1ÞDh=2. The total cost of ordering and
holding for a solution that consists of w order cycles (w [ Z) of lengths
n1; n2; . . .; nw (each cycle length [Z) is wK þ Pw
i¼1 niðni  1ÞDh=2


. Finding an
optimal solution for the T-period problem requires ﬁnding the optimal number of
order cycles and their lengths. The problem of ﬁnding optimal cycle lengths for a
given w can be formulated as
Problem P2
Min
n1;n2;...;nw wK þ ðDh=2Þ
X
w
t¼1
niðni  1Þ
"
#
such that
X
w
i¼1
ni ¼ T:
We can make two important observations for Problem P2.
Observation 1 Solving Problem P2 is equivalent to solving the following
problem:
Min
n1;n2;...;nw wK þ ðDh=2Þ
X
w
t¼1
n2
i
"
#
such that
Xw
i¼1 ni¼T:
This transformation is possible because, given the constraint Pw
i¼1 ni ¼ T, the
objective functions in Problem P2 and in Observation 1 differ only by the constant
term TDh=2.
26
S. Chand and S. Sethi

Observation 2 The total cost of a solution that consists of multiple order cycles is
independent of the detailed sequence of cycles in the solution.
We are now ready to present another property of an optimal solution.
Property 2 (Cycle lengths for ﬁnite-horizon problem) No two cycles in an
optimal solution to the T-period problem can differ in length by more than one
period.
Proof of Property 2 Assume, to the contrary that the optimal solution has a cycle
of length n and another cycle of length (n ? b) where b [ 1. Since the total cost of
a solution does not depend on the exact sequence of cycles, we can assume that
these two cycles are located next to each other.
Using the objective function in Observation 1, the contribution of these two
cycles to the cost is 2K ? (Dh/2)[n2 ? (n ? b)2]. Changing the cycle lengths to
(n ? 1) and (n ? b-1), respectively, does not affect the feasibility of the solution,
and the contribution to the cost becomes 2K ? (Dh/2)[(n ? 1)2 ? (n ? b-1)2],
and that is a saving of
ðDh=2Þ½n2 þ ðn þ bÞ2  ðDh=2Þ½n2 þ ðn þ b  1Þ2
¼ ðDh=2Þ½2b  2 [ 0 for b [ 1
This contradiction establishes that the optimal cycle lengths can differ by at
most one period.
h
We next show that, for any given number of cycles w [ Z, the T-period problem
has a unique solution that satisﬁes Property 2. We also show how to ﬁnd the
lengths of these cycles. We let ½½y denote the largest integer that is By.
Lemma 1 For a given w, if T/w is an integer then the optimal solution consists of
w cycles of length T/w each. If T/w is not an integer, then the optimal solution has
a mix of cycles of lengths ½½T=w and ½½T=w þ 1, and the number of these cycles is:
(i) Number of cycles of length ½½T=w ¼ w  ðT  ½½T=wwÞ
(ii) Number of cycles of length ½½T=w þ 1 ¼ T  ½½T=ww
Proof If T/w \ 1, then not all cycles can be of length one period or more and the
problem does not have a feasible solution. For T/w C 1, the solution prescribed in
the lemma is feasible and satisﬁes Property 2. For example, for w = T-1, there
are (T-2) cycles of lengths one period each and one cycle of length two periods.
To complete the proof, it is sufﬁcient to show that the problem has a unique
feasible solution that satisﬁes Property 2.
Let us assume that there are cycles of length n and (n ? 1) in the solution. If all
cycles are equal, then we will consider these to be cycles of length n. It follows
that wn B T and w(n ? 1) [ T. This implies that (T/w)-1 \ n B (T/w). Clearly,
there is only one integer n that satisﬁes this constraint. Thus, there is a unique
solution that satisﬁes Property 2. This completes the proof.
h
Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary Demand
27

We next present an alternate formulation of the problem based on results in
Orlin (1985); we present this for the sake of completeness with the understanding
that it may not provide any immediate application in the proof of the results in this
chapter. In other words, the reader should treat this as an aside.
Observation 3 As discussed in Orlin (1985), for a given w, the T-period problem
can be viewed as a partitioning problem to divide T periods (objects) into w
subgroups (intervals), each of size at least one period, and the problem can be
formulated as a parametric linear program shown below. The decision variable xj
denotes the number of cycles of length j periods.
Min
x1;x2;...;xT
X
T
j¼1
j2xj
"
#
such that
X
T
j¼1
jxj ¼ T;
X
T
j¼1
xj ¼ w
xj  0 for j ¼ 1; 2; . . .; T:
Summary 1 To summarize the results so far, the optimal solution for the con-
stant-demand ﬁnite-horizon problem has the property that no two cycles can differ
by more than one period; i.e., it satisﬁes Property 2. Further, for given problem
horizon T and number of cycles w, there is a unique solution that satisﬁes Property
2, and this solution is given by (i) and (ii) in Lemma 1.
The next step is to ﬁnd the optimal value of w. To do this, we ﬁrst need to analyze
the constant-demand inﬁnite-horizon problem. Since the objective function in
Problem P2 is unbounded for the inﬁnite-horizon problem, we use average per-
period cost (in place of the total cost over the problem horizon) as the objective
function for the inﬁnite-horizon problem. The solution has the following property.
Property 3 (Cycle lengths for the Inﬁnite horizon problem) The inﬁnite-horizon
problem has an optimal solution that has cycles of identical lengths.
Proof Suppose we have reached a time when the inventory has fallen to zero and
an order needs to be placed. We solve the inﬁnite-horizon problem we face at this
time, and it is optimal to order for p periods. After p periods, when inventory falls
to zero again, we need to solve an inﬁnite-horizon problem to ﬁnd the order size.
The inﬁnite-horizon problem we face now is identical to the inﬁnite-horizon
problem we faced last time (when inventory fell to zero) and therefore the solution
that was optimal last time (order for p periods) must be optimal now also.
28
S. Chand and S. Sethi

Thus, the inﬁnite-horizon problem has an optimal solution that has cycles of
identical lengths.
h
Remark We are not claiming that the inﬁnite-horizon problem has a unique
optimal solution. We will see later that up to two cycle lengths that differ by one
period can be optimal for the inﬁnite-horizon problem.
The average per-period cost for an n-period cycle in Problem P2 is FðnÞ ¼
K
n þ ðn1ÞDh
2


and solving the inﬁnite-horizon problem requires ﬁnding the n that
minimizes F(n). The function F(n) is convex in n. Treating n as a continuous
variable and by setting F0(n) = 0, we get
F0ðnÞ ¼  K
n2 þ Dh
2 ¼ 0; or n2 ¼ 2K
Dh ; or n ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=Dh
p
:
If the quantity
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=Dh
p
is an integer, then n ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=Dh
p
is the unique
optimal cycle length for the inﬁnite-horizon problem. If
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=Dh
p
is not an
integer, then the two integer values in the neighborhood of
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=Dh
p
are candi-
dates, and there may be up to two alternate values of n that minimize F(n). Let the
cycle length m be the smallest n that minimizes F(n). Then the following lemma
provides a result to ﬁnd m.
Lemma 2 The smallest cycle length m that is optimal for the inﬁnite-horizon
problem is such that mðm  1Þ\ 2K
Dh  ðm þ 1Þm. Further, if mðm þ 1Þ ¼ 2K
Dh then
both m and (m ? 1) are optimal.
Proof Because F(n) is convex in n, m is such that F(m-1) [ F(m) B F(m ? 1).
We get the results in the lemma by using FðnÞ ¼
K
n þ ðn1ÞDh
2
ð
Þ.
h
Corollary m ¼ ½½
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=Dh
p
 or ½½
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=Dh
p
 þ 1. Further, m ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=Dh
p
if the
quantity
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=Dh
p
is an integer.
Summary 2 The cycle length m in Lemma 2 is optimal for the constant-demand
inﬁnite-horizon problem. In addition, if the inﬁnite-horizon problem has multiple
optimal solutions, then both cycle lengths m and (m ? 1) are optimal. We use this
result to ﬁnd the optimal number of cycles in the constant-demand T-period
problem.
Let mL denote that largest optimal cycle length for the inﬁnite-horizon problem.
Recall that m is the smallest optimal cycle length for the inﬁnite-horizon problem.
Note that mL ¼ m if the Inﬁnite horizon problem has a unique optimal solution;
and, mL ¼ m þ 1 if the solution is not unique. The following lemma puts a bound
on the optimal number of cycles in an optimal solution for the T-period problem.
Recall that ½½y denotes the largest integer By. Recall also that when we say an ‘‘n-
period cycle’’, we mean a cycle that is n periods long.
Lemma 3 The number of cycles in an optimal solution for the constant-demand T-
period problem cannot be: (i) less than ½½T=mL and (ii) more than ½½T=m þ 1.
Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary Demand
29

Proof Note that F(n) [ F(m) for n \ m and FðnÞ [ FðmLÞ for n [ mL. We ﬁrst
show that the optimal number of cycles cannot be less than ½½T=mL. With ½½T=mL
cycles, the length of any cycle is either mL þ k
ð
Þ or ðmL þ k þ 1Þ where k is an
integer C0. Let S be the number of periods (out of T) covered by ðmL þ kÞ-period
cycles and let (T - S) be the number of periods covered by ðmL þ k þ 1Þ-period
cycles.
It
is
easy
to
see
that
the
cost
of
the
solution
is
S  FðmL þ kÞ þ ðT  SÞ  FðmL þ k þ 1Þ. Note that FðmL þ kÞ\FðmL þ k þ 1Þ.
If we reduce the number of cycles below ½½T=mL, then it easy to see that fewer
periods (fewer than S) will be covered by ðmL þ kÞ-cycles and more periods (more
than T - S) will be covered by ðmL þ k þ 1Þ or bigger cycles. The cost for
T periods will go up.
We now show that the optimal number of cycles cannot exceed ½½T=m þ 1.
With ½½T=m þ 1 cycles, the length of any cycle is either ðm  kÞ or ðm  k  1Þ
where k C 0. Note that Fðm  kÞ\Fðm  k  1Þ. If we increase the number of
cycles, then fewer periods will be covered by ðm  kÞ-cycles and more periods
will be covered by more expensive ðm  k  1Þ or shorter cycles and the cost for
T periods will go up. This completes the proof.
h
The next two results consider the speciﬁc cases when mL ¼ m or when
mL ¼ m þ 1. Theorem 1 considers the case when mL ¼ m.
Theorem 1 Assume mL ¼ m. Then there is an optimal solution that has either
½½T=m cycles or ½½T=m þ 1 cycles. In addition, if T/m is an integer, then the
optimal solution has T/m cycles.
Proof The proof follows from a direct application of Lemma 3.
Theorem 2 Assume mL ¼ m þ 1. Then, both of the following two solution types
are optimal.
Solution Type m: There is an optimal solution that has either ½½T=m cycles or
½½T=m þ 1 cycles. In addition, if T/m is an integer, then there is an optimal
solution that has T/m cycles.
Solution Type ðm þ 1Þ: There is an optimal solution that has either ½½T=ðm þ
1Þþ 1 cycles or ½½T=ðm þ 1Þ þ 1 cycles. In addition, if T/(m ? 1) is an integer,
then the optimal solution has T/(m ? 1) cycles.
Proof From Lemma 3, it is easy to see that an optimal solution cannot have less
than ½½T=ðm þ 1Þcycles, and more than ½½T=m þ 1 cycles. We complete the proof
by considering the two cases.
Proof for Solution Type m: If T \ m, then the optimal solution has one cycle
and the lemma holds. Let T = km ? b, where k C 1 and b B m - 1 so that
km B T B (k ? 1)m - 1. We get ½½T=m ¼ k. To prove the lemma, it is sufﬁcient
to show that the problem has an optimal solution that has k or (k ? 1) cycles.
For b values such that T varies from km ? 1 to k ðm þ 1Þ, there is a solution
that has k cycles, some of length m and some of length ðm þ 1Þ, and the solution is
optimal. For T C k(m ? 1) ? 1, the number of cycles cannot be less than k from
Part (i) of Lemma 3, and for T B ðk þ 1Þm - 1, the number of cycles cannot be
30
S. Chand and S. Sethi

more than (k ? 1) from Part (ii) of Lemma 3. Thus, for T from kðm þ 1Þ þ 1 to
(k ? 1)m - 1, there is an optimal solution that has k or (k ? 1) cycles.
Proof for Solution Type (m ? 1): Let T = k(m ? 1) ? b, where b B m so that
k(m ? 1) B T B (k ? 1)(m ? 1) - 1. We get ½½T=ðm þ 1Þ ¼ k. To prove the
lemma it is sufﬁcient to show that there is an optimal solution that has k or (k ? 1)
cycles.
Consider the b values such that T varies from kðm þ 1Þ þ 1 to (k ? 1)m - 1.
For T C k(m ? 1), the number of cycles cannot be less that k from Part (i) of
Lemma 3. For T B (k ? 1)m, the number of cycles cannot exceed k ? 1 from Part
(ii) of Lemma 3. Thus, for k(m ? 1) B T B (k ? 1)m, there is an optimal solution
that has k or (k ? 1) cycles. We now consider the remaining problem horizon
(k ? 1) m to (k ? 1)(m ? 1). For this horizon, it is optimal to use (k ? 1) cycles,
which is a mix of (m ? 1) and m-period cycles.
h
We next give the steps of the algorithm.
Steps of the Algorithm for the T-period Undiscounted Cost Problem
Step 1: Compute m from mðm  1Þ\2K
Dh  ðm þ 1Þm:
Step 2: Compute T/m and let ½½T=m ¼ w. If T/m is an integer, then it is optimal to
use w identical cycles, each of length m periods; go to Step 6. Go to step 3
if T/m is not an integer.
Step 3: Find a solution (using Lemma 1) assuming w cycles. Find the total cost for
this solution.
Step 4: Find another solution assuming (w ? 1) cycles. Find total cost of this
solution.
Step 5: Compare the solutions from Steps 3 and 4 and select the one that gives a
lower cost.
Step 6: Stop if the inﬁnite-horizon problem has a unique optimal solution.
Otherwise, go to the next step. Step 7 is for the case when both m and
(m ? 1) are optimal for the inﬁnite-horizon problem.
Step 7: The solution we found by following Steps 1–5 by using m is still optimal
for the T-period problem. Additional solutions can be found by following
Steps 1–5 and using (m ? 1) in place of m.
We next give an example to illustrate the steps of the algorithm.
Example 1 Let K = $6 per order, h = $1 per unit per period, D = 1 unit per
period, and T = 50 periods.
Step 1: 2K/Dh = 12 and m = 3.
Step 2: T/m = 16.67 and w = 16. The procedure does not stop because T/m is not
an integer.
Step 3: Solution with 16 cycles has 14 cycles of 3 periods each and 2 cycles of 4
periods each. Recall that the cost of an n-period cycle is = K ? n(n-
1)Dh(1/2). With Dh = 1, the cost of a 4-period cycle is 6 ? (4)(4 -
1)(1/2) = $12 and the cost of the 3-period cycle is 6 ? 32(1/2) = $9.
The total cost of the 16 cycles is 149 ? 212 = $150.
Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary Demand
31

Step 4: Solution with 17 cycles has 16 cycles of 3 periods each and 1 cycle of 2
periods. The cost of a 2-period cycle is 6 ? 2(2-1)(1/2) = $7. The total
cost is 169 ? 17 = $151.
Step 5: Comparing solutions in Steps 3 and 4, it is optimal to use 16 cycles and the
cost is $150.
Step 6: Since 2 K/Dh = 12, we have m(m ? 1) = 12 or m = 3; and so cycles of
length 3 as well as 4 periods are optimal for the inﬁnite-horizon problem.
The solution in Step 5 is optimal, and additional solutions can be found
from Step 7.
Step 7: We need to consider 12 or 13 cycles in the 50-period problem. The 12-
cycle solution has 10 cycles of 4 periods each and 2 cycles of 5 periods
each. The cost of a 5-period cycle is 6 ? 54(1/2) = $16. The cost of this
solution is 1012 ? 216 = $152. The 13-cycle solution has 11 cycles of
4 periods each and 2 cycles of 3 periods and the cost of this solution is
$150.
Solution for the example problem: Solutions with 16 or 13 cycles are optimal.
The total cost is $150.
Summary 3 We have so far developed analytical results to characterize the
optimal solutions for the constant-demand ﬁnite horizon problem. We have shown
that the optimal solution consists of cycles that can differ from each other in length
by at most one period. For a speciﬁed number of cycles, the problem has a unique
solution and it is easily computable. We also developed a simple procedure to ﬁnd
the optimal number of cycles. This procedure uses the optimal cycle lengths for the
inﬁnite horizon problem. The algorithm that we provide is efﬁcient in the sense that
solutions can be found in a constant amount of time irrespective of the value of T.
In the next section, we consider the case when the demand rate is constant only
over the initial few periods (say, T periods), and it could be time varying and
dynamic in periods beyond T. Thus, when we consider an N-period problem where
N [ T, we will assume a constant demand rate in periods 1 to T and possibly time
varying in periods T ? 1 to N. The cost structure does not change; that is, the cost
parameters K and h hold for all periods. There is no upper limit on capacity. The
lead time is assumed to be zero. As discussed in Chand et al. (2002), forecast
horizon results can be very useful for such dynamic problems, and we discuss this
in the next section.
3 Forecast Horizon Results for the Undiscounted Problem
We assume that the demand rate is constant over the ﬁrst T periods and it could be
time varying over the subsequent periods. It should be noted that the formulation
in Problem P1 holds for time varying demands if D is replaced by Dt (the demand
in period t). Also, the zero-inventory property holds. As a result, there is an
optimal solution such that the production in a period takes place only if the
32
S. Chand and S. Sethi

inventory at the end of the previous period is zero. The production batch size in a
period is equal to the sum of demands in an integer block of consecutive periods
starting from the period of production.
As discussed in Chand et al. (2002), managers are usually interested in the ﬁrst-
period decision in such dynamic environments, and the decisions are implemented
on a ‘‘rolling horizon’’ basis. To explain rolling horizons for a multi-period
problem, assume that we have demand forecasts for N periods and the ﬁrst-period
decision in the solution to the N-period problem is to order for k periods. After
k periods are over (that is, at the beginning of period k ? 1), the inventory falls to
zero and we need to place another order. We add forecasts for several future
periods to the forecasts that we already have so that we have forecasts for
R periods (R can be equal to N, but does not have to be), and select the order size
for period (k ? 1) by solving the R-period problem. Again, the ﬁrst decision is
implemented. This procedure is repeated every period and hence the term rolling
horizons. For a theory of rolling horizon optimality, the reader is referred to Sethi
and Sorger (1991).
Ideally, we are looking for a problem horizon such that the optimality of the
ﬁrst production lot size holds for arbitrary demands beyond the problem horizon.
That is, we are looking for a forecast horizon deﬁned below. For a general
treatment of forecast horizons, see Bes and Sethi (1988).
Deﬁnition Period g is a forecast horizon if the optimal ﬁrst production lot size for
the g-period problem remains optimal for longer problems irrespective of demands
in periods (g ? 1) and beyond.
We are at the beginning of period 1 and know that the demand rate is constant
for periods 1 to T, and want to determine if T is a forecast horizon. Lundin and
Morton (1975) developed a sufﬁcient condition to determine if T is a forecast
horizon, and we state this condition. This condition holds for the lot size problem
with or without constant initial demands. We need the following deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition A period t is called a production period if there is production in t.
We state the key results from Lundin and Morton without proofs. We use the
notation J(T) to denote the last production period in an optimal solution for the T-
period problem. Also, we let U
1ðjÞdenote the order quantity in the ﬁrst period in an
optimal solution for the j-period problem.
Lemma 4 Assume that we have the demand data for periods 1 to T, and have
solved for J(T). The demands in periods (T ? 1) and beyond are unknown.
Part 1: The (T ? 1)-period problem has at least one optimal solution such that
J(T ? 1) C J(T).
Part 2: Any problem with horizon longer than T has at least one optimal solution
with a production period in the set {J(T), J(T) ? 1, …, T}.
Part 3: If there is a quantity Q such that U
1ðjÞ ¼ Q for all j [ {J(T)-1, J(T), …,
T-1}, then period T is a forecast horizon.
Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary Demand
33

Proof We provide a brief outline of the proof; details can be found in Lundin and
Morton (1975).
Proof of Part 1: The proof is by contradiction. Let C(t, j) denote the minimum
cost of the t-period problem with the last setup in period j (j B t). Let d denote the
demand in period (T ? 1). Consider a modiﬁcation of the C(T,J(T))-solution such
that additional d units are produced in J(T); this solution is feasible for the (T ? 1)
period problem and its cost is
C(T ? 1, J(T)) = C(T,J(T)) ? h(T ? 1 - J(T))d.
Assume that the (T ? 1)-period problem does not have an optimal solution with
J(T ? 1) C J(T),
and
as
a
result
the
largest
J(T ? 1)
is
such
that
J(T ? 1) = k \ J(T). Then,
C(T ? 1, k) = C(T, k) ? h(T ? 1-k)d.
Note that C(T, k) C C(T, J(T)) because C(T, J(T)) is the minimum cost for the
T-period problem. Also, h(T ? 1-k)d [ h(T ? 1-J(T))d. It follows that
C(T ? 1, k) [ C(T ? 1, J(T)) for any k \ J(T). There is at least one optimal
solution such that J(T ? 1) = k C J(T).
Proof of Part 2: Consider a (T ? q) period problem with q C 1. It is easy to see
from Part 1 that J(T ? q) C J(T). If J(T ? q) [ {J(T), J(T) ? 1, …, T}, then we
are done. If not, then let J(T ? q) = T ? k for some k C 1, and the optimal
solution for the (T ? k-1) period problem is a part of the solution for the
(T ? q) period problem. Note that J(T ? k-1) C J(T). If J(T ? k-1) [ {J(T),
J(T) ? 1, …, T}, then we are done. If not, then there must be a b C 1 such that
J(T ? k-1) = T ? b and we next consider the (T ? b-1) period problem. We
continue this until there is a production in the set {J(T), J(T) ? 1, …, T}.
Proof of Part 3: A proof easily follows from Part 2 of the lemma. Every longer
problem (longer than T periods and any future demands) has a solution with a
production in the set {J(T), J(T) ? 1, …, T}. This implies that the solution for at
least one j-period problem with j [ {J(T)-1, J(T), …, T-1} is part of the optimal
solution for every longer problem. If there is a quantity Q such that U
1ðjÞ ¼ Q for
all j [ {J(T)-1, J(T), …, T-1}, then producing Q units in period 1 is a part of the
optimal solution for every longer problem. In other words, for any j [ T, there is
an optimal solution such that U
1ðjÞ ¼ Q. This completes the proof.
h
The condition in Part 3 will be called the forecast horizon condition or the FH
condition.
We next illustrate the results in the lemma by solving a numerical problem. The
goal in the example is to ﬁnd the earliest T when the forecast horizon condition is
met. The demand rate is assumed to be constant for periods 1 to T and unknown in
the later periods.
The set {J(T)-1, J(T), …, T-1} will be called the T-regeneration set (or the TR
set). Also, the vector UðTÞ ¼ fU
1ðTÞ; U
2ðTÞ; . . .; U
TðTÞg denotes the optimal
production quantities in a T-period solution.
Example 2 Same costs as in Example 1; that is, K = $6 per order, h = $1 per unit
per period, D = 1 unit per period.
34
S. Chand and S. Sethi

The cycle costs K þ nðn  1ÞDh=2 for the cycle lengths n = 1, 2,…., 5 are
(Table 1):
We next ﬁnd the optimal solutions for different values of T and stop when
T meets the forecast horizon condition (Table 2).
Interpretation T = 12 is the earliest when the forecast horizon condition is
met. If the constant demand rate of 1 unit per period holds for the ﬁrst 12 periods,
then any problem with horizon longer than 12 periods and any demands in periods
13 and beyond has an optimal solution with production of 3 units in period 1. In
other words, producing 3 periods’ worth of demand in period 1 will not constrain
the ability to ﬁnd an optimal solution for longer problems irrespective of demands
in periods 13 and beyond.
In the above example, note that m = 3 and m ? 1 = 4 are the optimal cycle
lengths for the constant-demand inﬁnite horizon problem. We notice that
T = 12 = 3 9 4 = m(m ? 1) for our example. Chand et al. (1990) showed that
T = m(m ? 1) is a forecast horizon; we state the result along with a shorter proof.
Recall that m denotes the smallest optimal cycle length for the constant-demand
inﬁnite-horizon problem.
Theorem 3 T = m(m ? 1) is a forecast horizon.
Proof For T = m(m ? 1), the problem has an optimal solution with (m ? 1)
cycles, each of length m periods, and J(T) = m2 ? 1 and TR Set = {m2, m2 ? 1,
Table 1 Costs for Example 2
Cycle length n
1
2
3
4
5
Cycle cost
6
7
9
12
16
Per-period cost
6
3.5
3
3
3.2
Table 2 Optimal solutions for different T values
T
U*(T)
U
1ðTÞ
J(T)
TR set
FH condition met?
1
{1}
1
1
{0}
No
2
{2, 0}
2
1
{0}
No
3
{3, 0, 0}
3
1
{0}
No
4
{4, 0, 0, 0}
4
1
{0}
No
5
{3, 0, 0, 2, 0}
3 or 2
4
{3, 4}
No
6
{3, 0, 0, 3, 0, 0}
3
4
{3, 4, 5}
No
7
{3, 0, 0, 4, 0, 0, 0}
3 or 4
4
{3, 4, 5, 6}
No
8
{4, 0, 0, 0, 4, 0, 0, 0}
4
5
{4, 5, 6, 7}
No
9
{3, 0, 0, 3, 0, 0, 3, 0, 0}
3
7
{6, 7, 8}
No
10
{3, 0, 0, 3, 0, 0, 4, 0, 0, 0}
3 or 4
7
{6, 7, 8, 9}
No
11
{3, 0, 0, 4, 0, 0, 0, 4, 0, 0, 0}
3 or 4
8
{7, 8, 9, 10}
No
12
{3, 0, 0, 3, 0, 0, 3, 0, 0, 3, 0, 0}
3
10
{9, 10, 11}
Yes
Notes For T = 5, U*(T) = {2, 0, 3, 0, 0} is also optimal, and hence there are two possible values
of U
1ð5Þ. There are alternate optimal solutions for other T values for the same reason
Since U
1ð9Þ ¼ U
1ð10Þ ¼ U
1ð11Þ ¼ 3; The FH condition is met for T = 12
Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary Demand
35

…, m2 ? m - 1}. To meet the forecast horizon condition, it is sufﬁcient to show
that U
1ðjÞ ¼ mD for all j [ {m2, m2 ? 1, …, m2 ? m-1}; that is, every j-period
problem with j [ {m2, m2 ? 1, …, m2 ? m-1} has an optimal solution such that
the ﬁrst order cycle covers the demands in m periods.
To show this, consider the (m2 ? b)-period problem with b [ {0, 1, …, m-1}.
From Theorem 2 and considering solution type m, we see that the (m2 ? b)-period
problem has an optimal solution with either m cycles or (m ? 1) cycles; we claim
that at least one of these cycles is of length m. If not, then all cycles will need to be
longer than m or shorter than m. (This follows from Property 2 of the optimal
solutions. If cycles can only differ by at most one period in length, then it is not
possible to have mix of cycle lengths larger than m and smaller than m.)
Case 1 (All cycles of length m ? 1 or larger): Given that the problem horizon
(m2 ? b) for b [ {0, 1, …, m-1} is less than m2 ? m, any feasible solution for the
(m2 ? b) problem that also satisﬁes Property 2 will have fewer than m cycles in
this case, and we do not have either m cycles or (m ? 1) cycles.
Case 2 (All cycles of length m-1 or shorter): Given that the problem horizon
(m2 ? b) for b [ {0, 1,…, m-1} is more than m2-1, it is easy to see that any
feasible solution for the (m2 ? b) problem that also satisﬁes Property 2 will have
more than (m ? 1) cycles in this case, and we do not have either m cycles or
(m ? 1) cycles.
It must be that there is a cycle of length m to get a solution that has either
m cycles or (m ? 1) cycles.
h
Forecast Horizon Length: As discussed in Chand et al. (1990), the length of
the forecast horizon can be shorter than m(m ? 1) depending on the value of K/
Dh. Values of T when the FH condition is satisﬁed for different values of K for our
example are given in the table (Table 3):
Note that when m(m ? 1) = 2K/Dh, the inﬁnite-horizon constant-demand
problem has alternate optimal solutions. The forecast horizon length (the FH
length) is equal to m(m ? 1) when the inﬁnite horizon constant demand problem
has alternate optimal solutions, and it is less than m(m ? 1) in all other cases.
Chand et al. (1990) provided few other forecast horizon results; we state these
results without proofs and illustrate them by using our example.
Lemma 5
Part 1: For m odd, m C 3, and K such that (m2-3) B 2K/Dh B (m2-1), there is a
forecast horizon T B (m ? 1)2/2-1.
Part 2: For m even, m C 2, and K such that (m2-2) B 2K/Dh B m2, there is a
forecast horizon T B m(m ? 1)/2.
Table 3 Effect of K on forecast horizon lengths
2K/Dh
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
m
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
m(m ? 1)
20
20
20
20
30
30
30
30
30
FH length
10
10
15
20
17
17
18
24
30
36
S. Chand and S. Sethi

Application of Part 1: Conditions in Part 1 of lemma are satisﬁed for K/
Dh = 11 and 12. With m = 5, Part 1 implies that T B (m ? 1)2/2-1 = 17. This
is consistent with our calculations.
Application of Part 2: Conditions in Part 2 of lemma are satisﬁed for K/Dh = 7
and 8. With m = 4, Part 2 implies that T B m(m ? 1)/2 = 10. This is consistent
with our calculations.
Chand et al. (1990) made an important observation on using these forecast
horizon results in determining the periods to be included in a rolling horizon
procedure for a dynamic problem.
Observation 4 Note that m in the expression m(m ? 1) is one EOQ’s worth.
Using a problem horizon of m(m ? 1) = [EOQ’s worth(1 ? EOQ’s worth)]
periods should give close to optimal decisions in a rolling horizon environment.
Summary 4 This section developed forecast horizon results for the constant-
demand undiscounted cost problem. If T is a forecast horizon, then for the given
constant demands in the ﬁrst T periods, the ﬁrst optimal decision for the T-period
problem remains optimal for any N [ T irrespective of the demands in (T ? 1)
and beyond. A forecast horizon condition was presented to detect a forecast
horizon. This condition is sufﬁcient but not necessary. It was shown that the length
of the forecast horizon is no more that m(m ? 1), where m is optimal EOQ’s worth
for the constant demand inﬁnite-horizon problem.
So far we have considered the average cost problem. We next consider the
discounted cost problem.
4 The Discounted Cost Problem
If a is the discount factor (0 \ a B 1) and b is the per-unit variable cost of
production (b C 0), then the T-period discounted cost problem can be formulated
as follows:
Problem P1Ð
Min
U1;U2;...;UT
X
T
t¼1
at1½K dðUtÞ þ bUt þ hIt
such that
I0 = 0,
It = It-1 ? Ut-D for t = 1, 2, …, T,
It C 0 for t = 1, 2, …, T and IT = 0.
The setup cost in period t is deﬁned as
KdðUtÞ ¼
0 if Ut¼0
K if Ut [ 0
n
o
:
Note We will use the character Ð to signify discounting to differentiate the
results in this section from those in the previous section.
Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary Demand
37

Since all costs are discounted to the beginning of period 1, the holding cost h in
the formulation should not include the cost of capital. The zero-inventory property
holds for this problem also. As a result, there is an optimal solution that consists of
a sequence of production cycles, each covering demands for a number of periods.
However, Property 2 for the undiscounted case (no two cycles could differ by more
than one period) does not hold for the discounted version of the problem. In
addition, how we sequence the order cycles matters for the discounted problem,
while it did not matter for the undiscounted problem.
As in the undiscounted version of the problem, the solution for the inﬁnite-
horizon problem will be used to develop properties for the ﬁnite-horizon problem.
We ﬁrst consider the inﬁnite-horizon problem.
Property 1 Ð (Cycle lengths for the discounted inﬁnite-horizon problem). The
discounted inﬁnite-horizon problem has an optimal solution that has cycles of
identical lengths.
Proof The proof for Property 3 for the undiscounted problem holds.
h
Let CðnÞ denote the cost of an n-period cycle discounted to the beginning of the
cycle, then
CðnÞ ¼ K þ bDn þ
X
n1
i¼1
aihDðn  1Þ:
Let Ð(n) denote the cost of the stationary policy for the inﬁnite-horizon
problem discounted to the beginning of period 1, then
FDðnÞ ¼ CðnÞ þ anCðnÞ þ a2nCðnÞ þ . . . ¼ CðnÞ
1  an
¼
K þ bDn þ P
n1
i¼1
aihDðn  1Þ
1  an
:
Chand et al. (1992) established the following important property of the function
FDðnÞ.
Property 2 Ð Let n* denote a cycle length that minimizes FDðnÞ. Then
(i)
FDðnÞ  FDðn0Þ  0 if n  n0  n;
(ii)
FDðnÞ  FDðn0Þ  0 if n  n0  n;
We let m denote the smallest cycle length that minimizes FDðnÞ. Then it is easy
to see that m is deﬁned by the condition in the following lemma.
38
S. Chand and S. Sethi

Lemma 1 Ð The smallest cycle length m that is optimal for the discounted
inﬁnite-horizon problem is such that FDðm  1Þ [ FDðmÞ  FDðm þ 1Þ
Proof A proof for this easily follows from Property 2 Ð.
h
Note: The result in Lemma 1 Ð suggests an enumerative search to ﬁnd m. A good
starting point for the search is ½½
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=ðh þ abÞD
p
, which is essentially the EOQ
for the undiscounted version of the problem obtained by replacing h by h þ ab.
Finding an optimal solution for the T-period problem requires ﬁnding the
optimal number of cycles and the lengths of these. Letting w represent the number
of cycles and let nk represent the length of the kth cycle, where k = 1, 2, …,
w. The T-period problem can be formulated as follows.
Problem P2 Ð
Min
w;n1;n2;...;nw½Cðn1Þ þ an1Cðn2Þ þ an1þn2Cðn3Þ þ    þ an1þn2þþnw1CðnwÞ
such that
X
w
i¼1
ni ¼ T:
In the rest of the chapter, we consider the case when the inﬁnite-horizon
problem has a unique optimal solution. Lemma 2 Ð below states three useful
properties of the optimal cycle lengths for a ﬁnite horizon problem. A formal proof
of the lemma is given in Chand et al. (1992) and we skip it here.
Lemma 2 Ð
Part 1: No cycle can exceed max{2, 2m-1} in any optimal solution to the T-period
problem.
Part 2: Let nk denote the length of the kth cycle. The T-period problem has at least
one
optimal
solution
such
that
either
m  n1  n2      nw or m  n1  n2      nw.
Part 3: If there is an integer r such that T = rm, then a solution that consists of r
cycles each of length m is optimal for the T-period problem.
The ﬁrst part provides a bound on the cycle length for any optimal solution. The
second part shows that we can restrict our search to a set of cycle lengths that
satisfy certain monotonicity conditions. The third part speciﬁes solution for a
special case when T is an integer multiple of m.
Chand et al. (1992) discuss an interesting interpretation of the cost function
C(n) that leads to a proof for Part 2 of the above lemma. If X(n) is the equivalent
per period cost of an n-period cycle, then
CðnÞ ¼ XðnÞ þ aXðnÞ þ a2XðnÞ þ . . . þ an1XðnÞ ¼ ð1  anÞXðnÞ
1  a
) XðnÞ ¼ ð1  aÞCðnÞ
ð1  anÞ
¼ ð1  aÞFDðnÞ
Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary Demand
39

Thus, ð1  aÞFDðnÞis the equivalent per period cost of a cycle of length
n. Also, ð1  aÞFDðmÞis the minimum per-period cost. Part 3 of the lemma
suggests using a solution with the minimum equivalent per- period cost; and
clearly that is optimal. If we have to use cycles with per-period cost higher than
ð1  aÞFDðmÞ, then Part 2 suggests that the cycles should be arranged such that
equivalent per period costs are non-decreasing. (From Property 2 D, it follows that
FDðmÞ  FDðn1Þ  FDðn2Þ    FDðnwÞfor the cycle lengths in Part 2 of the
lemma.) Since a smaller discount factor applies if costs are delayed, it is better to
delay larger costs if possible. Thus, it is optimal to arrange the cycles such that the
per-period costs are non-decreasing.
Lemma 3 Ð below provides a bound on the number of cycles in an optimal
solution. We state this without a formal proof. Proof for Lemma 3 can be extended
to this lemma by using Property 2 Ð and Lemma 2 Ð.
Lemma 3 Ð The optimal number of cycles is ½½T=m or ½½T=m þ 1:
We can now give steps for solving a T-period discounted cost problem.
Steps of the algorithm for the discounted cost:
Step 1: Find m using Lemma 1 Ð.
Step 2: If T/m is an integer, then the optimal solution has T/m cycles, each of
length m periods. Go to Step 3 if T/m is not an integer.
Step 3: Find a solution with ½½T=m cycles using Part 2 of Lemma 3 Ð. Find
another solution with ½½T=m þ 1 cycles using again Part 2 of Lemma 3
Ð. Choose the solution with the lower cost.
The following lemma is needed to prove the forecast horizon theorem. Recall
that U
1ðjÞ denotes the ﬁrst period production in an optimal solution to the j-period
problem.
Lemma 4 Ð U
1ðjÞ = mD for all j [ {m2, m2 ? 1, …, m2 ? m-1}; that is, every
j-period problem with j [ {m2, m2 ? 1, …, m2 ? m-1} has an optimal solution
such that the ﬁrst order cycle covers demands in m periods.
Proof Note that m2  j\mðm þ 1Þ. From Lemma 3 Ð, the j-period problem for
m2  j  mðm þ 1Þ  1 has an optimal solution with either m cycles or (m ? 1)
cycles, and we need to consider two cases.
Case 1 (m cycles): From Part 2 of Lemma 2 Ð, the cycle lengths will need to be
m periods or longer, because otherwise the problem horizon will be less than m2.
Also, not all cycles can be longer than m periods, because then the problem
horizon will be longer than m(m ? 1). Thus, at least one cycle will need to be
m periods long, and we can use U
1ðjÞ ¼ mD from Part 2 of Lemma 3 Ð.
Case 2 (m ? 1 cycles): The cycle lengths will need to be m periods or shorter,
because otherwise the problem horizon will be more than m(m ? 1) - 1. Also, not
all cycles can be shorter than m periods, because then the problem horizon will be
shorter than m2. Thus, at least one cycle will need to be m periods long, and we can
use U
1ðjÞ ¼ mD from Part 2 of Lemma 2 Ð.
40
S. Chand and S. Sethi

We are now ready to state the forecast horizon theorem.
Theorem 1 Ð T = m(m ? 1) is a forecast horizon.
Proof Results in Lemma 4 for the undiscounted problem holds for the discounted
problem also. The proof for the forecast horizon theorem for the undiscounted
problem (Theorem 3) can be easily extended for the discounted problem by using
Lemma 4 Ð.
h
Summary 5 This section showed that a stationary order policy is also optimal for
the discounted-cost constant-demand inﬁnite-horizon problem. A simple enumer-
ative search method was provided to ﬁnd the optimal EOQ for the inﬁnite-horizon
problem. For the ﬁnite-horizon problem, a property was developed to characterize
the optimal cycle lengths, and this property was used in proving the forecast
horizon theorem. It was shown that m(m ? 1) is a forecast horizon for the dis-
counted problem also.
We make a comment on the assumption I0 = 0, and then close the chapter by
providing a summary.
Assumption (I0 = 0) If I0 [ 0, then some initial demands could be met from I0.
After adjusting the initial demands for I0, it is possible that the ﬁrst demand in the
problem is less than D. Assume that the ﬁrst demand is equal to D-a, where
0 \ a\D. Adjusting a solution that is feasible for demand of D in Period 1 for the
reduced demand of (D-a) reduces the cost by ba. Since the cost difference is a
constant, assuming a = 0 will not change the optimal solution if the ﬁrst order
quantity is interpreted as number of periods of demands covered by the order
quantity.
5 Summary and Concluding Remarks
This chapter considered the periodic-review EOQ problem. Both undiscounted and
discounted cost problems were considered. Also, both ﬁnite and inﬁnite-horizon
problems were considered. The results for the inﬁnite horizon EOQ problem were
used to analyze the ﬁnite horizon EOQ problem. With the zero-inventory property,
a solution can be viewed as a collection of order cycles where a cycle covers the
demands in a successive block of periods.
It was discussed that the inﬁnite-horizon problem has an optimal solution that
has cycles of identical lengths. However, the solution is not guaranteed to be
unique and up to two different cycle lengths can be optimal. The cycle lengths
differ by one period if two different cycle lengths are optimal for the inﬁnite-
horizon problem. If two cycle lengths are optimal for the inﬁnite-horizon problem,
then any mix of these cycles is also optimal.
The optimal cycle length for the inﬁnite-horizon problem led to a ﬁnite bound
on the number of cycles in the optimal solution for the ﬁnite-horizon problem. The
Multi-Period Lot-Sizing with Stationary Demand
41

next step was to illustrate the results for solving a ﬁnite-horizon problem for a
given number of cycles.
For the ﬁnite-horizon undiscounted cost problem, the optimal solution has the
property that no two cycles can differ by more than one period; and in addition,
such a solution is unique for a given number of cycles. An efﬁcient algorithm to
solve the ﬁnite-horizon problem was described that used these results.
For the ﬁnite-horizon discounted cost problem, there is a property that char-
acterizes the optimal cycle lengths along with the sequence of these. But this
characterization may not lead to an efﬁcient algorithm to ﬁnd the cycles. For future
research, it will be interesting to investigate the characteristics of the cycle lengths
with an eye on developing an efﬁcient algorithm.
This chapter also summarized the forecast horizon results for these problems.
[EOQ’s worth(1 ? EOQ’s worth)] periods is a forecast horizon for both prob-
lems. By providing the forecast horizon results, we essentially addressed the issue
of selection the length of the problem horizon when the demand rate is constant
over an initial few periods and could be time-varying after these periods.
The literature reports many applications of the results for the ﬁnite and inﬁnite-
horizon continuous time EOQ problems. For example, Lev and Weiss (1990)
consider the case with announced price changes. The models in this chapter can be
used to address many of these applications.
References
Bes, C. and Sethi, S.P., ‘‘Concepts of Forecast and Decision Horizons: Applications to Dynamic
Stochastic Optimization Problems,’’ Mathematics of Operations Research, 13(2), May 1988,
295–310.
Beyer, D. and Sethi, S.P., ‘‘A Proof of the EOQ Formula Using Quasi-Variational Inequalities,’’
International Journal of Systems Science, 29, 11, 1998, 1295–1299.
Chand, S., ‘‘Lot Sizing for Products with Finite Demand Horizon and Periodic Review Policy,’’
European Journal of Operational Research, 11 (1982), 145–148.
Chand, S., S. P. Sethi and J. Proth, ‘‘Existence of Forecast Horizons in Undiscounted Discrete-
Time Lot Size Models,’’ Operations Research, 38 (1990), 884–892.
Chand, S., S. P. Sethi and G. Sorger, ‘‘Forecast Horizons in the Discounted Dynamic Lot Size
Model,’’ Management Science, 38 (1992), 1034–1048.
Chand, S., V. Hsu and S. P. Sethi, ‘‘Forecast, Solution and Rolling Horizons in Operations
Management Problems: A Classiﬁed Bibliography,’’ M&SOM, vol. 4 (2002), 25–43.
Lev, B. and H. Weiss, ‘‘Inventory Models with Cost Changes,’’ Operations research, 38(1990),
53–63.
Lundin, R. A. and T. E. Morton, ‘‘Planning Horizon for the Dynamic Lot Size Model: Zabel vs.
Protective Procedures and Computational Results,’’ Operations Research, 23(1975), 711–734.
Orlin, J. B., ‘‘Some Easy Knapsack/Partition Problems,’’ Operations Research, 33 (1985),
1154–1160.
Sethi, S.P. and Sorger, G., ‘‘A Theory of Rolling Horizon Decision Making,’’ Annals of O.R., 29,
1991, 387–416.
Wagner, H. M. and T. M. Whitin, ‘‘Dynamic Version of the Economic Lot-Size Model,’’
Management Science, 5 (1958), 86-96; also reprinted in Management Science, 12 (2004),
1770–1774.
42
S. Chand and S. Sethi

EOQ Models with Supply Disruptions
Zümbül Atan and Lawrence V. Snyder
Abstract Most of the early research in inventory theory concentrates purely on
demand uncertainty. However, models which aim to capture the dynamics of real-
world systems must also take uncertainties in the supply side into consideration.
One type of supply uncertainty that has attracted considerable attention during the
past decade is supply disruptions, such as those that arise as a result of customs
delays, labor strikes, and natural disasters. Over the past several years, companies
have developed many strategies to mitigate the effects of such disruptions. One
strategy is to hold more inventory with the additional amount serving as a buffer
against disruptions. Since it is among the most basic inventory models, the EOQ
model features prominently in the earliest work on disruptions, as well as many
subsequent models. This chapter summarizes the studies on EOQ models with
supply disruptions.
1 Introduction
An Icelandic volcano eruption in 2010 resulted in the shutdown of Europe’s
airspace for a number of days, causing delays in air freight shipments for many
multi-national companies. A number of factories ﬂooded due to the Japanese
earthquake and tsunami in 2011, causing production to be halted. Floods in
Thailand, in 2011, severely affected high-tech supply chains, resulting in shortages
Z. Atan (&)
School of Industrial Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600 MB
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
e-mail: Z.Atan@tue.nl
L. V. Snyder
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA
18015, USA
e-mail: larry.snyder@lehigh.edu
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_3,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
43

of some key components and shutdowns of signiﬁcant processes. These are some
recent examples of supply disruptions that have caused supply chains to stop
functioning properly for considerable period of time.
Snyder et al. (2012) deﬁne supply disruptions as random events that cause a
supplier or other elements of the supply chain to stop functioning either com-
pletely or partially, for a random duration of time. As the examples above suggest,
these random events can have signiﬁcant operational effects resulting in severe
ﬁnancial loses (Hendricks and Singhal 2003, 2005a, b). In order to avoid or reduce
the overall impact, supply chain practitioners need to improve the way in which
they run their supply chains.
There are multiple disruption mitigation strategies that companies can choose
from (Tomlin 2010). One of them is to hold more safety stock with the additional
inventory serving as a buffer against disruptions. Most research on evaluating this
strategy considers single-location systems (although some more recent papers
consider multi-echelon systems). Since it is among the most basic inventory
models, the economic order quantity (EOQ) model serves as ideal starting point.
The assumption of deterministic demand enables us to isolate the pure effects of
supply disruptions and to obtain results and insights that can assist in solving more
complex problems.
In this chapter, we discuss the EOQ model with disruptions. The exact for-
mulation and an approximation for the simplest model, with external disruptions
only, are explained in Sect. 2. In Sect. 3, we present the EOQ model with both
external and internal disruptions. We brieﬂy discuss other extensions of the EOQ
model with disruptions in Sect. 4.
2 The EOQ Model with External Supply Disruptions
2.1 The Exact Model
We ﬁrst consider the classical EOQ model with a single retailer and a single item.
Demand is deterministic and continuous (with a rate of d items per unit time) and
production or delivery is instantaneous. There is a ﬁxed cost, K, per order and a
holding cost, h, per item per unit time. In the absence of disruptions, the average
cost per unit time, the optimal order quantity and the corresponding Optimal
average cost per unit time are as in the following proposition.
Proposition 1 The average cost per unit time, the optimal order quantity and
the optimal average cost for the classical EOQ model are
C Q
ð Þ ¼ Kd
Q þ hQ
2 ;
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Kd
h
r
;
C Q
ð
Þ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Kdh
p
One implicit assumption of the classical EOQ model is the perfect reliability of
the supplier. Parlar and Berkin (1991) are the ﬁrst to relax this assumption by
44
Z. Atan and L. V. Snyder

considering the possibility of supply disruptions. They assume that the supplier
functions normally for a certain amount of time and then is disrupted for a certain
amount of time. We refer to the disrupted times as dry intervals and times during
which the supplier functions normally as wet intervals (Other authors sometimes
refer to these as off and on intervals, down and up intervals, etc.). The retailer
cannot receive any items from the supplier during dry intervals. Unlike the clas-
sical EOQ, the retailer will stock out on customer demands that occur when the
retailer does not have any inventory and its supplier is in a dry interval. We assume
that unmet demands are lost, and that lost sales incur a cost of p per item.
It is possible to make different assumptions about the transitions from one state
to the other, but for the sake of simplicity, we assume that the transitions between
dry and wet intervals are governed by a continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC).
The duration of dry and wet intervals is exponentially distributed with rates l
(known as the recovery rate) and k (known as the disruption rate), respectively.
The EOQ problem with disruptions is known as the EOQD. The inventory
curve for it is as pictured in Fig. 1.
Parlar and Berkin (1991) derive an expression for the expected cost per unit
time and prove its convexity. However, their analysis contains some errors. First,
they assume that stockouts occur every time the supplier is disrupted, but in fact, it
is possible for a disruption to begin and end entirely during an interval in which the
retailer has positive inventory. The other error is that, they account for the lost
sales cost as though it is incurred per item per unit time, rather than simply per
item. Berk and Arreola-Risa (1994) correct these mistakes and present the results
that we discuss below.
Deﬁne the time between successive orders as a cycle with a random length, T. If
the supplier is in a wet interval when the retailer places an order, we have T ¼ Q
d.
Otherwise, the retailer needs to wait for a positive duration of time until the
disruption is over. Deﬁne b to be the probability that the supplier is in a dry
Fig. 1 Inventory curve for EOQD model (Parlar and Berkin 1991)
EOQ Models with Supply Disruptions
45

interval when the retailer places a replenishment order. Using the properties of the
underlying CTMC it can be shown that
b ¼
k
k þ l 1  e kþl
ð
ÞQ
d


The probability density function of T, f(t), is the following:
f tð Þ ¼
0;
if t\Q=d
1  b;
if t ¼ Q=d
blel tQ
d
ð
Þ;
if t [ Q=d
8
<
:
Based on this function, we can say that each cycle lasts for at least Q
d time units
and after that, with probability b, it lasts, on average, an additional 1
b time units.
This implies that the expected cycle length is E T
½  ¼ Q
d þ b
l :
As in the classical EOQ model, we want to ﬁnd an expression for the expected
cost per unit time and then determine the order quantity Q that minimizes this cost.
Given that we know E T
½  we can determine an expression for the expected cost per
cycle and then make use of the Renewal Reward Theorem to ﬁnd the expected cost
per unit time.
The total order cost and the Holding cost per cycle are the same as in the
classical EOQ model: K þ cQ and h Q2
2d, respectively. In addition, we have a
penalty cost for lost sales arising when the inventory level is zero and the supplier
is in a dry interval. Due to the memoryless property of the exponential distribution,
the remaining duration of a dry interval after a replenishment order is given by 1
l :
Hence, the expected penalty cost per cycle is p db
l : As a result, the overall expected
cycle cost and the expected cost per unit time are given via the following
proposition.
Proposition 2 The expected cycle cost for the EOQ model with exponential
disruption and recovery rates (k and l, respectively) is:
K þ cQ þ h Q2
2d þ p db
l
The corresponding expected cost per unit time is given by
C Q
ð Þ ¼
K þ cQ þ h Q2
2d þ p db
l
Q
d þ b
l
Next, we want to determine Q, which is the order quantity that minimizes
C Q
ð Þ. It is not known whether C Q
ð Þ is convex. It is, however, quasiconvex, which
implies that it has a single local minimum. Nevertheless, there is, unfortunately, no
closed-form expression for Q, primarily due to the exponential terms within b
(Recall that b is itself a function of Q). Numerical techniques must be used to
determine Q.
46
Z. Atan and L. V. Snyder

Consistent with the classical EOQ model, Berk and Arreola-Risa (1994)
demonstrate numerically that Q is nondecreasing in K, p, and d. In addition, it is
nondecreasing in the availability ratio k
l ; which implies that the retailer orders
more when its supplier is disrupted more frequently and/or for longer intervals.
2.2 An Approximation
Although the EOQD can be solved numerically, an approximate closed-form
solution is still attractive since it can be used in solving other problems that require
the optimal order quantity or cost as an input. In addition, a closed-form solution
can provide insights that might be difﬁcult to obtain from numerical methods. To
this end, Snyder (2011) introduces a simple method that approximates the cost
function by a convex function. In particular, the author approximates b with a new
term b0 which ignores the exponential term:
b0 ¼
k
k þ l
In fact, b0 is the probability that the supplier is in a dry interval at an arbitrary
point in time, while b is the probability that the supplier is in a dry interval when a
replenishment order is placed. By replacing b with b0, the transient behavior of the
system is ignored and it is assumed that the system approaches steady state very
quickly. This approximation performs quite well when the Cycle length is rela-
tively long, i.e., Q
d is relatively large.
As pointed out above, the approximation leads to an expected cost function that
is convex, and whose minimizer can be expressed in closed-form by setting the
derivative of the cost function to 0 and solving for Q: The following proposition
summarizes the approximate result.
Proposition 3 Approximating b with
k
kþl ; the order quantity to minimize C Q
ð Þ
becomes
Q0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Kd
h
þ A2 þ B
r
 A
where
A ¼ b0d
l
and
B ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2d2pb0
hl
s
Recall that the optimal order quantity for the classical EOQ model is
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Kd
h
q
,
implying that—Q0 is larger. The same relation holds for the optimal cost. Snyder
(2011) also demonstrates that ignoring the possibility of supply disruptions and
using the order quantity from the classical EOQ model can be very costly if the
disruption risk is nontrivial.
EOQ Models with Supply Disruptions
47

3 The EOQ Model with External and Internal Supply
Disruptions
The simplest EOQD model takes into consideration only disruptions at the
supplier, i.e., external disruptions. Next, we consider a retailer that faces random
disruptions both internally and externally. In case of an internal disruption all
inventory at the retailer is destroyed, and the retailer cannot place a new order until
the disruption is over. Examples of these types of disruptions include ﬁres,
machine breakdowns resulting in damaged items, and so on. The transitions
between dry and wet intervals for the internal disruptions are similarly governed
by a CTMC. The duration of these dry and wet intervals is exponentially
distributed with recovery rate c and disruption rate a, respectively.
We retain all the assumption in the previous section regarding the external
disruptions and system parameters. Our objective, as in Sect. 2, is to ﬁnd the
optimal order quantity. This problem is studied by Qi et al. (2009) and the
following results are based on their analysis.
We again deﬁne the time between two successive orders as a cycle and develop
an expression for the expected cost function using the Renewal Reward Theorem.
The expected cost function C Q
ð Þ is the sum of the expected ordering, holding, and
lost-sales costs, divided by the expected cycle length.
Proposition 4 The expected cost function for the EOQ model with external and
internal Disruptions is
C Q
ð Þ ¼ pd þ
K þ c þ h
a


Q 
1  eaQ
d


hd
a2 þ pd
a


E T
½ 
Here, E T
½  is the expected cycle length which is itself a messy function
depending on the disruption parameters, as well as on Q and d. It can be shown
that C Q
ð Þ is quasiconvex in Q. As a result, like the EOQD, the optimal order
quantity can be found using any method for solving single-dimensional uncon-
strained quasiconvex optimization problems, such as bisection or golden section
search. However, one cannot derive a closed-form expression for Q.
Using a similar idea as that of Snyder (2011), Qi et al. (2009) propose an
effective approximation for the average cost function. They derive an approximate
but closed form expression for the optimal order quantity by replacing one
exponential term in the objective function with zero and another with its second-
order Taylor-series expansion. The corresponding approximate Optimal order
quantity, Q0, is given by
Q0 ¼ d
A þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
A2 þ
2a AþB
ð
Þ aKB
d þA pc
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
caþh
r
a A þ B
ð
Þ
48
Z. Atan and L. V. Snyder

where
A ¼
k a þ c
ð
Þ
cl a þ k þ l
ð
Þ
and
B ¼ 1
a þ 1
c
Qi et al. (2009) show that, when the retailer is never disrupted, i.e., when a ¼ 0,
Q0 reduces to the approximate solution derived by Snyder (2011) (see Sect. 2.2),
and when neither the retailer nor the supplier is disrupted, Q0 reduces to the
classical EOQ solution.
Qi et al. (2009) compare the optimal order quantity of the EOQ model, QEOQ
and Q0. In fact, the difference Q0  QEOQ can be deﬁned as the safety stock that the
retailer holds to protect against both types of disruptions. This safety stock
increases with the supplier’s disruption probability and it decreases with the
supplier’s recovery probability. On the other hand, the retailer tends to keep small
or even negative safety stock when the retailer is often disrupted. The reason is that
the internal disruptions destroy the retailer’s inventory. In fact, Q0 is small when
the retailer is disrupted very often or the supplier has high availability.
The authors also compare the effects of both types of disruptions on the ﬁll rate
and conclude that internal disruptions have a greater impact than external ones.
This result is in line with the conclusion by Atan and Snyder (2012), who state that
in one-warehouse, multiple-retailer (OWMR) systems with disruptions, uncer-
tainty in the part of the supply chain closer to the customers has a more signiﬁcant
negative impact than uncertainty farther upstream. As a result, one can conclude
that when both the retailer and its supplier are subject to disruptions, although both
disruption types have signiﬁcant effects and one needs to consider both to achieve
cost savings, disruptions at the retailer have a much larger impact on the ﬁll rate at
the retailer than disruptions at the supplier do.
The approximation by Qi et al. (2009) is used by Qi et al. (2010) in the context
of a joint location-inventory model with disruptions. The approximation enables
the optimal inventory cost to be a concave function of the demand, and this
property allows Qi et al. (2010) to apply an effective algorithm in solving their
optimization problem. This is analogous to the way in which Daskin et al. (2002)
embed the cost of the classical EOQ model into a joint location-inventory model
without disruptions.
4 Extensions of the EOQD Model
The EOQD is the simplest continuous-review model with Supply disruptions, but
its solution allows practitioners to have a basic understanding of the effects of
supply disruptions on inventory management decisions. This model is extended in
multiple ways. In this section, we discuss a few such extensions with fewer
mathematical details.
EOQ Models with Supply Disruptions
49

4.1 Disruptions in Manufacturing Environments
In addition to Supply chains, manufacturing environments are also subject to
disruptions, resulting from machine breakdowns or maintenance requirements.
Compared to disruptions caused by natural disasters, labor strikes, etc., disruptions
on the manufacturing ﬂoor tend to be more minor. Keeping inventory buffers to
mitigate the effects of these disruptions is the commonly employed strategy.
In this section, we discuss an unreliable manufacturing process studied by
Groenevelt et al. (1992a, b). The demand is deterministic, continuous and constant
with rate d items per unit time. The production process is continuous with rate
P items per unit time. The classical economic manufacturing quantity (EMQ)
model assumes that inventory accumulates during production intervals and is
depleted until the inventory reaches level zero. Then, production begins again.
However, in the unreliable process, we assume that when a machine breakdown
takes place the interrupted lot is aborted and the next production interval begins
when the inventory is depleted. Figure 2 depicts the on-hand inventory for the
classical EMQ problem and the EMQ problem with breakdowns.
We consider two maintenance processes for the EMQ with machine break-
downs. The ﬁrst one is corrective maintenance. It is performed after every
breakdown and it costs K ? M. The second one is regular maintenance. It is
performed at the end of each production interval and it costs K. Both corrective
and regular maintenances are instantaneous.
When the manufacturing process is functioning properly, i.e., the system is in a
wet interval, the next machine breakdown is assumed to happen at time B, which is
a random variable with density and distribution functions f b
ð Þ and F b
ð Þ, respec-
tively. Given that the system also incurs a linear holding cost of h per item per unit
time, the objective is to ﬁnd the lot size, Q, that minimizes the average cost per
unit time.
Fig. 2 Inventory curves for the classical EMQ model and the EMQ model with disruptions
(Groenevelt et al. 1992a)
50
Z. Atan and L. V. Snyder

Groenevelt et al. (1992a) deﬁne a cycle as the time between starts of successive
production runs and obtain the following expression for the expected cost function:
E C
½  ¼
ZQ=P
0
K þ M þ 1
2 h P  d
ð
Þ P
d b2


f b
ð Þdb
þ
Z1
Q=P
K þ 1
2 h P  d
ð
Þ P  d
pd
Q2


f b
ð Þdb
The ﬁrst integral is the expected cycle cost if the time to machine breakdown is
shorter than Q
P : This means that a breakdown happens that requires a corrective
maintenance costing K ? M. The third component of the ﬁrst integral is the
expected holding cost per unit time for the cycle during which a machine break-
down happens. The second integral is the expected cycle cost if the time to
machine breakdown is longer than Q
P : That means a breakdown does not occur and
the regular maintenance is enough. As in the ﬁrst integral, the expected cost for
this type of cycle is the sum of maintenance and inventory holding costs.
The expected cycle length is given by
E T
½  ¼
ZQ=P
0
P
d bf b
ð Þdb þ
Z1
Q=P
Q
d f b
ð Þdb
As in the expected cycle cost function, the ﬁrst and the second parts are the
expected cycle lengths if the time to the next disruption is shorter and longer than
Q
P ; respectively.
Using Renewal Theory, the long-run average cost per unit of time can be
calculated as E C
½ 
E T
½ . As in the EOQD model, the cost expression is complex and it
cannot be solved in closed-form when B has a general distribution. On the other
hand, if B is exponential with rate k, Q is the unique nonnegative solution of the
following nonlinear equation:
e kQ
P
ð Þ þ kQ
P ¼ 1 þ
dk2K
hP P  d
ð
Þ
This rather simple equation allows Groenevelt et al. (1992a) to obtain some
basic insights. They prove that the long-run average corrective maintenance cost
does not depend on Q. They also show that Q and the optimal cost values are
increasing functions of k. Via Proposition 1, the authors prove that when the
system approaches perfect reliability Q approaches the classical EMQ.
EOQ Models with Supply Disruptions
51

Proposition 5 When the rate k goes to zero, Q approaches the classical EMQ,
i.e.
lim
k!0 Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2KdP
h P  d
ð
Þ
s
Surprisingly, Groenevelt et al. (1992a) prove that when the system is subject to
disruptions, using the classical EMQ disruptions instead of Q results in an
average cost increase of at most 2 %. Although, the difference between the EMQ
and Q can be very large, the reason for the small cost difference is that when a
machine breakdown takes place, the interrupted lot is aborted. Hence, the differ-
ence in the average lot sizes is much smaller than the difference in the optimal lot
sizes.
An important assumption of the EMQ model with disruptions is that the
corrective maintenance times are negligible. In reality, repairs might be time
consuming. Safety stocks are required to satisfy the customer demands arising
during disruptions lasting long enough to deplete the entire inventory. Under these
conditions, one needs to maintain separate cycle and safety stocks, the latter to be
used only when a machine breakdown occurs. In fact, Groenevelt et al. (1992b)
show that the optimal safety stock level increases with the disruption rate, required
service level, demand rate, and setup and repair times.
4.2 Disrupted Demand Process
Disruptions do not only affect supply side of the inventory systems, but they can
also result in intermittent demand. Weiss and Rosenthal (1992) study an EOQ
model with a single disruption that can happen in either the supply or demand
process. In this section, we discuss the latter case only.
Assume that a demand disruption happens at a single known time in the future,
S. The disruption lasts for a random length D  0 with distribution function FD tð Þ
and incurs a cost at a constant rate, p, per disrupted time. When the demand
process is interrupted, demand does not arrive and the inventory level stays the
same from the beginning until the end of the disruption. Otherwise, the demand is
continuous and constant with rate d. Each order incurs a setup cost of K and there
is a unit holding cost h per unit time. The objective is to determine the structure of
the optimal policy and develop an algorithm for ﬁnding the optimal order quantity.
Weiss and Rosenthal (1992) consider two cases, ﬁrst with the disruption
occurring just as the inventory is depleted and second with the disruption hap-
pening when the inventory level is positive. In both cases, the inventory level
remains the same from the beginning to the end of the disruption.
52
Z. Atan and L. V. Snyder

Weiss and Rosenthal (1992) show that for the ﬁrst case, the optimal policy is to
place n S
ð Þ orders of size
dS
n S
ð Þ before the disruption happens. Here, n S
ð Þ is then
that satisﬁes
n n  1
ð
Þ  hdS2
2K  n n þ 1
ð
Þ
After the disruption is over at time S ? D, the ordinary EOQ policy needs to be
employed.
For the second case, suppose that at time S the inventory level is a. The optimal
order, Q, before the disruption is given by
Q ¼ C
h  dE D
½ 
where C ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2dKh
p
, i.e., the optimal average cost of the classical EOQ model.
Like the ﬁrst case, after the disruption the optimal order quantity is given by the
EOQ.
4.3 EOQD Model with Demand Uncertainty
Bar-Lev et al. (1993) extends the EOQD model of Parlar and Berkin (1991) by
considering Stochastic demand. The inventory process is assumed to be a
Brownian motion with negative drift implying that customers can return items.
Assuming ﬁnite capacity, the objective is to ﬁnd the order quantity and the
capacity. Cost parameters include ﬁxed and variable ordering costs, linear holding
and stockout costs, as well as a cost that is linear in the capacity. Using Renewal
Theory, the authors derive the expected cost function and minimize it numerically.
4.4 Phase-Type Disruption Parameters
Ross et al. (2008) study the EOQD problem with durations of dry and wet intervals
having phase-type distributions. The authors model this problem as a non-homo-
geneous continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC) and solve it numerically. They
propose several ordering policies and compare the costs of these policies under
different parameter settings. They conclude that nonstationary policies not only
provide some cost beneﬁt but are also robust to errors in estimating the system
parameters.
EOQ Models with Supply Disruptions
53

5 Conclusions and Future Research Directions
In this chapter, we summarized the studies on EOQ models with supply disrup-
tions. For the EOQ model with disruptions at the external supplier only, we
showed the derivation of the exact expression for the expected cost and claimed
the impossibility of obtaining a closed-form solution for the optimal order quan-
tity. Then, we mentioned an approximation which results in a closed-form
expression and shows how much more inventory is needed in order to be buffer
against the uncertainty introduced by supply disruptions. In addition, we
summarized EOQ models with both external and internal disruptions. As in the
previous case, the exact expression for the expected cost does not yield a closed-
form expression for the optimal order quantity but an approximation exists. An
important ﬁnding of this model is that internal disruptions have a greater impact
than external ones. Finally, we studied extensions of EOQ models with disruptions
to manufacturing environments. We also studied extensions with disrupted
demand processes, demand uncertainty and phase-type disruption parameters.
All the studies summarized in this chapter suggest that if inventory is chosen as
a disruption mitigation strategy, keeping extra inventory, the amount of which
depends on disruption parameters, is required. These studies make an assumption
regarding the structure of the inventory replenishment policy and do not try to ﬁnd
the optimal policy structure. Although there are some studies on optimal policy
structures for single-location systems subject to disruptions, for multi-echelon
systems this is rather difﬁcult. De Croix (2012) proves the optimality of state-
dependent base-stock policies for serial systems with linear holding and backor-
dering costs and extends this result to assembly systems. Future research should be
conducted on identifying optimal policies for distribution and more general
systems.
There are many other directions for future research on the subject of inventory
models subject to supply disruptions. Objective functions other than minimizing
the expected cost should be explored. For example, worst-case analysis is an
attractive alternative to reﬂect decision makers’ risk-averse attitudes toward dis-
ruptions. In addition, more general models of disruption processes are likely to
reﬂect the complexities of real-world consequences more realistically. The liter-
ature has a huge gap in this respect. Another important question is how to estimate
the parameters on these processes. supply disruptions are random events and
historical data might not provide accurate enough information. More research is
needed to develop methods for parameter estimation.
54
Z. Atan and L. V. Snyder

References
Z. Atan and L. Snyder. Disruptions in one-warehouse multiple-retailer systems. Working Paper,
P.C. Rossin College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Lehigh University, Bethlehem,
PA, 2012.
S. K. Bar-Lev, M. Parlar and D. Perry. Impulse control of a Brownian inventory system with
supplier uncertainty. Journal of Stochastic Analysis and Applications, 11:11–27, 1993.
E. Berk and A. Arreola-Risa. Note on ‘‘Future supply uncertainty in EOQ models’’. Naval
Research Logistics, 41:129–132, 1994.
M. S. Daskin, C. R. Coullard and Z. -J. M. Shen. An inventory-location model: Formulation,
solution algorithm, and computational results. Annals of Operations Research, 110:83–106,
2002.
G. A. De Croix. Inventory Management for an Assembly System Subject to Supply Disruptions.
To appear in Management Science, 2013
H. Groenevelt, L. Pintelon and A. Seidmann. Production lot sizing with machine breakdowns.
Management Science, 38(1):104–123, 1992a.
H. Groenevelt, L. Pintelon and A. Seidmann. Production batching with machine breakdowns and
safety stocks. Operations Research, 40(5):959–927, 1992b.
K. B. Hendricks and V. R. Singhal. The effect of supply chain glitches on shareholder wealth.
Journal of Operations Management, 21(5), 501–522, 2003.
K. B. Hendricks and V. R. Singhal. Association between supply chain glitches and operating
performance. Management Science, 51(5), 695–711, 2005a.
K. B. Hendricks and V. R. Singhal. An empirical analysis of the effect of supply chain disruptions
on long-run stock price performance and equity risk of the ﬁrm. Production and Operations
Management, 14(1), 35–52, 2005b.
M. Parlar and D. Berkin. Future supply uncertainty in EOQ models. Naval Research Logistics,
38:107–121, 1991.
L. Qi, Z.-J. M. Shen and L. Snyder. A continuous review inventory model with disruptions at both
supplier and retailer. Production and Operations Management, 18(5):516–532, 2009.
L. Qi, Z.-J. M. Shen and L. Snyder. The effect of supply disruptions on supply chain network
design. Transportation Science, 44(25):274–289, 2010.
A. Ross, Y. Rong and L. Snyder. Supply disruptions with time-dependent parameters. Computers
and Operations Research, 35(11):3504–3529, 2008.
L. Snyder. A tight approximation for a continuous review inventory model with supplier
disruptions. Working Paper, P.C. Rossin College of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, 2011.
L. Snyder, Z. Atan, P. Peng, Y. Rong, A. J. Schmitt and B. Sinsoysal. OR/MS Models for Supply
Chain Disruptions: A Review. Working Paper, P.C. Rossin College of Engineering and
Applied Sciences, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, 2012.
H. Weiss and E. Rosenthal. Optimal ordering policies when anticipating a disruption in supply or
demand. European Journal of Operational Research, 59(3):370–382, 1992.
EOQ Models with Supply Disruptions
55

Part II
Single-Echelon Problems

Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation:
Some Cases of Stock Blow Down
Dynamics Depending on its Level
Alessandro Gambini, Giovanni Mingari Scarpello and Daniele Ritelli
Abstract The EOQ mathematical models usually deal with the problem of a
wholesaler who has to manage a goods restocking policy, settling his best amount
of goods to be procured. Best means capable of minimizing all the costs con-
cerning the trade of the stored goods. The relevant seminal contributions are due to
Harris, and Wilson, who analyzed an easy scenario with a certain demand uniform
all over the time so that its instantaneous change rate is ﬁxed, with stocking
charges not dependent on time. In such a ﬁeld, our own contribution consists of
establishing sufﬁcient conditions on the well posedness to the minimum cost
problem and relationships providing either closed form solutions or, alternatively,
quadrature formulae—without ex ante approximations. All this allows a numerical
solution to the transcendental (or algebraical of high degree) equation solving to
the most economical batch. In short, such our paper is concerning the special
family of EOQ mathematical models with different deterministic time-dependent
demands.
1 Introduction
The EOQ mathematical models usually deal with the problem of a wholesaler who
has to manage a goods restocking policy, settling his best amount of goods to be
procured. Best means capable of minimizing all the costs concerning the trade of
A. Gambini  D. Ritelli (&)
Dipartimento di Scienze Statistiche, via Belle Arti 41 40126 Bologna, Italy
e-mail: daniele.ritelli@unibo.it
A. Gambini
e-mail: alessandro.gambini4@unibo.it
G. M. Scarpello
Via Negroli 6 20136 Milan, Italy
e-mail: giovannimingari@yahoo.it
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_4,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
59

the stored goods. The relevant seminal contributions are due to Harris (1913, 1915)
and Wilson (1934), where an easy scenario is analyzed with a certain demand
uniform all over the time so that its instantaneous change rate is ﬁxed, with
stocking charges not dependent on time. In subsequent years, the subject attracted
the authors’ continuous efforts to improve the assumptions of the ingenuous early
models about the stored goods’ demand, the charges due to goods stocking and to
their perishability, if any.
The model main features considered by us concern the store blow-down which
will depend on the products demand and on perishability, as for food or medicines
or vaporizing liquids. The theoretical models presented hereinafter provide single
mathematical representations of the blow-down and of charges. For example
Benkherouf (1997) and Sarma (1987) considering the case of a perishable good
stored in two different warehouses, get blow-down dynamics ruled by two different
time laws. In Balki and Benkherouf (1996) and Raafat and Wolfe (1991) time
changes of production/demand rates not due to perishability are taken into account,
while Bhunia and Maiti (1998) analyzes a frame where the store level decrement is
a function of its own level. Anyway the effort of providing a full overview on the
main contributions is out of our purpose for being giant the relevant literature.
Very often some Journals publish review articles on the subject like Goyal and Giri
(2001), Nahamias (1982), Pentico and Drake (2011) and Raafat (1991); alterna-
tively monographs are available as Zipkin (2000). The theoretical treatments
reviewed throughout this article are concerning a stocks blowdown dynamics
depending on their level itself. For an extended overview see Urban (2005).
In such a ﬁeld, our own contribution consists of establishing sufﬁcient condi-
tions ensuring the well posedness to the problem of minimum cost and relation-
ships providing either closed form solutions or, alternatively, quadrature
formulae—without ex ante approximations—allowing a numerical solution to the
transcendental (or algebraical of high degree) equation providing the most eco-
nomical batch. Let us introduce the uniﬁed notation used throughout all the paper:
qðtÞ store level at time t
fðt; qÞ demand level ruled by time t and store level q
^hðtÞ [ 0 holding cost, assumed as a positive function of t
^kðqÞ a factor affecting the holding cost as a increasing function of q such that
^kðqÞ ! 1 as q ! 1
A [ 0 costs for delivery
Let the stored goods blow-down according to:
_qðtÞ ¼ fðt; qðtÞÞ
qð0Þ ¼ Q [ 0

ð1Þ
where the function f : ½0; 1½½0; 1½! R is assumed positive, so that the solution
to (1) fulﬁlls qðtÞ  Q for each t  0: We call reordering time generated by the
batch Q the real positive value TðQÞ solution of qðtÞ ¼ 0 where qðtÞ solves (1). If
60
A. Gambini et al.

A [ 0 is the delivery cost, ^hðtÞ [ 0 models the holding cost at time t as a con-
tinuous function, so that ^hð0Þ [ 0, if ^kðqÞ denotes a continuous and positive
function of q so that ^kðqÞ ! 1 for q ! 1 and that ^kð0Þ ¼ 0, then the total cost
for reordering an amount Q [ 0 of goods is:
CðQÞ ¼
A
TðQÞ þ
1
TðQÞ
ZTðQÞ
0
^hðtÞ^kðqðtÞÞ dt:
ð2Þ
The Wilson originary treatment, Wilson (1934) follows putting fðt; qÞ ¼
d [ 0; ^hðtÞ ¼ h; ^kðqÞ ¼ q: Several literature models: Ferguson et al. (2007), Giri
and Chaudhuri (1998), Goh (1994) and Weiss (1982) are all particular cases of
what above, being there fðt; qÞ ¼ aq þ bqb; ^hðtÞ ¼ hta: For some models, the
function fðt; qÞ is piecewise deﬁned, e.g., Balki and Benkherouf (1996), Chang
et al. (2006), Dye and Ouyang (2005), Hou (2006) and Roy (2007). In Bernardi
et al. (2009) is treated the case fðt; qÞ ¼ dðtÞ where dðtÞ is a given positive and
continuous function of time, ^hðtÞ ¼ h; ^kðqÞ ¼ q:
The statement of the problem is quite clear: ﬁnd Q such that
CðQÞ ¼ inf
Q [ 0 CðQÞ
ð3Þ
The general problem (3) can be solved explicitly when:
(a) one succeeds in solving the differential equation (1) ﬁnding qðtÞ
(b) one succeeds in solving explicitly the equation qðTÞ ¼ 0
(c) one succeeds in solving explicitly the critical point equation
C0ðQÞ ¼ T0ðQÞ
T2ðQÞ
TðQÞ^hðTðQÞÞ^kðqðTðQÞÞÞ  A 
ZTðQÞ
0
^hðtÞ^kðqðtÞÞ dt
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
ð4Þ
In the Wilson model, the blow-down law will be: qðtÞ ¼ Q  d t and TðQÞ ¼ Q=d
and the cost
CðQÞ ¼
A
TðQÞ þ
h
TðQÞ
ZTðQÞ
0
qðtÞdt ¼ d A
Q þ h
2 Q:
In more elaborate models one shall solve, either exactly or numerically, the
Eq. (4), but a previous knowledge is needed whether problem (3) is well posed—
existence of solution—or not; so that a numerical treatment for solving Eq. (4) has
a meaning. When possible, some uniqueness conditions for the solution will be
provided. Let us notice that in Bernardi et al. (2009), an example is provided of a
not-unique solution taking
Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation
61

fðt; qÞ ¼ t2  9
2 t þ 13
2 ;
^h ¼ 1; A ¼ 1; ^kðqÞ ¼ q:
We will provide existence-uniqueness conditions following different demand good
dynamics. We will follow Bernardi et al. (2009), Gambini et al. (2013), Mingari
Scarpello and Ritelli (2008 and 2010), as far as it concerns the store costs given by
functions ^hðtÞ e ^kðqÞ: For each theoretical case, we will provide applications
leading—even if not always—either to closed form solutions by means of Special
Functions (e.g., Gauss hypergeometric function, Lambert W function) or to
quadrature formulae allowing a direct settlement of the best batch Q. Further-
more, the problem of backordering will be embodied: it has been recently tackled
by several authors, but always under a constant rate of store level change,
(Cárdenas-Barrón et al. 2010; Cárdenas-Barrón 2010a, b; Teng 2009). They try to
detect the optimal batch backordering levels without calculus, but founding upon
classic inequalities such that they are between the arithmetic and geometric means
powered by the methods in Garver (1935) and Niven (1981). Anyway in our very
general frame where the stock inventory level is ruled by a nonlinear dynamics, the
classic approach through the inﬁnitesimal calculus is compulsory.
2 Demand Depending on the Stock Level Only
Let us start with (1) when fðt; qÞ ¼ fðqÞ and let the stored goods blow-down
behaves according to law:
_qðtÞ ¼ fðqðtÞÞ
qð0Þ ¼ Q [ 0

ð5Þ
The autonomous structure of (5) allows a closed form solution: deﬁning
FðqÞ :¼
ZQ
q
1
fðuÞ du ¼ t
ð6Þ
then, inverting FðqÞ we ﬁnd that qðtÞ ¼ F1ðtÞ solves (5).
The reordering time generated by the batch Q is the positive value TðQÞ
solution of qðtÞ ¼ 0:
TðQÞ ¼ Fð0Þ ¼
ZQ
0
1
fðuÞ du:
The total cost for reordering an amount Q [ 0 of goods is here:
CðQÞ ¼
A
TðQÞ þ
1
TðQÞ
ZTðQÞ
0
^hðtÞ^kðqðtÞÞ dt:
ð7Þ
62
A. Gambini et al.

The
Wilson
early
treatment,
Wilson
(1934)
follows
putting
fðuÞ ¼ d;
^hðtÞ ¼ h; and ^kðqÞ ¼ q. Notice that the several literature models: Giri and
Chaudhuri (1998), Goh (1994) and Weiss (1982) are nothing else but particular
cases of what above, being there fðuÞ ¼ au þ bhb; ^kðqÞ ¼ q; and ^hðtÞ ¼ hta: In
Giri et al. (1996) fðqÞ is deﬁned as fðqÞ ¼ hq  aqb for 0  t  t1 and fðqÞ ¼
hq  D for  t1  t  T: In Mingari Scarpello and Ritelli (2008) is treated as the
case for arbitrary f ðuÞ:
Theorem 2.1
Suppose that function f in (1) is such that
lim
v!1
Zv
0
du
fðuÞ ¼ 1
ð8Þ
Moreover, we assume that if fð0Þ ¼ 0; the integrability in u ¼ 0 of both functions:
1
fðuÞ ;
^kðuÞ
fðuÞ :
ð9Þ
Then the cost function of (7) attains its absolute minimum at Q [ 0; which is
unique.
Proof
In the integral at the right hand side of (7), we do the change t ¼ FðuÞ:
Minding that t ¼ 0 ) u ¼ Q; t ¼ TðQÞ ) u ¼ 0; and that dt ¼ ð1=fðuÞÞdu; and
qðtÞ ¼ F1ðtÞ, we get:
CðQÞ ¼
A
TðQÞ þ
1
TðQÞ
ZQ
0
^hðFðuÞÞ ^kðF1ðFðuÞÞÞ du
f ðuÞ
¼
A
TðQÞ þ
1
TðQÞ
ZQ
0
^hðFðuÞÞ
^kðuÞ
fðuÞ du
ð10Þ
The good position of (10) follows from (9). The structure of (10) implies that
Q 7! CðQÞ; Q [ 0 has exactly one minimizer. First we observe that:
lim
Q!0þ CðQÞ ¼ 1:
Then from (8) we see that the cost function (10) diverges when Q ! 1, as
immediately checked through De l’Hospital rule:
lim
Q!1 CðQÞ ¼ lim
Q!1
^hðFðQÞÞ ^kðQÞ
fðQÞ
1
fðQÞ
¼ lim
Q!1
^hð0Þ ^kðQÞ ¼ 1
Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation
63

Thus CðQÞ is bounded from below: so it has at least one stationary value. The
extremum will be attained at only one value since the ﬁrst derivative of CðQÞ
vanishes if and only if the batch Q solves the equation:
^hð0Þ^kðQÞ
ZQ
0
du
fðuÞ 
A þ
ZQ
0
^hðFðuÞÞ
^kðuÞ
fðuÞ du
8
<
:
9
=
; ¼ 0:
ð11Þ
But the function
NðQÞ :¼ ^hð0Þ ^kðQÞ
ZQ
0
du
fðuÞ 
A þ
ZQ
0
^hðFðuÞÞ
^kðuÞ
fðuÞ du
8
<
:
9
=
;
is the difference of two increasing functions; thus this minimizing batch is unique.
Through a similar way it is possible to prove that thesis of Theorem 2.1 holds
with slightly different assumptions on f.
Corollary 2.2
The same conclusion of Theorem 2.1 holds if:
Z1
0
du
fðuÞ 2 R;
Z1
0
^hðFðuÞÞ
^kðuÞ
fðuÞ du ¼ 1
and
Z1
0
du
f ðuÞ 2 R;
Z1
0
^hðFðuÞÞ
^kðuÞ
fðuÞ du 2 R
2.1 Applications to Known Models
For the model (Goh 1994), where fðqÞ ¼ dqb; ^hðtÞ ¼ h; and ^kðqÞ ¼ q the opti-
mum condition (11) gives:
hQ2b  A b2  3b þ 2


d ¼ 0:
Finally, in the model (Giri and Chaudhuri 1998), being there fðqÞ ¼ hq þ
dqb; ^hðtÞ ¼ h; and ^kðqÞ ¼ q; the detection of the optimum batch, ﬁrst order con-
dition (4) leads at the Q-equation:
hQ
ð1  bÞ# ln 1 þ #
d Q1b


 A  hQ
#
1  2 F1 1;
1
1  b ; 2  b
1  b ;  #
d Q1b




¼ 0:
64
A. Gambini et al.

Anyway the above formula involving the Gauss hypergeometric function 2F1 is
not present in the article (Giri and Chaudhuri 1998); it is found upon the integral
identities:
ZQ
0
du
# u þ d ub ¼
1
#ð1  bÞ ln 1 þ #
b Q1b


;
ZQ
0
u du
# u þ d ub ¼ 1
# Q  Q 2F1 1;
1
1  b ; 2  b
1  b ;  #
d Q1b




:
We limit here to recall that 2F1 is the Gauss hypergeometric function deﬁned as a
jxj\1 power series:
2F1ða; b; c; xÞ ¼
X
1
n¼0
a
ð Þn b
ð Þn
c
ð Þn
xn
n! ;
where ðaÞk is a Pochhammer symbol: ðaÞk ¼ aða þ 1Þ    ða þ k  1Þ:
2F1 is
analytically continued by the integral representation theorem:
2F1 a; b; c; x
ð
Þ ¼
CðcÞ
Cðc  aÞCðaÞ
Z1
0
ta1ð1  tÞca1
ð1  xtÞb
dt;
whose validity ranges are: Re c [ Re a [ 0; jxj\1: It provides the way for
extending the region where the (complex) hypergeometric function is deﬁned,
namely for its analytical continuation to the (almost) whole complex plane
excluding the half-line 1; 1½:
Let us now introduce some fðqÞ not considered up to this time. Notice that fðqÞ
could be known as experimental data set to be ﬁtted in some reliable analytical
expression: this explains the theoretical laws we are going to study.
2.2 More Applications
2.2.1 Afﬁne Demand
The demand function which provides the most immediate generalization to the old
one (Wilson and Harris), consists of modeling the inventory blow-down through
an afﬁne function of the stock level q, namely fðqÞ ¼ d þ e q with d; e [ 0: The
optimum condition (11) in such a case will lead to the transcendental Q-equation
h
e2
ðd þ eQÞ ln d þ eQ
d


 eQ


 A ¼ 0:
ð12Þ
Equation (12) was treated by Warburton, see Warburton (2009).
Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation
65

2.2.2 Rational Demand
By rational demand functions, we ﬁnd algebraic ﬁrst order conditions, in fact, if
the inventory blow-down is rational,
fðqÞ ¼
a
b þ q ;
a; b [ 0; then the optimum condition leads (11) to a cubic Q-equation:
hQ3 þ 3bhQ2  6aA ¼ 0:
If:
fðqÞ ¼
a
b2 þ q2
from (11) we get:
hQ4 þ 6b2hQ2  12aA ¼ 0:
2.2.3 Quadratic Demand
Let
the
instantaneous
inventory
stock
level
be
ruled
by
(1)
with
0\fðuÞ ¼ ðu  aÞðu  bÞ; a; b\0. In such a way the optimum condition (11)
specializes in:
h Q
a  b ln bðQ  aÞ
aðQ  bÞ



h
a  b
a ln a  Q
a


 b ln b  Q
b




 A ¼ 0;
ð13Þ
being (13) to be solved to Q; the only possible approach is numerical. For example,
the left hand side of (13) as a function of Q is plotted below, showing the unique
optimal solution Q ’ 11:6987:
2.2.4 Exponential
The inventory manager is faced with aperiodic demand which either is always
increasing or decreasing: for instance fðqÞ ¼ a eq; or, fðqÞ ¼ a eq. Even if the
integrals in (11) are all elementary for the exponential situation, the relevant
Q-equations:
hQeQ  aA þ h
ð
ÞeQ þ h ¼ 0;
ð14Þ
 hQeQ  aA þ h
ð
ÞeQ þ h ¼ 0;
ð15Þ
66
A. Gambini et al.

are transcendental yet. Nevertheless they can be solved through a special function,
not being compulsory a numerical solution any more.
The Lambert function(s) WðyÞ can be achieved starting from ‘ðxÞ ¼ xex and
after taking its inverse. Of course ‘ðxÞ ¼ xex is a not monotonic function of x 2 R,
and then its inverse is multivalued. So that, we do not have one Lambert W-
function but two Lambert functions on the real line, both coming from the rela-
tionship WðyÞeWðyÞ ¼ y where the discriminating point, in order to decide the
branch, is x ¼ e1; W ¼ 1: Some special values are Wð0Þ ¼ 0; Wð1Þ ¼
e1; WðeÞ ¼ 1; and Wð1Þ ¼ X ¼ 0:67143. . .: In such a way, looking at the
Fig. 2, four behaviors are possible:
• if y  0; we move on the principal branch, say W0ðyÞ, or simply WðyÞ, when no
ambiguity can occur;
• if e1  y  0; we move on the principal branch again if WðuÞ   1;
• if e1  y  0; but WðyÞ\  1; we move on the secondary branch, say
W1ðyÞ;
• if y\  e1; we do not have at all real values of W any more.
Anyway, there is no possibility of expressing WðyÞ in terms of elementary
functions. A method for computing WðyÞ for each y could be: to develop ‘ðxÞ ¼
xex in a power series, what we know has a sum equal to y; and to revert such a
series by the Lagrange inversion theorem. In such a way, one obtains W expanded
in ascending powers of y:
WðyÞ ¼
X
1
n¼1
ðnÞn1
n!
yn
whose convergence radius is e1. As far as we are concerned, the ﬁrst appearance
of W function in an economics context was in Mingari Scarpello and Ritelli
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Q
−3
−2
−1
1
2
C’(Q)
Fig. 1 The solution to quadratic demand with a ¼ 3; b ¼ 2; h ¼ 1; A ¼ 3
Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation
67

(2007), a paper where we generalized a Goodwin microeconomic model, while the
ﬁrst use of this function in the EOQ contest is due to Warburton (2009). An almost
exhaustive survey on Lambert functions can be read at Corless et al. (1996).
After this short synopsis, let us go back to our Eqs. (14) and (15) and solve
them by means of W: Let us begin writing (14) as: eQ Q  b
ð
Þ ¼ 1 with the
obvious meaning of b [ 1: We change variable putting Q  b ¼ R obtaining:
R eR ¼ eb:
ð16Þ
It is worth noting that (16) is well posed, i.e., has two real roots because b [ 1:
they are W1ðebÞ and W0ðebÞ: Only W0ðebÞ has economic meaning, in
fact recalling that, 1\W0ðebÞ\0 and going back to the original Q we ﬁnd:
Q
þ ¼ b þ W0ðebÞ;
where the index þ reminds we started from a positive exponential. In order to
solve (15), we observe that it can be written as:
0.5
1.0
1.5
y
−4
−3
−2
−1
W
Fig. 2 The couple of real
branches of the Lambert W-
function: W0ðyÞ and W1ðyÞ
68
A. Gambini et al.

eQb Q  b
ð
Þ ¼ eb;
ð17Þ
where the meaning of b does not change. The solution, of economic interest, i.e.,
positive, is then:
Q
 ¼ b  W1ðebÞ;
since 1\W1ðebÞ\  1:
The W Lambert function is available by several computer algebra packages like
Mathematica, for automatic computing. In addition, the fðqÞ exponential nature
is not an analytical oddness, but has a deep market meaning.
3 Backordering
In order to take the backordering into account, we present our recent contribution
(Gambini et al. 2013). Assume fðt; qÞ ¼ fðqÞ; ^h ¼ const: and ^kðqÞ ¼ q. The
quantity Q ordered at each cycle undergoes two different uses: a ﬁrst share Q  R
covers the demand of the previous cycle, and then does not enter the inventory;
while R is the residual share which enters the store so that the outstanding amount
is again Q  R, and so on. As a consequence, the reordering time becomes:
TðQÞ ¼ FðR  QÞ ¼
ZR
RQ
1
fðuÞ du;
where the function f : ½R  Q; 1½! R is assumed positive, and the total cost is:
CðR; QÞ ¼
A
TðQÞ þ
h
TðQÞ
ZTðRÞ
0
qðtÞ dt 
b
TðQÞ
ZTðQÞ
TðRÞ
qðtÞ dt:
ð18Þ
It is possible to get easier (18), by the following Lemma.
Lemma 3.1
Let f ðqÞ be the law describing the q-blowdown dynamics: then the
total cost is given by:
CðR; QÞ ¼
A þ h
Z R
0
u
fðuÞ du  b
Z 0
RQ
u
fðuÞ du
Z R
RQ
du
fðuÞ
;
ð19Þ
where, if fð0Þ ¼ 0 we assume the integrability of both functions:
1
fðuÞ ;
u
fðuÞ :
Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation
69

Proof
Putting in (18) t ¼ FðuÞ, notice that t ¼ 0 ) u ¼ R; t ¼ TðRÞ ) u ¼ 0;
t ¼ TðQÞ ) u ¼ R  Q; and dt ¼ ð1=fðuÞÞdu; so that, minding that qðtÞ ¼
F1ðtÞ one ﬁnds:
CðR; QÞ ¼
A
TðQÞ þ
h
TðQÞ
ZFð0Þ
FðRÞ
F1ðtÞ dt 
b
TðQÞ
Z
FðRQÞ
Fð0Þ
F1ðtÞ dt
¼
A
TðQÞ þ
h
TðQÞ
ZR
0
FðqÞ dt 
b
TðQÞ
ðR  QÞFðR  QÞ þ
Z0
RQ
FðqÞ dt
0
B
@
1
C
A
writing F in terms of f we ﬁnd out:
CðR; QÞ ¼
1
TðQÞ
A þ h
ZR
0
ZR
q
du
fðuÞ
0
B
@
1
C
Adq
0
B
@
 b
ðR  QÞ
ZR
RQ
du
fðuÞ þ
Z0
RQ
ZR
q
du
fðuÞ
0
B
@
1
C
Adq
0
B
@
1
C
A
1
C
A
exchanging the integrations order and computing the inner one
CðR; QÞ ¼
1
TðQÞ
A þ h
ZR
0
u
fðuÞ du
2
4
b
ðR  QÞ
ZR
RQ
du
fðuÞ þ
Z0
RQ
u  ðR  QÞ
fðuÞ
du þ
ZR
0
Q  R
fðuÞ du
0
B
@
1
C
A
3
75
¼
A þ h
Z R
0
u
fðuÞ du þ b ðQ  RÞ
Z R
RQ
du
fðuÞ 
Z 0
RQ
u  ðR  QÞ
fðuÞ
du 
Z R
0
Q  R
fðuÞ du


Z R
RQ
du
fðuÞ
A numerator straightforward reduction completes the proof.
Theorem 3.1
The cost function introduced in (19) attains its absolute minimum
at proper positive values Q; R
ð
Þ: Such a minimizing batch is unique.
Proof
Recall that
lim
ðR;QÞ!ð0;0Þ CðR; QÞ ¼ 1
and that if R ! Q, we go back to the originary model, furthermore, by De
l’Hospital rule one ﬁnds that:
70
A. Gambini et al.

lim
Q!þ1 CðR; QÞ ¼ þ1
Let us change variables passing from CðR; QÞ to CðR; Q  RÞ: accordingly, the
total cost CðR; Q  RÞ is:
A þ h
Z R
0
u
fðuÞ du  b
Z 0
RQ
u
fðuÞ du
Z R
RQ
du
fðuÞ
ð20Þ
Partial derivatives of the total cost with respect to R and Q provide:
oC
oQ ¼
A þ b ðQ  RÞ
Z R
RQ
1
fðuÞ du  h
Z R
0
u
fðuÞ du þ b
Z 0
RQ
u
fðuÞ du
fðR  QÞ
Z R
RQ
1
fðuÞ du

2
oC
oR ¼
A þ h R
Z R
RQ
1
fðuÞ du  h
Z R
0
u
fðuÞ du þ b
Z 0
RQ
u
fðuÞ du
fðRÞ
Z R
RQ
1
fðuÞ du

2
 oC
oQ
Imposing partial derivatives to vanish:
oC
oQ ¼
A þ b ðQ  RÞ
Z R
RQ
1
fðuÞ du  h
Z R
0
u
fðuÞ du þ b
Z 0
RQ
u
fðuÞ du
fðR  QÞ
Z R
RQ
1
fðuÞ du

2
¼ 0
oC
oR ¼
A þ h R
Z R
RQ
1
fðuÞ du  h
Z R
0
u
fðuÞ du þ b
Z 0
RQ
u
fðuÞ du
fðRÞ
Z R
RQ
1
fðuÞ du

2
¼ 0
We assume f [ 0 for each u, then both the denominators are strictly positive;
setting the numerators to be zero, ﬁrst order conditions will provide the critical
point system:
Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation
71

gðR; Q  RÞ ¼ A þ h R
ZR
RQ
1
fðuÞ du  h
ZR
0
u
fðuÞ du þ b
Z0
RQ
u
fðuÞ du ¼ 0
mðR; Q  RÞ ¼ A þ b ðQ  RÞ
ZR
RQ
1
fðuÞ du  h
ZR
0
u
fðuÞ du þ b
Z0
RQ
u
f ðuÞ du ¼ 0:
ð21Þ
To solve (21), subtracting side by side, one ﬁnds:
Q ¼ hR
b þ R
m R; hR
b


¼ A þ hR
ZR
hR
b
1
fðuÞ du  h
ZR
0
u
fðuÞ du þ b
Z0
hR
b
u
fðuÞ du ¼ 0
mðR; hR=bÞ is an increasing function being:
d
dR mðR; hR=bÞ ¼ h
ZR
hR
b
1
fðuÞ du [ 0;
so observing that mð0; 0Þ\0, then mðR; hR=bÞ has a unique real root, and we have
one and only one critical point for the cost function (19). Let us show it is a
minimum. The Hessian determinant at the critical point is:
H ¼
bh
fðRÞf
 hR
b

 Z R
hR
b
1
fðuÞ du
 
!2
ð22Þ
In fact being:
H ¼ o2
oR2 CðR; QÞ o2
oQ2 CðR; QÞ 
o2
oRoQ CðR; QÞ

2
minding that gðR; Q  RÞ ¼ mðR; Q  RÞ ¼ 0, we have
o2C
oQ2 ¼
om
oQ
Z2fðR  QÞ ;
o2C
oR2 ¼
og
oR
Z2fðRÞ 
om
oR
Z2fðR  QÞ ;
o2C
oQoR ¼
om
oR
Z2fðR  QÞ
where we put:
Z ¼
ZR
RQ
1
fðuÞ du:
72
A. Gambini et al.

Eventually, recalling that
Q ¼ hR
b þ R;
om
oR ¼ bZ;
om
oQ ¼ bZ;
og
oR ¼ hZ
we ﬁnd (22) proving the stationary point to be a minimum.
4 Sample Problems
We provide now some applications of above to known models of the literature
extended to backorders, getting in any case a transcendental (or algebraic) R-
resolvent equation. The following conditions are assumed to be true in any case:
h [ 0; Q [ 0; A [ 0 R [ 0; 0\p\1; b [ 0; d [ 0
Wilson model
fðuÞ ¼ d ) CðR; QÞ ¼ d
Q
A þ b Q  R
ð
Þ2
2 d
þ h R2
2 d
 
!
Such a case has a theoretical interest due to its ﬁnal (not transcendental and)
exactly solvable resolvent: the minimizing batch is found to be:
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Adðb þ hÞ
bh
r
;
R ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Abd
hðb þ hÞ
s
In such a way, the minimized cost will be:
C ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Abdh
b þ h
r
Goh’s model, p ¼ 1=2
fðuÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
juj
p
) CðR; QÞ ¼ 3 A þ 2 h R
3
2 þ 2 b ðQ  RÞ
3
2
6
ﬃﬃﬃ
R
p
þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Q  R
p


Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation
73

By Q  R ¼ hR
b and gðR; Q  RÞ ¼ 0 we get:
3 A þ 4 h
1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃ
h
b
r
 
!
R
3
2 ¼ 0
Goh’s model, p general
If fðuÞ ¼ jujp then
CðR; QÞ ¼
1  p
ð
Þ b Rp ðQ  RÞ2 þ h R2 ðQ  RÞp þ A 2  p
ð
Þ R ðQ  RÞ
ð
Þp


2  p
ð
Þ RpðQ  RÞ þ RðQ  RÞp
ð
Þ
By Q  R ¼ hR
b and gðR; Q  RÞ ¼ 0 we get:
h1pR2p hbp þ bhp
ð
Þ  Abðp  2Þðp  1Þ ¼ 0
solving to R2p we get:
R2p ¼ A ðp  1Þðp  2Þ
h 1 þ bh
ð
Þp1


Exponentials
fðuÞ ¼ eu ) CðR; QÞ ¼ eQR A þ h 1 þ eR R  1
ð
Þ
½

f
g þ b eQR  Q þ R  1
ð
Þ
eQ  1
If Q  R ¼ hR
b e gðR; Q  RÞ ¼ 0, we get the transcendental R-equation:
b  e
h R
b
A þ b þ h  eR h


¼ 0
It is then provided a simulation for A ¼ 1; b ¼ 1=3; and h ¼ 1=4. Figure 3 shows
the iso-cost curves, highlighting the minimizer Q; R
ð
Þ numerically detected.
Figure 4 shows where is the intersection of lines obtained putting to zero the
single ﬁrst partial derivatives.
And ﬁnally in Fig. 5, a 3-D plot of the global cost function. We have a similar
behavior for fðuÞ ¼ eu.
74
A. Gambini et al.

Fig. 3 Level curves relevant
to the cost function
Fig. 4 Crossing of the loci of
roots of the single partial
derivatives
Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation
75

Rational (First)
fðuÞ ¼
k
n þ u ) CðR; QÞ ¼ 6 A k þ h R2 3 n þ 2 R
ð
Þ þ b 3 n  2 Q þ 2R
ð
Þ ðQ  RÞ2
3Q 2 n þ 2R  Q
ð
Þ
By Q  R ¼ hR
b and gðR; Q  RÞ ¼ 0 one obtains:
6 A b2 k þ h b þ h
ð
Þ R2 b 3 n þ R
ð
Þh R
½
 ¼ 0
which is providing promptly the batch.
Rational (Second)
fðuÞ ¼
k
n þ u2 ) CðR; QÞ ¼
3 4 A k þ h 2 n R2 þ R4
ð
Þ þ b ðQ  RÞ2
2 n þ ðQ  RÞ2




4 R3 þ ðQ  RÞ3 þ 3 n Q


By Q  R ¼ hR
b and gðR; Q  RÞ ¼ 0 one ﬁnds:
12 A k þ 6 h b þ h
ð
Þ n R2
b
þ h b3 þ h3
ð
Þ R4
b3
¼ 0
biquadratic equation.
Fig. 5 a 3-D plot of CðQ; RÞ
for fðuÞ ¼ eu
76
A. Gambini et al.

5 Conclusions
We proved two existence-uniqueness Theorems 2.1 and 3.1 about a minimum cost
batch for a class of EOQ models with perishable inventory and nonlinear cost and
with sole backordering, leading to a set of sufﬁcient conditions which require to
check the convergence of some improper integrals, and form the article’s main
theoretical effort. As application, several cases have been treated of demand fðqÞ
as a continuous function of the stock level q. Being one of the sufﬁcient conditions
met in any case, the economic order quantity is unique, and the relevant compu-
tations lead to transcendental equations. In some cases, the plot of the global cost
function is provided, and, even if the optimality condition can be written in closed
(but transcendental) form, its solution shall mostly be faced numerically. Mind that
the reordering time, the global cost function and the minimum cost (optimum)
condition are here detected without any previous approximation, being a numerical
treatment required—if any—only at the end, in order to solve the (often) tran-
scendental equation for the economic batch.
Acknowledgments We wish to thank the anonymous Referees and the Editor for their fruitful
suggestions which improved our article.
References
Axsäter, S.: Inventory Control. Kluwer, Boston (2000).
Balki, Z. T., & Benkherouf, L.: A production lot size inventory for deteriorating items and
arbitrary production and demand rates. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 92, 302–309 (1996)
Benkherouf, L.: A deterministic model for deteriorating items with two storage facilities.
International journal of production economics. 48, 167–175 (1997)
Bernardi, E., Mingari Scarpello, G., Ritelli, D.: EOQ under exogenous and periodic demand.
Advanced Modeling and. Optimization. 11, 279–287 (2009)
Bhunia, A. K., & Maiti, M.: Determinsitic inventory model for deteriorating items with ﬁnite rate
of replenishment dependent on inventory level. Computers Ops Res. 25, 997–1006 (1998)
Cáárdenas-Barrón, L. E.: An easy method to derive EOQ and EPQ inventory models with
backorders. Comp. Math. Appl. 59, 948–952 (2010a)
Cárdenas-Barrón, L. E.: A simple method to compute economic order quantities: Some
observations. Appl. Math. Model. 34, 1684–1688 (2010b)
Cárdenas-Barrón, L. E., Smith, R. N., & Goyal, S. K.: Optimal order size to take advantage of a
one-time discount offer with allowed backorders. Appl. Math. Model. 34, 1642–1652 (2010)
Chang, C. Y., Goyal, S. K., & Teng, J. T.: On ‘‘An EOQ model for perishable items under stock-
dependent selling rate and time-dependent partial backlogging’’ by Dye and Ouyang. Eur.
J. Oper. Res. 174, 923–929 (2006)
Corless, R. M., Goonnet, G. H., Jeffrey, D. J., & Knutt, D. E.: On the Lambert W Function.
Advances in Computational Mathematics. 4, 329–359 (1996)
Dye, C. Y., & Ouyang, L. Y.: An EOQ model for perishable items under stock-dependent selling
rate and time-dependent partial backlogging. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 163, 776–783 (2005)
Ferguson, M., Jayaraman, V., & Souza, G. C.: Note: An application of the EOQ model with
nonlinear holding cost to inventory managment of perishables. European Journal of
Operational Resesarch. 180, 485–490 (2007)
Existence of EOQ and its Evaluation
77

Gambini, A., Mingari Scarpello, G., Ritelli, D.: Mathematical properties of EOQ models with
special cost structure. App. Math. Model. 37, 656–666 (2013)
Garver, R.: The solution of problems in maxima and minima by algebra. Amer. Math. Monthly.
42, 435–437 (1935)
Giri, B. C., & Chaudhuri, K. S.: Deterministic models of perishable inventory with stock-
dependent demand rate and nonlinear holding cost. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 105, 467–474 (1998)
Giri, B. C., Pal, S., Goswami, A., & Chaudhuri, K. S.: An inventory model for deteriorating items
with stock-dependent demand rate. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 95, 604–610 (1996)
Goh, M.: EOQ models with general demand and holding cost function. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 73
50–54 (1994)
Goyal, S. K., & Giri, B. C.: Recent trends in modeling of deteriorating inventory. Eur. J. Oper.
Res. 134, 1–16 (2001)
Harris, F. W.: How Many Parts To Make At Once Factory. The Magazine of Management. 10,
135–136 (1913)
Harris, F. W.: Operations and Cost Factory Management Series. A.W. Shaw Co, Chicago (1915)
Hou, K. L.: An inventory model for deteriorating items with stock-dependent consumption rate
and shortages under ination and time discounting. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 168, 463–474 (2006)
Mingari Scarpello, G., Ritelli, D: EOQ problem well-posedness: an alternative approach
establishing sufﬁcient conditions. Appl. Math. Scie. 4, 1213–1219 (2010)
Mingari Scarpello, G., Ritelli, D: EOQ when holding costs grow with the stock level: well-
posedness and, solutions. Advanced Modeling and. Optimization. 10, 233–239 (2008)
Mingari Scarpello, G., Ritelli, D.: The Goodwin cycle improved with generalized wages: phase
portrait, periodic behaviour. Journal of Interdisciplinary Mathematics. 10, 71–87 (2007).
Nahamias, S.: Perishable inventory theory: A review. Oper. Res. 30, 680–708 (1982)
Niven, I.: Maxima and minima without calculus. The Dolciani Mathematical Expositions No. 6.
The Mathematical Association of, America (1981).
Pentico, D. W., & Drake, M. J.: A survey of deterministic models for the EOQ and EPQ with
partial backordering. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 214, 179–198 (2011)
Raafat, P. M., & Wolfe, H. K. Eddin, An inventory model for deteriorating items, Computers and
Engineering 20, 89–94 (1991)
Raafat, F.: Survey of literature on continuosly deteriorating inventory models. Journal of the
Operational Research Society. 42, 27–37 (1991)
Roy, T., & Chaudhury, K. S.: A ﬁnite time horizon deterministic EOQ model with stock
dependent demand, effects of inﬂation amd time value of money with shortages in all cycles.
Yugoslav Journal of Operations Research. 17, 195–207 (2007)
Sarma, K. V. S.: Deterministic order level inventory model for deteriorating items with two
storage facilities. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 29, 70–73 (1987)
Teng, J. T.: A simple method to compute economic order quantities. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 198,
351–353 (2009)
Urban, T. L.: Inventory models with inventory-level-dependent demand: A comprehensive
review and unifying theory. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 162, 792–804 (2005)
Warburton, R. D. H.: EOQ extensions exploiting the Lambert W function. European J. Industrial
Engineering 3, 45–69 (2009)
Weiss, H. J.: Economic Order Quantity Models with Nonlinear Holding Costs. Eur. J. Oper. Res.
9, 56–60 (1982)
Wilson, R. H.: A Scientiﬁc Routine for Stock Control. Harvard Business Review 13, 116–128
(1934)
Zipkin, P.: Foundations of Inventory Managment. Mac Graw Hill, New York (2000)
78
A. Gambini et al.

Generalizing the Ordering Cost
and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
in EOQ-Type Inventory Models
J. B. G. Frenk, Murat Kaya and Behrooz Pourghannad
Abstract In this chapter, we discuss generalizations of the ordering, inventory
holding, and backlog costs in EOQ-type models. We solve nested optimization
problems to determine the optimal ðS; TÞ inventory policy with S denoting the
order-up-to level and T the cycle length. In addition, we characterize the order
quantity, maximum backlog, and ﬁll rate for the optimal policy and study the
sensitivity of these optimal values with respect to model parameters such as
demand rate and opportunity cost rate. We also identify the classes of ordering cost
and holding-backlog cost rate functions for which the considered optimization
problem reduces to a convex minimization problem. For more general cost
functions, this optimization problem is related to a global optimization problem.
For such cases, using our structural results for convex problems, we generate lower
and upper bounds on the optimal cycle length T, and illustrate how this can be
used to construct efﬁcient computational algorithms to determine the optimal
ðS; TÞ policy.
1 Introduction
The standard Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) model assumes linear ordering,
linear inventory holding, and linear backlog costs (when extended to backlogging).
In practice, however, these cost functions can be much more complex and general.
J. B. G. Frenk  M. Kaya (&)  B. Pourghannad
Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University, Istanbul, Turkey
e-mail: mkaya@sabanciuniv.edu
J. B. G. Frenk
e-mail: frenk@sabanciuniv.edu
B. Pourghannad
e-mail: behrooz@sabanciuniv.edu
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_5,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
79

They may be represented by, for example, convex, or polyhedral concave func-
tions, or may not have any global structure at all. Our objective in this chapter is to
study EOQ-type models with such general ordering, inventory holding, and
backlog costs. We ﬁrst provide a reminder on the standard EOQ model, and the
relevant cost functions. After that we present our generalizations in detail.
1.1 The Standard EOQ Model
Introduced by Harris (1913) and popularized by Wilson (1934), the Economic
Order Quantity (EOQ) model is one of the building blocks of inventory theory.
The basic model considers one product that is subject to deterministic, constant,
and continuous demand over an inﬁnite horizon. The goal is to determine the order
quantity (i.e., lot size) Q that minimizes the long-run average costs of ordering and
inventory holding. The basic trade-off is between the ﬁxed ordering cost and the
inventory holding cost. A large order quantity would increase the holding costs
incurred per unit time; whereas, a small order quantity would increase the ﬁxed
ordering costs incurred per unit time. The basic model has been extended to
address features including quantity discounts, replenishment leadtimes, and
backlogging.
The analogous model in the production domain is called the Economic Pro-
duction Quantity (EPQ) model. Here, production setup cost replaces ﬁxed ordering
cost, and unit production cost replaces unit ordering cost. EPQ models often
consider a ﬁnite production rate as a simple extension of the standard model. See
Hadley and Whitin (1963) and Zipkin (2000) for some of the fundamental
extensions of the EOQ model and its application to production planning.
This chapter contributes to the EOQ literature by generalizing the ordering,
inventory holding, and backlog costs. Before discussing our cost generalizations,
we ﬁrst remind how these costs are considered in the standard EOQ model:
Ordering cost: Ordering Q units costs a þ cQ where a  0 is the ﬁxed ordering
cost and c [ 0 is the unit variable ordering cost. Under this linear ordering cost
approach, the marginal cost of each unit is the same and equal to c.
Inventory holding cost: Holding inventory causes two type of costs (see, for
example Zipkin 2000):
• Out-of-pocket holding cost represents real costs of holding inventory such as
warehouse rental, handling, insurance, and refrigeration costs. It is calculated by
multiplying the level of inventory with a physical holding cost rate h  0.
• Opportunity cost represents the opportunity cost of funds tied to inventory. It is
calculated by multiplying the value of inventory with an opportunity cost rate
parameter r  0. The value of inventory is assumed to be equal to the unit
ordering cost c.
80
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

Combining the two components, the holding cost rate, i.e., cost of holding one unit
of inventory per unit time becomes h þ rc. Multiplying this value with the level of
inventory at a certain point in time gives us the rate at which holding cost accu-
mulates at that time. Note that it has become commonplace to ignore the out-of-
pocket holding cost component and use only the opportunity cost component (see,
for example Nahmias 1993) in holding cost calculations.
Backlog cost: Backlogging means not meeting a certain demand immediately
from stock. The customer is assumed to wait until the demand is eventually met
after some delay. To determine the level of this planned backlog, the ﬁrm needs to
trade-off inventory holding and backlog costs. Figure 1 illustrates the evolution of
inventory and backlog levels in a typical order cycle, also indicating the maximum
inventory and backlog levels.
Observe that by backlogging the ‘‘last’’ unit of demand in a cycle, the ﬁrm
avoids incurring holding cost throughout the whole cycle. Backlogging the
‘‘second last’’ unit of demand brings less beneﬁt because (1) the avoided holding
cost is less, (2) the incurred backlog cost is more. Hence, the marginal beneﬁt of
backlogging decreases linearly as one chooses to backlog more units in an order
cycle.
The standard EOQ model does not consider backlogging. Most popular back-
logging extensions of the EOQ model (see, for example Hadley and Whitin
(1963)) assume a linear backlog cost rate of b per unit backlogged per unit time.
Note that here, the backlog cost is due to the continuation of backlog over time,
rather than the occurrence of a backlog. This linear backlog cost rate b, together
with the linear holding cost rate of h leads to the holding-backlog cost rate function
shown in Fig. 2. For this case, it is optimal to incur backlogs 100 b=ðb þ hÞ % of
the time. Because demand rate is constant, this ratio is also equal to the optimal ﬁll
rate, which is deﬁned as the proportion of demand that is satisﬁed immediately
from on-hand stock (i.e., that is not backlogged). Observe from the equation that it
is optimal to incur some level of backlog as long as the holding cost rate is positive
and the backlog cost rate is ﬁnite.
Fig. 1 Level of inventory and backlog over time
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
81

1.2 Our Generalization of the EOQ Model
In this chapter, we generalize the aforementioned standard EOQ model in two
directions:
• Generalized ordering cost: We consider a general ordering cost function c with
cðQÞ denoting the ordering cost of a batch of Q items. With this generalization,
the average ordering cost in this batch becomes cðQÞQ1, which is a function of
the order quantity unlike the standard EOQ model.
• Generalized inventory holding and backlog cost rates:
We generalize the
holding and backlog cost rates to much more general functions, examples of
which are provided in Fig. 3.
We consider an ðS; TÞ type inventory control policy, where the net inventory level
is raised to the order-up-to level S  0 every T [ 0 time units (the cycle length, or
the reorder interval). We solve a nested optimization problem to determine the
optimal S and T values. By doing so, we also characterize the order quantity, the
maximum level of inventory, the maximum level of backlog, and the ﬁll rate in the
optimal solution. Together, these measures characterize when and how much to
order, as well as the proportion of demand to satisfy immediately versus to
backlog. We also investigate the sensitivity of these measures with respect to the
model parameters such as the demand rate and the opportunity cost rate. Sensi-
tivity analysis is particularly important in inventory practice, because it is often not
possible to determine the true values of these model parameters.
Our procedure involves determining the optimal cycle length T. However, in
some cases this optimal value may not be used due to practical limitations. The
reorder interval, for example, might be required to be an integer multiple of 24-
hours. To this end, we also study the sensitivity of the optimal order-up-to level S
with respect to T.
The interplay between the two aforementioned cost generalizations we consider
leads to a difﬁcult optimization problem. We ﬁrst show that we face a convex
optimization problem for particular cases of convex ordering cost functions c, and
general holding-backlog cost rate functions f. For such cases, it is easy to construct
Fig. 2 Holding-backlog cost rate function in the standard EOQ model
82
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

a fast algorithm which determines the optimal order-up-to level and cycle length.
For more general choices of ordering and holding-backlog cost rate functions, we
face a non-convex minimization problem. This moves us to the ﬁeld of global
optimization (see, for example Horst and Pardalos 2010), where ﬁnding an efﬁ-
cient solution algorithm is difﬁcult. For these cases, our approach involves
determining an upper bound and a lower bound on the optimal cycle length using a
simple algorithm. We then use this upper and lower bound in combination with a
discretization procedure to approximate the optimal cycle length, and using this we
can also determine the order-up-to level. To aid in algorithm calculations, we
characterize the derivative of the optimal order-up-to level S with respect to T
under different cost structures.
When solving a global optimization problem to determine the optimal cycle
length T, researchers often assume an arbitrary upper bound, such as one year, to
initiate their search algorithms. Our method addresses two issues related to this
approach. First, an arbitrary upper bound may actually be lower than the optimal
cycle length, as it is not guaranteed to be a true upper bound. Second, to mitigate
the ﬁrst risk, the arbitrary upper bounds are often chosen unnecessarily large. Our
upper bound is likely to be tighter for most cases, leading to a faster search
procedure.
2 Related Literature
This chapter contributes to the literature on deterministic EOQ-type inventory
models by generalizing both ordering and holding-backlog costs. As such, it
extends the analysis in Birbil et al. (2012) where only general ordering costs are
considered and the holding-backlog cost is given by the classical EOQ cost rate
function depicted in Fig. 2. To this end, not restricted to deterministic EOQ-type
models, our literature survey focuses on the different ordering, holding, and
backlog cost structures used in stochastic and deterministic inventory models.1 We
classify a number of representative papers in Table 1, according to the demand
type (deterministic versus stochastic), horizon type (ﬁnite versus inﬁnite), and the
ordering, holding, and backlog cost structures used.
2.1 Ordering/Production Costs
The EOQ literature generally considers concave ordering/production costs, which
implies economies of scale. In this case, the marginal cost of ordering an item
decreases as the order quantity increases. In particular, piecewise linear concave
1 We refer the reader to Porteus (1990), Zipkin (2000) and Silver et al. (1998) for a broad
discussion of general inventory models.
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
83

functions are popular among researchers as these functions can be used to
approximate a general concave function. Concave ordering costs may arise due to
economies of scale in transportation or in purchasing. The latter is generally
modeled through quantity discounts (Porteus 1971; Lee and Rosenblatt 1986).
Quantity discounts are widely used in practice, with 95% of companies reporting
the use of an all-units discount scheme of some form. Munson and Rosenblatt
(1998) presents a literature review as well as a survey with 39 companies on the
use of quantity discounts in practice. Learning-by-doing is another reason that can
cause concavity in production costs.
When the ordering cost is convex, the marginal ordering cost of the product
increases as the order quantity increases. This would provide incentives toward
smaller lot sizes. Veinott (1966) provides a review of papers published prior to
1966 that consider convex ordering cost functions in a deterministic demand
setting. Zahrn (2009) provides a through review of literature on convex ordering
cost functions. Eliashberg and Steinberg (1991) discusses the rationale behind
convex production costs. As mentioned in Bhaskaran et al. (2010), convex pro-
duction costs also offer the advantage to model capacitated production without the
use of an explicit capacity constraint. Below, we discuss a number of cases where
convex ordering (or, production) costs are relevant.
• Consider a ﬁrm that has a number of different production technologies with
limited capacity and different marginal costs (Johnson and Montgomery 1974;
Porteus 1990). To produce a certain quantity, the ﬁrm will ﬁrst use the cheapest
technology up to its capacity, then move to the next cheapest technology etc.
until the desired quantity is produced. This scenario would lead to a piecewise
linear convex cost structure. Alternatively, from a labor cost point of view, the
Fig. 3 Holding-backlog cost rate functions satisfying our assumptions
84
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

Table 1 Ordering, holding, and backlog cost examples from the literature
References
Demand
Horizon
Ordering/Production cost
Inventory holding cost
Backlog cost
Wagner and Whitin
(1958)
Deterministic Finite
Concave
Concave
N/A
Zangwill (1966)
Deterministic Finite
Concave
Piecewise concave
Concave
Lippman (1969)—
model 1
Deterministic Finite
General-trucking
Nondecreasing
N/A
Lippman (1969)—
model 2
Deterministic Finite
Nondecreasing concave
Nondecreasing concave
N/A
Swoveland (1975)
Deterministic Finite
Piecewise concave
Piecewise concave
Piecewise concave
Modigliani and Hohn
(1955)
Deterministic Finite
Convex
Linear
N/A
Veinott (1964)
Deterministic Finite
Piecewise linear convex
Piecewise linear convex
Piecewise linear convex
Eppen and Gould
(1968)
Deterministic Finite
Strictly convex, increasing
Linear
Strictly convex, increasing
Kunreuther and Morton
(1973)
Deterministic Finite
Piecewise linear, two pieces
Convex
N/A
Kunreuther and Morton
(1974)
Deterministic Finite
Piecewise linear, two pieces
Convex increasing
Convex increasing
Morton (1978)
Deterministic Inﬁnite
Weakly convex
Weakly convex
Weakly convex
Smith and Zhang (1998) Deterministic Inﬁnite
Convex
Convex
N/A
Ghate and Smith (2009) Deterministic Inﬁnite
Convex
Convex
Convex
Bellman et al. (1955)
Stochastic
Both ﬁnite and inﬁnite Convex
N/A
Fixed plus linear
Karlin (1960)—model 1 Stochastic
Both ﬁnite and inﬁnite Linear
Convex increasing
Convex increasing
Karlin (1960)—model 2 Stochastic
Both ﬁnite and inﬁnite Strict convex
Convex increasing
Linear
Sobel (1970)
Stochastic
Both ﬁnite and inﬁnite Piecewise linear, two pieces
Convex
Convex
Yang et al. (2005)
Stochastic
Both ﬁnite and inﬁnite Piecewise linear, two pieces
Convex
Convex
Zahrn (2009)
Stochastic
Both ﬁnite and inﬁnite Piecewise linear convex
Convex
Convex
Huh et al. (2011)
Stochastic
Both ﬁnite and inﬁnite Fixed plus, strictly increasing Strictly increasing, bounded Strictly increasing, bounded
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
85

ﬁrm may need to resort to overtime, and then to expensive subcontracting when
producing beyond its regular capacity (Smith and Zhang 1998).
• Bhaskaran et al. (2010) cites empirical evidence from a number of industries
including steel, aluminum, petroleum as well as apparel manufacturing where
marginal costs increase with production. This may in part be explained by the
congestion effect due to high levels of equipment utilization.
• Most machinery operate well at a narrow band of utilization beyond which
short-run costs begin to increase due to decreasing efﬁciency and increasing
breakdowns (Nicholson 1978).
• A purchasing ﬁrm may need to buy from more expensive and/or further-away
suppliers as its order quantity increases (Bhaskaran et al. 2010), leading to a
piecewise linear convex cost structure.
• Consider linear production costs, and an extra linear cost due to changing the
production level from one period to another. Combined, these two costs leads to
a two-piece linear cost function. One may even face a V-shaped function if it is
extremely costly to reduce the production level. See the discussion in Zahrn
(2009) and Sobel (1970).
Bellman et al. (1955), Karlin (1958, 1960) study convex production/ordering costs
in a stochastic demand setting, yet they assume lost sales rather than backordering.
Lost sales models with strictly increasing convex costs include Karlin (1958) and
Bulinskaya (1967). Zhao and Wang (2002) discusses coordination issues between
a manufacturer and a distributor when production/ordering costs are convex.
Piecewise linear convex cost functions are particularly popular (Porteus 1990;
Zahrn 2009) and they can arise from different scenarios: For example, in Henig
et al. (1997), the transportation cost makes a certain capacity level available at zero
cost, beyond which the ﬁrm needs to pay a linear fee. In Yang et al. (2005), the
ﬁrm has capacitated in-house production and a costly outsourcing option.
2.2 Holding and Backlog Costs
Piecewise linear convex holding costs are well studied in the literature. One eco-
nomic interpretation for such holding costs is the existence of multiple capacitated
warehousing options with increasing marginal costs. Another explanation is that as
the level of inventory increases, so does the average time spent in inventory, which
in turn increases the risks of perishability and obsolescence. Giri and Chauduri
(1998) mentions that nonlinear holding costs can be justiﬁed for products such as
electronic components and volatile liquids that require sophisticated arrangements
for security and safety. Veinott (1966) provides a review of the early works (prior to
1966) that consider convex holding costs. Weiss (1982) considers a model where
the holding cost is a convex function of time, rather than the inventory level. This
would be relevant for perishable items. Goh (1994) and Giri and Chauduri (1998)
consider models with both time-dependent and quantity-dependent nonlinear
86
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

holding costs. In Giri and Chauduri (1998), holding cost is a power function of the
inventory level.
Quantifying the consequence of backlogs has always been an issue in inventory
models. See, for example the discussion in Liberopoulos et al. (2010). Some
researchers prefer using constraints on ﬁll rate service levels to specifying artiﬁcial
backlog penalty costs. Schwartz (1966) develops an alternative perturbed demand
approach where the backlogs cause reduction in future demand, rather than
causing a direct cost. The linear cost function that is used in most EOQ-type
models is found to be particularly disturbing.
3 The Model
We consider a single-item inventory model with an ðS; TÞ inventory control policy,
deterministic demand, a general ordering cost function, and a general inventory-
backlog cost rate function. Introducing the sets Rþ :¼ ½0; 1Þ and Rþþ :¼ ð0; 1Þ,
we analyze the following particular model.
• The demand rate k [ 0 for the item is known and constant.
• There is no replenishment lead time and no constraint on the order quantity.
• Unmet demand is completely backlogged, and satisﬁed by the next replenish-
ment order. The level of backlog is represented by a negative inventory level.
The cost of backlogging is an increasing function of the backlog level.
• Our backlogging assumptions require that a positive order is placed in each
cycle. Placing an order of size Q costs a þ cðQÞ. Here, a  0 denotes the ﬁxed
cost of ordering, representing the administrative costs of placing the order. The
expression cðQÞ represents the purchasing as well as transportation costs that the
ﬁrm incurs when ordering Q products. This so-called ordering cost function c is
non-negative, left continuous on Rþþ, and satisﬁes
cð0Þ ¼ 0; cð0þÞ :¼ limQ#0 cðQÞ  0; cð1Þ ¼ 1:
For technical reasons, we assume that limQ#0ða þ cðQÞÞQ1 ¼ 1: This con-
dition clearly holds for a [ 0.
• Keeping inventory causes two types of costs per unit time:
– (Out-of-pocket) holding cost: The total out-of-pocket holding cost is a strictly
increasing function of the inventory level (when inventory level is positive), and
does not have to be linear. This is the cost that we refer to shortly as the holding
cost.
– Opportunity cost: We assume an inventory opportunity cost rate parameter of
r  0. We use the ordering cost as the value of inventory. Thus, the opportunity
cost rate with an order quantity Q is calculated as rcðQÞQ1.
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
87

Note that unlike the (out-of-pocket) holding cost, the opportunity cost is a function
of the ordering cost. The ordering cost, in turn, is a function of the order quantity
due to our generalization. Thus, different from the standard EOQ model, the
opportunity cost rate becomes a function of the order quantity, which complicates
the analysis. Because of this, in reporting our results, we ﬁrst present the special
case of zero opportunity cost, i.e., the case with r ¼ 0. For this easier case, we are
able to obtain more structured results. We then discuss the case of positive
opportunity cost, which is signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult to analyze.
To capture the holding-backlog costs, we introduce the holding-backlog cost
rate function f where the value fðxÞ represents the out-of-pocket holding cost per
time unit when the net inventory level x is positive, and the backlog cost per time
unit when the net inventory level x is negative. Unless mentioned otherwise, this
non-negative function f on R always satisﬁes the following properties.
• The
function
f
is
continuous
on
R
satisfying
fð0Þ ¼ 0;
fð1Þ :¼ limx"1 fðxÞ ¼ 1, and fð1Þ :¼ limx#1 fðxÞ ¼ 1.
• The function f is strictly increasing on Rþþ and decreasing on RnRþ.
Note that the above assumptions on the holding-backlog cost rate function are
very natural and general. We only require the function to be decreasing in the
backlog domain, and be strictly increasing in the positive inventory domain. This
function is needed to be strictly increasing (or decreasing) in either of these
domains due to technical reasons.
Next, we add the opportunity cost to above-deﬁned fðxÞ to obtain the holding-
backlog-opportunity cost rate function (the cost rate function for short)
g : ð0; 1Þ  ½0; 1Þ ! R given by
gðT; xÞ ¼
fðxÞ þ rcðkTÞ
kT x
if x  0;
fðxÞ
if x\0:
(
ð1Þ
In the above cost rate function, we have chosen not to include the ﬁxed cost a.
Including this cost and replacing cðkTÞ by cðkTÞ þ a does not fundamentally
change our analysis.
Having introduced the cost structure, we next present the inventory control
policy. We assume an ðS; TÞ type inventory control policy, where the net inventory
level is raised to the order-up-to level S  0 every T [ 0 time units (the cycle
length). Because demand during an order cycle is kT, it follows by the complete
backlogging assumption that the order quantity Q in each cycle satisﬁes Q ¼ kT.
Note that because the demand rate k is ﬁxed, determining the cycle length T is
equivalent to determining the order quantity Q in this model.
The level of net inventory t  T time units after a cycle begins is S  kt, and (if
positive) the net inventory level at the end of the cycle is S  kT:This means that a
cost minimizing ðS; TÞ policy should satisfy S  kT. The absolute value of this
expression (if negative) represents the maximum amount of backlog incurred. Note
that unlike the standard EOQ model, two policy parameters need to be speciﬁed:
88
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

• The cycle length T, which also determines the order quantity Q through
Q ¼ kT;
• The order-up-to level S, which also determines the maximum (planned) backlog
Q  S to incur every cycle, for a given T value.
The objective is to determine the ðS; TÞ values that minimize the long-run
average cost of ordering, inventory holding, opportunity, and backlog penalty costs
in this inﬁnite horizon EOQ-type problem. This is equivalent to minimizing the
average cost incurred in a cycle because all order cycles are identical. From (1),
the total holding, opportunity, and backlog costs within a cycle of length T, using
an order-up-to level S  kT are given by
ZT
0
gðT; S  ktÞdt ¼ rcðkTÞS2
2k2T
þ
ZT
0
fðS  ktÞdt:
Adding the ﬁxed cost of ordering, and the ordering cost cðkTÞ per cycle, and
dividing by the cycle length T, we obtain the following expression for the average
cost vcðS; TÞ of an ðS; TÞ inventory control policy
vcðS; TÞ ¼
a þ cðkTÞ þ rcðkTÞS2
2k2T
þ
R T
0 fðS  ktÞdt
T
:
ð2Þ
The optimal ðS; TÞ control policy is therefore a solution of the optimization
problem
vcðPÞ :¼ minT2Rþþ;S2Rþ vcðS; TÞ:
ðPcÞ
One can show that an optimal solution exists for the set of functions f and c
considered in this chapter. This technical issue is discussed in Sect. 5. By the
separability of the decision variables S and T we have
minT2Rþþ;S2Rþ vcðS; TÞ ¼ minT2Rþþ minS2Rþ vcðS; TÞ:
Thus, an equivalent representation of the optimization problem (Pc) is given by
minT2Rþþ
a þ cðkTÞ þ ucðr; k; TÞ
T


:
In this case, the function uc : Rþ  R2
þþ ! R is deﬁned as
ucðr; k; TÞ :¼ minS2Rþ
rcðkTÞS2
2k2T
þ
Z T
0
fðS  ktÞdt


:
ð3Þ
To clarify the dependence of the optimization problem (Pc) on the demand rate
parameter k [ 0, we observe by (3) that
ucðr; k; TÞ ¼ k1wcðr; kTÞ;
ð4Þ
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
89

where wc : Rþ  Rþþ ! R is deﬁned by
wcðr; TÞ :¼ minS2Rþ
rcðTÞS2
2T
þ
Z T
0
fðS  tÞdt


:
ðPcðr; TÞÞ
Let Scðr; k; TÞ denote the optimal order-up-to level, which is the optimal solution
of the optimization problem in (3). It follows by (4) that
Scðr; k; TÞ ¼ Scðr; 1; kTÞ:
ð5Þ
Hence, without loss of generality the optimal order-up-to level depends only on the
parameter r and the product kT of the parameters k and T. By a slight abuse of
notation and using (5), the optimal order-up-to level Scðr; k; TÞ is denoted by
Scðr; kTÞ: Also by (4) we obtain that problem (Pc) has the form
minT2Rþþ Fcðr; k; TÞ;
ðPcÞ
where Fc : Rþ  R2
þþ ! R is given by
Fcðr; k; TÞ ¼ a þ cðkTÞ þ k1wcðr; kTÞ
T
:
ð6Þ
The evaluation of the objective function requires one to determine wcðr; TÞ, the
optimal objective value of the optimization problem (Pcðr; TÞ). In Sect. 4, we
consider ways to solve this optimization problem fast. We also provide an
extensive analysis of the sensitivity of the optimal order-up-to level S with respect
to the given cycle length T, as well as model parameters r and k. Then, in Sect. 5,
we discuss the determination of the optimal order cycle length T using the results
from Sect. 4.
In Sects. 4 and 5 both, we study two separate cases depending on whether the
opportunity cost rate is zero or positive. Zero opportunity costs would be relevant
when the amount of money invested into the product is not an important concern.
This may be the case, for instance, for ice cream where the out-of-pocket inventory
holding costs (due to cooling etc.) dominates the ﬁnancial opportunity cost. Also,
given the high speed of ﬂow in today’s supply chains, the average time spent in
inventory, hence the opportunity cost of funds tied to inventory has decreased
signiﬁcantly. On the other hand, one expects a positive opportunity cost in the
cases where the risks associated with holding inventory are high. Perishable
products or products that face quick obsolescence might be examples for this
category.
In Sect. 6, we discuss how one can compute lower and upper bounds on the
optimal cycle length for general ordering cost functions c using a simple algo-
rithm. These bounds can then be used in a discretization procedure to obtain an
approximation of the optimal cycle length for such a general problem. In Sect. 7,
we present numerical examples to illustrate some of our theoretical results and
conclude in Sect. 8.
90
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

4 The Order-Up-to Level and Its Sensitivity
In this section, we ﬁrst consider the solution of the optimization problem
(Pcðr; TÞ), and determine the optimal order-up-to level Scðr; kTÞ for any given
cycle length T. We show this to be a strictly convex minimization problem and
hence one can easily compute its objective value and its (unique) optimal order-
up-to level. Related to this optimal order-up-to level, we deﬁne the maximum
backlog in a cycle of length T as
Bcðr; k; TÞ :¼ kT  Scðr; kTÞ;
ð7Þ
and the ﬁll rate as
Acðr; k; TÞ :¼ ðkTÞ1Scðr; kTÞ:
ð8Þ
Similar to what we did with Sc, we make a slight abuse of notation by replacing
Bcðr; k; TÞ with Bcðr; kTÞ, and Acðr; k; TÞ with Acðr; kTÞ. In the second subsection,
we investigate the behavior of the optimal order-up-to level and these related
functions as a function of the cycle length T: We also discuss the inﬁnitesimal
sensitivity of the optimal order-up-to level for a given cycle length with respect to
r; k and T, under some additional smoothness assumptions on the functions c and f.
4.1 The Optimal Order-Up-to Level for a Given Cycle Length
For notational convenience, we introduce the function cav : Rþþ ! Rþ given by
cavðQÞ :¼ cðQÞQ1:
ð9Þ
The value cavðQÞ denotes the average ordering cost in a batch of size Q: The
following result shows that the optimization problem (Pcðr; TÞ) for a given order
cycle length T is algorithmically easy to solve.
Lemma 1
For every T [ 0 and r  0, the optimization problem (Pcðr; TÞ) has a
continuous differentiable objective function which is strictly convex on ½0; T and
strictly increasing on ðT; 1Þ: Its optimal solution Scðr; TÞ exists, it is unique and is
given by the unique solution of the system
rcavðTÞS þ fðSÞ  fðS  TÞ ¼ 0;
0  S  T:
ð10Þ
Proof
Using the continuity of the function f, the derivative of the objective
function of optimization problem (Pcðr; TÞ) is given by S 7! pcðr; S; TÞ with
pcðr; S; TÞ :¼ rcavðTÞS þ fðSÞ  fðS  TÞ:
ð11Þ
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
91

Since fð0Þ ¼ 0, and the nonnegative function f is continuous, decreasing on RnRþ
and strictly increasing on Rþþ, it follows that the function S 7! pcðr; S; TÞ in (11) is
continuous on Rþ; positive on ðT; 1Þ and strictly increasing on ½0; T: Hence, the
objective function is strictly convex on ½0; T and strictly increasing on ðT; 1Þ:
Also for S ¼ 0, we obtain pcðr; 0; TÞ ¼ fðTÞ  0, and for S ¼ T, we get
pcðr; T; TÞ ¼ rcavðTÞT þ fðTÞ [ 0. Therefore, the unique optimal solution is the
unique solution of the nonlinear system in (10). h
Since by Lemma 1 the function S 7! pcðr; S; TÞ is for each given T [ 0 and
r  0 strictly increasing on ½0; T and positive on ðT; 1Þ, one can apply, for
example, the bisection method to (10) to compute the root Scðr; TÞ: Using this, the
optimal objective value wcðr; TÞ is given by
wcðr; TÞ ¼ r
2 cavðTÞS2
cðr; TÞ þ
ZT
0
fðScðr; TÞ  tÞdt:
ð12Þ
Example For the holding-backlog cost rate function f used in the classical EOQ
model, the root Scðr; TÞ has a simple elementary expression. In this classical case,
the function f is given by
fðxÞ ¼
hx for x  0
bx for x\0;

ð13Þ
where the parameter h [ 0 denotes the unit inventory holding cost per unit time,
and b  0 denotes the unit backlog cost per unit time. Substituting this cost rate
function into (10) or in the objective function of problem (Pcðr; TÞ) given by
r
2 cavðTÞS2 þ
ZT
0
fðS  tÞdt ¼ rcavðTÞ þ h
2
S2 þ b
2 ðS  TÞ2:
ð14Þ
For 0  S  T we obtain
Scðr; TÞ ¼
bT
rcavðTÞ þ h þ b :
ð15Þ
By (15) the maximum backlog for this optimal order-up-to level is given by
(assuming k ¼ 1 without loss generality)
Bcðr; TÞ ¼ ðh þ rcavðTÞÞT
rcavðTÞ þ h þ b ;
ð16Þ
and the ﬁll rate by
Acðr; TÞ ¼
b
rcavðTÞ þ h þ b :
ð17Þ
92
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

In an economies of scale scenario, implying a decreasing average ordering cost,
it follows by (15) that the optimal order-up-to level increases as a function of the
cycle length. In a diseconomies of scale scenario implying increasing cav, the
optimal order-up-to level may be decreasing on certain intervals and increasing on
other intervals. By (16) the same observation applies to the maximum backlog
level for cav decreasing. Finally by relation (17), the condition that cav decreasing
(increasing) is equivalent to the ﬁll rate being increasing (decreasing).
We are interested in ﬁnding out whether these results for the classical EOQ cost
rate function remain valid for general cost rate functions. This is the topic of the
next subsection, together with inﬁnitesimal sensitivity results for the optimal
order-up-to level. Analyzing the behavior of the optimal order-up-to level as a
function of the cycle length T is useful when we need to compute the optimal
solution of optimization problem (Pcðr; TÞ) for different values of the cycle length
T. Using this behavior, we can restrict our search interval ½0; T containing an
optimal solution of (Pcðr; TÞ) for a given value of T.
4.2 Sensitivity Analysis
Because our procedure requires evaluating Scðr; kTÞ for different values of T, it is
important to determine the sensitivity of this optimal order-up-to level with respect
to T. Next, we show under smoothness type of conditions on the functions c and f
that the optimal order-up-to level Scðr; TÞ is differentiable with respect to T, and
we provide expressions for these derivatives. We also discuss the behavior of the
maximum backlog and ﬁll rate as a function of the cycle length.
4.2.1 No Opportunity Cost
In general, the sum of order-up-to level and the maximum backlog is equal to the
order quantity Q ¼ kT. This value is clearly increasing in the cycle length T. The
next lemma shows for a model with no opportunity cost that both the order-up-to
level Scð0; TÞ and the maximum backlog level Bcð0; TÞ in the optimal solution are
increasing functions of the cycle length. The lemma also characterizes the
behavior of the ﬁll rate as a function of T under some condition on the holding-
backlog cost rate function f. Without loss of generality, we set the demand rate to
k ¼ 1. We ﬁrst introduce for any cost rate function f the related functions f þ
av; f 
av :
Rþþ ! Rþ deﬁned as
f þ
avðxÞ :¼ x1fðxÞ;
f 
avðxÞ :¼ x1fðxÞ
for every x [ 0.
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
93

Lemma 2
The optimal order-up-to level Scð0; TÞ and the maximum backlog
Bcð0; TÞ are increasing on Rþþ. In addition, we have the following character-
izations of the ﬁll rate in the optimal solution.
1. If f þ
av is increasing on Rþþ and f 
av is decreasing on Rþþ, then the ﬁll rate is
decreasing on Rþþ:
2. If f þ
av is decreasing on Rþþ and f 
av is increasing on Rþþ, then the ﬁll rate is
increasing on Rþþ:
Proof
See the Appendix.
h
Hence, for larger cycle lengths, in addition to a larger order quantity, both the
order-up-to level and the maximum backlog are higher. Under the conditions in
part (1) of the ﬁll rate result of the lemma, it is increasingly more costly to hold
inventory as the level of inventory increases; whereas, it becomes less costly to
increase the backlog as the level of backlog increases. Given these conditions, the
inventory versus backlog balance is tilted toward more backlog, which causes the
ﬁll rate in the optimal solution to decrease in T.
In the previous section, we assumed implicitly that the optimization problem
(Pc) has an optimal solution. The next corollary of Lemma 2 is needed to formally
verify this assumption.
Corollary 3
It follows that limT"1Bcð0; TÞ ¼ 1:
Proof
Since by Lemma 2 the backlog Bcð0; TÞ is increasing, it follows that
limT"1 Bcð0; TÞ exists and is possibly equal to inﬁnity. If this limit is ﬁnite and
given by h then by the deﬁnition of backlog it must hold that limT"1 Scð0; TÞ ¼
1: From Lemma 1, f continuous, and fð1Þ ¼ 1 we have
fðhÞ ¼ limT"1 fðBcð0; TÞÞ ¼ limT"1 fðScð0; TÞÞ ¼ fð1Þ ¼ 1:
Hence, we obtain a contradiction with f ﬁnite on the set RnRþ. Thus, we must
have limT"1 Bcð0; TÞ ¼ 1: h
The next lemma shows for smooth functions f that the derivative of the function
T 7! Scð0; TÞ exists and can be expressed by an easily computable formula. In
addition to providing an important result related to the sensitivity of Scð0; TÞ with
respect to T, this lemma also yields, by using (12), a simple formula for the
derivative of wcðr; TÞ with respect to T. Hence by (6), we can also compute for
each T the derivative of Fc with respect to T, which can be used in an algorithmic
procedure to compute the optimal cycle length.
Lemma 4
The function T ! Scð0; TÞ is continuous on Rþþ: If the function f is
continuously differentiable on R with f positive on Rnf0g, and its derivative f 0
positive on Rþþ, then the function T 7! Scð0; TÞ is continuously differentiable on
Rþþ. Its partial derivative with respect to T is given by
94
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

oSc
oT ð0; TÞ ¼
f 0ðBcð0; TÞÞ
f 0ðScð0; TÞÞ  f 0ðBcð0; TÞÞ [ 0:
ð18Þ
Proof
See the Appendix.
h
Next, we consider the same questions for the positive opportunity cost case.
4.2.2 Positive Opportunity Cost
The next lemma presents similar results as Lemma 2 for the positive opportunity
cost case. Note that these results (except for the maximum backlog) reduce to the
no opportunity cost case if the average ordering cost function cav is set equal to the
zero function.
In the ﬁrst part of the lemma, we impose a natural condition on the average
ordering costs, and show that the order-up-to level is increasing in T. Contrary to
the no opportunity cost case, it is difﬁcult to impose natural conditions on the
average ordering costs to guarantee that the maximum backlog is an increasing
function of the cycle length. Because there exists an interaction between the
average ordering cost and holding-backlog costs within optimization problem
(Pcðr; TÞ), one cannot expect that a similar result as given in Lemma 2 also holds
for positive opportunity costs. Hence, for decreasing average ordering costs, the
maximum backlog Bcðr; TÞ may be increasing on an interval and decreasing on
another interval.
Lemma 5
If the function cav is decreasing on Rþþ, then for every r [ 0 the
optimal order-up-to level Scðr; TÞ is increasing on Rþþ. In addition, we have the
following characterization of the ﬁll rate in the optimal solution:
1. If cav is increasing, f þ
av is increasing on Rþþ, and f 
av is decreasing on Rþþ;
then the ﬁll rate is decreasing on Rþþ.
2. If cav is decreasing, f þ
av is decreasing on Rþþ, and f 
av is increasing on Rþþ;
then the ﬁll rate is increasing on Rþþ.
Proof
See the Appendix.
h
We next show for smooth f and c that the function T 7! Scðr; TÞ is continuously
differentiable. Again its derivative has a simple expression. Also by (12) one can
determine the derivative of wc with respect to T, and this implies using (6) that one
can determine the derivative of Fc with respect to T. Knowing this derivative is
useful when constructing an algorithm to ﬁnd the optimal cycle length.
Lemma 6
The function ðr; TÞ 7! Scðr; TÞ is continuous on R2
þþ. If the function f
is continuously differentiable on R, and c is continuously differentiable and
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
95

positive on Rþþ; then for every r [ 0 the function T 7! Scðr; TÞ is continuously
differentiable on Rþþ. Its partial derivative with respect to T is given by
oSc
oT ðr; TÞ ¼
ðrc0
avðTÞScðr; TÞ þ f 0ðBcðr; TÞÞÞ
rcavðTÞ þ f 0ðScðr; TÞÞ  f 0ðBcðr; TÞÞ :
ð19Þ
Proof
See the Appendix.
h
By (5) the inﬁnitesimal sensitivity of the optimal order-up-to level with respect
to the demand rate k [ 0 is given by T oSc
oT ðr; kTÞ: Also by Lemma 6 we obtain
oSc
oT ðr; TÞ  0 , rc0
avðTÞScðr; TÞ þ f 0ðBcðr; TÞÞ  0:
ð20Þ
This result implies that for certain ordering cost functions c and holding-
backlog cost rate functions f, the optimal order-up-to level Scðr; TÞ may be
decreasing in the cycle length T. For such cases, the maximum backlog should be
increasing in T since the sum of the order-up-to level and the maximum backlog is
equal to Q ¼ kT. Unfortunately, it seems that one cannot ﬁnd a natural sufﬁcient
condition on the functions c and f to achieve this result. However, (20) is useful for
computational purposes.
Finally, we state the sensitivity of the optimal order-up-to level with respect to
the opportunity cost rate r [ 0:
Lemma 7
For every T [ 0 the function r 7! Scðr; TÞ is decreasing on Rþ: If the
function f is continuously differentiable on R, then for every T [ 0 the function
r 7! Scðr; TÞ is continuously differentiable on Rþþ. Its partial derivative with
respect to r is given by
oSc
or ðr; TÞ ¼
cavðTÞScðr; TÞ
rcavðTÞ þ f 0ðScðr; TÞÞ  f 0ðBcðr; TÞÞ :
Proof
The proof is omitted as it uses similar techniques to Lemma 6.
h
In the next subsection, we discuss the determination of the optimal cycle length
and prove this to be a simple convex optimization problem for certain cases.
5 The Optimal Cycle Length
In this section, we discuss how one can determine the optimal cycle length TcðrÞ,
i.e., the solution of the optimization problem (Pc). We use the characterization of
the optimal order-up-to level Scðr; TÞ for a given T from Sect. 4 to evaluate
wcðr; TÞ, and the objective value Fcðr; k; TÞ given in (6). We aim to ﬁnd for which
choices of the ordering cost function c the objective function Fc has convexity-
type properties. This enables us to solve problem (Pc) fast by using standard
96
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

convex optimization algorithms. As in Sect. 4, we study the zero and positive
opportunity cost cases separately.
Before considering arbitrary cost rate functions f, we observe that for the
classical EOQ cost rate function f given in (13), the value wcðr; TÞ has a simple
analytical expression. Substituting the value for Scðr; TÞ given in (15) into (14), we
obtain after some computations
wcðr; TÞ ¼ b
2
rcavðTÞ þ h
rcavðTÞ þ b þ h T2:
ð21Þ
Hence, in the classical EOQ case with an arbitrary ordering cost function c, the
objective function listed in (6) is given by
Fcðr; k; TÞ ¼ aT1 þ kcavðkTÞ þ b
2
ðrcavðkTÞ þ hÞkT
rcavðkTÞ þ b þ h :
ð22Þ
From (16), this is equivalent to
Fcðr; k; TÞ ¼ aT1 þ kcavðkTÞ þ bBcðr; kTÞ
2
:
5.1 No Opportunity Cost
If there are no opportunity costs it is easy to show under which conditions on the
ordering cost function c the optimization problem (Pc) is convex and hence simple
to solve. To prove this, we use the following well-known result from convex
analysis (Roberts and Varberg 1973). For any convex function g : ð0; 1Þ ! R, its
left and right derivatives g0
ðTÞ and g0
þðTÞ exists for every T [ 0 and are
increasing. The left derivative g0
ðTÞ at T [ 0 is given by
g0
ðTÞ :¼ limh"0
gðT þ hÞ  gðTÞ
h
;
and its right derivative g0
þðTÞ at T [ 0 by
g0
þðTÞ :¼ limh#0
gðT þ hÞ  gðTÞ
h
;
and these satisfy for every T [ 0
g0
ðTÞ  g0
þðTÞ:
The next result shows that the function wc is differentiable and convex with respect
to T, and provides a simple expression for its derivative.
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
97

Lemma 8
The function T 7! wcð0; TÞ is continuously differentiable and convex
with derivative
owc
oT ð0; TÞ ¼ fðBcð0; TÞÞ:
Proof
It is shown in Lemma 3 of Frenk et al. (1999) that the function
ðS; TÞ 7!
Z T
0
fðS  tÞdt
is convex on the convex set C :¼ fðS; TÞ : T [ 0; 0  S  Tg: Since for every T [ 0
the optimal solution Scð0; TÞ of problem ðPcð0; TÞÞ belongs to the set C, this implies
that the function T 7! wcð0; TÞ is convex on Rþþ. Hence the left and right deriv-
atives w0
cð0; TÞ and w0
cþð0; TÞ exist and satisfy w0
cð0; TÞ  w0
cþð0; TÞ for every
T [ 0: To construct an upper bound on w0
cþð0; TÞ it follows for every h [ 0 that
wcð0; T þ hÞ  wcð0; TÞ
h
 h1
Z Tþh
T
fðScð0; TÞ  tÞdt:
This shows by the continuity of f that
w0
cþð0; TÞ  fðBcð0; TÞÞ:
ð23Þ
Similarly one can show that w0
cð0; TÞ  fðBcð0; TÞÞ. Hence, the result follows
from (23) and w0
cð0; TÞ  w0
cþð0; TÞ.
h
By Lemma 8 and Corollary 3 and fð1Þ ¼ 1, it follows immediately that
limT"1
owc
oT ð0; TÞ " 1. Thus we obtain
limT"1 T1wcð0; TÞ ¼ 1:
ð24Þ
The following result shows for which ordering cost functions c the objective
function Fc of the optimization problem (Pc) is convex. Note the change of
variables from T to T1, replacing the cycle length by the order frequency.
Theorem 9
For every cost rate function f satisfying our assumptions, the
function T 7! Fcð0; k; T1Þ is convex on Rþþ if and only if the ordering cost
function c is convex on Rþþ.
Proof
If the function c is convex then by Lemma 8 the function T 7! a þ
cðkTÞ þ k1wcð0; kTÞ is convex. From the perspective property of convex func-
tions (Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004),
T 7! Tða þ cðkT1Þ þ k1wcð0; kT1ÞÞ
is convex on Rþþ, and by (6) the function T ! Fcð0; k; T1Þ is convex.
To prove the reverse implication, we use the classical EOQ cost rate function in
(13) as it is a particular cost rate function satisfying our assumptions. Hence, by (22)
98
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

Fcð0; k; T1Þ ¼ Tða þ cðkT1ÞÞ þ
bhk
2ðb þ hÞT
is a convex function and thus
T 7! TcðkT1Þ þ 21T1ðb þ hÞ1bhk
is also convex. Letting h # 0, and using the pointwise limit of convex functions is
convex, this shows that the function T 7! TcðkT1Þ is convex. Applying the per-
spective property of convex functions yields that c is convex, concluding the proof.
h
By (24) and the assumption limQ#0 Q1ða þ cðQÞÞ ¼ 1, it is obvious from (6)
that
limT#0 Fcð0; k; TÞ ¼ limT"1 Fcð0; k; TÞ ¼ 1:
Hence for any increasing left continuous ordering cost function c, implying c is
lower semicontinuous (Aubin 1993), or ordering cost function c continuous on
Rþþ it follows by Corollary 1.2 of Aubin (1993) that optimization problem
infT2Rþþ Fcð0; k; TÞ has an optimal solution, and we may replace inf by min. Only
for left continuous ordering cost functions c which are in certain intervals not
increasing, we might face the technical problem that an optimal solution does not
exist. For c convex or concave on Rþþ it always holds that c is continuous on Rþþ,
and for these class of ordering cost functions, we do not encounter this technical
problem. Also replacing the decision variable cycle length T by frequency of
ordering, T1, we obtain
vðPcÞ ¼ minT2Rþþ Fcð0; k; T1Þ:
Thus by Theorem 9, the optimal cycle length Tcð0Þ is the reciprocal of the optimal
solution of the convex optimization problem minT2Rþþ Fcð0; k; T1Þ. This convex
optimization problem can be easily solved by a standard bisection procedure
applied to either the objective function or to the ﬁrst-order conditions of this
problem when c is differentiable. By the previous lemmas it is easy to determine
the derivative of the convex function T 7! Fcð0; k; T1Þ at any point T for dif-
ferentiable and convex c. Hence, we conclude that it is easy to determine the
optimal solution of optimization problem (Pc) when no opportunity cost exists and
when the ordering cost function c is convex. The following corollary presents an
implication of Theorem 9 that will be useful in the lower bounding procedure to be
discussed in Sect. 6.
Corollary
10
For
any
convex
ordering
cost
function
c,
the
function
T 7! Fcð0; k; TÞ is unimodal on Rþþ. In particular it is decreasing on ð0; Tcð0ÞÞ,
and increasing on ðTcð0Þ; 1Þ:
Proof
This is a direct consequence of convexity.
h
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
99

The next corollary presents another important implication of Theorem 9 for the
case of a polyhedral concave ordering cost function. An ordering cost function
c : ½0; 1Þ ! R is called polyhedral concave if there exists some n 2 N such that
cðQÞ ¼ min1  j  nfcjðQÞg
ð25Þ
with cjðQÞ ¼ ajQ þ bj satisfying a1 [ . . . [ an [ 0 and 0  b1\b2\. . .\bn:
(See Fig. 4).
In the inventory literature, the special case b1 ¼ 0 is known as the incremental
quantity discount scheme. This function reﬂects economies of scale in the ordering
costs. As shown in Fig. 4, there exists some break points
0 ¼ Q0\Q1\:::\Qn1 ¼ Qn ¼ 1
such that cðQÞ ¼ ajQ þ bj for every Qj1  Q\Qj and 1  j  n: To determine the
value of these break points, we observe for every 1  j  n  1 that
ajQj þ bj ¼ ajþ1Qj þ bjþ1:
This shows that the values Qj; 1  j  n  1 are given by
Qj ¼ ðaj  ajþ1Þ1ðbjþ1  bjÞ:
ð26Þ
For the polyhedral concave ordering cost function given in (25) the next result
holds.
Corollary 11
The objective function belonging to the ordering cost function c
given in (25) can be expressed as follows:
Fcð0; k; TÞ ¼ minj  n Fcjð0; k; TÞ;
where cjðQÞ ¼ ajQ þ bj. Also, for any 1  j  n, the function T ! Fcjð0; k; TÞ is
unimodal on Rþþ.
Fig. 4 Polyhedral concave function
100
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

Proof
Since the function ðT; xÞ 7! T1ða þ x þ k1wcð0; kTÞÞ is increasing in x
we obtain by (6) that
Fcð0; k; TÞ ¼ min1  j  n Fcjð0; k; TÞ
for every T [ 0. Applying Theorem 9 and Corollary 10 yields the desired result. h
To solve the optimization problem (Pc) for polyhedral concave c, we observe
by Corollary 11 that
vðPcÞ ¼ minT2Rþþ Fcð0; k; TÞ ¼ minT2Rþþ minj  n Fcjð0; k; TÞ ¼ minj  n vðPcjÞ:
Hence, we need to solve as many easily solvable optimization problems ðPcjÞ as
the number of break points in the polyhedral concave function c. Although the
minimum of a ﬁnite number of unimodal functions Fcj on Rþþ is in general not
unimodal, one can still prove the following corollary. This result will be of use in
our lower bounding procedure discussed in Sect. 6. Note that we can easily
compute the values TU and TL by solving the optimization problems ðPcnÞ and
ðPc1Þ, respectively.
Corollary 12
For the ordering cost function c given in (25), the function
T 7! Fcð0; k; TÞ is increasing on ½TU; 1Þ with
TU :¼ max Tcnð0Þ; bn  bn1
kðan1  anÞ


;
and decreasing on ð0; TLÞ with
TL ¼ min Tc1ð0Þ; b2  b1
kða1  a2Þ


:
Proof
It follows by (26) that Fcð0; k; TÞ ¼ Fcnð0; k; TÞ for every T  k1Qn1:
Because the function Fcn is unimodal on Rþþ and Tcnð0Þ denotes the optimal
solution of problem ðPcnÞ, the ﬁrst part follows. The second part can be shown
similarly and hence its proof is omitted.
h
5.2 Positive Opportunity Cost
In this subsection, we discuss the determination of the optimal cycle length T with
positive inventory opportunity costs r [ 0. In this case, the results are more
complicated and less general than the ones for the no opportunity cost case. First,
we show by means of a counterexample that contrary to the no opportunity cost
case, the function T 7! wcðr; TÞ might not be convex for convex c and r [ 0: This
counterexample holds for the particular case of the classical EOQ holding-backlog
cost rate function.
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
101

Example 13
If the function f is given by the classical EOQ cost rate function in
(13), and the convex ordering cost function is cðQÞ ¼ Q10, it follows from setting
h ¼ 1; b ¼ 20; r ¼ 0:05 that by (21)
wcðr; TÞ ¼ 10ðT9 þ 20ÞT2
T9 þ 420
:
The second derivative is given by
o2wc
oT2 ðr; TÞ ¼ 1080T9
T9 þ 420 
1620T18
ðT9 þ 420Þ2 þ 20ðT9 þ 20Þ
T9 þ 420
 1080T9ðT9 þ 20Þ
ðT9 þ 420Þ2
þ 1620T18ðT9 þ 20Þ
ðT9 þ 420Þ3
:
From Fig. 5, one can observe that the second derivative of the function wcðr; TÞ is
negative in some interval and hence the function T ! wcðr; TÞ is not convex on
Rþþ.
This counterexample illustrates that there is no similar result as Lemma 8 for
positive opportunity costs. To prove a similar result as discussed in Lemma 8 for
positive opportunity costs, we need to restrict the class of ordering cost functions.
The following lemma yields a similar result as Lemma 8 for r [ 0. Note that the
afﬁne ordering cost function cðQÞ ¼ aQ þ b with b  0; a  0 resembles the
ordering cost function in the standard EOQ model, however, the cost rate function
f is much more general. Observe that we cannot show the same result when b\0.
Otherwise, we could have proven that wc is convex for convex c using c ¼ sup cj
implying wc ¼ supj2J wcj and because any convex function can be seen as the
supremum of afﬁne functions. Clearly, this is not true by our counterexample.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
T : The Cycle Length
The second derivation of function ψc(r,T)
The numerical value of the second
derivation of function ψc (r,T)
Fig. 5 The second derivative of the function T ! wcðr; TÞ
102
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

Lemma 14
If the ordering cost function c : Rþ ! Rþ is given by cðQÞ ¼
aQ þ b with a  0; b  0, then the function T 7! wcðr; TÞ is convex and continu-
ously differentiable on Rþþ for any r [ 0. Its partial derivative with respect to T is
given by
owc
oT ðr; TÞ ¼ rbS2
cðr; TÞ
2T2
þ fðBcðr; TÞÞ:
ð27Þ
Proof
Since the ordering cost function is afﬁne, it follows by the deﬁnition of wc
that
wcðr; TÞ ¼ minS2Rþ
ra
2 þ rb
2T


S2 þ
Z T
0
fðS  tÞdt


:
Applying the perspective property of convex functions to the convex function
S 7! S2, we have ðT; SÞ 7! S2T1 is convex on Rþþ  R. Using a; b  0, this
implies that
ðT; SÞ 7!
ra
2 þ rb
2T


S2
is convex on Rþþ  Rþ. We already know that the function ðS; TÞ 7!
R T
0 fðS 
tÞdt is convex on C :¼ fðS; TÞ : T [ 0; 0  S  Tg which shows that
ðS; TÞ 7!
ra
2 þ rb
2T


S2 þ
Z T
0
fðS  tÞdt
is convex on the set C: Since for every T [ 0, the optimal solution Scðr; TÞ of
problem (Pcðr; TÞ) belongs to C, we obtain that the function T 7! wcðr; TÞ is
convex on Rþþ for any r [ 0. To verify (27) it follows by the convexity of wc that
the right derivative w0
cþðr; TÞ and left derivative w0
cðr; TÞ exists and w0
cðr; TÞ
 w0
cþðr; TÞ. To construct an upper bound on w0
cþðr; TÞ, it follows for every h [ 0
that
wcðr; T þ hÞ  wcðr; TÞ
h
 rbS2
cðr; TÞ
2h
ð
1
T þ h  1
TÞ þ h1
Z Tþh
T
fðScðr; TÞ  tÞdt
¼  rbS2
cðr; TÞ
2ðT þ hÞT þ h1
Z Tþh
T
fðScðr; TÞ  tÞdt:
This implies by the continuity of f, letting h # 0 that
w0
cþðr; TÞ   rbS2
cðr; TÞ
2T2
þ fðBcðr; TÞÞ:
ð28Þ
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
103

By a similar proof we obtain
w0
cðr; TÞ   rbS2
cðr; TÞ
2T2
þ fðBcðr; TÞÞ:
ð29Þ
The result follows from applying w0
cðr; TÞ  w0
cþðr; TÞ and relations (28) and
(29).
h
Note that the above lemma is a generalization of Lemma 8 because the case
a ¼ b ¼ 0 reduces to the no opportunity cost case.
In the previous lemma, we have veriﬁed that the function T 7! wcðr; TÞ is a
continuously differentiable convex function for any f and c given by the class of
increasing afﬁne functions with a constant nonnegative term. We have also shown
that it is easy to calculate the derivative of T 7! wcðr; TÞ. The following lemma
presents another case for which T 7! wcðr; TÞ is continuously differentiable (not
necessarily convex), and for which a simple formula for its derivative exists. In the
proof of this result, the main mathematical problem is to determine under which
conditions the order-up-to-level is differentiable, which has already been discussed
in Lemma 6. All that remains to obtain the result is applying the composite rule of
differentiation.
Lemma 15
If the functions f and c are continuously differentiable, then the
function T 7! wcðr; TÞ is also continuously differentiable with
owc
oT ðr; TÞ ¼ r
2 c0
avðTÞS2
cðr; TÞ þ fðBcðr; TÞÞ:
Proof
See the Appendix.
h
By the above result it seems to be difﬁcult to determine under which type of
general conditions on c the function T 7! wcðr; TÞ is convex. However, since we
know the derivative of the function wc with respect to T; we can easily evaluate the
derivative with respect to T of the objective function Fc of our optimization
problem (Pc). This might help in a Lipschitz optimization procedure over a
bounded interval if we can easily compute an upper bound on the optimal cycle
length T, and use the derivative to compute an upper bound on the rate of increase
or decrease. At the same time, this derivative is also useful in an algorithm to
determine the optimal cycle length in problem (Pc). We now show in the next
lemma the sensitivity of the function wc with respect to r:
Lemma 16
The function r 7! wcðr; TÞ is concave on Rþþ for any T [ 0. Its
partial derivative with respect to r is given by
owc
or ðr; TÞ ¼ 1
2 cavðTÞS2
cðr; TÞ:
ð30Þ
Proof
The proof is omitted as it is similar to the proof of Lemma 14.
h
104
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

Finally, we provide the following result which shows that the objective function
Fc is convex in T1 for increasing afﬁne ordering cost functions c with a non-
negative constant term.
Theorem
17
If
the
ordering
cost
function
c : Rþ ! Rþ
is
given
by
cðQÞ ¼ aQ þ b; a  0; b  0, then the function T 7! Fcðr; k; T1Þ is convex for
every r [ 0:
Proof
By Lemma 14, the function T 7! a þ cðkTÞ þ k1wcðr; kTÞ is convex.
Applying the perspective property of convex functions yields the desired result. h
Applying
(24)
and
using
wcðr; TÞ  wcð0; TÞ
it
must
hold
that
limT"1 T1wcðr; TÞ ¼ 1 for every r  0 and any ordering cost function. Using
also limQ#0 Q1ða þ cðQÞÞ ¼ 1, for any r  0, we have
limT#0 Fcðr; k; TÞ ¼ limT"1 Fcðr; k; TÞ ¼ 1:
ð31Þ
Hence for any increasing left continuous ordering cost function c, implying c is
lower semicontinuous (Aubin 1993), or ordering cost function c continuous on
Rþþ it follows by Corollary 1.2 of Aubin (1993) that optimization problem
infT2Rþþ Fcðr; k; TÞ has an optimal solution, and we may replace inf by min. Only
for left continuous ordering cost functions c which are in certain intervals not
increasing, we might face the technical problem that an optimal solution does not
exist.
By Theorem 17 for c increasing afﬁne with a non-negative constant term, one
can solve optimization problem (Pc) easily by means of a bisection method applied
to the convex optimization problem minT2Rþþ Fcðr; k; T1Þ, and by taking the
reciprocal of its optimal solution.
An immediate consequence of Theorem 17 is given by the following corollary
where the optimal cycle length is denoted with TcðrÞ. This is the analogous result
to Corollary 10 of the no opportunity cost case. Again, this result is useful in our
lower bounding procedure to be discussed in Sect. 6.
Corollary 18
For the ordering cost function c : Rþ ! Rþ given by cðQÞ ¼
aQ þ b; a  0; b  0, the function T 7! Fcðr; k; TÞ is unimodal for every r [ 0: In
particular, it is decreasing on ð0; TcðrÞÞ, and increasing on ðTcðrÞ; 1Þ:
The following lemma presents the behavior of the objective function Fc for a
polyhedral concave ordering cost function.
Lemma 19
For the ordering cost function c given in (25) it follows for any r [ 0
that
Fcðr; k; TÞ ¼ minj  n Fcjðr; k; TÞ;
with
cjðQÞ ¼ ajQ þ bj, and T ! Fcjðr; k; TÞ is unimodal on Rþþ for every
1  j  n:
Proof
The proof is omitted as it is similar to the proof of Corollary 11.
h
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
105

Finally, we provide the following corollary.
Corollary 20
For the ordering cost function c given in (25) and r [ 0, the
function T 7! Fcðr; k; TÞ is increasing on ½TU; 1Þ with
TU :¼ max TcnðrÞ; bn  bn1
kðan1  anÞ


;
and decreasing on ð0; TLÞ with
TL ¼ min Tc1ðrÞ; b2  b1
kða1  a2Þ


:
Proof
The proof is omitted as it is similar to the proof of Corollary 12.
h
In this subsection, we have shown that the optimization problem (Pc) is easy to
solve for increasing afﬁne functions with a positive constant term, and for poly-
hedral concave functions. For more general ordering cost functions; however, we
face a global optimization problem in T where we can only evaluate the objective
function at any given point T and its derivative (under certain smoothness con-
ditions). Using this information, one can apply a standard root-ﬁnding algorithm
for the derivative or a ﬁnite number of discrete function evaluations on a grid. In
both cases, bounding the optimal cycle length T would be useful as it restricts the
search to a bounded interval. This is discussed in the next section.
6 Bounding the Optimal Cycle Length for General
Ordering Cost Functions
So far, we have discussed solution procedures for ordering cost functions c sat-
isfying certain convexity or concavity properties. In practice, however, the
ordering cost function might be very general, lacking these structural properties.
For such cases, one needs to resort to numerical methods to calculate the optimal
cycle length. If a lower bound TL and an upper bound TU can be determined, our
results can be used to evaluate the objective function value Fcðr; k; TiÞ on a chosen
discrete grid T1 ¼ TL\T2\::::\Tn ¼ TU. In this section, we present an approach
to efﬁciently determine such bounds. The following lemma presents our result for
the upper-bounding procedure, which is also illustrated in Fig. 6.
Lemma 21
Let c and c0 be ordering cost functions satisfying cðkTÞ  c0ðkTÞ for
every T  T0 [ 0 and cðkT0Þ ¼ c0ðkT0Þ:
1. If the function T 7! Fc0ðr; k; TÞ is increasing on ½T; 1Þ and T  T0, then an
optimal solution of problem (Pc) is contained in the bounded interval ð0; TU
with TU ¼ T0.
106
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

2. If the function T 7! Fc0ðr; k; TÞ is increasing on ½T; 1Þ and T [ T0, then an
optimal solution of problem (Pc) is contained in the bounded interval ð0; TU
with
TU ¼ minfT  T : Fc0ðr; k; TÞ  Fc0ðr; k; T0Þg:
Proof
We ﬁrst show the ﬁrst part. Using (3) and cðkTÞ  c0ðkTÞ it follows that
wcðr; k; TÞ  wc0ðr; k; TÞ for every T  T0. This yields by (6)
Fcðr; k; TÞ  Fc0ðr; k; TÞ
ð32Þ
for every T  T0. Since by assumption T 7! Fc0ðr; k; TÞ is increasing on ½T; 1Þ
with T  T0 and cðkT0Þ ¼ c0ðkT0Þ, we obtain for every T  T0 that
Fc0ðr; k; TÞ  Fc0ðr; k; T0Þ ¼ Fcðr; k; T0Þ:
Applying now (32) yields Fcðr; k; TÞ  Fcðr; k; T0Þ for every T  T0 and this shows
the ﬁrst result.
To verify the second part of the lemma, it follows by (31) that TU is ﬁnite and
fT  T : Fc0ðr; k; TÞ  Fc0ðr; k; T0Þg ¼ ½TU; 1Þ 	 ½T; 1Þ:
This shows for every T  TU [ T0 that
Fcðr; k; TÞ  Fc0ðr; k; TÞ  Fc0ðr; k; T0Þ ¼ Fcðr; k; T0Þ;
which yields the second result.
h
Next, we provide the analogous result for the lower bound.
Lemma 22
Let c and c0 be ordering cost functions satisfying cðkTÞ  c0ðkTÞ for
every T  T0 [ 0 and cðkT0Þ ¼ c0ðkT0Þ:
1. If the function T 7! Fc0ðr; k; TÞ is decreasing on ð0; TÞ and T  T0, then an
optimal solution of problem (Pc) is contained in the bounded interval ½TL; 1Þ
with TL ¼ T0.
Fig. 6 Illustration of the procedure to ﬁnd an upper bound
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
107

2. If the function T 7! Fc0ðr; k; TÞ is decreasing on ð0; TÞ and T\T0 then the
optimal solution of problem (Pc) is contained in the bounded interval ½TL; 1Þ
with
TL ¼ maxfT  T : Fc0ðr; k; TÞ  Fc0ðr; k; T0Þg:
Proof
The proof is similar to that of Lemma 21 and hence it is omitted.
h
In order to apply the above lemmas to construct an upper and lower bound, we
need to verify their conditions. Observe that computing the values T and T is
easy by using our related results as summarized below:
• No opportunity cost case
– Case-1: Corollary 10 for convex c0
– Case-2: Corollary 12 for polyhedral concave c0
• Positive opportunity cost case
– Case-3: Corollary 18 for afﬁne c0
– Case-4: Corollary 20 for polyhedral concave c0
For cases 1 and 3, the computations boil down to solving a simple one
dimensional optimization problem. For cases 2 and 4, one needs to solve a ﬁnite
number of those convex minimization problems. The bounds TL and TU in the
second part of Lemmas 21 and 22 can be calculated by a bisection method using
our results for evaluating the objective function Fc for a particular value of T. An
immediate application of the above lemmas is given by the following useful result.
Lemma 23
Let c and c0 be ordering cost functions satisfying cð:Þ  c0ð:Þ, and
assume for some T0\T1 that cðkT0Þ ¼ c0ðkT0Þ and cðkT1Þ ¼ c0ðkT1Þ: If the
function T 7! Fc0ðr; k; TÞ is unimodal with unimodality point T2 satisfying
T0  T2  T1, then an optimal solution of problem (Pc) is contained in the interval
½T0; T1.
Proof
This lemma follows directly from Lemmas 21 and 22.
h
Based on the above lemmas, one can approximate the optimal cycle length by
using our numerical function evaluations on a user-deﬁned grid within the lower
and upper bounds. In addition, one can also calculate bounds on the obtained
approximation using Lipschitz continuous ordering cost functions, depending on
the accuracy of the grid.
The following lemma presents an alternative way to generate an upper bound
for both the special case of the classical EOQ holding-backlog cost rate function f
and a more general class of holding-backlog cost rate functions. In the ﬁrst case,
we only need that c is increasing, while in the second case we also need addi-
tionally that we have economies of scale with respect to ordering.
108
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

Lemma 24
Let c be an increasing ordering cost function.
1. For the EOQ cost rate function given in (13), we have TcðrÞ  Tcð0Þ for any
r [ 0.
2. If the holding-backlog cost rate function f satisﬁes f þ
av is decreasing on Rþþ,
and f 
av is increasing on Rþþ, and cav decreasing, we have TcðrÞ  Tcð0Þ for any
r [ 0:
Proof
See the Appendix.
h
This lemma shows that an upper bound in the no opportunity cost (r ¼ 0) case
automatically becomes an upper bound in the positive opportunity cost case for the
EOQ cost rate function and increasing c, or for more general holding-backlog cost
rate functions with economies of scale in ordering costs. This result has practical
implications as the no opportunity cost case is signiﬁcantly easier to solve.
In certain situations, the decision maker might introduce arbitrary bounds on the
cycle length (such as one week as a lower bound, or one year as an upper bound)
based on practical considerations. However, this approach has two shortcomings.
Consider the upper-bounding case. First, there is no guarantee that this arbitrary
upper bound is in fact an upper bound. The optimal cycle length can be higher than
the bound itself. Second, to avoid the ﬁrst issue, this arbitrary bound is often set
unnecessarily high, resulting in loss of algorithmic performance. Our approach, on
the other hand, allows one to determine a true upper bound on the optimal cycle
length in an efﬁcient manner.
7 Numerical Study
In this section, we illustrate how one can implement the analysis and the solution
procedure proposed in this chapter to solve a general EOQ-type inventory model.
In particular, we determine the optimal cycle length for two examples.
Example 1 Consider the convex out-of-pocket holding cost function fðxÞ ¼ x2.
From (2), the average cost vcðS; TÞ becomes
vcðS; TÞ ¼ 1
T

a þ cðkTÞ þ rcðkTÞS2
2k2T
 ðS  kTÞ3
3
þ S3
3

:
From Lemma 1 this function is convex on S. The optimal order-up-to level SoptðTÞ
is the solution to the following ﬁrst derivative equation
ovc
oS ðS; TÞ ¼ 1
T
 rcðkTÞS
k2T
 ðS  kTÞ2 þ S2

¼ 0:
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
109

While this equation can be easily solved using a bisection approach, for this
particular case, we can obtain the following closed form solution
SoptðTÞ ¼
k2T3
rcðkTÞ þ 2k2T3 :
ð33Þ
Using this expression for the order-up-to level, we can efﬁciently compute the
objective function value Fcðr; k; TÞ for any given T.
The next step is to determine the optimal cycle length. To this end, we need to
specify the ordering cost function c. Assume that c belongs to the polyhedral
concave cost function class discussed in Corollary 11, and is given by cðQÞ ¼
min1  j  3fcjðQÞg where
c1ðQÞ ¼ 500Q;
c2ðQÞ ¼ 200Q þ 2500;
c3ðQÞ ¼ 20Q þ 5000:
From (Pc) and Corollary 20, we can write the optimization problem as
vðPcÞ ¼ minj2f1;2;3g vðPcjÞ:
Because each cj; j 2 f1; 2; 3g is afﬁne, and from Corollary 10 and Corollary 18,
each Pcj; j 2 f1; 2; 3g is unimodal for both r [ 0 and r ¼ 0, and hence, easy to
solve. However, the main problem vðPcÞ is neither convex nor unimodal, as one
can see from Fig. 7. Using the arguments presented in Corollary 20 and Theorem
17, and assuming r ¼ 0:1, k ¼ 1, a ¼ 20, we determine the optimal cycle length as
Topt ¼ 2:15.
Example 2 Next, we consider an example with a carload discount schedule
type ordering cost function (See Nahmias 1993 page 225 for more details). Here,
ordering costs arise due to the use of n identical trucks. Each truck has a truckload
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
T: The Cycle Length
Total Average Cost
Fig. 7 Average cost function where cðQÞ is polyhedral concave
110
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

capacity ML, as well as a physical capacity M. For each truck used, the ﬁrm needs
to pay a ﬁxed fee of s, and a variable fee tðxÞ based on the load x given by
tðxÞ ¼
gðxÞ
if
0  x  ML
gðMLÞ
if
ML\x  M:

Thus, for a particular truck, the ﬁrm pays variable cost gðxÞ when the usage x is
equal or below the truckload capacity ML. If the usage is higher than ML, usage
beyond ML up to the physical capacity M is free. This is where the carload
discount arises from. The number of trucks n needed to order Q units satisﬁes
ðn  1ÞM\Q  nM. Given the payment schedule, the ordering cost of Q units
becomes
cðQÞ ¼ ns þ ðn  1ÞtðMLÞ þ tðQ  ðn  1ÞMÞ:
In general, as indicated in Nahmias (1993), a problem in which cðQÞ behaves
according to a carload discount schedule is not easy to solve. The objective
function does not have convexity or unimodality properties, as illustrated in Fig. 8.
To illustrate the use of our approach, we assume fðxÞ ¼ x2 similar to Example-
1, and use ML ¼ 0:5, M ¼ 1, s ¼ 0:5, and gðxÞ ¼ 2x. As it is shown in Fig. 9, the
function cðQÞ is bounded below by a linear function c0ðQÞ ¼ gðMLÞþs
M
which sat-
isﬁes the conditions in Lemma 21 and Lemma 22. Given the linearity of function
c0ðQÞ and based on Corollary 10 and Corollary 18, we compute the optimal value
of cycle length for the lower-bounding function c0ðQÞ as T ¼ 2:955. We then
compute the lower and upper bounds for the optimal cycle length for the original
cðQÞ function as TL ¼ bTk
M c ¼ 2 and TU ¼ dTk
M e ¼ 3. Finally, we apply the Lips-
chitz optimization method to compute Topt ¼ 3.
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
T: Cycle Length
Average Cost
Fig. 8 A sample average cost function with carload discount schedule cðQÞ
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
111

8 Conclusions
In this chapter, we present generalizations of the EOQ model, the building block of
deterministic inventory models. Our generalizations allow the model to address
more realistic ordering, inventory holding, and backlog cost scenarios. At the same
time, however, these generalizations cause the simple convex optimization char-
acteristic of the EOQ model to be lost. We discuss a series of structural results
concerning convex, polyhedral concave, and afﬁne ordering cost functions. For
more general cost function cases, using our theoretical results, we outline a
numerical solution approach based on the generation of upper and lower bounds
for the optimal cycle length. This approach, which allows efﬁcient bounding, leads
to a faster numerical search than using arbitrary bounds. The speed of solution
becomes an important factor when the EOQ model is used as part of a larger (often
iterative) optimization procedure, and when the number of products is large. As
such, our optimal cycle length determination approach has signiﬁcant practical
relevance.
Determination of the optimal order-up-to level S, and cycle length T allow us to
characterize how frequently to order, how much to order and how much backlog to
incur (i.e., the ﬁll rate), which directly affects the service level to customers. In
addition, we discuss the sensitivities of these optimal values with respect to certain
model parameters. This has important ramiﬁcations for practice because model
parameters such as the demand rate and opportunity cost rate are only estimates of
true values. We also characterize the sensitivity of the optimal order-up-to level S
with respect to the other decision variable, the cycle length T. This character-
ization is relevant for cases where the cycle length is dictated by external
conditions.
The work presented in this chapter can be extended in a multitude of directions.
One can, for example, obtain structural results for other ordering cost function and
Fig. 9 Carload discount schedule type ordering cost function
112
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

holding-backlog cost rate function cases. We used a long-run average cost mini-
mization criterion. An alternative would be to use a discounted-cost criterion. We
assumed a constant demand rate. One can study the case of time-dependent var-
iable demand rate. Given the fundamental building-block nature of the EOQ
model, all such generalizations hold the potential to make serious contributions to
inventory theory and practice.
A.1 9
Appendix: Omitted Proofs
In this appendix, the omitted proofs are provided.
Proof of Lemma 2Proof We only show the result for f strictly increasing on
ð1; 0Þ: By a simple perturbation argument replacing f by f with fðxÞ ¼ f ðxÞ for
x  0, and feðxÞ ¼ fðxÞ þ x;  [ 0 for x  0 and taking  # 0, one can show the
same result for f decreasing on ð1; 0Þ: By Lemma 1 it follows for T1 [ T2 [ 0
and f strictly decreasing on ð1; 0Þ that
fðScð0; T2ÞÞ  fðScð0; T2Þ  T1Þ\fðScð0; T2ÞÞ  fðBcð0; T2ÞÞ ¼ 0:
This implies using again Lemma 1 and S 7! fðSÞ  fðS  TÞ strictly increasing that
Scð0; T2Þ\Scð0; T1Þ: Also by the same lemma and T 7! Scð0; TÞ strictly increasing,
we obtain
fðBcð0; T2ÞÞ ¼ fðScð0; T2ÞÞ \ f ðScð0; T1ÞÞ ¼ fðBcð0; T1ÞÞ:
Using Bcð0; TÞ  0 for every T [ 0, and f strictly decreasing on ð1; 0Þ yields
Bcð0; T2Þ  Bcð0; T1Þ:
To show the last result that is about the optimal ﬁll rate, we ﬁrst observe for
every 0\a\1 that
T1ðfðaTÞ  fðða  1ÞTÞ ¼ a fðaTÞ
aT
 ð1  aÞ fðð1  aÞTÞ
ð1  aÞT
:
This implies for f þ
av increasing , f 
av decreasing and using fð0Þ ¼ 0 that for every
0  a  1 the function T 7! T1ðfðaTÞ  fðða  1ÞTÞ is increasing. Also by
Lemma 1, the ﬁll rate is the unique solution of the system
fðaTÞ  fðða  1ÞTÞ ¼ 0;
0  a  1:
ð34Þ
Hence for T1 [ T2 [ 0, we conclude
0
¼ T1
2 ðfðAcð0; T2ÞT2Þ  fððAcð0; T2Þ  1ÞT2ÞÞ
 T1
1 ðfðAcð0; T2ÞT1Þ  fððAcð0; T2Þ  1ÞT1ÞÞ:
ð35Þ
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
113

Since the function a 7! fðaTÞ  fðða  1ÞTÞ is strictly increasing on ð0; 1Þ, we
obtain by applying (34) and (35) that Acð0; T2Þ  Acð0; T1Þ. Thus, we have shown
that the ﬁll rate is decreasing. The other result can be proved similarly and we
therefore omit its proof.
h
Proof of Lemma 4 Proof By standard arguments using the continuity of f and the
uniqueness of the solution of the system in (10) it follows that the function T !
Scð0; TÞ is continuous on R2
þþ: To show the differentiability of the order-up-to
level with respect to T, we introduce the function q0 : Rþ  Rþþ ! R given by
q0ðx; TÞ :¼ fðxÞ  fðx  TÞ:
ð36Þ
By Lemma 1 we know that Scð0; TÞ is the unique solution of system (10). Using
fðTÞ [ 0 and fðTÞ [ 0, this shows
q0ðScð0; TÞ; TÞ ¼ 0; 0\Scð0; TÞ\T:
ð37Þ
Since f is continuously differentiable, we have
oq0
ox ðScð0; TÞ; TÞ ¼ f 0ðScð0; TÞÞ  f 0ðBcð0; TÞÞ [ 0;
ð38Þ
and hence the conditions of the implicit function theorem (Rudin 1982) are sat-
isﬁed. Thus, the function T 7! Scð0; TÞ is continuously differentiable on Rþþ. The
result in (18) follows from applying the composite product rule of differentiable
functions to (37).
h
Proof of Lemma 5 Proof By Lemma 1 and cav decreasing it follows for every
T1 [ T2 [ 0 that
fðScðr; T2ÞÞ ¼ fðScðr; T2Þ  T2Þ  rcavðT2ÞScðr; T2Þ;
 fðScðr; T2Þ  T1Þ  rcavðT2ÞScðr; T2Þ;
 fðScðr; T2Þ  T1Þ  rcavðT1ÞScðr; T2Þ:
This implies
rcavðT1ÞScðr; T2Þ þ fðScðr; T2ÞÞ  fðScðr; T2Þ  T1Þ  0:
Applying Lemma 1 again, we obtain the desired result.
To show the monotonicity property of the ﬁll rate, we ﬁrst observe using
Lemma 1 that for positive opportunity cost, the ﬁll rate is the unique solution of
the system
rcðTÞa þ fðaTÞ  fðða  1ÞTÞ ¼ 0;
0  a  1:
ð39Þ
If cav is increasing and f þ
av is increasing on Rþþ, and f 
av is decreasing on Rþþ, we
obtain for T1 [ T2 by a similar argument as used in Lemma 2 that
114
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

0
¼ rcavðT2ÞAcðr; T2Þ þ T1
2 ðf ðAcðr; T2ÞT2Þ  fððAcðr; T2Þ  1ÞT2ÞÞ
 rcavðT1ÞAcðr; T2Þ þ T1
1 ðfðAcðr; T2ÞT1Þ  fððAcðr; T2Þ  1ÞT1Þ:
This yields
0  rcðT1ÞAcðr; T2Þ þ fðAcðr; T2ÞT1Þ  fððAcðr; T2Þ  1ÞT1Þ;
and by (39) we obtain Acðr; T2Þ  Acðr; T1Þ showing that the ﬁll rate is decreasing.
The other monotonicity result can be proved similarly and so its proof is omitted.
h
Proof of Lemma 6 Proof By a similar argument as used in Lemma 5, one can
show that the function ðr; TÞ ! Scðr; TÞ is continuous on R2
þþ. To show the
second part, we observe by Lemma 1 that Scðr; TÞ is the unique solution of the
system in (10). Hence for every T [ 0 we have
qrðScðr; TÞ; TÞ ¼ 0;
ð40Þ
where qr : Rþ  Rþþ ! R is given by
qrðx; TÞ :¼ rcavðTÞx þ fðxÞ  fðx  TÞ:
Using 0  Scðr; TÞ  T, f 0 nonnegative (nonpositive) on Rþ ðRnRþÞ, and c posi-
tive on Rþþ, we obtain for every T [ 0 that
oqr
ox ðScðr; TÞ; TÞ ¼ rcavðTÞ þ f 0ðScðr; TÞÞ  f 0ðBcðr; TÞÞ [ 0:
The conditions of the implicit function theorem are satisﬁed, and we conclude that
the function T 7! Scðr; TÞ is continuously differentiable on Rþþ. The result in (19)
follows from applying the composite product rule of differentiable functions to
(40).
h
Proof of Lemma 15Proof We know by Lemma 6 that the derivative of Scðr; TÞ
with respect to T exists, and it is continuous. Also, from (12), we have wcðr; TÞ ¼
q1ðScðr; TÞ; TÞ; where q1 : R2
þþ ! R is given by
q1ðx; TÞ ¼ r
2 cavðTÞx2 þ
ZT
0
fðx  tÞdt:
ð41Þ
Based on this observation, the composite rule of differentiation, and Lemma 1, we
obtain
owc
oT ðr; TÞ ¼ r
2 c0
avðTÞS2
cðr; TÞ þ fðBcðr; TÞÞ;
which completes the proof.
h
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
115

Proof of Lemma 24Proof From (22), we know for the EOQ cost rate function that
Fcðr; k; TÞ ¼ aT1 þ kcavðkTÞ þ kTb
2 gðrcavðkTÞÞ
with g given by
gðxÞ ¼
x þ h
x þ b þ h :
This implies
Fcðr; k; TÞ  Fcð0; k; TÞ ¼ kTb
2 ðgðrcavðkTÞÞ  gð0ÞÞ ¼ kTb
2
Z
rcavðkTÞ
0
g0ðxÞdx:
ð42Þ
Replacing the variable x by the variable z ¼ kTx, it follows that
kTb
2
Z
rcavðkTÞ
0
g0ðxÞdx ¼ b
2
Z
rcðkTÞ
0
g0ðzk1T1Þdz
and so we obtain by (42)
Fcðr; k; TÞ  Fcð0; k; TÞ ¼ b
2
Z
rcðkTÞ
0
g0ðzk1T1Þdz:
ð43Þ
Since the function g is a strictly increasing and strictly concave it follows that
T 7! g0ðzk1T1Þ is increasing and positive. This implies using c is increasing and
(43) that the function T 7! Fcðr; k; TÞ  Fcð0; k; TÞ is increasing. To show the
same result for part (2), we observe by Lemma 16 that
Fcðr; k; TÞ  Fcð0; k; TÞ ¼ wcðr; kTÞ  wcð0; kTÞ
kT
¼ cavðkTÞ
2kT
Zr
0
S2
cðs; kTÞds
¼ cðkTÞ
2
Zr
0
A2
cðs; kTÞds:
Applying now part (2) of Lemma 5 yields that T 7! Fcðr; k; TÞ  Fcð0; k; TÞ is
increasing. In both cases this result, together with Tcð0Þ being an optimal solution
of minT2Rþþ Fcð0; k; TÞ implies the following for every T [ Tcð0Þ:
116
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

Fcðr; k; TÞ ¼ Fcðr; k; TÞ  Fcð0; k; TÞ þ Fcð0; k; TÞ
 Fcðr; k; Tcð0ÞÞ  Fcð0; k; Tcð0ÞÞ þ Fcð0; k; Tcð0ÞÞ
¼ Fcðr; k; Tcð0ÞÞ:
This proves the result.
h
References
Aubin J. P. Optima and Equilibria (An introduction to Nonlinear Analysis) . Springer Verlag,
Berlin, 1993.
Bellman R., I. Glicksberg, and O. Gross. On the optimal inventory equation. Management
Science, 2(1):83–104, 1955.
Bhaskaran S., K. Ramachandran, and J. Semple. A dynamic inventory model with the right of
refusal. Management Science, 56(12):2265–2281, 2010.
Birbil S. I., K. Bulbul, J. B. G. Frenk, and H. M. Mulder. On EOQ cost models with arbitrary
purchase and transportation costs. Working paper, Sabanci University, 2012.
Boyd S. and L. Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
MA, 2004.
Bulinskaya E. V. Optimum inventory policies with a convex ordering cost function. Theory of
Probability and its Applications, 1967.
Eliashberg J. and R. Steinberg. Competitive strategies for two ﬁrms with asymmetric production
cost structures. Management Science, 37(11):1452–1473, 1991.
Eppen G. D. and F. J. Gould. A Lagrangian application to production models. Operations
Research, 16(4):819–829, 1968.
Frenk J. B. G., M. J. Kleijn, and R. Dekker. An efﬁcient algorithm for a generalized joint
replenishment problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 118(2):413–428, 1999.
Ghate A. and R. L. Smith. Optimal backlogging over an inﬁnite horizon under time-varying
convex production and inventory costs. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management,
11(2):362–368, 2009.
Giri B. C. and K. S. Chauduri. Deterministic models of perishable inventory with stock-
dependent demand rate and nonlinear holding cost. European Journal of Operational
Research, 105(3):467–474, 1998.
Goh M. EOQ models with general demand and holding cost functions. European Journal of
Operational Research, 73(1):50–54, 1994.
Hadley G. and T. M. Whitin. Analysis of Inventory systems. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
1963.
Harris F. W. Operations and cost. Factory Management Series. A. W. Shaw Company, Chicago,
IL, Ch. IV, 1913.
Henig M., Y. Gerchak, R. Ernst, and D. F. Pyke. An inventory model embedded in designing a
supply contract. Management Science, 43(2):184–189, 1997.
Horst R. and P. Pardalos. Handbook of Global Optimization. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht, Boston, London, 1995.
Huh W. T., G. Janakiraman, and M. Nagarajan. Average cost single-stage inventory models: An
analysis using a vanishing discount approach. Operations Research, 59(1):143–155, 2011.
Johnson L. A. and D. C. Montgomery. Operations Research in Production Planning, Scheduling
and Inventory Control. Wiley, New York.
Karlin S. Dynamic inventory policy with varying stochastic demands. Management Science,
6(3):231–259, 1960.
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
117

Karlin S. One stage inventory models with uncertainty. In S. Karlin K. J. Arrow and H. Scarf,
editors, Studies in the Mathematical Theory of Inventory and Production, pages 109–134.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA, 1958.
Karlin S. Optimal inventory policy for the Arrow-Harris-Marschak dynamic model. In Studies in
the Mathematical Theory of Inventory and Production, pages 135–154. Stanford University
Press, Stanford, CA, 1958.
Kunreuther H. C. and T. E. Morton. General planning horizons for production smoothing with
deterministic Demands: II. extensions to overtime, undertime, and backlogging. Management
Science, 20(7):1037–1046, 1974.
Kunreuther H. C. and T. E. Morton. Planning horizons for production smoothing with
deterministic demands: I. All demand met from regular production. Management Science,
20(1):110–125, 1973.
Lee H. L. and M. J. Rosenblatt. A generalized quantity discount pricing model to increase
supplier’s proﬁts. Management Science, 32(9):1177–1185, 1986.
Liberopoulos G., T. Isidoros, and D. Stefanos. Backorder penalty cost coefﬁcient ‘‘b‘‘: What
could it be? International Journal of Production Economics, 123(1):166–178, 2010.
Lippman S. A. Optimal inventory policy with multiple set-up costs. Management Science,
16(1):118–138, 1969.
Modigliani F. and F. E. Hohn. Production planning over time and the nature of the expectation
and planning horizon. Econometrica, Journal of the Econometric Society, 23(1):46–66, 1955.
Morton T. E. Universal planning horizons for generalized convex production scheduling.
Operations Research, 26(6):1046–1058, 1978.
Munson C. and M. J. Rosenblatt. Theories and realities of quantity discunts: An exploratory
study. Production and Operations Management, 7(4):352–369, 1998.
Nahmias S. Production and Operations Analysis. Irwin, Homewood, Illinois, 1993.
Nicholson W. Microeconomic Theory (2nd ed.). Dryden Press, New York, 1978.
Porteus E. L. On the optimality of generalized (s, S) policies. Management Science,
17(7):411–426, 1971.
Porteus E. L. Stochastic inventory theory. In D. P. Heyman and M. J. Sobel, editors, Handbooks
in OR and MS, volume 2, pages 109–134. Elsevier Science Publishers, B.V., North Holland,
1990.
Roberts A. W. and D. E. Varberg. Convex Functions. Academic Press, New York, 1973.
Rudin W. Principles of Mathematical Analysis. McGraw-Hill, Auckland, 1982.
Schwartz B. L. A new approach to stockout penalties. Management Science, 12(12):538–544,
1966.
Silver E. A., D. F. Pyke, and R. Peterson. Inventory Management and Production Planning and
Scheduling. John Wiley and Sons, 1998.
Smith R. L. and R. Q. Zhang. Inﬁnite horizon production planning in time-varying systems with
convex production and inventory costs. Management Science, 44(9):1313–1320, 1998.
Sobel M. J. Making short-run changes in production when the employment level is ﬁxed.
Operations Research, 18(1):35–51, 1970.
Swoveland C. A deterministic multi-period production planning model with piecewise concave
production and holding-backorder costs. Management Science, 21(9):1007–1013, 1975.
Veinott A. F. Production planning with convex costs: A parametric study. Management Science,
10(3):441–460, 1964.
Veinott
A.
F.
The
status
of
mathematical
inventory
theory.
Management
Science,
12(11):745–777, 1966.
Wagner H. M. and T. M. Whitin. Dynamic version of the economic lot size model. Management
Science, 5(1):89–96, 1958.
Weiss H. Economic order quantity models with nonlinear holding costs. European Journal of
Operational Research, 9(1):56–60, 1982.
Wilson R. H. A scientic routine for stock control. Harvard Business Review, 13:116–128, 1934.
Yang J., X. Qi, and Y. Xia. A production-inventory system with markovian capacity and
outsourcing option. Operations Research, 53(2):328–349, 2005.
118
J. B. G. Frenk et al.

Zahrn F. C. Studies of inventory control and capacity planning with multiple sources. PhD thesis,
2009.
Zangwill W. I. A deterministic multi-period production scheduling model with backlogging.
Management Science, 13(1):105–119, 1966.
Zhao W. and Y. Wang. Coordination of joint pricing-production decisions in a supply chain. IIE
Transactions, 34:701-715, 2002.
Zipkin P. H. Foundations of Inventory Management. Boston: McGraw-Hill, Princeton, New
Jersey, 2000.
Generalizing the Ordering Cost and Holding-Backlog Cost Rate Functions
119

Economic and Environmental
Performance of the Firm: Synergy
or Trade-Off? Insights from the EOQ
Model
Jack A. A. van der Veen and V. Venugopal
Abstract Over the last decades, corporations are increasingly expected to perform
well on the triple bottom line: People, Planet and Proﬁt. However, both in aca-
demia and in practice, there is no consensus on the feasibility of doing good and
doing well simultaneously. The traditional view is that there is an unavoidable
trade-off between the social and environmental performance of an organisation and
its proﬁtability. The other school of thought claimed that breaking the trade-off and
creating a synergy, is not only desired but actually feasible. In this chapter, the
validity of both views is tested by using a multi-objective approach to a variant of
the well-known EOQ model. It is demonstrated that both views are not contra-
dictory but valid under different conditions. As such this chapter helps to reach a
better understanding of the factors that drive trade-offs and synergy behaviour of
the triple bottom line measures.
1 Introduction
Traditionally, proﬁtability has been the primary objective organisations have
focused on. However, under the term corporate social responsibility (CSR), over
the last decades many organisations have expanded the spectrum of their criteria
for measuring success towards the so-called triple bottom line: People, Planet and
Proﬁt. Besides the usual ﬁnancial measures such as cost and proﬁtability, nowa-
days organisations are expected to report on ecological and societal dimensions
J. A. A. van der Veen (&)  V. Venugopal
Center for Marketing and Supply Chain Management, Nyenrode Business Universiteit,
PO Box 130 3620 AC Breukelen, The Netherlands
e-mail: j.vdveen@nyenrode.nl
V. Venugopal
e-mail: v.venugopal@nyenrode.nl
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_6,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
121

too. Environmental sustainability (the Planet dimension) relates to various aspects
such as energy usage, carbon footprint, pollution, biodiversity, deforestation,
overﬁshing, etc. Social sustainability (the People dimension) relates to issues in,
fair trade, child labour, human and labour rights and quality of life.
In a nutshell, the triple bottom line is all about doing good (for society and the
environment) while doing well (economically) at the same time. There is a
growing recognition within the business community that transformational effort is
required to change the way of organisations design, source, manufacture, dis-
tribute, recycle and reuse their products to achieve this mission. Hence, business
leaders are taking a sustainable supply chain approach to achieve this mission; cf.
Butner et al. (2008) and Frank (2008). At the same time, sustainability has
received a lot of attention in the academic literature in the ﬁelds of purchasing,
operations, logistics and supply chain management; cf. Gupta (1995), Linton et al.
(2007) and Seuring and Muller (2008).
There is a long standing debate regarding how a ﬁrm’s sustainability and
economic measures are related to each other. The traditional view is that there is
an unavoidable trade-off between the sustainability and proﬁtability, so that when
an organisation decides to put more emphasis on environmental objectives, this
inevitably will result in increased cost and reduced proﬁt; cf. Wally and Whitehead
(1994) and Palme et al. (1995). However, this view has been challenged by many;
cf. Porter and Van der Linde (1995), Klassen and McLaughlin (1996) and Corbett
and Klassen (2006). For example, the claim ‘‘lean is green’’ is motivated by
observing that when energy usage would be lowered, both sustainability measures
and cost performance could be improved simultaneously. Within this line of
thinking, the traditional trade-off is broken and synergy is created as sustainability
and proﬁtability can be improved simultaneously.
Many researchers have studied the environmental/sustainability versus ﬁnancial
performance issue; cf. Grifﬁn and Mahon (1997), King and Lenox (2001),
Schaltegger and Synnestvedt (2002), Filbeck and Gorman (2004) and Boons and
Wagner (2009). It is fair to say that so far the debate has not reached a satisfactory
level of consensus and the discussion is far from settled. The objective of this
chapter is to test both views within a speciﬁc setting using a formal quantitative
model to help reaching a better understanding of the factors and conditions that
drive trade-offs and synergy behaviour of the triple bottom line measures within
the chosen setting.
In this chapter, a multi-objective approach to a variant of the well-known
economic order quantity (EOQ) model is used. As one of the simplest and most
frequently cited models within the ﬁeld of Operations, Logistics and Supply chain
Management, the EOQ model ﬁts perfectly for our purposes. To keep the model as
simple as possible, the focus will be limited to the environmental component of
sustainability (viz., green sourcing) and more speciﬁcally on one of the measures
in this category, viz., ‘‘energy usage’’. This is motivated by the fact that energy
consumption reduction initiatives has recently received a lot of attention in
practice within operations settings as it goes hand-in-hand with managing green-
house gas emissions and the organisation’s carbon footprint.
122
J. A. A. van der Veen and V. Venugopal

The remainder of this chapter is organised as follows. In the next section, (a
variant of) the EOQ model, the key deﬁnitions and concepts are introduced. This is
followed by Sect. 3 where the main results of the analysis are given and Sect. 4
with a discussion of managerial and governmental implications. The chapter is
closed with a section on conclusions and pointers for further research.
2 EOQ Model with Cost and Environmental Dimensions
Consider the well-known model for determining the EOQ. When sourcing an item
from an external supplier, an organisation is facing a stable demand rate where the
yearly demand is given by D. For deciding its optimal order quantity, the orga-
nisation has two types of relevant costs, namely inventory holding costs and
ordering costs. The inventory holding cost per unit per year is given by CH and the
ﬁxed cost per order is denoted by CO. The organisation wants to source a ﬁxed
amount (given as Q) from the supplier. Within this model, the total annual average
relevant cost as function of the order size is given by
TC Q
ð Þ ¼ 1
2QCH þ
D
Q
 
CO:
ð1Þ
The order size that minimises the above total annual average cost (i.e. the EOQ) is
given by
Q
C ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2D CO
CH


s
:
ð2Þ
Now consider a situation where both the ordering cost and the holding costs are
partly determined by the use of energy. Fixed ordering costs can include energy
costs for instance when there are costs of transportation from the supplier to the
organisation and the truck’s fuel usage depends on the truck size and the distance
travelled rather than on the amount ordered. Within this setting, let the ordering
cost per order be
CO ¼ cO þ ceEO;
ð3Þ
where ce ([0) is the cost per unit of energy, EO ([0) is the (ﬁxed) energy usage per
order and cO is the (ﬁxed) cost per order not related to the use of energy, such as
administrative handling costs. Similarly, assume that also the inventory holding
cost is partly determined by energy costs
CH ¼ cH þ ceEH;
ð4Þ
where EH ([0) is the energy usage per unit of inventory per year and cH is the per
unit annual inventory holding cost not related to the use of energy. The energy
costs can, for example, be related to the energy usage for material handling or the
Economic and Environmental Performance of the Firm
123

use of energy for maintaining climate conditions at the warehouse where the
inventory is stocked. The non-energy cost can, for example, be related to working
capital or obsolescence risks.
Note that it is assumed that the required energy usage depends linearly on the
number of orders and the inventory size. Clearly, in real life this need not be the
case; the energy usage frequently has other shapes like, a threshold function.
However, the model is kept as simple as possible in order to avoid mathematical
complexity that can obscure the key issues studied.
A similar EOQ model set-up has been discussed in a few papers. In Can Arslan
and Turkay (2010), it is shown how additional environmental and societal criteria
can be appended to traditional cost accounting in order to address sustainability in
supply chain management context and a number of insights for managers and
policy makers are given. In Bonney and Jaber (2011), various environmentally
responsible inventory models and policies and how including environmental cri-
teria will impact the traditional optimal economic decisions are discussed. Hua
et al. (2011) investigates how ﬁrms manage carbon footprints in inventory man-
agement under the Carbon emission trading mechanism and develops an EOQ
model incorporating a cap-and-trade mechanism. Bouchery et al. (2012) study a
multi-echelon, multi-objective version (including sustainability criteria) of the
EOQ model and propose an interactive method to ﬁnd a ‘‘best’’ decision amongst
the set of Pareto optimal solutions. In Chen et al. (2012) carbon emissions are
included in an EOQ-based model and conditions are derived under which the
relative reduction in emissions is greater than the relative increase in cost. This
chapter is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst study that uses a multi-objective
approach (of the EOQ model) to study the synergy versus trade-off issue, i.e. the
focus of this chapter is not on extending the EOQ model to ﬁnd optimal order
quantity decision in the context of sustainability; instead the chapter analytically
models and develops conditions that drive a trade-off or synergy between eco-
nomic and environmental performance of an organisation.
Next to minimising costs, the organisation might be interested in minimising
energy usage for environmental (i.e. sustainability) reasons. Within the setting of
the model, the annual average total energy usage as a function of the order size is
given by
TE Q
ð Þ ¼ 1
2QEH þ
D
Q
 
EO:
ð5Þ
The order size that minimises overall energy usage is
Q
E ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2D EO
EH


s
:
ð6Þ
In the remainder of this chapter, minimising TC and TE is referred to as the cost
objective and environmental objective, respectively. Similarly, Q
C and Q
E are
referred to as the optimal cost order size and optimal energy order size, respectively.
124
J. A. A. van der Veen and V. Venugopal

Now assume that the ﬁrm wants to take account of both objectives simulta-
neously. Within the ﬁeld of multi-criteria decision making, there are various ways
to handle multiple objectives. One approach is to optimise a weighted objective
function. Within the given setting, assume that a denotes the relative weight the
organisation assigned to the cost objective (0 B a B 1) when compared to the
environmental objective. The weighted objective function is then given by
TW Q
ð Þ ¼ a
1
2QCH þ
D
Q
 
CO


þ 1  a
ð
Þce
1
2QEH þ
D
Q
 
EO


:
ð7Þ
Note that in order to ensure a single unit of measurement, the second term is a cost
term too, i.e. TW is a weighted cost function.
For convenience of notation, deﬁne BO ¼ acO þ ceEO and BH ¼ acH þ ceEH.
The optimal order size with respect to the weighted objective function is given by
Q
W ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2D BO
BH


s
:
ð8Þ
Deﬁne
D ¼ c0EH  cHEO:
ð9Þ
It is easy to see that Q
C\Q
W\Q
E when D\0 and Q
E\Q
W\Q
C when D [ 0.
To ensure a meaningful discussion, in the remainder of this chapter, it will be
assumed that D 6¼ 0 (i.e. the various optimal order sizes are not the same) and that
only nontrivial cases are considered, i.e. 0 \ a \ 1.
The purpose of this chapter is to study the effect of the various parameters on
total annual cost and energy usage. The total annual cost at the optimal solution
with respect to the weighted objective function is given by
TC Q
W


¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
2D
r



CH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
BH
r
þ CO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
BO
r


;
ð10Þ
and the total annual energy usage by
TE Q
W


¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
2D
r



EH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
BH
r
þ EO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
BO
r


:
ð11Þ
Numerical example
Let D = 12,000; EO = 245; ce = 2; cO = 410; EH = 12 and cH = 36 (i.e.
D ¼ 3900\0),
CO = 900
and
CH = 60.
It
follows
that
Q
C = 600;
TC(600) = 36,000;
TE(600) = 8,500,
and
Q
E = 700;
TC(700) = 36,429;
TE(700) = 8,400.
Let
a = 0.3.
Note
that
Q
W 0:3
ð
Þ = 650;
TC(650) = 36,116
and
TE(650) = 8,423. The results are summarised in Fig. 1.
h
In Fig. 1 the so-called efﬁcient frontier is given, i.e. the combination of values
of TC Q
W a
ð Þ


and TE Q
W a
ð Þ


for all values of the relative weight parameter a.
Economic and Environmental Performance of the Firm
125

The efﬁcient frontier forms the collection of all Pareto optimal solutions and is
sometimes referred to as situations of operational efﬁciency. In other words, within
the framework of the model, operational efﬁciency refers to the situation where,
given the exogenous parameters of the model, the optimal order size is used.
It is important to distinguish between the different roles, the various parameters
and the decision variable have within the model (see Fig. 2). First of all, the weight
a is a parameter that represents the strategic choice on how much importance the
ﬁrm puts to the cost objective when compared to the environmental objective.
Second, the decision variable Q relates to the operational efﬁciency of the orga-
nisation. As mentioned, choosing the optimal value for the decision variable is
considered as being equal to achieving operational efﬁciency. Finally, the
parameters D, ce, EH, EO, cO and cH are considered as being exogenous data, i.e.
are determined outside the model. However, this does not necessarily imply that
these parameters cannot be inﬂuenced by the organisation. Therefore, also these
parameters will be included in the analysis below.
As mentioned in the outset, the objective of this chapter is to get an insight on
when the cost and environmental objectives are aligned or conﬂicting. Objectives
are said to be aligned (thus leading to synergy), when changing a parameter will
result in improvement (or worsening) of both objectives simultaneously and
conﬂicting (leading to trade-offs) when this will result in improved performance on
one objective and at the same time a worsened performance on the other objective.
Note that this deﬁnition is related to parameters a, EO, EH, cO, cH, D and ce, i.e. it
is quite possible that the objectives can be aligned with respect to one parameter,
while at the same time being conﬂicting with respect to another parameter. It is
8380
8400
8420
8440
8460
8480
8500
8520
35950 36000 36050 36100 36150 36200 36250 36300 36350 36400 36450
TC = 36,000; TE = 8,500
TC
TE
600
1
*
*
C
W
Q
Q
700
0
*
*
E
W
Q
Q
TC = 36,429; TE = 8,400
650
3.0
*
W
Q
TC = 36,116; TE = 8,423
=
=
=
=
=
( )
(     )
(  )
Fig. 1 Efﬁcient frontier (using the data from the numerical example)
126
J. A. A. van der Veen and V. Venugopal

also important to note that the analysis assumes incremental parameter changes;
starting from a given set of parameter values, the impact of small change in one of
the parameters on the cost and environmental objective is analysed. The sensitivity
analysis in this chapter is based on ﬁrst order derivatives. Other methods of sen-
sitivity analysis that do not rest on differentiability are applied to the EOQ model
in Borgonovo (2010).
3 Cost and Environmental Performance:
Aligned or Conﬂicting?
Note that
TWðQ
WÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2DBOBH
p
:
ð12Þ
It follows that lowering any of the parameters a, cO, cH, EO, EH, ce and D would
result in improved overall weighted performance of the ﬁrm (lower TW). How-
ever, it is less straightforward how changes in these parameters impact the indi-
vidual cost and environmental performance measures, respectively. In this section,
such impacts will be analysed. More speciﬁcally, ﬁve observations will be made
on whether the economic objective (cost, as given by the TC Q
W


function) and
environmental objective (in terms of energy usage as given by the TE Q
W


function) are aligned or conﬂicting with respect to each of the parameters.
Operations 
Strategy
Importance of 
relative weights
(α)
Optimal decisions
Achieving
Operational 
Efficiency
(Q)
Cost 
performance
(TC)
Sustainability
Performance
Overall Energy 
usage
(TE)
Demand
(D)
Energy usage
(EO; EH)
Energy price
(ce)
Ordering cost
Holding cost/unit
(γO; γH)
INPUT
OUTPUT
Fig. 2 Role and relations between the various parameters in the model
Economic and Environmental Performance of the Firm
127

Observation 1
TC Q
W


is a decreasing function of a and TE Q
W


is an increasing function of a,
i.e. the cost and environmental objectives are conﬂictingwith respect to the relative
weight parameter a.
Intuitively, the rationale behind Observation 1 is easy to understand: as more
weight is put on sustainability, Q
W moves closer to Q
E along the efﬁcient frontier
and further away from Q
C (and the other way around). The formal proof of this
observation (and for all other observations) is given in the appendix.
Note that Observation 1 supports the traditional view on environmental and
economic performance objectives: there is an unavoidable trade-off between the
environment and cost. If a change in a is made, this is to be considered as a
strategic repositioning of the ﬁrm, which can be visualised by a repositioning
towards the preferred position on the efﬁcient frontier. In other words, in deter-
mining its strategy, the organisation must choose in which of the two performance
measures it wants to excel and to which extent; you cannot have it both ways.
Example (continued) Assume that an organisation strategically decides to
decrease the value of a from 0.3 to 0.1 (i.e. the relative importance of the envi-
ronmental
objective
is
increased).
Note
that
Q
W 0:1
ð
Þ = 680;
TC(680) =
36,279 [ 36,116 and TE(680) = 8,404 \ 8,423, i.e. TC has increased and TE has
decreased.
h
For the next observation two conditions are used, namely
EO [ cO
ce
1  a
ð
ÞBH
CH þ BH
 a


;
ð13Þ
and
EH [ cH
ce
1  a
ð
ÞBO
CO þ BO
 a


:
ð14Þ
Observation 2
(i) If condition (13) applies, then both TC Q
W


and TE Q
W


are increasing
functions of EO, i.e. the cost and environmental objectives are aligned with
respect to the per order energy usage EO.
(ii) If the reverse of condition (13) applies, then TC Q
W


is a decreasing and
TE Q
W


is an increasing functions of EO, i.e. the cost and environmental
objectives are conﬂicting with respect to the per order energy usage EO.
(iii) If condition (14) applies, then both TC Q
W


and TE Q
W


are increasing
functions of EH, i.e. the cost and environmental objectives are aligned with
respect to the per unit holding energy usage EH.
(iv) If the reverse of condition (14) applies, then TC Q
W


is a decreasing and
TE Q
W


is an increasing functions of EH, i.e. the cost and environmental
128
J. A. A. van der Veen and V. Venugopal

objectives are conﬂicting with respect to the per unit holding energy usage
EH.
Intuitively, one would expect that if the energy usage is reduced, this would
have a positive effect on both the total annual cost and the total annual energy
usage (both would be reduced), i.e. that the two objectives are aligned and there is
a synergy with respect to the per unit energy usage. By Observation 2, this pre-
cisely is the case, but only if conditions (13) and (14) are fulﬁlled.
To understand the reason for existence of conditions (13) and (14), it is
important to note that a decrease in the per unit energy usage has two effects; (a)
on the optimal order size Q
W; and (b) on the TC and TE functions itself (other than
through the order size). Clearly, the TC and TE functions are, apart from the
inﬂuence of the order size, increasing functions in EH and EO. However, if the
energy usage is reduced, this also causes a change in the optimal order size. As
demonstrated in Observation 2, the net effect of (a) and (b) together can be that
under certain circumstances a decrease of the energy usage leads to increased total
costs. Note that conditions (13) and (14) indicate that such ‘‘unexpected’ behav-
iour can only happen if the energy usage is relatively small.
Example (continued) Assume that the per order energy usage becomes EO = 215
(i.e. is reduced by 30). Note that the right hand side of (13) is -8.82, so that
condition
(13)
is
fulﬁlled.
The
new
optimal
order
size
is
Q
W = 618;
TC(618) = 34,849 \ 36,116 and TE(680) = 7,883 \ 8,423, i.e. both TC and TE
have decreased and the objectives are aligned with respect to EO.
Next assume that EH = 10 (reduced by 2) and EO is reset at 245. Note that the right
hand side of (14) is -0.3, hence condition (14) is fulﬁlled. The new optimal order size
is Q
W = 691; TC(691) = 34,978 \ 36,116 and TE(691) = 7,710 \ 8,423, i.e.
both TC and TE have decreased and the objectives are aligned with respect to EH. h
Observation 3
(i) If D [ 0, then both TC Q
W


and TE Q
W


are increasing functions of cO, i.e.
the cost and environmental objectives are aligned with respect to the ﬁxed cost
per order not related to the use of energy cO.
(ii) If D \ 0, then
TC Q
W


is an increasing and TE Q
W


is a decreasing
function of cO, i.e. the cost and environmental objectives are conﬂicting with
respect to the ﬁxed cost per order not related to the use of energy cO.
(iii) If D \ 0, then both TC Q
W


and TE Q
W


are increasing functions of cH, i.e.
the cost and environmental objectives are aligned with respect to the per unit
holding cost not related to the use of energy cH.
(iv) If D [ 0, then TC Q
W


is an increasing and
TE Q
W


is a decreasing
function of cH, i.e. the cost and environmental objectives are conﬂicting with
respect to the per unit holding cost not related to the use of energy.
At ﬁrst glance it might look somewhat surprising that the parameters cO and cH,
do impact the environmental objective as these are not a direct part of the energy
Economic and Environmental Performance of the Firm
129

usage function TE. However, obviously a change in these two parameters does
have an impact on the optimal order size Q
W, hence also inﬂuences TE Q
W


.
Clearly, whether the cost and environmental objectives are aligned or conﬂicting
depends on whether Q
W will move closer either to Q
C or to Q
E; it is therefore no
surprise that this is determined by the sign of D.
Example (continued) Assume that cO = 350 (i.e. is decreased by 60). Note that
D ¼ 4620, i.e. remains negative. The new optimal order size is Q
W = 641;
TC(641) = 34,953 \ 36,116
and
TE(641) = 8,433 [ 8,423,
i.e.
TC
has
decreased and TE has increased so that the objectives are conﬂicting with respect
to cO.
Next consider the case that cO = 410 (reset at the original value) and cH = 25
(i.e. is decreased by 11). Note that D ¼ 1205, i.e. still negative. The new optimal
order
size
is
Q
W = 683;
TC(683) = 32,547 \ 36,116
and
TE(683) =
8,402 \ 8,423, i.e. both TC and TE have decreased and the objectives are aligned
with the respect to cH.
h
Observation 4
(i) Both TC Q
W


and TE Q
W


are increasing functions of D, i.e. the cost and
environmental objectives are aligned with respect to the demand parameter D.
(ii) The cost per unit TC Q
W


/D and the energy usage per unit TE QW


/D both
are decreasing functions of D, i.e. these two objectives are aligned with
respect to the demand parameter D.
Since within the EOQ model there is no ‘‘revenue’’ associated to increased
demand, it is no surprise that both TC and TE increase at higher demand.
Therefore, Observation 4(ii) on the per unit behaviour of annual cost and annual
energy usage is probably more relevant from a managerial point of view.
Observation 5
(i) TC Q
W


is an increasing functions of ce, and TE Q
W


is a decreasing function
of ce, i.e. the cost and environmental objectives are conﬂicting with respect to
the cost per unit of energy parameter ce.
(ii) Lim
ce!1 Q
C ¼ Q
E.
Intuitively, Observation 5(i) is easy to understand; obviously higher per unit
energy costs would increase total annual costs, and at the same time be a driver to
reduce overall annual energy usage. Observation 5(ii) shows that if the per unit
energy costs increase, the gap between the optimal energy order size and optimal
cost order size is reduced. This can be interpreted as follows: at increasing energy
costs, other costs get less relevant in determining the optimal order size and in the
ultimate case (extremely high energy costs), the energy usage is all that matters so
130
J. A. A. van der Veen and V. Venugopal

that the optimal decisions for the two objectives (hence also the weighted objective
function) coincide.
Example (continued) If ce = 1, instead of the original ce = 2, the new optimal order
size is Q
W = 622; TC(622) = 27,566 \ 36,116 and TE(622) = 8,458 [ 8,423, i.e.
TC has decreased and TE has increased, so that both objectives are conﬂicting with
respect to ce.
h
4 Discussion and Managerial Insights
The ﬁve observations in the previous section together constitute the main con-
clusion of this chapter: the trade-off and synergetic views on the economic and
environmental objectives are not contradictory but valid under different conditions
and strategic focus. In this section, we will discuss the managerial implications of
the results derived in the previous section.
To understand the decision processes underlying the approach towards sus-
tainability, it is important to start with the question: why would any ﬁrm involve
itself in efforts to improve environmental and societal sustainability? Typically,
there are three fundamental reasons; cf. Brønn and Vidaver (2009). The ﬁrst one is
the altruistic motive, the deeply felt urge to do good. Undoubtedly, there are many
people and organisations who feel that there is more to life than money alone; by
the altruistic motive, ﬁrms are ﬁnding their reward in strong sustainability per-
formance by itself, even if there is no economic beneﬁt. The second reason is the
legitimacy motive: ﬁrms need to (and want to) fulﬁl the written and unwritten laws
of doing business in a sustainable way. Clearly, within the altruistic and legitimacy
motives, there is no real need for synergy between the two objectives so that the
discussion of trade-off versus. synergy becomes irrelevant. The third reason for
ﬁrms getting into sustainability is the economic motive: the belief that there are
(long-term) economic beneﬁts to focusing on environmental and societal perfor-
mance; cf. Wal-Mart’s motives in Hsu (2011). Clearly, for ﬁrms in this category, it
is paramount to ﬁnd synergies between the three bottom line measures.
In the previous section, it has been demonstrated that sustainability and eco-
nomic beneﬁts do not always go hand-in-hand. However, for ﬁrms that operate in a
complex environment, the observations made do not always tell the full story.
Firms that focus on (environmental and societal) sustainability because of the
economic motive, believe that long-term beneﬁts can come from various sources,
including operational cost reductions, attracting new customers by establishing a
higher sustainability prestige and reputation, attracting and maintaining highly
motivated employees who like working for a social and environmental responsible
ﬁrm, etc.
It is important to note that all observations in the previous section assume a
ceteris paribus condition, i.e. the impact of a change in one parameter is studied
under the assumption that all other parameters remain at their original value.
Economic and Environmental Performance of the Firm
131

Although from a mathematical point of view this is a convenient assumption, the
managerial practice at ﬁrms is far more complex.
For ﬁrms getting into a strategy of sustainability for economic motives, typi-
cally several developments happen in parallel:
(i) More strategic emphasis on sustainability implies that sustainability measures
get more weight (within the model setting: a gets smaller). By Observation 1,
this might result in decreased cost performance;
(ii) The ﬁrm probably expects to attract more (sustainable sensitive) customers
which, in turn, creates more revenue (see Arc B in Fig. 3). Note that by
Observation 4, higher demand (D) might result in higher cost, but at a lower
cost per unit;
(iii) It is to be expected that a sustainability focused ﬁrm will increase its efforts to
reduce energy usage (EH; EO). The effect of such efforts on cost performance
can be positive or negative, see Observation 2.
Note that the overall net effect of (i–iii) on cost performance (represented by
Arc A in Fig. 3) can be positive or negative depending on several factors such as
the setting of the parameters and the extent to which efforts of reducing energy
efforts are successful. Also, the elasticity of demand with respect to the strategic
sustainable positioning efforts of the ﬁrm will largely drive the impact of Arc B in
Fig. 3. Organisations can and should strive to lower the operational cost (Arc A) in
all the conditions; however, organisations can and should choose Arc B only when
the sustainability choice of an organisation has a positive effect on market demand.
Concluding, whether the ﬁrm will be successful in ﬁnding a synergy between
sustainability and the economy depends on many aspects of which only a few were
studied in the model setting discussed in the previous section.
The ﬁnal remarks in this section are related to the role of energy prices (ce in the
model). One of the frequently proposed instruments by governments to achieve
environmental sustainability is to use energy taxes. One of the reasons behind
energy taxes appears to be that higher energy prices would make ﬁrms more aware
More focus on
Sustainability 
performance
Increased revenue
by attracting more
customers
Lower
operational
cost
Improved
profitability
B
A
Fig. 3 Linking a focus on
sustainability to proﬁtability
of a ﬁrm
132
J. A. A. van der Veen and V. Venugopal

of their energy usage, so that the need for energy usage reductions get higher on
the ﬁrm’s agenda, which in turn would lead to improved sustainability
performance.
The model in this chapter only partly supports such logic behind energy taxes.
The impacts of increasing energy prices are multi-fold and the various dynamics
are to be considered concurrently. First note that within the model, increased
energy prices neither have a direct impact on the organisation’s importance
assigned to environmental objectives (a higher value of ce does not imply a lower
value of a), nor on the efforts to lower energy usage rates (a higher ce does not
imply lower values for EO and EH). However, by Observation 5, energy taxes do
have the (intended) effect that a ﬁrm’s annual energy usage is decreased. This
effect might be partially offset by a higher energy usage per unit of output when
the energy taxes would lead to a higher consumer price hence lower demand, see
Observation 4(ii).
When compared to other government instruments to stimulate sustainable
behaviour, like communication (promoting sustainable behaviour of ﬁrms and the
public through education, promotion and subsidies) and legislation, it is not clear
whether introducing energy taxes is the best choice (achieving the most impact on
sustainability). The model discussed in this chapter seems to indicate that,
depending on the parameters, it is possible that the annual energy usage (TE) is
more sensitive to strategy changes (a) when compared to energy cost (ce). From
that perspective, persuading ﬁrms to make sustainability as a part of their strategy
might be a more important instrument for governments compared to taxing energy.
5 Conclusions
Within the framework of a multi-criteria decision-making extension of the EOQ
model, in this chapter it has been shown that there is no single answer to the issue
whether economic and environmental (sustainability) performance are aligned or
conﬂicting. In fact both can be the case, and which one applies is a matter of
perspective. Indeed careful analysis is needed in every problem setting to see
which of the two situations applies under what conditions.
The research presented in this chapter can be extended in multiple ways. First,
this research can be extended within the EOQ modelling context by (a) incorpo-
rating the effect of organisation’s sustainability strategic choice on customer
demand; (b) including the social/people aspects of sustainability in the model; (c)
including other environmental factors (instead of energy factor) in the model; (d)
considering other types of deterministic and stochastic inventory models that exist
within operations, logistics and supply chain literature, cf. Benjaafar and Daskin
(2010). Second, this research can be extended within the sustainability context, by
studying the trade-off and synergy behaviour of the triple bottom line measures
within the setting of quality, speed, dependability and ﬂexibility.
Economic and Environmental Performance of the Firm
133

Appendix
In this appendix the formal proofs of the various observations will be given. To do
so, the partial derivatives of TC Q
W


and TE Q
W


with respect to the parameter at
hand will be determined. Note that when either both partial derivates are positive
or both are negative, the two objectives are aligned and if both partial derivatives
have opposite signs, the objectives are conﬂicting. Throughout this appendix, the
assumptions D 6¼ 0, 0 \ a \ 1, and ce, cH, cO, EO, EH [ 0 will be used.
Proof of Observation 1 Note that
o
oa TC Q
W


¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
CH
BH
 CO
BO

 cO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
 cH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p


:
It is easy to see that
CH
BH
 CO
BO


[ 0 iff 1  a
ð
ÞD\0;
and
cO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
 cH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p


[ 0 iff D [ 0:
Similarly, note that
o
oa TEðQ
WÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
EH
BH
 EO
BO

 cO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
 cH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p


;
and
EH
BH
 EO
BO


[ 0 iff aD [ 0
It follows that o
oa TE Q
W


[ 0 and o
oa TC Q
W


\0 for all 0 \ a \ 1.
j
Proof of Observation 2 Using
o
oEO
TC Q
W


¼ ce
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
CH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
þ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
 CO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
O


;
it is easy to verify that this partial derivate is positive iff Condition (13) is fulﬁlled.
Similarly,
o
oEH
TC Q
W


¼ ce
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
CO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
þ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
 CH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
H


;
which is positive iff condition (14) is fulﬁlled. Furthermore,
134
J. A. A. van der Veen and V. Venugopal

o
oEO
TE Q
W


¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
ceEH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
þ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
 ceEO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
O


;
and
o
oEH
TE Q
W


¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
ceEO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
þ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
 ceEH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
H


:
Note that
ceEH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
þ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
 ceEO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
O


\0
iff
EO\ acO
ce
2BH þ ceEH
BH þ ceEH


\0
and
ceEO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
þ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
 ceEH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
H


\0
iff
EH\ acH
ce
2BO þ ceEO
BO þ ceEO


\0;
from which Observation 2 follows.
j
Proof of Observation 3 Note that
o
ocO
TC Q
W


¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
aCH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
þ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
 aCO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
O


;
which is negative iff
cO\ ceEO aCH þ 2  aÞBH
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
a aCH þ BH
ð
Þ
\0:
Similarly,
o
ocH
TC Q
W


¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
aCO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
þ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
 aCH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
H


;
is negative iff
cH\ ceEH aCO þ 2  aÞBO
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
a aCO þ BO
ð
Þ
\0:
Economic and Environmental Performance of the Firm
135

Also,
o
ocO
TE Q
W


¼ a
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
EH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
 EO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
O


;
is positive iff aD [ 0, and
o
ocH
TE Q
W


¼ a
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
EO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
 EH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
H


;
is positive if aD\0. Observation 3 follows immediately.
j
The proofs of Observation 4 and 5(ii) are trivial and will be omitted.
Proof of Observation 5(i) Note that
o
oce
TC Q
W


¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
C0EH þ CHEO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
þ 2EO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p


þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
2EH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BO
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BH
p
 COEO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
O
 CHEH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
H


:
Careful analysis shows that this is positive iff
2BOBH EOBH þ EHBO
ð
Þ þ a 1  a
ð
ÞD2 [ 0:
Furthermore,
o
oce
TE Q
W


¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
8D
r
2EHEO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
 E2
O
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
O
 E2
H
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
BHBO
p
B2
H


;
which is negative iff a2D2 [ 0. Together these results constitute Observation
5(i).
j
References
Benjaafar S, Li Y, Daskin M (2010) Carbon footprint and the management of supply chains:
insights from simple models. Working paper, University of Minnesota. http://isye.umn.edu/
faculty/pdf/beyada-10-02-10-ﬁnal.pdf, accessed 19 January 2013
Bonney M, Jaber MY (2011) Environmentally responsible inventory models: Non-classical
models for a non-classical era. International Journal Production Economics, 133(1): 43–53
Boons F, Wagner M (2009) Assessing the relationship between economic and ecological
performance: Distinguishing system levels and the role of innovation. Ecological Economics
68: 1908–1914
Borgonovo E (2010) Sensitivity analysis with ﬁnite changes: An application to modiﬁed EOQ
models, European Journal of Operational Research 200: 127–138
Bouchery Y, Ghaffari A, Jemai Z, Dallery Y (2012) Including sustainability criteria into
inventory models, European Journal of Operational Research 222: 229–240
136
J. A. A. van der Veen and V. Venugopal

Brønn P, Vidaver-Cohen D (2009) Corporate motives for social initiative: legitimacy,
sustainability, or the bottom line? Journal of Business Ethics 87: 91–109
Butner K, Geuder D, Hittner J (2008) Mastering carbon Management: Balancing trade-offs to
optimize
supply
chain
efﬁciencies.
IBM
Institute
for
Business
Value.
http://www-
935.ibm.com/services/uk/bcs/pdf/mastering_carbon_management.pdf, accessed 19 January
2013
Can Arslan M, Turkay M (2010) EOQ revisited with sustainability considerations. Working
paper,
Koç
University,
Istanbul,
Turkey.
http://home.ku.edu.tr/*mturkay/pub/EOQ_
Sustainability.pdf, accessed 19 January 2013
Chen X, Benjaafar S, Elomri A, (2012) The carbon-constrained EOQ, Operations Research
Letters, doi:10.1016/j.orl.2012.12.003
Corbett CJ, Klassen RD (2006), Extending the horizons: Environmental excellence as key to
improving operations. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 8(1): 5–22
Filbeck F, Gorman RF (2004) The relationship between the environmental and ﬁnancial
performance of public utilities. Environmental and Resource Economics 29: 137–157
Franck A (2008) Sustainable Supply Chain Management: A tool for reinforcing shareholder
value.
Accenture
Supply
Chain
Management
Viewpoint.
http://www.accenture.com/
SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/Accenture-Sustainable-Supply-Chain-Management.pdf,
accessed 19 January 2013
Grifﬁn JJ, Mahon JF (1997) The corporate social performance and corporate ﬁnancial
performance debate: Twenty-ﬁve years of incomparable research. Business and Society
36(1): 5–31
Gupta MC (1995) Environmental management and its impact on the operations function.
International Journal of Operations & Production Management 15(8): 34–51
Hua G, Cheng TCE, Wang S (2011) Managing carbon footprints in inventory management,
International Journal Production Economics 132: 178–185
Hsu T (2011) Wal-Mart’s motive is no secret: going green saves it money. Los Angeles Times.
June
4.
http://articles.latimes.com/2011/jun/04/business/la-ﬁ-walmart-green-20110604,
accessed 19 January 2013
King A, Lenox M (2001) Does it really pay to be green? An empirical study of ﬁrm
environmental and ﬁnancial performance, The Journal of Industrial Ecology 5(1): 105–116
Klassen R, McLaughlin C (1996) The impact of environmental management on ﬁrm
performance, Management Science 42(8): 1199–1215
Linton JD, Klassen R, Jayaraman V (2007) Sustainable supply chains: An introduction. Journal
of Operations Management 26(6): 1075–1082
Palme K, Wallace E, Portney P (1995) Tightening environmental standards: The beneﬁt-cost or
the no-cost paradigm. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(4): 119–132
Porter ME, Van der Linde C (1995), Green and competitive: Ending the stalemate. Harvard
Business Review, Sept-Oct: 120–134
Seuring S, Muller M (2008), From a Literature review to a conceptual framework for sustainable
supply chain management. Journal of Cleaner production 16: 1699–1710
Schaltegger S, Synnestvedt T (2002): The link between ‘green’ and economic success:
environmental management as the crucial trigger between environmental and economic
performance. Journal of Environmental Management 65: 339–346
Walley N, Whitehead B (1994), It’s not easy being green. Harvard Business Review 72(3): 2–7
Economic and Environmental Performance of the Firm
137

EOQ Models with Two Modes of Freight
Transportation and All-Units Quantity
Discounts
Abraham Mendoza and José A. Ventura
Abstract This chapter studies two valuable contributions in the literature
regarding extensions of the traditional economic order quantity model. In partic-
ular, a base theoretical model for a single-stage system over the inﬁnite horizon
and two modes of transportation is presented. The transportation options are
truckload transportation with ﬁxed cost per truck, less than truckload transporta-
tion with a constant cost per unit shipped, or a combination of both modes
simultaneously. Then, an extension of this model to include the all-units quantity
discount scheme is studied. Exact algorithms are proposed for computing optimal
policies for each case.
1 Introduction
This chapter presents optimal policies for inventory models that include trans-
portation costs in an environment with assumptions similar to the economic order
quantity (EOQ) model. In inventory control, EOQ is the most fundamental model,
which dates back to the work of Harris (1913). Although the model has several
simplifying assumptions, it has been effectively used in practice. The demand rate
is constant, inventory shortages are not allowed, and replenishments are instan-
taneous. Moreover, the unit purchasing and holding costs are independent of the
size of the order. The model describes the important trade-off between ﬁxed
A. Mendoza
Department of Industrial Engineering, Universidad Panamericana, 45010 Guadalajara,
Jalisco, Mexico
e-mail: amendoza@up.edu.mx
J. A. Ventura (&)
Harold and Inge Marcus Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering,
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
e-mail: jav1@psu.edu
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_7,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
139

ordering costs and holding costs. The standard EOQ model has been extended to
different settings, for instance, to consider the inclusion of shortage costs, an
extension to the case of ﬁnite production rate, and consideration of quantity dis-
counts on the purchasing price and on the transportation cost. Hadley and Whitin
(1963), Muckstadt and Sapra (2009), Nahmias (1997) and Silver et al. (1998)
include sections that offer complete analyses on these extensions.
Given the importance of transportation costs on lot-sizing decisions, in this
chapter, we pay particular attention to the inclusion of transportation costs and
quantity discounts into the traditional EOQ model. Different modes of shipping
freight are typically categorized as either truckload (TL) transportation or less than
truckload (LTL) transportation. In TL transportation, there is a ﬁxed cost per load
up to a given capacity. With TL transportation, a company may use less than the
capacity available and transport this freight at the cost of a full load. This ﬁxed
cost comprises the costs due to the truck, driver, and operating expenses. Examples
of TL transportation are the usage of trucks, railway wagons, and overseas con-
tainers as ways of shipping freight; however, in some cases, the quantity of freight
may not be large enough to justify the cost associated with a TL shipment. For
these small quantities, a LTL carrier may be used. In LTL, the unit transportation
cost is constant. An example of LTL transportation is a company that uses a third
party carrier such as United Parcel Service to ship freight.
Regarding quantity discounts on the purchased units, these are given to cus-
tomers in order to encourage them to place larger orders. There exist two types of
quantity discounts: all-units and incremental quantity discounts. An all-units
quantity discount is a discount given on every unit that is purchased after the
purchasing quantity exceeds a given level (breakpoint). In an incremental quantity
discount, the discount only applies to units that are purchased beyond the level at
which the discount is given.
In this chapter, we ﬁrst study the inclusion of two modes of transportation into
the traditional EOQ model (single-stage model), namely truckload (TL) and less
than truckload carriers (LTL). Then, we extend the EOQ model with transporta-
tions costs to include the all-units quantity discount structure into the analysis.
Exact algorithms are studied for computing the optimal policies for each case.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, previous
works related to this research are summarized. Section 3 presents how TL and
LTL costs are incorporated into the EOQ model and shows the derivation an
optimal policy for a one-stage system over the inﬁnite horizon. In Sect. 4, the
model studied in Sect. 3 is extended to consider all-units quantity discounts along
with the corresponding algorithms to ﬁnd the optimal reorder policy. An illus-
trative example for the two previous sections is presented in Sect. 5. Some con-
clusions and future research directions are presented in Sect. 6.
140
A. Mendoza and J. A. Ventura

2 Literature Review
In this section, we review the literature on EOQ and lot-sizing models, where the
main focus is the incorporation of transportation costs and quantity discounts on
the purchasing cost. The reader is referred to Carter and Ferrin (1996) for a
discussion on the role of transportation costs in inventory control.
One of the earliest works that discussed the importance of transportation costs
on controlling the inventory levels in single-stage models is given by Baumol and
Vinod (1970). They try to include freight decisions within inventory models and
point out that LTL shipments make the overall problem difﬁcult to solve. Around
the same time, Lippman (1969) presents a single-product, multi-period setting
where charges due to multiple trucks of different sizes are considered. These
charges create discontinuities in the objective functions. Lippman (1971) considers
a similar setup for ﬁnding the economic order quantities, assuming that the excess
truck space cannot be used, and therefore, the shipment cost is incurred in the
multiples of the truck. Iwaniec (1979) studies an inventory model, where demand
is stochastic and a ﬁxed cost is charged and included in the ordering cost. The
conditions under which the full load order minimizes the total expected cost are
characterized. This work also used the multiple setup cost structure proposed by
Lippman (1971). Aucamp (1982) solves the continuous review case of the multiple
setup problem discussed by Lippman (1971) and Iwaniec (1979). The main dif-
ference between the EOQ model and the one proposed by Aucamp is the inclusion
of vehicle costs to the setup cost. In the previous studies, the cost per load does not
change with the number of truckloads. Lee (1986), in contrast, considered the
classical EOQ model with setup cost including a ﬁxed cost and freight cost, where
the freight cost is subject to quantity discounts. Lee (1989) also developed a
dynamic programming algorithm for TL shipments with discrete demand. Hwang
et al. (1990) further extended Lee’s freight discount model to include an all unit
quantity discount on the purchasing cost. Li et al. (2004) generalized the work by
Lee (1989) to solve more general problems with concave holding, backordering,
and LTL freight costs.
Abdelwahab and Sargious (1992), and Swenseth and Godfrey (2002) consid-
ered TL and LTL inventory models as disjoint problems and compared the policies
for each scenario. Lee et al. (2003) also studied outbound transportation for a
model with discrete demand. For periodic review policies, Chan et al. (2002a, b)
presented results for LTL transportation cost called a modiﬁed all-unit discount
cost. Chan et al. (2002b) considered a single retailer with LTL transportation costs
for discrete demand and showed that this problem is NP-hard. Abad and Aggarwal
(2005) extend the model proposed by Burwell et al. (1997) by considering both
over-declaring and LTL shipments, like Swenseth and Godfrey (2002). The
solution procedure proposed is based on solving a series of nonlinear equations to
obtain the optimal order quantity as well as the selling price. Some of the works
have extended the single-stage models to other settings. For instance, Rieksts and
Ventura
(2010)
presented
two-stage
inventory
models
with
a
bi-modal
EOQ Models with Two Modes of Freight Transportation
141

transportation cost along with a heuristic algorithm for a one-warehouse one-
retailer system. Also, Lee et al. (2003) analyzed a one-warehouse one-retailer
system with holding and setup costs at each stage, a TL transportation cost to the
retailer, and a waiting cost at the retailer for unsatisﬁed demand. Jaruphongsa et al.
(2007) developed a model similar Lee et al.’s model including both TL and LTL
transportation costs.
Recently, and from the perspective of transportation companies, Toptal and
Bingöl (2011) studied the transportation-pricing problem of a truckload carrier in a
setting that consists of a retailer, a TL carrier and a LTL carrier. Also, Konur and
Toptal (2012) analyzed the replenishment decisions of a buyer with the objective
of maximizing the total expected proﬁt. The buyer faces stepwise freight costs in
inbound transportation and a hybrid wholesale price schedule given by a combi-
nation of all-units discounts with economies and diseconomies of scale.
Regarding inventory models with quantity discounts, most research work has
focused on all-units and incremental quantity discounts. An overview of the
quantity discounts research is presented by Benton and Park (1996). Moreover,
Munson and Rosenblatt (2001) presented an exploratory study of 39 companies
and their different discount strategies in practice. They found that 95 % of
the companies they studied either offer or receive some type of all-units quantity
discounts. In addition, 37 % of these ﬁrms offer or receive incremental quan-
tity discounts. Hu and Munson (2002) presented a heuristic for incremental
quantity discounts with constant demand over a ﬁnite horizon. Hu et al. (2004)
suggested a modiﬁcation of the classical silver-meal heuristic under the incre-
mental quantity discount case to improve the results presented by Hu and Munson
(2002). Munson and Hu (2010) provide methodologies to calculate optimal order
quantities and compute total purchasing and inventory costs when products have
quantity discount pricing. More recently, systems with an additional degree of
complexity have been analyzed, for instance, the single-supplier, multiple coop-
erative retailers inventory model with quantity discounts and permissible delay in
payments has been studied by Krichen et al. (2011).
In two recent works, Rieksts and Ventura (2008) and Mendoza and Ventura
(2008) examine optimal inventory policies with both TL and LTL transportation
modes. In this chapter, these two studies are presented as two valuable extensions
of the EOQ model to include transportation costs. Rieksts and Ventura provide the
theoretical inventory model for a single-stage model over the inﬁnite horizon.
Mendoza and Ventura extends this work to include purchasing discount schemes.
3 Inﬁnite Horizon Single-Stage Model
This section considers a single-stage system with an inﬁnite horizon. The
assumptions are essentially the same as those of the EOQ except for the trans-
portation cost. An example of this system is a retailer that incurs transportation
costs for incoming shipments. We assume the holding cost is independent of the
142
A. Mendoza and J. A. Ventura

purchase price and any capital invested in transportation. The cost parameters
include a setup cost, K, for each order and a positive unit holding cost per time
unit, denoted as h. The demand rate, d, is constant and continuous, and no
shortages are allowed. Lead times are assumed to be constant for both modes of
transportation, TL and LTL. Notice that if l represents a constant lead time, the
reorder point can then be calculated as r* = dl.
The transportation cost of an order depends on the mode of transportation and
the order quantity, Q. It is assumed a ﬁxed cost for each TL, denoted as CT. Each
truckload has sufﬁcient capacity to ship a quantity that satisﬁes TQ time units of
demand. Note that if QT is the capacity of the truck in terms of the number of units
of product, then TQ = QT/d. Another option of transportation is available for
quantities that are less than a full truckload with a cost, s, for each unit shipped. It
is assumed that sdTQ [ CT. That is, the cost of ﬁlling up a truck up to its full
capacity is less than shipping the same quantity by LTL; otherwise, only LTL
transportation is used in the optimal policy. Similar to the EOQ model, an optimal
policy may be deﬁned by the order interval T. Each order placed at an inventory
level of zero corresponds to the quantity that is exactly sufﬁcient to satisfy demand
that occurs over the interval T. Policies that only order if the inventory is zero are
said to satisfy the zero-inventory ordering property. It has been proven by Rieksts
and Ventura (2008) that, even for the case of a ﬁnite horizon, an optimal policy
satisﬁes this property. Since the arguments of the proof hold as the ﬁnite horizon
goes to inﬁnity, there exists an optimal policy for the single-stage model with two
modes of transportation over an inﬁnite horizon that satisﬁes the zero-inventory
ordering property.
The shipping cost for a quantity corresponding to an order interval T within the
range jTQ  T  (j ? 1)TQ is,
CðTÞ ¼ minfsdðT  jTQÞ þ jCT; ðj þ 1ÞCTg;
ð1Þ
where the ﬁrst term accounts for a policy that uses both, TL and LTL, modes of
transportation. In this case, LTL transportation is used to ship freight over the
capacity of j truckloads. The second term evaluates a policy in which TL trans-
portation, in particular (j ? 1) truckloads, is used disregarding the use of LTL.
By solving for the quantity at which both modes of transportation have the same
cost, the transportation cost is reduced to,
CðTÞ ¼
sdðT  jTQÞ þ jCT;
for T 2 I1
j ;
ðj þ 1Þ CT;
for T 2 I2
j ;

ð2Þ
where I1
j ¼
T : jTQ  T\ CT
sd þ jTQ


and I2
j ¼
T : CT
sd þ jTQ  T\ðj þ 1ÞTQ


:
A graph of the total transportation cost as a function of the order interval is
given in Fig. 1. The parameters used in this example are d = 1 unit/month,
TQ = 3 months/truck, CT = $10/truck, s = $5/unit.
The average holding, setup, and transportation cost for the system is,
EOQ Models with Two Modes of Freight Transportation
143

ZðTÞ ¼ K
T þ hdT
2 þ CðTÞ
T
:
ð3Þ
Figure 2 shows the average holding, setup, and transportation costs versus the
order interval. Notice that Z(T) is neither concave nor convex.
3.1 Solution Algorithm for Inﬁnite Horizon Single-Stage
Model
An algorithm for obtaining the optimal order interval may be derived from the
bounds that Lemma 1 provides. Aucamp (1982) and Lippman (1971) prove similar
bounds for their TL models.
Fig. 1 Total transportation
cost versus Order interval
(Adapted from Rieksts and
Ventura 2008)
Fig. 2 Average cost versus
order interval (Adapted from
Rieksts and Ventura 2008)
144
A. Mendoza and J. A. Ventura

Lemma 1 The optimal order interval T* is in the range [j*TQ, (j* ? 1)TQ] where
j* corresponds to j*TQ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=hd
p
 (j* ? 1)TQ.
Proof (By contradiction) Suppose that the optimal order interval T* is not on the
interval [j*TQ, (j* ? 1)TQ]. This implies that T* [ (j* ? 1)TQ or T* \ j*TQ. First,
assume that T* [ (j* ? 1)TQ. Since the average holding and setup costs represent
a convex function with a minimum on the interval [j*TQ, (j* ? 1)TQ], the average
holding cost and setup costs for T* are more than for (j* ? 1)TQ. The average
transportation cost at (j* ? 1)TQ is at a minimum since full truckloads are used.
This implies that the average cost at T* is greater than the cost at (j* ? 1)TQ. If
T* \ j*TQ, a similar argument shows that the cost at T* is greater than the cost at
j*TQ contradicting the optimality of T*. Therefore, the optimal order interval T* is
on the interval interval [j*TQ, (j* ? 1)TQ].
h
In computing the optimal order interval T*, only the interval [j*TQ, (j* ? 1)TQ]
needs to be considered. Let the average cost function be separated into the
functions, as follows:
Z1
j ðTÞ ¼ K  jsdTQ þ jCT
T
þ hdT
2 þ sd;
ð4Þ
for the range I1
j , and
Z2
j ðTÞ ¼ K þ ðj þ 1ÞCT
T
þ hdT
2 ;
ð5Þ
for the range I2
j . In Algorithm 1, these functions are used to compute an optimal
policy for the single-stage inﬁnite horizon model.
Algorithm 1
Step 0: Let j* be an integer such that j*TQ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=hd
p
 (j* ? 1)TQ.
Step 1: If K– j*sdTQ ? j*CT [ 0 and jTQ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK  jsdTQ þ jCTÞ=hd
p
\ CT
sd þ
jTQ, then go to Step 2.
Otherwise, go to Step 3.
Step 2: Set ^T1 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK  jsdTQ þ jCTÞ=hd
p
and go to Step 4.
Step 3: Set ^T1 ¼ argmin Z1
jðjTQÞ; Z1
j CT
sd þ jTQ


n
o
and go to Step 4.
Step 4: If CT
sd þ jTQ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK þ ðj þ 1ÞCTÞ=hd
p
\ðj þ 1ÞTQ, then set
^T2 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK þ ðj þ 1ÞCTÞ=hd
p
and go to Step 6. Otherwise, continue to
Step 5.
Step 5: Set ^T2 ¼ argmin Z2
j CT
sd þ jTQ


; Z2
j ðj þ 1ÞTQ
ð
Þ
n
o
and go to Step 6.
Step 6: Let the optimal order interval be T* 2 argminfZ1
jð^T1Þ; Z2
jð^T2Þg.
Theorem 1 proves that T* is the optimal order interval for the single-stage
model over the inﬁnite horizon.
EOQ Models with Two Modes of Freight Transportation
145

Theorem 1 Algorithm 1 yields an optimal policy over the inﬁnite horizon.
Proof By Lemma 1, only the range [j*TQ, (j* ? 1)TQ] must be considered in
computing the optimal order interval, where j* corresponds to j*TQ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K=hd
p

(j* ? 1)TQ. This range is separated into the intervals
jTQ; CT
sd þ jTQ

	
and
CT
sd þ jTQ; ðj þ 1ÞTQ

	
.
First,
Z1
jðTÞ
is
considered
over
the
interval
jTQ; CT
sd þ jTQ

	
. Note that if K - jsdTQ ? jCT [ 0, then Z1
j T
ð Þ is strictly con-
vex. This implies that if jTQ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK  jsdTQ þ jCTÞ=hd
p
\ CT
sd þ jTQ, the
minimum
of
Z1
jðTÞ
occurs
at
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK  jsdTQ þ jCTÞ=hd
p
.
However,
if
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK  jsdTQ þ jCTÞ=hd
p
is not within the range or K - jsTQ ? jCT  0, then
Z1
j T
ð Þ attains a minimum at an endpoint of the range jTQ; CT
sd þ jTQ

	
. Therefore,
^T1 is the optimal order interval for the function Z1
jðTÞ.
For Z2
j T
ð Þ, the function is always convex. This implies that the minimum of the
function will occur at
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK þ ðj þ 1ÞCTÞ=hd
p
provided that
CT
sd þ jTQ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK þ ðj þ 1ÞCTÞ=hd
p
\ðj þ 1ÞTQ. If
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK þ ðj þ 1ÞCTÞ=hd
p
is not in this
interval, the minimum occurs at an endpoint of the range
CT
sd þ jTQ; ðj þ 1ÞTQ

	
.
Thus, ^T2 is the optimal order interval for the function Z2
jðTÞ. Therefore, T* is
optimal for the range [j*TQ, (j* ? 1)TQ].
h
4 Inﬁnite Horizon Single-Stage Model with All-Units
Quantity Discounts
The average setup, holding, transportation, and purchasing cost per time unit for
the system with all-units quantity discounts is as follows:
WðTÞ ¼ K
T þ hdT
2 þ CðTÞ
T
þ d  FðTÞ;
ð6Þ
where C(T) represents the shipping cost for a quantity corresponding to an order
interval T within the range jTQ  T  (j ? 1)TQ, as introduced by Eq. (2).
F(T) represents the unit purchasing cost as a function of T.
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the purchasing cost structure for the all-units
quantity discount case. Then, this cost structure along with the transportation cost
structure introduced in Eq. (2) is incorporated into the average cost, Eq. (6).
Finally, we present an algorithm that ﬁnds the optimal reorder interval for this
inventory model.
Let n ? 1 be the number of breakpoints corresponding to changes in the per
unit purchasing cost and let S = {0, …, n} denote the index set of all breakpoints.
Let bi represent the ith breakpoint (in terms of the order interval T), for i 2 S, with
0 ¼ b0\b1\    \bn\1. Since the all-units quantity discount model is being
146
A. Mendoza and J. A. Ventura

considered, the discount for a given range of consecutive breakpoints applies to all
the units purchased in a single batch. The unit purchasing cost as a function of T is
represented as follows:
FðTÞ ¼
co;
if 0  T\b1;
c1;
if b1  T\b2;
. . .
cn;
if bn  T\1:
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
ð7Þ
where ci, i = 0,1,…, n, is the corresponding unit cost. It is assumed that
c0 [ c1 [[cn [ 0.
After simplifying W(T) and including the transportation cost structure from
Eq. (2), the average cost for the system including all-units quantity discounts
becomes,
WðTÞ ¼
KjsdTQþjCT
T
þ hdT
2 þ sd þ d  FðTÞ;
for T 2 I1
j ;
Kþðjþ1ÞCT
T
þ hdT
2 þ d  FðTÞ;
for T 2 I2
j :
(
ð8Þ
Figure 3 shows an example of an average cost function, W(T), for n = 2. The
solid-line segments represent the actual function W(T). Wi(T), i = 0,1,2, is the
average cost function for T [ 0 at a cost ci. The parameters are d = 7,000 units/
month, K = $6,000, h = $0.5/unit/month, CT = $2,000/truck, TQ = 0.57 months/
truck, and s = $2.5/unit. In addition, three different purchasing costs are consid-
ered, c0 = $7/unit, c1 = $6/unit, and c2 = $5.5/unit; and the breakpoints are set to
b1 = 1.43 months
and
b2 = 4.29 months.
Note
that
the
actual
function
W(T) = Wi(T), for bi  T\biþ1, i 2 S, S ¼ f0; 1; 2g.
Fig. 3 Average cost versus order interval (all-units quantity discounts)
EOQ Models with Two Modes of Freight Transportation
147

4.1 Solution Algorithm for the All-Units Quantity Discount
Model
The solution algorithm developed for the all-units quantity discount case ﬁrst
computes the optimal reorder interval, T0, for the basic model without quantity
discounts using Algorithm 1 (see Sect. 3). Note that T0 falls within the interval
ðjTQ; ðj þ 1Þ TQÞ, where j ¼ T0=TQ


indicates the number of full trucks
required to cover the demand in the time interval T0. Note that, when T0  bn, the
optimal reorder interval without considering quantity discounts belongs to the time
interval associated with the smallest unit purchasing cost. Since the setup, holding,
and transportation costs are minimized at T0, and the unit purchasing costs are
decreasing (c0 [ c1 [    [ cn), if T0 C bn, then T0 would also be the optimal
cycle time to the model with all-units quantity discounts. If T0 \ bn, the break-
point interval (bi-1, bi), i 2 S, containing T0 can be identiﬁed. Since the unit
purchasing costs are decreasing (c0 [ c1 [    [ cn), the optimal cycle time (T*)
will be greater than or equal to T0. The solution algorithm in this section uses the
general method for ﬁnding a minimum of a piecewise deﬁned function, namely by
computing the values of all local minima, including the breakpoints for quantity
discounts. Finally, the global minimum is found by comparing all these values.
4.2 Identifying Potential Minima
Notice that each semi-open interval ½jTQ; ðj þ 1ÞTQ, for j = j*, j* ? 1, …, m-1,
needs to be checked for potential minima, including breakpoints for quantity
discounts, where the value of m is computed as m ¼ bn=TQ


, indicating the
smallest number of full trucks where all items would take advantage of the largest
discount (e.g., lowest per unit purchasing cost, cn). Given the deﬁnition of m, the
use of m trucks also needs to be checked as part of the potential minima.
As introduced in Sect. 3, each semi-open interval can be separated into I1
j and
I2
j , and the average cost function, W(T), at each one of these intervals can be
deﬁned separately, as follows:
W1
j ðTÞ ¼ K  jsdTQ þ jCT
T
þ hdT
2 þ sd þ d  FðTÞ; for T 2 I1
j ;
ð9Þ
and
W2
j ðTÞ ¼ K þ ðj þ 1ÞCT
T
þ hdT
2 þ d  FðTÞ; for T 2 I2
j :
ð10Þ
It can be easily shown that W1
j ðTÞ is convex if K - jsdTQ ? jCT [ 0 for
T 2 I1
j ; otherwise, it is concave. The reader is referred to Mendoza and Ventura
(2008) for the convexity and concavity properties of the cost function. If W1
j ðTÞ is
148
A. Mendoza and J. A. Ventura

convex, then the minimum, considering only the ﬁrst three terms of Eq. (9), is
attained at
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK  jsdTQ þ jCTÞ=hd
p
provided that this point belongs to I1
j . If
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK  jsdTQ þ jCTÞ=hd
p
is not in this interval, then the minimum occurs at an
endpoint of I1
j . If W1
j ðTÞ is concave, then the minimum occurs at an endpoint of I1
j .
In addition, W2
j ðTÞ is always convex for T 2 I2
j . Hence, considering the ﬁrst two
terms of Eq. (10), the minimum cost occurs at
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK þ ðj þ 1ÞCTÞ=hd
p
if this point
is in I2
j ; otherwise, the minimum is attained at an endpoint of the range I2
j . Based
on these properties, the local minima for W1
j ðTÞ and W2
j ðTÞ, j = j*, j* ? 1, …,
m-1, can now be identiﬁed.
To identify local minima, the sets B1
j and B2
j are deﬁned. These sets contain the
breakpoints that fall within the corresponding intervals I1
j and I2
j respectively, as
well as the other potential minimum points for W1
j ðTÞ and W2
j ðTÞ, j = j*, j* ? 1,
…, m-1. For instance, in the ﬁrst set B1
j , besides the breakpoints that fall in the
interval, we include the point
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK  jsdTQ þ jCTÞ=hd
p
, which is the minimum
point within the interval provided that the function is convex and the point falls
within the interval I1
j . If W1
j ðTÞ is either concave or the unrestricted minimum
point is not in the interval I1
j , then we only include the initial point of the interval,
jTQ, as a potential minimum in the set B1
j . It is important to note that the intervals
I1
j and I2
j are open from the right and the upper endpoints deﬁning the end of the
intervals, namely CT
sd þ jTQ for I1
j and ðj þ 1Þ TQ for I2
j , will be considered in the
following interval as a potential overall minimum. That is, the endpoint of I1
j will
be considered as a potential minimum in set B2
j . Similarly, the endpoint of I2
j will
be considered as a potential minimum point in set B1
jþ1. Finally, also given the fact
that the intervals are open from the right, the use of m trucks needs also be checked
by including the following sets: B1
m ¼ fmTQg; B2
m ¼ £:
4.3 Solution Algorithm for Inﬁnite Horizon Single-Stage
Model with Quantity Discounts
The algorithm to ﬁnd the optimal solution for the case of the inﬁnite horizon
single-stage model with quantity discounts is now presented.
Algorithm 2
Step 1: Find T0 using Algorithm 1. If T0 C bn, then T* = T0 and stop. Otherwise,
let T0 be in some interval (bi-1, bi). Compute j ¼ T0=TQ


and
m ¼ bn=TQ


.
Step 2: For j = j*, j* ? 1, j* ? 2, …, m-1, compute the following sets:
EOQ Models with Two Modes of Freight Transportation
149

B1
j ¼
bi : jTQ  bi\ CT
sd þ jTQ; i ¼ 1; . . .; n


[ fT1
j g;
where
T1
j ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK  jsdTQ þ jCTÞ=hd
p
;
if
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK  jsdTQ þ jCTÞ=hd 2 I2
j
q
and K  jsdTQ þ jCT [ 0;
CT
sd þ jTQ;
otherwise:
8
>
<
>
:
and
B2
j ¼
bi; CT
sd þ jTQ  bi\ðj þ 1ÞTQ; i ¼ 1; . . .; n


[
T2
j
n
o
;
where
T2
j ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK þ ðj þ 1ÞCTÞ=hd
p
;
if
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðK þ ðj þ 1ÞCTÞ=hd
p
2 I2
j ;
CT
sd þ jTQ;
otherwise:
(
Step 3: For j = m, B1
m ¼ fmTQg; B2
m ¼ £: Find T* 2 arg minj¼j;...;m{minT2B1
j
{W1
j ðTÞ}, minT2B2
j {W2
j ðTÞ}} and stop.
Theorem 2 The optimal reorder interval T* determined by Algorithm 1 provides
an optimal policy for the single-stage inventory model with two modes of trans-
portation and all-units quantity discounts.
Proof Clearly, if T0 C bn, then T* = T0. If T0 \ bn, then the optimal must be
within T0  T  mTQ, where m ¼ bn=TQ


. Since Algorithm 1 checks the use of
m
trucks
in
addition
to
all
local
minima
in
the
semi-open
intervals
½jTQ; ðj þ 1ÞTQÞ, for j = j*, j* ? 1, …, m-1, which are included in sets B1
j and
B2
j , then it ﬁnds the optimal reorder interval T*.
h
5 Illustrative Example
In this section, a numerical example is presented with the purpose of illustrating
the concepts presented in Sects. 3 and 4. Since Algorithm 2 requires the use of
Algorithm 1, the numerical example solved is one for the case with quantity
discounts.
The parameters for the illustration problem are as follows: d = 7,000 units/
month, K = $6,000, h = $0.5/unit/month, CT = $2,000/truck, QT = 5,000 units/
truck, s = $2.5/unit, and TQ = 0.57 months/truck. Suppose that the unit cost is
c0 = $7/unit if less than 10,000 units are supplied, c1 = $6/unit if purchases are at
150
A. Mendoza and J. A. Ventura

least 10,000 units and less than 30,000 units, c2 = $5.50/unit if purchases are at
least 30,000 units. In terms of time units, these breakpoints correspond to:
b1 = 1.43 months and b2 = 4.29 months.
Following Algorithm 2, we ﬁnd the optimal reorder interval for the basic model
without quantity discounts (T0 = 1.71 months), using Algorithm 1. Since T0 \ b2
(last breakpoint), the optimal cycle time (T*) will be greater than or equal to T0. T0 is
now identiﬁed within the interval of breakpoints (b1, b2) = (1.43, 4.29 months). In
addition, j ¼ T0

TQ


¼ 3 trucks and m ¼ bn=TQ


¼ 8. Next, by checking the
use of m trucks and each semi-open interval jTQ; ðj þ 1ÞTQ
h

, for j = j*, j* ? 1, …,
m-1, we ﬁnd the breakpoints as well as the other potential points that can attain a
minimum cost in each range. The sets containing these points along with their
corresponding costs (within parenthesis) are the following: B1
3 ¼ {1.71 months
($52,010.04)};
B2
3 = {1.82 months
($52,877.31)};
B1
4 = {2.28 months
($52,
130.35)}; B2
4 = {2.39 months ($52,877.06)}; B1
5 = {2.85 months ($52,601.54)};
B2
5 = {3.21 months ($53,224.98)}; B1
6 = {3.42 months ($53,248.16)}; B2
6 =
{3.53 months ($53,843.22)}; B1
7 = {3.99 months ($53,995.03)}; B2
7 = {4.10
months ($54,540.85), 4.29 months ($51,135.71)}; B1
8 = {4.56 months ($51,
304.56)}; and B2
8 = [. By comparing all costs, the optimal reorder interval T* is
4.29 months with a cost of $51,135.71. This corresponds to an optimal order
quantity of 30,000 units.
6 Conclusions
From the concepts and analysis presented in this chapter, it is clear that in some
instances it may be beneﬁcial to use two modes of transportation simultaneously.
Companies using a single mode of transportation for their supply chain logistics
may be more responsive, but might compromise efﬁciency given the higher cost
associated with such policies.
Although the cost functions presented in this chapter are neither concave nor
convex over the entire order interval, they can be partitioned into subintervals where
one of these two properties holds in each interval. By taking advantage of this
structure, two algorithms to compute optimal policies have been introduced for
single-stage models over the inﬁnite planning horizon. First, a base theoretical
model with two modes of transportation has been presented. The transportation
options are truckloads with a ﬁxed cost per truck, less than truckload transportation
with a constant cost per unit shipped, or using a combination of both modes. Second,
an extension of this model to include the all-units purchasing discount scheme has
been studied. The reader is referred to Rieksts and Ventura (2008) for an exact
algorithm for computing optimal policies for single-stage models over a ﬁnite
planning horizon. In addition, Mendoza and Ventura (2008) offer an exact algorithm
when incremental quantity discount schemes are available in a single-stage model
EOQ Models with Two Modes of Freight Transportation
151

over the inﬁnite horizon. Although the focus here has been on single-stage scenarios,
these inventory models provide a strong foundation for subsequent analyses of
multi-stage systems. A numerical example has been solved to illustrate the concepts
studied in this chapter.
In terms of future work, models that include stochastic settings could be
developed (e.g., stochastic demand). Backlogging could also be included in these
models. Also, given the different supply chain conﬁgurations, it might be worth-
while to analyze and apply concepts similar to the ones studied here to multi-stage
systems in different environments. Since previous efforts in quantity discounts
have primarily been focused on models involving only suppliers and producers,
future research should also consider quantity discounts in multi-stage systems.
If the transportation cost were sufﬁciently large, it would also be valuable to
explore models with holding costs dependent on opportunity costs of capital
invested in transportation. In some situations, the quantity discounts may be
applied to both freight and purchasing costs, so an interesting area to exploit is to
derive optimal inventory policies for this case. Finally, models that include
analysis of multiple items and multiple suppliers could also be studied.
References
Abad PL, Aggarwal V (2005). Incorporating transport cost in the lot size and pricing decisions
with downward sloping demand. International Journal of Production Economics 95:297–305.
Abdelwahab W, Sargious M (1992). Freight rate structure and optimal shipment size in freight
transportation. Logistics and Transportation Review 26:271–292.
Aucamp DC (1982). Nonlinear freight costs in the EOQ problem. European Journal of
Operational Research 9:61–63.
Baumol WJ, Vinod HD (1970). An inventory theoretic model of freight transport demand.
Management Science 16(7):413–421.
Benton W, Park S (1996). A Classiﬁcation of literature on determining the lot size under quantity
discounts. European Journal of Operational Research 92:219–238.
Burwell TH, Dave DS, Fitzpatrick KE, Roy MR (1997). Economic lot size model for price-
dependent demand under quantity and freight discounts. International Journal of Production
Economics 48:141–155.
Carter JR, Ferrin BG (1996). Transportation costs and inventory management: Why transpor-
tation costs matter. Production and Inventory Management Journal 37(3):58–62.
Chan L, Muriel A, Shen Z, Simchi-Levi D, Teo C (2002a). Effective zero-inventory ordering
policies for the single-warehouse multiretailer problem with piecewise linear cost structures.
Management Science 48:1446–1460.
Chan L, Muriel A, Shen Z, Simchi-Levi D (2002b). On the effectiveness of zero-inventory
ordering policies for the economic lot-sizing model with a class of piecewise linear cost
structures. Operations Research 50:1058–1067.
Hadley G, Whitin T (1963). Analysis of inventory systems. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Harris F (1913) How many parts to make at once. Factory, The Magazine of Management
10(2):135–136.
Hu J, Munson CL (2002). Dynamic demand lot-sizing rules for incremental quantity discounts.
Journal of the Operational Research Society 53:855–863.
152
A. Mendoza and J. A. Ventura

Hu J, Munson CL, Silver EA (2004). A modiﬁed silver-meal heuristic for dynamic lot sizing
under incremental quantity discounts. Journal of the Operational Research Society
55:671–673.
Hwang H, Moon DH, Shinn SW (1990). An EOQ model with quantity discounts for both
purchasing price and freight cost. Computers and Operations Research 17(1):73–78.
Iwaniec K (1979). An inventory model with full load ordering. Management Science
25(4):374–384.
Jaruphongsa W, Centinkaya S, Lee CY (2007). Outbound shipment mode considerations for
integrated inventory and delivery lot-sizing decisions. Operations Research Letters 35:813–
822.
Konur D, Toptal A (2012). Analysis and applications of replenishment problems under stepwise
transportation costs and generalized wholesale prices. International Journal of Production
Economics 140:521–529.
Krichen S, Laabidi A, Abdelaziz FB (2011). Single supplier multiple cooperative retailers
inventory model with quantity discount and permisible delay in payments. Computers &
Industrial Engineering 60:164–172.
Lee CY (1986) The economic order quantity for freight discount costs. IIE Transactions
18(3):318–320.
Lee CY (1989). Solution to the multiple set-up problem with dynamic demand. IIE Transactions
21:266–270.
Lee CY, Cetinkaya S, Jaruphongsa W (2003). A dynamic model for inventory lot sizing and
outbound shipment scheduling at a third-party warehouse. Operations Research 51:735–747.
Li CL, Hsu VN, Xiao WQ (2004). Dynamic lot sizing with batch ordering and truckload
discounts. Operations Research 52: 639–654.
Lippman SA (1969). Optimal inventory policy withmultiple set-up costs. Management Science
16(1):118–138.
Lippman SA (1971). Economic order quantities and multiple set-up costs. Management Science
18(1):39–47.
Mendoza A, Ventura JA (2008). Incorporating quantity discounts to the EOQ model with
transportation costs. International Journal of Production Economics 113:754–765.
Muckstadt JA, Sapra A (2009). Principles of inventory management: when you are down to four
order more. Springer, New York.
Munson CL, Hu J (2010). Incorporating quantity discounts and their inventory impacts into
centralized purchasing decisions. European Journal of Operational Research 201:581–592.
Munson CL, Rosenblatt M (2001) Coordinating a three-level supply chain with quantity
discounts. IIE Transactions 33:371–384.
Nahmias S (1997). Production and operations analysis (Third Edition). Irwin/McGraw-Hill, New
York.
Rieksts BQ, Ventura JA (2008). Optimal inventory policies with two modes of freight
transportation. European Journal of Operational Research 186:576–585.
Rieksts BQ, Ventura JA (2010). Two-stage inventory models with a bi-modal transportation cost.
Computers & Operations Research 37:20–31.
Silver EA, Pyke DF, Peterson R (1998). Inventory Management and Production Planning and
Scheduling. John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ.
Swenseth SR, Godfrey MR (2002). Incorporating transportation costs into inventory replenish-
ment decisions. International Journal of Production Economics 77:113–130.
Toptal A, Bingöl SO (2011). Transportation pricing of a truckload carrier. European Journal of
Operational Research 214:559–567.
EOQ Models with Two Modes of Freight Transportation
153

Part III
Multi-Echelon Problems

An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network
Design
Brecht Landrieux and Nico Vandaele
Abstract The aim of this chapter is to combine two types of problems: a facility
location problem, that determines where a facility should be set up in order to
serve a set of customers, and a EOQ-based spare parts inventory problem, which
seeks to determine the optimal stocking levels of a collection of spare parts. The
theoretical ﬁndings are practiced on a case for projectors of a Belgian Digital
Cinema Projector producer, serving customers located all over the world. The goal
is to minimize the total costs under four scenarios, which differ mainly in terms of
SLA’s and modes of transport. The most remarkable difference between these total
costs is related to the number of opened facilities, the safety stock that is required,
and the transportation modes that can be used in the considered scenario.
1 Introduction
The digital cinema projector (DCP) producer underlying this location problem,
wants to offer service contracts which guarantee a service level agreement (SLA)
of 4, 6, 8, or 18 h, where the different settings to fulﬁll the latter differ mainly in
terms of the transportation mode. We developed an integrated model to determine
the total number of facilities to be set up and to obtain their respective total costs.
For the demand information for the spare parts we used historical breakdown data
B. Landrieux (&)  N. Vandaele
Research Center for Operations Management, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Naamsestraat 69, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
e-mail: brecht.landrieux@kuleuven-kulak.be
N. Vandaele
e-mail: nico.vandaele@kuleuven.be
B. Landrieux  N. Vandaele
Faculty of Business and Economics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven Campus Kortrijk,
Etienne Sabbelaan 53, 8500 Kortrijk, Belgium
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_8,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
157

provided by the DCP producer. When reviewing the results, it can be concluded
that the average costs decrease over the scenarios with the lesser stringent SLA’s,
mainly due to the location pooling effect, the use of cheaper transportation modes
and the smaller number of facilities.
2 Problem Setting
The technology for digital cinema projectors was developed quite some time ago.
However, the implementation was a long time coming because of the high
expenses that had to be defrayed by the integrators that take care of the distri-
bution, the setup, and the maintenance of post-production technology and digital
cinema projection. The movie studios encourage the use of digital equipment
because they can realize big savings when customers switch to equipment that can
handle digital sources. After some profound discussions, the Virtual Print Fee
system was introduced to support the investment of digital projection equipment
by the integrators with a fee for each movie performance. When a projector is
defective, it is of utmost importance that the number of cancelled movie perfor-
mances are minimized.
In the USA, a service network was rolled out in 2010 to allow demanding
customers to subscribe to a repair service with SLA’s of 2 or 4 h. Thirteen
facilities were opened initially, but this number was raised to 31 in order to let
more customers beneﬁt from the service.
Following the USA example, the DCP manufacturer also wants to set up a
similar network in Europe. The European customers are less demanding and until
now, the SLA is agreed to be 18 h. In the remainder of this chapter, we will
analyze the situation for an SLA of 4, 6, and 8 h and we will compare the total
costs and the assignment of customer orders with the current SLA of 18 h.
Some problems came up when developing the model: there is almost no his-
torical data available to analyze because of the recentness of the projectors and the
exponentially increasing installed base. The perpetual changes and improvements
make it almost impossible to extrapolate the collected data from the past.
3 Literature
Our problem relates to two lines of research, which are combined in this chapter.
The ﬁrst section discusses earlier work where models were developed for the
facility location problem and the second section gives an overview of spare parts
literature. The last literature section presents rather recent models that combine
aspects from the two previous categories.
158
B. Landrieux and N. Vandaele

3.1 The Facility Location Problem
The facility location problem has been discussed in a multitude of studies. The ﬁrst
formal introduction was by Weber and dates back to the beginning of the twen-
tieth century (Weber 1929). A location problem can be deﬁned as a spatial
resource allocation problem where one tries to determine the location of one or
more service facilities (‘‘servers’’) to serve a spatially distributed set of demands
(‘‘customers’’). The objective is to locate facilities and to allocate customers to the
servers to optimize an objective function, such as the minimization of the average
travel time (adapted from Brandeau and Chiu 1989). Either a network or a plane
(chart) can be used as a basis for the location problem. However, this choice
determines the way distances are measured. According to Owen and Daskin (1998)
the optimal location of the servers is an important aspect of the company’s strategy
because of its long-term nature and its ﬁnancial impact. Robustness of the network
is also desirable to minimize the impact of some unknown factors such as market
trends and regulation. More recently, Geographic Information Systems are often
used because they can contribute to location analysis and modeling (Murray 2010).
Facility location problems can be subdivided into three categories (Owen and
Daskin 1998):
• The ﬁrst category covers the static, deterministic problems, which was the main
focus of the earlier work because of computational barriers due to complex
formulations. All inputs being considered as ﬁxed, the applicability to real-
world situations was quite limited. These problems can further be subdivided
into three types of problems. Median problems determine the effectiveness of a
facility by considering the average distance (Church and ReVelle 1974). They
have been under study since the introduction by Hakimi (1965). Neema et al.
(2011) present some new genetic algorithms for the p-Median problem in
continuous space. They conclude that GA-based models can be practical when
also information of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) can be incorporated.
Covering problems consider the maximum distance that can be covered (Current
et al. 1990; White and Case 1974). The center problems do not use an exoge-
nous maximal distance but let the model decide the distance endogenously such
that the predetermined number of facilities can serve all customers (Tansel et al.
1983).
• Dynamic location problems try to take some future uncertainty into account to
create a (near-)optimal solution for a particular time horizon. The input
parameters are ﬁxed and known or deterministically varying over time. Because
investment costs are usually quite large, it is an absolute necessity to consider an
extended time horizon. The problem boils down to the selection of a robust set
of locations, to serve demand that is subject to changes over time, and the
appropriate choice of the timing for facility expansions and relocations over the
longer term. Ballou (1968) makes use of static deterministic optimal solutions to
locate only one warehouse such that the proﬁts over the considered time period
are maximized. Scott (1971) enhanced the model of Ballou by considering
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design
159

multiple facilities. Contreras et al. (2011) discuss the Dynamic Uncapacitated
Hub Location Problem (DUHLP) to minimize the total costs over a ﬁnite time
horizon while all demand has to be routed through the network for each period
and solve it by an exact brand-and-bound algorithm.
• The input parameters of stochastic location problems are characterized by
random variables. The aim of stochastic location problems is to generate several
solutions for each considered scenario to obtain a robust solution that performs
well. These problems can be subdivided into probabilistic models and scenario
planning models. The former of these two categories consider probability dis-
tributions explicitly, while the latter start from an already speciﬁed set of pos-
sible future values for the variables. Bell et al. (2011) tackle the problem of
uncertain demand for the location optimization of alert sites for homeland
defense, where response times should be kept as low as possible when highly
uncertain events occur.
ReVelle and Eiselt (2005) suggest another way of classifying the models by
contemplating the space of location decisions. They distinguish between location
problems in the planar spaces and network location problems, which affects the
way distances are measured. In planar spaces, distances are often measured by
using Minkowski distances, according to dp
ij ¼
ai  aj

pþ bi  bj

p

1=p with p
indicating the number of dimensions of the solution space. On the other hand,
distances in networks are determined from the network characteristics itself and
are calculated by making use of the Dijkstra shortest path algorithm (Dijkstra
1959).
3.2 Spare Parts Inventories
According to Kennedy et al. (2002) inventories can serve multiple purposes. On
the one hand, raw material, work-in-process, and ﬁnished product inventories are
directed to smooth out irregularities that are typical of production processes (e.g.,
machine break downs and different processing speeds) and to cope with changes in
consumer demand or supply patterns. On the other hand, spare parts inventories
are mandatory when one wants to guarantee the continuity of the production
process. The pursued policy determines whether a repair or a replacement is
preferred, which is linked with the time interval available to put the machine back
into operation. Historical data about part failures is not always readily available
and the costs that go with a failure are often difﬁcult to estimate. When machines
get out of date, the availability of spare parts also becomes a pressing difﬁculty.
They also distinguish preventive repair, where techniques like just-in-time can be
used, from unplanned repair, where it is necessary to keep a stock of the most
crucial parts.
A typical issue for spare parts inventories is the distinction that has to be made
between single- and multi-echelon inventory control policies (Hausman and Erkip
160
B. Landrieux and N. Vandaele

1994). In a single inventory control policy each warehouse at the lowest echelon is
independently responsible for its own stocking policies. Once every individual
policy is ﬁxed, an aggregated order is placed at the next higher level, where the next
single-echelon inventory control policy is observed. In a multi-echelon inventory
control policy, all parameters, and the interaction effects are considered simulta-
neously which yields a global solution. This type of inventory models are fre-
quently used when customers are geographically dispersed (Lee 1987). Kukreja
et al. (2001) analyzed an analytical model to determine the optimal inventory
stocking levels for a single-echelon inventory control policy with a number of
locations on a continuous-review basis where lateral transhipments are allowed.
The emergency lateral transhipments are only considered when customer demand
can be met this way and the time that a demand would be backordered is reduced
(Lee 1987). Moreover, the complete pooling results in a signiﬁcant cost reduction.
Rappold and Muckstadt (2000) study an inventory system for one product in a two-
echelon production and inventory setting in a lean environment. The production
quantity, the allocation of the inventory and the order levels are determined in view
of the minimization of the long run average system costs. An algorithm was
developed to solve large-scale problems. Sun and Zuo (2013) determine the stock
level of aircraft spare parts in a multi-echelon inventory control policy. They
conclude that it is more obvious to use a negative binomial distribution than a
Poisson distribution to characterize a non-stationary demand process.
Most parts are characterized by low demand and high costs. In a recent study,
Jalil et al. (2010) stress the potential economic value of installed base data and
they consider data quality issues related to installed base data. In a case study at
IBM, they conclude that savings up to 58 % could be realized when the installed
base for spare parts is tracked properly. Pinçe and Dekker (2011) discuss a con-
tinuous review inventory system of a slow moving item that is characterized by a
drop in demand at a known future time instance. Cohen and Lee (1990) state that a
competitive advantage can be obtained by offering superior after sales services to
the customers. Besides the set up of warehouses and the deﬁnition of their
capacity, the number of echelons, the replenishment policy, the customer alloca-
tion, and the granted priorities to the customer groups should also be taken into
consideration. Hua et al. (2007) bring the forecasts of demand for spare parts into
focus to determine the optimal inventory levels of spare parts in warehouses.
Syntetos et al. (2012) discuss which distributional assumptions are appropriate to
model demand of spare parts and verify the goodness-of-ﬁt of a number of dis-
tributions by using three empirical datasets. Hollier (1980) developed a method to
rank the spare parts according to the ratio of the total expected usage to the costs of
acquisition and the savings made by having the spare parts close at hand instead of
having to obtain them through a normal distribution network. Cohen et al. (1986)
consider how to manage low demand products in a multi-echelon inventory sys-
tem. A formula was developed to decide on the optimal inventory levels while
minimizing the total system costs. Cohen et al. (1992) look at the trade-off
between a fast response time and the elimination of inventory. This resulted in the
classiﬁcation of customer demand into urgent and standard demand.
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design
161

3.3 Integrated Models
Integrated models cover both the strategic, tactical and operational part of the
spare parts management (Miranda and Garrido 2004). These models can be used to
analyze realistic scenarios. The Distribution Network Design with Risk Pooling
Effect model from Miranda and Garrido combines a facility location model with
some crucial elements from inventory management (e.g., the Economic Order
Quantity and the risk pooling effect) (Miranda and Garrido 2004). This mixed
integer model is nonlinear, for which a heuristic was developed that was based on
Langrangian relaxation and a subgradient method. This model only takes one
product and one transportation mode into account. The total cost reduction is
higher as the holding costs, ordering costs, lead times, and the service level
increase; the beneﬁcial risk pooling effect is easily noticeable. Jayaraman (1998)
describes the Facility Location, Inventory, Transportation NETwork model
(FLITNET-model) where different products and transportation modes are taken
into account. This linear model does not take into account the safety stock, which
makes it relatively easy to generate a solution. Shen et al. (2003) developed a
model that takes the safety stock and the risk pooling effect into account. The
customers can also serve as a distribution center for customers in their neigh-
borhood. Nozick and Turnquist (2001) take the customer responsiveness as a
starting point. They try to ﬁnd an optimal level of inventory centralization when
trying to ﬁnd a balance between customer responsiveness and cost reductions.
Karsten et al. (2012) apply some cooperative game theory concepts to consider
several decision makers who independently stock expensive, low-demand, and
repairable spare parts and who can collaborate by inventory pooling. Mete and
Zabinsky (2010) present a stochastic optimization approach for the storage
and distribution problem of medical supplies that are used for disaster manage-
ment. The decisions in this setting are characterized by uncertainties and incom-
plete information.
4 Model
4.1 The Miranda and Garrido Model
The integrated model discussed in this section incorporates decisions related to the
set up of locations and the inventory of the spare parts. The model described by
Miranda and Garrido (2004) starts from a given situation where a factory delivers
one particular product, which is characterized by high holding costs and a high
variability in demand, to a set of facilities. We opt for the Miranda and Garrido
model as a basis for the DCP model because it perfectly ﬁts the need for our case
study. Some of the arguments will be dealt with in Sect. 5 where the case study is
exposed in detail. Each facility f must satisfy the demand of the customers, who
162
B. Landrieux and N. Vandaele

place orders in a stochastic way, with a yearly demand characterized by an average
of Df and a variance Uf . The safety stock for each facility depends on the variance
in customers’ demand. When the demand of the customers is aggregated, the
necessary safety stock decreases by
ﬃﬃﬃn
p due to the effect of location pooling when
demand is not correlated (Lambrecht 2006). An assumption is made with regard to
the costs, consisting of the costs to open the facilities, the transportation costs and
the holding costs, which are born by only one of the contracting parties. The model
is based on the Economic Order Quantity Model, in which each facility f observes
a stochastic demand pattern characterized by an average yearly demand value Df
and a variance Uf . Every facility follows a continuous review policy ðQf ; RPf Þ.
The reorder point RPf indicates when it is obligate to place an order of size Qf
which increases the inventory after LTf time units. The decisive factors of the
reorder point are thus the demand during lead time and the probability that the
demand during lead time can be fulﬁlled. Therefore,
RPf ¼ Df  LTf þ z1a  rf 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
LTf
p
ð1Þ
The average holding costs HCf;tot for a facility f are determined by the holding
costs of the safety stock and the average cycle stock.
HCf;tot ¼ HCf  z1a 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
LTf
p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Uf
p
þ HCf  Qf
2
ð2Þ
The operational costs OKf are composed of the unit transportation costs RCf ,
the ordering costs OCf , that are incurred for each order placement Qf , and the
elapsed time TPf between two consecutive orders.
OKf ¼ RCf  Qf þ OCf þ HCf;tot  TPf
ð3Þ
The formula for the total costs also requires the introduction of a binary variable
zf , which is set to one when a facility is set up, zero otherwise, and yfc, which is
used to assign customers to facilities. The total costs consist of the ﬁxed costs Fi to
set up a facility, the holding costs for the safety stock, and the average cycle stock
and the transportation costs, which consist of the shipping costs from the facility to
the customer TCfc, the shipment costs between the factory and the facility RCf and
the ordering costs OCf =Qf .
TC ¼
X
f
Fi  zi þ
X
f
HCf  z1a 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
LTf
p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Uf
p
þ
X
f
HCf  HCf
2
þ
X
f
X
c
TCfc þ RCf þ OCf
Qf
 dc  yfc


ð4Þ
When taking the derivative of TC with respect to Qf , the following expression
is obtained.
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design
163

dðTCÞ
dðQf Þ ¼ HCf
2
 OCf
Q2
f

X
dc  yfc
ð5Þ
Q
f ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2  OCf  Df
HCf
s
ð6Þ
We substitute Q
f into the total cost formula and assume that dc is the average
demand of customer c. Then we obtain the following expression:
TC ¼
X
f
Fi  zi þ
X
f
X
c
TCfc þ RCf

	
 dc  yfc þ
X
f
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2  HCf  OCf
p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Df
p
þ
X
f
HCf  z1a 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
LTf
p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Uf
p
ð7Þ
4.2 The DCP Model
The model has to be revisited in order to meet some presumed criteria of the DCP
producer. As already described above, the DCP producer wants to meet a speciﬁc
service level for the on-time delivery of the requested spare parts. A solution to the
problem gives the total costs incurred for the DCP producer and furthermore the
assignment of the customer orders to a speciﬁc facility. We will develop four
scenarios. Because the model for the fourth scenario is only slightly different from
the model of the ﬁrst three scenarios, the fourth model will only be discussed
brieﬂy. An overview of the model is given in Fig. 1.
In a ﬁrst step, the spare parts will be sent from the factory to the central hub and
during this type of transport, ﬁxed pre-transport costs are incurred for every
shipment. In other words, the hub, where all inventory is stored, is the spill and the
starting point of the designed network.
The set up of the hub entails a ﬁxed cost which consists of a monthly stand-by
fee and yearly insurance charges. When the spare parts are received at the hub, a
small quality check is performed to verify the condition of every part after which
the parts are stored. The storage of inventory also entails a ﬁxed cost which
depends on the number of stored pallet boards and we assume that only one
product type is stored on every pallet board. Every 6 months, the stock items are
counted at the hub. When items are shipped from the hub, they are delivered either
by air transports or by sprinter transports. In the ﬁrst case, the parcel is prepared at
a ﬁxed cost, after which a sprinter transport delivers the parcel at the nearest
airport. The cost of air transportation depends on the volumetric weight of the
parcel. After the ﬂight, the parcel is transported by a sprinter to the customer.
Another way of shipping the spare parts from the hub is by delivering them
164
B. Landrieux and N. Vandaele

directly to the customer via sprinters. In this case, the parcel has also to be
prepared at the hub after it is delivered to a dummy facility. This facility is
introduced in the model to assign customers to the hub, so no set up costs,
transportation costs from the hub to this facility, and no inventory costs are
incurred. The last possibility is the delivery of parcels by introducing some extra
facilities. These facilities receive their replenishment orders from the hub via
economy transport. For these facilities, some ﬁxed costs have to be taken into
account: the ﬁxed set up, reception, stock counting, and weekly storage costs are
calculated in the same way as for the hub. When a parcel leaves a facility, a call is
made to a sprinter transport.
A summary of the used sets can be found in Table 1.
For the ﬁrst four sets, we keep track of the city name, which will enable us to
visualize the solution in the end. The set of facilities and the set of the customers
FACILITY
BRUSSELS 
HUB
BRUSSELS 
FACILITY
Zone 
TC = 0 
TCeconomy 
~ zone 
~ volumetric weight (vbcp · mp) 
CUSTOMER
abcp, vbcp, vdcp
TCsprint 
~ distance (lfcfc)
TCsprint 
~ distance
AIRPORT
AIRPORT
TCair 
~ volumetric weight 
(vbcp · mp) 
CUSTOMER
abcp, vbcp, vdcp
TCsprint 
~ distance (lacac)
CUSTOMER
abcp, vbcp, vdcp
TCsprint 
~ distance (lfcfc)
Pre-transport  (pt)
Reception (r)
Stock counting (sc)
Storage (st)
Standby fee + Insurance (o)
Reception (r)
Stock counting (sc)
Storage (st)
Standby fee + Insurance (o)
Picking, packing, loading, 
consolidation, administra-
tion (pla)
Picking, packing, loading, 
consolidation, administra-
tion (pla)
FACTORY
Picking, packing, loading, 
consolidation, administra-
tion (pla)
Fig. 1 Overview of the model
Table 1 Sets and data
Sets
Data
Hubs (h)
City
Facilities (f)
City, zone
Customers (c)
City, zone, number of orders/year ab,
average demand/order vb, variance vd
Airports (a)
City
Products (p)
Name, cost, weight
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design
165

contain the same elements because a facility can only be set up where the cus-
tomers are located. For both facilities and customers, we need to keep track of the
zone to calculate the shipment rates that have to be applied. Elements of the set of
customers are also characterized by their average yearly number of orders and by
the average and the variance of their order size. Every element of the products set
is characterized by its product name, its cost, and its volumetric weight. These
characteristics inﬂuence shipment and storage decisions.
An overview of the decision variables in the model can be found in Table 2.
The parameters of the model are brieﬂy described in Table 3.
The model is given below through Eqs. 8–30 and will be discussed below.
min
X
f
o  zf
ð8aÞ
þ
X
h
o  wh
ð8bÞ
þ
X
h
X
a
X
c
X
p
pt  abcp  xhacp
ð8cÞ
þ
X
h
X
a
X
c
X
p
r  abcp  vccp  xhacp
ð8dÞ
þ
X
f
X
c
X
p
pt  abcp  yfcp
ð8eÞ
þ
X
f
X
c
X
p
2  r  abcp  vbcp  yfcp
ð8fÞ
þ
X
h
X
p
st  bhp
ð8gÞ
þ
X
h
X
p
sc  bhp
ð8hÞ
þ
X
f
X
p
st  afp
ð8iÞ
Table 2 Decision variables
Symbol Description
afp
Pallet board for product p in facility f, binary
bhp
Pallet board for product p in hub h, binary
DFfp
Aggregated average demand for product p in facility f
DHhp
Aggregated average demand for product p in hub h
Ufp
Aggregated variance of demand for product p in
facility f
166
B. Landrieux and N. Vandaele

þ
X
f
X
p
sc  afp
ð8jÞ
þ
X
h
X
a
X
c
X
p
pla  abcp  xhacp
ð8kÞ
þ
X
h
X
a
X
c
X
p
mks  abcp  xhacp
ð8lÞ
þ
X
h
X
a
X
c
X
p
abcp  vbcp  mp  v  xhacp
ð8mÞ
Table 3 Model parameters
Symbol Description
abcp
Average yearly number of orders of product p placed by customer c
e
Time margin when products are shipped by air transportation
HCp
Inventory holding costs for product p
k
Cost price per pallet board
lacac
Distance from an airport a to a customer c
lfcfc
Distance from a facility f to a customer c
LTFf
Order lead time for facility f
LTHh
Order lead time for hub h
mp
Product weight
mks
Minimum cost level for a sprinter transport
o
Fixed set up costs of a facility f or hub h
OCf
Order costs when an order is placed at hub h
OCh
Order costs when a hub places an order at the factory
pla
Fixed costs to collect the items and prepare the shipping documents
pt
Pre-transport costs when transporting from the factory to the hub
r
Reception costs
s
Sprinter rate per kilometre
sc
Stock counting costs
st
Storage costs
T
Time limit
tacac
Travel time from airport a to customer c
tbl
Travel time from the hub to the airport
tfcfc
Travel time from facility f to customer c
TKEfg
Economy transport costs, depending on the zone of the addressee and the parcel weight
TKfg
Next Day Delivery transport costs
v
Air transportation rate per volumetric weight unit
vbcp
Average order quantity of product p for customer c
vdcp
Demand variance of product p for customer c
vs
Flying speed
vva
Distance between two airports (by using Haversine formula)
z1a
Deﬁnition of the service level
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design
167

þ
X
h
X
a
X
c
X
p
abcp  max lacac  s; mks
ð
Þ  xhacp
ð8nÞ
þ
X
f
X
c
X
p
X
g
TKEfg  abcp  yfcp
ð8oÞ
þ
X
f
X
c
X
p
pla  abcp  yfcp
ð8pÞ
þ
X
f
X
c
X
p
abcp  max lfcfc  s; mks

	
 yfcp
ð8qÞ
þ
X
f
X
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2  HCp  OCf  DFfp
p
ð8rÞ
þ
X
h
X
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2  HCp  OCh  DHh
p
ð8sÞ
þ
X
f
X
p
HCp  z1a 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
LTFf
p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Ufp
p
ð8tÞ
þ
X
h
X
p
HCp  z1a 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
LTHh
p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Vhp
p
ð8uÞ
such that
8c 2 C; 8p 2 P :
X
f
yfcp þ
X
h
X
a
xhacp ¼ 1
ð9Þ
8f 2 F; 8c 2 C; 8p 2 P :
yfcp  tfc  T
ð10Þ
8h 2 H; 8a 2 A; 8c 2 C; 8p 2 P :
xhacp 
tbl þ vva
vs þ tacac þ e


 T
ð11Þ
8f 2 F; 8p 2 P :
X
c
yfcp  M  zf
ð12Þ
8f 2 F; 8p 2 P; 8h 2 H :
X
c
yfcp  M  wh
ð13Þ
8h 2 H; 8a 2 A; 8p 2 P :
X
c
xhacp  M _wh
ð14Þ
8f 2 F; 8p 2 P :
yfcp  M  afp
ð15Þ
8h 2 H; 8a 2 A; 8p 2 P :
X
c
xhacp  M  bhp
ð16Þ
168
B. Landrieux and N. Vandaele

8f 2 F; 8p 2 P :
X
c
abcp  vbcp  yfcp ¼ DFfp
ð17Þ
8h 2 H; 8p 2 P :
X
a
X
c
abcp  vbcp  xhacp ¼ DHhp
ð18Þ
8f 2 F; 8p 2 P :
X
c
vdcp  yfcp ¼ Ufp
ð19Þ
8h 2 H; 8p 2 P :
X
a
X
c
vdcp  xhacp ¼ Vhp
ð20Þ
8f 2 F :
zf 2 0; 1
f
g
ð21Þ
8h 2 H :
wh 2 0; 1
f
g
ð22Þ
8f 2 F; 8c 2 C; 8p 2 P :
yfcp 2 0; 1
f
g
ð23Þ
8h 2 H; 8a 2 A; 8c 2 C; 8p 2 P :
xhacp 2 0; 1
f
g
ð24Þ
8f 2 F; 8p 2 P :
afp 2 0; 1
f
g
ð25Þ
8h 2 H; 8p 2 P :
bhp 2 0; 1
f
g
ð26Þ
8f 2 F; 8p 2 P :
DFfp  0
ð27Þ
8h 2 H; 8p 2 P :
DHhp  0
ð28Þ
8f 2 F; 8p 2 P :
Ufp  0
ð29Þ
8h 2 H; 8p 2 P :
Vhp  0
ð30Þ
The objective function contains 21 terms, which represent the different costs.
Terms (8a) and (8b) represent the set up costs for the hub and the facilities, which
consist of the yearly ﬁxed insurance charges and a monthly stand by fee. The pre-
transport costs are given in terms (8c) and (8e), which represent the costs for the
shipments from the factory to the hub. As all orders that are delivered from
facilities passed by the hub, these costs have to be taken into account for this type
of transports. Terms (8d) and (8f) give us the reception costs which are propor-
tional to the number of parts sent. When parts are shipped from a facility to the
customer, these costs are incurred twice. Terms (8g)–(8j) show us the costs
attached to the storage of the goods and the biannual stock counting of the
available parts, which are only determined by the number of pallet boards. Terms
(8k)–(8n) are associated with the costs to make use of air transportation: the items
need to be picked ﬁrst (8k), after which a sprinter service transports the parcel to
the nearest airport (8l). The parcel is loaded into the airplane (8m) and ﬁnally, a
sprinter delivers the parcel to the end customer (8n). When the requested parts
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design
169

depart from a facility, the parts need to be available in the facilities, which are in
turn supplied by the hub, which entails an economy transport to deliver the parts in
advance to the facilities (8o). The parcels need to be prepared, which is repre-
sented in (8p), and shipped to the customer, which is shown by (8q). The inventory
and the safety stock are both stored in the hub and the facilities, for which the
EOQ-model laid the foundation of the calculations (8r)–(8u).
The constraints will be explained below. The ﬁrst constraint (9) ensures that
each order will be handled by either the hub or a facility. Constraints (10) and (11)
impose a time limit on the delivery of the requested parts where T represents the
requested time limit, ﬁxed for each considered scenario. When a parcel leaves a
facility, only the sprinter time needs to be taken into account (10). When a part is
shipped directly from the hub to a customer by using air transport, the part must be
shipped from the hub to the nearest airport, loaded and unloaded, and shipped to
the end customer through a sprinter transport (11). Constraints (12) and (14) are
needed to enforce the set up of facilities that supply customers. Constraint (13)
demands the set up of the hub even when all parts are shipped to the customers
through facilities. Constraints (15) and (16) are needed to ensure that the number
of pallet boards at the facilities and the hub equals the number of different
requested parts, which is obligate to calculate the costs that are associated with the
inventory stock counting and the storage. Constraints (18)–(21) are needed to
model the total yearly average demand (D) and variance (U or V) for each
requested product in a facility or the hub. These variables are needed to calculate
the holding costs for the average cycle stock and the safety stock. The last bunch of
constraints (22)–(30) is required to establish the range of the variables, which can
be either binary or a positive real number.
5 Case Study
A DCP producer wants to set up a network for the delivery of spare parts to its
European customers following the already unfolded US network. At the moment,
about 16,000 movie theatres worldwide are equipped with digital projectors
originated at the company under study. In the US, a network consisting of 13
facilities ensures that the requested spare parts are delivered within 2 or 4 h to a
selected number of customers. In order to offer the same service to more cus-
tomers, the number of facilities will be increased to 31 in the nearby future. The
company has to contend with data shortage with regard to historical failures and an
exponentially increasing installed base, which makes it hard to produce mean-
ingful forecasts that determine proper inventory levels for each facility. Based on
the argument of the aggregated demand for several closely located customers and
the fact that the installed base will increase exponentially in the coming years, a
normally distributed demand for these parts will make sense in the future.
Therefore, the assumptions of the Miranda and Garrido make sense in our case
(Miranda and Garrido 2004). In Europe, SLA’s with delivery times of 4, 6, and 8 h
170
B. Landrieux and N. Vandaele

are set against the current delivery time of 18 h. Because no speciﬁc potential
locations for the set of facilities are given, we assume that every customer can also
serve as a proxy for a facility to supply customers in their neighborhood. Note that
in many cases just renting a single room, even at a customer’s premises may
sufﬁce. Many parts are small and do not take much space. The model that is
described above in Sect. 3 will be used for the scenarios with a SLA of 4, 6, and
8 h. The model will also be slightly adjusted to be able to compare the desired
situation with the current situation with an SLA of 18 h.
5.1 Data Collection and Analysis
All data were extracted from the BAAN ERP system. For each spare part request, a
speciﬁc order number, the order date, the client identiﬁcation code and its name
and address, and the item and item description were stored. The original data set
consisted of 34,552 order lines, and due to incomplete information in some cells,
around 95 % of the data was used in the further analysis. The data was obtained
from and veriﬁed by employees of the DCP producer.
Third party logistics providers take care of the delivery of the requested parts to
the customers and offer four types of transport. The ﬁrst type of transport is
economy transport, with a shipping time of one to ﬁve days, and is typically used
for the shipment of less urgent parcels. Shipments of this type of transport are
characterized by the zone of the addressee and the volumetric weight of the parcel.
A second type of transport is called Next Day Delivery (NDD) transport. NDD
transport is used so far and delivers parcels to the customers within 18 h. The costs
are calculated in the same way as for the ﬁrst type of transport. A third way of
transporting goods is when sprinters are used. Sprinters collect the parcel and
deliver it to the customer right after. When the transport costs are lower than the
postulated minimum costs, the shipment costs equalize that minimum cost.
Otherwise, the transport cost amounts the actual costs. The last type of transport
under consideration is air transportation. The only determinant for this type of
transport is the volumetric weight of the parcel. Due to the small and lightweight
of some spare parts, this option is an interesting alternative.
Information regarding the exact ﬂow of the requested parts is rather tacit
knowledge and this knowledge was passed on during a number of interviews.
During the research, we were in close contact to verify the correctness of the
ﬁndings.
5.2 Calculation of the Distances
The distance calculation is an important portion of our model input. A ﬁrst pos-
sibility is to calculate the distances by using the coordinates of the cities that are
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design
171

obtained from Google Maps or similar software packages. When using the
Pythagorean Theorem (a2 þ b2 ¼ c2), the Euclidean distances are easily and
quickly calculated. Another way of making use of the coordinates is to calculate
the distance with the Haversine formula that factors in the three-dimensional shape
of the earth.
R ¼ 6371 km
Du ¼ u1  u2
Dk ¼ k1  k2
a ¼ sin Dk
2


þ cos k2
ð
Þ  cos k1
ð
Þ  sin2 Dk
2


c ¼ 2  atan2
ﬃﬃﬃa
p ;
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  a
p


Distance ¼ R  c
When a new city is considered, the distances can easily be recalculated. The
disadvantage, however, is that the distances are rough estimations and they can
tremendously deviate from the actual distances. A better way to calculate the
actual distances between cities is when the Google Maps API or the Microsoft
Mappoint package is used. A Java application that is based on the Google Maps
API was implemented and used to read in two lists of cities between which the
distances were calculated. When Microsoft Mappoint is used in combination with
Winwaed Software Technology LLC’s MPMileage, lists can be read in and the
distances can be calculated automatically and ofﬂine. Moreover, the data can be
visualized in maps and the parameters can be set to speciﬁc conditions, e.g., the
speed of the vehicle on certain types of roads and automatic rest stops. The time
and distance matrices are more or less symmetrical. In this paper, we used the
Haversine formula to calculate distances between airports, Microsft Mappoint for
sprinter distances, and the Java application for some extra checks.
6 Results
In this section, the generated results will be discussed for the scenarios under
study. The academic version of IBM ILOG CPLEX Studio IDE was used to solve
the model for a selection of 12 representative parts. On the basis of the results for
this basket, conclusions were drawn for the complete set of parts, although full
deployment for all spare parts is waiting for some stability in the level of the
installed base. Figures 2 and 3 show the allocation of the customers to the hub and
the facilities for the considered scenarios. A green dot is placed on the map when a
facility is set up and a purple pushpin indicates that customers receive their spare
parts from the facility within the blue drawing. The blue outline indicates the drive
time zone, enclosing all cities that can be reached within a given time frame which
172
B. Landrieux and N. Vandaele

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 2 Results for one single product. a Service level agreement of 4 h. b Service level
agreement of 6 h. c Service level agreement of 8 h. d Break down analysis of the total costs
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 3 Results for a Basket of 12 Products. a Service level agreement of 4 h. b Service level
agreement of 6 h. c Service level agreement of 8 h. d Break down analysis of the total costs
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design
173

is determined by the SLA of the scenario. When air transportation is used, the
addressee is indicated by a symbol of an airplane.
One randomly selected spare part will be analyzed thoroughly to explain the
rationale. The selected part has a rather low cost price, a low volumetric weight of
0.67 kg and a rather low average annual demand. The biggest portion of the total
costs of the ﬁrst scenario is related to the set up of four facilities and the hub to
supply six customers. The safety stock costs are rather low which can be traced
back to the low demand variance of this spare part. When the SLA is relaxed, the
number of set up facilities decreases and more air transportation is used to supply
the parcels to the customers. The third and fourth scenario have similar total costs.
In Table 4, some numbers and ﬁgures are presented for the basket of 12
products. The set up costs for the hub and the pre-transport costs remain
unchanged when the SLA changes. Other costs really depend on the considered
scenario: as the SLA becomes less stringent, a smaller number of facilities has to
be opened. The set up costs for facilities diminish and the holding costs, the
storage and stock counting costs, and the safety stock costs decline because of the
inventory pooling effect. It is also noticeable that the requested modes of transport
hinge on the considered scenario: for the scenario with an SLA of 18 h, only NDD
transport is used, while the other types of transport—air transport, economy
transport, and sprinter transport—are excluded. For the other scenarios, it is the
other way around, and it can be noticed that there is a general trend toward air
transport instead of economy and sprinter transport when comparing the scenarios
with an SLA of 6 and 8 h and the scenario with an SLA of 4 h.
As the digital cinema market is not yet saturated and still expanding, the future
will dictate which of the given scenarios is the best choice. A ﬁrst step will
probably be to open a small number of locations and to deliver the spare parts by
using air transport, while in the future, it will be advisable to have a larger number
of facilities and to deliver the parts by sprinter transports.
Table 4 Total costs for the basket of twelve products
4 h
6 h
8 h
18 h
Holding costs
€ 53,019
€ 43,311
€ 30,340
€ 15,599
Stock counting and storage costs facilities
€ 9,399
€ 6,622
€ 2,421
€ 0
Stock counting and storage costs hub
€ 0
€ 499
€ 855
€ 1,709
Opening costs facilities
€ 64,050
€ 45,750
€ 15,250
€ 0
Opening costs hub
€ 3,050
€ 3,050
€ 3,050
€ 3,050
Reception costs
€ 426
€ 426
€ 426
€ 0
Pre-transport costs
€ 23,540
€ 23,540
€ 23,540
€ 23,540
Safety stock
€ 2,40,830
€ 2,33,160
€ 2,24,460
€ 1,41,140
Air transport costs
€ 0
€ 7,103
€ 25,928
€ 0
Economy transport costs
€ 12,318
€ 9,726
€3,022
€ 0
Sprinter transport costs
€ 27,620
€ 26,869
€ 13,823
€ 0
NDD transport costs
€ 0
€ 0
€ 0
€ 37,206
Total costs
€ 4,34,252
€ 4,00,056
€ 3,43,115
€ 2,22,244
174
B. Landrieux and N. Vandaele

Given that a lot of the spare parts are small, the deﬁnition of a facility should
deﬁnitely be broadened: a small storage compartment will be sufﬁcient to store the
parts. This also implies that the volumetric weight of the packed is low enough to
prefer air transport over sprinters when the costs turn out to be lower.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, a model for spare parts was developed to organize the distribution of
the parts for a DCP producer. A solution was obtained for four different scenarios,
which gives the total costs and the allocation of the customers to the facilities. We
can conclude that the number of facilities decreases as the required delivery time
increases: every facility supplies more customers which leads to a decrease of the
total costs due to the avoidance of set up costs and due to the savings with regard
to the average cycle and safety stock. The total costs are also inﬂuenced by the
transportation costs, which is especially important for this sector. One can notice a
shift toward air transportation as the delivery time is relaxed. Our next steps
involve getting all the data for all parts as soon as the full range of installed base
gets to a more or less stable volume. Subsequently an implementation of the model
is foreseen.
References
Ballou, R.H.: Dynamic warehouse location analysis. Journal of Marketing Research 5(3),
pp. 271–276 (1968).
Bell, J., Grifﬁs, S., Cunningham, W., Eberlan, J.: Location optimization of strategic alert sites for
homeland defense. Omega 39(2), 151–158 (2011).
Brandeau, M.L., Chiu, S.S.: An overview of representative problems in location research.
Management Science 35(6), 645–674 (1989).
Church, R., ReVelle, C.R.: The maximal covering location problem. Papers in Regional Science
32(1), 101–118 (1974).
Cohen, M.A., Kleindorfer, P.R., Lee, H.L.: Optimal stocking policies for low usage items in
multi-echelon inventory systems. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 33(1), 17–38 (1986).
Cohen, M.A., Kleindorfer, P.R., Lee, H.L., Pyke, D.F.: Multi-item service constrained (s, s)
policies for spare parts logistics systems. Naval Research Logistics (NRL) 39(4), 561–577
(1992).
Cohen, M.A., Lee, H.L.: Out of touch with customer needs? spare parts and after sales service.
Sloan Management Review 31, 55–66 (1990).
Contreras, I., Cordeau, J., Laporte, G.: The dynamic uncapacitated hub location problem.
Transportation Science 45(1), 18–32 (2011).
Current, J., Min, H., Schilling, D.: Multiobjective analysis of facility location decisions. European
Journal of Operational Research 49(3), 295–307 (1990).
Dijkstra, E.W.: A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische Mathematik 1,
269–271 (1959).
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design
175

Hakimi, S.: Optimum distribution of switching centers in a communication network and some
related graph theoretic problems. Operations Research 13(3), 462–475 (1965).
Hausman, W.H., Erkip, N.K.: Multi-echelon vs. single-echelon inventory control policies for
low-demand items. Management Science 40(5), 597–602 (1994).
Hollier, R.H.: The distribution of spare parts. International Journal of Production Research 18,
665–675 (1980).
Hua, Z.S., Zhang, B., Yang, J., Tan, D.S.: A new approach of forecasting intermittent demand for
spare parts inventories in the process industries. The Journal of the Operational Research
Society 58(1), 52–61 (2007).
Jalil, M., Zuidwijk, R., Fleischmann, M., van Nunen, J.: Spare parts logistics and installed base
information. Journal of the operational Research Society 62(3), 442–457 (2010).
Jayaraman, V.: Transportation, facility location and inventory issues in distribution network
design: An investigation. International Journal of Operations and Production Management
18(24), 471–494 (1998).
Karsten, F., Slikker, M., van Houtum, G.: Inventory pooling games for expensive, low-demand
spare parts. Naval Research Logistics (NRL) (2012).
Kennedy, W.J., Patterson, J.W., Fredendall, L.D.: An overview of recent literature on spare parts
inventories. International Journal of Production Economics 76(2), 201–215 (2002).
Kukreja, A., Schmidt, C.P., Miller, D.M.: Stocking decisions for low-usage items in a
multilocation inventory system. Management Science 47(10), 1371–1383 (2001).
Lambrecht, M.: Productie- en logistiek management. Alta, Leuven-Heverlee (2006).
Lee, H.L.: A multi-echelon inventory model for repairable items with emergency lateral
transshipments. Management Science 33(10), pp. 1302–1316 (1987).
Mete, H., Zabinsky, Z.: Stochastic optimization of medical supply location and distribution in
disaster management. International Journal of Production Economics 126(1), 76–84 (2010).
Miranda, P.A., Garrido, R.A.: Incorporating inventory control decisions into a strategic
distribution network design model with stochastic demand. Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review 40(3), 183–207 (2004).
Murray, A.: Advances in location modeling: Gis linkages and contributions. Journal of
geographical systems 12(3), 335–354 (2010).
Neema, M., Maniruzzaman, K., Ohgai, A.: New genetic algorithms based approaches to
continuous p-median problem. Networks and Spatial Economics 11(1), 83–99 (2011).
Nozick, L.K., Turnquist, M.A.: Inventory, transportation, service quality and the location of
distribution centers. European Journal of Operational Research 129(2), 362–371 (2001).
Owen, S.H., Daskin, M.S.: Strategic facility location: A review. European Journal of Operational
Research 111(3), 423–447 (1998).
Pinçe, Ç., Dekker, R.: An inventory model for slow moving items subject to obsolescence.
European Journal of Operational Research 213(1), 83–95 (2011).
Rappold, J.A., Muckstadt, J.A.: A computationally efﬁcient approach for determining inventory
levels in a capacitated multiechelon production-distribution system. Naval Research Logistics
(NRL) 47(5), 377–398 (2000).
ReVelle, C.S., Eiselt, H.A.: Location analysis: A synthesis and survey. European Journal of
Operational Research 165(1), 1–19 (2005).
Scott, A.: Dynamic location-allocation systems: some basic planning strategies. Environment and
Planning 3(1), 73–82 (1971).
Shen, Z.J.M., Coullard, C., Daskin, M.S.: A joint location-inventory model. TRANSPORTA-
TION SCIENCE 37(1), 40–55 (2003).
Sun, L., Zuo, H.: Optimal inventory modeling of multi-echelon system for aircraft spares parts.
Information Technology Journal 12, 688–695 (2013).
Syntetos, A., Babai, M., Altay, N.: On the demand distributions of spare parts. International
Journal of Production Research 50(8), 2101–2117 (2012).
176
B. Landrieux and N. Vandaele

Tansel, B.C., Francis R, L., Lowe, T.J.: Location on networks: A survey. part ii: Exploiting tree
network structure. Management Science 29(4), 482–497 (1983).
Weber, A.: Theory of the Location of Industries. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago
(1929).
White, J.A., Case, K.E.: On covering problems and the central facilities location problem.
Geographical Analysis 6(3), 281–294 (1974).
An EOQ-Based Spare Parts Network Design
177

Supply Chain Coordination with Energy
Price Uncertainty, Carbon Emission Cost,
and Product Return
S. Paul, M. I. M. Wahab and X. F. Cao
Abstract An EOQ model for a coordinated two-level supply chain is developed
under energy (gasoline) price uncertainty and defective items in transhipment. It is
assumed that the transportation cost not only depends on the lot size, but also
depends on the gasoline price uncertainty. The purpose is to determine the optimal
production–shipment policy for the proposed model by taking into account the
percentage of defective items, transportation cost, setup cost, screening cost,
holding cost, and carbon emission cost. The objective is to determine the optimal
number of shipments and the optimal order quantity that minimize the expected
total cost per unit time. Expressions for the optimal order quantity, the optimal
number of shipments, the optimal number of buyer’s cycle during which the
defective items are stored at the buyer’s warehouse before shipping them to the
vendor are derived by minimizing the expected total cost per unit time. In order to
illustrate the proposed model, a numerical example is presented and results are
discussed. It is found that as the gasoline price uncertainty increases, both the total
cost and shipment size increase. This shows that the gasoline price inﬂuences the
supply chain coordination. Moreover, when the ﬁxed gasoline consumption
depending on the vehicle size, type, or age increases, shipment size increases, the
number of shipments decreases, and the total cost increases. This implies that
when the truck size or type used for shipping changes, the supply chain coordi-
nation decision will also change. The variable gasoline consumption increases the
total cost of the supply chain. Finally, a similar behavior is observed with respect
to ﬁxed and variable carbon emissions costs for the buyer.
S. Paul  M. I. M. Wahab (&)  X. F. Cao
Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada
e-mail: wahab@ryerson.ca
S. Paul
e-mail: suborna.paul@ryerson.ca
X. F. Cao
e-mail: xiangfeng.cao@ryerson.ca
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_9,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
179

1 Introduction
Rising energy price (e.g., gasoline price) forces companies to rethink about supply
chain coordination strategies. It has been reported that $10 per barrel increase in
the oil price results in 4 ¢ per mile increase in transportation cost The Wall Street
Journal (2008). In the year 2000, the cost of shipping a 40-foot container from
Shanghai, China, to the USA was $3000 but now it is $8000 The New York Times
(2008). Hence, in order to reduce the transportation cost, companies are trying to
reduce the distance between the distribution centers and retailers. For example,
Sharp Corporation has moved its ﬂat screen television manufacturing section to
Mexico from Asia to be closer to North and South American customers The Wall
Street Journal (2008). Johnson & Son Inc. has saved $1.6 million and reduced fuel
use by 168;000 gallons by manufacturing a larger lot size and improving truckload
utilization The Wall Street Journal (2008). These are some of the examples of how
companies change their supply chain coordination strategies when energy (gaso-
line) price is very volatile.
In this regard, the coordination between a vendor and a buyer is very important
to reduce the total cost. Aderohunmu et al. (1995) showed that a signiﬁcant cost
reduction can be achieved by a joint economic lot-size model as information is
shared between the vendor and buyer. A joint economic lot-size model for a single
vendor and a single buyer was proposed by Goyal (1976). Then, Benerjee (1986)
introduced a joint economic lot-size-inventory policy incorporating a ﬁnite pro-
duction rate for the vendor to satisfy a buyer’s demand on a lot-for-lot basis. Again,
Goyal (1988) proposed an equal size shipment policy by relaxing the assumption of
lot-for-lot policy for the vendor; and it was illustrated that this model can provide a
lower total cost than that of the previous models. Later, Goyal (1995) addressed an
unequal shipment size policy, where the shipment size increases by a constant
factor. Ha and Kim (1997) also developed an integrated single vendor and a single
buyer inventory policy under just-in-time and showed that both vendor and buyer
could be beneﬁted by adopting that policy. Hoque and Goyal (2000) developed a
model for a vendor-buyer production-inventory system with equal and unequal
shipment sizes under the shipping capacity constraint. Goyal and Nebebe (2000)
proposed a policy that has a smaller shipment size ﬁrst and then subsequently an
equal shipment size. Then, Hill and Omar (2006) developed a different approach of
a single-vendor single-buyer integrated production inventory system by decreasing
the holding cost as the stock goes down. Moreover, a comprehensive review on
vendor-buyer coordination can be found in Ben-Daya et al. (2008).
The above studies have focused on the production-shipment policy between the
vendor and buyer ignoring the relationship between shipment size and quality,
because these supply chain coordination models have assumed that the items
produced are perfect in quality. However, in most industrial applications, because
of the damage in transit and/or imperfect production process of the vendor, some
defective items may result in a shipment. These defective items will affect the
supply chain coordination policy. There are a number of studies that investigate
180
S. Paul et al.

the effect of defective items on the economic order quantity (EOQ). Cheng (1991)
proposed an EOQ model considering imperfect items in the production processes.
Along this line, Ben-Daya and Hariga (2000) incorporated the effect of defective
items on the economic lot sizing policy. Salameh and Jaber (2000) also developed
an EOQ model considering a random proportion of defective items in a lot.
Papachristos and Konstantaras (2006) derived the sufﬁcient condition to ensure no
shortage due to defective items in Salameh and Jaber (2000). Recently, Wahab and
Jaber (2010) modiﬁed Salameh and Jaber’s model considering different holding
costs for good and defective items.
In more recent years, there is a great awareness that carbon emissions will lead
to major climate changes in the earth. Governments enforce carbon emission costs
to encourage individuals, businesses, industry, and others to reduce their carbon
emissions. Consequently, companies undertake initiatives to change their supply
chain to ‘‘green’’. In other words, companies do not only concern about reducing
the total cost but also thrive for establishing a supply chain to reduce carbon
footprint. Hence, logistics and supply chain managers take steps to balance the cost
and innovate new environmentally friendly processes Pagell et al. (2004). For
example, some reputed companies such as General Electric, DuPont, Alcoa,
Procter & Gamble have already started reducing both fuel consumption and carbon
emission The New York Times (2008). In 2005, Walmart also declared to reduce
greenhouse gases by 20 % and energy use at stores by 30 % in 7 years (MSNBC
and Reuters 2005).
In this research, we investigate how the energy price uncertainty and carbon
emission costs play a role in a coordinated supply chain, which has some defective
items in each shipment because of the damage in transit. It is assumed that the
defective items are shipped back to the vendor. As a result, in this particular supply
chain, in order to reduce both energy cost and carbon emission cost, the total cost
of the supply chain is minimized with respect to the number of shipments from the
vendor to the buyer and its shipment size, and the number of shipments from the
buyer to the vendor and its shipment size. The results show that both energy price
uncertainty and carbon emission cost signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the supply chain
coordination decisions.
This chapter is organized as follows: Sect. 2 introduces the mathematical model
for coordinated inventory policy. Section 3 presents a numerical example and
Sect. 4 concludes the chapter.
2 The Model
We ﬁrst list the parameters and variables that are used in this chapter.
Nomenclature:
Q
Shipment size from the vendor to the buyer
n
The number of shipments
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price
181

Sb
Buyer’s setup cost per order
D
Buyer’s annual demand
#b
Buyer’s ﬁxed carbon emission cost per shipment
Cb
Buyer’s variable carbon emission cost per unit during the shipment
T
Buyer’s cycle time
c
The percentage of defective items in each shipment
v
Buyer’s screening cost per unit of item
hb
Buyer’s holding per unit per unit time
fb
Buyer’s ﬁxed gasoline consumption per shipment
kb
Buyer’s variable gasoline consumption per unit during the shipment
gt
Gasoline price at time t, and lnðgtÞ ¼ ht
b
Mean reversion coefﬁcient of the gasoline price process
l
The long-term mean of the gasoline price process
r
Volatility of the gasoline price process
P
Vendor’s production rate
hv
Vendor’s holding cost per unit per unit time during the production
hd
Vendor’s holding cost per defective item per unit time at the buyer’s
warehouse
N
The number of buyer’s cycle during which the defective items are stored at
the buyer’s warehouse before returning back to the vendor
fv
Vendor’s ﬁxed gasoline consumption per shipment of defective items
kv
Vendor’s variable gasoline consumption per defective item during the
shipment
Sv
Vendor’s setup cost per production run
Kv
Vendor’s carbon emission cost per unit of item produced
#b
Vendor’s ﬁxed carbon emission cost per shipment of defective items
Cb
Vendor’s variable carbon emission cost per defective unit during the
shipment
We consider a supply chain coordination model that consists of a single vendor
and a single buyer. The buyer’s demand rate D is assumed to be constant and
deterministic. When the buyer places an order for nQ items, it incurs the buyer a
setup cost of Sb. The vendor produces nQ items with a production rate of P, where
P [ D to avoid shortages. The items are shipped to the buyer in equal size of Q;
and there are n number of shipments. Production incurs the vendor a setup cost of
Sv per production run and a carbon emission cost of Kv. For each shipment, the
buyer has to pay a transportation cost of Ub and a carbon emission cost of Eb. We
assumed that the transportation cost not only depends on the shipment size but also
depends on the energy (gasoline) price. It is assumed that, due to the damage in
transit, each shipment has a percentage of defective items, c, which is a random
variable. That means, in each shipment, there are on average, QE½c number of
defective items and the rest are good items. As soon as the shipment is received,
the buyer screens the lot completely at the rate of pð[DÞ during the time t (where
182
S. Paul et al.

t ¼ Q=p) with a screening cost of v per item. The segregated defective items are
stored at the buyer’s warehouse to be returned to the vendor; and the holding cost
for the defective items is paid by the vendor. The holding cost of the good and
defective items at buyer’s warehouse are hb and hd, respectively, where hb [ hd.
Once the inventory level of the defective items in the buyer’s warehouse reaches to
NQE½c, they are shipped back to the vendor. In other words, the defective items
are returned to the vendor in every N cycles of the buyer. For this product return,
the transportation cost of Uv and the carbon emission cost of Ev incur to the
vendor.
2.1 The Buyer’s Total Expected Cost
There are ﬁve major costs for the buyer: transportation cost, setup cost, screening
cost, holding cost, and carbon emission cost.
2.1.1 Transportation Cost
The price of commodities, such as oil, copper, sugar, gas, and electricity, shows a
mean-reverting behavior (e.g., Clewlow and Strickland 2000; Hahn and Dyer
2008; Hull 2012; Pinto et al. 2007; Schwartz and Smith 2000). We use the fol-
lowing stochastic differential equation to represent the mean reverting process of
the gasoline price.
dht ¼ bðl  htÞdt þ rdwt:
ð1Þ
In the above equation, ht is the logarithm of gasoline price, gt, i.e., lnðgtÞ ¼ ht; b is
the mean reversion coefﬁcient; l is the long-term mean price; r is the volatility of
the process; and dwt is the standard Wiener process. The price shows a downward
trend when the logarithm price, ht, is greater than l and an upward trend when the
logarithm price, ht, is less than l. These upward and downward movements are
greatly inﬂuenced by the mean reversion coefﬁcient, b. Given the logarithm of
gasoline price at time t ¼ 0, h0, the logarithm of gasoline price at time t, ht, is
normally distributed with mean
E½htjh0 ¼ ebth0 þ lð1  ebtÞ;
ð2Þ
and variance
Varðhtjh0Þ ¼ ð1  e2btÞ r2
2b :
ð3Þ
As a result, the gasoline price, gt, is log—normally distributed with mean
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price
183

Eðgtjh0Þ ¼ exp ebth0 þ lð1  ebtÞ þ ð1  e2btÞ r2
4b


:
ð4Þ
Since we are dealing with the long-term average cost in this supply chain model, as
the
time
t ! 1,
the
terms
ebt
and
e2bt
approach
to
zero.
Hence,
Eðg1jh0Þ ¼ expðl þ r2
4bÞ. The gasoline price in Toronto, Canada, from September
10, 2008 to December 12, 2011 is presented in Fig. 1, which shows that the
gasoline price (per liter) varies from 0.69 CAD to $1.39 CAD. The required
parameters of the mean reverting process are estimated using the procedure
described in Dixit and Pindyck (1994). The estimated values of l, b, and r are
0.0240, 1.4787, and 0.2552, respectively.
Having deﬁned the process for the gasoline price, we are going to derive the
transportation cost per shipment under energy (gasoline) price uncertainty. Some
studies such as Darwish (2008), Ertogral et al. (2007), and Lee (1986) considered
transportation cost in a joint vendor–buyer inventory model, and they assumed that
the transportation cost depends only on the size of the shipment. However, in
reality, it may also depend on energy (gasoline) price. In this chapter, we assume
that the transportation cost not only depends on shipment size, but also depends on
energy (gasoline) price. In order to incorporate the gasoline price uncertainty in the
supply chain model, ﬁrst we have to determine the gasoline consumption during
the shipment. The gasoline consumption mainly depends on factors such as dis-
tance between the vendor and the buyer, actual weight of the vehicle including the
weight of the shipment, age of the vehicle, condition of the vehicle, type of the
vehicle, and traveling speed between the vendor and the buyer (Fitch 1994).
However, for a given distance between the vendor and the buyer, a constant speed
of traveling between the vendor and the buyer, and for a particular type and age of
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Gasoline price ($/liter)
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
Days from September 10, 2008 to December 12, 2011
ln(Gasoline price)
Fig. 1 Gasoline price in
Toronto, Canada, from
September 10, 2008 to
December 12, 2011
184
S. Paul et al.

the vehicle, the fuel consumption is linearly proportional to the weight of the
shipment (Nylund and Erkkilä 2005). Moreover, as one understands, the weight of
the shipment is proportional to the size of the shipment. Therefore, we consider a
ﬁxed gasoline consumption depending on all the factors except the size of the
shipment; and a variable gasoline consumed per unit of the shipment. Let, fb and kb
be the ﬁxed and variable gasoline consumptions in liters, respectively. Since, Q is
the shipment size from the vendor to the buyer, ðfb þ kbQÞ is the total volume of
gasoline that will be burnt per shipment. Now, given that the average price of the
gasoline is exp ðl þ r2
4bÞ, the buyer’s transportation cost per shipment is given by
Ub ¼ ðfb þ kbQÞeðlþr2
4bÞ:
ð5Þ
2.1.2 Setup Cost and Screening Cost
The buyer has to pay a ﬁxed setup cost of Sb per order. As each shipment has a
certain percentage of defective items, the shipment is screened at unit cost of v to
separate the good items from the defective items. Hence, the total screening cost is
Qv per buyer’s cycle.
2.1.3 Holding Cost
The buyer has to pay the holding cost only for good items. The total inventory
level of the good items per cycle is as follows:
E½cQ2
2p
þ QEð1  cÞE½T
2
:
ð6Þ
Since only good items will satisfy the demand during a cycle, the cycle time is
T ¼ ðQ=DÞð1  cÞ and the expected cycle time is E½T ¼ ðQ=DÞð1  E½cÞ. Now,
substituting E½T ¼ ðQ=DÞð1  E½cÞ in Eq. (6), the expected holding cost per unit
time can be written as
hb
E½T
E½cQ2
2p
þ Q2E½ð1  cÞ2
2D
"
#
:
ð7Þ
2.1.4 Carbon Emission Cost
During the shipment, though gases such as N2O, CH4, and NH3 have a small
contribution to the greenhouse gases emission, the main source of greenhouse
gases emission is CO2. The amount of the carbon emission depends on several
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price
185

factors such as distance traveled, fuel consumption, quality of fuel, vehicle type,
vehicle age, average speed, actual weight of the vehicle, road type, and climate
(Sathaye et al. 2010). For given locations of the vendor and the buyer and a
particular type of vehicle with an average speed between the vendor and the buyer,
the amount of carbon emission per shipment can be considered to be ﬁxed. On the
other hand, the amount of carbon emission varies depending on the actual weight
of the shipment. Consequently, we consider a ﬁxed, #b, and a variable, Cb, carbon
emission costs for the shipment from the vendor to the buyer. The ﬁxed cost, #b,
depends on the distance between the vendor and the buyer, vehicle type, speed,
road type, and climate. The variable cost, Cb depends on the actual size of the
shipment. Since the shipment size is Q, the total carbon emission cost per buyer’s
cycle can be expressed as
Eb ¼ #b þ CbQ:
ð8Þ
Having deﬁned the relevant costs of the buyer, we can express the total expected
cost of per unit time as follows:
E½TCðQ; nÞb ¼
1
E½T
Sb
n þ Qv þ #b þ CbQ


þ
1
E½T ðfb þ kbQÞeðlþr2
4bÞ
h
i
þ hb
E½T
E½cQ2
2p
þ Q2E½ð1  cÞ2
2D
 
!
:
ð9Þ
2.2 The Vendor’s Total Expected Cost Per Unit Time
The vendor’s total expected cost per unit time is the summation of holding cost for
the average accumulation of items during the production run, holding cost for
defective items that are stored at the buyer’s warehouse, setup cost, and trans-
portation cost, and carbon emission cost for bringing back the defective items from
the buyer.
2.2.1 Holding Cost
During the production run, the cumulative inventory of the vendor is expressed as
Iv ¼
nQ Q
P þ ðn  1ÞE½T


 n2Q2
2P


 E½T½Q þ 2Q þ    þ ðn  1ÞQ:
ð10Þ
186
S. Paul et al.

The vendor has to pay holding cost of hv per unit per unit time for accumulated
inventory. Hence, the holding cost per unit time is
Hv1 ¼ hvQ2
E½T
1
P 1  n
2


þ 1
2D ðn  1Þð1  E½cÞ

	
:
ð11Þ
The holding cost for the defective items stored in the buyer’s warehouse is paid by
the vendor at a rate of hd per unit per unit time. The expected number of defective
items per buyer’s cycle is QE½c and this amount of segregated defective items is
stored in the buyer’s warehouse before shipping them together after N buyer’s
cycles. Hence, the total inventory of the defective items per shipment can be
determined as follows:
Idv ¼ QE½cE½T þ 2QE½cE½T þ    þ NQE½cE½T:
ð12Þ
Therefore, the expected holding cost per unit time for defective items can be
written as
Hv2 ¼ hdQE½cð1 þ NÞ
2
:
ð13Þ
2.2.2 Transportation Cost
As discussed in Sect. 2.1.1, in order to ship the defective items accumulated at the
buyer’s warehouse, we consider a ﬁxed and a variable volumes of the gasoline that
will be burnt during the shipment. Let fv and kv be the ﬁxed and variable volumes
(in liters) of gasoline, respectively. Since the vendor receives NQE½c defective
items in N cycles of the buyer, the transportation cost per unit time is
Uv ¼ ðfv þ kvNQE½cÞeðlþr2
4bÞ
NE½T
:
ð14Þ
2.2.3 Carbon Emission and Setup Costs
The vendor has a ﬁxed setup cost of Sv per vendor’s cycle. The vendor produces Q
items per buyer’s cycle and pays a carbon emission cost of Kv per unit of pro-
duction. The vendor also pays a carbon emission cost for shipping back the
defective items from the buyer. As discussed in Sect. 2.1.4, we consider ﬁxed and
variable carbon emission costs for shipping back the defective items; and let #v
and Cv be the ﬁxed and variable carbon emission costs, respectively. Since the
number of defective items in each shipment from the buyer to the vendor is
NQE½c, the total emission cost is Ev ¼ ð#v þ CvNQE½cÞ for every N cycles of the
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price
187

buyer. Therefore, the vendor’s carbon emission and setup costs per unit time can
be expressed as
Sv
nE½T þ KvQ
E½T þ ð#v þ CvNQE½cÞ
NE½T
:
ð15Þ
Finally, the vendor’s expected total cost per unit time is given by
E½TCðQ; n; NÞv ¼ hvQ2
E½T
1
P 1  n
2


þ 1
2D ðn  1Þð1  E½cÞ

	
þ hdQE½cð1 þ NÞ
2
þ ðfv þ kvNQE½cÞeðlþr2
4bÞ
NE½T
þ
1
E½T
Sv
n þ #v
N þ CvQE½c þ KvQ

	
:
ð16Þ
2.3 The Total Expected Cost Per Unit Time
The total cost per unit time for the coordinated supply chain is the sum of the total
cost per unit time for the buyer and the vendor and can be written as
E½TCðQ; n; NÞ ¼ E½TCðQ; nÞb þ E½TCðQ; n; NÞv:
ð17Þ
Expressions for E½TCðQ; nÞb and E½TCðQ; n; NÞv can be obtained from Eqs. (9)
and (16), respectively, and substituted in Eq. (17) as follows:
E½TCðQ;n;NÞ ¼
1
E½T
1
nðSb þ SvÞ þ
#b þ #v
N



	
þ Q
E½Tðv þ Cb þ CvE½c þ KvÞ
þ hb
E½T
E½cQ2
2p
þ Q2E½ð1  cÞ2
2D
 
!
þ hvQ2
E½T
1
P 1  n
2


þ 1
2Dðn  1Þð1  E½cÞ

	
þ hdQE½cð1 þ NÞ
2
þ
1
E½T
fb þ fV
N


eðlþr2
4bÞ

	
þ Q
E½T ðkb þ kvE½cÞeðlþr2
4bÞ
h
i
:
ð18Þ
Substituting E½T ¼ ðQ=DÞð1  E½cÞ, Eq. (18) can be written as
188
S. Paul et al.

E½TCðQ; n; NÞ ¼
D
Qð1  E½cÞ
1
n ðSb þ SvÞ þ
#b þ #v
N



	
þ
D
ð1  E½cÞ ðv þ Cb þ CvE½c þ KvÞ
þ
QD
1  E½c
hbE½c
2p
þ hbE½ð1  cÞ2
2D
þ hv
P
1  n
2


"
#
þ hvQ
2 ðn  1Þ
þ hdQE½cð1 þ NÞ
2
þ
D
Qð1  E½cÞ
fb þ fV
N


eðlþr2
4bÞ

	
þ
D
ð1  E½cÞ ðkb þ kvE½cÞeðlþr2
4bÞ
h
i
:
ð19Þ
Now, the objective is to determine optimal order quantity, Q, the optimal number
of shipments to the buyer, n, and the optimal number of cycles that the defective
items are accumulated at the buyer’s warehouse, N, so that the total expected cost
per unit time is minimized. Taking the partial derivative of E½TCðQ; n; NÞ with
respect to Q and setting it as zero, we have
oE½TCðQ; n; NÞ ¼ 
D
Q2ð1  E½cÞ
1
n ðSb þ SvÞ þ
#b þ #v
N



	
þ hv
2 ðn  1Þ
þ
D
ð1  E½cÞ
hbE½c
2p
þ hbE½ð1  cÞ2
2D
þ hv
P
1  n
2


"
#
þ hbE½cð1 þ NÞ
2

D
Q2ð1  E½cÞ
fb þ fv
N


eðlþr2
4bÞ ¼ 0:
ð20Þ
After rearranging the above equation, we obtain the following expression for the
optimal shipment size:
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2pPD N½ðSb þ SvÞ þ nð#b þ #v
NÞ þ nðfbN þ fvÞeðlþr2
4bÞ
n
o
nN½A1 þ A2 þ A3
v
u
u
t
ð21Þ
where, A1 ¼ PhbfDE½c þ pE½ð1  cÞ2g, A2 ¼ phvfDð2  nÞ þ Pðn  1Þ ð1 
E½c Þg, and A3 ¼ hdpPE½cð1  E½cÞð1 þ NÞ.
Taking the partial derivative of E½TCðQ; n; NÞ with respect to n and setting it as
zero, we obtain the following:
oE½TCðQ; n; NÞ
on
¼ 
DðSb þ SvÞ
Qn2ð1  E½cÞ þ hvQ
2 
hvDQ
2Pð1  E½cÞ ¼ 0:
ð22Þ
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price
189

After rearranging the above equation, we obtain the following expression for the
optimal number of shipments from the vendor to the buyer:
n ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2DPðSb þ SvÞ
hvQ2ðPð1  E½cÞ  DÞ
s
:
ð23Þ
Taking the partial derivative of E½TCðQ; n; NÞ with respect to N and setting it as
zero, we can write the following equation:
oE½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oN
¼ hdQE½c
2
 Dðfveðlþr2
4bÞ þ #vÞ
QN2ð1  E½cÞ ¼ 0:
ð24Þ
This can be rearranged to obtain the optimal N as follows:
N ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2D fve lþr2
4b
ð
Þ þ #v


hbQ2ð1  E½cÞE½c
v
u
u
t
:
ð25Þ
Substituting the values of n and N into Eq. (21), we rewrite the expressions for
Q as follows:
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2pDP fbe lþr2
4b
ð
Þ þ #b


B1 þ B2 þ B3
v
u
u
t
:
ð26Þ
where B1 ¼ PhbfDE½c þ pE½ð1  cÞ2g, B2 ¼ hvpf2D  Pð1  E½cÞg, and B3 ¼
hdPpE½cð1  E½cÞ.
Substituting the value of Q into Eqs. (23) and (25), we rewrite the expressions
for n and N as follows:
n ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðSb þ SvÞðB1 þ B2 þ B3Þ
hvp fbe lþr2
4b
ð
Þ þ #b


ðPð1  E½cÞ  DÞ
v
u
u
t
:
ð27Þ
N ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðfveðlþr2
4bÞ þ #vÞðB1 þ B2 þ B3Þ
hdPp fbeðlþr2
4bÞþ#b


E½cð1  E½cÞ
v
u
u
u
t
;
ð28Þ
Lastly, as it is given below, it can easily be shown that the expected total cost per
unit time E½TCðQ; n; NÞ is a convex function on Q, n, and N simultaneously.
The Hessian matrix is given as:
190
S. Paul et al.

o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oQ2
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oQon
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oQoN
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oQon
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
on2
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
onoN
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oQoN
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
onoN
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oN2
2
66666664
3
77777775
:
The elements of the Hessian matrix are:
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oQ2
¼
2D
Q3ð1  E½cÞ
1
n ðSb þ SvÞ þ ð#b þ #vÞ

	
þ
2D
Q3ð1  E½cÞ
fb þ fv
N


eðlþr2
4bÞ [ 0;
ð29Þ
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
on2
¼ 2DðSb þ SvÞ
n3Qð1  E½cÞ [ 0;
ð30Þ
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oN2
¼ ðfveðlþr2
4bÞ þ #vÞ
N3Qð1  E½cÞ [ 0:
ð31Þ
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oQon
¼ o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
onoQ
¼ hv 1 
D
ð1  E½cÞP


[ 0;
ð32Þ
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oQoN
¼ o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oNoQ
¼ ð1  E½cÞhd [ 0;
ð33Þ
and
o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
onoN
¼ o2E½TCðQ; n; NÞ
oNon
¼ 0;
ð34Þ
and the second order condition is positive:
DE½c2h2
dQðSb þ SvÞ
fbe
lþ r2
4b


þ #b
0
B
@
1
C
A
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
D
E½cð1  E½cÞhd
fve lþr2
4b


þ #v


s
ð1  E½cÞ
DPðSb þ SvÞ
hvðD þ ð1  E½cÞPÞ

3=2
fve
lþ r2
4b


þ #v
0
B
@
1
C
A
[ 0
The algorithm to solve the above model is as follows:
Step 0.
Determine Q using Eq. (26)
Step 1.
Determine the optimal number of shipments n and N using Eqs. (27)
and (28)
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price
191

Step 2.
If both n and N are integers, go to Step 5
Step 3.
If both n and N are not integers, or either of them is not an integer, go
to Step 4
Step 4.
For n ¼ bnc and dne; and for N ¼ bNc and dNe determine Q using
Eq. (21), and then go to Step 5
Step 5.
Choose n ¼ n, N ¼ N, and Q ¼ Q as the optimal ones that give the
minimum cost from Eq. (19), and then stop
3 A Numerical Example
In this section, a numerical example is presented to illustrate the model. Let pro-
duction rate, P ¼ 200000 units/year, demand rate, D ¼ 70000 units/year, holding
cost for vendor, hv ¼ $2/unit/year, setup cost for vendor, Sv ¼ $300/cycle, ﬁxed
gasoline consumption for vendor, fv ¼ 15 l per shipment, variable gasoline con-
sumption, kv ¼ 0:25 l per unit of item in a shipment, ﬁxed carbon emission cost for
σ
σ
σ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Optimal number of shipment n
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Optimal number of shipment N
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
944
946
948
950
952
Optimal order quantity
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
186500
187000
187500
188000
188500
189000
Expected total cost per unit time
σ
Fig. 2 The behavior of n, N, Q, and the expected total cost as the volatility of gasoline price,
r, changes
192
S. Paul et al.

vendor, #v ¼ $2:5 per shipment, variable carbon emission cost for vendor, Cv ¼
$0:3 per unit of item in a shipment, carbon emission cost due to production, Kv ¼
$0:4 per unit, setup cost for buyer, Sb ¼ $100/order, holding cost for buyer,
hb ¼ $4:5/unit/year, screening rate, p ¼ 195200 units/year, screening cost,
v ¼ $0:6/unit, ﬁxed gasoline consumption for buyer, fb ¼ 20 l per shipment, vari-
able gasoline consumption, kb ¼ 0:5 l per unit of item in a shipment, ﬁxed carbon
emission cost for buyer, #b ¼ 5 per shipment, variable carbon emission cost for
buyer, Cb ¼ 0:5 per unit of item in a shipment, and holding cost of defective items at
buyer’s warehouse, hd ¼ $3/unit/year. The percentage of defective items, c, is
uniformly distributed, i.e., c  U½c; d, where E½c ¼ ðc þ dÞ=2, E½1=ð1  cÞ
¼ ½1=ðc  dÞ ln½ð1  dÞ=ð1  cÞ, and E½ð1  cÞ2 ¼ ð1=3Þðc2 þ cd þ d2Þ þ ð1 
c  dÞ . We consider c ¼ 0 and d is varied from 0:025 to 0:225.
We ﬁrst analyze the effect of the gasoline price uncertainty on the decision
variables. Gasoline price volatility, r, is varied from 0.1 to 0.5 while assuming that
the percentage of defective items, E½c, is 0.15. Figure 2 shows that, as the vol-
atility of the gasoline price increases, n and N do not change but Q and the
expected total cost increase.
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
6
8
10
f b
Optimal number of shipment n
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
6
8
10
f b
Optimal number of shipment N
10
20
30
40
50
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
f b
Optimal order quantity
10
20
30
40
50
186000
187000
188000
189000
190000
f b
Expected total cost per unit time
Fig. 3 The behavior of n, N, Q, and the expected total cost as the ﬁxed gasoline consumption
for the buyer, fb, changes
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price
193

We then study the inﬂuence of the ﬁxed volume of gasoline, fb, which will be
burnt per shipment when the items are transported from the vendor to the buyer. It
is considered that fb depends on distance traveled, type of the vehicle type, age of
the vehicle, etc. For a given vehicle, the vendor, and the buyer fb are constant, but
fb will change when any of these factors change. For example, if the vendor’s
location changes the distance between the vendor and the buyer will change, or
when a different type of vehicle is used for shipment fb will change. In this
analysis, the value of fb is varied from 10 to 50 l. As expected, Fig. 3 shows that,
when the value of fb increases, the optimal number of shipments, n, decreases.
This indicates that as more gasoline is going to be burnt in shipping, one should
decrease the frequency of transportation to minimize the cost. When the frequency
of shipping decreases, shipment size, Q, will increase. As Q increases the pro-
portion of the defective items will increase and this leads to a higher frequency (a
lower N) of shipments of the defective items. Overall the expected total cost
increases. Similarly, as the variable gasoline consumption per item for the buyer is
varied from 0.1 to 0.9 liters, Fig. 4 shows that it only inﬂuences the expected total
cost.
Next, as shown in Fig. 5, when the value of the ﬁxed carbon emission cost for
the buyer, #b, increases, the number of shipments decreases so as to reduce the
λ
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
b
Optimal order quantity n
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
b
Optimal order quantity N
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
900
920
940
960
980
1000
b
Optimal order quantity
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
160000
180000
200000
220000
b
Expected total cost per unit time
λ
λ
λ
Fig. 4 The behavior of n, N, Q, and the expected total cost as the variable gasoline
consumption per item for the buyer, kb, changes
194
S. Paul et al.

cost; this leads to a smaller value of N, a larger value of Q, and a higher expected
total cost. Likewise, the inﬂuence of the variable carbon emission cost for the
buyer, Cb, is investigated. Figure 6 indicates that it only effects the expected total
cost.
Finally, how the percentage of defective items affects the supply chain deci-
sions is also studied. From Fig. 7, it can be seen that when the percentage of
defective items increases, the number of shipments increases to compensate for the
defective items so that the demand can be met. When the number of shipments
remains the same at 6, the order quantity increases, because more items are needed
to compensate for the increasing defective items. However, when the number of
shipments shifts from 7 to 8, the order quantity drops because of a larger number
of shipments. Again, when the number of shipments remains at 8, the order
quantity keeps increasing to compensate for a higher percentage of defective
items. A higher percentage of defective items leads to a higher number of defective
items and consequently the frequency of shipments of the defective item increases.
In other words, N, which is the number of buyer’s cycles during which the
defective items are stored at the buyer’s warehouse, decreases. Again, as one
would expect, the expected total cost increases when the percentage of defective
items increases.
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
b
Optimal number of shipment n
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
b
Optimal number of shipment N
4
6
8
10
900
950
1000
1050
1100
b
Optimal order quantity
4
6
8
10
187000
187200
187400
187600
187800
b
Expected total cost per unit time
Fig. 5 The behavior of n, N, Q, and the expected total cost as the ﬁxed carbon emission cost
for the buyer, #b, changes
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price
195

4 Conclusion
A coordinated supply chain is studied under energy (gasoline) price uncertainty
and defective items in transhipment. The expression for the optimal order quantity,
the optimal number of shipments, the number of buyer’s cycles during which the
defective items are stored at the buyer’s warehouse, and the expected total cost per
unit time are derived. Examples are presented to show the effects of gasoline price
uncertainty, ﬁxed and variable carbon emission costs, and percentage of defective
items on the supply chain coordination.
Transportation is always a part of the supply chain coordination and the
transportation cost depends on the gasoline price. However, the literature has
ignored how recent gasoline price uncertainty inﬂuences the supply chain coor-
dination. The results show that, in a coordinated supply chain, when the gasoline
price uncertainty increases, the shipment size increases and hence the total supply
chain cost increases. Moreover, it can also be seen that the increment in the
shipment size is not good enough to trigger a higher number of shipments. Since
the gasoline price plays a role in the supply chain coordination, another aspect that
has been investigated in this chapter is how the gasoline consumption of the
vehicle used for transportation affects the supply chain coordination. With respect
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
b
Optimal order quantity n
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
b
Optimal order quantity N
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
900
920
940
960
980
1000
b
Optimal order quantity
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
150000
160000
170000
180000
190000
200000
210000
220000
b
Expected total cost per unit time
Fig. 6 The behavior of n, N, Q, and the expected total cost as the variable carbon emission
cost for buyer, Cb, changes
196
S. Paul et al.

to the gasoline consumption, ﬁxed and variable gasoline consumptions are con-
sidered. The ﬁxed gasoline consumption basically depends on the vehicle type,
size, age, etc. The results show that when the vehicle used for transportation
changes, the decisions on the supply chain coordination change. For example, if a
vehicle with a higher ﬁxed gasoline consumption is used, the number of shipments
from the vendor to the buyer becomes smaller and this leads to a larger shipment
size. Moreover, the larger shipment size increases the amount of defective items at
the buyer’s warehouse and hence the frequency of returning the defective items
from the buyer to the vendor increases. With respect to the variable gasoline
consumption, it only increases the total cost of the supply chain. Lastly, effect of
carbon emission cost, a factor related to the gasoline consumption, is also inves-
tigated using ﬁxed and variable carbon emission costs. It is observed that the effect
of the ﬁxed carbon emission cost is similar to that of the ﬁxed gasoline con-
sumption. Likewise, the effect of the variable carbon emission cost is similar to
that of the variable gasoline consumption.
The future research can be directed in many ways. For example, demand
uncertainty, lead time uncertainty, and multistage supply chain model can be
investigated in this framework.
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
E
Optimal order quantity n
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
E
Optimal order quantity N
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
900
950
1000
1050
1100
E
Optimal order quantity
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
150000
160000
170000
180000
190000
200000
210000
220000
E
Expected total cost per unit time
γ
γ
γ
γ
Fig. 7 The behavior of n, N, Q, and the expected total cost as the percentage of defective
items, E½c, changes
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price
197

References
Aderohunmu R., Mobolurin A., Bryson N., (1995). Joint vendorbuyer policy in JIT manufac-
turing. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 46: 375–385.
Ben-Daya M., Hariga M. (2000). Economic lot scheduling problem with imperfect production
processes. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 51: 875–881.
Ben-Daya M., Darwish, M., and Ertogral, K. (2008). The joint economic lot sizing problem:
Review and extensions. European Journal of Operational Research, 185: 726–742.
Benerjee A. (1986). A joint economic lot size model for purchaser and vendor. Decision Sciences,
17: 292–311.
Cheng C. E. (1991). An economic order quantity model with demand-dependent unit production
cost and imperfect production processes. IIE Transactions, 23: 23–28.
Clewlow L., Strickland C. (2000) Energy Derivatives: Pricing and Risk Management, Lacima
Publications.
Darwish M. A. (2008). Joint determination of order quantity and reorder point of continuous
review model under quantity and freight rate discounts. Computers & Operations Research,
35: 3902–3917.
Dixit A. K., Pindyck R. S. (1994). Investment under uncertainty, Princeton University Press,
Princeton USA.
Ertogral K., Darwish M., Ben-Daya M. (2007). Production and shipment lot sizing in a vendor
buyer supply chain with transportation cost. European Journal of Operational Research, 176:
1592–1606.
Fitch J. W. (1994). Motor truck engineering handbook, Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc.
USA, 4th Edition. 4: 83–108.
Goyal S. K. (1976). An integrated inventory model for a single supplier-single customer problem.
International Journal of Production Research, 15: 107–111.
Goyal S. K. (1988). Joint economic lot size model for purchaser and vendor: A comment.
Decision Sciences, 19: 236–2411.
Goyal S. K. (1995). A one-vendor multi-buyer integrated inventory model: A comment.
European Journal of Operational Research, 82: 209–210.
Goyal S. K., Nebebe F. (2000). Determination of economic production-shipment policy for a
single-vendor single-buyer system. European Journal of Operational Research, 121(1):
175–178.
Ha D., Kim S. L. (1997). Implementation of JIT purchasing: an integrated approach. Production
Planning & Control, 8(2): 152–157.
Hahn W. J., Dyer J. S. (2008). Discrete time modeling of mean reverting stochastic processes for
real option valuation. European Journal of Operational Research, 184: 534–548.
Hill R. M., Omar M. (2006). Another look at the single-vendor single-buyer integrated
production-inventory problem. International Journal of Production Research, 44(4):
791–800.
Hoque M. A., Goyal S. K. (2000). An optimal policy for single-vendor single-buyer integrated
production-inventory system with capacity constraint of the transport equipment. Interna-
tional Journal of Production Economics, 65(3): 305–315.
Hull J. (2012). Options Future and other Derivatives, Prentice Hall, NewJersey.
Lee C. Y. (1986). The economic order quantity for freight discount cost. IIE Transactions 18(3):
318–320.
MSNBC
and
Reuters.
October
25,
(2005).
Is
Wal-Mart
going
green?
http://
www.msnbc.msn.com/id/9815727
Nylund N.-O., Erkkilä K., (2005). Heavy-duty truck emissions and fuel consumption simulating
real-world driving in laboratory conditions. 2005 Diesel Engine Emissions Reduction (DEER)
Conference August 21–25, 2005 Chicago, Illinois, USA.
198
S. Paul et al.

Pagell M., Yang C. L., Krumwiede D. W., Sheu C., (2004). Does the competitive environment
inﬂuence the efﬁcacy of investment in environmental management? Journal of Supply Chain
Management, 40(3): 30–39.
Papachristos S., Konstantaras L. (2006). Economic ordering quantity models for items with
imperfect quality. International Journal of Production Economics, 100: 148–154.
Pinto C. B., Brandão L., Hahn W. J. (2007). Modeling Switching Options using Mean Reverting
Commodity Price Models, 11th International Conference on Real Options. 6–9.
Salameh M. K., Jaber M. Y. (2000). Economic Production quantity model for items with
imperfect quality. International Journal of Production Economics, 64: 59–64.
Sathaye N., Horvath A., and Madanat S. (2010). Unintended impacts of increases truck loads on
pavement supply-chain emission. Transportation Research Part A, 44: 1–5.
Schwartz E., Smith J. E. (2000). Short-term variations and long-term dynamics in commodity
prices. Management Science, 46: 893–911.
The New York Times. August 3, (2008). Shipping costs start to crimp globalization.
The Wall Street Journal. September 22, (2008). Why high oil prices are upending the way
companies should manage their supply chain.
Wahab M. I. M., Jaber M. Y. (2010) Economic order quantity for items with imperfect quality,
different holding costs, and learning effects: A note. Computer & Industrial Engineering,
58(1): 186–190.
Supply Chain Coordination with Energy Price
199

Coordinating a Supply Chain
with an EOQ Model
Jing Chen and Genevieve Mushaluk
Abstract In this paper, we consider a supply chain coordination scheme and
issues in which a manufacturer supplies a product to a retailer. The retailer decides
his optimal order quantity using an economic order quantity (EOQ) model which
takes into consideration the shipment costs charged by the manufacturer. We show
that under some circumstances, the manufacturer can offer a contract which
includes a discount shipment fee per delivery and a shipment fee per unit to
coordinate the supply chain and enhance the proﬁts of both the manufacturer and
the retailer. We also identify under which condition the manufacturer cannot
coordinate the supply chain with shipment fees. This research highlights that the
manufacturer needs to further investigate these conditions before offering and
implementing a contract. Numerical examples are also included to illustrate the
main results discussed in the paper.
1 Introduction
Classical economic order quantity (EOQ) model with different variations has been
excelled by many researchers since it was ﬁrst explored a century ago by Ford
Whitman Harris in 1913. Several authors (for example, Clark 1972; Urgeletti
Tinarelli 1983) have given comprehensive review for using an EOQ model. For
instance, Cheng (1989) solved the EOQ model for a single product with demand
related to unit price using a geometric programming method. By assuming that the
demand declines exponentially over time, Wee (1995) examined an EOQ model
J. Chen (&)  G. Mushaluk
Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg R3B 2E9, Canada
e-mail: je.chen@uwinnipeg.ca
G. Mushaluk
e-mail: genevieve.mushaluk@hotmail.com
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_10,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
201

with shortages. Khanra and Chaudhuri (2003) developed an EOQ model consid-
ering shortages over a ﬁnite-time horizon, by assuming a quadratic demand pat-
tern. Sana and Chaudhuri (2008) considered an EOQ model for various types of
deterministic demand when delay in payment is permitted by the retailer to the
supplier. Chang and Dye (1999) considered the effect of the backlogging rate on
the EOQ decision. Teng et al. (2003) extended Chang and Dye’s work by adding a
non-constant purchase cost into the model. Some authors developed EOQ models
that focused on deteriorating items with time-varying demand and shortages (for
example, Benkherouf 1995; Hariga and Alyan 1997). Liao and Chung (2009)
investigated EOQ for deteriorating items under the conditions of permissible delay
in payments offered by the supplier. Salameh and Jaber (2000) developed models
on lot sizing when procured items are of imperfect quality and Khan et al. (2011)
summarized the current body of research that has extended the Salameh and Jaber
(2000) EOQ model for imperfect items. Taleizadeh et al. (2013a) considered an
EOQ problem under partial delayed payment and Taleizadeh et al. (2013b)
developed EOQ models with multiple prepayments under no shortage, full back-
ordering, and partial backordering. Pentico and Drake (2011) gave a compre-
hensive review on deterministic models that have been developed over the past
40 years with considerations, such as pricing, perishable, or deteriorating inven-
tory, time-varying or stock-dependent demand, quantity discounts, or multiple-
warehouses.
As the competition is intensiﬁed and more options in selecting distribution
channels are available, many companies realize that the performance of their
business is highly dependant upon the degree of collaboration and coordination
across the supply chain. Extensive studies on a supply chain in which a manu-
facturer supplies a product to a retailer have been undertaken (e.g., Wang and Liu
2007; Lee and Rhee 2010). Coordination of the supply chain through a contract
between the manufacturer and the retailer to incentivize both to accept the contract
has attracted much attention of both academics and practitioners. Various contracts
that can assist in the coordination of the supply chain have been widely studied,
such as, quantity discount contract (Li and Liu 2006), returns policy (Pasternack
1985; Choi et al. 2004; Ai et al. 2012), revenue-sharing contract (Cachon and
Lariviere 2005; Giannoccaro and Pontrandolfo 2009), returns with whole sale
price discount (Chen 2011).
Chen et al. (2001) investigated a two-echelon system with set demand for
multiple buyers, and used an optimization strategy to maximize total system-wide
proﬁts. Parlar and Weng (1997) explored the joint coordination between manu-
facturing and supply departments where the manufacturing department has random
demands and a short product life. Furthermore, Weng (1995) analyzed the impact
of joint decision policies on channel coordination in a system of a single supplier
and a group of buyers and also addressed quantity discount on inventory and
ordering policies. Consistent with Chen et al. (2001), he showed that quantity
discounts alone cannot coordinate the supply chain. Lei et al. (2006) examined the
optimal channel coordination policies for business processes that involve not only
a supplier and buyer, but transportation partners as well.
202
J. Chen and G. Mushaluk

Several authors have also discussed coordination schemes on EOQ models. For
instance, Xia et al. (2008) examined the supply chain coordination issue for a
supply chain with multiple buyers and multiple suppliers and found that matching
buyers’ order proﬁles to suppliers’ cost structures is the main source of supply
chain coordination. Chen and Chen (2005) considered a Multi-item inventory and
production problem with joint setup costs for a single manufacturer and a single
retailer where the retailer faces a deterministic demand and sells a number of
products in the marketplace. Based on an EOQ policy, they determined the optimal
replenishment policies for the retailer’s end-items and for the manufacturer’s raw
materials to minimize the total cost of the supply chain. They proposed a proﬁt
sharing mechanism through a quantity discount scheme to achieve Pareto
improvements among the participants of a coordinated supply chain.
More recently, Wahab et al. (2011) considered an EOQ model with defective
items to examine the effects of imperfect items in a coordinated supply chain. They
developed the optimal production-shipment policy by minimizing the total
expected cost per unit time in a coordinated vendor–buyer supply chain with the
return policy so that the defective items can be sent back to the vendor. Khan and
Jaber (2011) developed the model for a two level multi-supplier, single-vendor
supply chain where a vendor needs a number of components from different sup-
pliers to make a single product. They optimized cycle time for three coordination
mechanisms. Chan and Lee (2012) proposed a model that incorporates both
incentive and coordination issues into a single coordination model for a single-
vendor multi-buyer supply chain. They found that synchronizing ordering and
production cycles while giving a price discount based on the buyers’ order
intervals can achieve coordination. In addition, this coordination mechanism can
be used as the incentive to motivate buyers to participate in the coordination.
Mutlu and Cetinkaya (2011) studied a retailer-carrier channel for the purpose of
long-term planning and coordination. Voigt and Inderfurth (2011) discussed the
supply chain coordination on extending the standard framework of lot sizing
decisions under asymmetric information by allowing investments in setup cost
reduction. Duan et al. (2012) examined the coordination scheme that allows the
buyer to delay the payment in compensation for altering the order size in a single-
vendor, single-buyer supply chain system for ﬁxed lifetime products.
Differing from papers on supply chain coordination using EOQ models, in this
paper, we examine a manufacturer Stackelberg supply chain in which the manu-
facturer should decide the shipment fees to the retailer and the retailer should
decide the optimal ordering quantity using an EOQ model which takes these
shipment fees into consideration. We propose a contract offered by the manu-
facturer which consists of a discount shipment fee per delivery and a shipment fee
per unit that can achieve supply chain coordination and ensure both the retailer and
the manufacturer to be more proﬁtable. We identify conditions under which such a
contract can coordinate the supply chain and give the retailer incentives to accept
it. This paper contributes the literature by proposing a new scheme using manu-
facturer’s shipment fees to coordinate the supply chain and ensure both the
manufacturer and the retailer beneﬁt.
Coordinating a Supply Chain
203

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We present the research frame-
work in Sect. 2. Models, conditions that can coordinate the supply chain through a
discount shipment fee per delivery, and conditions which result in a win–win sit-
uation for both the manufacturer and the retailer will be discussed in Sect. 3. In
Sect. 4, we discuss situations in which the coordination conditions do not hold.
Numerical examples that illustrate our results and insights are given in Sect. 5.
Section 6 gives conclusions. Proofs are provided in the Appendix.
2 Framework
We consider a problem in a supply chain in which a manufacturer supplies a
product to a retailer. We use the subscripts M and R to denote the manufacturer
and the retailer, respectively. After the manufacturer produces the products, he
delivers them to the retailer. The manufacturer is the Stackelberg leader and makes
decision on its shipment charges (CR, ct) to its retailer, where CR is the fee per
delivery (for the cost, such as the payment to the driver) and ct is the cost per unit
of product that is shipped to the retailer. Although for many major manufacturers,
the transportation cost is a sunk cost, either because they have their own ﬂeet or
due to their long-term package contract with their third party transportation pro-
vider, this paper shows that the manufacturer can still leverage the shipment fees it
charges to the retailer to coordinate the supply chain and eventually beneﬁt itself
and the retailer under certain conditions. The retailer, as the supply chain follower,
determines the order quantity (Q). The ordering cost is sR per order for the retailer.
The manufacturer ﬁrst produces the products and then delivers the order
amount to the retailer. The manufacturer’s production rate is pM units per year and
set-up cost per production run is sM. Since shortages are not allowed in this model,
we assume that the manufacturer has sufﬁcient production capacity to ensure
annual production rate pM C D, where D is the retailer’s annual demand. The
holding costs are hM and hR per unit annually at the manufacturer and the retailer,
respectively. We also assume that the manufacturer’s production cost per unit is
c and wholesale price per unit is w. The retailer sells the products at the price of
p to the end customers.
In a traditional EOQ model, the retailer decides his ordering quantity based on
its holding and ordering cost. In this paper, we consider the problem in the supply
chain setting and focus on how the supply chain coordination scheme can enhance
the supply chain efﬁciency. For simplicity, we assume that the manufacturer’s
production cycle is the same as the retailer’s ordering cycle. The paper takes into
consideration a number of special cases, such as a case in which the manufac-
turer’s holding cost is expensive as compared to his other costs, or that the retailer
requires a slight change order by order. This assumption can be relaxed without
altering our basic conclusions on the issues of supply chain coordination.
204
J. Chen and G. Mushaluk

The following assumptions are used in this paper: (i) all parameters in the
model are deterministic; (ii) the cost structure for the retailer (sR and hR) is known
by the manufacturer; (iii) replenishment at the retailer is instantaneous.
3 Models
The retailer’s total cost consists of ordering cost, holding cost, shipment cost that it
pays to the manufacturer, and purchasing cost. The retailer’s revenue comes from
selling the products to the customers. Let Q
R and Q
M be the proﬁts of the retailer
and the manufacturer, respectively. The retailer’s proﬁt function is:
Y
R ¼ ðp  wÞD  ðsR þ CRÞD
Q
 hR
2 Q  ctD:
ð1Þ
The total cost of the manufacturer consists of set-up cost per run, holding cost if
the retailer’s ordering quantity is lower than the run size and production cost. The
manufacturer can collect the revenue from selling the products and charging
shipment fees (per delivery and per unit shipped) to the retailer. Thus, the man-
ufacturer’s proﬁt function is:
Y
M ¼ ðw  cÞD  sMD
Q  hM
2 Q 
Q
D  Q
pM


hMD þ CRD
Q
þ ctD:
ð2Þ
We ﬁrst discuss the decisions in a decentralized supply chain and then examine
under what conditions the manufacturer can set the optimal shipment fee per
delivery (CR). Then we discuss how the supply chain can achieve the coordination
using CR in a contract by the manufacturer and under what conditions a contract
consisting of CR and ct can enhance proﬁts of the manufacturer and the retailer, as
well as motivate the retailer to accept the contract. We also discuss the case if the
manufacturer cannot set an optimal shipment fee per delivery (CR) in a decen-
tralized supply chain, how the manufacturer can incentivize the retailer so that the
supply chain can achieve coordination and both of them are more proﬁtable.
3.1 Decentralized Supply Chain Decision
In a decentralized supply chain, the retailer determines the ordering quantity (Q) to
maximize its proﬁt function in (1) by anticipating manufacturer’s shipment fee per
delivery (CR). The manufacturer anticipates the retailer’s interaction in order
quantity (Q) and decides CR. After the manufacturer announces CR, the retailer
decides Q.
From (1), we have the following result:
Coordinating a Supply Chain
205

Proposition 1 For a given CR, there exists a unique optimal order quantity for the
retailer (Q*), which is given by:
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðsR þ CRÞD
2hR
s
:
ð3Þ
Equation (3) implies that the optimal order quantity (Q*) increases with the
shipment fee per delivery (CR) and is independent of the shipment fee per unit (ct).
This suggests that when the retailer decides the order quantity based on its own
interests, besides considering its own cost structure, it also needs to be aware of CR
instead of the shipment fee per unit (ct).
With the order quantity Q* in (3), the manufacturer maximizes his proﬁt in (2)
by determining CR. Taking the partial derivative of (2) w.r.t. CR:
o Q
M
oCR
¼
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
D2hR ðsM þ 2sR þ CRÞhRpM  hMðsR þ CRÞð3pM  2DÞ
ð
Þ
4pMðhRDðsR þ CRÞÞ3=2
:
ð4Þ
With (4), we can show the following result:
Proposition 2 If hR
hM \3  2D
pM \ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
, there exists a unique positive optimal
shipment fee per order ( C
R) which is given by:
C
R ¼ ðhRsM  3sRhM þ 2hRsRÞpM þ 2hMsRD
ð3hM  hRÞpM  2hMD
:
ð5Þ
Proposition 2 shows that if hR
hM \3  2D
pM \ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
, the manufacturer can set a
positive optimal shipment fee per order. If hR
hM \3  2D
pM \ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
does not hold,
the manufacturer cannot have an optimal C
R. We will discuss this case in Sect. 4.
After the manufacturer announces C
R, the retailer makes the decision on Q*.
Using (3), we have:
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðsM þ sRÞpMD
ð3hM  hRÞpM  2hMD
s
:
ð6Þ
From (6) we see that a positive Q* requires 3  2D
pM  hR
hM.
oQ
oD ¼
ð3hMhRÞðsMþsRÞp2
M
½ð3hMhRÞpM2hMD
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2½ð3hMhRÞpM2hMDðsMþsRÞDpM
p
[ 0,
implies
that
Q*
increases with annual demand (D).
We now examine the decisions of the centralized supply chain. We will show
how the manufacturer can use shipment fees (ct, CR) to incentivize the retailer to
order the amount of products that can maximize the supply chain’s proﬁt through a
contract between them so that both manufacturer and the retailer can gain more
proﬁt.
206
J. Chen and G. Mushaluk

3.2 Centralized Supply Chain Decision
In a centralize supply chain, the retailer and the manufacturer collaborate to ﬁnd an
order quantity that maximizes chain-wide proﬁt (Q). Let QI be this order quantity.
With (1) and (2), the supply chain’s proﬁt (Q) is:
Y
¼ ðp  cÞD  sMD
QI
 hM
2 QI 
QI
D  QI
pM


hMD  sRD
QI
 hR
2 QI:
ð7Þ
With (7), we have the following result:
Proposition 3 There exists a unique optimal order quantity ( Q
I ) that can max-
imize the supply chain proﬁt, which is given by:
Q
I ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðsM þ sRÞDpM
ð3hM þ hRÞpM  2hMD
s
:
ð8Þ
Since pM C D, from Eq. (8), we have Q
I ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðsMþsRÞDpM
ð3hMþhRÞpM2hMD
q

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðsMþsRÞD
ð3hMþhRÞ2hM
q
and Q
I ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðsMþsRÞDpM
ð3hMþhRÞpM2hMD
q

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðsMþsRÞpM
ð3hMþhRÞ2hM
q
, i.e., optimal order quantity (Q
I ) is
bounded by
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðsMþsRÞD
ð3hMþhRÞ2hM
q
 Q
I 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðsMþsRÞpM
ð3hMþhRÞ2hM
q
. Also, from Eq. (8), we have:
oQ
I
oD ¼
ð3hMþhRÞðsMþsRÞp2
M
½ð3hMþhRÞpM2hMD
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2½ð3hMþhRÞpM2hMDðsMþsRÞDpM
p
[ 0, implying that Q
I increa-
ses with annual demand (D). Comparing (6) to (8), we can see that the optimal
ordering quantity (Q*) in the decentralized supply chain is higher than the optimal
ordering quantity (Q
I ) in the centralized supply chain.
From Eqs. (3) and (8), we see that the manufacturer can set a discount CR to
have Q ¼ Q
I . We denote this discount CR as Cd
R. We have the following result:
Proposition 4 If 3  2D
pM  hR
hM
sM
sR, the manufacturer can set a discount Cd
R so that
the retailer can order Q
I and the supply chain can achieve the coordination,
where Cd
R is given by:
Cd
R ¼ ðhRsM  3sRhMÞpM þ 2hMsRD
ð3hM þ hRÞpM  2hMD
;
ð9Þ
where Cd
R\C
R in (5) for hR [ 0.
Proposition 4 shows that if the product of ratio hR
hM and sM
sR is sufﬁciently high
(  3  2D
pM), the manufacturer can set a discount shipment fee per order (Cd
R) which
incentivizes the retailer to order the amount of products at Q
I . From the proof of
Proposition 3, we have:
Coordinating a Supply Chain
207

Corollary 1 If 3  2D
pM [ hR
hM
sM
sR, the supply chain cannot be coordinated using a
discount Cd
R.
We now discuss how the manufacturer should incent the retailer to order the
amount (Q
I ) that can maximize chain-wide proﬁt and ensure both are more
proﬁtable.
3.3 Coordinating the Supply Chain Through a (ct
d, CR
d)
Contract
Proposition 4 shows that a discount Cd
R contract can induce the retailer to order
QI. We now discuss a contract (cd
t , Cd
R, Q
I ) which consists of a new unit shipment
cost (cd
t ) and a discount Cd
R [given in Eq. (9)] that can enhance the retailer’s proﬁt
and ensure the retailer to accept this contract. With the discount Cd
R in (9) and Q
I
in (8), the retailer’s proﬁt and the manufacturer’s proﬁt in (1) and (2) become:
Y
R cd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I


¼ ðp  wÞD  ðsR þ Cd
RÞD
Q
I
 hR
2 Q
I  cd
t D
and
ð10Þ
Y
M cd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I


¼ ðw  cÞD  sMD
QI  hM
2 Q
I 
Q
I
D  Q
I
pM


hMD þ Cd
RD
Q
I
þ cd
t D:
ð11Þ
With (1) and (10), we have when:
cd
t \ct ¼ hRðQ  Q
I Þ
2D
 sRðQ  Q
I Þ  Cd
RQ þ C
RQ
I
QQ
I
þ ct
ð12Þ
Q
Rðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ [ Q
Rðct; C
R; QÞ, where Q, C
R, Q
I , and Cd
R are given in (5), (6),
(8), and (9), respectively.
From (12), we see that when hRðQQ
I Þ
2D
[ sRðQQ
I ÞCd
RQþC
RQ
I
QQ
I
, i.e., the annual
holding cost difference for the retailer between the order size of Q and Q
I is
sufﬁciently high ( [ sRðQQ
I ÞCd
RQþC
RQ
I
QQ
I
), the manufacturer can set a cd
t that is
higher than ct in a contract (cd
t , Cd
R) to ensure the retailer enhanced proﬁtability
under this contract. However, when hRðQQ
I Þ
2D
\ sRðQQ
I ÞCd
RQþC
RQ
I
QQ
I
, the manu-
facturer should give the retailer a further discount in unit shipment cost (ct) to
incent the retailer to order Q
I rather than Q. This raises a cautionary note for the
management of the manufacturer. It should carefully examine whether hRðQQ
I Þ
2D
is
higher or lower than sRðQQ
I ÞCd
RQþC
RQ
I
QQ
I
before it makes the decision on unit
shipment cost (cd
t ) to achieve supply chain coordination.
208
J. Chen and G. Mushaluk

When the manufacturer offers a contract (cd
t , Cd
R, Q
I ), with (2) and (11), we
have
cd
t [ ct ¼ sMðQ  Q
I Þ þ C
RQ
I  Cd
RQ
QQ
I
 hMðQ  Q
I Þð3pM  2DÞ
2DpM
þ ct; ð13Þ
Q
Mðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ [ Q
Mðct; CR; QÞ, where Q, C
R, Q
I , and Cd
R are given in (5),
(6), (8), and (9), respectively.
From (13), we see that when
hMðQQ
I Þð3pM2DÞ
2DpM
\ sMðQQ
I ÞþC
RQ
I Cd
RQ
QQ
I
, the
manufacturer’s annual holding cost difference between the order size of Q and Q
I
is sufﬁciently low, the manufacturer can set a cd
t that is higher than ct in a contract
(cd
t , Cd
R, Q
I ) to ensure a proﬁtability gain under this contract. However, when
hMðQQ
I Þð3pM2DÞ
2DpM
[ sMðQQ
I ÞþC
RQ
I Cd
RQ
QQ
I
, the manufacturer should give the retailer
further discount in unit shipment cost (ct) to squeeze more proﬁt under this
contract.
From the above analysis, we see that when ct\ct and cd
t [ ct, both the retailer
and the manufacturer can earn more proﬁt under the contract (cd
t , Cd
R, Q
I ). From
(12) and (13), we see that ct\ct requires
3  2D
pM
[ 2DðsR þ sMÞ
hMQQ
I
 hR
hM
:
ð14Þ
Note that the condition in (14) only depends on parameters of the manufacturer
and the retailer.
With Propositions 4 and (14), we summarize our above discussion in the fol-
lowing result:
Proposition 5 If 3  2D
pM  hR
hM
sM
sR, the manufacturer can offer a contract that con-
sists of a discount shipment cost per delivery ( Cd
R), such that the supply chain can
be coordinated (Q ¼ Q
I ). Further, a contract ( cd
t , Cd
R, Q
I ) that consists of unit
shipment fee ( cd
t ) and a discount shipment fee per delivery ( Cd
R) can ensure that
both the retailer and the manufacturer are more proﬁtable if only if 3  2D
pM [
2DðsRþsMÞ
hMQQI  hR
hM and ct\cd
t \ct, where Q, C
R, Q
I , Cd
R, ct, and ct are given by (5),
(6), (8), (9), (12), and (13), respectively.
From Proposition 4 and (14), hR
hM
sM
sR [ 2DðsRþsMÞ
hMQQI  hR
hM requires:
D\ hRQ
QI
2sR
:
ð15Þ
Propositions 4 and 5, and (15) result in:
Proposition 6 When 2DðsRþsMÞ
hMQQI  hR
hM \3  2D
pM  hR
hM
sM
sR, a contract ( cd
t , Cd
R, Q
I ) can
ensure that both the retailer and the manufacturer are more proﬁtable.
Coordinating a Supply Chain
209

However, if cd
t [ ct [ ct, i.e., 3  2D
pM \ 2DðsRþsMÞ
hMQQI  hR
hM, the supply chain coor-
dination cannot beneﬁt the retailer, but can beneﬁt the manufacturer. If
Q
Mðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ þ Q
Rðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ [ Q
Mðct; C
R; QÞ þ Q
Rðct; C
R; QÞ, the man-
ufacturer should consider a side proﬁt sharing contract (cd
t , Cd
R, b) which would
share the extra proﬁt that is gained from setting cd
t and Cd
R between the retailer and
himself, such that ð1  bÞ Q
Mðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ þ Q
Rðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ


[ Q
Rðct; C
R; QÞ,
where b is the proﬁt share of the manufacturer and ð1  bÞ is the proﬁt share of the
retailer.
The above analysis illustrates that when the retailer uses the EOQ model to
determine an order quantity, the manufacturer can offer a discount shipment fee
per delivery (Cd
R) to coordinate the supply chain to enhance chain-wide proﬁt. The
manufacturer also can offer a contract (cd
t , Cd
R, Q
I ) to enhance proﬁt for both
parties by setting ct\cd
t \ct if 2DðsRþsMÞ
hMQQI  hR
hM \3  2D
pM  hR
hM
sM
sR.
4 Discussion for Some Cases
We note that in Proposition 2, if the condition hR
hM \3  2D
pM \ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
does not
hold, the manufacturer cannot have an optimal positive shipment fee per order
(C
R) in (5). In addition, Proposition 4 shows that only when 3  2D
pM  hR
hM
sM
sR, the
manufacturer can set a discount Cd
R for the retailer to coordinate the supply chain.
Now we discuss situations in which these conditions do not hold. There are two
cases: sM=sR [ 1, i.e., the manufacturer’s set-up cost per production run is higher
than the retailer’s ordering cost per order, and sM=sR\1. We illustrate the con-
ditions of 3  2D=pM for the optimal C
R in the decentralized supply chain and the
condition for the discount Cd
R in the coordinated supply chain for cases sM=sR [ 1
and sM=sR\1 in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively.
From Figs. 1 and 2, we see that both have four ranges for 3  2D=pM. We now
discuss the supply chain decisions for these ranges for two cases.
R
M
h
h
R
M
R
M
R
h
s(
2
)
s
h
s
+
R
M
M
R
h
s
h
s
*
R
C
d
R
C
I
II
III
IV
Fig. 1 The condition of 3 
2D=pM for CR and Cd
R when
sM=sR [ 1
210
J. Chen and G. Mushaluk

4.1 Case I: When sM
sR [ 1
4.1.1 Range I: If 3  2D
pM \ hR
hM
This is the case of Range I in Fig. 1, implying that the demand level D is sufﬁ-
ciently high. From (4), we see that
oQ
M
oCR [ 0, suggesting that a higher CR can
enhance the manufacturer’s proﬁt and the manufacturer cannot set an optimal C
R
in a decentralized supply chain. Equation (3) also shows that the retailer’s optimal
order quantity increases with CR since the retailer can reduce its annual trans-
portation cost by ordering more products per manufacturer’s delivery. In this case,
let us assume that the manufacturer sets a CR based on the marketing price. Then,
in a decentralized supply chain, the retailer can set the optimal order quantity using
(3). From Proposition 4, we see that the manufacturer can coordinate the supply
chain by setting a Cd
R using (9). A Cd
R contract should induce the retailer to order
Q
I . We now discuss a contract (ctt, Cd
R) which consists of a unit transportation cost
(ctt) and a Cd
R that can enhance the retailer’s proﬁt and ensure the retailer will
accept this contract. Replacing cd
t with ctt in (10) and comparing it to (1), we have
when:
ctt\ctt ¼ hRðQ  Q
I Þ
2D
 sRðQ  Q
I Þ þ Cd
RQ  CRQ
I
QQ
I
þ ct;
ð16Þ
Q
Rðctt; Cd
R; Q
I Þ [ Q
Rðct; CR; QÞ, where Q, Q
I , and Cd
R are given in (3), (5),
and (9), respectively.
Replacing cd
t with ctt in (11) and comparing it to (2), we have when:
ctt [ ctt ¼ sMðQ  Q
I Þ þ CRQ
I  Cd
RQ
QQ
I
 hMðQ  Q
I Þð3pM  2DÞ
2DpM
þ ct; ð17Þ
Q
Mðctt; Cd
R; Q
I Þ [ Q
Mðct; CR; QÞ, where Q, Q
I , and Cd
R are given in (3), (5),
and (9), respectively.
From the above analysis, we see that when ctt\ctt\ctt, both the retailer and the
manufacturer can earn more proﬁt under the contract (ctt, Cd
R). ctt\ctt requires
R
M
h
h
(
2
)
R
M
R
M
R
h
s
s
h
s
+
R
M
M
R
h
s
h
s
*
R
C
d
R
C
I
III
II
IV
Fig. 2 The condition of 3 
2D=pM for CR and Cd
R when
sM=sR\1
Coordinating a Supply Chain
211

3  2D
pM
[ 2D½ðsR  sMÞðQ  Q
I Þ þ 2Cd
RQ  2CRQ
I 
hMQQ
I ðQ  Q
I Þ
 hR
hM
:
ð18Þ
We summarize our above discussion in the following result:
Proposition 7 If 3  2D
pM \ hR
hM, the manufacturer can offer a contract with Cd
R, such
that the supply chain can be coordinated ( Q ¼ Q
I ). Further, a contract ( ctt, Cd
R)
that consists of a unit shipment cost ( ctt) and a shipment cost per shipment ( Cd
R)
can ensure that both the retailer and the manufacturer gain more proﬁts only if
3  2D
pM satisﬁes the condition given in (18).
However, if ctt [ ctt [ ctt, i.e., 3  2D
pM \ 2D½ðsRsMÞðQQ
I Þþ2Cd
RQ2CRQ
I 
hMQQ
I ðQQ
I Þ
 hR
hM, the
supply chain coordination cannot beneﬁt the retailer, but can beneﬁt the manu-
facturer.
If
Q
Mðctt; Cd
R; Q
I Þ þ Q
Rðctt; Cd
R; Q
I Þ [ Q
Mðct; CR; QÞ þ Q
R
ðct; CR; QÞ, the manufacturer should consider a proﬁt sharing contract (ctt, Cd
R, b)
to share the extra proﬁt gained from setting ctt and Cd
R with the retailer to coor-
dinate the supply chain, such that ð1  bÞ Q
Mðctt; Cd
R; Q
I Þ þ Q
Rðctt; Cd
R; Q
I Þ


[
Q
Rðct; CR; QÞ, where b is the proﬁt share of the manufacturer and ð1  bÞ is the
proﬁt share of the retailer.
4.1.2 Range II: hR
hM \3  2D
pM  hR
hM
sM
sR
This is the case of Range II in Fig. 1, suggesting that the demand level D is
moderately high. We have discussed this case in detail in Sect. 3.3.
4.1.3 Range III: hR
hM
sM
sR \3  2D
pM \ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
This is the case of Range III in Fig. 1, implying that the demand level D is
moderately low. From Propositions 4 and 2, we can conclude that the manufacturer
cannot coordinate the supply through setting a discount shipment fee Cd
R. Both the
manufacturer and the retailer can operate in a decentralized supply chain.
The manufacturer can ﬁrst announce its optimal decision C
R using Eq. (5). Then
the retailer determines the optimal order quantity Q* that is given in (6).
4.1.4 Range IV: 3  2D
pM [ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
This is the case of Range IV in Fig. 1, implying that the demand level D is suf-
ﬁciently low. From (4) we see that
oQ
M
oCR \0 suggesting that a lower CR can
enhance the manufacturer’s proﬁt and discourage the retailer to order more
212
J. Chen and G. Mushaluk

products (Eq. (3)). The manufacturer also cannot set an optimal CR in a decen-
tralized supply chain. Proposition 4 also shows that the manufacturer cannot
coordinate the supply chain through setting the shipment fee Cd
R. The manufacturer
needs to coordinate the supply chain using other mechanisms.
4.2 Case II: When sM
sR \1
4.2.1 Range I: If 3  2D
pM  hR
hM
sM
sR
This is the case of Range I in Fig. 2, implying that the demand level D is sufﬁ-
ciently high. It is the case in which the manufacturer can use a discount shipment
fee per delivery (Cd
R) to coordinate the supply chain, but cannot set an optimal C
R
in a decentralized supply chain. The discussion for this range is similar to that of in
Range I for the case when sM
sR [ 1.
4.2.2 Range II: hR
hM
sM
sR \3  2D
pM \ hR
hM
This is the case of Range II in Fig. 2, suggesting that the demand level D is
moderately high. In this range, the manufacturer cannot either use a discount
shipment fee per delivery (Cd
R) to coordinate the supply chain, no set an optimal C
R
in a decentralized supply chain. Since, in this paper, we focus on supply chain
coordination, we will not discuss this case further.
4.3 Range III: hR
hM \3  2D
pM \ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
This is the case of Range III in Fig. 2, implying that the demand level D is
moderately low. Discussion for this range is similar to the discussion of Range III
for the case when sM
sR [ 1.
4.3.1 Range IV: 3  2D
pM [ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
This is the case of Range IV in Fig. 2, implying that the demand level D is suf-
ﬁciently low. Discussion for this range is similar to the discussion of Range IV for
the case when sM
sR [ 1.
The discussion in this section suggests that when the manufacturer makes a
decision on whether or not to offer a contract to its retailer, it should ﬁrst carefully
Coordinating a Supply Chain
213

examine the ratio of sM
sR, and then carefully examine the value of 3  2D
pM and the
relationship between 3  2D
pMand other costs hR, hM, sM, and sR.
5 Numerical Examples
In this section, we will illustrate our major results discussed above using numerical
examples. We set hR ¼ 6; hM ¼ 5; sR ¼ 100; sM ¼ 200, and pM ¼ 5000 (the case
sM
sR [ 1),
which
gives
hR
hM ¼ 1:2,
hR
hM
sM
sR ¼ 2:4,
hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
¼ 4:8,
and
3 
2D
pM \ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
for any D. We see that when 4500 \ D \ 5000, then 3  2D
pM \ hR
hM,
which is the Case I we discussed in Sect. 4.1.1. Also when 1500 B D \ 4500,
then hR
hM \3  2D
pM  hR
hM
sM
sR, which is the Case II we discussed in Sect. 3.3. In addi-
tion, when D \ 1500, then hR
hM
sM
sR \3  2D
pM \ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
, which is the Case III we
discussed in Sect. 4.1.3. We also set p = 10, w = 10, c = 4 and ct = 1.
In the following numerical examples, we will focus the Case II discussed in
Sect. 3.3, i.e., 1500 \ D \ 4500 resulting in hR
hM \3  2D
pM  hR
hM
sM
sR.
The changes of Q, C
R, Q
I , and Cd
R with the demand level D are illustrated in
Table 1. Table 1 shows that as annual demand (D) increases, Q, C
R, Q
I , and Cd
R
increase. The manufacturer can use the shipment fee per delivery that is collected
from the retailer to coordinate the supply chain and enhance the supply chain
efﬁciency.
When D = 1500, we have Q
Mðct; C
R; QÞ ¼ 8176:3 and Q
Rðct; C
R; QÞ ¼
3676:2
while
Q
Mðct; C
R; QÞ ¼ 18676
and
Q
Rðct; C
R; QÞ ¼ 7352:3
when
D = 3000. Tables 2 and 3 show that the percent of enhancement in proﬁts of the
retailer and the manufacturer under a contract ðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þfor different cd
t , when
D = 1500 and D = 3000, respectively.
Tables 1 and 2 show that under a contract ðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ, the manufacturer sets
Cd
R= 0 (free shipping per delivery for D = 1500 comparing to C
R= 200) to
coordinate the supply chain. At the same time, the manufacturer charges a higher
Table 1 The change of Q, C
R, Q
I , Cd
R, and proﬁts of both decentralized and centralized supply
chain with demand level D
D
Q^{*}
C
R
Q
I
Cd
R
Supply chain proﬁt
(decentralized)
Supply chain proﬁt
(centralized)
1500
387.3
200
223.6
0.00
11852.5
12475.1
2000
489.9
260
265.7
5.88
16611.6
17483.9
2500
612.4
350
306.2
12.50
21376.8
22601.6
3000
774.6
500
346.4
20.00
26028.4
27803.7
3500
1024.7
800
387.3
28.57
30302.8
33078.0
4000
1549.2
1700
429.7
38.46
33165.8
38414.0
214
J. Chen and G. Mushaluk

shipment fee per unit (cd
t [ ct ¼ 1) so that both the retailer and the manufacturer
can gain more proﬁts.
Tables 1 and 3 show that under a contract ðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ, the manufacturer gives
the retailer a signiﬁcant discount in shipment fee per delivery (Cd
R= 20 comparing
to C
R= 200 for D = 3000) to encourage the retailer to order Q
I such that the
supply chain can achieve coordination. At the same time, the manufacturer charges
a slightly higher shipment fee per unit (cd
t [ ct ¼ 1) so that both the retailer and
the manufacturer can gain more proﬁts. Comparing Tables 2 and 3, we see that as
the retailer’s demand increases, contract ðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ can signiﬁcantly improve the
proﬁtability of both the retailer and the manufacturer, which motivates the man-
ufacturer to offer such a contract while incenting the retailer to accept the contract.
Figure 3 shows that the boundaries of cd
t (ct and ct) change with D in the
contract ðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ that can achieve the supply chain coordination and enhance
both proﬁts of the retailer and the manufacturer.
Figure 3 shows that as demand increases, the ranges of cd
t that can enhance both
proﬁts of the retailer and the manufacturer increase.
Table 2 The percent of enhancement in proﬁts of the retailer and the manufacturer under a
contract ðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þfor different cd
t when D = 1500
cd
t
Q
Rðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ
Q
Mðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ
% enhancement in the
retailer’s proﬁt (%)
% enhancement in the
manufacturer’s proﬁt (%)
1.24
4298.8
8176.3
16.94
0.00
1.30
4208.4
8266.7
14.48
1.11
1.40
4058.4
8416.7
10.40
2.94
1.50
3908.4
8566.7
6.32
4.78
1.60
3758.4
8716.7
2.24
6.61
1.65
3676.2
8798.9
0.00
7.62
Table 3 The percent of enhancement in proﬁts of the retailer and the manufacturer under a
contract ðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þfor different cd
t when D = 3000
cd
t
Q
Rðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ
Q
Mðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ
% enhancement in the
retailer’s proﬁt (%)
% enhancement in the
manufacturer’s proﬁt (%)
1.26
9127.7
18676
24.15
0.00
1.30
9021.5
18782
22.70
0.57
1.40
8721.5
19082
18.62
2.17
1.50
8421.5
19382
14.54
3.78
1.60
8121.5
19682
10.46
5.39
1.70
7821.5
19982
6.38
6.99
1.80
7521.5
20282
2.30
8.60
1.86
7352.4
20452
0.00
9.51
Coordinating a Supply Chain
215

6 Conclusion
This research provides new insights for the retailer using the EOQ model to
determine the optimal order quantity. We propose a coordination mechanism for
the manufacturer who is the Stackelberg leader to coordinate the supply chain
through offering a discount shipment fee per delivery that is collected from its
retailer. We show that under certain circumstances, such a coordination mecha-
nism through a contract between the manufacturer and the retailer can enable both
to gain more proﬁt.
In this paper, we show that based on the cost structure of both the manufacturer
and retailer, as well as the production rate per year at the manufacturer, if the
manufacturer knows the retailer’s demand information, the manufacturer can
justify whether or not to offer a contract ðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ to the retailer to incent the
retailer to order Q
I and, at the same time, enhance proﬁtability for both parties. To
know the demand information of the retailer, the manufacturer must maintain a
good relationship with its retailer.
Our work shows the managers of the practitioners that they can easily deter-
mine whether or not a coordination contract could work for their supply chain by
simply checking the coordination conditions presented in this paper. It also shows
that supply chain coordination can enhance the proﬁtability of both the manu-
facturer and the retailer if the coordination contract is well designed (the shipment
fee per unit is set between the upper bound and lower bound given in this paper).
The results obtained in this paper are helpful in structuring supply chain contracts
involving shipment fees set by the manufacturer and the retailer’s optimal order
quantity.
The research also discusses the case in which a manufacturer cannot have an
optimal C
Rin a decentralized supply chain and how the manufacturer can enhance
the proﬁts of both himself and the retailer. As discussed in Sect. 4.2.2, when the
demand level D is moderately high, the manufacturer cannot use a discount
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
D
tc
tc
 and 
t
t
c
c
Fig. 3 ct and ct change with
D in the contract ðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ
216
J. Chen and G. Mushaluk

shipment fee per delivery (Cd
R) to coordinate the supply chain, nor set an optimal
C
R in a decentralized supply chain. The direct extension of this study is to
investigate other mechanisms (or contracts) that the manufacturer can use to
coordinate the supply chain and incent the retailer to accept the contracts. In this
paper we assume that the manufacturer, as a Stackelberg leader, knows the
retailer’s demand information as well as cost information (holding cost and
ordering cost). But if one or some of the retailer’s private information is not
perfectly known by the manufacturer, it would be interesting to examine under
which conditions the retailer would like to share this information with the man-
ufacturer, how the manufacturer should incent the retailer to share this informa-
tion, and how to design mechanisms to achieve supply chain coordination. This
paper examines the coordination of a supply chain that consists of a manufacturer
and a retailer. The present research could also be extended to consider how to
design coordination contracts when the manufacturer supplies the products to
multiple retailers who compete on retail price. A careful examination of whether
the results and insights of this paper would still hold in a competitive environment
might be very interesting and useful.
This research shows that the contract ðcd
t ; Cd
R; Q
I Þ can be a proﬁt maximizing
and coordinating contract under certain circumstances and highlights that need for
the manufacturer to further investigate these conditions before offering the
contract.
Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge two anonymous referees whose com-
ments improved this paper, and ﬁnancial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada.
Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1 For a given CR, taking partial derivatives of (1) w.r.t. Q:
o
Y
R
.
oQ ¼ ðsR þ CRÞD
	
Q2  hR=2
and
ðA1Þ
o2 Q
R
	
oQ2 ¼ 2ðsR þ CRÞD
	
Q3\0: Therefore, there exists a unique optimal
ordering quantity for the retailer, which is given by setting o Q
R
	
oQ ¼ 0.
Proof of Proposition 2 With Q* in (3), taking partial derivatives of (2) w.r.t. CR:
Coordinating a Supply Chain
217

o Q
M
oCR
¼
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
D2hR ðsM þ 2sR þ CRÞhRpM  hMðsR þ CRÞð3pM  2DÞ
ð
Þ
4pMðhRDðsR þ CRÞÞ3=2
ðA2Þ
o2 Q
M
oC2
R
¼ 
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
hMð3pM  2DÞðsR þ CRÞ þ hRpMð3sM þ 4sR þ CRÞ
½
h2
RD3
8pMðhRDðsR þ CRÞÞ5=2
:
ðA3Þ
o Q
M
	
oCR ¼ 0 gives
C
R ¼ ðhRsM  3sRhM þ 2hRsRÞpM þ 2hMsRD
ð3hM  hRÞpM  2hMD
:
ðA4Þ
With (A4), we see that o2 Q
M
	
oC2
R


CR¼C
R\0, suggesting that there exists a
unique optimal ordering quantity for the retailer, which is given by (A3). Also, a
positive CR requires hR
hM \3  2D
pM \ hR
hM
ðsMþ2sRÞ
sR
.
Proof of Proposition 3 Taking partial derivatives of (7) w.r.t. QI:
o
Y.
oQI ¼ ðsR þ sMÞD
	
Q2  hR=2  3hM=2 þ hMD=pM
and
ðA5Þ
o2 Q	
oQ2
I ¼ 2ðsR þ sMÞD
	
Q3
I \0:
Therefore, there exists a unique optimal ordering quantity for the supply chain,
which is given by setting o Q=oQI ¼ 0.
Proof of Proposition 4 Comparing Eqs. (3) to (8), we have that the manufacturer
can set a discount in CR so that Q ¼ Q
I , where Cd
R ¼ ðhRsM3sRhMÞpMþ2hMsRD
ð3hMþhRÞpM2hMD
. A
nonnegative Cd
R requires hR
hM
sM
sR  3  2D
pM. Comparing (9) to (5), it is obvious that
Cd
R\C
R for hR [ 0.
References
Ai, X., Chen, J., Zhao, H., Tang, X. (2012), ‘‘Competition among supply chains: Implications of
full returns policy’’, International Journal of Production Economics 139, 257–265.
Benkherouf, L. (1995), ‘‘On an inventory model with deteriorating items and decreasing time-
varying demand and shortages’’, European Journal of Operational Research 86, 293–299.
Cachon, G. P., Lariviere, M. A. (2005), ‘‘Supply chain coordination with revenue sharing
contracts: strengths and limitations’’, Management Science 51 (1), 30–44.
Chan., C.K., Lee, Y.C.E., (2012), ‘‘A co-ordination model combining incentive scheme and co-
ordination policy for a single-vendor–multi-buyer supply chain’’, International Journal of
Production Economics 135, 136–143.
Chen, F., Federgruen, A., Zheng, Y. (2001), ‘‘Coordination mechanisms for a distribution System
with one supplier and multiple retailers’’, Management Science, 47, 693–708.
218
J. Chen and G. Mushaluk

Chen, J. (2011), ‘‘Returns with wholesale-price-discount contract in a newsvendor problem’’,
International Journal of Production Economics 130, 104–111.
Chen, J., Chen, T. (2005), ‘‘The multi-item replenishment problem in a two-echelon supply chain:
the effect of centralization versus decentralization’’, Computers & Operations Research 32,
3191–3207.
Chang, H.-J., Dye, C.-Y. (1999), ‘‘An EOQ model for deteriorating items with time varying
demand and partial backlogging’’, Journal of the Operational Research Society 50,
1176–1182.
Cheng, T.C.E. (1989), ‘‘An economic order quantity model with demand-dependent unit cost’’,
European Journal of Operational Research 40, 252–256.
Choi, T.M., Li, D., Yan, H. (2004), ‘‘Optimal returns policy for supply chain with e-
marketplace’’, International Journal of Production Economics 55 (2), 205–227.
Clark, AJ. (1972), ‘‘An informal survey of multi-echelon inventory theory’’, Naval Research
Logistics Quarterly 19, 621–650.
Duan, Y., Huo, J., Zhang, Y., Zhang, J. (2012), ‘‘Two level supply chain coordination with delay
in payments for ﬁxed lifetime products’’, Computers & Industrial Engineering 63, 456–463.
Giannoccaro, I., Pontrandolfo, P. (2009), ‘‘Negotiation of the revenue sharing contract: an agent-
based systems approach’’, International Journal of Production Economics 122, 558–566.
Hariga, M. Alyan, A. (1997), ‘‘A lot sizing heuristic for deteriorating items with shortages in
growing and declining markets’’, Computers & Operations Research 24, 1075–1083.
Khan, M., Jaber, M.Y. (2011), ‘‘Optimal inventory cycle in a two-stage supply chain
incorporating imperfect items from suppliers’’, International Journal of Operational Research
10 (4), 442–457.
Khan, M., Jaber, M.Y., Guiffrida, A.L., Zolfaghari, S. (2011), ‘‘A review of the extensions of a
modiﬁed EOQ model for imperfect quality items’’, International Journal of Production
Economics 132, 1–12.
Khanra, S., Chaudhuri, K.S. (2003), ‘‘A note on an ordered-level inventory model for a
deteriorating item with time-dependent quadratic demand’’, Computers and Operations
Research 30, 1901–1916.
Lee, C. H., Rhee, B. (2010), ‘‘Coordination contracts in the presence of positive inventory
ﬁnancing costs’’, International Journal of Production Economics 124, 331–339.
Lei, L., Wang, Q., Fan, C. (2006), ‘‘Optimal business policies for a supplier-transporter-buyer
channel with a price-sensitive demand’’, Journal of the Operational Research Society 57,
281–289.
Li, J., Liu, L. (2006), ‘‘Supply chain coordination with quantity discount policy’’, International
Journal of Production Economics 101, 89–98.
Liao, J–J., Chung, K-J. (2009), ‘‘An EOQ model for deterioration items under trade credit policy
in a supply chain system’’, Journal of the Operations Research Society of Japan 52, 46–57.
Mutlu, M., Cetinkaya, S. (2011), ‘‘Coordination in retailer-carrier channels for long term
planning’’, International Journal of Production Economics 133, 360–369.
Parlar, M., Weng, Z.K. (1997), ‘‘Designing a ﬁrm’s coordinated manufacturing and supply
decisions with short product life cycles’’, Management Science 43, 1329–1344.
Pasternack, B. A. (1985), ‘‘Optimal pricing and returns policies for perishable commodities’’,
Marketing Science 4, 166–176.
Pentico, D.W., Drake, M.J. (2011), ‘‘A survey of deterministic models for the EOQ and EPQ with
partial backordering’’, European Journal of Operational Research 214, 179–198.
Sana, S.S., Chaudhuri, K.S. (2008), ‘‘A deterministic EOQ model with delays in payments and
price-discount offers’’, European Journal of Operational Research 184, 509–533.
Salameh, M.K., Jaber, M.Y. (2000), ‘‘Economic production quantity model for items with
imperfect quality’’, International Journal of Production Economics 64, 59–64.
Taleizadeh, A.A., Pentico, D.W., Jabalameli, M. S., Aryanezhad, M. (2013a), ‘‘An economic
order quantity model with multiple partial prepayments and partial backordering’’,
Mathematical and Computer Modelling 57, 311–323.
Coordinating a Supply Chain
219

Taleizadeh, A.A., Pentico, D.W., Jabalameli, M. S., Aryanezhad, M. (2013b), ‘‘An EOQ model
with partial delayed payment and partial backordering’’, Omega 41, 354–368.
Teng, J-T, Yang, H-L., Ouyang, L-Y. (2003), ‘‘On an EOQ model for deteriorating items with
time-varying demand and partial backlogging’’, Journal of the Operational Research Society
54, 432–436.
Urgeletti Tinarelli, G. (1983), ‘‘Inventory control models and problems’’, European Journal of
Operational Research 14, 1–12.
Voigt, G., Inderfurth, K. (2011), ‘‘Supply chain coordination and setup cost reduction in case of
asymmetric information’’, OR Spectrum 33, 99–122.
Wahab, M.I.M., Mamuna, S.M.H., Ongkunaruk, P. (2011), ‘‘EOQ models for a coordinated two-
level international supply chain considering imperfect items and environmental impact’’,
International Journal of Production Economics 134, 151–158.
Wang, X., Liu, L. (2007), ‘‘Coordination in a retailer-led supply chain through option contract’’,
International Journal of Production Economics 110, 115–127.
Wee, H.M. (1995), ‘‘A deterministic lot size inventory model for deteriorating items with
shortages and a declining market’’, Computers and Operations Research 22, 345–356.
Weng, Z.K. (1995), ‘‘Channel coordination and quantity wiscounts’’, Management Science 41,
1509–1522.
Xia, Y., Chen, B., Kouvelis, P. (2008), ‘‘Market-based supply chain coordination by matching
suppliers’ cost structures with buyers’ order proﬁles’’, Management Science, 54 (11),
1861–1875.
220
J. Chen and G. Mushaluk

The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain
Design and Operation
Burcu B. Keskin and _Ibrahim Çapar
Abstract Supply chain design and operation problems are complicated in many
fronts due to intervened decision making. One of the main complications is related
to inventory decisions and costs. In many cases, considering inventory in the
overall supply chain domain introduces stochastic and nonlinear formulations.
Ignoring inventories, as in the traditional approach, results in inferior supply chain
designs and operations in terms of cost performance. Economic order quantity
(EOQ) models, with their simplicity, intuitive explanation, and clear implemen-
tation, aid in the resolution of these issues in a number of integrated supply chain
problem contexts. In this chapter, we summarize the role and utility of EOQ
models in these integrated supply chain design and operation problems. Speciﬁ-
cally, we consider the three pillars of supply chain management: location, trans-
portation, and inventory. We discuss how EOQ models ease the analysis of
integrated supply chain models under each pillar in detail including inventory-
location models, inventory-routing models, and multi-echelon inventory models.
1 Introduction
The supply chain (SC) encompasses all activities associated with the ﬂow and
transformation of goods from the raw material procurement stage to production,
from storage to distribution, from markets to end users for demand satisfaction.
Supply chain management (SCM) is the integration of these activities, through
B. B. Keskin (&)  _I. Çapar
Information Systems, Statistics, and Management Science, University of Alabama, BOX:
860227 Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0226, USA
e-mail: bkeskin@cba.ua.edu
_I. Çapar
e-mail: icapar@cba.ua.edu
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_11,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
221

improved supply chain relationships, to achieve a sustainable, competitive
advantage (Handﬁeld and Nichols 1999). SCM is a term that has emerged in recent
years that captures the essence of integrated logistics and even goes beyond it. It
emphasizes the logistics interactions that take place among the functions of pur-
chasing, production, logistics, and marketing within a ﬁrm and those interactions
that take place between separate ﬁrms within the product-ﬂow channel. Three
major problem areas of supply chain management include facility location,
inventory decisions, and transportation decisions. Although it is common to treat
them separately, these problem areas are interrelated and should be planned as a
unit (Ballou 2004). Each has an important impact on the system design, and
ultimately, on operating costs.
Inventories, in particular, are essential to supply chain management since it is
usually not possible or practical to provide instant production or ensure delivery
times to customers. Inventories serve as a buffer between supply and demand so
that needed product availability is maintained for customers while providing
ﬂexibility for production and distribution in seeking efﬁcient methods to manu-
facture and transport the product. Inventory decisions refer to the manner in which
inventories are managed. The particular inventory policy used by the ﬁrm affects
the facility location and transportation decisions, and, therefore, the policy should
be considered in overall logistics strategy. The economic order quantity (EOQ)
model is the simplest and most fundamental of all inventory models. It describes
the important trade-off between ﬁxed order costs and holding costs and it is the
basis for the analysis of more complex settings.
In this chapter, we review a number of recent research papers that use EOQ as a
tool to resolve complicated supply chain trade-offs. In particular, we examine the
integrated decision making within three areas of supply chain addressing location,
transportation, and other inventory decisions and demonstrate the utility of EOQ
models. In the remainder of this chapter, in Sect. 2, we discuss the integrated
inventory-location models within discrete and continuous facility location models.
Also, in Sect. 2, reﬂecting on the similarities between vendor selection and facility
location problems, we present integrated inventory-sourcing models. In Sect. 3,
we consider the integrated inventory transportation models including freight
transportation and routing problems. In Sect. 4, we provide a summary of other
inventory problems that consider EOQ as a subproblem such as multi-product
constrained systems, joint replenishment problem, and multi-echelon inventories.
Finally, in Sect. 5, we conclude by discussing some of the future research direc-
tions in integrated SCM.
2 Location Models
The relationship between inventory and location has long been revealed by Eppen
(1979). He was the ﬁrst to discuss the ‘‘impact of inventories’’ on locations by
exploiting risk pooling effects. Assuming that each facility operates under the
222
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

EOQ assumptions with individual inventory management, Eppen show that when
n identical facilities are consolidated at a single location, the cost ratio of inde-
pendent facilities versus consolidated facility would be 1
ﬃﬃﬃn
p . This is known as the
square root law of inventory centralization. Building on this knowledge, there are
several new studies that combine inventory management and location decisions
including discrete location models (Erlebacher and Meller 2000; Keskin and Üster
2012; Keskin et al. 2012; Romeijn et al. 2007; Shu et al. 2005) and continuous
location models (Drezner et al. 2003; McCann 1993; Üster et al. 2008).
The relationship between inventory and location has been characterized through
the modeling of transportation. In many facility location problems, the decision for
selecting a facility depends on the resolution of ﬁxed facility location costs and
transportation costs. Since changing the order quantities implies a modiﬁcation of
the ordering frequencies, the transportation costs are directly inﬂuenced by the
inventory policy. Some researchers consider this impact explicitly (Keskin et al.
2010b, 2012; Keskin and Üster 2012; Üster et al. 2008) and some implicitly. On
the other hand, some others consider the relationship between inventory and
location problems from a lead time perspective and evaluate the impact of lead
times on backorders (Drezner et al. 2003). In the rest of this section, we discuss
how these models utilize EOQ to simplify the analysis and draw insights from
complicated trade-offs.
2.1 Discrete Location Models
Daskin et al. (2002), Shen et al. (2003) and Shen and Daskin (2005) develop
location models with risk pooling that explicitly incorporate inventory decisions
into the uncapacitated facility location problem (UFLP). Ozsen (2004) and Ozsen
et al. (2008, 2009) expand these models to consider the capacitated warehouse
location model with risk pooling which captures the interdependence between
capacity issues and the inventory management at the distribution centers. In these
problems, it is common to assume a three-tiered supply chain consisting of one or
more suppliers, distribution centers, and retailers. Furthermore, the locations of
suppliers at the ﬁrst tier and retailers at the third tier are known. The problem is to
determine the optimal number of distribution centers (DC), their locations, the
retailers assigned to each distribution center, and the optimal ordering policy at the
distribution centers. In all of these models, the costs at each distribution center
exhibit economies of scale, especially for capacitated models. These integrated
inventory-location problems are formulated as mixed integer, nonlinear programs
in which the objective function is neither concave nor convex. The typical solution
approaches are based on Lagrangian relaxation as well as set covering reformu-
lation and column generation algorithms.
The inventory problem faced by the distribution centers is modeled using a
ðQ; rÞ inventory model with type I service (Hopp and Spearman 1996; Nahmias
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
223

2009). It is common to approximate the ðQ; rÞ model using two steps, where in the
ﬁrst step the order quantity is determined using an EOQ model in which the mean
demand is used to represent the stochastic demand process and in the second step
the reorder point is determined (Axsater 1996; Zheng 1992). Axsater (1996) shows
that the maximum relative error incurred by using the EOQ instead of the optimal
ðQ; rÞ quantity is 0.118; and Zheng (1992) argues that in most cases, the relative
increase is much less than the worst-case bounds. Therefore, in many of the
inventory-location problems, the DC orders inventory from the supplier using an
EOQ model. Next, we present the formulation of this model under these
assumptions. For the sake of the technical discussion, we introduce the following
notation given in Table 1.
For a given DC j with a particular set of assigned retailers S  I, the total cost
of ordering inventory at a DC j is approximated by the EOQ formula:
Kjnj þ ðpj þ rjQjÞnj þ 0:5hjQj:
ð1Þ
Given that nj ¼ Dj=Qj due to the EOQ approximation assumptions, we can restate
the cost as
Table 1 Discrete inventory-location problem: notation
Parameters
I
Set of retailers, indexed by i
J
Set of candidate DC sites, indexed by j
Nðli; r2
i Þ Normally distributed daily demand at retailer i, 8i 2 I
Dj
Expected annual demand observed by DC j from its assigned retailers
i; 8i 2 S  I; Dj ¼ P
i2S vli, where v is the number of days per
year
hi
Holding cost of retailer i per item per year, 8i 2 I
Kj
Fixed cost of placing an order at DC j, 8j 2 J
pj
Fixed cost of transportation from the supplier to DC j, 8j 2 J
rj
Volume-dependent cost of transportation from the supplier to DC j,
8j 2 J
pj þ rjx
Total transportation cost of an order size x from the supplier to DC j,
8j 2 J
fj
Fixed (annual) cost of locating a distribution center at candidate site j,
8j 2 J
dij
Cost per unit to ship between retailer i and candidate DC j, 8i 2 I,
8j 2 J
Lij
Leadtime between retailer i and candidate DC j, 8i 2 I, 8j 2 J
za
A standard Normal deviate such that Pðz  zÞ ¼
Decision
variables
nj
Number of orders per year by DC j, 8j 2 J
Qj
Order quantity of DC j, 8j 2 J
Xj
1, if we locate a DC at candidate site j; 0, if not, 8j 2 J
Yij
1, if demands at retailer i are assigned to a DC at candidate site j,
8i 2 I, 8j 2 J
224
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

rjDj þ ðKj þ pjÞ Dj
Qj
þ 0:5hjQj;
where the optimal quantity Qj and the corresponding number of orders nj at DC j
are given as follows, respectively:
Qj ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðKj þ pjÞDj
hj
s
and
nj ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
hjDj
2ðKj þ pjÞ
s
:
ð2Þ
Unfortunately, the derivation of the working inventory cost in (1) assumes that
we know the set S  I, assignments of retailers to selected DC. The contents of
this set is not known a priori and must be determined using the following integer
program:
Min
X
j2J
fjXj þ
X
i2I
X
j2J
dijvliYij
þ
X
j2J
pjvliYij þ
X
j2J
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2hjðKj þ pjÞ
X
i2I
vliYij
r
(
)
þ za
X
j2J
hj
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
i2I
Lijr2
i Yij
r
ð3Þ
S.t. X
j2J
Yij ¼ 1;
8i 2 I:
ð4Þ
X
j2J
Yij  Xj;
8i 2 I; 8j 2 J:
ð5Þ
Xj 2 f0; 1g; Yij 2 f0; 1g;
8j 2 J:
ð6Þ
In the objective function (3), the ﬁrst term is the cost of opening DCs, the second
term is the total unit transportation cost, the third term is the working inventory
cost at DCs, and the last term is the safety stock cost at DCs. The impact of
inventories on the transportation cost is captured using the EOQ, as the EOQ-based
cost clearly appears as the second term of the total transportation cost. Constraints
(4) ensure that each retailer must be assigned to a DC. Constraints (5) stipulate that
assignments can only be made to open DCs. Finally, constraints (6) are the
standard integrality constraints. This problem and its variants are solved using
Lagrangian Relaxation based heuristics (Daskin et al. 2002; Ozsen et al. 2008,
2009) and set covering and column generation based algorithms (Romeijn et al.
2007; Shen et al. 2003).
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
225

2.2 Continuous Location Models
As opposed to the discrete location problem where DCs are located at one of the
pre-determined candidate facilities, in the continuous facility location problem the
goal is to determine the coordinates of a DC on a plane such that the weighted sum
of the distances to given retailers on the plane are minimized. Finding the optimal
location of this new facility is equivalent to solving the following optimization
problem (Love et al. 1988), also known as the Weber problem:
min
X WðXÞ ¼
X
i2I
widðX; AiÞ;
where
I
the set of existing facilities (or, ‘‘demand points’’, ‘‘retailers’’),
wi
weight that converts the distance between the new DC facility
and existing retailer facility i into cost, and wi [ 0,
X ¼ ðx1; x2Þ
coordinates of the new DC facility,
Ai ¼ ðai1; ai2Þ
coordinates of the existing retailer facility,
dðX; AiÞ
distance between the new facility and retailer facility i, i 2 I.
The limited existing research by Drezner et al. (2003), Keskin and Üster (2012)
and McCann (1993) considers joint optimization of continuous facility location
and inventory decisions while considering EOQ models as subproblems. In par-
ticular, McCann (1993) considers a two-stage supply chain that consists of a DC
and two markets (e.g., retailers) where the only inventory keeping point is the DC
and its location is unknown. Hence, the problem is to ﬁnd the optimum location
and the optimum order quantity of the DC while minimizing total inventory and
transportation costs in the system. The inventory subproblem in this problem is a
single-facility lot-sizing problem that is solved using the EOQ formula. McCann
shows that the location of the DC, obtained using constant transportation costs,
does not coincide with the location obtained using total logistics costs. As an
extension of McCann’s work, Drezner et al. (2003) consider the problem of
locating a central DC given the locations of a ﬁxed number (  2) of multiple local
DCs where the central DC does not keep inventory, but the local DCs do. In fact,
the local DCs operate under the assumptions of EOQ with backorders. At a local
DC i, i 2 I, the optimal order quantity and reorder point as a function of the
central DC location X are given as
QiðXÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2DiKiðXÞ
hihi
s
and
RiðXÞ ¼ ð1  hÞQiðXÞ þ DiLiðXÞ;
226
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

where
• KiðXÞ ¼ ji þ rikX  Aik, where ji is ﬁxed order cost, and ri is the transporta-
tion cost per truck per mile for DC i 2 I, and kX  Aik is the distance between
new facility X and existing facility Ai;
• hi is equal to
bi
biþhi with bi is the backorder cost for local DC i; and
• LiðXÞ ¼ si þ bikX  Aik, where si is order processing time, and bi is a non-
negative constant that can be considered as the inverse of the average speed for
local DC i, i 2 I.
Drezner et al. (2003) show that the solution determined by the traditional
approach, that minimizes the total transportation costs only, differs from the one
determined by the approach that also takes into account the inventory and service
costs.
Keskin and Üster (2012) investigate a similar problem under three transporta-
tion cost functions and two different distance modeling. In particular, Keskin and
Üster (2012) state the total average annual cost for the integrated location-
inventory problem as:
min
X;T ZðX; TÞ ¼
X
n
i¼1
ai
Ti
þ
X
n
i¼1
Ki
Ti
þ 1
2 hiTiDi


;
ð7Þ
where ai represents the transportation cost between the central DC to the local DCs
and Ti represents the cycle time of DC i, i.e., Ti ¼ Qi=Di, for i 2 I. For different
forms of a, the key results are summarized as follows:
Quantity Based Transportation Costs: aiðQiÞ ¼ pq
i þ rq
i Qi, where pq
i and rq
i are the
ﬁxed and variable portions of the transportation cost, respectively, the integrated
location-inventory problem becomes
min
X;Q ZðX; QÞ ¼
X
n
i¼1
ðpq
i þ rq
i QiÞDi
Qi
þ
X
n
i¼1
KiDi
Qi
þ 1
2 hiQi


:
That is, the central DC location and the reorder quantities of the local DCs are
independent of each other. The central DC can be located anywhere on the plane.
The reorder quantity of each local DC i, i 2 I, is given by
Qi ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðKi þ pq
i ÞDi
hi
s
;
8i 2 I:
Quantity and Distance Based Transportation Costs: aiðQi; diÞ ¼ p qd þ rqdQidi,
where p qd
i
and r qd
i
are the ﬁxed and variable portions of the transportation cost,
respectively, as before and di is the distance between the central DC location X
and the existing local DC location Ai. Then, the integrated location-inventory
problem becomes
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
227

min
X;Q ZðX; QÞ ¼
X
n
i¼1
widi þ
X
n
i¼1
ðKi þ pqd
i ÞDi
Qi
þ 1
2 hiQi
(
)
;
where wi ¼ rqd
i Di, the weight of each facility in the location problem. Therefore,
the location and inventory problems become separable. Furthermore,
• The location of the central DC depends on the solution of the following Weber
problem:
min
X
X
n
i¼1
widi;
where wi ¼ rqd
i Di and di ¼ dðAi; XÞ for i 2 I; and
• the order quantity of each local DC i is given by
Qi ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðKi þ pqd
i ÞDi
hi
s
;
8i 2 I:
Distance-Based Transportation Costs: aiðdiÞ ¼ pd þ rddi, where, as before, where
p d
i and r d
i are the ﬁxed and variable portions of the transportation cost, respec-
tively. Then, the problem is
min
X;Q ZðX; QÞ ¼
X
n
i¼1
ðpd
i þ rd
i diÞDi
Qi
þ
X
n
i¼1
KiDi
Qi
þ 1
2 hiQi


:
ð8Þ
Even after reorganization, the facility location and the inventory problems are not
separable due to the ﬁrst term. Solution of (8) depends on how the distance is
modeled. Under squared Euclidean distances, convexity is preserved and an iter-
ative algorithm similar to Weiszfeld Algorithm solves the problem (Brimberg and
Love 1993; Kuhn 1973; Morris 1981; Ostresh 1978; Üster and Love 2000). Using
the Euclidean distances, the convexity is not guaranteed, but the iterative algo-
rithm provides decent solutions (Keskin and Üster 2012).
2.3 Sourcing Models
In many industries, the cost of raw materials and component parts constitutes the
main cost of a product. Therefore, vendor selection decisions have been one of the
most important traditional functions of the purchasing department of a ﬁrm
(Dobler et al. 1990). Unfortunately, analytical models addressing the importance
of vendor selection problem are limited. Furthermore, research that is placing an
emphasis on the impact of vendor selection on the supply chain cost efﬁciency is
even more sparse. Several researchers (Ghodsypour and O’Brien 2001; Keskin
228
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

et al. 2010a, b) study generalized vendor selection models aimed at optimizing the
total logistical costs including not only the vendor-speciﬁc ﬁxed management and
purchasing costs considered in traditional models, but also the transportation,
inventory replenishment, and holding costs.
Ghodsypour and O’Brien (2001) propose a single buyer, multi-supplier problem
with inventory considerations. They also consider supplier-speciﬁc ﬁxed ordering
cost, unit cost, and quality levels. The main decisions are how much the buyer
orders and which supplier fulﬁlls what percentage of the order quantity. The total
annual cost consists of purchasing cost, inventory holding cost, and ordering cost.
The optimal order quantity formulation for the buyer is similar to the EOQ for-
mulation. The major difference is that instead of using a single holding cost and a
single setup cost, a weighted average of combined holding and setup costs is used
considering the different parameters of the selected suppliers.
In the solution, Ghodsypour and O’Brien ﬁrst determine the total order quantity
of the buyer using an EOQ formulation:
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2DK
rC
r
;
where r is the inventory holding cost rate, K is the sum of all of the ordering costs,
and C is the generalized unit cost. In the next step, the total economical order
quantity is distributed among suppliers. They assign each supplier a certain per-
centage, Xj of Q. Let Yj be 1 if supplier j is selected, otherwise, 0. The total annual
ordering cost is then equal to
 X
n
j
KjYj
!
D
Q :
Furthermore, the annual purchasing and holding costs are given as
X
n
j
XjcjD
and
rQ
2
 X
n
j
X2
j cj
!
;
respectively. Then, the total annual cost is given as
X
n
j
XjcjD þ
 X
n
j
KjYj
!
D
Q þ rQ
2
 X
n
j
X2
j cj
!
:
The optimal order quantity is calculated as
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2D Pn
j ðKjYjÞ
r
 Pn
j X2
j cj

v
u
u
t
;
ð9Þ
and the total annual cost corresponding to order quantity Q is
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
229

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Dr
 X
n
j
KjYj
! X
n
j
X2
j cj
!
v
u
u
t
þ
X
n
j
cjXjD:
ð10Þ
Ghodsypour and O’Brien (2001) solve this mixed integer nonlinear program by
branching over Yj variables and solving a number of pure nonlinear models for
each ﬁxed Yj using a general purpose nonlinear programming software package.
Although there could be as many as 2n potential pure nonlinear models for n
suppliers, the solution is still obtained quite quickly by limiting the number of
suppliers to 12 and eliminating the cases that cannot satisfy the demand constraint.
Keskin et al. (2010b) generalize this problem to a multi-buyer ﬁrm where the
goal is the simultaneous determination of (i) the set of vendors the ﬁrm should
work with and (ii) how much each buyer should order from the selected vendors.
By exploiting the relationship between facility location applications and the
problem at hand, Keskin et al. approach the problem as an integrated location-
inventory optimization model with dispersed buyer stores where each store faces
store-speciﬁc deterministic and stationary demand. The vendor selection decisions
for each buyer store are conducted at the ﬁrm level, considering a pool of vendors
with vendor-speciﬁc ﬁxed management and purchasing costs that meet initial
quality and delivery performance criteria. Each store operates under the assump-
tions of the classical Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) model (Zipkin 2000). That
is, each store is replenished by a single vendor and holds inventory to meet the
deterministic stationary demand.
In their mathematical model, they introduce three sets of variables representing
the vendor selection and inventory decisions for the buyer stores. The ﬁrst set
relates to the vendor selection decisions. For each vendor j 2 J,
Xj ¼
1;
if vendor j is selected;
0;
otherwise:

The second set of decision variables pertains to the assignment of stores to ven-
dors. For store i 2 I and vendor j 2 J,
Yij ¼
1;
if store i is assigned to vendor j;
0;
otherwise:

These binary assignment variables ensure that each store receives shipments from
only one (dedicated) vendor, i.e., a single-sourcing strategy. Finally, the third set
of decision variables relates to the inventory policies of the stores, Qi, i 2 I. The
generalized vendor selection problem GVSP is then formulated as the following
MINLP.
Min
X
j2J
fjXj þ
X
i2I
X
j2J
cjDiYij þ
X
i2I
X
j2J
ðpij þ rijdijÞDi
Qi
Yij þ
X
i2I
KiDi
Qi
þ hiQi
2


ðGVSPÞ
230
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

subject to
X
j2J
Yij ¼ 1;
8 i 2 I;
ð11Þ
Yij  Xj;
8 i 2 I; 8 j 2 J;
ð12Þ
X
i2I
DiYij  PjXj;
8 j 2 J;
ð13Þ
X
i2I
Di
Qi
Yij  RjXj;
8 j 2 J;
ð14Þ
Xj 2 f0; 1g;
8 j 2 J;
ð15Þ
Yij 2 f0; 1g;
8 i 2 I; 8 j 2 J;
ð16Þ
Qi 2 Rþ;
8 i 2 I:
ð17Þ
The objective function of GVSP is aimed at minimizing the annual total cost
which includes (i) ﬁxed management costs associated with the selected vendors,
(ii) purchasing costs, (iii) ﬁxed dispatch and distance-based transportation costs
from the selected vendors to the stores, and (iv) inventory replenishment and
holding costs of the stores. Constraints (11) dictate that the annual demand of each
store must be satisﬁed. Constraints (12) ensure that each store is assigned to a
selected vendor. Constraints (13) and (14) represent the throughput and dispatch
capacities at the vendors, respectively. Finally, constraints (15) and (16) ensure
integrality, whereas constraints (17) ensure nonnegativity. The resulting model is a
major extension of the ﬁxed charge facility location problem with explicit
inventory decisions at the stores and generalized transportation costs and capacity
constraints. It is solved using an algorithm based on the Generalized benders
decomposition (GBD).
To develop a GBD approach here, a critical property of GVSP is used: when the
vendor selection and assignment decisions are known (i.e., when the binary X and
Y vectors are ﬁxed), the resulting problem is separable for each (selected) vendor,
and, more importantly, each such problem is a nonlinear program in Q repre-
senting a multi-store capacitated EOQ problem. When the values of binary vari-
ables are ﬁxed, say as ^X and ^Y, GVSP reduces to
Min
SPðQj^X; ^YÞ ¼
X
i2I
X
j2J
pij þ rijdij
Qi


Di^Yij þ
X
i2I
KiDi
Qi
þ 1
2 hiQi


subject to
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
231

X
i2I
Di
Qi
^Yij  Rj^Xj;
8 j 2 J;
Qi 2 Rþ;
8 i 2 I;
which is the subproblem of interest, denoted by SPðQj^X; ^YÞ. Examining the above
formulation, it is easy to see its equivalence to a multi-vendor, multi-store
EOQ problem with dispatch limitations for the selected vendors. Furthermore,
letting ^J ¼ fj 2 J : Xj ¼ 1g denote the set of selected vendors and Ij ¼ fi 2
I : Yij ¼ 1g; 8j 2 ^J denote the set of stores (uniquely) assigned to a selected
vendor j, it is also easy to verify that SPðQj^X; ^YÞ is separable for each selected
vendor j 2 ^J. This observation, in turn, implies that an optimal solution to
SPðQj^X; ^YÞ can be obtained by solving
Min
SPjðQÞ ¼
X
i2Ij
ðpij þ rijdijÞDi
Qi
þ KiDi
Qi
þ 1
2 hiQi


ð18Þ
subject to
X
i2Ij
Di
Qi
 Rj;
Qi 2 Rþ;
8 i 2 Ij;
ð19Þ
for each j 2 ^J. Each such problem is essentially a single-vendor, multi-store EOQ
problem with a simple dispatch capacity constraint. At every iteration of the GBD
algorithm, A Benders cut is generated by solving the subproblem SPðQj^X; ^YÞ for
given values of ^X; ^Y. As highlighted before, the EOQ problem is extremely useful
in exploiting complex trade-offs in distribution system design, especially in the
integrated decision making associated with sourcing and inventory.
3 Transportation Models
The integration of inventory and transportation decisions has received increasing
attention both from academia and practice (Çetinkaya 2004). This line of research
(i) investigates the impact of inbound and/or outbound transportation costs and
decisions on inventory optimization and (ii) demonstrates that signiﬁcant cost
savings are realizable through simultaneous consideration of inventory and
transportation costs and decisions. For this purpose, in this section, we present two
important problem domains under transportation models. In the ﬁrst group of
work, the transportation among different facilities assumes direct shipment
whereas in the second group of work, the transportation is done via routing.
232
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

3.1 Integrated Inventory and Transportation Models
In this subsection, we assume that the transportation is conducted as direct ship-
ments as in Drezner et al. (2003), Keskin et al. (2010b), Keskin and Üster (2012),
Toptal et al. (2003) and Üster et al. (2008). Keskin et al. (2012) propose a model
that minimizes the total annual cost that includes the ﬁxed facility location costs
associated with the open DCs, the transportation cost from DCs to retailers, and the
inventory replenishment and holding costs at the retailers. The decision variables
of model are opening DCs, assigning retailers to DCs, and order quantity for each
retailer. A main difference of this work from others is that the transportation cost is
subject to cargo capacity. That is, the number of trips/trucks required by retailer i,
i 2 I for a replenishment quantity of Qi is given by
Qi=CT
d
e where CT is the
cargo capacity. Then, the total transportation cost from DC j, j 2 J to retailer i,
i 2 I for a replenishment quantity of Qi is ðpij þ rijdijÞ Qi=CT
d
e:
Consequently, the integrated location-inventory problem with cargo costs can
be formulated as the following mixed integer nonlinear program denoted by IFLP
Minimize
X
j2J
fjXj þ
X
i2I
X
j2J
ðpij þ rijdijÞ
Qi
CT
l
m
Qi
0
@
1
ADiYij þ
X
i2I
KiDi
Qi
þ 1
2 hiQi


ðIFLPÞ
subject to
X
j2J
Yij ¼ 1;
8i 2 I:
ð20Þ
Yij  Xj;
8i 2 I and 8j 2 J:
ð21Þ
Xj 2 f0; 1g;
8j 2 J:
ð22Þ
Yij 2 f0; 1g;
8i 2 I and 8j 2 J:
ð23Þ
Qi  0;
8i 2 I:
ð24Þ
The objective function of IFLP minimizes the total annual costs: (i) the ﬁxed
facility location costs associated with the open DCs, (ii) the cargo-based trans-
portation costs from DCs to retailers, and (iii) the inventory replenishment and
holding costs at the retailers. Constraints (20) ensure that the demand of each
retailer is satisﬁed. Constraints (21) establish that each retailer will be assigned to
an open DC. Finally, constraints (22) and (23) ensure integrality, and constraints
(24) ensure nonnegativity. Observe that the cargo capacity is modeled in the
objective function rather than in the constraints. This is because the replenishment
quantities of the retailers imply the number of trucks needed along with the
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
233

resulting transportation costs. Hence, one can argue that the overall transportation
capacity is installable which is true in many practical settings due to the abun-
dance of contract and for-hire carriers in the truckload industry.
Using the structural properties of the problem, Keskin et al. (2012) show that
for given retailer-DC assignment, the optimal order quantity could be found by
using modiﬁed EOQ formulation, considering transportation cost as a part of ﬁxed
order cost. Now, observe that if X and Y are known, then the remaining problem is
a multi-retailer EOQ-model with a generalized replenishment cost structure.
Further, given X and Y, the IFLP is decomposable for each retailer i 2 I. More
speciﬁcally, let Ij ¼ fi 2 I : Yij ¼ 1g, for any j 2 J. Then, for each DC j 2 J
and each retailer i 2 Ij, we have the following EOQ problem with a generalized
replenishment cost structure:
min
Q  0 gijðQÞ ¼
Ki þ ðpij þ rijdijÞ
Q
CT
l
m


Di
Q
þ 1
2 hiQ:
ð25Þ
This problem can be solved using the Generalized EOQ Algorithm, given below,
developed by Toptal et al. (2003) (see Algorithm 1 on p. 991).
Generalized EOQ Algorithm:
For retailer i 2 I and DC j 2 J:
Step 1:
Compute
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2KiDi=hi
p
.
Step 2:
Let N denote the integer multiple of CT such that NCT\
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2KiDi=hi
p

ðN þ 1ÞCT: Compute
QNþ1
ij
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2DiðKi þ ðN þ 1Þðpij þ rijdijÞÞ
hi
s
:
If QNþ1
ij
 ðN þ 1ÞCT, then go to Step 3. Otherwise, go to Step 4.
Step 3:
Q
ij ¼ arg min gðNCTÞ; gððN þ 1ÞCTÞ
f
g. Stop.
Step 4:
Q
ij ¼ arg min
	
gðNCTÞ; gðQNþ1
ij
Þ

. Stop.
Note that the optimal Q
ij resulting from the above algorithm is the preferred order
quantity of retailer i 2 I and DC j 2 J under single sourcing, and it is given by
arg min gijðQNþ1
ij
Þ; gijðNCTÞ; gijððN þ 1ÞCTÞ
n
o
:
Swenseth and Godfrey (2002) approach a similar problem from a different
perspective. Dating to the origination of economic order quantity (EOQ) models,
the objective of inventory replenishment decisions has centered on the minimi-
zation of total annual logistics cost. Swenseth and Godfrey (2002) note that
accurate solutions require that all of the relevant costs be appropriately incorpo-
rated into the total annual logistics cost function to determine purchase quantities.
Furthermore, depending on the estimates used, upwards of 50 % of the total annual
234
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

logistics cost of a product can be attributed to transportation. Any consideration of
purchase quantities should therefore consider transportation costs. To appropri-
ately represent the true total annual logistics cost function, transportation cost
functions that emulate reality and simultaneously provide a straightforward rep-
resentation of actual freight rates must be identiﬁed ﬁrst.
Swenseth and Godfrey (2002) explain that there are technically three ways to
ﬁnd a good order quantity: (i) shipments that result in true truck-load (TL) ship-
ping quantities; (ii) shipments that are likely to be over-declared as TL; and (iii)
shipments that are less-than-truck-load (LTL) rates. In addition to the constant
charge per unit of the EOQ model, two freight rate functions, the inverse and the
adjusted inverse, were incorporated into the total annual cost. The inverse trans-
portation rate, a constant charge per shipment, models the freight rates exactly
when TL shipping weights are transported. On the other hand, the adjusted inverse
transportation rate takes on the same characteristics as the inverse function but
emulates the LTL rates.
With the inverse transportation rate, the company is assumed to ship everything
with a full truck load. Then the total cost is:
TC ¼ DK
Q þ Qh
2 þ FxWx
Qw


Dw;
where FxWx is the total charge for a TL shipment for a given route and w is per
unit weight. The corresponding optimal order quantity is
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2DðK þ FxWxÞ
h
r
:
This model, by accounting for the TL cost, sets the shipping weight as a TL or
would be over-declared as a TL.
On the other hand, the adjusted inverse rate provides a means of emulating
freight rates without further complicating the order quantity decision. With the
inverse adjusted rate, the cost per pound is calculated as
Fy ¼ Fx þ aFx
Wx  Qw
Qw


;
where Fy is the freight rate for the given order quantity, Fx is TL freight rate, and a
is a constant between 0 and 1. The revised total cost and the corresponding order
quantity are
TC ¼ DK
Q þ Qh
2 þ Fx þ aFx
Wx  Qw
Qw




Dw;
and
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2DðK þ aFxWxÞ
h
r
;
respectively :
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
235

One of the challenges of the adjusted inverse model is ﬁnding a value for a. To
predict a, Swenseth and Godfrey (2002) utilize real LTL and TL rates from actual
carriers in a linear regression formula. From their analysis, they set a as 0:173050.
3.2 Inventory Routing Problems
A typical problem in supply chain management is the coordination of product and
material ﬂows between locations. These main activities involve distribution
decisions among the facilities of the distribution. The task is often performed by a
ﬂeet of vehicles either directly controlled by the ﬁrm or the management of the
ﬂeet is assigned to a third party logistics provider (Anily and Bramel 1999). In the
inventory routing problem (IRP), a central warehouse with unlimited supply serves
a set of retailers distributed in a given area. The retailers experience a ﬁxed
demand per unit of time for the items, and the vehicles of limited capacity must be
dispatched to replenish the retailer inventories. Each retailer incurs a holding cost
per item per unit of time and a ﬁxed cost per order placed. The objective is to
schedule the vehicle departures and specify the loads destined for each retailer
such that the total cost per unit time is minimized. This includes transportation
cost, ﬁxed ordering cost, and inventory holding cost at the retailers.
Bramel and Simchi-Levi (1995) propose an algorithm that can solve an IRP
with the characteristics stated above. The main issue is clustering customers so that
the total inventory holding cost and transportation cost are minimized. The
algorithm ﬁrst selects m seeds. Then, it assigns each retailer to one of the seeds.
The main challenge in this method is related to calculating the retailer assignment
cost to the seed. Bramel and Simchi-Levi (1995) use an EOQ approximation to
estimate this assignment cost. This similar approach is later used by other
researchers including Natarajarathinam et al. (2012) and Stacey et al. (2007).
Assume that a set S of customers, assigned to a particular seed, is served every
tðSÞ units of time. The optimal tðSÞ
tðSÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðLOðSÞ þ KðSÞÞ
P
i2S hiDi
s
;
where KðSÞ ¼ P
i2S Ki, DðSÞ ¼ P
i2S Di, and L0ðSÞ is cost of optimal variable
route cost. However, the vehicle capacity, Cap may be violated with this fre-
quency. Therefore, the frequency needs to be adjusted to tðSÞ ¼ min
n
tðSÞ; Cap
DðSÞ
o
.
Then, the total annual cost /ðSÞ for set S is given as
/ðSÞ ¼ L0ðSÞ þ KðSÞ
tðSÞ
þ 1
2 tðSÞ
X
i2S
hiDi:
236
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

The algorithm calculates this cost for each potential seed j ¼ 1; . . .; m and sets it as
seed assignment cost, i.e., vj ¼ /ðTjÞ; 8j ¼ 1; 2; . . .; m; where Tj is the seed set j. In
the next step, the algorithm calculates the assignment cost of a particular retailer to
a seed:
cij ¼ /ðTj [ fxigÞ  /ðTjÞ; 8i ¼ 1; 2; . . .; n and 8j ¼ 1; 2; . . .; m:
ð26Þ
In the ﬁnal stage, the algorithm uses an assignment model to ﬁnd assignment.
That is, let yj be 1, if a seed is located at site j, 0, otherwise, and let xij be 1 if
retailer i is assigned to seed j, 0, otherwise. Then this assignment is formulated as
min
X
m
j¼1
vjyj þ
X
n
i¼1
X
m
j¼1
cijxij
subject to
X
m
j¼1
xij ¼ 1;
i ¼ 1; . . .; n:
ð27Þ
X
n
i¼1
wixij  Qj;
j ¼ 1; . . .; m:
ð28Þ
xij  yj;
i ¼ 1; . . .; n;
j ¼ 1; . . .; m:
ð29Þ
xij 2 f0; 1g;
i ¼ 1; . . .; n;
j ¼ 1; . . .; m:
ð30Þ
yj 2 f0; 1g;
j ¼ 1; . . .; m:
ð31Þ
Constraints (27) ensure that each retailer is assigned exactly to one seed location.
Constraints (28) ensure that the seed capacity is not violated. Constraints (29)
guarantee that a retailer is only assigned to a selected seed. Finally, constraints
(30) and (31) ensure the integrality. Even though this is an NP-hard formulation, it
is considerably easier to solve it in the sense of ﬁnding a ‘‘good’’ solution in a
‘‘reasonable’’ amount of time.
4 Inventory Models
The EOQ appears as a subproblem to many advanced inventory models including
multi-product constrained systems, joint replenishment problem, and multi-eche-
lon inventories. Many of these models have already appeared as mainstream
course materials in various books including Ballou (2004), Ghiani et al. (2003),
Nahmias (2009) and Zipkin (2000). Additionally, there is extensive literature on
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
237

the coordination of supply chains via supply contracts that utilize EOQ models or
analysis as a major part of the contribution. We refer the interested readers to the
research in Banerjee (1986), Banerjee and Burton (1994), Chan and Lee (2012),
Chan et al. (2010), Chen and Mushaluk (2013), Goyal (1976) and Goyal and
Gupta (1989). In this section, we summarize the inventory coordination problem
associated with a multi-echelon supply chain, studied by Khouja (2003), and we
showcase how an EOQ model appears as a subproblem at every step and simpliﬁes
the overall analysis.
Khouja (2003) considers a three-stage supply chain model with multiple ﬁrms
at each stage, and each ﬁrm can supply two or more customers. In formulation, it is
assumed that the product is processed on a single system at each ﬁrm. Production
and usage rates at each ﬁrm are deterministic and uniform. The holding cost is
linear in the inventory held. Furthermore, the per unit annual holding cost is the
same for ﬁrms in the same stage. Similarly, the setup/ordering cost is the same for
ﬁrms in the same stage. The downstream ﬁrms in the chain are retailers or
assemblers. He analyzes three inventory coordination mechanisms (CM) between
chain members and solves a cost minimization model for each mechanism. Spe-
ciﬁcally, he considers
CM 1: Equal Cycle Time
The same cycle time is used throughout the
supply chain.
CM 2: Integer Policies
The cycle time at each stage of the chain is an
integer multiple of the cycle time of the adjacent
downstream stage.
CM 3: Power-of-two Policies
The cycle time of each ﬁrm is an integer power
of two multiples of a basic cycle time.
We review the respective coordination mechanisms as follows.
4.1 CM 1: Equal Cycle Time
All ﬁrms in the supply chain use the same cycle time which implies Tij ¼ T, for all
i and j. Let i ¼ 1, 2, and 3, be an index denoting the stage in the supply chain,
where 1 denotes upstream suppliers, 2 denotes manufacturers, and 3 denotes
retailers or assemblers. The total annual cost for a downstream ﬁrm is:
TC3;j ¼ TD3;j
2
h3 þ K3
T ;
where j is the index for ﬁrms within each stage such that j ¼ 1; 2; . . .; J3.
The total annual cost for the manufacturers is
TC2;j ¼
TD2
2;j
2P2;j
ðh1 þ h2Þ þ K2
T ;
238
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

where P2;j is annual production rate for j ¼ 1; 2; . . .; J2, and h1 and h2 are the
holding costs for the raw materials and ﬁnished good of manufactured product,
respectively.
Similarly, the total annual cost for a supplier stage ﬁrm is
TC1;j ¼
TD2
1;j
2P1;j
ðh0 þ h1Þ þ K1
T :
The total cost TC of the whole supply chain is TC ¼ P3
i¼1 TCi is nothing but a
modiﬁed EOQ formulation. The optimal order frequency of the supply chain is
then
T ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðJ1K1 þ J2K2 þ J3K3ÞP
P2
i¼1
h
ðhi1 þ hiÞ P
jðD2
i;jPi;jÞ
i
þ h3DP
v
u
u
t
ð32Þ
In Eq. (32), Ji is the number of ﬁrms in each stage, P ¼ Q
i;j Pi;j is the product
of the production rates for all ﬁrms in the supply chain, Pi;j ¼ P  Pi;j is the
product of production rates for all ﬁrms in the chain except for ﬁrm j in stage i,
D ¼ PJ1
j¼1 D1;j ¼ PJ2
j¼1 D2;j ¼ PJ3
j¼1 D3;j is the total demand at each stage.
4.2 CM 2: Integer Policies
In this method, the cycle time at each stage is an integer multiplier of the cycle
time at the adjacent downstream stage, which implies T3;j ¼ T for j ¼ 1; 2; . . .; J3,
T2;j ¼ S2T for j ¼ 1; 2; . . .; J2, and T1;j ¼ S1S2T for j ¼ 1; 2; . . .; J1, where Si is an
integer multiplier at stage i, i ¼ 1 and 2.
The total cost for the retailers in stage 3 stays the same as the equal cycle time
coordination mechanism. On the other hand, the total cost for stage 2 ﬁrm,
manufacturer, is given by an augmented EOQ formulation:
TC2;j ¼
S2TD2
2;j
2P2;j
h1 þ TD2;j
2
ðS2ð1 þ D2;j=P2;jÞ  1Þh2 þ K2
S2T ;
where the ﬁrst term is holding cost of raw materials, the second term is annual
holding cost of ﬁnished goods for the production portions of the cycle and annual
holding cost for the non-production portions of the cycle, and the third term is the
annual setup cost. Similarly, the total annual cost for a supplier stage ﬁrm is:
TC1;j ¼
S1S2TD2
1;j
2P1;j
h0 þ S2TD1;j
2
ðS1ð1 þ D1;j=P1;jÞ  1Þh1 þ
K1
S1S2T :
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
239

Let St ¼ S1  S2. For any value of S1 and S2, the optimal cycle time T is
T ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ðJ1K1 þ S1J2K2 þ StJ3K3ÞP
St
h
ðh1 þ h2ÞS2
P
j D2
2;jPi;j þ ðh0 þ h1ÞSt
P
j D2
1;jPi;j þ DP½ðh3  h2Þ þ ðh2  h1ÞS2 þ h1St	
i
v
u
u
t
ð33Þ
To minimize TC, the solution to oTC=oS1 ¼ 0 gives an S1 that minimizes the
total cost:
S1 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2J1K1P1
T2S2
2

ðh0 þ h1Þ P
j

D2
1;jx1;j

þ h1DP1

s
;
ð34Þ
where Pi ¼ Qj¼J1
j¼1 Pi;j, and xi;g ¼ Pi  Pi;g. Substituting for S1 to total cost func-
tion and ﬁnding S2 in a similar fashion gives:
S2 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2J2K2P2
T2
ðh1 þ h2Þ P
j

D2
2;jx2;j

þ ðh2  h1ÞDP2

s
:
ð35Þ
Finally, substituting both S1 and S2 in Eq. (33) provides the optimal T :
T ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2J3K3
ðh3  h2ÞD
s
:
After ﬁnding the optimal T, simply back tracking equation (34) and (35) and
rounding them to the closest integer, helps set the integer multiples S1 and S2.
4.3 CM 3: Power-of-Two Policies
To further generalize the inventory policy of the integer multipliers mechanism
(CM2), the cycle times for ﬁrms within each stage can be unequal. To achieve that,
the cycle time for each ﬁrm is assumed to be an integer powers-of-two multiplier
of a basic cycle time, T. In addition, to guarantee feasibility, the powers of two
multipliers of each ﬁrm is assumed to be equal to or greater than the largest powers
of two of any of the ﬁrm’s customers at the adjacent downstream stage.
The total annual cost for a stage 3 ﬁrm, i.e., a retailer, is
TC3;j ¼ 2S3;jTD3;j
2
h3 þ K3
2S3;jT ;
where Si;j is an integer power of two associated with ﬁrm j in stage i.
240
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

The total annual cost for a manufacturer stage ﬁrm is:
TC2;j ¼
K2
2S2;jT þ
2S2;jTD2
2;j
2P2;j
ðh1 þ h2Þ
þ h2T
X
g2A2;j
"
2S2;j  2S3;g  22S3;g
2S2;j
 
X
2S2;j=2S3;g1
v¼1
v
!#
D3;g;
ð36Þ
where Ai;j is the set of ﬁrms at stage i þ 1 that satisﬁes their demand from ﬁrm j in
stage i. In Eq. (36), the ﬁrst term is the annual setup cost; the second term is the
annual holding cost of raw material and ﬁnished goods for the production portions
of the cycles; and the last term is the annual holding cost of ﬁnished goods during
the non-production portion of the cycle.
The total annual cost for a supplier stage ﬁrm is:
TC1;j ¼
K1
2S1;jT þ
2S1;jTD2
1;j
2P1;j
ðh0 þ h1Þ
þ h1T
X
g2A1;j
"
2S1;j  2S2;g  22S2;g
2S1;j
 
X
2S1;j=2S2;g1
v¼1
v
!#
D:
ð37Þ
Solving oTC=oSi;j ¼ 0; i ¼ 1; 2; 3 gives:
S3;j ¼ 1
2  0:721348Ln½ðh3  h2ÞT2D3;j=K3	;
S2;j ¼ 1
2 þ 0:721348Ln
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K2P2;j
T2D2;j½ðh1 þ h2ÞD2;j þ ðh2  h1ÞP2;j	
s
"
#
;
S1;j ¼ 1
2 þ 0:721348Ln
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K1P1;j
T2D1;j½ðh0 þ h1ÞD1;j þ h1P1;j	
s
"
#
:
Let
C1 ¼
X
2
i¼1
ðhi1 þ hiÞ
X
j
D2
i;jPi;j22Si;jþSi;j;
C2 ¼
X
3
i¼2
ðhi1PÞ
X
j
Di;jð22Si1;qði;jÞþSi1;qði;jÞ  2SÞ;
C3 ¼ ðh3PÞ
X
i¼3;j
Di;j22S3;jþS3;j;
where Si;g ¼ S  Si;g the sum of power of two for all ﬁrms in the chain except for
ﬁrm g in stage i, S ¼ P
i;j Si;j the sum of powers of two for all ﬁrms in the chain,
qði; jÞ is the index of the ﬁrm at stage i  1 which supplies ﬁrm j in stage i. Solving
oTC=oT ¼ 0 gives:
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
241

T ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
P P3
i¼1 Ki
P
j 21þSi;j
C1 þ C2 þ C3
s
:
ð38Þ
To ﬁnd optimal or near-optimal cycle time and integer powers of two, Khouja
(2003) proposes a heuristic. The analysis shows that the integer multipliers
mechanism has a lower total cost than the equal cycle time mechanism, and the
integer powers of two multipliers mechanism has a lower cost than the integer
multipliers mechanism. While the savings in total cost a supply chain realizes in
moving from the equal-cycle time mechanism to the integer multipliers mecha-
nism may be considerable, the savings in moving from the integer multipliers
mechanism to the integer powers of two multipliers mechanism are less
considerable.
5 Conclusions
This chapter demonstrates the use and utility of EOQ models in analyzing complex
supply chain problems related to integrated inventory-location, integrated inven-
tory-transportation, and higher level inventory problems. A number of recent
research papers are reviewed and summarized with regard to how EOQ models aid
in resolving the complicated supply chain problems. Given the increased impor-
tance of big data and increased pressure to do well with respect to all of the supply
chain performance metrics, the importance of EOQ-based models continue to
increase in the near future due to their simplicity and intuitiveness. Important
extensions of the research presented in each one of the pillar areas include the
following:
• Location Models: Since location decisions are inherently strategic and long-
term in nature, there is a strong need for supply chain models that account for
the inherent uncertainty surrounding future conditions and possible disruptions.
Scenario-based location models, reliability-based location models, as well as
models that account for robust optimization are areas worthy of considerable
additional research.
• Transportation: There are two important trends in transportation models that
will need immediate attention. One of the trends is related to sustainability and
environmental issues in transportation. Models that reduce carbon foot-print and
that incorporate environmental costs are interesting extensions of the proposed
works. The second trend is about availability and visibility of data, in particular
related to tracking shipments, providing information at every step of the
transportation process, and re-optimizing given new information. In regard to
this trend and to meet the growing real-time requirements of customers, fast
online optimization algorithms are needed.
• Inventory: In the area of inventory, supply chain coordination and the mech-
anisms for coordination will continue to be the focus of research in this area. To
242
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

coordinate the whole supply chain, the aggregation of the impact of all coor-
dination mechanisms on the performance of supply chain is required. Various
combinations may be explored with the help of simulation. Supply chain con-
tracts have proved to coordinate single period supply chains. The research is
required to explore the utility of contracts in multi-period cases. In multi-period
model, the supply chain members are exposed to the uncertainty more as they
are dealing with supply chain members frequently. It is important to evaluate
how various coordination mechanisms can be developed in multi-period
problems.
Some of the models presented in this chapter will be useful in formulating and
solving such advanced models.
References
Anily, S., J. Bramel. 1999. Vehicle routing and the supply chain. S. R. Tayur, R. Ganeshan, M.
J. Magazine, eds., Quantitative Models for Supply Chain Management. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Massachusetts, 149–161.
Axsater, S. 1996. Using the deterministic EOQ formula in stochastic inventory control.
Management Science 42 830–834.
Ballou, R. H. 2004. Business Logistics/Supply Chain Management. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle
River, NJ.
Banerjee, A. 1986. A joint economic-lot-size model for purchaser and vendor. Decision
Sciences 17 292–311.
Banerjee, A., J. S. Burton. 1994. Coordinated vs. independent inventory replenishment policies
for a vendor and multiple buyers. International Journal of Production Economics 35
215–222.
Bramel, Julien, David Simchi-Levi. 1995. A location based heuristic for general routing
problems. Operations Research 43 649–660.
Brimberg, J., R. F. Love. 1993. Global convergence of a generalized iterative procedure for the
minisum location problem with lp distances. Operations Research 41(6) 1153–1163.
Çetinkaya, S. 2004. Coordination of inventory and shipment consolidation decisions: A review of
premises, models and justiﬁcation. J. Geunes, E. Akçalı, P. M. Pardalos (Editor), H.
E. Romeijn, Z.-J. Shen, eds., Applications of Supply Chain Management and E-Commerce
Research in Industry, vol. 92. Kluwer Series: Applied Optimization, New York, 1–50.
Chan, C. K., Y. C. E. Lee. 2012. A coordination model combining incentive scheme and
coordination policy for a single vendor, multi-buyer supply chain. International Journal of
Production Economics 135(1) 136–143.
Chan, C. K., Y. C. E. Lee, S. K. Goyal. 2010. A delayed payment method in coordinating a single
vendor, multi-buyer supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics 127(1)
95–102.
Chen, J., G. Mushaluk. 2013. Coordinating a supply chain with an EOQ model. Working Paper,
University of Winnipeg.
Daskin, Mark S., Collette R. Coullard, Zuo-Jun Max Shen. 2002. An inventory-location model:
formulation,
solution
algorithm
and
computational
results.
Annals
of
Operations
Research 110 83–106.
Dobler, D.W., L. Lee, N. Burt. 1990. Purchasing and Materials Management: Text and Cases.
McGraw-Hill, New York.
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
243

Drezner, Zvi, Carlton Scott, Jing-Sheng Song. 2003. The central warehouse location problem
revisited. IMA Journal of Management Mathematics 14 321–336.
Eppen, G. 1979. Effects of centralization on expected costs in a multi-location newsboy problem.
Management Science 25(5) 498–501.
Erlebacher, S., R. D. Meller. 2000. The interaction of location and inventory in designing
distribution systems. IIE Transactions 32 155–166.
Ghiani, G., G. Laporte, R. Musmanno. 2003. Introduction to Logistics Systems Planning and
Control. Wiley, West Sussex, England.
Ghodsypour, S.H., C. O’Brien. 2001. The total cost of logistics in supplier selection, under
conditions of multiple sourcing, multiple criteria and capacity constraint. International
Journal of Production Economics 73 15–27.
Goyal, S. K. 1976. An inventory model for a single supplier-single customer problem.
International Journal of Production Research 15(1) 107–111.
Goyal, S. K., Y. P. Gupta. 1989. Integrated inventory models: The buyer-vendor coordination.
European Journal of Operational Research 41 261–269.
Handﬁeld, R. B., E. L. Nichols Jr. 1999. Introduction to Supply Chain Management. Prentice-
Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Hopp, W., M. L. Spearman. 1996. Factory Physics: Foundations of Manufacturing Management.
Irwin, Chicago.
Keskin, B. B., S. Melouk, I. Meyer. 2010a. A simulation-optimization approach for integrated
sourcing and inventory decisions. Computers and Operations Research 37(9) 1648–1661.
Keskin, B. B., H. Üster, S. Çetinkaya. 2010b. Integration of strategic and tactical decisions for
vendor selection under capacity constraints. Computers and Operations Research 37(12)
2182–2191.
Keskin, Burcu B., Halit Üster. 2012. A continuous facility location problem with inventory
decisions in a two-stage supply chain. Working Paper.
Keskin, Burcu B., Halit Üster, Sıla Çetinkaya. 2012. Characterization of facility assignment costs
for a location-inventory model under truckload distribution. Working Paper.
Khouja, Moutaz. 2003. Optimizing inventory decisions in a multi-stage multi-customer supply
chain. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 39 193–208.
Kuhn, H. W. 1973. A note on Fermat’s problem. Mathematical Programming 4 98–107.
Love, R. F., J. G. Morris, G. O. Wesolowsky. 1988. Facilities Location: Models and Methods.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
McCann, Philip. 1993. The logistics-cost location-production problem*. Journal of Regional
Science 33 503–516.
Morris, J. G. 1981. Convergence of the Weiszfeld algorithm for weber problems using a
generalized ‘‘distance’’ function. Operations Research 29(1) 37–48.
Nahmias, S. 2009. Production and Operations Analysis. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Natarajarathinam, Malini, Jennifer Stacey, Charles Sox. 2012. Near-optimal heuristics and
managerial insights for the storage constrained, inbound inventory routing problem.
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management 42 152–173.
Ostresh, L. M. 1978. On the convergence of a class of iterative methods for solving the weber
location problem. Operations Research 26(4) 597–609.
Ozsen, L. 2004. Location-inventory planning model: Capacity issues and solution algorithms. Ph.
D. dissertation, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois.
Ozsen, L., C. R. Coullard, M. S. Daskin. 2008. Capacitated warehouse location model with risk-
pooling. Naval Research Logistics 55(4) 295–312.
Ozsen, L., C. R. Coullard, M. S. Daskin. 2009. Facility location modeling and inventory
management with multisourcing. Transportation Science 43(4) 455–472.
Romeijn, H. E., J. Shu, C.-P. Teo. 2007. Designing two-echelon supply networks. European
Journal of Operational Research 178 449–462.
Shen, Z. M., M. S. Daskin. 2005. Trade-offs between customer service and cost in integrated
supply chain design. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management 7(3) 188–207.
244
B. B. Keskin and _I. Çapar

Shen, Z. J. M., C. Coullard, M. S. Daskin. 2003. A joint location-inventory model. Transportation
Science 37 40–55.
Shu, J., C.-P. Teo, Z. M. Shen. 2005. Stochastic transportation-inventory network design
problem. Operations Research 53(1) 48–60.
Stacey, Jennifer, Malini Natarajarathinam, Charles Sox. 2007. The storage constrained, inbound
inventory routing problem. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics
Management 37 484–500.
Swenseth, Scott R., Michael R. Godfrey. 2002. Incorporating transportation costs into inventory
replenishment decisions. International Journal of Production Economics 77 113–130.
Toptal, A., S. Çetinkaya, C.-Y. Lee. 2003. The buyer vendor coordination problem: Modeling
inbound and outbound cargo capacity and costs. IIE Transactions 35 987–1002.
Üster, H., B. B. Keskin, S. Çetinkaya. 2008. Integrated warehouse location and inventory
decisions in three-tier distribution systems. IIE Transactions 40(8) 718–732.
Üster, H., R. F. Love. 2000. The convergence of the Weiszfeld algorithm. Computers and
Mathematics with Applications 40 443–451.
Zheng, Y.-S. 1992. On properties of stochastic inventory systems. Management Science 38(1)
87–103.
Zipkin, P. H. 2000. Foundations of Inventory Management. Irwin/McGraw-Hill, Boston.
The Utility of EOQ in Supply Chain Design and Operation
245

Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–
Buyer Single-Item System Under Vendor-
Managed Inventory
Fidel Torres, Frank Ballesteros and Marcela Villa
Abstract This work develops a new coordinated manufacturer–buyer model for a
single item in a vendor-managed inventory (VMI) context. The proposed model
includes the manufacturing uptime and a manufacturer–buyer synchronization
scheme. This mechanism makes logistical coordination between manufacturer and
buyer much easier. The analysis of the mathematical model of coordination
considers production and demand rates, as well as totals of the manufacturer and
the buyer’s ordering and holding inventory costs. This study is complemented by a
sensitivity analysis. It focuses on the effects of parameter variations on proposed
performance measurements in the manufacturer–buyer VMI-coordinated scheme.
Finally, analytical conditions under which the suggested coordinated implemen-
tation of VMI gives beneﬁts to both manufacturer and buyer and to the supply
chain are deduced and veriﬁed. Results show that it is possible for both the
manufacturer and buyer to obtain proﬁts in VMI implementation by selecting
satisfactory parameter combinations using our proposed coordination scheme in a
win–win relationship.
F. Torres (&)  F. Ballesteros
Department of Industrial Engineering, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia
e-mail: ftorres@uniandes.edu.co
F. Ballesteros
e-mail: frank.ballesteros@polymtl.ca
M. Villa
School of Industrial Engineering, Universidad Pontiﬁcia Bolivariana,
Bucaramanga, Colombia
e-mail: marcela.villa@upb.edu.co
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9_12,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
247

1 Introduction
A full integration of the supply chain has become one of industry’s greatest
dreams, thanks to the success achieved by different businesses working together
with their suppliers and customers (Darwish and Odah 2010). Initiatives like
‘‘efﬁcient customer response’’ in the grocery industry and ‘‘quick response’’ in the
garment industry (Waller et al. 1999) are good examples of this concept.
In recent years, there has been growing interest in implementing vendor-
managed inventory (VMI) initiatives (Emigh 1999), thanks to important recog-
nition from different industrial leaders (Southard and Swenseth 2008). This interest
stems from the fact that there are beneﬁts to the whole chain in cost reduction,
improved service levels, and supplier performance (Choi et al. 2004).
VMI is a coordination mechanism that improves multi-ﬁrm supply chain efﬁ-
ciency (Waller et al. 1999) between a supplier and its customers (Silver et al.
1998). VMI can decrease inventory levels, increase ﬁll rates in the supply chain
(Yao et al. 2007), and reduce lead times and inventory stock outs (Daugherty et al.
1999). In spite of this, this tool has not been studied in detail, especially as applied
to the systems that exist between manufacturers and purchasers.
The models presented in this paper analyze a two-level supply chain in which
external demand for a single item occurs at the purchaser. The paper proposes an
analysis of total, ordering, and inventory holding costs for each agent and the
supply chain with and without VMI.
The general basis of this work is the classic theory of economic order quantity
(EOQ). These models complement some previous works (Yao et al. 2007; Van der
Vlist et al. 2007), including research associated to both productive (uptime) and
non-productive times. The use of these times facilitates control of inventories in
our coordinated manufacturer–buyer single-item VMI-conduced system. Our VMI
approach includes a new manufacturer–buyer synchronization scheme that makes
logistics coordination in the VMI environment between manufacturer and buyer
much easier. The proposed synchronization scheme is a logical extension of
previous models studied in other manufacturer–buyer VMI approaches (Dong and
Chu 2002; Choi et al. 2004; Yao and Dresner 2008). These models do not include
explicit synchronization and coordination mechanisms between buyer and sup-
plier. Analytical conditions under which the suggested coordinated implementa-
tion of VMI gives beneﬁts to both manufacturer and buyer and to the supply chain
are deduced and veriﬁed.
The proposed sensitivity analysis of the involved variables shows the behavior
of the parameters—costs, demand, and production rates—over performance
measurements related to total cost, inventory holding cost and ordering costs, order
quantities, and cycle times, thereby establishing relationships between all relevant
manufacturer and buyer parameters and the potential beneﬁts in our proposed
manufacturer–buyer synchronized VMI implementation.
This article is divided as follows: Section 2 is a review of the literature. Sec-
tion 3 describes the proposed model and develops the main results. Section 4
248
F. Torres et al.

presents a sensitivity analysis for the main parameters of the model. Section 5
presents the main conclusions. Finally, Sect. 6 outlines potential areas for future
research.
2 Literature Review
The ﬁrst VMI models appeared in the late 1980s, when Walmart, K-Mart, and
Procter and Gamble implemented major projects relating to supply chain inte-
gration (Waller et al. 1999; Blatherwick 1998). However, not until recently was
this subject discussed in the academic literature (Southard and Swenseth 2008). To
ensure proper classiﬁcation of the published scientiﬁc literature on VMI, we
established ﬁve categories, divided by focus: strategic, statistical characterization,
simulation, deterministic modeling, and stochastic modeling. Summaries of arti-
cles with a VMI approach can be seen in Tables 1 and 2.
The ﬁrst articles published on the subject are those that present a strategic
focus. The ﬁrst work was published in 1994, when Jain (1994) established the basis
for VMI implementation between two agents in a chain, outlining VMI’s beneﬁts
and disadvantages to companies. Cottrill (1997), described some VMI cases and
identiﬁed some current trends related to this strategy. Cachon and Fisher (1997),
reviewed various VMI models, such as synchronized consumer response, contin-
uous replenishment program, efﬁcient consumer response, and rapid replenish-
ment, through the case study of Campbell’s Soup.
Table 1 State-of-the-art review in VMI
Category
References
Strategy
Jain (1994), Cottrill (1997), Cachon and Fisher (1997), Holmstrom
(1998), Blatherwick (1998), Emigh (1999), Challener (2000), Lee and
Chu (2005), Saxena (2009)
Discrete simulation
Waller et al. (1999), Disney and Towill (2002, 2003), Yang et al. (2003),
Angulo et al. (2004), White and Censlive (2006), Song and
Dinwoodie (2008), Southard and Swenseth (2008), Sari (2008),
Ofuoku (2009), Hemmelmayr et al. (2010)
Classical analytical
modeling
Cachon and Zipkin (1999), Lee et al. (2000), Achabal et al. (2000), Dong
and Chu (2002), Wang et al. (2004), Choi et al. (2004), Yao et al.
(2007), Yao and Dresner (2008), Wong et al. (2009), Xu and Leung
(2009), Yang et al. (2010), Yao et al. (2010), Darwish and Odah
(2010), Hongjie et al. (2011), Kastsian and Mönnigmann (2011), Lee
and Ren (2011), Liao et al. (2011), Pasandideh et al. (2011), Chen
et al. (2012), Yu et al. (2012), Zanoni et al. (2012), Kristianto et al.
(2012)
Statistics
Daugherty et al. (1999), Kuk (2004)
Game theoretical
modeling
Yu et al. (2009a), Yu et al. (2009), Yu and Huang (2009b)
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
249

Table 2 Chronological state-of-the-art review in VMI
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Strategy
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
Simulation
1
1
2
1
1
3
1
1
Modeling
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
3
5
4
Statistics
1
1
Game theory
3
250
F. Torres et al.

Following this strategic approach, Blatherwick (1998), analyzed some of VMI’s
beneﬁts and disadvantages to the agents involved in the agreements. He also
showed how supply chains have evolved to become co-managed inventories.
Around the same time, Holmström (1998), studied and characterized the adapta-
tion of SAP R/3 in a partnership relationship within the context of VMI. Later,
Emigh (1999), presented VMI cases in different industrial sectors and analyzed
some technological requirements necessary to ensure successful implementation.
In this decade, Challener (2000), illustrated VMI implementation in the pharma-
ceutical industry through detailed presentation of some success stories. Addi-
tionally, Lee and Chu (2005), analyzed supply chain interaction and established
various control strategies, one of which was VMI. Recently, Saxena (2009),
characterized VMI systems and explained the reasons for judging that the system
is not always applicable or beneﬁcial to all actors in the chain.
A number of papers have addressed statistical characterization of VMI models,
starting with Daugherty et al. (1999), who presented the statistical results of a
survey about the implementation of automatic replenishment programs in different
industries. Kuk (2004), described the factors that may affect VMI’s effectiveness
as measured in service improvement and cost reduction in electric enterprises,
arguing that the success of VMI programs in some areas cannot be generalized to
others.
The articles that cover discrete-event simulation technique application were
written before 1999. The ﬁrst work on this subject was published by Waller et al.
(1999), who compared order frequency in different scenarios, facing inventory
reduction through experimentation with a VMI strategy. Additionally, Disney and
Towill (2002), designed a VMI system with different cost levels and proposed a
simulation method to determine the optimal parameters in the chain.
The same authors (Disney and Towill 2003) later compared various supply
chains with and without VMI through simulation models and found a substantial
reduction in the so-called bullwhip effect. In another article, Yang et al. (2003),
analyzed the impacts of different parameters on a supply chain consisting of a
single vendor supplying a set of retailers with VMI through discrete-event simu-
lation methods. Angulo et al. (2004), presented the variations of demand and cycle
times of a chain with VMI in the simulation of a four-level chain with stochastic
demand and lead times.
Following the simulation line, White and Censlive (2006), searched for an
appropriate factory production delay for VMI systems and showed that this time
depends on the level of aggregation and the representation of the delay, due to
production, as a ﬁnite or an exponential delay. Shortly after this, Song and
Dinwoodie (2008), utilized numerical experiments to show that the politics of
VMI and inventory management can be used on uncertain situations, resulting in
beneﬁts to the whole chain. Additionally, Southard and Swenseth (2008), showed
that VMI can achieve sufﬁcient economic beneﬁts by comparing inventory costs in
cooperative farms through discrete-event simulation. Elsewhere, Sari (2008),
compared CPFR and VMI models through a simulation of a four-level chain,
ﬁnding signiﬁcant inﬂuence of uncertain demand. The author shows that beneﬁts
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
251

are greater in a CPFR than in a VMI environment. Ofuoku (2009), compared total
optimal costs obtained for a chain with and without VMI using discrete-event
simulation. Finally, Hemmelmayr et al. (2010), developed a technology to plan
delivery routes to supply blood to hospitals and blood banks using VMI policies.
We also identiﬁed a set of articles using classical mathematical modeling
approaches, starting with Cachon and Zipkin (1999), who analyzed a two-level
chain with stationary stochastic demand, ﬁxed transport times and cooperative
inventory policies. The same approach was developed by Lee et al. (2000), who
modeled a chain consisting of a manufacturer and a retailer with stochastic
demand and information sharing between agents, thereby reducing inventories and
costs. Later, Achabal et al. (2000), described models of demand and inventory
forecasting in a VMI environment and found improvement in service level and
stock turnover. Dong and Chu (2002), analyzed the ways in which VMI affects a
two-level chain with deterministic demand, demonstrating that it reduces total
costs, while sometimes also reducing supplier beneﬁts. Wang et al. (2004), ana-
lyzed a chain consisting of a supplier and multiple retailers in a non-cooperative
environment and with stochastic demand. They demonstrated through a model that
coordination is required to achieve an optimal solution. Choi et al. (2004), mod-
eled a system of a supplier and a buyer with independent demand and variables
and examined the roles of the service levels and backorders in the system.
More recent mathematical modeling works developed deterministic approa-
ches. Yao et al. (2007), presented an analytical model applied to supply chains of
two agents with and without VMI and found inventory cost reductions. Yao and
Dresner (2008), planned a model consisting of a manufacturer and a retailer with
stochastic demand and examined management practices before and after infor-
mation-sharing implementation, continuous replenishment, and VMI. Wong et al.
(2009), showed how a sales rebate contract helps achieve supply chain coordi-
nation through a two-echelon model consisting of a supplier and multiple retailers.
Recently, Yang et al. (2010), evaluated the effects of a distribution center on a
VMI system consisting of a manufacturer, a distributor, and multiple retailers,
analyzing decision strategies of one agent (OSD) and two agents (TSD), which
generate different beneﬁt levels. Yao et al. (2010), demonstrated how a manu-
facturer might use an incentive contract with a distributor under a VMI arrange-
ment to gain market share through an analytical model. This approach models
manufacturer–distributor coordination to convert lost sales into backorders.
Darwish and Odah (2010), presented a model consisting of a vendor and multiple
agents under VMI and proposed a set of theorems and an efﬁcient algorithm to ﬁnd
an optimal total cost solution using KKT. Zanoni et al. (2012), considered a two-
level supply chain system with a single vendor and a single buyer at each level,
and investigated and compared different policies that the vendor might adopt to
exploit the advantages offered by the VMI with a consignment agreement when the
vendor’s production process is subject to learning effects. Kristianto et al. (2012),
proposed an adaptive fuzzy control application to support a VMI. Results showed
that the adaptive fuzzy VMI control surpasses fuzzy VMI control and traditional
VMI in terms of mitigating the bullwhip effect and lowering delivery overshoots
252
F. Torres et al.

and backorders. Liao et al. (2011), proposed an integrated location-inventory
distribution network problem that integrates the effects of facility location, dis-
tribution and inventory issues. The problem was formulated under the VMI setup.
The paper presented a multi-objective location-inventory problem (MOLIP) model
and investigated the use of a multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on the
non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA2) to solve MOLIP. Pasandideh
et al. (2011), proposed a genetic algorithm to ﬁnd the order quantities and the
maximum backorder levels so that the total inventory cost is minimized over a
two-level supply chain system consisting of several products, one supplier and one
retailer, in which shortages are backordered under a VMI-controlled system. Chen
et al. (2012), studied how a vendor’s optimal distribution policies with trans-
shipment combined with the variance of demand affects the optimal policy in a
VMI environment. The paper explores a two-echelon supply chain with one
supplier and two retailers in a planning horizon of two periods. Kastsian and
Mönnigmann (2011), addressed the steady-state optimization of a supply chain
that belongs to the class of VMI, automatic pipeline, inventory and order-based
production control systems (VMI-APIOBPCS). The supply chain is optimized
with the so-called normal vector method. Xu and Leung (2009), focused on a two-
party VMI channel in which the vendor operates the basic stocking and delivery
functions and makes inventory replenishment decisions, while the retailer is
responsible for customer acquisition and in-store services. This book proposed an
analytical model for the partners in the supply channel to determine the inventory
policy that optimizes net system proﬁt. Hongjie et al. (2011), studied the inventory
control of deteriorating items for suppliers under a VMI model, establishing bi-
level programming models of integrated delivery strategies and introducing a
genetic algorithm to solve the problem. Yu et al. (2012), studied a VMI-conduced
supply chain in which the manufacturing vendor decides how to manage the
system-wide inventories of its fast-deteriorating raw material and its slowly
deteriorating product. The paper proved the convexity of the cost functions and
proposed a golden search algorithm to ﬁnd the model’s optimal solution. Lee and
Ren (2011), proposed a periodic-review stochastic inventory model to examine the
beneﬁts of VMI in a global environment, in which the supplier and the retailer face
exchange rate uncertainty and incur different ﬁxed ordering costs. The paper
provides some analytical results, including the optimality of a state-dependent
(s, S) policy for the supplier.
A recent VMI approach has analyzed the model through game theory. In this
category, the work of Yu et al. (2009a), used evolutionary game theory to analyze
a strategy of evolutionary stability in supply chains with VMI. An earlier work by
Yu et al. (2009c), formulated a model of a manufacturer and multiple retailers and
proposed a computational algorithm based on an analysis of a response function
and a generic demand function. Additional work by Yu and Huang (2009b),
analyzed the interaction between a manufacturer and its retailers to optimize its
marketing strategy for a product with VMI by using a Nash game model between
agents.
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
253

3 Modeling Framework
The supply chain we study consists of a manufacturer and a buyer implementing
VMI for a single product. This problem has been studied by Dong and Chu (2002),
Choi et al. (2004), and Yao et al. (2007). These approaches propose an implicit
coordination strategy between supplier and buyer, but the studied models do not
include explicit synchronization and coordination mechanisms between buyer and
supplier. In our approach, as an alternative, we propose an unambiguous coordi-
nation scheme between manufacturer and buyer by means of which a coherent and
realistic VMI implementation can be achieved. A key difference is that we clearly
model this coordination strategy by means of a synchronization mechanism
between the buyer and manufacturer replenishment cycles.
The proposed coordinated manufacturer–buyer VMI model contains the design
parameters of the synchronization scheme between manufacturer and buyer,
ordering and holding cost in VMI and non-VMI conditions, and production and
demand rates. The decision variables of the model include batch sizes, manufac-
turer production uptime, manufacturer and buyer inventory replenishment times,
and integer coordination and synchronization constants.
The notation used in our model is:
Parameters: C, c, c0, H, h, P, r, d, d, g, g0
Variables: T, t, Q, q, Ts, k, L, U, ss, Is
Where:
C
Setup (ordering) costs for the manufacturer (in $/setup)
c
Setup (ordering) costs for the buyer without VMI (in $/setup)
c0
Setup (ordering) costs for the buyer with VMI (in $/setup)
H
Holding cost of manufacturer inventory (in $/unit/year)
h
Holding cost of buyer inventory (in $/unit/year)
P
Manufacturer production rate (in units/year)
r
Demand rate (in units/year)
d = H/h
Manufacturer and buyer inventory holding cost ratio
d = r/P
Demand and production rate
g = C/c
Manufacturer and buyer setup (ordering) cost ratio without VMI
g0 = C/c0
Manufacturer and buyer setup (ordering) cost ratio with VMI
T
Manufacturer replenishment time (in years)
t
Buyer replenishment time (in years)
t
Buyer replenishment time (in years)
Q
Manufacturer lot size or total quantity manufactured over replen-
ishment time T (in units)
q
Buyer lot size or total quantity demanded over replenishment time t
(in units)
Ts = q/P
Manufacturing time of buyer lot size q (in years)
k
Number of buyer shipments placed during the manufacturer
replenishment time (integer)
254
F. Torres et al.

L
Number of buyer shipments placed during the manufacturer uptime
(integer)
U
Manufacturer uptime (in years)
ss = U – Lt
Fractional manufacturer up time (in years)
Is
Manufacturer average inventory (in units)
The production plant manufactures and distributes a single product to the buyer,
who has a known deterministic annual demand rate that is the same for the
manufacturer and the buyer and is denoted by r. The system is studied before and
after VMI implementation and is presented in Fig. 1. In this article we adopted the
convention, used by Yao et al. (2007), that uppercase parameters are for the
manufacturer and lowercase parameters are for the buyer.
Annual holding inventory costs per unit are denoted as H for the manufacturer
and h for the buyer, in money units per unit per year. Single-order costs are
denoted with C for the manufacturer, c0 for the buyer with VMI, and c for the
buyer without VMI. Production rate is constant and denoted with P and P [ r. The
buyer replenishment time is represented by t. The manufacturer replenishment
time T is kt (with k integer) and contains L buyer replenishment cycles (with
L integer). The time required to produce a lot size required for the buyer (q) is
denoted by Ts. The lot size of the manufacturer is Q = kq. The explicit syn-
chronization mechanism between buyer and manufacturer consists in sending
to buyer from the manufacturer q units during the buyer replenishment
period t. These periodical replenishments are planned during the manufacturer
replenishment period T. In our model, we explicitly consider the uptime
U = Lt ? ss. This uptime is not taken into consideration in other manufacturer–
buyer VMI approaches (Dong and Chu 2002; Choi et al. 2004; Yao et al. 2007).
The explicit replenishment coordination mechanism between manufacturer and
buyer is represented in Fig. 2. In this study, we have deduced the mathematical
conditions (Eqs. 4a–12) needed to achieve the explicit manufacturer–buyer syn-
chronization, represented with integer coordination constants k and L. In our
model, the replenishment cycle of the manufacturer T is exactly k buyer replen-
ishment cycles and contains the uptime Lt ? ss. From a practical point of view,
this mechanism makes logistical coordination between manufacturer and buyer
much easier than in the other related VMI approaches (Yang et al. 2003; Dong and
Chu 2002; Choi et al. 2004; Yao et al. 2007).
Manufacturer
Q
q
r
H, C
h, c (without VMI)
h, c’ (withVMI)
Buyer
Fig. 1 Modeling framework
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
255

Without VMI, manufacturer and buyer relate to each other following a ﬁnite
production rate model. Because the buyer average inventory level is driven by a
simple EOQ model, his or her average inventory level is q/2. As a consequence,
the buyer’s average total annual holding and setup cost is given by:
f q
ð Þ ¼ c r
q þ h q
2
ð1Þ
Similarly, without VMI the manufacturer is guided by a ﬁnite production rate
model. The change in manufacturer inventory level over time is shown in Fig. 3.
Feasibility requires that P [ r. Average inventory level can be deduced as
(Q/21 - r/P), according to the economic production quantity (EPQ) model (Silver
et al. 1998). In consequence, the manufacturer’s average total annual holding and
setup cost is:
F Q
ð Þ ¼ C r
Q þ H Q
2
1  r
P


ð2Þ
It follows that with optimal order quantities q and Q for the buyer and manu-
facturer, the optimal total costs of the system without VMI are:
TC
NON VMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2r
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
CH 1  r
P


r
þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ch
p


ð3Þ
Considering our manufacturer–buyer coordinated and synchronized VMI sys-
tem shown in Fig. 2, manufacturer and buyer replenishment times are related
through an integer coordination constant called k. The synchronization scheme
time
Manufacturer inventory level NON VMI
Slope = P - r
Slope = - r
T
Fig. 3 Manufacturer level without VMI
t            2t
3t
4t
5t
6t
7t
8t
9t
kt
Pt-q
Pt
2Pt-q
3Pt-2q
LPt-(L-1)q
2Pt-2q
3Pt-3q
LPt-Lq
(k-L-1)q
(k-L-2)q
(k-L-3)q
2q
q
s
Lt
s
T
kt −
+τ
Fig. 2 Manufacturer’s inventory levels and the proposed manufacturer–buyer coordination
mechanism under VMI
256
F. Torres et al.

implies that the manufacturer sends the buyer the lot size q each replenishment
time t. In this sense, manufacturer lot size Q is equal to kq. If IS is the manu-
facturer’s average inventory, the total cost of the manufacturer–buyer coordinated
VMI system is given by:
TCVMI ¼ c0 r
q þ h q
2 þ C r
Q þ HIS
ð4aÞ
In our VMI approach, we can calculate the area under the curve for the man-
ufacturer’s inventory over his/her replenishment time T = kt. Dividing this value
by T, we get the manufacturer’s average inventory (denoted by IS), given by
Eq. 4b.
IS ¼ q
2 k 1  r
P


þ 2 r
P  1
h
i
ð4bÞ
The proof of Eq. 4b is shown in Appendix 1.
Graphically, it is possible to conclude that:
Ts ¼ q
P
ð5Þ
And by deﬁnition, the fractional manufacturer uptime must satisfy:
0  sS ¼ k  1
ð
Þ r
P t  Lt  t
ð6Þ
From the proposed relationship in (6), we obtain the next relationship between
synchronization constants L and k:
L ¼
k  1
ð
Þ r
P
j
k
ð7Þ
Using the terms identiﬁed above, it is possible to calculate the optimal supply
chain total ordering and inventory holding cost, solving the nonlinear model
represented in Eq. 8a, as shown in Appendix 2.
Min
c0 r
q þ h q
2 þ C r
kq þ H q
2 k 1  r
P


þ 2 r
P  1
h
i


s:t:
q  0
k 2 1; 2; . . .;
f
g
ð8aÞ
With k constant, taking the partial derivatives of TCVMI with respect to q, and
setting the respective equation equal to zero, the optimal cost in terms of k is given
in Eq. 8b.
TC
VMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2r
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c0 þ C
k


s
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
h þ H k 1  r
P


þ 2 r
P  1
h
i
n
o
r
"
#
ð8bÞ
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
257

Optimizing the expression in Eq. 8b and relaxing the integrality condition on k,
the optimal supply chain total ordering and inventory holding cost is calculated in
Eq. 8c.
TC
VMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2r
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
CH 1 r
P


r
þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c0 hþH 2 r
P 1


n
o
r
	

ð8cÞ
The new optimal order quantities (lot sizes) for the buyer with and without
VMI, as shown in Appendix 2, are given by the following equations, respectively:
q
VMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2c0r
h þ H 2 r
P  1




s
ð9Þ
q
NON VMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2cr
h
r
ð10Þ
Due to VMI’s savings simpliﬁcation, we can see that c0 \ c, and, as the rela-
tionship between annual holding inventory costs per unit is h [ H, we cannot
conclude a relationship between q
VMI and q
non VMI, as either one can be larger than
the other. This result differs from that in the literature. On the other hand, it is
possible to calculate the optimal order quantity for the manufacturer given in
Eq. 11. However, in this case we can show that the manufacturer lot size is the
same with or without VMI.
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Cr
H 1  r
P


s
ð11Þ
Our analysis can be accomplished by deﬁning the ratios between the demand
and production rates (d = r/P), the manufacturer holding cost and the buyer
inventory (d = H/h), the ordering cost without VMI (g = C/c), and the ordering
cost with VMI (g0 = C/c0). The coordination constant kVMI between the manu-
facturer and the buyer with VMI is an integer value that we can approach from:
kVMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g0
2d  1
ð
Þ þ 1
d


1  d
ð
Þ
s
ð12Þ
Values deduced from our coordination model in Eqs. 3 and 8a–12 are taken as
the support for the proposed deﬁnitions of performance measurement in the sen-
sitivity analysis explained in the next paragraph.
Example:
A manufacturer and a buyer are implementing the coordinated VMI scheme.
The operational parameters of the supply chain are:
C
$300
c
$100
c0
$80
258
F. Torres et al.

H
$10/unit/year
h
$20/unit/year
P
2,000 units/year
r
1,200 units/year
Applying our model, Table 3 shows the results of our manufacturer–buyer
coordinated VMI scheme.
For the selected parameters, the supply chain receives economic rewards from
implementation of the proposed coordinated manufacturer–buyer VMI scheme. In
this case, total supply chain costs are reduced by 3.38 %. The buyer receives cost
reductions equivalent to 10.19 %, and average inventory level decreases of about
18.35 %. However, the manufacturer sees his or her costs ampliﬁed by 5.41 %.
The proposed coordinated scheme implies than each manufacturer replenishment
cycle (0.37 years) contains ﬁve buyer replenishment cycles (0.07 years), with
0.18 years as the manufacturer uptime.
If demand is now increased to r = 1,800 units/year while the other parameters
stay unchanged, the supply chain will not receive economic rewards from
implementation of the proposed coordinated manufacturer–buyer VMI scheme, as
shown in Table 4. Supply chain total costs increase by 4.21 %. The buyer receives
cost reductions equivalent to 9.39 %, and average inventory level decreases by
23.91 %, while the manufacturer’s total costs increase by 39.31 %. For the new
combination of parameters, the proposed coordinated scheme implies that each
manufacturer replenishment cycle (0.57 years) contains 10 buyer replenishment
cycles (0.06 years), with 0.46 years as the manufacturer uptime.
Table 3 Results of the manufacturer–buyer coordinated VMI scheme
Without VMI
With coordinated VMI
Manufacturer
Ordering cost ($/year)
$ 848.53
$ 804.98
Inventory holding cost ($/year)
$ 848.53
$ 983.87
Total cost ($/year)
$ 1,697.06
$ 1,788.85
Q (units)
424.26
447.21
L
–
2
t (years)
0.09
0.07
ss (years)
–
0.03
Uptime (years)
–
0.18
T (years)
0.35
0.37
Ts (years)
–
0.04
Buyer
Ordering cost ($/year)
$ 1,095.45
$ 1,073.31
Inventory holding cost ($/year)
$ 1,095.45
$ 894.43
Total cost ($/year)
$ 2,190.89
$ 1,967.74
q (units)
109.54
89.44
Supply chain
Total ordering cost ($/year)
$ 1,943.97
$ 1,878.30
Total inventory holding cost ($/year)
$ 1,943.97
$ 1,878.30
Total cost ($/year)
$ 3,887.95
$ 3,756.59
Coordination constant k
3.87
5
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
259

The sensitivity analysis presented in the next section studies the effects of
combining parameters over different proposed performance measurements. Ana-
lytical conditions are derived by explaining the effect of the parameters on the
performance of the proposed coordinated VMI scheme.
4 Sensitivity Analysis
4.1 Total Cost Savings Throughout the Supply Chain
This section discusses some details related to our sensitivity analysis associated
with the percentage of savings in total costs to the supply chain. In order to
compute the system performance, we proposed the indicator V, deﬁned in Eq. 13.
The analysis was validated by selecting different values of ratios d and d (d = H/h,
d = r/P), each varying in the (0, 1) interval. The ordering cost parameters were
chosen as C = 4,000, c = 100, and c0 = 70. As a result, a range of levels for the
percentage of savings in total cost was obtained from the implementation of the
coordinated VMI scheme, as shown in Fig. 4.
The proposed performance measurement V is:
V ¼ TC
NON VMI  TC
VMI
TC
NON VMI
ð13Þ
Table 4 Results of the manufacturer–buyer coordinated VMI scheme, increasing demand to
r = 1800 units/year
Without VMI
With coordinated VMI
Manufacturer
Ordering cost ($/year)
$ 519.62
$ 528.98
Inventory holding cost ($/year)
$ 519.62
$ 918.75
Total cost ($/year)
$ 1,039.23
$ 1,447.73
Q (units)
1,039.23
1,020.84
L
–
8
t (years)
0.07
0.06
ss (years)
–
0.01
Uptime (years)
–
0.46
T (years)
0.58
0.57
Ts (years)
–
0.05
Buyer
Ordering cost ($/year)
$ 1,341.64
$ 1,410.61
Inventory holding cost ($/year)
$ 1,341.64
$ 1,020.84
Total cost ($/year)
$ 2,683.28
$ 2,431.44
q (units)
134.16
102.08
Supply chain
Total ordering cost ($/year)
$ 1,861.26
$ 1,939.59
Total inventory holding cost ($/year)
$ 1,861.26
$ 1,939.59
Total cost ($/year)
$ 3,722.51
$ 3,879.18
Coordination constant k
–
10
260
F. Torres et al.

Using the deductions previously obtained in Eqs. 3 and 8, and by simplifying
some terms, we arrived at the deﬁnition for V described in Eq. 14, as shown in
Appendix 3:
V ¼
1 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g
g0 1  d þ 2dd
ð
Þ
q
1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
gd 1  d
ð
Þ
p
ð14Þ
With the selected parameters shown in this paragraph, the sensitivity analysis of
the percentage of total cost savings V shows that some d greater than 0.45 and
some d near one generate a negative proﬁt from VMI. In addition, for values of
d near zero, the percentage of total cost savings V is always non-negative.
4.2 Savings in Inventory Holding Costs for the Buyer
Figure 5 illustrates a second sensitivity analysis, performed with different values
for the ratios d and d for the percentage of savings from the buyer’s holding
inventory cost performance indicator (Z) with the selected parameters from
Sect. 4.1.
The performance measurement Z presented in Fig. 5 is deﬁned in Eq. 15, where
IHCbuyer,VMI
*
and IHCbuyer,non VMI
*
represent the optimal buyer inventory holding
costs with and without VMI, respectively.
Z ¼
IHC
buyer; non VMI  IHC
buyer; VMI
IHC
buyer; non VMI
ð15Þ
According to this relationship, it is possible to obtain an equivalent expression
in terms of previously known variables, which are represented in Eq. 16, as shown
in Appendix 3:
Fig. 4 Sensitivity of V to
changes in d and d
(C = 4000, c = 100,
c0 = 70)
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
261

Z ¼ 1 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g
g0 1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
½

r
ð16Þ
For this sensitivity ordering, costs remained constant at the level set for the case
of V, obtaining the graph presented in Fig. 5, with the same selected parameters
from Sect. 4.1.
As Fig. 5 shows, if Z is positive, then VMI implementation results in savings.
The combinations of selected variables generate positive beneﬁts with VMI
implementation, except for at a few levels, those below d = 0.2 and higher than
d = 0.6, which generate negative results for Z.
4.3 Savings in Inventory Holding Costs
for the Manufacturer
Figure 6 shows the results of a sensitivity analysis performed with different values
d and d for the percentage of savings on manufacturer inventory holding costs
performance indicator Y with the parameters set as deﬁned in Sect. 4.1.
The performance measurement Y presented in Fig. 6 is deﬁned in Eq. 17, where
IHCmanufacturer,VMI
*
and IHCmanufacturer,non VMI
*
represent the optimal manufacturer
inventory holding costs with and without VMI, respectively.
Y ¼
IHC
manufacturer; non VMI  IHC
manufacturer; VMI
IHC
manufacturer; non VMI
ð17Þ
Substituting terms deﬁned in this article leads to the relationship in Eq. 18, as
shown in Appendix 3:
Fig. 5 Sensitivity of Z to
changes in d and d.
(C = 4000, c = 100,
c0 = 70)
262
F. Torres et al.

Y ¼ 1  2d
ð
Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  d
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
d
g0 1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
½

s
ð18Þ
From the above equation, we can perform the same analysis with the previous
variables remaining constant, keeping ordering costs at the same levels as those of
previous cases.
After this analysis we can see that, in the selected scenario of a VMI system,
some values generate positive beneﬁts for the manufacturer’s costs, and therefore a
d lower than 0.5 will return a positive value for the performance measurement
Y. This observation is also shown mathematically from the ratio of the described
variables. Furthermore, we performed a sensitivity analysis on the total cost of
placing orders for the manufacturer. In this case, we can show, following Eq. 11,
that the cost to the manufacturer is the same when placing an order with or without
VMI. Therefore, manufacturer total ordering costs are not affected by the imple-
mentation of our coordinated VMI scheme.
4.4 Savings in Buyer Ordering Costs
For the sensitivity analysis of the buyer’s ordering cost before and after imple-
menting VMI, we deﬁned the percentage of savings in the implementation of a
VMI policy in the buyer’s order cost performance indicator (N), according to
Eq. 19, where OCbuyer,VMI
*
and OCbuyer,non
VMI
*
represent the optimal buyer
ordering costs with and without VMI, respectively.
N ¼
OC
buyer;non VMI  OC
buyer;VMI
OC
buyer;non VMI
ð19Þ
Fig. 6 Sensitivity of Y to
changes in d and
d. (C = 4000, c = 100,
c0 = 70)
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
263

Dividing these costs into their components and replacing the order quantities
from Eqs. 9 and 10, we obtained the expression presented in Eq. 20, as shown in
Appendix 3:
N ¼ 1 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g dð2d  1Þ þ 1
½

g0
s
ð20Þ
Using the same deﬁned cost levels, there are values for which the VMI
implementation process is not beneﬁcial to the buyer, since the relationship d = r/P
generates outstanding proﬁt at a decreasing rate for values greater than 0.5. In this
case, with the selected parameters shown in Sect. 4.1, negative percentages are
obtained for certain values of d = H/h greater than 0.7, as shown in Fig. 7.
4.5 Savings in Manufacturer Total Costs
For the sensitivity analysis of manufacturer’s total cost before and after imple-
menting VMI, we propose the performance measurement S, which is deﬁned as the
percentage of savings in the implementation of the coordinated VMI policy on
manufacturer’s total costs. With the selected parameters shown in Sect. 4.1, S is
deﬁned in Eq. 21 and represented in Fig. 8, where TCmanufacturer,VMI
*
and TCman-
ufacturer,non VMI
* represent the optimal manufacturer total costs with and without
VMI, respectively.
S ¼ TC
manufacturer;non VMI  TC
manufacturer;VMI
TC
manufacturer;non VMI
ð21Þ
Substituting terms deﬁned in this paper result in the relationship shown in
Eq. 22, as shown in Appendix 3:
Fig. 7 Sensitivity of N to
changes in d and
d. (C = 4000, c = 100,
c0 = 70)
264
F. Torres et al.

S ¼ ð1  2dÞ
2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
d
g0ð1  dÞð1 þ dð2d  1ÞÞ
s
ð22Þ
From Eq. 22, we can perform our sensitivity analysis for S with all previous
parameters remaining constant.
The analysis of manufacturer total costs is performed taking the ﬁrst derivative
of the performance measurement S with respect to g0. The result is shown in
Eq. 23.
oS
og0 ¼
ð1 þ 2dÞ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
d
g0ð1þdÞð1þdð2d1ÞÞ
q
4g0
ð23Þ
We can show for this case that S grows as d [ 0.5 and decreases as d \ 0.5.
4.6 Savings in Buyer’s Total Costs
Our last sensitivity analysis corresponds to buyer’s total costs with and without
VMI. The performance measurement T is the percentage of savings in buyer total
costs resulting from the implementation of a coordinated VMI policy. T is deﬁned
in Eq. 24, where TCbuyer,VMI
*
and TCbuyer,non VMI
*
represent the optimal buyer total
costs with and without VMI, respectively.
T ¼
TC
buyer; non VMI  TC
buyer; VMI
TC
buyer; non VMI
ð24Þ
Fig. 8 Sensitivity of S to
changes in d and
d (C = 4000, c = 100,
c0 = 70)
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
265

Breaking these costs down into their components and replacing the order
quantities from Eqs. 9 and 10, we obtained the expression presented in Eq. 25, as
shown in Appendix 3:
T ¼ 1  1
2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃg
g0
r
2 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
p
(
)
ð25Þ
From the above equation, we can perform the same analysis with the previous
parameters remaining constant.
Figure 9 shows that a large set of values of d and d generate positive beneﬁts
for the buyer in the VMI agreement, with the selected parameters shown in
Sect. 4.1. In addition, when d is near 0 and d is near 1, T is negative and strongly
decreases to 1. In addition, T is very responsive to changes in d and d when d is
near 1 and d is near 0 or 1.
From our analysis, we obtain the following ﬁndings:
• The potential effect of changes in the g and g0 values on the beneﬁts to the buyer
in the VMI agreement could be evaluated by computing the ﬁrst derivative of
T with respect to the parameters g and g0, as described in Eqs. 26 and 27. As a
result, T decreases when the parameter g (g = C/c) increases and increases
when the parameter g0 (g0 = C/c0) increases.
oT
og0 ¼
g
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
1þdð1þ2dÞ
q
þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ dð1 þ 2dÞ
p
h
i
4g02
ﬃﬃﬃ
g
g0
q
[ 0
ð26Þ
oT
og ¼ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
1þdð1þ2dÞ
q
þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ dð1 þ 2dÞ
p
4g0
ﬃﬃﬃ
g
g0
q
\0
ð27Þ
Fig. 9 Sensitivity of T to
changes in d and
d (C = 4000, c = 100,
c0 = 70)
266
F. Torres et al.

• Savings from VMI implementation in supply chain total costs (V) decrease when
the parameter g (g = C/c) increases and increase when the parameter g0
(g0 = C/c0) increases, which is checked from the partial derivatives using
Eqs. 28 and 29.
oV
og ¼
1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2d1þ1
d
1d
ð
Þg0
q
	

1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
gd 1d
ð
Þ
q
h
i2
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
d 1  d
ð
Þ
p
 1
2 g3=2


\0
ð28Þ
oV
og0 ¼ 
1
1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
gd 1d
ð
Þ
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2d  1 þ 1
d
1  d
ð
Þ
s
 1
2 g3=2


[ 0
ð29Þ
• The percentage of savings in manufacturer inventory holding costs (Y) is ana-
lyzed from the partial derivatives with respect to g0 shown in Eq. 30.
oY
og0 ¼
1 þ 2d
ð
Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
d
1þ 1þ2d
ð
Þd
q
2g3=2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  d
p
ð30Þ
• In this case, values of the ﬁrst derivative of Y with respect to g0 depend on
values of d, as shown in Eqs. 31 and 32.
oY
og0 \0 if 0\d\0; 5
ð31Þ
oY
og0 [ 0 if 0; 5\d\1
ð32Þ
• The performance measurement Z, related to buyer inventory holding costs, is
analyzed from the partial derivatives with respect to the parameters g and g0, in
Eqs. 33 and 34. In the same way, results show that Z decreases when the
parameter g (g = C/c) increases and increases when the parameter g0 (g0 = C/c0)
increases.
oZ
og0 ¼
1
g0
h i3=2
2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1dþ2dd
g
q
[ 0
ð33Þ
oZ
og ¼ 
ﬃﬃﬃ
1
g0
q
2g
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1dþ2dd
g
q
\0
ð34Þ
• From the partial derivatives of the percentage of savings in the implementation
of a VMI policy in buyer’s order cost performance indicator (N) with respect to
the parameters g and g0, represented in Eqs. 35 and 36, we deduce similarly that
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
267

N decreases when the parameter g (g = C/c) increases and increases when the
parameter g0 (g0 = C/c0) increases.
oN
og ¼ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ d 1 þ 2d
ð
Þ
p
2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g0g
p
\0
ð35Þ
oN
og0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g 1 þ d 1 þ 2d
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
p
2g03=2
[ 0
ð36Þ
5 Conclusions
This article analyzes the performance of a supply chain under a coordinated
manufacturer–buyer VMI approach. The main contribution of the proposed model
is that it includes an explicit coordinated manufacturer–buyer VMI scheme related
to the manufacturer’s uptime and non-productive time. The model proposes syn-
chronization between the manufacturer’s and the buyer’s replenishment cycles.
The realistic manufacturer–buyer coordination scheme makes VMI logistics
implementation much easier, which is not the case in other related VMI approa-
ches. Our proposed synchronization scheme was modeled and optimized. Studying
the supply chain under ordering and holding cost optimization, mathematical
expressions were deduced for:
• Buyer and manufacturer lot sizes
• Inventory replenishment times
• Buyer and manufacturer average inventory levels
• Manufacturer uptimes
• Integer coordination constants
• Buyer and manufacturer total, holding and ordering costs
In conclusion, we have presented and developed a comprehensive model
showing an explicit manufacturer–buyer coordination mechanism for a VMI
implementation.
5.1 Managerial Implications
The objective of this study was to compare the behavior of the total supply chain
costs, individual buyer costs, and manufacturer costs in a synchronized VMI
implementation, according to a sensitivity analysis on the model parameters. We
have proposed different performance measurements to evaluate the beneﬁts of our
coordinated scheme. The proposed performance measurements evaluate costs to
the manufacturer, buyer, and supply chain. Our analysis of the savings to total
268
F. Torres et al.

supply chain costs with the implementation of VMI has shown from the partial
derivatives of performance indicators that total savings increase at an increasing
rate in g0 = C/c0 (the ratio between manufacturer and buyer of ordering cost with
VMI) and decrease at an increasing rate in g = C/c (the ratio between the man-
ufacturer and buyer ordering cost without VMI). Furthermore, savings to total
buyer costs and buyer inventory holding and ordering costs with the implemen-
tation of VMI also increase at an increasing rate in g0 and decrease at an increasing
rate in g. When d = r/P (the ratio between demand and production rates) is lower
than 0.5, the savings to manufacturer inventory holding costs decrease at an
increasing rate in g0. When d is greater than 0.5, the savings to manufacturer
inventory holding costs increase at an increasing rate in g0.
Savings to the manufacturer’s inventory holding cost and to the total cost with
VMI implementation will be non-negative when d is lower than 0.5. In general,
our sensitivity analysis determined that there is a set of values for the levels of c,
c0, d, and d that generates non-negative beneﬁts with the implementation of a VMI
system for both the manufacturer and buyer. Table 5 shows a summary of the set
of conditions that must satisfy all parameters to accomplish non-negative beneﬁts
with the implementation of the VMI-coordinated approach for both the manu-
facturer and buyer. From a practical point of view, these results have clear man-
agerial implications and can explain the general buyer and manufacturer
expectations in the implementation of a coordinated VMI approach under different
supply chain conditions. The analysis presented in Table 5 shows that it is com-
pletely possible and realistic that both manufacturer and buyer obtain positive
beneﬁts in VMI implementations using the proposed coordination scheme in a
win–win relationship. Our model shows that this can be accomplished by selecting
particular combinations of c, c0, d, and d parameters as shown in the last column of
Table 5. This ﬁnding differs from that in the literature. The main result of the study
is to show how manufacturer and buyer can both obtain proﬁts under a coordinated
VMI implementation.
Table 5 Set of conditions to achieve non-negative beneﬁts with the implementation of the VMI-
coordinated approach, according to the performance measurements for each agent
Performance
measurement
Cost
Agent
Agent obtains a non-negative
beneﬁt from VMI implementation when
Z
Inventory holding
cost
Buyer
d [ 1
2 or d\ 1
2

and dð2d  1Þ [ c0c
c

Y
Inventory holding
cost
Manufacturer d\ 1
2
N
Ordering cost
Buyer
0\d\ 1
2 or
1
2 \d\
	
1 and dð2d  1Þ\ cc0
c0

M
Ordering cost
Manufacturer Equal with and without VMI
T
Total cost
Buyer
ﬃﬃﬃ
c0
c
q
\
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1þ2dðd1
2Þ
p
1þdðd1
2Þ
S
Total cost
Manufacturer d\ 1
2
V
Total cost
Chain
c
c0 [ dð2d  1Þ þ 1
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
269

A non-empty intersection of c, c0, d, and d values will give a general condition
need to achieve non-negative beneﬁts to both the manufacturer and the buyer with
the implementation of VMI, when performance measurements T and S accomplish
the simultaneous settings shown in the last column of Table 5. In addition, we can
deduce two independent sufﬁcient conditions required to achieve non-negative
beneﬁts to the buyer’s inventory holding cost. These conditions are described by
the performance measurement Z in Table 5. The ﬁrst one is associated with values
of d greater than 0.5, while the second corresponds to values of d lower than 0.5
with dð2d  1Þ [ c0c
c . In the same way, a non-negative beneﬁt in the manufac-
turer’s inventory holding cost is described by the performance measurement Y and
is associated with values of d lower than 0.5. Also, there are two sets of values
for c, c0, d, and d that give non-negative beneﬁts with the implementation of
VMI for the buyer’s ordering cost. These sets are described by 0\d\ 1
2 and
1
2 \d\
	
1 and dð2d  1Þ\ cc0
c0

. Finally, the whole supply chain will achieve
non-negative beneﬁts from VMI implementation when c
c0 [ dð2d  1Þ þ 1 .
From the models developed in this work, under our proposed manufacturer–
buyer synchronization scheme, it follows that the buyer’s optimal order quantity
under the VMI-coordinated approach is lower than that without VMI when
c0
c \dð2d  1Þ þ 1, according to Appendix 4. This result differs from and com-
plements previous ﬁndings in the literature (Dong and Chu 2002; Choi et al. 2004;
Yao et al. 2007). In our approach, the buyer’s optimal order quantity under the
VMI-coordinated approach is not always lower than that without VMI. However,
Table 5 shows that it is even possible to select a combination of the parametersc,
c0, d, and d that generates non-negative cost beneﬁts for buyer, manufacturer, and
the supply chain, with the buyer’s optimal order quantity lower under the VMI-
coordinated approach than that without VMI. From our models, we can show that
these conditions are accomplished when 0\d\ 1
2 and
c0
c \dð2d  1Þ þ 1, as
shown in Appendix 4.
6 Future Work
The next step in this research topic will be the extension of this type of analysis to
other models of supply chains with stochastic demands, including VMI, systems
formed by a manufacturer and multiple buyers, multi-product supply chains, and
delivery-time links between manufacturers and buyers, including transportation
costs.
We also expect that some real applications of this model to the industry will be
undertaken, possibly together with system simulations using specialized software.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank to the anonymous referee and to the editor
for their valuable comments.
270
F. Torres et al.

Appendix 1
To calculate the area under the curve for inventory levels of the manufacturer, the
geometry of the Fig. 2 is considered as follows:
First we analyzed the manufacturer’s inventory levels to obtain the equation for
the area under the curve:
AS ¼ Pt t
2 þ t
2 Pt  q þ 2Pt  q
ð
Þ þ t
2 2Pt  2q þ 3Pt  2q
ð
Þ
þ    þ t
2
L  1
½
Pt  L  1
½
q þ LPt  L  1
½
q
ð
Þ
þ ss
2 LPt  Lq þ k  L  1
½
q
ð
Þ þ t  ss
ð
Þ k  L  1
½
q
þ t k  L  2
½
q þ k  L  3
½
q þ    þ q
ð
Þ þ PTs
Ts
2
ð37Þ
Figure 2 gives the average inventory level as follows:
IS ¼
Pt2
2
	
X
L
i¼1
i þ
X
L1
i¼1
i
 
!
 qt
X
L1
i¼1
i þ
k  L  1
ð
Þq þ Lpt  Lq
½
 ss
2
þ k  L  1
ð
Þq t  ss
ð
Þ þ qt
X
kL2
i¼1
i þ P T2
s
2 =kt
ð38Þ
Replacing it with the relationships included in Eqs. 5 and 6, we can turn this
equation into:
IS ¼
Pt2L2
2
	
 qtL L  1
ð
Þ
2
þ kq þ q þ Lpt
½
 ss
2 þ qt
2 k  L  1
ð
Þ k  L
ð
Þ þ P T2
s
2

=kt
¼ Pt2L2
2
	
 qtL L  1
ð
Þ
2
þ ss
2 P Lt þ q
P  k q
P


þ qt
2 k  L  1
ð
Þ k  L
ð
Þ þ P T2
s
2

=kt
¼
Pt2L2
2
	
 qtL L  1
ð
Þ
2
 P
2
Lt þ q
P  k q
P

2
þ qt
2 k  L  1
ð
Þ k  L
ð
Þ þ P T2
s
2

=kt
¼
Pt2L2
2
	
 qtL L  1
ð
Þ
2
þ P
2
q2
P2 
Lt þ q
P  k q
P

2
	

þ qt
2 k  L  1
ð
Þ k  L
ð
Þ

=kt
¼
Pt2L2
2
	
 qtL L  1
ð
Þ
2
þ P
2 L2t2 þ Lt 2 kq
P  2 q
P


þ kq2
P2 2  k
ð
Þ
	

þ qt
2 k  L  1
ð
Þ k  L
ð
Þ

=kt
¼
kq
2
2 q
P  k q
P


	
þ q
2 tk2  q
2 tk

=kt
¼
krt
2
2 rt
P  k rt
P


	
þ rt
2 tk2  rt
2 tk

=kt
¼ q
2 2 r
P  1 þ k 1  r
P


h
i
ð39Þ
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
271

And ﬁnally:
IS ¼ q
2
1 þ 2r
P þ k 1  r
P




ð40Þ
Appendix 2
With VMI, the total costs of the system are:
TCVMI ¼ c0 r
q þ h q
2 þ C r
Q þ HIS
¼ c0 r
q þ h q
2 þ C r
kq þ H q
2 k 1  r
P


þ 2 r
P  1
h
i
Taking the ﬁrst derivative with respect to q and equaling to zero to minimize
TCVMI:
oTCVMI
oq
¼ 0 ¼ c0 r
q2 þ h
2  C r
kq2 þ H
2 k 1  r
P


þ 2 r
P  1
h
i
Therefore:
q2
VMI ¼
2r c0 þ C
k


h þ H k 1  r
P


þ 2 r
P  1




ð41Þ
And:
TCVMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2r c0 þ C
k


	

h þ H k 1  r
P


þ 2 r
P  1
h
i
h
i
s
Taking the ﬁrst derivative of the last expression with respect to k and equaling
to zero to minimize TCVMI:
0 ¼
c0 þ C
k


H 1  r
P


 C
k2 h þ H k 1  r
P


þ 2 r
P  1
h
i
h
i
As a result:
k2 ¼ C h þ H 2 r
P  1




c0H 1  r
P


272
F. Torres et al.

Replacing the last expression in Eq. 41, we obtain:
q2
VMI ¼
2r kc0 þ C
ð
Þ
hk þ H k2 1  r
P


þ k 2 r
P  1






¼
2r kc0 þ C
ð
Þ
hk þ
C hþH 2r
P1
ð
Þ
½

c0
þ HK 2 r
P  1


	

¼
2rc0 kc0 þ C
ð
Þ
h kc0 þ C
ð
Þ þ 2 r
P  1


H kc0 þ C
ð
Þ

 ¼
2rc0
h þ H 2 r
P  1




As a consequence:
QVMI ¼ kqVMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
C h þ H 2 r
P  1




c0H 1  r
P


2rc0
h þ H 2 r
P  1




s
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Cr
H 1  r
P


s
And:
TCVMI ¼ qVMI h þ H k 1  r
P


þ 2 r
P  1
h
i
h
i
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2rc0
h þ H 2 r
P  1




s
h þ H
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
C h þ H 2 r
P  1




c0H 1  r
P


s
1  r
P


þ 2 r
P  1
"
#
"
#
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2r
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
CH 1  r
P


r
þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c0 h þ H 2 r
P  1


h
i
r
	

Appendix 3
The percentage of savings in total costs for the supply chain is deﬁned according to
performance measurement V as:
V ¼ TC
NON VMI  TC
VMI
TC
NON VMI
¼ 1 
TC
VMI
TC
NON VMI
Replacing:
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
273

V ¼ 1 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2r
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
CH 1  r
P


q
þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c0 h þ H 2 r
P  1




q
h
i
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2r
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
CH 1  r
P


q
þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ch
p
h
i
¼ 1 
1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2r
P1
ð
Þþh
H
C
c0 1r
P
ð
Þ
r
1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
C
c
H
h 1r
P
ð
Þ
q
¼ 1 
1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2d1
ð
Þþ1
d
g0 1d
ð
Þ
q
1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
gd 1d
ð
Þ
q
¼
1 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g
g0 1  d þ 2dd
ð
Þ
q
1 þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
gd 1  d
ð
Þ
p
The percentage of savings in inventory holding cost for the buyer is deﬁned
according to performance measurement Z as:
Z ¼
IHC
buyer; non VMI  IHC
buyer; VMI
IHC
buyer; non VMI
¼ 1 
HC
buyer; VMI
IHC
buyer; non VMI
¼ 1  h qVMI
2
h qnon VMI
2
¼ 1 
qVMI
qnon VMI
¼ 1 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c0h
c h þ 2 r
P  1


H


s
¼ 1 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g
g0 1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
½

r
The percentage of savings in inventory holding cost for the manufacturer is
deﬁned according to performance measurement Y as:
Y ¼
IHC
manufacturer;non VMI  IHC
manufacturer;VMI
IHC
manufacturer;non VMI
¼ 1 
IHC
manufacturer;VMI
IHC
manufacturer;non VMI
¼ 1  H qVMI
2
k 1  r
P þ 2 r
P  1




H Qnon VMI
2
1  r
P


¼
 2 r
P  1


1  r
P


ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
C hþH 2r
P1
ð
Þ
½

c0H 1r
P
ð
Þ
r
¼ 1  2d
ð
Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  d
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
d
g0 1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
½

s
The percentage of savings in buyer ordering cost is deﬁned according to per-
formance measurement N as:
N ¼
OC
buyer; non VMI  OC
buyer; VMI
OC
buyer; non VMI
¼ 1 
OC
buyer;VMI
OC
buyer;non VMI
¼ 1 
c0
r
qVMI
c
r
qnon VMI
¼ 1 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c0
c
1 þ H
h
2 r
P  1


	

s
¼ 1 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g 1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
½

g0
s
274
F. Torres et al.

The percentage of savings in manufacturer total costs is deﬁned according to
performance measurement S as:
S ¼ TC
manufacturer;non VMI  TC
manufacturer;VMI
TC
manufacturer;non VMI
¼ 1 
TC
manufacturer;VMI
TC
manufacturer;non VMI
¼ 1 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2CrH 1  r
P


q
þ H
2 2 r
P  1


ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2rc0
hþH 2r
P1
ð
Þ
½

q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2CrH 1  r
P


q
¼ 1
2 1  2 r
P


ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Hc0
C 1  r
P


h þ H 2 r
P  1




s
¼ 1
2 1  2d
ð
Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
d
g0 1  d
ð
Þ 1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
½

s
The percentage of savings in buyer’s total costs is deﬁned according to per-
formance measurement T as:
T ¼
TC
buyer; non VMI  TC
buyer; VMI
TC
buyer; non VMI
¼ 1 
TC
buyer; VMI
TC
buyer; non VMI
¼ 1 
c0
r
qVMI þ h qVMI
2


hqVMI
¼ 1 
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2crh
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rc0
2
h þ H 2 r
P  1


h
i
r
þ h
2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2rc0
h þ H 2 r
P  1




s
"
#
¼ 1  1
2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c0
c
r
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ H
h
2 r
P  1


r
þ
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ H
h 2 r
P  1


q
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼ 1  1
2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃg
g0
r
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
p
þ
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
p
(
)
¼ 1  1
2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃg
g0
r
2 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
p
(
)
Appendix 4
Given that:
qnon VMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2rc
h
r
;
qVMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2rc0
h þ H 2 r
P  1




s
Therefore, if qnon VMI
qVMI ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c
c0 1 þ d 2d  1
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
p
[ 1 then c0
c \dð2d  1Þ þ 1
Furthermore,
If 0\d\ 1
2 ; then
ﬃﬃﬃ
c0
c
q
\
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1þ2dðd1
2Þ
p
1þdðd1
2Þ
because the function F x
ð Þ ¼ 1þ2dx
1þdx
ð
Þ2 is non-
decreasing in the interval  1
2 ; 0


and c0\c.
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
275

References
Achabal, D., McIntyre, S., Smith, S., Kalyanam, K., 2000, A decision support system for vendor
managed inventory, Journal of Retailing 76 (4), 430.
Angulo, A., Nachtmann, H., Waller, M., 2004, Supply chain information sharing in a Vendor-
managed inventory partnership, Journal of Business Logistics 25 (1), 101-120.
Blatherwick, A., 1998, Vendor-managed inventory: Fashion fad or important supply chain
strategy?, Supply Chain Management 3 (1), 10-11.
Cachon, G., Fisher, M., 1997, Campbell soup’s continuous replenishment program: evaluation
and enhanced inventory decision rules, Production and Operations Management 6 (3), 266-
276.
Cachon, G., Zipkin, P., 1999, Competitive and cooperative inventory policies in a two-stage
supply chain, Management Science 45 (7), 936-947.
Challener, C., 2000, Taking the VMI step to collaborative commerce, Chemical Market Reporter
258 (21), 11-12.
Chen, X., Hao, G., Li, X., Yiu, K.F.C., 2012, The impact of Demand variability and
transshipment on vendor’s distribution policies under vendor managed inventory strategy.
International Journal of Production Economics 139 (1), 42-48.
Choi, K., Dai, J., Song, J., 2004, On measuring supplier performance under vendor-managed
inventory programs in capacitated supply chains, Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management 6 (1), 53-72.
Cottrill, K., 1997, Reforging the supply chain, Journal of Business Strategy 81 (6), 35-39.
Darwish, M., Odah, O., 2010, Vendor-managed inventory model for single-vendor multi-retailer
supply chains, European Journal of Operational Research 204 (3), 473-484.
Daugherty, P., Myers, M., Autry, C., 1999, Automatic replenishment programs: An empirical
examination, Journal of Business Logistics 20 (2), 63-82.
Disney, S., Towill, D., 2002, A procedure for the optimization of the dynamic response of a
Vendor Managed Inventory system, Computers & Industrial Engineering 43 (1-2), 27-58.
Disney, S., Towill, D., 2003, The effect of vendor-managed inventory (VMI) dynamics on the
bullwhip effect in supply chains, International Journal of Production Economics 85 (2), 199-
215.
Dong, Y., Chu, K., 2002, A supply chain model of vendor managed inventory, Transportation
Research Part E 38 (2) 75–95.
Emigh, J., 1999, Vendor-managed inventory, Computerworld, 33 (34), 52.
Hemmelmayr, V., Doerner, K., Hartl, R., Savelsbergh, M., 2010, Vendor managed inventory for
environments with stochastic product usage, European Journal of Operational Research 202
(3), 686-695.
Holmström, J., 1998, Business process innovation in the supply chain – a case study of
implementing vendor managed inventory, European Journal of Purchasing & Supply
Management 4 (2-3) 127-131.
Hongjie, L., Ruxian, L., Zhigao L., Ruijiang W., 2011, Study on the inventory control of
deteriorating items under VMI model based on bi-level programming, Expert Systems with
Applications 38 (8), 9287–9295.
Jain, C., 1994, Ready or not, here comes vendor-managed inventory program, Journal of Business
Forecasting 13 (2), 2-44.
Kastsian, D., Mönnigmann, M., 2011, Optimization of a vendor managed inventory supply chain
with guaranteed stability and robustness, Int. J. Production Economics 131 (2), 727–735.
Kristianto, Y., Helo, P., Jiao, J., Sandhu M., 2012, Adaptive fuzzy vendor managed inventory
control for mitigating the Bullwhip effect in supply chains, European Journal of Operational
Research 216 (2), 346–355.
Kuk, G., 2004, Effectiveness of vendor-managed inventory in the electronics industry:
determinants and outcomes, Information & Management 41 (5) 645–654.
276
F. Torres et al.

Lee, C., Chu, W., 2005, Who should control inventory in a supply chain, European Journal of
Operational Research 164 (1), 158–172.
Lee, H., So, K., Tang, C., 2000, The value of information sharing in a two-level supply chain,
Management Science 46 (5), 626-643.
Lee, J., Ren, L., 2011, Vendor-managed inventory in a global environment with exchange rate
uncertainty, Int. J. Production Economics 130 (2), 169–174.
Liao, S., Hsieh C., Lai, P., 2011, An evolutionary approach for multi-objective optimization of
the integrated location–inventory distribution network problem in vendor-managed inventory,
Expert Systems with Applications 38 (6), 6768–6776.
Ofuoku, M., 2009, Stochastic vendor managed inventory: impact on non-identical retailers, New
Mexico State University, PhD. Thesis, 2009, 121 pages, AAT 3400350.
Pasandideh, S.H.R., Niaki, S.T.A., Nia, A.R., 2011, A genetic algorithm for vendor managed
inventory control system of multi-product multi-constraint economic order quantity model,
Expert Systems with Applications 38 (3), 2708–2716.
Sari, K., 2008, On the beneﬁts of CPFR and VMI: a comparative simulation study, International
Journal of Production Economics 113 (2) 575-586.
Saxena, R., 2009, Vendor-managed inventory, Industrial Engineer 41 (7), 20.
Silver, E., Pyke, D., Peterson, R., 1998, Inventory management and production planning and
scheduling, third edition, John Wiley & sons.
Song, D., Dinwoodie, J., 2008, Quantifying the effectiveness of VMI and integrated inventory
management in a supply chain with uncertain lead-times and uncertain demands, Production
Planning and Control 19 (6), 590-600.
Southard, P., Swenseth, S., 2008, Evaluating vendor-managed inventory (VMI) in non-traditional
environments using simulation, International Journal of Production Economics, 116 (2), 275-
287.
Van der Vlist, P., Kuik, R., Verheijen, B., 2007, Note on supply chain integration in vendor-
managed inventory, Decision Support Systems 44 (1), 360-365.
Waller, M., Johnson, E., Davis, T., 1999, Vendor-Managed Inventory in the retail supply chain,
Journal of Business Logistics 20 (1), 183-203.
Wang, H., Guo, M., Efstathiou, J., 2004, A game-theoretical cooperative mechanism design for a
two-echelon decentralized supply chain, European Journal of Operational Research 157 (2),
372–388.
White, A., Censlive, M., 2006, Observations on modeling strategies for vendor-managed
inventory, Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management 17 (4), 496-512.
Wong, W., Qi, J., Leung, S., 2009, Coordinating supply chains with sales rebate contracts and
vendor-managed inventory, International Journal of Production Economics 120 (1), 151-161.
Xu, K., Leung M. T., 2009, Stocking policy in a two-party vendor managed channel with space
restrictions, Int. J. Production Economics 117 (2), 271–285.
Yang, K., Ruben, R., Webster, S., 2003, Managing vendor inventory in a dual level distribution
system, Journal of Business Logistics 24 (2), 91-108.
Yang, L., Ng, C., Cheng, T., 2010, Evaluating the effects of distribution centers on the
performance of vendor-managed inventory systems, European Journal of Operational
Research 201 (1), 112-122.
Yao, Y., Dong, Y., Dresner, M., 2010, Managing supply chain backorders under vendor managed
inventory: An incentive approach and empirical analysis, European Journal of Operational
Research 203 (2), 350-359.
Yao, Y., Dresner, M., 2008, The inventory value of information sharing, continuous
replenishment and vendor-managed inventory, Transportation Research Part E 44 (3)
361–378.
Yao, Y., Evers, P., Dresner, M., 2007, Supply chain integration in vendor-managed inventory,
Decision Support Systems 43 (2), 663-674.
Yu, H., Zeng, A., Zhao, L., 2009a, Analyzing the evolutionary stability of the vendor-managed
inventory supply chains, Computers & Industrial Engineering 56 (1), 274–282.
Modeling a Coordinated Manufacturer–Buyer Single-Item System
277

Yu, Y., Huang, G., 2009b, Nash game model for optimizing market strategies, conﬁguration of
platform products in a Vendor Managed Inventory (VMI) supply chain for a product family,
European Journal of Operational Research 206 (2), 361.
Yu, Y., Huang, G., Liang, L., 2009c, Stackelberg game-theoretic model for optimizing
advertising, pricing and inventory policies in vendor managed inventory (VMI) production
supply chains, Computers & Industrial Engineering 57 (1) 368–382.
Yu, Y., Wang, Z., Liang, L., 2012, A vendor managed inventory supply chain with deteriorating
raw materials and products. International Journal of Production Economics 136 (2), 266-274.
Zanoni, S., Jaber M.Y., Zavanella, L.E., 2012, Vendor managed inventory (VMI) with
consignment considering learning and forgetting effects, International Journal of Production
Economics 140 (2), 721-730.
278
F. Torres et al.

Index
A
All units quantity discount, 139, 140, 142,
146, 150
Annual holding cost, 5, 6, 209, 239, 241
Approximation, 44, 47–49, 54
B
Backlog, 79, 81–83, 87–89, 91, 93, 94, 96,
109, 152, 202
Backorder, 5, 8, 62, 69, 77, 161, 252, 253
Backorder cost, 5, 227, 54
Buffer, 43, 44, 50, 54, 222
C
Capacity, 7, 8, 11–14, 53, 84, 86, 143, 161,
204, 223, 231, 233, 236
Carbon emission, 124, 181, 185–187
Carbon emission cost, 124, 179, 181, 182, 186,
187, 193, 194, 197
Century, 3, 8, 16, 159, 201
Channel coordination, 202
Conﬂicting, 126, 128–130, 133, 134
Constant demand, 5, 26, 32, 36, 113, 142
Continuous location model, 162, 222, 223, 226
Coordination, 7, 15, 86, 179, 180, 202–205,
207, 210, 215–217, 236, 238, 243, 247,
248, 252, 254, 255, 258, 268
Cost rate function, 79, 83, 88, 93, 102, 109
Customer delay, 81
Cycle length, 26–29, 35, 36, 38–41, 46–48,
51, 79, 82, 83, 88–91, 93, 94, 96, 99,
109, 112
D
Defective, 158, 203
Defective item, 179–182, 185–187, 189,
194–197, 203
Demand, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 13, 24–26, 28, 32–34,
37, 42, 44, 50, 52, 59, 60, 65, 66, 69, 79,
81, 86–88, 123, 130, 132, 133, 139, 141,
143, 157, 161, 163, 170, 207, 212, 215,
217, 222, 233, 248, 252, 253, 259
Demand uncertainty, 43, 53, 54, 197
Deterministic, 5, 12, 44, 50, 59, 80, 83, 84, 87,
133, 202, 205, 230, 238, 249, 252
Discount, 11, 37, 80, 111, 113, 140, 142, 148,
152, 207–209, 215
Discount shipment fee, 201, 203, 207, 209,
212, 213
Discrete location model, 223
Disruption, 44, 45, 48–50, 52–54, 242
Dynamic demand, 23
E
Economic, 8, 25, 67, 68, 77, 79, 86, 122, 124,
127, 131, 161
Economic manufacturing
quantity (EMQ), 50, 52
Economic production
quantity (EPQ), 4, 80, 256
Economic order quantity (EOQ), 3, 7–11,
13–16, 41, 43, 44–46, 59, 79–83, 93, 97,
102, 122, 139, 142, 201–203, 229, 248
EOQ inventory, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 14, 23, 77, 79,
80, 109, 112, 139, 157, 170, 221–224, 230,
237, 242
T.-M. Choi (ed.), Handbook of EOQ Inventory Problems, International Series
in Operations Research & Management Science 197, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7639-9,
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014
279

EOQ model, 3–15, 23, 24, 43, 44, 47–49, 54,
77, 80, 82, 88, 112, 122–124, 133, 140,
181, 201, 203, 204, 210, 224, 235, 238,
242, 256
Energy, 122–125, 129, 130, 133, 179,
180–182, 184, 196
Environment, 4, 8, 16, 33, 37, 50, 122, 124,
128, 131, 139, 217, 252, 253
Environmental performance, 121, 124
Exact model, 44, 235
Exact algorithm, 139, 140
Exponential demand, 66, 158, 170
External supply disruptions, 44
F
Facility location, 162, 222, 223, 226, 228, 233,
253
Facility location problem, 157, 159, 222, 223,
226, 231, 253
Finite horizon, 32, 41, 143
Fixed ordering cost, 80, 123, 140, 222, 229, 253
Ford W. Harris, 3, 59, 60, 80
Forecast, 33
Forecast horizon, 23, 24, 32, 33–37, 40
Freight, 43, 140–142, 152, 222, 235
G
Generalized EOQ algorithm, 24, 49, 234
Goh’s model, 73
H
Harris’ model, 3, 4, 23, 65
Harris’ EOQ model, 3, 4, 139
History, 3, 4
Holding cost, 3, 6, 8, 11, 15, 25, 38, 44, 46, 51,
60, 80, 81, 86, 92, 123, 129, 142, 152, 162,
163, 183, 185–187, 204, 205, 217, 229,
233, 236, 238, 258, 261, 262, 267–269
I
Inﬁnite horizon, 23, 28, 29, 32, 35, 37, 41, 80,
89, 139, 142, 144, 146, 149
Information sharing, 180, 247, 252
Integer policies, 82, 162, 238–240, 242
Integrated model, 157, 162, 253
Internal supply disruptions, 48
Inventory level, 6, 46, 52, 53, 62, 82, 87, 88,
143, 161, 183, 185, 259, 271
Inventory routing problem, 236
L
Lead time, 5, 9–11, 32, 87, 143, 162, 197, 223
Location model, 162, 221–223, 242
Lot sizing, 9–12, 179–181, 202
M
Managerial insights, 3, 124, 131
Multi-item, 203
Multiple items, 152
Multi-period, 23, 33, 141, 243
N
Network, 158–160, 170, 253
Network design, 15, 162
O
Optimal average cost, 44, 53
Optimal cycle length, 26, 27, 29, 32, 35, 41,
42, 83, 96, 104, 106, 108–112
Optimal order quantity, 3, 5, 44, 47, 48, 123,
179, 189, 196, 201, 211, 226, 229, 234, 258
Order-up-to level, 79, 82, 83, 89–91, 93–96,
110
P
Power-of-two policies, 240, 241
Price, 11, 12, 42, 132, 133, 140–142, 180, 181,
183–185, 196, 201–203, 217
Price uncertainty, 179, 184, 196
Product return, 179, 183
Q
Quadratic demand, 66, 202
Quantity discount, 5, 6, 8, 11, 14, 80, 84, 100,
140–142, 146, 148–151, 202
Quasiconvex, 46, 48
R
Return, 10, 15, 53, 183, 197, 202, 263
Return policy, 203
S
(S, T) policy, 79, 82, 87, 88
Screening cost, 179, 183, 185
Setup cost, 8, 12, 37, 80, 143, 145, 182, 185,
229, 241, 256
280
Index

Service level agreement (SLA), 157, 158, 170,
174
Shipment fee, 201, 203, 205, 206, 214–216
Single item, 44, 87, 247, 248
Single stage, 139, 142, 145, 146, 149, 151
Single-period, 243
Sourcing model, 228
Spare part, 13, 158, 160–162, 164, 172, 175
Spare part inventory, 157, 160
Spare part network, 170
Stationary demand, 23, 24, 230
Stochastic, 10, 53, 83, 86, 133, 141, 152, 162,
163, 224, 249, 252, 253
Stockout, 5, 6, 45, 53
Supply chain, 6, 14, 15, 44, 49, 50, 90, 122,
151, 152, 179, 181, 195, 196, 202–209,
212, 213, 215, 218, 221, 222, 236, 239,
242, 243, 248, 251–254, 258, 260, 270
Supply chain coordination, 13, 15, 179, 180,
182, 188, 196, 201, 203, 208, 212, 213,
216, 242
Supply chain design, 221
Supply chain integration, 221
Supply disruption, 43–45, 49, 54
Sustainability, 14, 15, 122, 124, 132, 133, 242
T
Transcendental equation, 59, 60, 74, 77
Transportation, 4, 5, 8, 12, 13, 84, 139,
140–143, 150, 151, 158, 164, 174, 175,
184, 185, 194, 196, 197, 227, 232, 233, 242
Transportation cost, 12, 86, 87, 139, 140–143,
145–147, 152, 163, 175, 179, 183, 187,
204, 211, 223, 225–227, 233, 235, 236
Transportation model, 222, 232, 233, 242
Truckload, 139–143, 151, 180, 234
U
Uncertainty, 43, 54, 243, 253
Utility, 221, 222, 242, 243
V
Vendor-managed inventory (VMI), 15, 184,
247, 248, 249, 251–255, 258, 259, 262,
263, 269, 270
W
Wagner-Whitin algorithm, 5, 9
Index
281

