
Handbook of 
Critical Psychology
Critical psychology has developed over time from different standpoints, and in different cultural 
contexts, embracing a variety of perspectives. This cutting-edge and comprehensive handbook 
values and reflects this diversity of approaches to critical psychology today, providing a definitive 
state-of-the-art account of the field and an opening to the lines of argument that will take it 
forward in the years to come.
The individual chapters by leading and emerging scholars plot the development of a critical 
perspective on different elements of the host discipline of psychology. The book begins by sys-
tematically addressing each separate specialist area of psychology, before going on to consider 
how aspects of critical psychology transcend the divisions that mark the discipline. The final part 
of the volume explores the variety of cultural and political standpoints that have made critical 
psychology such a vibrant contested terrain of debate.
The Handbook of Critical Psychology represents a key resource for researchers and practition-
ers across all relevant disciplines. It will be of particular interest to students and researchers in 
psychology, psychosocial studies, sociology, social anthropology, and cultural studies, and to dis-
course analysts of different traditions, including those in critical linguistics and political theory.
Ian Parker was co-founder and is co-director of the Discourse Unit (www.discourseunit.com), 
and is Professor of Management at the University of Leicester, and Managing Editor of Annual 
Review of Critical Psychology. He edited the four-volume major work ‘Critical Psychology’ for 
Routledge in 2011, edits the book series ‘Concepts for Critical Psychology’, and also authored 
the ‘Psychology after Critique’ series.

This page intentionally left blank

Handbook of 
Critical Psychology
Edited by Ian Parker

First published 2015
by Routledge
27 Church Road, Hove, East Sussex BN3 2FA
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2015 Ian Parker
The right of the editors to be identified as the authors of the editorial 
material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in 
accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents 
Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in 
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without 
intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Handbook of critical psychology / edited by Ian Parker.
  pages cm
  1.  Critical psychology.  I.  Parker, Ian, 1956–
  BF39.9.H36 2015
  150.19'8—dc23
  2014042679
ISBN: 978-1-84872-218-7 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-31572-652-6 (ebk)
Typeset in Bembo 
by Apex CoVantage, LLC

v
List of Contributors	
xi
Introduction: principles and positions	
1
Ian Parker
PART I
Varieties of psychology and critique	
11
PART Ia
The mainstream	
13
	 1	 Quantitative methods: science means and ends	
15
Lisa Cosgrove, Emily E. Wheeler, and Elena Kosterina
	 2	 Cognitive psychology: from the bourgeois individual to class struggle	
24
Michael Arfken
	 3	 Behaviourisms: radical behaviourism and critical inquiry	
33
Maria R. Ruiz
	 4	 Emotion: being moved beyond the mainstream	
43
Paul Stenner
	 5	 Biological and evolutionary psychologies: the limits of critical psychology	
52
John Cromby
	 6	 Personality: technology, commodity and pathology	
61
China Mills
	 7	 Developmental psychology: the turn to deconstruction	
70
Erica Burman
	 8	 Social psychology: a commentary on organizational research	
79
Parisa Dashtipour
Contents

Contents
vi
	 9	 Abnormal psychology: a psychology of disorders	
88
Susana Seidmann and Jorgelina Di Iorio
10	 Forensic psychology: clinical and critical	
96
Sam Warner
PART Ib
Radical attempts to question the mainstream	
105
11	 Qualitative methods: critical practices and prospects from a diverse field	
107
Brendan Gough
12	 Theoretical psychology: a critical-philosophical outline of core issues	
117
Thomas Teo
13	 Humanistic psychology: a critical counter culture	
127
Keith Tudor
14	 Political psychology: critical approaches to power	
137
Maritza Montero
15	 Community psychology: subjectivity, power, collectivity	
145
David Fryer and Rachael Fox
16	 Organizational psychology and social issues: the place of the place	
155
Mary Jane Paris Spink and Peter Kevin Spink
17	 Counselling psychology: critical achievements, possibilities, and limitations	
164
Richard House and Colin Feltham
18	 Health psychology: towards critical psychologies for well-being  
and social justice	
173
Yasuhiro Igarashi
19	 Black psychology: resistance, reclamation, and redefinition	
182
Garth Stevens
20	 Psychology of women: questions of politics and practice	
191
Rose Capdevila and Lisa Lazard
21	 From ‘lesbian and gay psychology’ to a critical psychology of sexualities	
200
Pam Alldred and Nick Fox

Contents
vii
PART Ic
Adjacent parts of psy-complex	
211
22	 Alienists and alienation: critical psychiatry in search of itself	
213
Janice Haaken
23	 Psychotherapists: agents of change or maintenance men?	
222
Ole Jacob Madsen
24	 Education and psychology: change at last?	
231
Tom Billington and Tony Williams
25	 Social work: oppression and resistance	
240
Suryia Nayak
26	 Self-help: and pop psychology	
250
Jan De Vos
PART II
Varieties of critical psychology	
259
27	 Activity theory: theory and practice	
261
Manolis Dafermos
28	 Marxist psychology and dialectical method	
271
Mohamed Elhammoumi
29	 Kritische Psychologie: psychology from the standpoint of the subject	
280
Johanna Motzkau and Ernst Schraube
30	 Does psychoanalysis have anything to say to critical psychology?	
290
Kareen Ror Malone with Emaline Friedman
31	 Deconstruction: the foundations of critical psychology	
297
Andrew Clark and Alexa Hepburn
32	 Deleuzian perspectives: schizoanalysis and the politics of desire	
306
Hans Skott-Myhre
33	 Discursive psychology: key tenets, some splits, and two examples	
315
Margaret Wetherell

Contents
viii
PART III
Standpoints and perspectives on psychology  
and critical psychology	
325
PART IIIa
Perspectives	
327
34	 Feminist psychology: researches, interventions, challenges	
329
Amana Mattos
35	 Queer theory: disarticulating critical psychology	
339
Miguel Roselló Peñaloza and Teresa Cabruja Ubach
36	 Liberation psychology: another kind of critical psychology	
348
Mark Burton and Luis H. Gómez Ordóñez 
37	 Indigenous psychologies and critical-emancipatory psychology	
356
Narcisa Paredes-Canilao, Ma. Ana Babaran-Diaz, Ma. Nancy B. Florendo,  
and Tala Salinas-Ramos with S. Lily Mendoza
38	 Postcolonial theory: towards a worlding of critical psychology	
366
Desmond Painter
39	 From critical disability studies to critical global disability studies	
376
Shaun Grech
40	 A politically informed immanent spirituality for critical psychology	
386
Kathleen S. G. Skott-Myhre
PART IIIb
Places	
395
41	 Critical psychology in Africa: the impossible task	
397
Ingrid Palmary and Brendon Barnes
42	 Critical psychology and the American continent: from colonization and 
domination to liberation and emancipation	
406
Raquel S. L. Guzzo
43	 Critical psychology in the Arab world: insights from critical community 
psychology in the Palestinian colonial context	
415
Ibrahim Makkawi
44	 ‘Critical psychology in Asia’: four fundamental concepts	
425
Anup Dhar

Contents
ix
45	 European critical psychological trends: an open road to  
psychological recidivism	
434
Ángel J. Gordo López and Roberto Rodríguez López
46	 South Pacific: tensions of space in our place	
444
Leigh Coombes and Mandy Morgan
Index
455

This page intentionally left blank

Contributors
Pam Alldred is Senior Lecturer in Education and Youth Work Studies at Brunel University, UK.
Michael Arfken is Associate Professor in the Department of Psychology at University of Prince 
Edward Island, Canada.
Brendon Barnes is Professor in the Psychology Department at the University of Johannesburg, 
South Africa.
Tom Billington is Professor of Educational and Child Psychology and Director of the Centre 
for the Study of Children, Families and Learning Communities in the School of Education at 
the University of Sheffield, UK.
Erica Burman is Professor of Education in the Manchester Institute for Education, University 
of Manchester, UK.
Mark Burton is an independent Scholar-Activist, and is also a Visiting Professor at Manchester 
Metropolitan University, UK.
Teresa Cabruja Ubach is Professor of Social Psychology in the Psychology Department of the 
University of Girona, Spain.
Rose Capdevila is Senior Lecturer in Psychology in the Faculty of Social Sciences at the Open 
University, UK.
Andrew Clark is a research administrator in the Institute for Criminal Justice in the University 
of Portsmouth, UK.
Leigh Coombes is Senior Lecturer in the School of Psychology at Massey University, New 
Zealand.
Lisa Cosgrove is Professor in the Department of Counseling and School Psychology at Univer-
sity of Massachusetts Boston, USA.
John Cromby is a psychologist in the School of Management, University of Leicester, UK.
xi

Contributors
xii
Manolis Dafermos is Assistant Professor in the Department of Psychology at the University of 
Crete, Greece.
Parisa Dashtipour is Lecturer in Organizational Psychology in the Department of Leadership, 
Work and Organisation at Middlesex University, UK.
Jan De Vos is postdoctoral researcher at the Centre for Critical Philosophy at Ghent University, 
Belgium.
Anup Dhar is Associate Professor in the School of Human Studies at Ambedkar University, 
Delhi, India.
Maria Ana B. Diaz is Assistant Professor of Psychology in the College of Social Sciences at the 
University of the Philippines Baguio, Philippines.
Jorgelina Di Iorio is Professor of Social Psychology in the School of Psychology at the Univer-
sidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Mohamed Elhammoumi is Associate Professor in the Department of Psychology at Imam 
Muhammad Ibn Saud University, Saudi Arabia.
Colin Feltham is Emeritus Professor of Critical Counselling Studies, Sheffield Hallam University, 
and External Associate Professor of Humanistic Psychology, University of Southern Denmark.
Ma. Nancy B. Florendo is Associate Professor in Psychology in the Department of Social 
Anthropology and Psychology,  College of Social Sciences at University of the Philippines 
Baguio, Philippines.
Nick Fox is Honorary Professor of Sociology in the School of Health and Related Research, 
University of Sheffield, UK.
Rachael Fox is Lecturer in Psychology at Charles Sturt University, Australia.
Emaline Friedman is a PhD student and Graduate Teaching Assistant in Psychology at the Uni-
versity of West Georgia, USA.
David Fryer is currently Professor Extraordinarius at the University of South Africa, Honorary 
Associate Professor at the University of Queensland, Australia and Honorary Lecturer at the 
University of Stirling, Scotland.
Luis H. Gómez Ordóñez is Professor and Researcher of the School of Psychology, School of 
Sociology, and Institute of Latin American Studies at National University, Costa Rica.
Brendan Gough is Professor of Social Psychology in the School of Social, Psychological, and 
Communication Sciences at Leeds Beckett University, UK.
Ángel J. Gordo López is Profesor Titular in the Departamento de Sociología IV (Métodos de 
Investigación y Teoría de la Comunicación) at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain.

Contributors
xiii
Shaun Grech is Research Fellow in the Research Institute for Health and Social Change at 
Manchester Metropolitan University, UK.
Raquel S. L. Guzzo is Full Professor of Community and School Psychology in Pontifical Catho-
lic University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
Janice Haaken is Professor Emeritus of Psychology at Portland State University, USA.
Alexa Hepburn is Reader in Conversation Analysis in the Department of Social Sciences at 
Loughborough University, UK.
Richard House is a freelance Early Years Consultant, publishing editor and therapy practitioner, 
formerly lecturing in Early Childhood and Psychotherapy at the Universities of Winchester and 
Roehampton respectively.
Yasuhiro Igarashi is Professor in the General Department of Aesthetics, Yamano College of 
Aesthetics, Japan.
Elena Kosterina is a doctoral student in the Department of Counseling and School Psychology 
at University of Massachusetts Boston, USA.
Lisa Lazard is Lecturer in Psychology in the School of Social Sciences at the Open University, UK.
Ole Jacob Madsen is Associate Professor of Psychology in the Department of Psychology at the 
University of Oslo, Norway.
Ibrahim Makkawi is Faculty member of the Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, 
and founding director of the Masters Program in Community Psychology at Birzeit University, 
Palestine.
Kareen Ror Malone is a professor of psychology in the West Georgia College and founding 
director of the doctoral program in Consciousness & Society. She is a member and AF of Après 
Coup in New York City, USA.
Amana Mattos is Professor in the Instituto de Psicologia at the Universidade do Estado do Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil.
S. Lily Mendoza is Associate Professor of Culture and Communication in the Department of 
Communication and Journalism at Oakland University in Rochester, USA.
China Mills is a researcher at the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI) 
at the University of Oxford, UK.
Maritza Montero is Professor Emeritus of Community, Political and Liberation Psychology in 
the PhD course in Psychology at the Universidad Central de Venezuela, Venezuela.
Mandy Morgan is Professor of Feminist Psychology in the School of Psychology at Massey 
University, Aotearoa/New Zealand.

Contributors
xiv
Johanna Motzkau is Senior Lecturer in Psychology in the Faculty of Social Sciences at the 
Open University, UK.
Suryia Nayak is Senior Lecturer in Social Work in the School of Nursing, Midwifery, Social 
Work and Social Sciences at the University of Salford, UK.
Desmond Painter is Senior Lecturer in the Department of Psychology at Stellenbosch Univer-
sity, South Africa.
Ingrid Palmary is Associate Professor in the African Centre for Migration and Society at the 
University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa.
Narcisa Paredes-Canilao is Professor of Philosophy in the Department of History and Philos-
ophy in the College of Social Sciences at the University of the Philippines Baguio, Philippines.
Ian Parker is Professor of Management in the School of Management at the University of 
Leicester, UK.
Roberto Rodríguez López is a PhD Candidate in the Facultad de Ciencias Políticas y Sociología 
at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain.
Miguel Roselló Peñaloza, PhD, is a researcher in the research group Discourse, Gender, Culture 
and Science (DIGECIC) of the Quality of Life Research Institute (IRQV) at the University of 
Girona, and of the Inter-University Women and Gender Studies Institute (iiEDG), Spain.
Maria R. Ruiz is Professor of Psychology in the Department of Psychology at Rollins College 
in Florida, USA.
Tala Salinas-Ramos is Assistant Professor in Anthropology in the Department of Social Anthro-
pology and Psychology, College of Social Sciences at the University of the Philippines Baguio, 
Philippines.
Ernst Schraube is Associate Professor in the Department of Psychology at Roskilde University, 
Denmark.
Susana Seidmann is Professor of Social Psychology in Postgraduate Studies Masters in Com-
munity Social Psychology at the Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Hans Skott-Myhre is Professor in the Child and Youth Studies Department in the Faculty of 
Social Sciences at Brock University, Canada.
Kathleen S. G. Skott-Myhre is Assistant Professor of Psychology in the College of Social 
Sciences, University of West Georgia, USA.
Mary Jane Paris Spink is Professor in the Programa de Pós-graduação em Psicologia Social at 
the Pontifícia Universidade Católica de São Paulo, Brazil.

Contributors
xv
Peter Kevin Spink is Professor in the Centro de Administração Pública e Governo Fundação 
Getulio Vargas – Escola de Administração de Empresas de São Paulo, Brasil.
Paul Stenner is Professor of Social Psychology in the Department of Psychology in the Faculty 
of Social Sciences at the Open University, UK.
Garth Stevens is Associate Professor and Clinical Psychologist in the Department of Psychology 
at the University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa.
Thomas Teo is Professor of Psychology at York University, Canada.
Keith Tudor is Associate Professor and Head of the Department of Psychotherapy and Coun-
selling | Tari Whakaora Hinengaro a¯ Whakanga¯rahu at the Auckland University of Technology, 
Aotearoa, New Zealand.
Sam Warner is a Consultant Clinical Psychologist and Research Fellow in the Research Insti-
tute for Health and Social Change at Manchester Metropolitan University, UK.
Margaret Wetherell is Professor of Social Psychology at the University of Auckland, New 
Zealand and Emeritus Professor of Social Psychology, Faculty of Social Sciences, Open 
University, UK.
Emily E. Wheeler is a doctoral student in the Department of Counseling and School Psychology 
at University of Massachusetts Boston, USA.
Tony Williams is Director of the Doctor of Educational and Child Psychology training pro-
gramme in the School of Education at the University of Sheffield, UK.

This page intentionally left blank

1
This handbook provides a comprehensive review of the rapidly expanding field of critical psy-
chology, and will serve as a key resource for researchers, teachers, and students. The book as 
a whole comes as close as is possible to defining the scope of critical psychology. There are 
important reasons why that task is actually unachievable, and I will address some reasons in 
this introduction. Even an ‘introduction’ to critical psychology is fraught with dangers, as many 
authors have recognized when they have embarked on that endeavour, and they have most often 
retreated to a definition of it as primarily being a more ‘social’ form of psychology (e.g. Gough 
et al. 2013; Gough and McFadden 2001; Hepburn 2003; Tuffin 2004).
That we take social context as a starting point for our critique of mainstream psychology – 
a discipline that routinely reduces explanation to the level of the individual – should be no 
surprise, and this ‘social context’ has provided a springboard for researchers who have a much 
more ambitious agenda, which ranges from innovative studies of subjectivity to radical political 
change (Stainton Rogers et al. 1995; Ibáñez and Íñiguez 1997). Some journals in the field, as a 
reflection of these debates, have explicitly traced a route toward research into subjectivity that 
would depart from assumptions made in psychology (e.g. Subjectivity), others have set their sights 
on the conditions that make the discipline of psychology function (e.g. Annual Review of Critical 
Psychology), some do both of these things (e.g. Radical Psychology) and some provide a direct 
connection with political activity (e.g. Psychology in Society) and with therapeutic practice (e.g. 
Journal of Critical Psychology, Counselling and Psychotherapy).
Impossibility and multiplicity
Compendia of critical psychology have always reflected the specific sub-disciplinary back-
ground, geographical location, and political interests of editors (e.g. Parker 2011; Teo 2014), to 
the extent that some have chosen to topicalize that diversity rather than try to cover over the 
differences (Dafermos et al. 2006, 2013). This has also been the case for specific interventions 
which bring together multiple voices (e.g. Sloan 2000; Walkerdine 2002), and this volume is no 
exception. Some of the earliest path-breaking collections did even aim in their first incarnations 
to serve as a ‘handbook’ for the field (e.g. Fox and Prilleltensky 1997; Fox et al. 2009), and we are 
indebted to them for showing us that the most we can hope for here is to fail better.
Introduction
Principles and positions
Ian Parker

Introduction
2
What we can say for sure is that in this book, the individual chapters by leading and emerging 
scholars around the world plot the development of a critical perspective on different elements of 
the host discipline of psychology. The book addresses most separate areas of psychology, aspects 
of ‘critical psychology’ that transcend the divisions between areas of research that mark the dis-
cipline, and the variety of cultural and political standpoints that now make critical psychology 
into a vibrant, contested terrain of debate. You will notice that as we try to encompass the mul-
tiplicity of competing sub-fields of psychology, pretend to offer overarching frameworks, and 
bring different cultural perspectives into the frame, we are already betraying what an impossibly 
grandiose project we are tangled in.
First, mainstream psychology as a discipline is divided into warring specialties that are year 
by year splitting and multiplying. This means that it is not only difficult to keep track of every 
attempt to capture what the real domain of psychology should be  – whether it should be 
concerned with ‘cognition’, ‘development’ or ‘personality’ or ‘social’ aspects of behaviour, for 
example – but each attempt renews itself and then repeats its own failures to win territory from 
all the other sub-fields with such speed that if we tried to map every variant of the discipline in 
this book, our map would be out of date by the time the book was published. Second, there is 
no one agreed field of ‘critical psychology’ that is able to stitch together all these domains and 
provide a transcendent framework through which we would be able to understand the disarray 
in our host discipline.
Critical psychology has emerged, as you will see in the different chapters in this book, as 
a response to problems posed by each sub-field of the discipline, and so the theoretical and 
methodological resources it mobilizes are tailored to each specific problem. The third problem 
we face when we try to be exhaustive and inclusive is a function of the globalization of psy-
chology, both as a discipline and as a commonsensical series of metaphorical tropes through 
which people talk about their childhood, their feelings, and their relationships. The globaliza-
tion of psychology also entails a ‘psychologization’ of the globe (De Vos 2012; Gordo and De 
Vos 2010), but in such a way that the response of each specific culture exacerbates the problem. 
Each cultural response to the arrival of psychological discourse and practice gives a different 
twist to what ‘psychology’ as such is assumed to be, and the forms of ‘critical psychology’ that 
arise also proliferate in order to voice their own particular concerns with what psychology is 
doing to them (Teo 2005).
Nevertheless, this handbook makes a pretty good start, and will operate as a state of the art 
account of critical psychology, an opening to the lines of argument that will take us all forward in 
the years to come. Something emerges here that will be surprising to mainstream psychologists 
who like to position ‘critical psychologists’ as only thorns in their side, as if critical contributions 
were only distractions from the real work of psychology: critical psychology actually provides 
a model of good research into human subjectivity and social relations that all psychologists can 
learn from. It is an uncomfortable fact, one that will evidently be disturbing to contributors on 
the more extreme rejectionist end of the argument in critical psychology, that this handbook 
will in some circumstances serve to re-energize psychology itself. Those who have turned to 
critical arguments in order to gently nudge their colleagues in a more progressive dimension 
will be pleased, of course, and even the overall project could be excoriated for ending up with a 
too-balanced collection of perspectives which range from those who want to accommodate to 
psychology and those who want to get rid of it altogether.
‘Critical psychologists’ of different kinds emphasize either a ‘critical’ approach to psychology 
as such or a ‘psychological’ approach that is critical in its ethos. This handbook embraces both 
perspectives and all the shades of opinion between, and thus provides a resource for understand-
ing what the stakes of the debate between different wings of critical psychology are.

Introduction
3
Here in this introduction I take some tentative steps toward defining what ‘critical psy-
chology’ is, and also necessarily unravelling such a definition as we go along. So, this is an 
opportunity not to provide one watertight definition, but to formulate some principles of a 
critical psychological take on mainstream psychology. You will find different contributors adopt-
ing explicitly or implicitly, and with varying degrees of emphasis, these principles as their own 
axiomatic assumptions around which they build their own arguments.
A ‘critical’ approach to psychology
Some critical psychologists are wary of stepping into ‘psychology’ as such as the terrain on 
which they want to fight their battles, and some so dislike the fundamental principles of psy-
chology that they would characterize ‘critical psychology’ as being more part of the problem 
than it is part of the solution (e.g. Parker 2007). So, on the one hand, the handbook exemplifies 
a ‘critical’ characterization of our host discipline which can be summed in the following points, 
and you will see that here there is deep suspicion that psychology as a discipline has not only 
taken the wrong path to understanding subjectivity but is also implicated in some of the worst 
aspects of modern society. The name of the problem is ‘psychology’, and rejection of attempts 
to reform the discipline must also tackle the nature of the modern society of which it is a key 
component. Part of the debate then turns on how this society itself should be understood: as a 
‘modern’ regime of surveillance and confession (Foucault 1975/1979, 1976/1981), as a capitalist 
economy driven by the pursuit of profit which necessarily entails exploitation (Bensaïd 2002; 
Marx 1867/2010), or as a heteropatriarchal system revolving around the exercise of power 
­(Butler 1990; Millett 1977), to mention just three perspectives that recur through this book 
(including among them some who would attempt to reclaim something from psychology).
The first point the rejectionists would make is that psychology’s gaze is directed at those 
outside the discipline who are assumed to be non-psychologists and who are routinely deceived 
and misrepresented. A first principle of ‘critical psychology’, then, is that there is a deep problem 
in the way that relations between those ‘inside’ the discipline are separated from those viewed as 
being ‘outside’. The separation of the real psychologists from their objects of study – those who 
are sometimes brought into the experimental laboratories to perform certain prescribed tasks 
in research studies or who are asked for their responses in questionnaires and interviews – leads 
either to a dehumanizing of these others in which they are reduced to being objects or to a 
romanticizing of them as the place where ‘psychological’ processes are really supposed to be tak-
ing place. It is this one-way street – psychologists describing, measuring, and speculating about 
others who are positioned as ‘other’ – that structures contemporary psychology (Prilleltensky 
1994).
Second, psychology reduces phenomena to the level of the individual, but there is a curi-
ous double-reduction at work here; this reduction proceeds both downwards from the level of 
social processes and upwards from the level of physiological functions. So, as a second principle 
of critical psychology, there is refusal to fall in line with the way that mainstream psychologists 
defend their own specific domain of study as if it were the only thing that really matters. On the 
one hand, debates in sociology are seen as resources rather than a threat from a neighbouring 
discipline that offers a mistaken or only partially-correct understanding of societal phenomena. 
On the other hand, ‘biology’ and contemporary neuroscience are seen as offering a different 
way of accounting for, instead of providing, the scientific ‘evidence’ for phenomena that are 
correctly conceptualized by the psychologist. In both directions we notice that there is some 
unease on the part of mainstream psychologists at the accounts that these rival disciplines pro-
vide, and there are attempts to produce models of psychology operating at exactly the right level 

Introduction
4
of analysis – that of the individual – that will seize territory from these other fields of work. For 
some critical psychologists the solution is not so much to replace psychology with sociology or 
biology, but to redefine the space for interdisciplinary or ‘transdisciplinary’ research into subjec-
tivity (Curt 1994).
Third, psychology reproduces an abstracted model of behavioural sequences and cognitive 
mechanisms in which each individual is assumed to operate as a miniature version of the opera-
tional forms that define positivist investigation. The third principle of critical psychology is then 
to provide methodological as well as conceptual critique of mainstream psychology. The focus 
of critical work should not only be on the failures of the traditional models of the individual 
to explain how and why people behave they do, but to examine how psychologists go about 
building those models and gathering data about behaviour using flawed research designs. This 
does not necessarily mean that ‘qualitative’ research is vaunted as a progressive alternative to the 
mainstream laboratory-experimental paradigms of research, thought that has been important for 
some critical psychologists, but rather that the way that psychologists understand and implement 
their own ‘quantitative’ procedures is thrown into question (Danziger 1990).
Fourth, psychology pretends to merely describe human activity, but this description requires 
a degree of declared or surreptitious interpretation that prescribes a correct version of events. 
A fourth critical psychological principle concerning the role that interpretation plays in main-
stream psychological research is therefore twofold; the value-laden interpretations that psy-
chologists make about behaviour are challenged (we draw attention to the way that political 
presuppositions are used to frame how studies are set up and the accounts of how people are 
positioned in them by the researcher), and the slippage from an interpretation of the way things 
are now to the way things should be is also challenged (and so we question the ways that notions 
of ‘normality’ and ‘health’ are used to endorse present-day forms of behaviour). An interpreta-
tion always carries with it undeclared, and often ideological, assumptions about its objects of 
study, and in the case of psychology it invariably carries with it the assumption that the psy-
chologist knows best (Billig 2008).
Fifth, psychology subscribes to a form of objectivity – fake neutrality – which obscures the 
enduring role of personal, institutional, and political stakes in the formulation of research ques-
tions. The fifth principle of critical psychology is that the position of the researcher needs to be 
closely studied so that we can get a better understanding of why it is that psychologists ask the 
kinds of questions they do. This principle is sometimes developed within an alternative research 
paradigm that values ‘reflexivity’, something that is important not only to qualitative but also to 
good quantitative research, and in that kind of work the researcher reflects on the limitations 
that their own personal history and structural position in relation to their objects of study place 
on the account they can give of what they observe. Some critical psychologists would expand 
the scope of the critique to look at how the agonizing reflexive work of the researcher actually 
comes to reinforce the privileged position they adopt and, worse, encourages the researcher who 
looks deep into themselves to discover the limitations of their description to subscribe all the 
more deeply to a ‘psychological’ explanation for what is going wrong (De Vos 2012).
These first five principles of critical psychology concerning gaze, reductionism, positivism, 
interpretation, and neutrality amount to an indictment of the mainstream discipline. The quite 
understandable anger that drives these different aspects of critical psychological work then leads 
many researchers, who take these arguments to their logical endpoint, to conclude that there is 
nothing of value if you want to take seriously the perspectives of those outside the discipline 
who should be accorded the status of human ‘subjects’ in a full philosophical sense of the term, 
to build a complete holistic account of human experience, to develop research drawing on other 
research traditions that are empowering, to produce the kinds of interpretations that are open 

Introduction
5
and aimed at changing the world, and to position oneself as an active agent conscious of the 
political position one is arguing for. Psychology as such is then treated as the problem, and all 
the more so when it pretends to be part of the solution.
A ‘psychological’ critique
On the other hand, the handbook showcases arguments for a new form of psychological practice 
that is ‘critical’ in its ethos, an ethos that can be summed up in the following points. These next 
five principles taken together as a package could serve to temper the rather negative assessment 
of psychology that the first five principles lead us to, and some critical psychologists would see 
their role as offering positive alternatives. Again, however, I should emphasize that these different 
aspects of the critique and principles for critical research are adhered to by different critical psy-
chologists with different degrees of intensity. Some of those who are most in favour of the first 
five principles will also, at different points in their work, subscribe to these next five principles.
The point is made by those on the more ‘constructive’ wing of critical psychology, for exam-
ple, that critical psychology can forge alliances between academics, professionals, and users of 
services to build a respectful, empowering, practical approach. This sixth principle of critical 
psychology therefore concerns how we overcome the separation between those who think they 
know best and those upon whom the supposedly correct knowledge is often imposed. This 
means questioning the power of academics and professionals to define the agenda in psycho-
logical research, and constructing forms of knowledge from the experts by experience who are 
able to best see what mainstream psychology does to people and what its limits are (Prilleltensky 
and Nelson 2002).
Some critical psychologists therefore argue for the development of a culturally attuned prac-
tice that embeds bodily and life experience in social context, and this sets in place a further prin-
ciple of critical psychology in which people are encouraged to think outside the box of the self. 
That is, an alternative ‘psychology’ (if that is what we still want to call it) would treat the box of 
the self as the limited space which the ‘individual’, conceived of as undivided and separate from 
others in much of mainstream psychology, inhabits. Human activity, according to this seventh 
principle, would be seen as entailing an understanding of and participation in society and the 
wider culture, with an understanding of ‘culture’ here as something formed through a history of 
colonialism and resistance that make each of us what we are (Spivak 1988).
The aim is thus to provide a resource for overcoming alienation and restoring the humanity 
of those who seek psychological help, with an eighth principle of critical psychology concern-
ing practical steps for facilitating recognition of the deeper, most destructive aspects of contem-
porary life of which mainstream psychology is a part. This is done, however, in such a way that 
this recognition simultaneously builds new forms of relationship that sustain the critique. Each 
aspect of alienation – competitiveness, mind-numbing work for others, disconnection of the 
mind from the body, fear of nature – is in this way dissolved, as people who are usually treated as 
‘objects’ by psychologists are engaged as active agents working together creatively with a holistic 
appreciation of their own nature and their place in ecological processes (e.g. Kovel 2007).
This means that an alternative critical psychology would, for many practitioners, put the 
project for social change at the heart of its ethical practice in forms of action research. The ninth 
principle, that the way that researchers work with people should ‘prefigure’ the kind of social 
relationships they want to build together instead of reproducing a culture of obedience in which 
the psychologist knows best, is therefore ostensibly about ‘methodology’ in psychology. But the 
ramifications of this principle, which combines ‘research’ with ‘action,’ take critical psycholo-
gists much further; at each point in the formulation of research questions and development of 

Introduction
6
theoretical models there is an attempt to bring those who actually use psychological services 
into the equation as, for the first time, privileged partners (Kagan and Burton 2000).
Finally, laying the basis for a tenth principle of critical psychology, the aim is to develop 
forms of self-activity that build upon the ‘standpoint’ of users of psychology and connect with 
the subjectivity of those who wish to help them. This tenth principle, then, is that psychologists 
can only break from the partial view of the world their discipline inculcates by becoming active 
reflexive agents themselves in partnership with people in the real world. Those who argue for 
this perspective aim to embed academics and practitioners in the same contradictory reality as 
those they hitherto tried to understand. This principle entails a settling of accounts not only 
with ‘psychology’ but with forms of politics that mistakenly screen off the world of personal pain 
from big power (Rowbotham et al. 2013).
These second five principles of critical psychology concerning alliances, culture, alienation, 
action research, and standpoint amount to an agenda even perhaps for the redemption of psy-
chology itself. We could view this set of ten principles as enabling a balance between harsher 
judgment of the shortcomings of psychology so far (which the first five principles voice) and 
an attempt to build something more positive out of the wreckage of our critique (which the 
second five principles aim for). On the other hand, we do also need to acknowledge that there 
are tensions between these two sets of five principles, and, even if the ten together help define 
what critical psychology is, it is clear that there are deep contradictions in the emerging field of 
work that this handbook takes as its area of operation.
Critiques and standpoints
The internal complexity of psychology as an academic discipline and professional practice 
demands a level of detailed and sustained critique that is able to address different ‘sub-disciplines’ 
and that is able to acknowledge that critical psychology itself is divided and contested. There is 
no one agreed ‘critical psychology’, but rather a field of debate from which we can develop a 
number of arguments that are useful in different kinds of alternative research, including working 
with social movements. This handbook values diversity, and is designed to give a comprehensive 
overview of critical psychology while opening up the possibility of new versions of it. Critical 
psychology has developed from different standpoints (such as connections with anti-racist and 
feminist research, or with liberation psychology) as well in difficult cultural contexts (with spe-
cific histories of psychology in different regions of the world posing quite distinct questions for 
critical psychologists), and these are addressed in the following pages.
Separate specialist areas of psychology are addressed in the handbook’s section on ‘varieties of 
psychology and critique’, in which each chapter focuses on a different area of psychology. This 
first part of the book is divided in turn into three different components. First we examine ‘the 
mainstream’ of psychology as the core of the problem, and you will find many of the authors of 
these chapters deploying a conceptual device that is designed to capture the way that psychology 
operates not only as a theoretical framework but also as a social practice. This conceptual device 
is the ‘psy-complex’, which is the material and ideological meshwork of psychological ideas and 
institutions that structure academic departments, professional interventions, and popular-cultural 
representations of mind and behaviour (Ingleby 1985; Rose 1985). There are then the second 
set of chapters, which concern ‘radical attempts to question the mainstream’, and in which we 
acknowledge the various ways that psychologists have engaged with questions of subjectivity 
and social change and tried their best to ameliorate the worst of psychology as a normalizing 
and pathologizing discipline. Here the emphasis is on the promises of alternatives from within 
psychology, and the way that a critical perspective is needed to keep track of the failures and 

Introduction
7
betrayals of these promises. We conclude this first part of the book with an exploration of ‘adja-
cent parts of the psy-complex’, wherein the contributors address the professional disciplines 
that operate alongside psychology. Here we broaden our understanding of the context in which 
psychologists work to take account of the way the psy-complex includes prescriptions for good 
behaviour in the fields of psychiatry, psychotherapy, education, social work, and self-help.
The chapters in the second part of the handbook, which focus on ‘varieties of critical psy-
chology’, are concerned with the way that distinct forms of critical work have been developed 
as alternatives to mainstream psychology, and here the task of contributors is to review the 
emergence of a particular approach and then show how that approach tackles the division of 
mainstream psychology into specialist sub-disciplines. These chapters provide a curious antidote 
to the temptation of seeing the first five principles of critical psychology as the most radical and 
the second five principles as somehow more accommodating of the discipline. Rather, in this 
second part of the book we see determined efforts to refuse compromise with mainstream psy-
chology and to start from scratch in the formulation of something quite different. In some cases, 
critical psychologists see their work as involving the retrieval of something that was valuable 
from the old discipline and using it as one of the building blocks of a new ‘critical psychology’ 
(e.g. Kovel 1988; Newman and Holzman 1993). In other cases we find something quite new 
being elaborated from theoretical resources and cultural traditions outside the discipline (Brown 
and Stenner 2009; Henriques et al. 1984/1998). These alternatives are competing to redefine 
what psychology is.
The last part of the book, on ‘standpoints and perspectives on psychology and critical psy-
chology’, utilizes different positions from which to provide alternative visions of what has gone 
wrong and what needs to be taken into account, and whether that would then amount to a 
new psychology or an abandonment of the project begun at the end of the nineteenth century. 
These contributions mobilize forms of knowledge and practice that show us alternative routes 
to good research that we might take if we conclude that psychology as such has reached the 
end of the road. First, from different ‘perspectives’ we learn about resources for rethinking what 
‘psychology’ is from different traditions of research, and then, in the concluding section of the 
book, on ‘places’, we see how psychology has taken different form in different parts of the world 
and how ‘critical psychology’ also varies according to the specific kind of problems it confronts.
There are clearly different ways of asking critical questions, and different answers that either 
refuse the questions that psychology asks or find ways of reformulating them. The critique that 
we are developing engages with and unravels all aspects of psychology, asking the following 
questions: how is ‘psychology’ produced as a commonsensical resource for individuals to make 
sense of themselves and others and of possibilities for changing social conditions? How are social 
processes reproduced and maintained at the level of interpersonal interaction and individual 
experience, at the level of ‘psychology’? How are patterns of activity structured to replicate 
power relations regardless of and even despite the immediate intentions of an individual ‘psy-
chology’? How can theoretical articulation of the place of individual ‘psychology’ and social 
structure be developed to provide some critical distance from ideology? How can research into 
the political functions of ‘psychology’ operate in such a way as to maintain a degree of auton-
omy of activity and experience from political interference? In this way we discover how being 
‘critical’ is finding a place in and against psychology.
Further reading
Parker, I. (ed.) (2011) Critical Psychology: Critical Concepts in Psychology, 4 Volumes. London and New York: 
Routledge.

Introduction
8
Website resources
Dafermos, M., Marvakis, A., Mentinis, M., Painter, D. and Triliva, S. (eds) (2013) Critical ­Psychology in 
a Changing World: Building Bridges and Expanding the Dialogue, Special Issue, Annual Review of  
Critical Psychology, 10: http://www.discourseunit.com/annual-review/arcp-10-critical-psychology-in-
a-changing-world-building%20bridges-and-expanding-the-dialogue/
Dafermos, M., Marvakis, A. and Triliva, S. (eds) (2006) Critical psychology in a changing world: Contributions 
from different geo-political regions, Special Issue, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5: http://www.discourse 
unit.com/annual-review/arcp-5-critical-psychology-in-a-changing-world-contributions-from-
different-geo-political-regions/
Journal of Critical Psychology, Counselling and Psychotherapy, journal: http://www.pccs-books.co.uk/products/
category/journal-of-critical-psychology-counselling-and-psychotherapy-jcpcp
Psychology in Society (PINS), journal: http://www.pins.org.za/
Radical Psychology, online journal: http://radicalpsychology.org/
Subjectivity, journal: http://www.palgrave-journals.com/sub/index.html
Teo, T. (2013) Encyclopedia of Critical Psychology, http://www.springerreference.com/docs/navigation.
do?m=Encyclopedia+of+Critical+Psychology+%28Behavioral+Science%29-book162
References
Bensaïd, D. (2002) Marx for our Times: Adventures and Misadventures of a Critique. London: Verso.
Billig, M. (2008) The Hidden Roots of Critical Psychology: Understanding the Impact of Locke, Shaftesbury and 
Reid. London: Sage.
Brown, S. and Stenner, P. (2009) Psychology without Foundations: History, Philosophy and Psychological Theory. 
London: Sage.
Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. London and New York: Routledge.
Curt, B. (1994) Textuality and Tectonics: Troubling Social and Psychological Science. Buckingham: Open Univer-
sity Press.
Dafermos, M., Marvakis, A., Mentinis, M., Painter, D. and Triliva, S. (eds) (2013) Critical Psychol-
ogy in a Changing World: Building Bridges and Expanding the Dialogue, Special Issue, Annual Review of  
Critical Psychology, 10, http://www.discourseunit.com/annual-review/arcp-10-critical-psychology-in-
a-changing-world-building%20bridges-and-expanding-the-dialogue/
Dafermos, M., Marvakis, A. and Triliva, S. (eds) (2006) Critical psychology in a changing world: Contributions 
from different geo-political regions, Special Issue, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5, http://www.discourse 
unit.com/annual-review/arcp-5-critical-psychology-in-a-changing-world-contributions-from-
different-geo-political-regions/
Danziger, K. (1990) Constructing the Subject: Historical Origins of Psychological Research. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press.
De Vos, J. (2012) Psychologisation in Times of Globalisation. London: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (1975/1979) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Foucault, M. (1976/1981) The History of Sexuality, Volume 1: An Introduction. Harmondsworth: Pelican.
Fox, D. and Prilleltensky, I. (eds) (1997) Critical Psychology: An Introduction. London: Sage.
Fox, D., Prilleltensky, I. and Austin, S. (eds) (2009) Critical Psychology: An Introduction (2nd Edn). London: Sage.
Gordo, A. and De Vos, J. (eds) (2010) Psychologisation under Scrutiny, Special Issue, Annual Review of Critical 
Psychology, 8, http://www.discourseunit.com/annual-review/arcp-8-psychologisation-under-scrutiny/
Gough, B. and McFadden, M. (2001) Critical Social Psychology: An Introduction. London: Palgrave.
Gough, B., McFadden, M. and McDonald, M. (2013) Critical Social Psychology: An Introduction (2nd Edn). 
London: Palgrave.
Hepburn, A. (2003) An Introduction to Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Henriques, J., Holloway, W., Urwin, C. and Walkerdine, V. (1984/1998) Changing the Subject: Psychology, Social 
Regulation and Subjectivity. London and New York: Routledge.
Ibáñez, T. and Íñiguez, L. (eds) (1997) Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Ingleby, D. (1985) ‘Professionals as socializers: The “psy complex” ’, in I. Parker (ed.) (2011) Critical Psychol-
ogy: Critical Concepts in Psychology, Volume 1: Dominant Models of Psychology and Their Limits. London and 
New York: Routledge.
Kagan, C. and Burton, M. (2000) ‘Prefigurative Action Research: an alternative basis for critical psychol-
ogy?’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 2, 73–87.

Introduction
9
Kovel, J. (1988) The Radical Spirit: Essays on Psychoanalysis and Society. London: Free Association Books.
Kovel, J. (2007) The Enemy of Nature: The End of Capitalism or the End of the World? (2nd Revised Edn). Lon-
don: Zed Books.
Marx, K. (1867/2010) Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1867-c1/
Millett, K. (1977) Sexual Politics. London: Virago.
Newman, F. and Holzman, L. (1993) Lev Vygotsky, Revolutionary Scientist. London: Routledge.
Parker, I. (2007) Revolution in Psychology: Alienation to Emancipation. London: Pluto Press.
Parker, I. (ed.) (2011) Critical Psychology: Critical Concepts in Psychology, 4 Volumes. London and New York: 
Routledge.
Prilleltensky, I. (1994) The Morals and Politics of Psychology: Psychological Discourse and the Status Quo. New 
York: SUNY press
Prilleltensky, I. and Nelson, G. (2002) Doing Psychology Critically: Making a Difference in Diverse Settings. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Rose, N. (1985) The Psychological Complex: Psychology, Politics and Society in England 1869–1939. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Rowbotham, S., Segal, L. and Wainwright, H. (2013) Beyond the Fragments: Feminism and the Making of Social-
ism (3rd Edn). Pontypool, Wales: Merlin.
Sloan, T. (ed.) (2000) Critical Psychology: Voices for Change. London: Macmillan.
Spivak, G. C. (1988) ‘Can the subaltern speak?’, in I. Parker (ed.) (2011) Critical Psychology: Critical Concepts in 
Psychology, Volume 4: Dominant Models of Psychology and Their Limits. London and New York: Routledge.
Stainton Rogers, R., Stenner, P., Gleeson, K. and Stainton Rogers, W. (1995) Social Psychology: a Critical 
Agenda. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Teo, T. (2005) The Critique of Psychology: From Kant to Postcolonial Theory. New York: Springer.
Teo, T. (ed.) (2014) Encyclopedia of Critical Psychology. New York: Springer.
Tuffin, K. (2004) Understanding Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Walkerdine, V. (ed.) (2002) Challenging Subjects: Critical Psychology for a New Millennium. London: Palgrave.

This page intentionally left blank

Part I
Varieties of psychology 
and critique

This page intentionally left blank

Part Ia
The mainstream

This page intentionally left blank

15
1
Quantitative methods
Science means and ends
Lisa Cosgrove, Emily E. Wheeler, and Elena Kosterina
The hegemony of quantification within psychology actually has its roots in the Western Enlight-
enment period – when faith fell out of fashion and reason took its place. During this time 
mathematics also underwent a transformation from a discrete, insular discipline into a universal 
language that could be applied to other disciplines, allowing it to become the language of quan-
tification in any scientific field (Frängsmyr 1990). This history set the stage for psychology to 
embrace quantitative methods and thereby help prove it was a ‘real’ science.
And certainly, Western psychology did come to accept quantitative methods as the route to 
knowledge early in its disciplinary history. Two major sources are typically cited as influential in 
the transformation that swept psychology in the nineteenth and into the twentieth centuries: 
psychophysics and mental testing. Gustav Fechner is credited as the father of psychophysics, a 
field which took as its mission the measurement of psychological phenomena via discrete units 
of physical sensation (for a history of Fechner’s career in psychophysics, see Heidelberger 2004). 
Mental testing was the earliest iteration of psychological assessment in the form of intelligence 
testing, or the first attempts to capture mental capacity in discrete, measureable units (see e.g. 
Goodenough 1949 for a more thorough description of the origin of mental testing). The revo-
lution lay in the belief that the leap from the internal world of the research subject to a tangible, 
behavioural representation was justified and scientifically sound.
Many historians have noted important contextual influences that allowed psychophysics 
and mental testing to come into existence and be widely embraced. Hornstein’s (1988) his-
tory points out that neither movement was without its detractors or without debate, but 
each profoundly shaped the future of experimental psychology nonetheless. The wider cultural 
embrace of technology as a result of industrialization, along with the increasing need for social 
control, were political forces that supported the use of psychological science. Hornstein argues 
that the acceptance of these methods allowed psychologists of the time to focus on the meth-
ods of their science rather than its theory. This focus allowed them to avoid the uncomfortable 
and unanswered question of whether psychological phenomena were, in fact, measurable, and 
if these measures had any real meaning. Embracing quantitative methods in both psychophys-
ics and mental testing provided considerable benefits to the profession, including facilitating 
communication between researchers as a result of standardized methods of experimentation 
and evaluation.

Lisa Cosgrove et al.
16
The link between widespread acceptance of quantitative methodology and the positivistic 
paradigm in psychology also owes some debt to the professionalization of psychology at the 
end of the nineteenth century. This process involved, in part, distancing psychology from the 
discipline of philosophy, as the natural sciences had long since done, and from philosophy’s intro-
spective methods of knowledge production as a means of garnering legitimacy and its related 
benefits (Coon 1993). This professionalization process came with an attendant set of values, ones 
that were key to psychology’s place at the science table: positivism, objectivism, and the belief in 
value-free knowledge (Hoshmand and Polkinghorne 1992; Morawski 2011).
Largely in the latter half of the twentieth century, criticism of quantitative methods them-
selves as well as their dominance in psychology arose most often from advocates of qualitative 
methods (e.g. Ponterotto 2005a). These critiques addressed the limitations of quantitative meth-
ods, arguing for the use of qualitative ones, but did so in a way that dichotomized and often 
pitted the methods against each other in methodological debates. For example, quantitative 
researchers have argued for the advantages of these methods (e.g. the increased ease of standard-
ization, generalization, and dissemination of results, and their congruence with evidence-based 
practice). The assumption that a quantitative approach is objective and value-neutral, however, 
has come under fire. Specifically, the claim of value-neutrality glosses examination of the ways 
in which quantitative methods may reify social inequalities (Fine 2011), and produce research 
results that have limited clinical (Hunsley 2007; Ioannidis 2005) as well as multicultural (Burman 
2007) utility.
Critical psychology’s contributions
As critical psychologists have noted, the central role of quantification within psychology is inex-
orably linked to the discipline’s need to be seen as a ‘real’ science, and concomitantly, the prestige 
associated with scientificity (Morawski 1985; Teo 2009; Toomela 2010). Unlike other scientific 
disciplines, however, psychology has had to grapple with a fundamental ontological question: 
what is – and what should be – psychology’s proper subject matter, behaviour or conscious-
ness (lived experience)? What are psychology’s epistemic commitments as it struggles to define 
itself and interpret its goals as a science? Thus, the contributions that critical psychologists have 
made in terms of critiquing quantitative methods must be seen as part of a much larger debate 
about the relationship between epistemology (how the world/experience/behaviour is known 
and represented) and ontology (what the world/experience/behaviour ‘really’ is). Here we will 
review critiques of quantitative methods within the context of how science is interpreted in 
psychology. We also discuss how phenomenological, feminist, and critical psychologists have 
helped to deconstruct the ‘quantitative/qualitative divide,’ and we address some of the political, 
ethical, and social policy implications of transcending this divide.
Psychology as a human science
The meaning of science within psychology has been contested since the discipline’s break 
with philosophy. Yet this contestation has not received adequate attention within mainstream 
­psychology. As a result, critiques of the hegemony of quantification – frequently referred to as the 
quantitative/qualitative divide – have focused on issues of methodology. However, as described 
below, the ‘quantitative imperative’ (Michell 1990, 2003) developed out of a particular view of sci-
ence and thus is as much an epistemic and ontological achievement as it is a methodological one.
Edmond Husserl, often referred to as the founder of phenomenology, described what he saw as 
an epistemological ‘crisis’ in psychology and the social sciences more generally in the early 1900s:  

Quantitative methods
17
without a proper philosophical grounding the focus was shifting from description to ­causality. 
This shift led psychology to commit the dangerous error of ‘naturalizing’ consciousness  –  
upholding the subject/object dichotomy and treating lived experience as if it were a thing that 
could be measured (Husserl 1970; Jennings 1986; see also Cosgrove and McHugh 2008). Hus-
serl, and later other phenomenological psychologists (e.g. Giorgi 1985), argued not for a simple 
return to psychology qua philosophy, but rather argued for a philosophically grounded empirical 
psychology. The problem was not that psychology turned toward science per se. Rather, the 
problem was that it turned toward a particular version of science – a positivist empiricist model 
that objectified its subject matter, believed that the methods of the natural sciences were the 
only valid route to knowledge, and failed to appreciate the sociopolitical grounding of expe-
rience. Husserl laid the groundwork for later phenomenological psychologists to argue that 
psychology should be (re)conceptualized as a (philosophically grounded) human science – one 
which understood the limits of purely psychological explanations of lived experience.
Thus, since the beginning of the discipline’s break with philosophy, there were attempts to 
address the larger epistemological and political issues at stake. Indeed, if these issues and concerns 
had not been marginalized within mainstream psychology, perhaps the field could have avoided 
the reductionism inherent in the quantitative/qualitative debate, for conceptualizing psychology 
as a philosophically-grounded human science does not mean that one must eschew quantita-
tive methods. Quantitative methods may be a helpful resource provided that researchers using 
these methods adopt what Westerman and Yanchar (2011) refer to as an interpretive (rather 
than objectivist) view of inquiry. An interpretive view of inquiry is one that is consistent with 
a reflexive, contextual approach and does not succumb to a classical view of measurement (i.e. 
quantification is the only valid and reliable route to knowledge). Westerman and Yanchar (2011: 
144, emphasis added) sum this point up well: ‘[N]umerical data will be useful if they are endemic 
and thus relevant to the lived experiences under investigation, that is, if they are based on everyday, 
practical numeracy’. From this perspective, statistical significance is not the Holy Grail, but is 
simply another way for psychologists to use scientific inquiry in the service of social justice. 
Laboratory research and quantitative methods can be employed in a way that is consistent with 
the narrative emphasis and philosophical anthropology of a human science approach. Insofar 
as researchers understand that statistics tell stories and serve rhetorical purposes (Billing 1994), 
and in so doing produce certain realities/meanings and marginalize others, there is nothing 
inherently incompatible with using quantitative methods to investigate what Husserl termed 
the Lebenswelt or lifeworld.
Guild interests, positivism, and quantification
The over-emphasis on quantitative methodology must also be understood in terms of the field’s 
guild interests. For example, the recent push for prescription privileges for psychologists can be 
seen as promoting guild interests in a way that sustains the hegemony of quantification; many 
critical psychologists see this push as being dictated by the pressure of managed care, and by 
loyalty to the tradition of positivism and quantification (Ball et al. 2009; Cushman 2000; Hayes 
et al. 1995). In the applied psychologies, (e.g. clinical psychology), the positivist view of science 
was reified in the Boulder scientist-practitioner model, which makes clear a division between 
the ‘science’ of positivistic, quantitative research and the methods of psychology in practice 
and emphasizes a one-way flow of knowledge from researcher to practitioner (Chwalisz 2003; 
Hoshmand and Polkinghorne 1992). The Boulder model was promoted as unique to the train-
ing of psychologists and thus served the profession’s guild interests; it afforded a level of prestige 
and helped differentiate psychology from related mental health fields.

Lisa Cosgrove et al.
18
Guild interests are also manifest in mainstream psychology’s uncritical endorsement of the 
evidence-based practice (EBP) movement. Critical psychologists have noted the conflation 
of EBP with quantification and measurement, and the lack of theorizing about the ethical 
and conceptual framework that grounds it. Yet mainstream psychology has embraced EBP; it is 
strongly encouraged by leading agencies in the profession (APA 2006; Hunsley 2007), reflected 
in the content of training curricula (Pontoretto 2005b), and required in order to be compet-
itive by funding agencies. The National Institutes of Health (NIH), in its research guidelines, 
defines research integrity in terms of a value-neutral definition of objectivity and emphasizes 
the importance of statistical procedures and replication of ‘experiments’ in publications (NIH 
2007, 2012). Also, when funding agencies encourage the use of mixed-methods designs, they 
require researchers to provide evidence of validity of their qualitative data by using the con-
ceptual framework of a quantitative approach – such as using software programs to structure 
sampling and demographic information and to categorize narrative data quantitatively. Despite 
the emphasis on mixed methods, many authors acknowledge the difficulties of integrating the 
two methodologies because of unexamined differences in their philosophy (Sale et al. 2002). It 
is necessary to critically examine implicit differences in their underlying conceptual, norma-
tive, and ethical frameworks. Otherwise, invitations to combine approaches through the use of 
‘mixed methods’ simply reproduce the positivist tradition (Giddings and Grant 2007).
Feminist contributions and quandaries
It is important to emphasize that confidence intervals, p-values, and MANOVAS are not the 
enemy. Quantitative methods – such as comparisons of group means – can be used in the ser-
vice of social justice. For example, advocates of quantitative research such as feminist empiricists 
could use the practice of comparisons of group means to try and better understand ‘within 
cell differences’ (e.g. differences among women) and ‘between cell similarities’ (e.g. similarities 
between men and women or girls and boys) (Stewart and McDermott 2004). Quantitative 
methods could therefore be used to disrupt inaccurate beliefs in gender differences and be used 
to inform public policy. For example, Hyde (2005) reviewed meta-analyses that compared males 
and females on a variety of constructs in support of the ‘gender similarities hypothesis’. In con-
trast to the popular gender differences model, Hyde found support that men and women are 
largely similar; 78 per cent of the results from meta-analyses on gender differences yielded effect 
sizes of 0.35 or smaller. Hyde also reviewed research supporting the influence of context on the 
appearance of differences between men and women and discussed the results of her review in 
terms of the social and political costs of the gender differences model. Although Hyde does not 
identify as a critical psychologist, her research is grounded in a similar framework; she interro-
gates the social and political costs of the epistemic commitments she makes as a researcher.
However, some feminists have been harshly critical of the ways in which the ‘institutionaliza-
tion of a quantitative perspective in psychology’ (Hornstein 1988: 3) has led to oppressive stere-
otypes, social practices, and institutions. For example, standpoint theorists maintain that gender 
differences exist and researchers should challenge stereotypes by using qualitative methods to 
identify, describe, and celebrate gender differences. Feminist standpoint theorists appreciate the 
fact that quantitative methods:
were introduced at a time when psychology was struggling to transform itself into a science 
and American society was engaged in developing new means of controlling an increasing 
heterogeneous population. . . . [P]sychology has of necessity had to form alliances with such 
agents of social control as government, education and the military. . . . [I]t is not surprising 

Quantitative methods
19
therefore that American psychology has increasingly advanced a view which has empha-
sized control, prediction, and classification.
(Hornstein 1988: 24)
Thus, historically there has been a clash between feminist empiricists like Hyde (2005) who 
believe that researchers should ‘fight with science’s own tools’ (Hubbard 1988) and standpoint 
theorists who maintain that narrative approaches are more consistent with a social justice focus. 
This clash is an example of how polarizing the quantitative/qualitative divide can be when the 
predominant focus is on methods rather than on the normative frameworks and epistemic com-
mitments that should ground our methodological choices.
Initial attempts to bridge this divide within feminist psychology, as well as in psychology 
more broadly, led to calls for ‘methodological pluralism’. (Indeed, the very phrase ‘mixed meth-
ods’ is still de rigueur in academe.) Advocates suggested a rather simplistic solution: the call for 
pluralism was essentially an additive approach. Both statistical techniques as well as narrative 
methods could be used to understand psychological phenomena. However, implicit in the call 
for pluralism was the belief that quantitative methods were needed (and privileged) in the 
search for objective data and causes of behaviour. Qualitative approaches were helpful insofar as 
they could give the researcher access to participants’ ‘subjective’ experiences. The call for plu-
ralism still left the terms (and power dynamics) of the debate intact – the subjective/objective 
dichotomy remained unchallenged and ‘real,’ ‘hard’ data could only be obtained through quan-
titative measures. Moreover, the recommendation of methodological pluralism as a counter to 
the ‘institutionalization of quantification’ is grounded in naïve realism (Michell 2003). A naïve 
realist view assumes that experience is something one ‘has’, and that one can know the world/
experience and represent it accurately, whether by words or numbers.
‘Beyond the pluralist compromise’ (Morawski 2011: 272)
Many feminist and critical psychologists have argued that because of the hegemony of quan-
titative methods, real dialogue in the field about the relationship between epistemology and 
methodology has been undermined (see e.g. Morawski 2011; Ussher 1999). There is a clear 
need for a more nuanced discussion of power dynamics, representation, and how best to capture 
the sociopolitical grounding of experience. Unfortunately, however, the quantitative/qualitative 
divide tends to pit one side against the other in a debate solely or predominantly about methods. 
For example, qualitative researchers often position themselves as being uniquely able to obtain 
more valid and useful data; they can give voice to marginalized groups in a way that investiga-
tors using quantitative methods cannot. However, as Brinberg and McGrath (1985: 13) astutely 
note, ‘validity is not a commodity that can be purchased with techniques’. Critical psychologists 
have shown that it is not only quantitative researchers who are committed to a naïve realist view 
(see e.g. Michell 2003; Morawski 2011); some narrative approaches position the researcher as an 
‘omniscient narrator and summarizer’ (Flyvbjerg 2001: 86) of individuals’ experiences.
In contrast to the ‘pluralist compromise,’ critical psychologists recognize the impossibility 
of any method, in and of itself, as a guarantor of truth. They argue that it is theoretically weak 
and politically problematic to accept mainstream psychology’s individual-society dualism, to 
assume that the individual is a fixed entity ‘rather than the product of historically specific prac-
tices of social regulation’ (Henriques et al. 1998: 13). Critical psychologists thus emphasize the 
relationship between knowledge and power. In fact, over twenty years ago Prilleltensky (1989) 
insightfully described the ways in which psychology’s failure to fully interrogate this relationship 
led the field to reinforce, rather than challenge, the status quo – regardless of the psychologist’s 

Lisa Cosgrove et al.
20
approach. For the critical psychologist, the question of what it means to generate knowledge in 
an unjust world (Lather 1991) needs to be at the foreground of all psychological inquiry.
Therefore, one way out of the pluralist compromise is to challenge the naïve realism that 
pervades both quantitative and qualitative approaches (Michell 2003). If psychological research is 
to live up to its emancipatory potential, researchers must recognize that experience can be epis-
temically substantive but never epistemically self-sufficient (Alcoff 1997). That is, consciousness 
[experience] is constituted; it is ‘something produced rather than the source of social ideas about 
the world’ (Henriques et al. 1998: 8). Researchers will be less likely to be tethered to a particular 
methodology if they avoid the ‘false ontology of experience’ and see subjectivity itself as being 
produced. Thus, from a critical psychological perspective, moving beyond pluralism should not 
be equated with giving qualitative methods equal status. Regardless of one’s method (narra-
tive or statistical), certain epistemic commitments must be made: one must use an interpretive 
framework, challenge the individual-society dualism, and understand the subject as a product of 
positions and discourses.
Conclusion and future directions
As demonstrated in this chapter, throughout much of its history the discipline of psychology 
has been struggling to establish its own ‘scientificity’ primarily through its quantitative orien-
tation. Critical psychologists have shown that disciplinary insecurity and a lack of theorization 
of key concepts such as validity and objectivity have contributed to the field’s obsession with 
quantitative research designs. The assumption within mainstream psychology is that validity and 
reliability can be purchased – with quantitative techniques. This assumption has been referred to 
as ‘methodolatry’ (Bakan 1967), and ‘methodologism’ (Teo 2009), and has led to the perception 
that methodology, ontology, and epistemology are separate domains and independent from one 
another. However, it is impossible to develop robust research designs and choose appropriate 
research methods without considering the interdependence among all three domains. Teo (2009: 
44) sums this point up well, ‘[Methodologism] is a research practice in which the subject matter 
is secondary but the method has primacy’. Thus, one of the main goals in critical psychology is 
to resist unhelpful and reductive dichotomies (e.g., the qualitative/quantitative divide) and to 
bring greater attention to the importance of exploring the epistemological bases of our meth-
odological and research design choices.
Resisting the pull of unnecessary dichotomies also has practical implications. Critical psy-
chologists need to engage more with mainstream psychologists who use quantitative approaches. 
Such collaborations will continue to invigorate dialogue about methods and theory; researchers 
using quantitative methods will be less likely to reify the individual/society dualism and these 
collaborations will help critical psychologists develop new and innovative ways to incorpo-
rate quantitative methods within an interpretive framework. For example, there has been a 
recent influx of members from Divisions 24 (Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology) and 
32 (Humanistic Psychology), among others interested in qualitative inquiry into Division 5 
(Evaluation, Measurement, and Statistics), forming a new Section within that Division so as to 
facilitate dialogue and further development of collaboration between diverse methodological 
orientations. The goal of an explicit collaboration among these divisions is congruent with 
and extends a Husserlian approach: to develop philosophically grounded empirical research 
agendas and projects. That is, quantitative data can be analyzed in terms of the construction of the 
lived experience under investigation. Focusing on the constitutive aspects of individuals’ experiences 
challenges the individual/society dualism by understanding the subject as being a product of 
dominant positions and discourses. For example, Cosgrove and Riddle (2004) used quantitative 

Quantitative methods
21
methods to investigate the relationship between adherence to conventional notions of feminin-
ity and women’s likelihood to position themselves as ‘having’ Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder 
(PMDD)/PMS. Rather than start from a naïve realist perspective and assume that femininity is 
an independent variable and PMDD/PMS is a ‘real’ biopsychiatric phenomenon, they took as 
their starting point the idea that both are constructions.
Another way in which critical psychologists can continue to contribute to our understanding 
of quantitative methods and their appropriate use is in applying and theorizing Bayesian methods 
as an alternative to conventional statistical approaches. Bayesian statistics represent an alternative 
approach to probability that is congruent with a postmodern epistemology. (For a more thorough 
discussion of Bayesian statistics, see Lynch 2007.) Hypotheses are generated contextually by pre-
dicting the probability of a hypothesis given the experimental data. That is, the probability of the 
hypothesis is based on previous research as well as probability estimates of the hypothesis being 
true or false. This formulation stands in contrast to the frequency approach to probability and 
significance testing found in conventional statistics, which guide interpretation using estimates of 
the results of many repetitions of the same experiment. While critics of Bayesian methods argue 
that they are too ‘subjective,’ chiefly in the choosing of a prior distribution, they provide a more 
contextual interpretation of study results into conclusions about research hypotheses (Haig 1996). 
Taking a critical perspective on quantitative methods can continue to expand methodological 
knowledge, by identifying experimental situations in which a Bayesian approach to inference is 
most appropriate and, alternatively, when simple significance testing is not.
Thus, critical psychologists have moved the field forward by showing us that our obsession 
with methods undermines full consideration of the relationship between epistemology and 
methodology. They have invigorated the quantitative/qualitative debate in psychology, not only 
by critiquing ‘methodolatry’ but also by identifying the problems associated with a classical 
view of measurement, resisting unhelpful dichotomies, and bringing questions of power to the 
foreground. Indeed, a critical perspective on the dominance of quantification in mainstream 
psychology can enhance our ability to theorize the production of social differences and injustice.
Further reading
Hornstein, G. A. (1988) ‘Quantifying psychological phenomena: debates, dilemmas, and implications’, in 
J. G. Morawski (ed.) The Rise of Experimentation in American Psychology. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press.
Ioannidis, J. (2005) ‘Why most published research findings are false’, PLoS Medicine, 2(8), e124.
Michell, J. (1990) An Introduction to the Logic of Psychological Measurement. Hillsdale, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc.
Van de Schoot, M., Hoitjink, H. and Jan-Willem, R. (2011) ‘Moving beyond traditional null hypothesis 
testing: evaluating expectations directly.’ Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 1–5.
Website resources
American Psychological Association’s “Quantitative Psychology” report: http://www.apa.org/research/
tools/quantitative/index.aspx?item=1
Felix Schönbrodt’s website – A collection of blogs and resources on contemporary findings in statistical 
methods in social sciences: http://www.nicebread.de
References
Alcoff, L. (1997) ‘The politics of postmodern feminism, revisited’, Cultural Critique, 36, 5–27.
American Psychological Association Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice (2006) ‘Evidence-  
based practice in psychology’, American Psychologist, 61, 271–285.

Lisa Cosgrove et al.
22
Bakan, D. (1967) On Method: toward a Reconstruction of Psychological Investigation. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass Behavioral Sciences Series.
Ball, C. R., Kratochwill, T. R., Johnson, H. F. and Fruehling, J. (2009) ‘Limited prescription privileges for 
psychologists: review and implication for the practice of psychology in the schools’, Psychology in the 
Schools, 46(9), 836–845.
Billing, M. (1994) ‘Repopulating the depopulated pages of social psychology’, Theory & Psychology, 4(3), 
307–335.
Brinberg, D. and McGrath, J. (1985) Validity and the Research Process. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Burman, E. (2007) ‘From orientalism to normalization: cross-cultural lessons from Japan for a critical his-
tory of psychology’, History of Psychology, 10, 179–198.
Chwalisz, K. (2003) ‘Evidence-based practice: a framework for twenty-first century scientist-practitioner 
training’, The Counseling Psychologist, 31(5), 497–528.
Coon, D. J. (1993) ‘Standardizing the subject: experimental psychologists, introspection, and the technosci-
entific ideal’, Technology and Culture, 34, 757–783.
Cosgrove, L. and McHugh, M. (2008) ‘A post-Newtonian, postmodern approach to science: innovative 
methods in social action research’, in S. N. Hesse-Biber and P. L. Leavy (eds) Handbook of Emergent Meth-
ods. New York: Guilford Publications.
Cosgrove, L. and Riddle, B. (2004) ‘Gender bias and sex distribution of mental disorders in the DSM-IV-TR’, 
in P. J. Caplan and L. Cosgrove (eds) Bias in Psychiatric Diagnosis. Lanham, MD: Jason Aronson.
Cushman, P. (2000) ‘Will managed care change our way of being?’, American Psychology, 55(9), 985–996.
Fine, M. (2011) ‘Troubling calls for evidence: a critical race, class and gender analysis of those evidence 
counts’, Feminism & Psychology, 22(1), 3–19.
Flyvbjerg, B. (2001) Making Social Science Matter (trans. S. Sampson). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.
Frängsmyr, T. (1990) ‘The mathematical philosophy’, in T. Frängsmyr, J. L. Heilbron, and R. E. Rider (eds) 
The Quantifying Spirit of the 18th Century. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Giddings, L. S. and Grant, B. M. (2007) ‘A Trojan horse for positivism? A  critique of mixed methods 
research’, Advances in Nursing Science, 30(1), 52–60.
Giorgi, A. (1985) Phenomenological and Psychological Research. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University Press.
Goodenough, F. L. (1949) Mental testing: its history, principles, and applications. New York: Rinehart and 
Company.
Haig, B. D. (1996) ‘Statistical methods in education and psychology: a critical perspective’, Australian Journal 
of Education, 40(2), 190–219.
Hayes, S. C., Walser, R. D. and Follette, V. M. (1995) ‘Psychology and the temptation of prescription privi-
leges’, Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, 36(4), 313–320.
Heidelberger, M. (2004) Nature from Within: Gustav Theodor Fechner and his Psychophysical Worldview. Pitts-
burgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Henriques, J., Hollway, W., Urwin, C., Venn, C. and Walkerdine, V. (1998) Changing the Subject: Psychology, 
Social Regulation and Subjectivity. Florence, KY: Taylor and Francis/Routledge.
Hornstein, G. A. (1988) ‘Quantifying psychological phenomena: debates, dilemmas, and implications’, in 
J. G. Morawski (ed.) The Rise of Experimentation in American Psychology. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press.
Hoshmand, L. T. and Polkinghorne, D. E. (1992) ‘Redefining the science-practice relationship and profes-
sional training’, American Psychologist, 47(1), 55–66.
Hubbard, R. (1988) ‘Science, facts, and feminism’, Hypatia, 3(1), 5–17.
Hunsley, J. (2007) ‘Addressing key challenges in evidence-based practice in psychology’, Professional Psychol-
ogy: Research and Practice, 38(2), 113–121.
Husserl, E. (1970) The Crisis of the European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology (trans. D. Carr). Evan-
ston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Hyde, J. S. (2005) ‘The gender similarities hypothesis’, American Psychologist, 60(6), 581–592.
Ioannidis, J. (2005) ‘Why most published research findings are false’, PLoS Medicine, 2(8), e124.
Jennings, J. (1986) ‘Husserl revisited: the forgotten distinction between psychology and phenomenology’, 
American Psychologist, 41, 1231–1240.
Lather, P. (1991) Getting Smart: Feminist Research and Pedagogy With/in the Postmodern. New York: Routledge.
Lynch, S. M. (2007) Introduction to Applied Bayesian Statistics and Estimation for Social Scientists. New York: 
Springer Science + Business Media, LLC.

Quantitative methods
23
Michell, J. (1990) An Introduction to the Logic of Psychological Measurement. Hillsdale, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc.
Michell, J. (2003) ‘The quantitative imperative: positivism, naïve realism, and the place of qualitative meth-
ods in psychology’, Theory & Psychology, 13(1), 5–31.
Morawski, J. G. (1985) ‘The measurement of masculinity and femininity: engendering categorical realities,’ 
Journal of Personality, 53(2), 196–223.
Morawski, J. G. (2011) ‘Our debates: finding, fixing, and enacting reality’. Theory  & Psychology, 21(2), 
260–274.
National Institutes of Health (2007) Guidelines for conducting research in the intramural research program at NIH 
(4th Edn), http://sourcebook.od.nih.gov/ethic-conduct/Conduct%20Research%206-11-07.pdf
National Institutes of Health (2012) ‘NIH policies and procedures for promoting scientific integrity’, 
http://www.nih.gov/about/director/sci-int-nov2012.pdf
Ponterotto, J. G. (2005a) ‘Qualitative research in counseling psychology: a primer on research paradigms and 
philosophy of science’, Journal of Counseling Psychology, 52(2), 126–136.
Ponterotto, J. G. (2005b) ‘Qualitative research training in counseling psychology: a survey of directors of 
training’, Teaching of Psychology, 32, 60–62.
Prilleltensky, I. (1989) ‘Psychology and the status quo’, American Psychologist, 44, 795–802.
Sale, J.E.M., Lohfeld, L. H. and Brazil, K. (2002) ‘Revisiting the quantitative-qualitative debate: implications 
for mixed-methods research’, Quality and Quantity, 36, 43–53.
Stewart, A. J. and McDermott, C. (2004) ‘Gender in psychology’, Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 519–544.
Teo, T. (2009) ‘Philosophical concerns in critical psychology’, in D. Fox, I. Prilleltensky, and S. Austin (eds) 
Critical Psychology: An Introduction. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Toomela, A. (2010) ‘Quantitative methods in psychology: inevitable and useless’, Frontiers in Psychology, 
1, 29.
Ussher, J. M. (1999) ‘Eclecticism and methodological pluralism’, Psychology of Women Quarterly, 23(1), 41–46.
Westerman, M. A. and Yanchar, S. C. (2011) ‘Changing the terms of the debate: quantitative methods in 
explicitly interpretive research’, Theory & Psychology, 21(2), 139–154.

24
In terms of the impact of an intellectual movement, few developments in the history of psychol-
ogy compare to what has come to be known as the cognitive revolution (Gardner 1985). Since 
the middle of the twentieth century, nearly every aspect of psychological research and practice has 
come to bear the imprint of the emergence of the digital computer, the rise of cybernetics and 
information-processing theory, and the mechanization of the human mind. Insofar as cognitive 
psychology has come to colonize nearly every facet of psychology in general, it is clear that any 
program worthy of the name ‘critical’ must interrogate the commitments and assumptions under-
lying orthodox theories of cognition. To do so, it is necessary to appreciate many of the changes 
and transformations that have contributed to the development of modern cognitive psychology.
The evolution of cognitive psychology
According to the classical model of cognition – or what is commonly referred to as cognitiv-
ism – psychological processes are fundamentally computational processes involving the system-
atic manipulation of discrete symbols ( Johnson-Laird 1988; Newell and Simon 1981; Pylyshyn 
1984). The origin of these symbols can be traced to the sense data that individuals encounter 
as they navigate their world. By converting this data into symbolic form, it becomes possible 
to systematically transform what would otherwise be a chaotic collection of sense data into a 
relatively coherent representation of reality.
These symbolic transformations are guided by mental rules that organize information in a 
systematic fashion. Although individuals are sometimes aware of these mental rules, more often 
such rules operate below the level of awareness. For cognitivism, providing a psychological 
explanation for systematic variations in thought and behaviour ultimately involves identifying 
variations in the content of these rules. In contrast, the view that human thought and behaviour is 
guided by rules involves a commitment to a singular form (rules) that provides a basis for psycho-
logical explanation. So while cognitivism recognizes that mental rules are socially, culturally, and 
historically contingent, this is predicated on the view that all human thought and behaviour is 
fundamentally rule-governed. Indeed, this commitment is not only treated as a universal feature 
of human mental functioning, but it has also become a template for what constitutes a legitimate 
psychological explanation.
2
Cognitive psychology
From the bourgeois individual 
to class struggle
Michael Arfken

Cognitive psychology
25
There are several advantages to using the digital computer as a model for human men-
tal processes. To the extent that a scientific explanation is construed in mechanistic terms, 
the computational processes occurring between the input of information and the output 
of orderly behaviour can potentially be reproduced on a physical machine. In principle, this 
makes it possible to furnish an exclusively mechanistic explanation of our psychological pro-
cesses. Moreover, one can abstract principles from this process that need not be tied to any 
particular physical medium such as the computer or the brain (Dreyfus and Dreyfus 1988). 
This means that researchers can pursue an empirical research program largely divorced from 
neurophysiology.
While classical models of cognition view mental processes as proceeding in a series of dis-
crete steps, connectionism suggests that as mental activity reaches higher levels of complexity, it 
becomes advantageous to develop models of human cognition in which these processes both 
operate in parallel and are distributed rather than localized (McClelland et al. 1986). According 
to connectionism, the basic building blocks of cognition are units which maintain a certain level 
of activation. Units with different numerical weights are linked together through a network 
of connections, and the activation of any individual unit has the potential to excite or inhibit 
the activity of other units. When a unit becomes active in the presence of a novel stimulus, it 
initiates a spread of activity across the entire network. This activity can change the parameters 
of the entire network so that further encounters with the stimulus bear the imprint of previous 
experience (Bechtel 1987; Smolensky 1988).
Proponents of connectionism argue that in some instances, distributive models of cognition 
appear to provide a more realistic model of human performance. For example, by emphasizing 
the weight of activation for different units of a network, connectionism seems to be in a better 
position to simulate the smooth degradation of performance that is characteristic of a wide array 
of human activity. Moreover, while classical models of cognition continue to excel at basic tasks 
requiring reasoning and problem solving, connectionism has shown promise in other areas of 
human mental functioning, such as pattern recognition (Bechtel 1987).
There is considerable debate surrounding the relationship between cognitivism and con-
nectionism. Some advocates of connectionism argue that given what we know about the brain, 
distributed models of cognition seem much more plausible at a neurophysiological level than 
traditional information-processing models (McClelland et al. 1986). Others have argued that 
connectionism is perhaps best understood as a subsymbolic paradigm that addresses the micro-
structure rather than the macrostructure of cognition (Bechtel 1987; Smolensky 1988). Still 
others have argued that while connectionism may be adequate at the level of neurophysiology, 
a serial/modular view of cognition remains a more robust psychological explanation of human 
mental functioning (Pinker and Mehler 1988).
Despite important differences between cognitivism and connectionism, both tend to begin 
their analysis at the point where information has already been captured through a separate 
perceptual system. The emerging field of embodied cognition is in some respects a reaction to 
this largely disembodied view of human cognition. According to one embodied approach – 
grounded cognition (Barsalou 2008) – traditional models of cognition treat perception and con-
ception as independent systems. Such an amodal view of cognition fails to appreciate the extent 
to which perceptual and conceptual systems are integrated so that our experience is grounded 
in the very nature of our embodied engagement in the world. As we have seen, cognitivism’s 
commitment to a computational view of mental functioning makes it necessary to transform 
the non-symbolic information received through the perceptual system into symbolic form. In 
this process of transduction the perceptual modality through which the information is received 
becomes irrelevant. Grounded cognition argues that by integrating perceptual and conceptual 

Michael Arfken
26
systems, it becomes possible to develop cognitive models that address the embodied nature of 
our experience while remaining congruent with the latest neurophysiological research.
Cognitive psychology and its critics
While connectionism and grounded cognition point to some significant problems surrounding 
the classical view of cognition, it is clear that a number of assumptions guiding cognitive psy-
chology as a whole remain largely unchallenged. Indeed, the evolution of cognitive psychology 
can best be understood as a series of reforms in which internal critiques have been deployed 
to salvage a set of core commitments regarding the nature of human thought, knowledge, and 
experience. In contrast, the most radical critiques of cognitive psychology have tended to zero 
in on the underlying philosophical anthropology that makes something like cognition the point 
of departure for many of our modern institutions, from liberal democracy and political economy 
to moral theory and jurisprudence. For these more radical critiques, the evolution of cognitive 
psychology must be transformed into a revolution that challenges the epistemological founda-
tion of modern thought (Taylor 1995).
To begin with, critics have drawn attention to the orthodox view of perception within cogni-
tive psychology. Central to cognitive psychology is an assumption that our encounter with the 
world is fundamentally indirect, so that in our everyday activities we initially encounter not peo-
ple or objects but rather a collection of sense data that must be enriched in order to construct a 
coherent representation of the world. Leading the charge against theories of indirect perception 
are ecological psychologists, who argue that our perception of the world is fundamentally direct 
and involves the detection of information already available in the environment (Gibson 1979; 
Michaels and Carello 1981, Reed 1996). Central to this critique is a redefinition of the very 
notion of perception, so that organisms perceive not so much a series of time slices or snapshots 
but instead events extended in time. One of the most important consequences of this novel view 
of perception is that it becomes necessary to interrogate orthodox assumptions regarding the 
relationship between organisms and their environments.
Within cognitive psychology, organisms and environments are traditionally viewed in spa-
tial terms so that organisms – much as physical objects – are treated as occupying a certain 
space within a particular environment. For cognitive psychology, this moves in the other direc-
tion as well, since it is assumed that organisms carry around internal representations of their 
environments. Ecological psychologists argue that traditional cognitive models produce an 
animal-environment dualism that supplies the very justification for indirect theories of percep-
tion. As an alternative, they suggest that the point of departure for exploring perception should 
be a synergistic system made up of both the animal and the environment (Michaels and Carello 
1981; Turvey and Shaw 1977). Here activity points not to a process residing in our heads but 
instead to a practical engagement between an organism and its environment.
The traditional emphasis on sense data and animal-environment dualism has important 
methodological consequences for cognitive psychology. If we assume that perception refers 
to cognitive processes that enable individuals to construct a coherent representation of the 
world, priority will be accorded to producing artificial contexts where maximum control of the 
conditions can be assured. For Gibson (1979), the attempt to study perception in a controlled 
environment with exposure devices, headrests, and tachistoscopes tends to make us think that 
perception can be broken into a series of time-frame moments and reassembled in the mind. 
Yet this view of perception arises not from any facts about perception but as a consequence of 
a commitment to an atomistic and mechanistic view of psychological explanation. In this sense, 
ecological psychology remains a powerful critique of cognitive psychology not only because it 

Cognitive psychology
27
calls into question these atomistic and mechanistic assumptions, but also because it provides an 
alternative framework for the scientific investigation of perception.
By redefining perception as a practical activity, ecological psychologists have challenged the 
atomistic and mechanistic assumptions that inform not only traditional theories of perception 
but also our very understanding of the nature of psychological explanation. In a similar vein, 
scholars drawing on phenomenology (Dreyfus 1992; Taylor 1995) and ordinary language philos-
ophy (Coulter 1989; Coulter and Sharrock 2007) have pointed to issues surrounding cognitive 
accounts of skilled performance. At the heart of many cognitive accounts of skilled performance 
is a view that orderly and structured behaviour must follow from the application of discrete 
(though often implicit) rules. Viewed in this way, the project for a psychological account of 
human activity is largely geared towards making these implicit rules as explicit as possible. In 
principle, such explicit knowledge (or ‘know-that’) could fill the pages of a book that social 
actors metaphorically possess at one level or another.
At stake here is whether we must assume that all knowledge can be made explicit as a col-
lection of rules or if it is necessary to make room for a type of practical knowledge (know-how, 
as opposed to ‘know-that’) that resists being transformed into discrete propositions and rules. 
Since orthodox cognitive psychology is largely dedicated to a mechanistic view of psychological 
explanation, the suggestion that certain types of knowledge cannot be transformed into discrete 
rules and propositions appears to those working within the cognitive tradition as a capitulation 
to mysticism and an affront to the development of a psychological science. One place where this 
tension is particularly acute is in research on expertise.
According to cognitive psychology, the transformation of a novice into an expert in a par-
ticular domain involves a prolonged process of accumulating a large number of relevant rules. 
Since an expert is defined as someone who understands exactly what a particular situation 
demands, cognitive psychology assumes that such knowledge must be a massive collection of 
rules for guiding skilled performance. Yet for Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1988), this view of expertise 
is the inevitable outcome of adherence to a mechanistic model of the mind. They suggest that 
the development of expertise is best understood as the development and refining of practical 
skills in an ongoing situation. This means that what remains vital for the novice (i.e. explicit 
rules) ultimately becomes a hindrance for highly skilled performance. While cognitive psycholo-
gists argue that this merely indicates that in the development of skilled performance mental rules 
become increasingly implicit, Dreyfus and Dreyfus argue that another possibility exists – that 
the expert does not follow rules at all. Pointing to work in the field of Artificial Intelligence 
(AI), Dreyfus (1992) argues that many of the obstacles AI researchers have encountered in their 
attempts to simulate human intelligence on a digital computer can be traced to the mistaken 
view that intelligent human behaviour follows from the application of discrete rules and prop-
ositions. Here the frame or common sense knowledge problem has made it necessary for AI 
researchers to reflect on the philosophical commitments that inform their mental models (Drey-
fus 2007; Dreyfus and Dreyfus 1988).
If we assume that the development of a scientific psychology necessarily involves translat-
ing all human knowledge into discrete rules that can in principle be programmed on a digital 
computer, it becomes necessary to explain how we can formalize all the rules that make it 
possible for individuals to navigate their world. Surveying the myriad forms of human activity, 
it becomes clear that our point of departure for acting appropriately in a particular situation is a 
sense of what is relevant or important about that situation. By framing a situation, it is possible to 
identify the unique characteristics that distinguish one situation from another. But within cogni-
tive psychology, relevance or significance must in principle be something that can be formalized 
as a collection of rules. The consequence is that we appear to require rules for identifying rules. 

Michael Arfken
28
But because the frames that indicate relevance are about rather than in situations, the result is an 
infinite regress (Dreyfus 2007). Indeed, recent developments in AI have largely arisen from aban-
doning the mechanistic, rules-based epistemology that guided early attempts to simulate human 
mental functioning (Brooks 1991; Dreyfus 2007). These efforts have in a number of cases drawn 
inspiration from ecological psychology and its critique of indirect perception.
One of the consequences of challenging the assumption that human activity is governed by 
mental rules or that our experience of the world is mediated by mental representations has been 
increased interest in the nature of the background knowledge that makes it possible for people to 
navigate their world (Dreyfus 1980, 1992; Taylor 1993). As we have seen, cognitive psychologists 
not only recognize the importance of background knowledge in providing a context for our 
experiences, they suggest that one of the major goals of cognitive research is to make this knowl-
edge as explicit as possible. Yet critics argue that the very nature of this background knowledge 
is such that it functions only when it operates behind our backs (Dreyfus 1980). From this 
perspective, attempts to bring such knowledge into the foreground amount to little more than 
a mechanistic colonization of human experience (Taylor 1995).
The struggle here is between cognitive psychologists who assume that our encounter with 
the world is primarily theoretical and indirect and critics who argue that the very possibility of 
adopting a detached, disembodied, theoretical stance towards the world is itself only made pos-
sible by our practical, engaged, embodied activities (Dreyfus 1980; Taylor 1995). By challenging 
the view that social activity is necessarily governed by mental activity, critics have endeavoured 
to show that the mental space staked out by cognitive psychology is itself a social accomplish-
ment. This provides a means for shifting attention away from the mental activities of individuals 
and towards the social activities and those spaces between people that make anything like cog-
nition possible (Taylor 1995).
For cognitive psychology, the point of departure for analysing social and cultural behaviour 
is the mental activity of individual social actors. Yet critics have argued that the very nature of 
our background knowledge is such that anything we might call mental activity must ultimately 
be derived from our collective social practices (Dreyfus 1980; Taylor 1995). The emergence of the 
practice turn in social theory (Schatzki et al. 2001) has propelled investigations of social activity 
in a number of directions. On the one hand, the primacy of social practice has created a space 
for an empirical research program grounded in a non-cognitive account of human interaction. 
On the other hand, the practice turn has also served as a catalyst for deploying grammatical 
investigations in an effort to destroy any coherent conception of the cognitive or the mental.
For scholars working within the tradition of Discursive Social Psychology (DSP), the topic 
of cognition plays an important role in a variety of contexts (Edwards 1997; Potter 1996). 
To begin with, DSP emphasizes the importance of locating what are traditionally viewed as 
cognitive processes within the realm of social and discursive practice. Here discourse is treated 
not as the expression of an interior mental process but instead as an intersubjective practice in 
which social actors produce particular representations of reality. Central to the production of 
these representations is the use of psychological terms (i.e. feel, knows, believes, intended) to 
buttress or undermine particular versions of events. Drawing on the analytical tools developed 
by ethnomethodology and conversations analysis (CA), these scholars have sought to establish 
a post-cognitive research paradigm that is sensitive to the role that ordinary talk plays in the 
negotiation of social reality.
Other scholars suggest that when the issues addressed by cognitive psychology are submitted 
to conceptual analysis, it becomes clear that what are viewed as central problems surrounding 
the mind and the brain are actually grammatical confusions that require conceptual interven-
tion. For example, Coulter and Sharrock (2007) point to the tendency in cognitive psychology 

Cognitive psychology
29
to transform achievement words into process words. So while playing, travelling, and seeking are 
clearly processes, winning, arriving, and finding are better understood as achievements. Over-
looking conceptual facts such as this make it possible to treat something like remembering or 
seeing as a process that requires cognitive explanation rather than an achievement embedded 
within a social practice.
For Coulter (1989), conceptual clarification reveals that any discourse surrounding the men-
tal is fundamentally incoherent. While we may be excused for using mental terms in our ordi-
nary language, Coulter argues that it is vital that we identify and discard conceptual confusions 
that continue to plague our professional discourse. In this regard, conceptual intervention repre-
sents a formidable challenge to the development of any coherent science of the mental.
While there are important differences between a grammatical investigation focusing on the 
limits of intelligibility and an empirical investigation of the situated deployment of mental 
vocabulary, both critiques suggest that the recent turn to social practices has important if not 
devastating implications for cognitive psychology as a whole. Moreover, by making their point 
of departure practical rather than theoretical, critics of cognitive psychology have laid the foun-
dation for productive collaboration among a range of traditions from phenomenology and ordi-
nary language philosophy to ecological psychology and standpoint epistemology.
From culture to political economy
At their best, radical critiques of cognitive psychology call into question the atomistic, mecha-
nistic, and representational foundations of modern epistemology. In many cases, these critiques 
have gained traction by inverting the traditional relationship between action and cognition so 
that mental processes are themselves treated as a form of social practice. While this certainly 
moves us in the proper direction, it is important to avoid equating social and cultural practices 
(Arfken 2012). Insofar as cognitive psychology is treated principally as a form of cultural imperi-
alism, resistance often amounts to little more than fetishizing the local and marginal in the hope 
that the mere presence of alternative perspectives will give pause to the neoliberal juggernaut. 
This runs the risk, as Fraser (2003) observes, of allowing political struggles to become entirely 
consumed by cultural critique while injustices surrounding the social relations of production 
run rampant. Despite some notable exceptions (Parker 2009; Reed 1996; Shotter 1987; Still and 
Costall 1991), critics of cognitive psychology have rarely ventured into the domain of political 
economy. Indeed, the overwhelming tendency has been to view modern epistemology as a 
manifestation of Western culture rather than an expression of the underlying logic of capitalist 
accumulation.
To see this, it is important to understand which substantive issues proponents and critics of 
cognitive psychology view as simply off limits. As we have seen, cognitivism in particular argues 
that our background knowledge can in principle be formalized into a collection of explicit rules 
that guide our everyday activities. To call this assumption into question is to challenge the very 
possibility of providing a legitimate psychological explanation. In contrast, critics of cognitive 
psychology argue that what cognitivists view as the basis of psychological explanation is actually 
the expression of a contingent and increasingly dominant cultural practice. While this observa-
tion is intended to destabilize Western imperialism, in reality it transforms culture into an incor-
rigible entity that is even more impervious to scrutiny (Pollner 1974). This is particularly clear in 
contemporary multiculturalism, where marginalized social practices are accorded the status of a 
culture in an effort to insulate them from critique. While the aim is to challenge the ascendance 
of a single, dominant worldview, one of the unfortunate consequences is that the possibility of 
establishing a foundation for challenging the legitimacy of any specific social practice (dominant 

Michael Arfken
30
or otherwise) is radically undermined. Indeed, by focusing exclusively on cultural domination, 
critics have largely forfeited their ability to trace the evolution of cognitive psychology to devel-
opments in the capitalist mode of production. In this way, the politics of multiculturalism may 
inadvertently reproduce a system of economic exploitation (Arfken 2013; Michaels 2006).
One of the advantages of placing cognitive psychology within the context of political econ-
omy is that it makes it possible to integrate various critical elements that would otherwise 
remain only loosely related. As we have seen, ecological psychologists emphasize the engaged 
and direct way in which organisms explore their environments. In a similar vein, hermeneutic 
phenomenologists argue that the subject/object dualism central to cognitive psychology is itself 
derived from a more primordial engagement that blurs the boundary between an individual and 
his or her context. While these are certainly important insights, it is vital that we add another 
critical component. Through Marx’s (1844/1964) concept of alienation, we can begin to see the 
chasm separating people from their creations, from one another, and from their world as more 
than an expression of a dominant cultural worldview. From the perspective of political economy 
the abstract and mechanical models that lie at the heart of cognitive psychology are an insti-
tutional expression of the alienation of labour under the capitalist mode of production. In this 
sense, cognitive psychology is not so much a cultural movement but rather an embodiment of 
alienation itself.
Another reason for grounding critiques of cognitive psychology in class struggle is that 
it prevents revolutionary concepts from being appropriated for essentially reformist purposes. 
A case in point is the notion of an affordance which is central to the ecological critique of indirect 
perception (Gibson 1979). In the hands of grounded cognition, affordances have been trans-
formed into theoretical entities that are viewed not only as compatible but actually vital to an 
indirect theory of perception (Semin and Smith 2008). Yet when affordances are placed within 
the context of class struggle, we can see the rise of a market in wage labour and the transfor-
mation of use-values into exchange-values as a process of estrangement or re-affording in the 
service of capital accumulation. Once again, by linking the practice turn with political economy, 
it becomes possible to forge important links between revolutionary class struggle and ecological 
critiques of indirect perception (Reed 1996).
Of course, the danger in reorienting the turn to social practice towards a critique of political 
economy is that the contemporary reduction of the economic to the cultural is repeated in the 
opposite direction. To avoid this, it is important to understand that drawing attention to the eco-
nomic foundations of exploitation makes it possible to dismantle the very class differentials that 
often serve as the vehicle for marginalizing social and cultural groups. Put somewhat differently, 
if the existence of a system of economic stratification is what makes it possible for one group 
to extract material advantage from the exploitation of another group, it becomes clear that the 
turn to social practice is necessarily a class as well as a cultural struggle.
Conclusion
In The Condition of Postmodernity (1989), David Harvey asks whether the historical transfor-
mation in the twentieth century from Fordism and scientific management to more flexible 
forms of accumulation represents a radical shift that gives birth to a new postindustrial age or 
is instead merely a course correction in which the capitalist mode of production adjusts to an 
increasingly global economy. Placed within the context of this question, it is possible to read the 
evolution of cognitive psychology against the grain. Looking at the mechanical models of the 
mind developed by cognitive psychology, one is struck by the similarities between these mod-
els and the organization of labour under Fordism and scientific management. Indeed, insofar 

Cognitive psychology
31
as scientific management endeavours to transform the knowledge of the labourer into a set of 
explicit instructions that can be used to increase the pace of work (Taylor 1911), the develop-
ment of cognitivism can be viewed both as an antecedent and a consequence of transformations 
in industrial relations. Yet because the ambitions of capital remain entirely exposed in cognitiv-
ism and scientific management, it became necessary to construct models of the mind in which 
these naked ambitions are obscured. In this way, the internal critiques of cognitive psychology 
(i.e. connectionism, grounded cognition) serve as a useful means for further extending and 
entrenching a system of exploitation.
Turning to the radical critiques of cognitive psychology, we must ask whether these critiques 
disturb the hidden economic foundations of modern cognitive psychology or whether they 
actually play an increasingly vital role in obscuring those foundations. To the extent that these 
critiques have treated the primacy of social practice exclusively as a cultural phenomenon, the 
manifest differences between internal and radical critiques ultimately conceal an underlying 
logic that threatens the greater part of our planet with a host of problems from ecological dev-
astation to compulsory servitude.
For Harvey, while postmodernism claims to be a radically destabilizing movement, a closer 
look indicates that its obsession with dissolving all moral, ethical, and political foundations leads 
it to view the notion of class struggle as little more than an antiquated grand narrative. The con-
sequence is that legitimate concerns regarding the economic structure of society become little 
more than language games that players are free to adopt or discard at their convenience. What is 
often lost in much of postmodernism is that the needs of vast segments of the population have 
little to do with the play of difference or the politics of recognition (Michaels 2006). For those 
living under the crushing weight of economic exploitation, it is the social relations of produc-
tion that matter most.
This is all the more important to keep in mind since the movement that perhaps is in the best 
position to challenge cognitive psychology – hermeneutics – has too often been hijacked by 
postmodernists who see the impossibility of bringing our background knowledge into view as 
a sceptical tool for undermining any system, revolutionary or not. For critical psychologists who 
see class struggle as more than a vestige of some bygone modern discourse, the path forward 
involves integrating the ontological shift in hermeneutics and the practice turn in contemporary 
social theory with the Marxist analysis of the social relations of production under capitalism. 
While the development of more radical approaches to embodiment is a promising sign, it is 
important to ensure that these developments bring renewed attention to the structure of human 
labour and the importance of class struggle.
Further reading
Costall, A. and Still, A. (eds) (1987) Cognitive Psychology in Question. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Dreyfus, H. (1992) What Computers Still Can’t Do. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Johnson, D. M. and Erneling, C. E. (eds) (1997) The Future of the Cognitive Revolution. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Still, A. and Costall, A. (eds) (1991) Against Cognitivism: Alternative Foundations for Cognitive Psychology. New 
York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Website resources
Being in the World (Movie): http://beingintheworldmovie.com/
Discourse and Rhetoric Group (DARG): http://www.lboro.ac.uk/departments/socialsciences/research/
groups/darg/
Discourse Unit: http://www.discourseunit.com/
The International Society for Ecological Psychology (ISEP): http://www.trincoll.edu/depts/ecopsyc/isep/

Michael Arfken
32
References
Arfken, M. (2012) ‘Scratching the surface: internationalization, cultural diversity and the politics of recog-
nition’, Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 6(6), 428–437.
Arfken, M. (2013) ‘Social justice and the politics of recognition’, American Psychologist, 68(6), 475–476.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008) ‘Grounded cognition’, Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617–645.
Bechtel, W. (1987) ‘Connectionism and the philosophy of mind: an overview’, Southern Journal of Philosophy, 
26, 17–41.
Brooks, R. A. (1991) ‘Intelligence without representation’, Artificial Intelligence, 47, 139–159.
Coulter, J. (1989) Mind in Action. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press International.
Coulter, J. and Sharrock, W. (2007) Brain, Mind, and Human Behavior in Contemporary Cognitive Science: Crit-
ical Assessments of the Philosophy of Psychology. Lewiston, NY: The Edwin Mellen Press.
Dreyfus, H. L. (1980) ‘Holism and hermeneutics’, Review of Metaphysics, 34, 3–23.
Dreyfus, H. L. (1992) What Computers Still Can’t Do. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. L. (2007) ‘Why Heideggerian AI failed and how fixing it would require making it more Hei-
deggerian’, Artificial Intelligence, 171, 1137–1160.
Dreyfus, H. L. and Dreyfus, S. E. (1988) ‘Making a mind versus modeling the brain: artificial intelligence 
back at a branchpoint’, Daedalus, 117(1), 15–43.
Edwards, D. (1997) Discourse and Cognition. London: Sage.
Fraser, N. (2003) ‘Social justice in the age of identity politics: redistribution, recognition, and participation’, 
in N. Fraser and A. Honneth (eds) Redistribution or Recognition: A Political-Philosophical Exchange. London: 
Verso.
Gardner, H. (1985) The Mind’s New Science. New York: Basic Books.
Gibson, J. J. (1979) The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Harvey, D. (1989) The Condition of Postmodernity. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1988) The Computer and the Mind: An Introduction to Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Marx, K. (1844/1964) The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. New York: International Publishers.
McClelland, J. L., Rumelhart, D. E. and Hinton, G. E. (1986) ‘The appeal of parallel distributed processing’, 
in D. E. Rumelhart and J. L. McClelland (eds) Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstruc-
ture of Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Michaels, C. and Carello, C. (1981) Direct Perception. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Michaels, W. B. (2006) The Trouble with Diversity: How We Learned to Love Identity and Ignore Inequality. New 
York: Metropolitan Books.
Newell, A. and Simon, H. A. (1981) ‘Computer science as empirical inquiry’, in J. Haugeland (ed.) Mind 
Design. Montgomery, VT: Bradford Books.
Parker, I. (2009) ‘Critical psychology and revolutionary Marxism’, Theory & Psychology, 19(1), 71–92.
Pinker, S. and Mehler, J. (eds) (1988) Connections and Symbols. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pollner, M. (1974) ‘Mundane reasoning’, Philosophy of Social Science, 4(1), 35–54.
Potter, J. (1996) Representing Reality: Discourse, Rhetoric and Social Construction. London: Sage.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1984) Computation and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Reed, E. S. (1996) The Necessity of Experience. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Schatzki, T. R., Cetina, K. and Savigny, E. V. (eds) (2001) The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory. London: 
Routledge.
Semin, G. R. and Smith, E. (eds) (2008) Embodied Grounding: Social, Cognitive, Affective and Neuroscientific 
Approaches. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Shotter, J. (1987) ‘Cognitive psychology, “Taylorism”, and the manufacture of unemployment’, in A. Costall 
and A. Still (eds) Cognitive Psychology in Question. New York: St Martin’s Press.
Smolensky, P. (1988) ‘On the proper treatment of connectionism’, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 11, 1–74.
Still, A. and Costall, A. (eds) (1991) Against Cognitivism: Alternative Foundations for Cognitive Psychology. New 
York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Taylor, C. (1993) ‘Engaged agency and background in Heidegger’, in C. B. Guignon (ed.) The Cambridge 
Companion to Heidegger. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, C. (1995) Philosophical Arguments. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Taylor, F. W. (1911) The Principles of Scientific Management. New York: Harper and Brothers.
Turvey, M. T. and Shaw, R. (1977) ‘The primacy of perceiving: an ecological reformulation of perception 
for understanding memory’ in L. Nilsson (ed.) Perspectives on Memory Research: Essays in Honor of Uppsala 
University’s 500th Anniversary. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

33
When we speak of the perspective in psychology that has come to be known as behaviourism, we 
must clarify that this assignation has been applied to characterize several psychological models 
that emerged over the first half of the twentieth century in the United States, including classical 
behaviourism, cognitive behaviourism, and radical behaviourism. Our discussion here will con-
cern the dominant and perhaps most controversial of these, B. F. Skinner’s (1945) radical behav-
iourism, the philosophy of science underpinning operant psychology, and the fast expanding 
field of applied behaviour analysis. But before turning our focus to radical behaviourism, let us 
briefly introduce each of the three branches and distinguish amongst them.
Three branches of behaviourism
Historically, the oldest branch of behaviourism, founded by American psychologist John B. 
Watson (1913), is known as classical behaviourism. Classical behaviourism incorporated Ivan 
Pavlov’s scientific studies of conditioning and the reflex, and it is correctly characterized as a 
type of S-R, that is, stimulus-response, psychology. Also known as methodological behaviour-
ism, this perspective emerged in full force with the publication of Watson’s (1913) well-known 
theoretical manifesto, ‘Psychology as the behaviourist views it’. Watson’s new psychology was a 
radical departure from the introspective and subjective psychology of mental life that dominated 
both Wundt’s Structuralism and the Functionalist school in America, whose leaders included 
William James, G. Stanley Hall, and James McKean Cattell.
The second branch of behavioural psychology, cognitive behaviourism, derives from social 
learning theory and the work of Albert Bandura (1977) and co-workers (e.g. Bandura et al. 
1966), along with the earlier neo-behavioural models of Edward C. Tolman (1922, 1932) and 
Clark L. Hull (1935,1937) on latent learning and drive reduction theory, respectively. We can 
characterize this perspective generically as a mediational model of learning and behaviour that 
incorporates cognitive processes. Bandura’s social learning theory follows the S-O-R-C formu-
lation of behaviour; the ‘O’ refers to organismic mediational variables that process the stimulus (S)  
or input and influence the response (R). These variables include physical, cognitive, and mental 
characteristics and processes. Individuals learn not just by doing, but also by observing how oth-
ers respond to specific inputs and settings. Organismic variables function as interpretive filters 
3
Behaviourisms
Radical behaviourism and critical inquiry
Maria R. Ruiz

Maria R. Ruiz
34
for the observer whose motivation and anticipated expectations influence the effects of the 
observed consequences (C). Tolman’s (1922, 1932) model follows an S-O-R formulation where 
the mediating ‘O’ variables include cognitive maps and information acquired through latent 
learning. Similarly, Hull’s (1935, 1937) theory of drive reduction follows the same formulation, 
where the ‘O’ represents motivational variables.
Cognitive behaviourism is compatible with dominant cognitive models of psychology that 
embrace the ontological assumption of mind-body dualism that we trace back to Rene Des-
cartes. Cognitive behaviourism has had an influential impact on theories of psychotherapy, and 
the works of Albert Ellis in Rational Emotive Therapy and Aaron Beck in Cognitive Behav-
ioural Therapy are well known exemplars. The causal role of mental events in the form of disor-
dered thoughts and beliefs is central in these approaches.
The third branch of behaviourism, and the one we will focus on here, is radical behaviour-
ism, the philosophy of science developed by B. F. Skinner (1945), and the foundation of operant 
learning theory and research and the ever-expanding field of behaviour analysis. Today the field 
incorporates the basic science known as the experimental analysis of behaviour, and its primary 
publication source the Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 1958 – present; the applied 
science or applied behaviour analysis and the Journal of Applied Behaviour Analysis, 1968 – present; 
and a technology that has been organized into a set of professional practices governed by the 
international organization known as the Behaviour Analyst Certification Board (BACB). The 
BACB administers board exams to qualified applicants and certifies professionals in the practice 
of behaviour analysis at three levels: Board Certified Assistant Behaviour Analysts (BCABA) who 
hold a four year college/university degree; Board Certified Behaviour Analysts (BCBA) who 
hold a master’s degree; and BCBA-Ds for individuals holding doctorates in the field.
Disentangling radical behaviourism from classical behaviourism
Behaviour analysts have documented the mistaken identification of Skinner’s radical behav-
iourism as Watsonian classical behaviourism in psychological texts (Todd and Morris 1983) and 
beyond (Roessger 2012; Ruiz, 1995; Todd and Morris 1992). This confusion has led to char-
acterizations of radical behaviourism as, for example, antifeminist (Kaschak 1992; Unger 1988, 
1989) and the contemporary embodiment of ‘black box’ psychology (see Iversen 1992). Like-
wise, the confusion has given rise to misrepresentations of radical behaviourism in ‘academic 
folklore’ (Todd and Morris 1983, 1992) as: (a) a form of stimulus-response psychology that  
(b) conceptualizes the organism as a passive recipient of external forces and (c) denies or ignores 
innate contributions to behaviour because of its extreme environmentalism while (d) focus-
ing on fragmented analytic measures assumed to be elemental units of behaviour and finally  
(e) concerned only with overt behaviour thus denying or ignoring subjective experience includ-
ing feelings and thoughts. While these characterizations aptly apply to classical behaviourism, 
Watson’s (1919, 1927, 1930) frequent discussions of the role of heredity notwithstanding, none 
are applicable to Skinner’s radical behaviourism.
Critiques of radical behaviourism that have misidentified some or most of its elements have 
contributed to a received view that masks radical behaviourism’s potential as a progressive criti-
cal perspective in psychology. These also obscure the compatibility of radical behaviourism with 
aspects of other psychological systems that have developed constructive criticisms of dominant 
mainstream psychology, such as feminist psychology (see Ruiz 1995, 1998, 2003), and includ-
ing critical psychology (Parker 1999). In what follows, I will focus on three of these elements:  
(1) the mischaracterization of radical behaviourism as a form of S-R psychology, (2) the assump-
tion that radical behaviourists rule private experience out of their conceptual scheme, as did 

Behaviourisms
35
Watson, and (3) the frequently mistaken epistemological identity of radical behaviourism as a 
form of logical positivism. In each case I will discuss how the problems associated with a mis-
taken identity have made it difficult, if not impossible, for critical psychologists outside our field 
to adopt some potentially useful radical behaviourist tools for deconstruction and critical analysis.
Behavioural units: essentialist reflexes vs. transformative operants
A central theme in Watson’s account is the function of the environment as major determinant of 
behaviour and individual development. The philosophical foundation of classical behaviourism 
was logical positivism, and its subject matter was restricted to publically observable behavioural 
events in the form of essentialist stimulus-response units (Palmer and Donahoe 1992). These 
were operationally defined, and comprised classical behaviourism’s fundamental units of meas-
urement and analysis. The description of behaviourism as a stimulus-response psychology is 
accurate in the case of classical behaviourism, also known as methodological behaviourism. This 
is a distinctly different conceptualization of behaviour from Skinner’s model associated with 
the three-term contingency, that is, the S-R-C or stimulus-response-consequence model of 
behaviour-environment interactions. The critical organism-environment interactions in Skin-
ner’s model consist of the relations between behaviour and its consequences (R-C). Stimulus 
conditions (S) present during these interactions come to set the conditions for the occurrence 
of the behavioural relations in the three-term contingency (S-R-C). These conditions form the 
context in which behaviour is said to occur. Far from being understood as fragmented essen-
tialist units of behaviour, operants are understood as behavioural classes, the members of which 
may be quite different from each other in form but yet be united by common consequences or 
functions.
In keeping with his positivistic epistemological stance and realist view of psychological 
knowledge, Watson considered the purpose of methodological behaviourism to be the discov-
ery of objective universal truths about behaviour through the application of scientific methods. 
Watson (1924: 18) talked about it this way:
Behaviouristic psychology has as its goal to be able, given the stimulus, to predict the 
response – or, seeing the reaction take place to state what the stimulus is that called out the 
reaction.
Skinner, on the other hand, sought to describe dynamic workings and the emergent mean-
ing of behaviour within a particular place and time. Speaking of how we can come to know 
the nature of an operant class, Skinner (1969: 131–132) contrasted methodological and radical 
behaviourism:
An operant is a class, of which a response is an instance or member [and] . . . a set of contin-
gencies defines an operant . . . A response is reinforced in the presence of a given stimulus, 
but we cannot tell from a single instance . . . the contingencies . . . Only by surveying many 
instances can we identify . . . the contingencies. This is not quite the traditional question 
of whether we can know particulars or universals, but it is interesting that the practice of 
imparting a universal meaning to the response itself as an alternative to surveying a large 
number of instances is close to the Platonic practice of letting ideas stand for universals.
Operants have no fixed boundaries, and members of an operant class have common effects or 
functions on the environment. These effects, or consequences, and not the formal properties of 

Maria R. Ruiz
36
the members of the class, define the operant. Therefore, two responses that look quite different, 
such as holding a clenched fist to another’s face and an admonition spoken in the manner of 
a joke, may both qualify as members of an aggressively threatening operant class if they result 
in the listener complying with the individual posing the threat in order to avoid it. Thus, the 
essentialist stimulus-response units in methodological behaviourism are replaced by dynamic 
and variable behavioural units that emerge through environmental selection (Skinner 1969). 
This is a critical distinction between methodological and radical behaviourism, because selec-
tion allows for the emergence of novel forms of behaviour in radical behaviourism, whereas 
essentialist units of behaviour are non-transformative in methodological behaviourism (Chiesa 
1992; Ruiz 1995).
In methodological behaviourism, causal relationships between the stimulus and response 
are established through temporal contiguity and the process is viewed as linear causation from 
stimulus to response. Thus, the responsive organism reactive to external stimulation (Baer 1976) 
is accurate in methodological behaviourism. In radical behaviourism, linear causation is replaced 
by what Morris (1988: 303) called ‘an integrated perspective of functional interdependencies’. 
Therefore, temporally distant events can be functionally interrelated, as is the case when deferred 
consequences lead to useful rules (Skinner 1957, 1969). Thus a speaker who has used force in the 
past to make another comply may only need to utter a verbal reminder to mediate compliance. 
Radical behaviourist epistemology has a phenomenological quality (Morris 1988) that confirms 
the scientist is a part of the integrated field, and not outside it. Skinner (1974: 234) discussed it 
by noting, ‘it would be absurd for the behaviourist to contend that he is any way exempt from 
his analysis. He cannot step out of the causal stream and observe behaviour from some special 
point of vantage’. Thus the scientist shares the field of discovery with the participant and holds 
no privileged position in the analysis, as is the case in methodological behaviourism.
Status of subjectivity: private events, not mentalism
A distinction that unequivocally distinguishes between methodological and radical behaviour-
ism is their respective positions on consciousness and private events. Watson (1913: 158) stated 
his position clearly in the introduction of his manifesto, where he claimed that:
Psychology as the behaviourist views it is a purely objective experimental branch of natural 
science. . . . Introspection forms no essential part of its methods, nor is the scientific value 
of its data dependent upon the readiness with which they lend themselves to interpretation 
in terms of consciousness.
In contrast, while Skinner (1974) discarded mentalism and dispositioning schemes (see Fields 
and Hineline 2008; Ruiz 2009) that attribute causal status to mental entities and agents, he 
acknowledged the importance of private events – including feeling and thinking – in a compre-
hensive science of behaviour. In the same text, Skinner (1974: 219) summarized his position on 
consciousness and subjective reality by contrasting it with Watson’s:
Methodological behaviourism and certain versions of logical positivism could be said to 
ignore consciousness, feelings, and states of mind, but Radical Behaviourism does not 
thus ‘behead the organism’; it does not ‘sweep the problem of subjectivity under the rug’; 
and it does not ‘maintain a strictly behaviouristic methodology by treating reports of 
introspection merely as verbal behaviour’; and it was not designed to ‘permit conscious-
ness to atrophy.’

Behaviourisms
37
For Skinner, the challenge posed by private events (1974: 233) was how to access them, as he 
explained:
A science of behaviour must consider the place of private events as physical things, and in 
so doing it provides an alternative account of mental life. The question, then, is this: What is 
inside the skin, and how do we come to know about it? The answer is, I believe, the heart 
of radical behaviourism.
Critics have generally construed Skinner’s rejection of mind and its derivative Cartesian agent 
as synonymous with rejection of subjectivity and private experience. As a result, the radical 
behaviourist understanding of private events has remained out of reach to the wider audience. 
Skinner dismissed dualistic distinctions between objective and subjective reality, and concerned 
himself with how we come to have knowledge about our private experiences. A key question 
is how members of the verbal community, who have access only to public events, teach us to 
communicate effectively under stimulating conditions occurring privately, or within the skin. 
A critical treatment of these questions, of course, must not regard the task as a simple instrumen-
tal one, but must also address the social and power contingencies that influence how individuals 
from different groups are taught to develop voice. The point here is that the radical behaviourist 
approach to subjectivity and self-knowledge might offer useful tools that could be adapted to 
help advance feminist epistemologies grounded in the experiences of women and other mar-
ginalized groups (see Ruiz 1995, 1998).
Epistemology: pragmatism, not logical positivism
Watson’s alignment with logical positivism implied, for one, that he expected his scientific work 
to produce certain and objective knowledge of universally applicable principles and facts. The 
meaning of a psychological term was given in its operational definition and its truth established 
by the correspondence in the observations of two or more scientist-observers.
Although we should recall that very early on Skinner (1938) used the tem reflex and phil-
osophically tipped towards logical positivism, he bemoaned this alignment later on (Skinner 
1989), and in speaking of Watson and other early behaviourists Skinner (1999: 671) noted 
that ‘. . . an event seen by only one person had no place in [their] science’. Instead, for 
the greatest portion of his scientific career, Skinner’s epistemological stance was aligned 
with pragmatism, which he introduced in ‘The Operational Analysis of Psychological Terms’ 
(1945: 293–294):
The ultimate criterion for the goodness of a concept is not whether two people are 
brought into agreement but whether the scientist who uses the concept can operate suc-
cessfully upon his material – all by himself if need be . . . this does not make agreement the 
key to workability. On the contrary, it is the other way around.
In this work, he also introduced the term radical behaviourism, the three-term contingency for the 
analysis of operant behaviour and the acceptance of private events. Skinner’s views were consist-
ent with those of the three key figures in American pragmatism: William James, Karl Peirce, and 
John Dewey (Baum 1994; Leigland 1993; Moxley 2002, 2004; Ruiz and Roche 2007; Schneider 
1997), all of whom shared an affinity with Darwin and reflected the influence of evolutionary 
theory. The parallels between a pragmatic theory of truth and Skinner’s concept of the operant 
and evolutionary theory are striking. For Skinner, the truth criterion, or method for establishing 

Maria R. Ruiz
38
truth and value, is ‘successful working’; or, as the behaviourist puts it, ‘effective action’ (Skinner 
1974: 235). Scientific beliefs about reality are true only if they allow the scientist to function 
effectively with respect to particular goals (O’Donnell 1985). One implication of this formu-
lation that may be useful to critical psychology is the relative nature of what facts a scientist is 
entitled to accept as truth. On the other hand, a close examination of this truth criterion must 
raise questions about values and the very tasks of goal selection and defining ‘effective action’. 
The formulation for establishing pragmatic truth requires the critical scientist to interrogate the 
operative contingencies that influence the scientist’s selection, and the cultural values these sub-
stantiate. It is important to recall that neither the rules of evidence of scientific empiricism nor 
those for formulating pragmatic truth offer guidance on this task, as they explicitly authorize 
and privilege the scientist as sole arbiter (see Ruiz 1995 and Ruiz and Roche 2007). However, 
the critical psychologist’s commitment to reflexivity and dismantling power relations in the ser-
vice of social justice is nowhere more important than in the process of selecting scientific goals, 
and, as I have claimed elsewhere:
Although communal consensus is not a logical requirement for establishing the scientific 
validity of pragmatic truth a feminist [and critical] approach that seeks to transform values 
demands the scientist converge on the task, not as a lone decontextualized player, but as a 
community-conscious member of a culture whose values are reflected in its cultural prac-
tices, including the practice of science.
(Ruiz 1995: 175)
One suggestion to balance the power is to heed John Dewey’s (1958) pleas for free and open 
(noncoercive, nonforceful) communal dialogue. Dewey’s sense of community reflects evolution-
ary principles and values in that he emphasized the importance of creating maximal conditions 
for individual variation within groups. Not surprisingly, Skinner likewise endorsed pluralism 
in groups and diversity in cultural practices as survival-worthy (Skinner 1971). For Dewey, the 
effort was to have as many diverse community members or stakeholders as possible engaging in 
open discussion. Agreement reached in this fashion was for Dewey the highest source of com-
munal authority (Rorty 1999; Ruiz and Roche 2007).
Critical inquiry: domestic violence psychology and the law
The foregoing exercise in extricating radical behaviourism from methodological behaviourism 
is a necessary first step in proposing a complementarity of functions with critical psychology. 
The second step is to illustrate by using a radical behaviourist analysis as a tool for deconstruction 
(Teo, 1999). The normative construction of the battered woman defence in the United States is 
a useful illustration of the limitations of the dominant psychological model implicitly accepted 
and applied by the culture at large. A radical behaviourist deconstruction of the battered woman 
defence exposes challenges posed by psychological explanations based on an outdated model of 
science that incorporates mind-body dualism and dispositioning schemes (Fields and Hineline 
2008; Ruiz 2009), and requires proximal causation in explanations of behaviour. When contig-
uous events cannot be identified to explain behavioural phenomena, agentic entities within the 
actor are created. In psychological science this model was inherited by contemporary cognitive 
psychology, the dominant paradigm in the field today. A significant limitation of this model in 
psychology is its inability to account for the influence of spatially dispersed and temporally dis-
tant events on behavioural processes.

Behaviourisms
39
In the US, the legal arguments that have been used successfully to defend battered women 
who kill their spouses after years of abuse have been taken from the battered woman defence. 
The psychological explanations that have buttressed this defence have been based on Leonore 
Walker’s (1984) pioneering work on the Battered Woman Syndrome (BWS). The BWS is recog-
nized by the World Health Organization’s International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) as a 
medical disorder. The syndrome is said to result from cycles of violence after which the woman 
experiences learned helplessness that debilitates her and interferes with her ability to leave the 
batterer. The critical reader will immediately recognize the conceptual slippery slope on which 
this most effective of defences is built: the BWS defence reframes historical events in a fashion 
that, ironically, pathologizes and revictimizes the woman it saves (Ruiz 2009; Schneider 2000; 
Stubbs 1991).
The normative psychological model that underwrites this defence assumes that the act 
of self-defence by a battered woman is based on individual psychic pathology. Likewise, the 
dominant cultural worldview that supports such explanatory schemes and makes them accept-
able in American courts pathologizes the victim, not the cycles of violence by the perpetra-
tor. A radical behaviourist deconstruction of what would appear to the feminist-minded a 
transparently misogynistic account, targets the outdated model of behavioural causation on 
which this defence rests. Fields and Hineline (2008) have discussed the conditions under 
which speakers in our culture – in the vernacular and in the more technical parlance of psy-
chological theory – explain behaviour by appealing to contiguous events, or, in their absence, 
to contiguous events inside the actor. They refer to the latter as dispositioning, in which the 
dysfunctional agent functions as the source of contiguous causation. Presumably, the syndrome 
explains why the dysfunctional agent is unable to leave the relationship and thus engage in 
resistance. One general result of dispositioning practices is to obscure the role of extended 
behavioural relations and temporally distant events related to the behaviour being explained. 
While the agentic explanatory scheme fits with the legal requirements for self-defence, it flies 
in the face of research data showing that battered women who kill their partners generally 
do so following extended periods, often years, of emotional and physical abuse (see Downs 
1996), and that the act typically takes place when there is no immediate threat, such as when 
the partner is asleep.
Conclusions
Radical behaviourism incorporates a set of assumptions about the subject matter of psychology 
and how, as scientists, we can come to understand psychological events and offer explanations for 
them. As a philosophy of science, radical behaviourism has often been confused with classical, or 
methodological, behaviourism, which was originally defined by John B. Watson. In this chapter 
I have disentangled the two behaviourisms in order to clarify the psychological worldview of 
radical behaviourism and suggest some ways in which it may be applied as a conceptual tool in 
critical inquiry. I have focused on three aspects of radical behaviourism that I see as potentially 
useful in this endeavour. First, the conceptualization of behaviour as inextricably embedded 
within its contexts, so that there can be no valid consideration of behavioural processes without 
at once considering contextual conditions of life. Similar to Darwinian processes, the environ-
mental context selects behavioural adaptations while behaving organisms simultaneously change 
the environmental context through actions and reactions. Second, private behavioural processes 
are legitimate subject matter, while dualistic mentalistic constructs, which often pass as invisible 
bearers of privilege, are ruled out. Analyses of private events in fact represent some of the most 

Maria R. Ruiz
40
exciting behavioural research in the field today. One such research area is the analysis of verbal 
relations involved in so called unconscious cognitions (Gavin et al. 2008; Gavin et al. 2012; 
O’Reilly et al. 2012; O’Reilly et al. 2013; Ridgeway et al. 2010). These and other private events 
are integral to psychological experience.
Finally, contrasting classical behaviourism and the cognitive model in contemporary psychol-
ogy, the view of science in radical behaviourism is aligned with the Darwinian account of life, 
time, and causation. The focus is not on fixed and unchanging relations that occur by necessity, 
as in S-R relations, but on changing relations that are temporally becoming something differ-
ent over time (Oyama 1997). In the Darwinian model and radical behaviourism, change over 
extended time is understood as a transformative process. An important ramification of these 
models for critical analyses of resistance and oppression is the optimistic view that individual 
change and growth are natural processes of overcoming.
Further reading
Catania, C. (2013) Learning (5th Edn). Cornwall-on-Hudson, NY: Sloan Publishing.
Moore, J. (2008) Conceptual Foundations of Radical Behaviorism. Cornwall-on-Hudson, NY: Sloan Publishing.
Sidman, M. (1960/1988) Tactics of Scientific Research: Evaluating Experimental Data in Psychology. Fulton, CA: 
Authors Cooperative.
Website resources
Association for Behaviour Analysis International: http://www.abainternational.org/
Behaviour Analyst Certification Board: http://www.bacb.com/
Cambridge Center for Behavioural Studies: http://www.behavior.org/
References
Bandura, A. (1977) Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A., Grusec, J. E., & Menlove, F. L. (1966) ‘Observational learning as a function of symbolization 
and incentive set’, Child Development, 37, 499–506.
Baum, W. M. (1994) Understanding Behaviorism. New York: Harper Collins.
Baer, D. M. (1976) ‘The organism as host’, Human Development, 19, 87–98.
Chiesa, M. (1992) ‘Radical behaviorism and scientific frameworks’, American Psychologist, 47, 1287–1311.
Dewey, J. (1958) Experience and Nature. New York: Dover.
Downs, D. A. (1996) More than Victims: Battered Women, the Syndrome Society, and the Law. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Fields, D. P. and Hineline, P. N. (2008) ‘Dispositioning and the obscured roles of time in psychological expla-
nations’, Behavior and Philosophy, 36, 5–69.
Gavin, A., Roche, B. and Ruiz, M. R. (2008) ‘Competing contingencies over derived relational responding: 
a behavioral model of the implicit association test’, The Psychological Record, 58, 427–441.
Gavin, A., Roche, B., Ruiz, M. R., Hogan, M. and O’Reilly, A. (2012) ‘A behavior-analytically modified 
implicit association test for measuring sexual categorization of children’, The Psychological Record, 62,  
55–68.
Hull, C. L. (1935) ‘The conflicting psychologies of learning – a way out’, Psychological Review, 42, 491–516.
Hull, C. L. (1937) ‘Mind, mechanism, and adaptive behavior’, Psychological Review, 44, 1–32.
Iversen, I. H. (1992) ‘Skinner’s early research: from reflexology to operant conditioning’, American Psycholo-
gist, 47, 1318–1328.
Kaschak, E. (1992) Engendered Lives: A New Psychology of Women’s Experiences. New York: Harper Collins.
Leigland, S. (1993) ‘Discussion of S. C. Hayes: scientific goals and the context of justification’, in S. C. Hayes, 
L. J. Hayes, and T. R. Sarbin (eds) Varieties of Scientific Contextualism. Reno, NV: Context Press.
Morris, E. (1988) ‘Contextualism: the world view of behaviour analysis’, Journal of Experimental Child Psy-
chology, 46, 289–323.
Moxley, R. A. (2002) ‘Some more similarities between Peirce and Skinner’, The Behavior Analyst, 25, 
201–214.

Behaviourisms
41
Moxley, R. A. (2004) ‘Pragmatic selectionism: the philosophy of behaviour analysis’, The Behavior Analyst 
Today, 5, 108–125.
O’Donnell, J. M. (1985) The Origins of Behaviorism: American Psychology, 1870–1920. New York: New York 
University Press.
O’Reilly, A., Roche, B., Ruiz, M. R. and Campion, G. (2012) ‘A behavior-analytic implicit test for assessing 
stimulus relations’, The Psychological Record, 63, 707–724.
O’Reilly, A., Roche, B., and Ruiz, M. R., Tyndall, I. and Gavin, A. (2013) ‘A function acquisition speed test 
for equivalence relations (FASTER)’, The Psychological Record, 62, 507–528.
Oyama, S. (1997) ‘Essentialism, women and war: protesting too much, protesting too little’, in M. M. Gergen 
and S. N. Davis (eds) Toward a New Psychology of Gender. New York: Routledge.
Palmer, D. C., and Donahoe, J. W. (1992) ‘Essentialism and selectionism in cognitive science and behavior 
analysis’, American Psychologist, 47, 1344–1358.
Parker, I. (1999) ‘Critical psychology: critical links’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 1, 3–18.
Ridgeway, I., Roche, B., Gavin, A. and Ruiz, M. R. (2010) ‘Establishing and eliminating implicit association 
test effects in the laboratory: extending a derived relations model of the IAT’, The European Journal of 
Behaviour Analysis, 11, 133–150.
Roessger, K. M. (2012) ‘Re-conceptualizing adult education’s monolithic behaviourist interpretation: 
toward a new understanding of radical behaviourism’, International Journal of Lifelong Education, 31, 
569–589.
Rorty, R. (1999) Philosophy and Social Hope. London: Penguin.
Ruiz, M. R. (1995) ‘B. F. Skinner’s radical behaviorism: historical misconstructions and grounds for feminist 
reconstructions’, Psychology of Women Quarterly, 19, 161–179.
Ruiz, M. R. (1998) ‘Personal agency in feminist theory: evicting the illusive dweller’, The Behaviour Analyst, 
21, 179–192.
Ruiz, M. R. (2003) ‘Inconspicuous sources of behavioral control: the case of gendered practices’, The Behav-
ior Analyst Today, 4, 12–16.
Ruiz, M. R. (2009) ‘Beyond the mirrored space: time and resistance in feminist theory’, Behavior and Phi-
losophy, 37, 141–147.
Ruiz, M. R. and Roche, B. (2007) ‘Values and the scientific culture of behavior analysis’, The Behaviour 
Analyst, 30, 1–16.
Schneider, E. M. (2000) Battered Women and Feminist Lawmaking. Harrisonburg, VA: R.R. Donnelley 
and Sons.
Schneider, S. M. (1997) ‘Back to our philosophical roots: a journal review of the Transactions of the Charles S. 
Peirce Society’, The Behavior Analyst, 20, 17–23.
Skinner, B. F. (1938) The Behavior of Organisms. New York: Apple-Century-Crofts.
Skinner, B. F. (1945) ‘The operational analysis of psychological terms’, The Psychological Review, 52, 70–277, 
291–294.
Skinner, B. F. (1957) Verbal Behavior. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Skinner, B. F. (1969) ‘The phylogeny and ontogeny of behavior’, in Contingencies of Reinforcement: A Theoret-
ical Analysis. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Skinner, B. F. (1971) Beyond Freedom and Dignity. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Skinner, B. F. (1974) About Behaviorism. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Skinner, B. F. (1989) ‘The behavior of organisms at 50’, in Recent Issues in the Analysis of Behavior. Columbus, 
OH: Merrill.
Skinner, B. F. (1999) ‘Can psychology be a science of mind?’, in Cumulative Record: Definitive Edition. Acton, 
MA: Copley Publishing Group.
Stubbs, J. (1991) ‘Battered women’s syndrome: an advance for women or further evidence of the legal 
system’s inability to comprehend women’s experience?’, Current Issues in Criminal Justice, 3, 267–270.
Teo, T. (1999) ‘Methodologies of critical psychology: illustrations from the field of racism’, Annual Review 
of Critical Psychology, 1, 119–134.
Todd, J. T. and Morris, E. K. (1983) ‘Misconception and miseducation: presentations of radical behaviorism 
in psychology textbooks’, The Behavior Analyst, 6, 153–160.
Todd, J. T. and Morris, E. K. (1992) ‘Case histories in the great power of misrepresentation’, American Psy-
chologist, 47, 1441–1453.
Tolman. E. C. (1922) ‘A new formula for behaviorism’, Psychological Review, 29, 44–53.
Tolman, E. C. (1932) Purposive Behavior in Animals and Men. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Unger, R. K. (1988) ‘Psychological, feminist and personal epistemology: transcending contradiction’, in 
M. M. Gergen (ed.) Feminist Thought and the Structure of Knowledge. New York: University Press.

Maria R. Ruiz
42
Unger, R. K. (1989) ‘Sex, gender and epistemology’, in M. Crawford and M. Gentry (eds) Gender and 
Thought. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Walker, L. E. (1984) The Battered Woman Syndrome. New York: Springer.
Watson, J. B. (1913) ‘Psychology as the behaviorist views it’, Psychological Review, 20, 158–177.
Watson, J. B. (1919) Psychology From the Standpoint of a Behaviorist. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Watson, J. B. (1924) Behaviorism. New York: People’s Institute.
Watson, J. B. (1927) ‘The behaviorist looks at instincts’, Harper Monthly Magazine, 155, 228–235.
Watson, J. B. (1930) Behaviorism (Revised Edn). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

43
We will start with common sense, since it is often said that emotion is hard to define despite the 
fact that most of us know – quite intimately – what it is. Artists, for instance, devote themselves 
not only to its expression, but also to stimulating and cultivating the ‘emotions’ of their publics. 
A piece of music, heard at the right moment, might make us shiver with nostalgia or melancholy, 
and a good novel might make us weep, fume, and despair at the joys and sorrows of its characters. 
What we intuitively call ‘emotion’ is the collective name for this multitude of feelings (senti-
ments, passions, affections) through which we are affected by actual, imaginary, remembered, and 
anticipated events, and on the basis of which we affect the world around us.
From common sense to art
The emotions associated with art works are in turn related to those experienced in the ordi-
nary (and extraordinary) lives both of artists and their publics. The great French novelist Marcel 
Proust devoted some 3,700 pages to a novel whose guiding theme was an exploration of his own 
emotions, including his own jealous mode of loving. Here is how the young Marcel describes 
the moment he discovered from his servant (Françoise) that his live-in lover Albertine had 
abandoned him:
Françoise, having heard my ring, came into the room, rather uneasy as to how I would 
take what she had to say . . .  ‘I was very worried,’ she said to me, ‘that Monsieur should be 
so late in ringing this morning. I didn’t know what I ought to do. This morning at eight 
o’clock Mademoiselle Albertine asked me for her boxes. I dared not refuse her, and I was 
afraid that Monsieur might scold me if I came and waked him. It was no use lecturing her, 
telling her to wait an hour because I expected all the time that Monsieur would ring; she 
wouldn’t have it, she left this letter with me for Monsieur, and at nine o’clock off she went.’ 
Then – so ignorant can we be of what is inside us, since I was convinced of my indiffer-
ence to Albertine – my breath was cut short, I gripped my heart in my hands, which were 
suddenly moistened by a perspiration I had not experienced since the revelation she had 
made to me on the little train with regard to Mlle Vinteuil’s friend, and I was incapable of 
4
Emotion
Being moved beyond the mainstream
Paul Stenner

Paul Stenner
44
saying anything else but: ‘Ah! very good, Françoise, you were of course right not to wake 
me. Leave me now for a moment, I shall ring for you presently’.
(Proust 2000: 473)
We can probably all recognize the many emotions alluded to in this little interaction, from the 
uneasy worry felt by Françoise (on account of the delicate nature of what she must communi-
cate), to Marcel’s quickly concealed shock of heart-stricken panic (in the face of a transformative 
event that would mark him for the rest of his life). A novelist like Proust draws upon the stock 
of his own life experience to portray how such events are ‘subjectively’ experienced as more or 
less meaningful in the context of the unfolding texture of a life interwoven with that of others, 
and as part of a ‘now’ that is also defined by a past lodged in a broader historical epoch. Main-
stream psychologists, on the other hand, have for the most part been influenced by the idea that 
a properly scientific account of emotions must concentrate upon observable (and preferably 
measurable) externalities. They have concerned themselves with providing ‘objective’ descrip-
tions which are supposed to hold good regardless of the ‘who’, the ‘where’, and the ‘when’ of 
an emotional experience. The most obvious examples are neuroscientific theories that reduce 
emotions to specific neural circuits in the brain (e.g. Hyman 1998). These scientific theories and 
descriptions of what are, at best, abstract pictures of other people’s emotions from the outside often 
strip away the sense of immediate subjective experience in concrete unfolding contexts that is 
so pertinent to our emotions. As a result, they typically end up dealing in artificial abstractions 
which are then re-presented as if they were more real than what is expressed by the intuitions of 
non-scientific thinking. As Harré (1986: 4) puts it, the tendency is for psychologists to abstract 
an entity and call it by an emotion word (perhaps ‘anxiety’ or ‘shock’), when what really exists is 
always a concrete flux of activities in context: a Françoise becoming anxious about reporting a 
disturbing fact to a Marcel, and a Marcel concealing in turn his shocked response to the news 
of Albertine’s departure, for instance.
Those psychologists that do attend to the ‘subjective’ dimension of other people’s emotional 
experience, on the other hand, are typically influenced by a philosophical settlement of the 
eighteenth century which held that the unity of the human mind can be divided into three 
parts: cognition (concerning such things as knowledge, thought, intelligence), affection (con-
cerning feelings, passions, pleasures, pains), and conation (concerning will, desire, and other spurs 
to action). Consider the widely influential definition of Nico Frijda (1993: 256): ‘Emotional 
experience . . .  can take three different forms: awareness of situational meaning structure [i.e. 
cognition], awareness of autonomic arousal [i.e. affection], and awareness of action readiness [i.e. 
conation]. Each of these can be taken to define emotional experience’. It is notable that what is 
absent from this definition is precisely that which most interested Proust: the place of emotion 
in an ongoing process in which a key ingredient is the lived experience of transition (being 
moved by the things which affect us and moving the things which we, in turn, affect). Cognitive, 
affective, and conative aspects can nevertheless easily be abstracted from the ongoing totality 
depicted in our Proust quotation: Françoise’s worry and Marcel’s shock both presuppose a ‘situ-
ational meaning structure’ (‘cognition’). Françoise knows that Marcel may be upset and possibly 
angered by her news, and she is ‘cognitively’ aware that she might be considered culpable for 
not having delayed Albertine’s departure or woken Marcel; second, the breath cut short and the 
perspiring palms indicate Marcel’s awareness of his highly aroused autonomic nervous system 
(‘affection’); and third, both Marcel and Françoise are caught in a dilemma of will whereby they 
must act out a socially expected role whilst simultaneously feeling an urge or ‘action tendency’ 
to do otherwise (‘conation’). Marcel, for instance, suppresses his urges to cry in despair and to 
run after Albertine, concealing them in the utterance ‘Ah! very good, Françoise . . . ’

Emotion
45
From art to ‘science’
The tendency first to separate (or take for granted the separation of ) and then to integrate 
cognitive, affective, and conative factors has become something of a standard approach amongst 
those psychologists who define emotions as complex response systems or syndromes. These 
systems are thought to involve the coordination or organization of multiple components into 
a temporarily unified system to address some external or internal event. For Scherer (2009), 
for instance, emotion is a sequence of state changes in a number of organismic sub-systems. 
These include the motivational system, which underpins the action tendencies that give rise to 
behaviour (‘conation’); the autonomic system which underpins felt arousal (‘affection’); and a 
system of higher cerebral processes which underpins appraisal (‘cognition’). These sub-systems, 
Scherer suggests, can function relatively autonomously, but in response to events that trigger 
emotions, they converge into interdependence. Under these circumstances, and along with a 
monitor system (which supplies the conscious feeling of emotion) and a motor system (which 
underpins expressive reactions like smiles), they can temporarily combine to generate intense 
felt experiences of emotions like jealousy, anger, and embarrassment.
In a short chapter it is only possible to scratch the surface of over 150 theories of emotion 
that have been proposed by psychologists (Gardiner et al. 1937/1970). In a paper entitled ‘A 
century of emotion theories’, Salzen (2001) reviewed almost 100 of these theories and divided 
them into five types, depending on whether their prime focus is on (a) adaptive responses (focus 
on ‘conation’ and observable behavior); (b) response feedback (focus on bodily states involved in 
‘affection’); (c) appraisal (focus on ‘cognition’); (d) neural systems (focus on cerebral states); and 
(e) frustration and conflict theories (focus on emotions as responses to interruptions in organ-
ized thought and conduct). To simplify this vast tradition, the following are often taken as key 
moments in the history of the modern scientific study of emotions:
•	
1820: Thomas Brown used the relatively novel word ‘emotion’ to designate all feelings that 
are neither intellectual states (like thoughts or cognitions) nor sensations (like feeling cold 
or having an itch);
•	
1872: Charles Darwin proposed a biological theory of human emotions as mostly residual 
traces of once highly functional animal expressions (the snarl of anger revealing canine 
teeth before a bite, ‘hair-raising’ fear as revealing the still discernable trace of a once much 
more hairy ancestor, etc.);
•	
1884: William James offered a feedback theory of the affective portion of emotion (i.e. its 
intensive feeling) as awareness of visceral changes (i.e. changes in heart rate, perspiration, 
trembling, etc.) that occur as a function of the autonomic nervous system (ANS);
•	
1895: John Dewey stressed that emotion is simultaneously a) ‘about’ an object and b) a 
subject’s response to it. He stimulated (along with Frédric Paulhan in France) a ‘conflict’ 
approach where emotion is theorized to result from tension between incompatible lines of 
conduct, or from interruptions, suspensions, or breakdowns of ongoing activity sequences;
•	
1921: Sigmund Freud re-stated a theory of libido (a term ‘taken from the theory of the 
emotions’ [Freud 1921: 90]) as an energy force ‘stored up’ in the ego but ‘invested’ in objects 
such that an emotion like love can be viewed as an object (the lover) cathected with libido.
•	
1927: Walter Cannon proposed a ‘central’ theory that emotions are patterned responses 
produced by specific parts of the brain (notably what we now call the ‘limbic system’);
•	
1954: Arnold and Gasson proposed an appraisal theory which places a moment of 
self-referential judgement before the experience of emotion (e.g. the appraisal that an event 
bodes ill for me will generate a felt tendency to escape its influence);

Paul Stenner
46
•	
1962: Schachter and Singer proposed a ‘two factor’ theory that emotions result from a com-
bination of undifferentiated visceral intensity provided by the ANS, qualified by cognitive 
sense making processes that occur in social contexts (such that intense ANS arousal might 
be interpreted as pleasure in a fair-ground context, and fear in context of a plane crash);
•	
1963: Silvan Tomkins proposed a motivational theory of basic affects which proposes a small 
number of universal affects (fear, anger, joy, distress, etc.) whose mixtures and dynamics 
form the basis of emotional experience. Each basic affect is thought to be a drive amplifier 
hard-wired into neural circuitry and defined by its distinctive facial and vocal expressions;
•	
1984: Klauss Scherer proposed an integrative theory of emotions as a syndrome involving 
the integration of multiple factors (cognitive, autonomic, motivational, etc.).
These theories do not constitute a progression, but a collection of sometimes incompatible 
conceptualizations. Where these approaches do not completely ignore subjective experience, 
socio-material context, and dynamic process, they attempt to ground these in something more 
objective, predictable, and controllable (like the repeatable pattern of a facial expression, an auto-
nomic response, an instinct, or a situational attribution). Debates then rage about whether emo-
tion is determined by central brain activity (as with Cannon) or peripheral autonomic activity 
(as with James), or about whether cognition is fundamental to emotion (as with Arnold) or a 
bit player to more fundamental ‘pre-cognitive’ organismic responses (as with Freud or Tomkins).
Some key critiques
Critique is endemic to the tensions and debates ‘internal’ to the mainstream traditions indi-
cated above (Parkinson 2011). Here, however, we will concentrate on a number of more or 
less ‘external’ critiques of these traditions which emerged during the last few decades of the 
twentieth century, many of which cohered around the theme of the social construction of 
emotion. Classic examples here are Averill (1980) and Harré (1986). These in turn echo ear-
lier general critiques of psychology informed by Marxism and phenomenology (e.g. Canguil-
hem 1958/1980; Holzkamp-Osterkamp 1991; Sartre 1938; Vygotsky 1927/1987, 1932). The 
constructionist critiques challenged the authority of scientific truth by affirming the partial 
(abstract) and partisan (siding with power) nature of psychological knowledge about emotions. 
They are informed by developments in the sociology of knowledge and by those forms of 
anti-essentialist, post-structuralist, or non-representational philosophy that emphasized the per-
formative nature of language (e.g. Wittgenstein, Heidegger, Austin, Ryle, Derrida, and so on). 
To abstract an artificial entity (e.g. ‘anger’) from the contextual flux is not merely to ‘reify’ the 
emotions, but also to fall under the spell of a false ‘representationalist’ conception of language 
(assuming the word ‘anger’ represents a separable thing), which in turn neglects the reality con-
structing pragmatics of language (saying ‘I am angry’ does things in the communicative context of 
its concrete utterance).
The critiques also drew upon developments in anthropology that suggested the rather local 
and specific nature of ‘Western’ ways of thinking and acting about emotion (e.g. Lutz and 
Abu-Lughod 1990), and developments in history which showed that key aspects of local and 
specific ‘Western’ ways of thinking and feeling were also a relatively new historical development 
associated with ‘modernity’ (e.g. Elias 1994; Stearns and Stearns 1988). With respect to the latter, 
it is notable that the word ‘emotion’ was hardly used before the beginning of the nineteenth 
century, when English-speakers talked instead of affections, passions, and sentiments. Dixon 
(2003) shows that the growing use of the word ‘emotion’ was attributable to a new interest in 
scientific psychology amongst medics, scientists, and early psychologists. He writes not of the 

Emotion
47
discovery of emotion, but ‘the creation of “the emotions” as a psychological category’. In short, 
the concept of emotion must not be taken for granted since it was crafted and put to use as part 
of the early development of the modern discipline of psychology.
The ways in which ‘modern Westerners’ construct emotions also embody particular values 
and stakes associated with distinctively modern forms of social selfhood which are associated 
with European capitalism and colonialism (Lutz 1996) and which are highly gendered (Cancian 
1987; Crawford et al. 1992). Modern Western psychology of emotions ignores this specificity 
by stripping away the vitally important social and political context and offering instead an 
authoritatively scientific translation of human emotions based on a reification which ultimately 
reduces them to the level of the self-interested biological or cybernetic individual. This is not a 
neutral discourse that represents an independent reality, but a constitutive part of how modern 
Westerners are enjoined to construct and ‘do’ their emotions (Curt 1994; Despret 2004; Stenner 
and Stainton Rogers 1998). It is inseparable from the ‘hope’ that, with scientific knowledge, 
the responses of these human automata can be predicted and controlled – always in the name 
of their own well-being – through biological modifications (e.g. pharmaceutical) and psycho-
logical interventions (e.g. cognitive restructuring). The way in which this supposedly scientific 
knowledge is in fact shot through and saturated with social values and political and economic 
stakes is clear in the following quotation from Walter Cannon’s famous central theory:
The thalamic patterned processes are inherent in the nervous organisation, they are like 
reflexes in being instantly ready to seize control of the motor responses, and when they do 
so they operate with great power. They can be controlled, however, by the processes in the 
cerebral cortex, by processes conditioned by all sorts of previous impressions. The cortex 
also can control all the peripheral machinery except the viscera. The inhibited processes 
in the thalamus cannot set the organism in action, except the parts not under voluntary 
control, but the turmoil there can produce emotions in the usual manner, and possibly with 
greater violence because of the inhibition.
(Cannon 1927)
In this highly influential theory, emotions are identified with neural processes in the thalamus 
that are symbolically associated with a militant working class. Parodying Marxist language, these 
potentially violent forces are presented as if ready to seize control of the means of production 
(in this case, the means to produce motor responses) from a ruling class associated with the 
rational control circuitry of the cerebral cortex. Emotions here are made to play the role of those 
supposedly violent insurgents, irrational children, hysterical women, and savage non-Westerners 
that an authoritarian state takes it as its duty to inhibit and otherwise repress. Ribot, a positivistic 
French psychologist, went as far as to describe emotions as ‘the gypsies of our mind’ – a ‘dying 
breed’ that can be likened to a ‘state within a state’ (Vygotsky 1927/1987).
Averill (1996) refers to this tendency to associate emotions with biologically basic and prim-
itive mechanisms as a form of ‘psychophysiological symbolism’ that should not be confused with 
what emotions ‘in fact’ are. A long Western tradition treats affectivity as a bestial, bodily, and 
subjective source of irrationality and distortion: the ‘flip side’, as it were, to a high value placed 
on rational, deliberate action. This symbolism reflects a split between mind and body that is not 
simply epistemological, but also normative, since it concerns questions of power, governance, 
and control. In the Cartesian dualism, mind (associated with transcendent spirit) should exercise 
complete power over body (associated with meaningless materiality). If reason is associated with 
white, European, bourgeois masculinity, and if emotion with all other categories of humanity, 
then this is because – in practical political reality – the latter were made systematically subservient 

Paul Stenner
48
to the former during the apex of Western modernity. This is why, to put it bluntly, much early 
psychology of emotion embodies the prejudices and preoccupations of a Victorian gentleman – 
complete with stiff upper lip – at the height of the British empire (Stenner and Greco 2013).
As this empire collapsed and the US became the new superpower, the symbolism changed  
and took on a character tinged with the revolutionary spirit occasioned by a break with ‘old 
Europe’ and influenced by values of mass consumerism with its seductive advertising, ‘go get it’ 
attitude, and imagery of expressive liberty. In this context – at least in so far as they motivate con-
sumption and do not challenge the economic order – emotions take on a positive spin. The basic 
emotions tradition inspired by Tomkins and developed by Ekman and Friesen (1971), for exam-
ple, is saturated with the biases of a romantic and revolutionary strain of thought – derived from  
Rousseau – for which the spontaneous emotional animal stands in positive contrast to the inauthen-
tic rational human being weighed down by artificial convention (Fridlund and Duchaine 1996).
Evaluation of critiques
The positive agenda of this wave of constructionist critique was to theorize and study situated 
affective practices in their full diversity as discursive and dialogical phenomena inextricably 
rooted in cultural and historical power relations, and played out interactionally according to the 
symbolic resources of a culture (Curt 1994). The ‘non-representational’ epistemology shifted the 
empirical focus to emotion talk, which is considered to be a constitutive part of social reality and 
emotional experience rather than simply reflective of it (Stenner 1993).
This turn to language and text, however, has arguably become a limitation. The positive 
attention to relationality, power, and context comes at the cost of a defensive adherence to 
an ontology that bifurcates the world into matter (assumed to be the province of the natural 
sciences) and meaning (assumed to be the province of the social sciences and humanities). Lan-
guage is taken to be the primary medium of meaning and hence the basic stuff of any serious 
social scientist. This bifurcation is most clearly expressed in Harré’s (1997) distinction between 
two ontological ‘grammars’: a p-grammar applicable to persons and an m-grammar applicable 
to molecules. M-grammar concerns the causally deterministic interactions studied by natural 
scientists, whilst p-grammar concerns the intentional actions of persons construed as more or 
less skilled performers subject to normative constraints. The social constructionist critique of 
emotion research can be seen as part of an argument that emotion ‘belongs’ to the social sciences 
and not the natural sciences, since emotions, when seen in proper context, are best understood 
in relation to p-grammar (m-grammar constraints notwithstanding).
Things become more linguistically entrenched when this ontological commitment is con-
verted into a methodological axiom, as occurred with forms of discursive psychology which 
explicitly limited its attention to a ‘conceptual analysis’ of the uses ‘emotion categories’ are put to 
in ‘emotion discourse’ (Edwards 1999). This reality-agnostic tendency towards a linguistic hard-
ening of social constructionism has led to a flood of critiques of ‘linguistic imperialism’ – cri-
tiques that are increasingly going under the name of an ‘affective turn’ (Blackman and Venn 2010; 
Clough and Halley 2007; Cromby 2007). Such critiques ‘speak up’ for the ‘non-linguistic’ and 
‘extra-discursive, ’ as if social constructionism were the imperialist dominator and organic vitality 
the subjugated abject whose experience is silenced and denied (Stenner and Moreno 2013).
The turn to affect was partly influenced by the rapid growth of affective neuroscience which 
in turn contributed to a renewed interest in psychodynamic notions like the primary process 
(rapid and general unconscious processing) as distinct from a conscious secondary process (Sal-
vatore and Freda 2011). With the help of PET and FMRI technologies, psychological questions, 
it was felt, could at last be posed in a properly scientific manner: i.e. as biological questions. 

Emotion
49
Hyman (1998: 417) thus feels able simply to ignore the 200 years or so of psychological work on 
emotion, creating a new ‘year zero’ beginning with his own tradition of neuroscientific research: 
‘[emotion] . . .  had largely been ignored as a field of study until recently. Then, several groups 
identified the anatomy, physiology and chemistry of the circuits that underlie fear in animals and 
humans . . . ’. Since the excitement of the 1990s (the ‘decade of the brain’), however, the dream 
of being able to specify which clusters of neurons underlie which emotions has run up against a 
more complex reality. According to Pachalska et al. (2007), ‘nearly every brain function involves 
a complex network of brain regions and neuron clusters, sometimes widely separated from each 
other’ such that ‘most neurons or groups of neurons participate in a number of different brain 
functions, which do not always seem to be related to each other in any obvious way’.
Progressive possibilities
The dangers of a renewed biological construction of emotion are obvious from a critical perspec-
tive, particularly in a social context where affective difficulties associated with troubled, anxious, 
and depressed lives are increasingly packaged as discrete psychological and psychiatric disorders 
and treated pharmaceutically on a massive scale (Rose 2006). The solution, however, does not lie 
in a bifurcated ontology where the insistence on p-grammar or discourse analysis simply invites 
a return pendulum swing to the biological. Indeed, the enduring fascination of the emotions is 
surely attributable to their unstable and liminal features as simultaneously organic, psychic, and com-
municative; individual, pre-personal, and social; conative, cognitive, and affective; pre-conscious, 
conscious, and unconscious; inherited, learned, and deliberate; passive, active, and neutral (Stenner 
2004). The main challenge for critical scholars in this context is conceptual rather than empir-
ical. It is the articulation of a critical transdisciplinary approach capable of acknowledging and 
affirming the complexity and liminality proper to a non-representational approach, but without 
attaching sole significance to language. Particularly promising is the tradition of process thought 
articulated by Bergson, James, Whitehead, Langer, Serres, Deleuze, Stengers, and others that has 
roots in the seventeenth century philosophy of Spinoza (see Brown and Stenner 2009).
In this Spinozist heritage, one finds unexpected common ground between otherwise diver-
gent traditions. What other philosophy is positively embraced by cognitivists (Frijda 1993), 
neuroscientists (Damasio 2004), psychoanalysts (Neu 1977), social constructionists (Brown and 
Stenner 2001), feminists (Braidoti 2003), and affect theorists (Massumi 2002) alike? Spinoza is 
interesting to critical psychologists precisely because of the way he treats experiential (affective), 
epistemological (cognitive), and ethico-political (conative) concerns as inseparable aspects of a 
political philosophy of experience grounded in a concept of power defined as the capacity to 
affect and be affected. Bader Sawaia (2003: 17), a Latin American feminist critical psychologist 
who works as an activist with urban slum dwellers, describes how her praxis lacked an adequate 
theoretical motor until she recognised the relevance of affectivity as ‘a microcosm in which the 
social and the psychological worlds meet in a process of transformation’ – a recognition which 
came with her explicit adoption of a Spinozist approach.
Neuroscientists too are coming to recognise that each event of experience entails a microgen-
esis entailing multiple phases such that even the most abstract flower of an intellectual thought 
emerges from an embodied ground and has affective roots (Brown 2012; Falmagne 2011). 
Spinoza argues for the decisive political and ethical relevance of concrete, local, and singular 
emotional experiences. Ethics is thus about affectivity, but affectivity is also about coming to 
know and act in the world more adequately, and reconstructing our political systems on this 
basis. Through our encounters, we come to know the world by way of the affects. Much like 
Proust, when Spinoza thinks of affects, he has in mind the human being as a socially embedded 

Paul Stenner
50
relational whole undergoing encounters through which our powers are ongoingly modified or 
affected and through which we modify or affect the world. The message of a critical psychology 
of emotion is Spinozist: become active.
Further reading
De Courville Nicol, V. (2011) Social Economies of Fear and Desire: Emotional Regulation, Emotion Management, 
and Embodied Autonomy. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Greco, M. and Stenner, P. (eds) (2008) The Emotions: A Social Sciences Reader. London: Routledge.
Illouz, E. (2007) Cold Intimacies: the Making of Emotional Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Wetherell, M. (2012) Affect and Emotion: a New Social Science Understanding. London: Sage Publications.
Website resources
International Society for Research on Emotion: http://isre.org
Society for the Study of Emotion, Affect and Space: http://www.sseas.org
Sociology of Emotions: http://www.socemot.com
Tomkins Institute: http://www.tomkins.org
References
Averill, J. R. (1980) ‘A constructivist view of emotion’, in R. Plutchik and H. Kellerman (eds) Emotions: 
Theory, Research and Experience. New York: Academic Press.
Averill, ⁜J. R. (1996) ‘An analysis of psychophysiological symbolism and its influence on theories of emotion’, 
in R. Harré and W. G. Parrott (eds) The Emotions: Social, Cultural, and Biological Dimensions. London: Sage.
Blackman, L. and Venn, C. (2010) ‘Affect’, Body & Society, 16(1), 7–28.
Braidoti, R. (2003) Metamorphoses: Towards a Materialist Theory of Becoming. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Brown, J. W. (2012) Love and Other Emotions: on the Process of Feeling. London: Karnac.
Brown, S. D. and Stenner, P. (2001) ‘Being affected: Spinoza and the psychology of emotion’, International 
Journal of Group Tensions, 30(1), 81–105.
Brown, S. D. and Stenner, P. (2009) Psychology Without Foundations: History, Philosophy and Psychosocial Theory. 
London: Sage.
Cancian, F. (1987) Love in America. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Canguilhem, G. (1958/1980) ‘What is psychology?’, Ideology & Consciousness, 7, 37–50.
Cannon, W. B. (1927) ‘The James-Lange theory of emotion: a critical examination and an alternative the-
ory’, American Journal of Psychology, 39, 106–24.
Clough, P. and Halley, J. (eds) (2007) The Affective Turn: Theorizing the Social. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press.
Crawford, J., Kippax, J., Onyx, J., Goult, U. and Benton, P. (eds) (1992) Emotion and Gender: Constructing 
Meaning from Memory. London: Sage.
Cromby, J. (2007) ‘Toward a psychology of feeling’, International Journal of Critical Psychology, 21, 94–118.
Curt, B. (1994) Textuality and Tectonics: Troubling Social and Psychological Science. Buckingham: Open Univer-
sity Press.
Damasio, A. (2004) Looking for Spinoza. London: Vintage.
Despret, V. (2004) Our Emotional Makeup: Ethnopsychology and Selfhood. New York: Other Press.
Dixon, T. (2003) From Passions to Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Edwards, D. (1999) ‘Emotion discourse’, Culture & Psychology, 5(3), 271–291.
Ekman, P. and Friesen, W. V. (1971) ‘Constants across culture in the face and emotion’, Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 17, 124–129.
Elias, N. (1994) The Civilizing Process, Vols 1 & 2. Oxford: Blackwell.
Falmagne, R. J. (2011) ‘The affective roots of thought’, in P. Stenner, J. Cromby, J. F. Motzkau and J. Yen (eds) 
Theoretical Psychology: Global Transformations and Challenges. Concord, Ontario: Captus Press.
Freud, S. (1921) Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (trans. J. Strachey) The Standard Edition of the 
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Volume 18. London: The International Psycho-analytical 
Press.

Emotion
51
Fridlund, A. J. and Duchaine, B. (1996) ‘Facial expressions of emotion and the delusion of the hermetic self’, 
in R. Harré & W. G. Parrott (eds) The Emotions: Social, Cultural and Biological Dimensions. London: Sage.
Frijda, N. (1993) The Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gardiner, H. M., Metcalf, R. C. and Beebe-Center, J. G. (1937/1970) Feeling and Emotion: A History of The-
ories. Westport, CN: Greenwood.
Harré, R. (ed.) (1986) The Social Construction of Emotions. Oxford: Blackwell.
Harré, R. (1997) ‘Forward to Aristotle: the case for a hybrid ontology’, Journal for the Theory of Social Behav-
iour, 27(2/3), 173–191.
Holzkamp-Osterkamp, U. (1991) ‘Emotion, cognition and action potence’, in W. Tolman and W. Maiers 
(eds) Critical Psychology: Contributions to an Historical Science of the Subject. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Hyman, S. (1998) ‘A new image for fear and emotion’, Nature, 393(4), 417–418.
Lutz, C. A. (1996) ‘Engendered emotion’, in Harré, R. and Parrott, W. G. (eds) The Emotions: Social, Cultural, 
and Biological Dimensions. London: Sage.
Lutz, C. A. and Abu-Lughod, L. (1990) Language and the Politics of Emotion. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Massumi, B. (2002) Parables for the Virtual: Movement, Affect, Sensation. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Neu, J. (1977) Emotion, Thought and Therapy. London: Routledge.
Pachalska, M., Lipowska, M. and Lukaszewska, B. (2007) ‘Towards a process neuropsychology: microgenetic 
theory and brain science’, Neuropsychologica, 5(4), 228–245.
Parkinson, B. (2011) ‘How social is the social psychology of emotion?’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 
50(3), 405–413.
Proust, M. (2000) In Search of Lost Time, Volume 5 (trans. C. K. Scott Moncrieff and T. Kilmartin). London: 
Vintage Books.
Rose, N. (2006) ‘Disorders without borders? The expanding scope of psychiatric practice’, BioSocieties, 1, 
465–484.
Salvatore, S. and Freda, M. F. (2011) ‘Affect, unconscious and sensemaking: a psychodynamic, semiotic and 
dialogic model’, New Ideas in Psychology, 29, 119–135.
Salzen, E. (2001) ‘A century of emotion theories – proliferation without progress?’, History and Philosophy 
of Psychology, 3, 56–75.
Sartre, J. P. (1938) The Emotions: Sketch of a Theory (trans. B. Frechtman). New York: Philosophical Library.
Sawaia, B. B. (2003) ‘Affectivity as an ethical-political phenomenon and locus for critical epistemological 
reflection in social psychology’, in M. Montero and P. F. Christlieb (eds) Critical Psychology in Latin Amer-
ica, Critical Psychology 9. Kings Lynn, Norfolk: Lawrence & Wishart.
Schachter, S. and Singer, J. E. (1962) ‘Cognitive, social and physiological determinants of emotional state’, 
Psychological Review, 69, 379–399.
Scherer, K. R. (1984) ‘Emotion as a multicomponent process: a model and some cross-cultural data’, in  
P. Shaver (ed.) Emotions, Relationships, and Health. Beverly Hills: Sage.
Scherer, K. R. (2009) ‘Emotions are emergent processes: they require a dynamic computational architec-
ture’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Series B, 364, 3459–3474.
Stearns, C. Z. and Stearns, P. N. (eds) (1988) Emotion and Social Change. New York: Holmes & Meier.
Stenner, P. (1993) ‘Discoursing jealousy’, in E. Burman and I. Parker (eds) Discourse Analytic Research: Reper-
toires and Readings of Texts in Action. London: Routledge.
Stenner, P. (2004) ‘Is autopoietic systems theory alexithymic? Luhmann and the socio-psychology of emo-
tions’, Soziale Systeme: Zeitschrift fuer Soziologische Theorie, 10(1), 159–185.
Stenner, P. and Greco, M. (2013) ‘Affectivity’, Informática na Educaçao: Teoria e Prática, 16(1), 49–70. http://
seer.ufrgs.br/InfEducTeoriaPratica/article/view/36925
Stenner, P. and Moreno, E. (2013) ‘Liminality and affectivity: the case of deceased organ donation’, Subjec-
tivity, 6(3), 229–253.
Stenner, P. and Stainton Rogers, R. (1998) ‘Jealousy as a manifold of divergent understandings: a Q meth-
odological investigation’, European Journal of Social Psychology, 28, 71–94.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1927/1987) The Historical Meaning of the Crisis in Psychology: A Methodological Investigation. 
New York: Plenum Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1932) ‘Emotions and their development in childhood’, in R. W. Rieber and A. S. Carton 
(eds) (1988) The Collected Works of L. S. Vygotsky, Volume 1. New York: Plenum Press.

52
Biological and evolutionary psychologies are separate but overlapping fields of enquiry. Text-
books are where the taken-for-granted assumptions of a discipline are frequently made most 
explicit, and most biological psychology textbooks also include discussion of evolutionary 
explanations and evolutionary psychology. For example, Kalat (2009: 1) describes biological 
psychology as the study of the ‘animal roots of behaviour’, saying that ‘it holds that we think and 
act as we do because of certain brain mechanisms, which we evolved because ancient animals 
with these mechanisms survived and reproduced’ (3). Toates (2007) similarly places considerable 
emphasis on evolutionary explanations, arguing that they are one of four ways in which behav-
iour can be accounted for (alongside causal, developmental, and functional explanations).
Biological psychology has close links with neuroscience, and potentially considers all of the 
various ways in which brain and body functions, structures, and systems influence what we 
do. Evolutionary psychology is a comparatively recent endeavour, more specifically concerned 
with how these functions, structures, and systems might have become part of our species-nature 
because of sexual selection: that is, because they enhanced reproductive fitness, so were more 
likely than other adaptations to have been passed down through the generations. Thus, whilst 
biological psychology is a wider field than evolutionary psychology, the two are closely linked. 
In what follows I will speak of ‘biological psychology’ when considering the field in general, and 
of ‘evolutionary psychology’ when referring specifically to explanations based upon theories of 
selection and reproductive fitness.
In most undergraduate courses, biological psychology is presented as a relatively distinct 
sub-discipline. Undergraduate psychology teaching is typically organized in ways that reflect the 
fracturing of the discipline into sub-disciplinary fields: cognitive, social, biological, and so forth. 
These fields mostly map onto dualisms – between mind and body, individual and society, for 
example – that are widely accepted in our culture. Because scientists frequently adopt relatively 
narrow perspectives upon phenomena, this fracturing of psychology might appear to make 
intuitive sense. It can generate the superficial impression that psychology includes each of these 
areas equally, giving the same weight to social explanations as it does to biological ones. It may 
even produce the illusion that psychology is where these disparate perspectives get integrated 
into nuanced explanations that take proper account of influences within each realm.
5
Biological and evolutionary 
psychologies
The limits of critical psychology
John Cromby

Biological and evolutionary psychologies
53
Unfortunately, such integration is rare. Most psychological research which claims to integrate 
these perspectives is said to be based upon the biopsychosocial model (Engel 1977). However, 
rather than develop such a model, Engel merely proposed that this would be a good idea, and 
in the decades since there has been no such systematic development (Mclaren 1998). Conse-
quently, the term ‘biopsychosocial’ is largely undefined, means different things in different con-
texts, and tends to function largely as a rhetorical justification for including variables from each 
realm in the same study. This leads to a second concern, which is that social causation is nec-
essarily contingent and probabilistic rather than deterministic, and that it necessarily implicates 
phenomena – discourses, structures of feeling, class and gender relations, power hierarchies – 
that are both relatively intangible and difficult to operationalize. As a result, even where there are 
genuine attempts to consider social influence in these studies, it can appear comparatively weak 
compared to biological influence.
Moreover, in practice the sub-disciplines of psychology are relatively autonomous: their advo-
cates read different books and journals, attend different conferences, compete for (somewhat) 
different funding streams, and frequently hold disparate epistemological or ontological stances. 
Simultaneously, their situation within universities thoroughly suffused with the competitive 
logic of the market means that, rather than seek integration, advocates of these sub-disciplines 
frequently assert their (presumed) superiority. Biological psychology can seem to have the gloss 
of natural science that many psychologists would like for their discipline (and in this way it cur-
rently benefits from its associations with neuroscience). It plays into cultural presuppositions that 
the ‘real’ causes of what we do lie hidden deep inside us, but might be revealed using specialized 
technologies such as brain imaging. More mundanely, biological psychology research requires 
specialized laboratories and equipment; consequently, its associated research grants are often 
bigger, which can make it seem more prestigious. Additionally, because citations are often more 
rapid in this field, managers relying on journal impact factors as quality indicators may also judge 
this research more highly. For such reasons, whilst sub-disciplinary imperialism is not the unique 
province of biological psychologists, their efforts are sometimes more influential.
In short, the relations between biological psychology and the wider discipline of which it is 
a part are complex and multiple. Moreover, the historical influence of biology upon psychology 
has been diverse and, sometimes, subtle, and the relations between them continue. For example, 
today’s social psychological notion of the ‘attitude’ originated in Darwin’s evolutionary writings 
on emotion: when first imported into psychology, it referred to a biological stance of prepar-
edness toward a stimulus ( Jones and Elcock 2001). Conversely, the abstract noun ‘motivation’ 
was first popularized by early twentieth century applied psychologists under the influence of 
marketing imperatives to induce consumers to ‘want’ new goods (Danziger 1997), and only 
subsequently became a prominent topic in biological psychology.
Like the other sub-disciplines, then, biological psychology has been influenced by pragmatic 
imperatives to supply solutions for contemporary problems and to demonstrate wider social 
utility. It has also been shaped by new technological accomplishments, such as genome scanning 
and brain imaging. These technologies, in turn, reflect funding and interests associated with 
groups such as the military and the pharmaceutical industry, and disciplines such as medicine. 
Simultaneously, as we have seen, biological psychology’s constitution as a distinct field reflects 
wider cultural presuppositions and dualistic assumptions. So biological psychology is contin-
gently related both to the wider discipline of psychology and to the diverse field of cultural, 
social, and technological interests within which it operates. Simplistic histories that present its 
development as little more than the ongoing march of science and progress must therefore be 
treated with suspicion.

John Cromby
54
Critiques of biological and evolutionary psychologies
Critiques of biological psychology have tended to emphasize problems of biological deter-
minism and biological reductionism. Whilst critiques of evolutionary psychology have likewise 
emphasized these problems, they have also elaborated further concerns associated with the spe-
cific claims made in this field – for example, the claim that ‘mind’ can be sensibly understood as 
composed of distinct modules.
Biological determinism refers to the tendency of biological psychology to claim or imply 
that important differences between individuals and social groups are determined by biological 
differences between them. Claims have been made that many psychological and behavioural 
attributes are determined in this way: Turkheimer (1998) lists intelligence, homosexuality, schiz-
ophrenia, criminality, and psychopathology in general, whilst evolutionary explanations have 
been proposed for phenomena as diverse as pregnancy complications, stress responses, conven-
tional beauty, the attraction of money, and the historical practice of favouring first-born sons 
(Betzig 1997).
Biological explanations of intelligence, for example, have a long and controversial history, 
with some biologists and psychologists claiming that lighter skinned people are more intelligent 
than darker skinned, that women are less intelligent than men, and that these differences have 
a biological basis (Gould 1981; Rose et al. 1984). Murray and Herrnstein’s 1994 book The Bell 
Curve presented a relatively recent version of this argument, claiming that decades of more equal 
opportunities in the USA had created a situation where underlying biological differences were 
now more visible. They argued that a division was emerging between a ‘cognitive elite’ and an 
‘underclass’, and that the differences between these groups were a direct effect of their different 
biological capabilities. Their analyses presumed that IQ and related tests (such as the US Armed 
Forces Qualifying Test – AFQT) all measure a single underlying factor of general intelligence – 
‘g’ – and claimed to prove that differences in g were more powerfully predictive of life success 
than differences in socioeconomic status. Murray and Herrnstein compared IQ scores of black 
and white people in the USA, using them to argue that these measures were the most powerful 
predictors of the social and employment status of each group. Although they were careful to 
acknowledge that g may be subject to environmental as well as genetic influence, they also con-
stantly imply that genetic differences matter most, and ‘at certain places in the text, they write as 
though the heritability factor is as large as 100 percent’ (Heckman 1995: 1096).
The claims made in The Bell Curve were dismissed on technical, empirical, and conceptual 
grounds. Sternberg (1995) summarized evidence demonstrating that variables uncorrelated with 
IQ – tacit knowledge, thinking style, personality – were all more important influences upon 
income and employment status. Moreover, whilst there is extensive evidence that measures of 
IQ never account for more than approximately 20 per cent of the variance in social outcomes 
(and in many studies, considerably less), the book’s own data show that, for black and white peo-
ple of average IQ – i.e. when IQ is the same in both groups – black people are ‘twice as likely 
to be in poverty (p. 326), five times as likely to be born out of wedlock (p. 331), two and a half 
times as likely to have ever been on welfare (p. 332), twice as likely to give birth to a low-birth-
weight baby (p. 334), and two and a third times as likely to have lived in poverty during their first 
3 years of life’ (Sternberg 1995: 260). Sternberg also challenged Murray and Herrnstein’s asser-
tion of widespread agreement that g simply equates to intelligence by describing four influential 
psychological conceptions of intelligence that do not reduce it to a single factor. He also took 
issue with the book’s claims that g is what laypeople typically mean when they refer to people as 
intelligent, and that intelligence cannot be modified or improved and is very strongly heritable. 
Another influential analysis of The Bell Curve (Heckman 1995) identified five reasons why the 

Biological and evolutionary psychologies
55
book fails to prove its case: g is not adequate to explain the variance in the data presented, and is 
not primarily responsible for social differences; the assumption that the AFQT measures innate 
intelligence is incorrect; cost-benefit analyses demonstrate that life and employment outcomes 
can be significantly enhanced by interventions that address capacities other than IQ; the analy-
sis supposedly demonstrating that IQ accounts for more variance in outcomes than social and 
environmental factors is biased, flawed, and largely meaningless; and that the book’s social policy 
recommendations are both speculative and not dependent on the analyses preceding them.
More recent determinist explanations have often been derived from studies that use brain-  
imaging technologies. For example, Fine (2010) engages critically with studies which claim to 
show that male brains display greater hemispheric lateralization (toward language in the left 
hemisphere, or visuo-spatial ability in the right hemisphere), whereas female brains have a larger 
corpus callosum joining their two hemispheres, and so are better at integration and empathy. 
The implication in most studies is that these gender differences are ‘hardwired’, innate, and bio-
logically determined, and that structural differences in the brain, rather than gendered practices 
of socialization, are the origin of gender differences. Fine raises a number of incisive objections 
to such claims, engaging closely with the methodological and technological aspects of these 
studies to demonstrate that they are not actually supported by the data. She notes that whilst 
some individual papers do report gender differences in lateralization, a meta-analysis of 26 such 
studies found no significant gender differences (Sommer et al. 2008); similarly, a meta-analysis of 
49 studies of corpus callosal size (using both post-mortem and imaging data) found no evidence 
that the corpus callosum is larger in women (Bishop and Wahlsten 1997). Fine also questions 
the simplistic equation of brain features with psychological qualities, observing that there is no 
neuroscientific evidence that relatively small differences in the quantity of inter-hemispheric 
neural connection would simply equate to more empathy, or that a sharper focus upon details is 
facilitated by the shorter neural pathways purported to be a feature of male brains.
Critics also argue that explanations in biological psychology are typically reductionist: that 
they drive causality down to the smallest level possible, trying to explain complex psychological 
phenomena entirely in terms of the actions (and interactions) of brain and body processes. For 
example, biological explanations of schizophrenia have implicated a dizzying range of biological 
phenomena that are supposed to be causal, including abnormalities of dopamine, glutamate, 
serotonin, acetylcholine, gamma-butyric acid, prostaglandin, and neuropeptide neurotransmitter 
systems, and neuro-anatomical features including enlarged ventricles, cerebral asymmetry, tem-
poral lobe abnormalities, a thickened corpus callosum, a thinner corpus callosum, abnormalities 
of the basal ganglia and cerebellum, and reduced overall brain volume (Cromby et al. 2013). 
However, despite the many strong claims that appear in the biological psychology literature – 
and despite more than a century of well-funded research with access to ever more sophisticated 
technologies – no biological cause has been consistently demonstrated in relation to schizophre-
nia or any other functional psychiatric diagnosis; this why psychiatric diagnosis still depends on 
interview and observation, because no biological tests are available to confirm any functional 
diagnosis.
Regardless of this lack of evidence, biological psychology invariably posits these kinds of 
explanations as the causes of schizophrenia: it reductively assumes that biological events and 
processes are, of themselves, causal of psychological events and processes. We see this assumption 
in claims such as ‘Mental illnesses are real, diagnosable, treatable brain disorders’ (Hyman 1998) 
or ‘schizophrenia is beyond doubt a brain disease’ (Harrison and Weinberger 2005). However, 
not only is the evidence that schizophrenia is a brain disease lacking (and not only are there 
long-standing conceptual and empirical challenges to this diagnosis – Boyle 2002) there is also 
solid evidence of causal associations between the experiences associated with this diagnosis and 

John Cromby
56
environmental, social, and relationship influences, including poverty and low SES (Harrison 
et al. 2001), disturbed relationships (Harrop and Trower 2003), childhood trauma, and physical 
and sexual abuse (Read et al. 2005).
Biological reductionist explanations of schizophrenia (and other functional psychiatric diag-
noses) divert attention from these social and environmental causes, making it less likely that 
political or policy interventions will be pursued; consequently, resources are wasted pursuing 
individual biological solutions to social problems, and individuals do not receive interventions 
that would help most, so they frequently end up overmedicated, but undertreated (Miller 2010). 
Reductionism is nevertheless highly prevalent in biological psychology, especially in relation to 
neuroscience where Bennett and Hacker (2003) demonstrate that it frequently takes the form of 
simply equating the brain with the person, as though the two were simply identical: for example, 
by attributing psychological capacities such as deciding, believing, or choosing to brains, rather 
than to the persons whose brains they study. They show how this inevitably produces errors 
since, no matter how much we discover about the neural processes that enable activities – for 
example, writing a signature – a complete neural explanation will always be impossible, because:
no amount of neural knowledge would suffice to discriminate between writing one’s name, 
copying one’s name, practising one’s signature, forging a name, writing an autograph, signing 
a cheque, witnessing a will, signing a death warrant, and so on . . . the differences between 
these are circumstance-dependent, functions not only of the individual’s intentions but also 
of the social and legal conventions that must obtain to make the having of such intentions 
and the performance of such actions possible.
(Bennett and Hacker 2003: 360)
Evolutionary psychology has been a prominent element of biological psychology in recent 
years, although its influence is likely to decline considerably in the coming years. Assumptions 
made by evolutionary psychology include that sexual selection (rather than other influences) is 
the primary driving force of evolution; that, through competition, evolution results in a relent-
less process of improvement; that selection occurs only at the level of individuals; and that the 
relevant evolutionary environment for modern humans is the Pleistocene period, because no 
significant genetic change has occurred in our species since that time. All of these assumptions 
lack empirical support, and all are challenged by empirical evidence as well as by conceptual and 
ideological critique. For example, Gannon (2002) observes that Darwin distinguished clearly 
between natural selection (selection by survival) and sexual selection (selection by reproduc-
tive success). Darwin posited that sometimes these processes will be contradictory (flamboyant 
peacock tails enhance sexual success, but make their owners more vulnerable to predators), and 
sometimes they will be complementary (physical fitness may be advantageous for both survival 
and reproduction, so may be favoured by both natural and sexual selection).
However, evolutionary psychology consistently disregards this distinction, claiming to have 
‘clarified what Darwin meant’ by showing that ‘ “good” traits are those that promote an indi-
vidual’s reproductive fitness’ (Thornhill and Palmer 2000: 5). Challenging this, Gannon cites 
anthropological evidence showing that, when faced with extreme adversity, human commu-
nities put reproduction ‘on hold’ and prioritize survival (although, she notes, even survival is 
sometimes subordinated to principled belief ). Likewise, Gannon notes that evolutionary psy-
chology downplays other known influences upon evolution – genetic recombination, gene flow 
and mutation – consistently subordinating these to sexual selection. In so doing it produces 
a linear narrative of improvement where evolution is consistently driven by competition to 
favour increased precision, efficiency, and economy (a narrative with very obvious ideological 

Biological and evolutionary psychologies
57
resonances). Taking bipedalism as an example, Gannon observes that its selection in our species 
was clearly not conducted with precision, efficiency, or economy since our upright posture is 
often associated with back pain, vertebral crush fractures, varicose veins, haemorrhoids, hyper-
tension, and circulatory and numerous other problems.
Probably the most comprehensive critique of evolutionary psychology was produced by 
Rose and Rose (2001). Their edited volume details empirical evidence that contradicts many 
evolutionary psychological assumptions, showing that evolution did not simply stop in the 
Pleistocene, that many human abilities are developmental rather than ‘modular’ in character, and 
that many evolutionary biologists favour notions of group (rather than individual) selection. 
Their contributors also critique the ideological agenda of evolutionary psychology, such as the 
claim that sexual selection has endowed all men with an inherent propensity to rape, and that 
women’s endorsement of feminism is therefore a specialized brain circuit (or ‘module’ of mind) 
that evolved as a form of pre-emptive defense or protection (Thornhill and Palmer 2000: 103).
Relatedly, biologist and neuroscientist Steven Rose (1997) provided a detailed alternative to 
evolutionary psychology. His notion of the lifeline – the developmental sequence of an organism 
as it grows, changes, matures, and declines – incorporates evolutionary theory, developmental 
biology, cell biology, and environmental influence to produce a non-reductionist alternative to 
biological and evolutionary psychologies. He demonstrates that, in multi-cellular creatures such as 
humans, selection occurs at the level of the organism as a whole, not at the levels of genes or mod-
ular abilities. His account shows how popular accounts of ‘selfish genes’ are overly simplistic, erro-
neous, and misleading, and that evolutionary psychological claims that we behave as we do because 
of tendencies inherited from our stone-age progenitors are similarly speculative and ideological.
Critical responses
Viewed from a critical psychological perspective, biological psychology is both flawed and trou-
blesome. First, its tendencies toward determinism and reductionism may preclude any proper 
consideration of social and cultural influences. Second, its prioritization of forces and causes 
hidden within individuals plays into reactionary ideological agendas that either divert attention 
away from inequalities and power relations – of class, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, disability – or 
that ‘naturalize’ them by casting them as the inevitable outcome of biological difference. Third, 
its naïve promotion of a simplistic version of the scientific method leaves it unable to capture the 
nuances, dynamics, and complexities of lived human experience, making its findings inadequate 
as the basis for serious attempts to integrate what we know of human biological functioning 
with our other ways of knowing.
Evolutionary psychology is even more flawed. First, it is a distortion of the very Darwinism it 
claims to promote, one that both lacks and disregards evidence so as to misrepresent evolution-
ary science in a way that furthers ideological agendas associated with patriarchy and capitalism. 
Second, like biological psychology more generally, it attempts to ‘naturalize’ gender and other 
differences, presenting them as the outcome of biological processes with origins many thousands 
of years in the past. And third, its view of many psychological capacities as predefined in hard-
wired modules is not supported by consistent evidence, is not consistent with evidence about 
development and plasticity in the human brain and body, and produces an impoverished, mech-
anistic psychology within which what we perceive, feel, and do is frequently the consequence 
of supposed evolutionary pressures inherited from an unknown past.
It may seem strange, then, that for the most part critical psychology has largely ignored 
biological and evolutionary psychologies. The great majority of the discussion and analysis 
summarized above was conducted by biologists, mainstream psychologists, and scholars from 

John Cromby
58
other disciplines (philosophy, neuroscience, economics, and the social sciences). Despite the 
prominence of biological psychology within the wider discipline of psychology, and despite 
frequent attempts by biological and evolutionary psychologists to promote narrow research 
agendas that promulgate their own interests, critical psychologists have for the most part not 
responded. Perhaps to some extent this is understandable: faced with Thornhill and Palmer’s rape 
hypothesis, for example, it can be hard to overcome repulsion sufficiently to identify a point of 
contact that might enable rational critique to begin. Besides, there is no shortage of other psy-
chological claims with which to critically engage, many of which might seem more promising 
in terms of the possible development of constructive alternatives. Moreover, critique may seem 
largely irrelevant to the many critical psychologists who already have their own version of the 
body – whether this be, for example, psychoanalytic, phenomenological, cyborgian, performa-
tive, relational, or discursive. For such reasons, the absence of the biological body from critical 
psychological accounts might go largely unnoticed, or come to appear relatively unimportant: 
nevertheless, it has consequences.
First, it means that most critiques are not specifically concerned with the psychological 
aspects of biological psychology, and so might fail to bring out the relevant social and cultural 
dimensions of subjectivity and experience. When these critiques come from mainstream psy-
chology they might challenge biological reductionism and determinism, but will tend to leave 
individualism largely intact. Second, entirely ignoring the biological aspects of psychology can 
make critical accounts appear biased, defensive, and unconvincing, increasing their vulnerability 
to dismissal by those not already persuaded of their worth. Third, it contributes to a paradoxical 
situation where critical psychology – in wholly separating the material substrates that enable 
experience from the forms that experience takes – becomes just as dualistic as its mainstream 
alternative. Fourth, ignoring biological psychology makes it more difficult for critical psycholo-
gists to forge connections with critical colleagues in cognate areas such as critical neurosci-
ence (Choudhury and Slaby 2012), a problem likely to become more acute as the influence 
of neuroscience over psychology continues to grow (Rose and Abi-Rachid 2013). And fifth, 
it marginalizes or obstructs critical attempts to deploy biological evidence constructively and 
progressively – for example, in feminist accounts of embodiment (Wilson 2004), or in challenges 
to psychiatric claims and diagnoses (Cromby and Harper 2009).
Engagement with the biological aspects of experience and subjectivity is of course difficult 
and needs to be supported with appropriate conceptual and methodological resources, and 
Harré (2002) proposed a promising Wittgensteinian framework within which biology always 
enables, but never simply causes, experience. He suggested that psychology can be described in 
terms of three distinct grammars, each with its associated realm of causality and interaction. ‘Per-
sons grammar’ describes the realm of experience, morality, relationality, and the effects that ensue 
from our spontaneous orientation to the norms or precepts of culture. ‘Organisms grammar’ 
describes the effects of those functions our bodies conduct on our behalf without willed effort, 
for example, breathing or digesting: without oxygen or food our experiences would be radically 
transformed, but influences here are purposive rather than normative-intentional. ‘Molecules 
grammar’ describes the effects upon experience of chemical substances such as aspirin or alco-
hol, and molecular clusters such as synapses, influences that regulate sleep, cognitive function, 
perception, levels of activity, and so forth. Harré argues that these grammars are nested in accord 
with what he calls a ‘taxonomic priority principle’ which means that we can only investigate 
organismic or molecular grammar influences upon an activity if – in the terms of person gram-
mar – an individual can meaningfully be said to be engaging with that activity. In this way, Harré 
suggests, biological influences might be included in psychological accounts without falling prey 
to determinism or reductionism, and without introducing implicit dualisms.

Biological and evolutionary psychologies
59
Conclusions
The need for critical engagement with biological psychology is likely to increase in the com-
ing years as three contemporary developments affect the discipline. First, in recent decades the 
life sciences have been ‘transformed into gigantic biotechnosciences, blurring the boundaries 
between science and technology, universities, entrepreneurial biotech companies and the major 
pharmaceutical companies’ (Rose and Rose 2012: 2): industry, commerce, and biological science 
are now more thoroughly enmeshed than ever before, and this will have consequences for bio-
logical psychology. Second, developments in epigenetic research will also affect biological psy-
chology significantly. Epigenetics studies how heritable changes in gene expression are produced 
without changes to underlying DNA, and is frequently concerned with the ways in which gene 
expression is regulated by environmental influences. The exponential growth in this research – 
which began around the turn of the millennium and shows no sign of slowing down – was 
spurred in part by the surprise discovery from the Human Genome Project that humans have 
far fewer genes than was previously thought (around 23,000 as opposed to over 100,000). Epige-
netics recognizes that gene expression – all gene expression – always occurs in an environment, 
which not only regulates it in that moment but also (by modifying how DNA is stored in the 
cell nucleus) can regulate its expression in future generations. Epigenetic research is shaped 
by powerful interests, some antithetical to progressive politics, so there are emergent concerns 
here (for example, over how the term ‘environment’ should be defined – Papadopoulos 2011). 
Nevertheless, its growing prominence is likely to render evolutionary psychology ever more 
redundant, and will inevitably lead geneticists to place more emphasis upon influences outside 
the individual and her or his body. And third, the continuing development of brain-imaging 
technologies – though they encourage both reductionism and the naïve belief that brain state 
images are somehow objective representations of experience  – will simultaneously demon-
strate, over and again, how the brain itself is both socialized and enculturated, showing that 
environmentally-driven plasticity is intrinsic to any viable understanding of brain function and 
structure. In the coming years, it seems that many of the presumed certainties of biological and 
evolutionary psychology will be transformed by these developments.
Further reading
Choudhury, S. and Slaby, J. (2012) Critical Neuroscience. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Rose, H. and Rose, S. (2012) Genes, Cells and Brains: the Promethean Promises of the New Biology. London: 
Verso.
Website resources
Critical Neuroscience: http://www.critical-neuroscience.org/
Evolutionary Psychology: A Primer: http://www.cep.ucsb.edu/primer.html
The RSA, Hilary and Steven Rose, ‘The Rise of “Biotechnosciences” ’: http://www.thersa.org/events/
video/vision-videos/hilary-and-steven-rose
References
Bennett, M. R. and Hacker, P.M.S. (2003) Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience. Oxford: Blackwell.
Betzig, L. (1997) ‘Introduction: people are animals’, in L. Betzig (ed.) Human Nature: A Critical Reader. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bishop, K. and Wahlsten, D. (1997), ‘Sex differences in the human corpus callosum: myth or reality?’, Neu-
roscience and Biobehavioural Reviews, 21, 581–601.
Boyle, M. (2002) Schizophrenia: A Scientific Delusion? London: Routledge.

John Cromby
60
Choudhury, S. and Slaby, J. (2012) Critical Neuroscience. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Cromby, J. and Harper, D. (2009) ‘Paranoia: a social account’, Theory & Psychology, 19, 335–361.
Cromby, J., Harper, D. and Reavey, P. (2013) Psychology, Mental Health and Distress. London: Palgrave.
Danziger, K. (1997) Naming the Mind: how Psychology Found its Language. London: Sage Publications.
Engel, G. (1977) ‘The need for a new medical model’, Science, 196, 129–136.
Fine, C. (2010) ‘From Scanner to Soundbite: issues in interpreting and reporting sex differences in the 
brain’, Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19, 280–283.
Gannon, L. (2002) ‘A critique of evolutionary psychology’, Psychology, Evolution and Gender, 4, 173–218.
Gould, S.J. (1981) The Mismeasure of Man. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Harré, R. (2002) Cognitive Science: A Philosophical Introduction. London: Sage Publications.
Harrison, G., Gunnell, D., Glazebrook,C., Page, K. and Kwiecinski, R. (2001) ‘Association between schiz-
ophrenia and social inequality at birth: case-control study’, British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 346–350.
Harrison, P. and Weinberger, D. (2005) ’Schizophrenia genes, gene expression, and neuropathology: on the 
matter of their convergence’, Molecular Psychiatry, 10, 40–68.
Harrop, C. and Trower, P. (2003) Why Does Schizophrenia Develop at Late Adolescence?: A Cognitive-developmental 
Approach to Psychosis. Chichester: Wiley.
Heckman, J. (1995) ‘Lessons from The Bell Curve’, Journal of Political Economy, 103, 1091–1120.
Hyman, S. (1998) ‘NIMH during the tenure of Director Steven E.Hyman, MD: the now and future of 
NIMH’, American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 36–40.
Jones, D. and Elcock, J. (2001) History and Theories of Psychology: A Critical Perspective. London: Arnold (Hod-
der Headline).
Kalat, J. (2009) Biological Psychology. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Mclaren, N. (1998) ‘A critical review of the biopsychosocial model’, Australian and New Zealand Journal of 
Psychiatry, 32, 86–92.
Miller, G. (2010) ‘Mistreating psychology in the decades of the brain’, Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 
716–743.
Papadopoulos, D. (2011) ‘The imaginary of plasticity: neural embodiment, epigenetics and ecomorphs’, 
Sociological Review, 59, 432–456.
Read, J., van Os, J., Morrison, A. P. and Ross, C.A. (2005) ‘Childhood trauma, psychosis and schizophrenia: a 
literature review with theoretical and clinical implications’, Acta-Psychiatrica-Scandinavica, 112, 330–350.
Rose, H. and Rose, S. (2001) Alas Poor Darwin: Arguments Against Evolutionary Psychology. London: Vintage 
( Jonathan Cape).
Rose, H. and Rose, S. (2012) Genes, Cells and Brains: the Promethean Promises of the New Biology. London: 
Verso.
Rose, N. and Abi-Rachid, J. (2013) Neuro. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rose, S. (1997) Lifelines: Life Beyond the Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rose, S., Lewontin, R. and Kamin, I. (1984) Not in Our Genes. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Sommer, I. E., Aleman, A., Somers, M., Boks, M. P. and Kahn, R. S., (2008) ‘Sex differences in handedness, 
asymmetry of the planum temporale and functional language lateralization’, Brain Research, 1206, 76–88.
Sternberg, R. (1995) ‘For whom the bell curve tolls: a review of The Bell Curve’, Psychological Science, 6, 
257–261.
Thornhill, R. and Palmer, T. (2000) A Natural History of Rape: Biological Bases of Sexual Coercion. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Toates, F. (2007) Biological Psychology. Harlow: Pearson Education Limited.
Turkheimer, E. (1998) ‘Heritability and biological explanation’, Psychological Review, 105, 782–791.
Wilson, E. A. (2004) Psychosomatic: Feminism and the Neurological Body. Durham/London: Duke University 
Press.

61
Do you fantasize about power and attractiveness, and exaggerate your own achievements? Then 
there’s a chance you might suffer from ‘narcissistic personality disorder’. Do you have a strong 
need to be cared for by others? Then you may well have ‘dependent personality disorder’. Phar-
maceutical companies advertise psychotropic drugs that will restore your self to itself and make 
you feel more like yourself again; reality TV show competitions offer record label prizes, but it’s 
not just your voice that counts – it’s about your personality; and makeover shows give you back 
your personality through styled hair and new clothes. This is a personality that can be catego-
rized and tested, as it often is within education and job selection, and it is a personality that the 
psy-disciplines tells us can be disordered – ‘paranoid’, ‘borderline’, ‘avoidant’, or ‘multiple’ – to 
name but a few. So if drugs can restore it and we can win competitions with it – what is this 
thing called ‘personality’?
Considering there is no ‘objective’ evidence of personality, despite a battery of tests, ‘how can 
you be sure that you have a personality at all’? (Burr 1995: 21). Thus, through our (and often 
psychology’s) attempts to understand the behaviour of others (and of ourselves), to compare this 
behaviour to what we assume is ‘normal’, to try and change this behaviour, and to anticipate 
future behaviour, we infer that we have something called a ‘personality’ – it is theoretical. Some 
such theories have become dominant frameworks of understanding, yet are always embedded 
within a worldview and entangled with decisions on how to understand people, decisions about 
how personality has developed, and choices about what counts as knowledge about personality 
(Sloan 2009: 61).
Personality psychology is a messy space where different theories coexist and compete around 
how they conceptualize the ‘object’ of study – the personality. Some differ in terms of where 
they think ‘personality’ can be found, whether they direct their gaze inside bodies, or inside 
brains; the outside of bodies, feeling the bumps on people’s heads; or how the outside gets inside, 
often framed through interactions in childhood shaping our inner selves. They differ according 
to their time, and place, and the prevailing social norms out of which they emerge (though they 
might not admit it). They differ according to what they position themselves against, the other 
theories and ideas available at the time, what is considered old, new, or fashionable – the con-
ditions that make it possible to think of ‘personality’ in certain ways (and gloss over other ways 
of knowing). They differ according to the relationships of the people (often white men) who 
6
Personality
Technology, commodity and pathology
China Mills

China Mills
62
formulated them; did they study together, and who was whose professor? Bearing this in mind, 
I want to trace a messy and interlacing history of how ‘personality’ functions as a construct, and 
the socio-economic-politico spaces in which our ‘personalities’ function, or sometimes cease to 
function.
Bumpy heads, iron rods, and salivating dogs
‘Personality’ has a long history, and it’s not the same construct throughout this history. In the 
1700s, phrenologists felt the bumps on people’s heads to locate their personalities. Then the 
search for ‘personality’ moved ‘inside’ brains when, in 1848, a man called Phineas Gage survived 
a dynamite explosion that blasted an iron rod through the frontal lobes of his brain, drastically 
changing his personality. Since then, ‘personality’ has been understood as something made up of 
various numbers of traits (Allport 1937; Eysenck 1947/1998) or types ( Jung and Baynes 1921); 
as something ‘located’ in genes, biochemicals, and parts of the brain that show up as different 
colours in the neuro-images to which our gaze increasingly turns; as something in psychosexual 
stages linked to early childhood experiences (Freud 1933); as the concept of ‘self-actualizing’ 
persons, who are active and creative (Maslow 1943); or as seeing people as ‘naïve scientists’ devel-
oping and testing constructs for understanding the world (Kelly 1955).
Personality psychology credits its more ‘official’ beginnings in the Central European consult-
ing rooms of Freud, meaning that personality theories are always already embedded within the 
therapeutic encounter. From there personality theory shifted, emigrating with many of its the-
orists to the USA during World War II, moving across geographical and paradigmatic borders to 
become a concern for ‘science’ (and marking one of many entanglements between personality 
psychology and war, see Pettigrew and Cherry 2012). While nineteenth-century North Amer-
ican and European theory had been more concerned with spiritual and moral aspects of the 
‘whole’ person, the twentieth century saw the shift, alongside industrialization, to a focus on the 
distinctiveness of individual personalities (Pettigrew and Cherry 2012). This marked a change 
in how people spoke about and understood their personalities, evident in Gordon Allport’s 
(1937) staking out of personality psychology as a scientific field. Here personality began to be 
understood ‘scientifically’ through behaviour, inspired by Pavlov’s salivating dogs, and responses 
to stimuli that could be measured, predicted, and controlled (Skinner 1953).
This set the scene for the assumption that personality is made up of a set of basic dimen-
sions, whether they be the ‘Big Five’ trait structure (McCrae and Costa 2008), or Cattell’s 16 
Principle Factors personality inventory (16 PF) (Cattell 1946; Cattell and Mead 2008). Thus, 
‘the history of personality theory is the history of a European and North American debate 
about the nature of human individuals and the sort of science that would be appropriate for 
understanding them’ (Sloan 2009: 60), and whether science is the appropriate medium for 
understanding them at all.
However many traits we may decide our personality consists of, these mainstream frame-
works make certain assumptions based on a specific worldview. Many mainstream psychology 
textbooks (the dog-eared and the new) inform us that the etymology of ‘personality’ can be 
traced to the Latin word persona, meaning masks worn by performers to either project different 
roles or disguise their identities. Yet in the often essentializing terms of much psychological 
theory, ‘personality’ is rarely conceptualized as a mask. Much of psychology assumes that people 
have a unique personality different from others; that this personality is stable and coherent (with 
traits that complement each other); that personality influences our behaviour; and, they often 
assume that personality is a ‘biological given’ (human nature), seen as transcultural and transhis-
torical (Burr 1995: 24). But the concept of ‘personality’ is not the same in every place and time. 

Personality
63
In many parts of the world, ‘personality’ is not within people so much as between them and is 
less fixed and unified than multiple and fragmented.
‘Personalities’ across borders
For Mkhize (2004), writing from a South African context, the bounded autonomous self-  
contained individualism of much personality psychology contrasts starkly with other ways of 
knowing the self in indigenous societies, or in the Global South more generally. These other 
ways of knowing the self tend to be context-based, collectivist, and interdependent, where per-
sonhood is defined relationally (for example, in some parts of Africa): ‘I am because we are, and 
since we are, therefore I am’ (Mbiti 1969: 214). This ‘self-in-community’, a form of ‘being with 
and for others’, means that ‘individuals are part of a collective (community) that they create and 
which, in turn, creates them’ (Mkhize 2004: 48). Across the Indian Ocean, within Ayurveda (a 
system of well-being and healing practised in India, and the cultural prism through which many 
people in India have traditionally viewed the person), understandings of self see the person in 
their wholeness and this, not disease, is the centre of ayurvedic medicine (Kakar 1982). This 
wholeness means that a person has not only three types of temperament with their 16 subtypes, 
but that these are enmeshed and entangled with the type of land on which the person grew up, 
with caste and lineage, and with food habits (to name but a few). The ayurvedic person lives 
within and partakes of different orders of being (physical, psychological, social, and metaphysi-
cal) all of which interrelate over fluid boundaries. The person is a microcosm – all that is within 
the cosmos is within the person, meaning a person is constituted through a myriad of intercon-
nections: the body with the psyche, and the person with the natural environment, but also with 
the polis and the cosmos (Kakar 1982: 228–229).
Personality and the status quo
However, this ‘sociality of personality is erased by individualistic concepts’ (Sloan 2009: 70) that 
imagine the person as an individual container of essences and origins, describing ‘personality 
mechanistically with an impoverished vocabulary’ (58) that reduces complexity to a set num-
ber of dimensions or traits. In this way, personality psychology may operate to maintain the 
status quo, in part through promoting a form of individuality specific to particular cultures at 
particular times that leads us to believe that if all people are, for example, inherently greedy or 
biologically predisposed to be aggressive, then there is little point in re-imagining or reorganiz-
ing societal structures of inequality. Furthermore, through defining social problems or problems 
in living as private matters, the individual personality is constructed as the site for change and 
transformation, not society. This is to understand how personality theories may function as ide-
ological constructions (Sloan 2009) as power moves through institutions and through our per-
sonalities, our intimate hopes and dreams. This is made ever more powerful as we come to think 
of ourselves as having, and act on ourselves as though we have, something called a ‘personality’.
Technologies of the self
In this way, our self, regarded as fundamental to who we ‘are’, has become a target and territory 
of power, through which we act on ourselves and are acted on by others (Hook 2004). Rose 
(1996: 213) traces the ways in which politico-economic rationales become aligned with, and in 
part constitute, the selves each of us want to be – a ‘technology of subjectivity’ that enfolds into 
a person through action on the self (self-disclosure, self-inspection) – constituting a ‘technology 

China Mills
64
of self’. For Foucault (1988), ‘technologies of the self’ constitute the myriad individualized ways 
that we understand and act on ourselves (as if we were individuals), how we know, master and 
care for ourselves, always under the eye of an authority or a truth, real or imagined (Rose 1996). 
This is a government of subjectivity, which acts tacitly, indirectly, and often through (psycho-
logical) expertise that is enmeshed with projects of government to shape and produce identities 
more powerful and subjectifying because ‘they appear to emanate from our individual desires 
to fulfil ourselves in our everyday lives, to craft our personalities, to discover who we really are’ 
(Rose 1996: 17). And, thus, as we come to experience ourselves through the capacities promoted, 
we become further tied to specific governmental and socioeconomic rationales (Dean 1999).
The entangling of personality with fascist and racist rationales has been a key site of con-
cern for personality theorists. For some this concern came out of trying to understand Hitler’s 
popularity among lower-middle-class German voters, leading Fromm (1942/2001), and later 
Adorno et al. (1950), to suggest an ‘authoritarian personality’, meaning that specific fascist ide-
ologies were congenial to certain personality types. Moving away from assuming a personality 
‘type’, others have questioned how racist ideologies ‘grab hold’ of the individual, and how inner 
technologies complement and enmesh with structural arrangements of power (Wetherell 1996: 
199; Hook 2004).
Personalities for sale
So what are the projects of government and ideologies that theories of personality may serve? 
For Craib (1998: 3), the personality, constantly worked on and questioned as part of a lifetime 
project, is embedded within the beginnings of industrialization, the development of the market 
economy, and its concomitant process of individualization. This, for Fromm (1942/2001: 207), 
is a process where the modern industrial system unbinds individuals from those things which 
previously gave life meaning, creating a ‘personality which feels powerless and alone, anxious 
and insecure’, meaning that changes in economic structure are accompanied by, and embed, 
changes in personality structure. In experiencing alienation from their own self, people must ‘sell 
their “personality”. They have to have a “personality” if they are to sell their products’ (Fromm 
1942/2001: 103). Here we face the market as individual personalities (always readjusting, always 
flexible) (Craib 1998), and the market, as with all commodities, decides the value of our person-
alities, and perhaps, of the existence of personality itself.
Pharmaceutical personalities
The same market system that enables us to sell ourselves through our personalities also, by fixing 
us in a position of lack (always in need of improvement), enables us to buy our personalities, or 
to restore ourselves through a product. This is a marketing of personalization: the hair dye, or 
the car, that is ‘the difference which will make us ourselves’ (Baudrillard 1998: 87). For Barthes 
(1989), this constitutes the effectivity of advertising, which works by making the advertised 
product appear integral to the viewer’s identity.
Perhaps nowhere is this more apparent than in the marketing of psychotropic medication 
(psychiatric drugs), where pills are portrayed as a way to restore the unity of one’s being, con-
stituting a ‘synthetic individuality’ (Baudrillard 1998: 88), where ‘it is through the drug that the 
self is restored to itself’ (Rose 2007: 214). Furthermore, psychotropic drugs are most success-
fully marketed as themselves having a personality, as ‘social beings with individual personalities’, 
where ‘developing a personality for the drug’ begins in the early phases of drug production 
(Martin 2007: 150).

Personality
65
Psychotropic drugs provide one means by which people can work on themselves, and be 
worked upon (for taking these drugs is not always voluntary, and those with the power to pre-
scribe may also have the power to detain). The marketing of psychotropic drugs both consti-
tutes and relies upon an increasingly biologically coloured language of personhood, where we 
come to understand our sadness, through the language of dopamine levels, as a condition called 
depression amendable to drug treatment. Ultimately, we come to understand ourselves through 
the language of neurochemistry (Rose 2003). This constitutes a ‘neurochemical reshaping of 
personhood’ (Rose 2004: 122), where we increasingly ‘understand ourselves, speak about our-
selves, and act upon ourselves – and others – as being shaped by our biology’ (Rose 2007: 188), 
and where features of our individuality, such as ‘personality . . . now appear to be amenable to 
transformation by the use of specially engineered drugs’ (Rose 2007: 112). Thus, not only drugs 
but, increasingly, people can be understood as ‘pharmaceutical personalities’ (Martin 2007). Yet 
these drugs are entangled with certain conceptions of what people should be like – norms and 
judgments of particular worldviews are internalized in their molecular makeup (Rose 2006). 
These are norms that seem connected to the unitary-bounded subject as a figure of autonomy 
privileged by the neoliberal (masculine) market economy that further disavows relationality and 
interdependency.
Pathological personalities
How can a product such as a drug restore our personalities? And why would our personalities 
need restoring in the first place? This rests on the assumption that personality lies in biology, 
that biology can become faulty, and that drugs can restore this personality. That some types of 
personality are understood as pathological also implies an assumption that there exists a ‘normal’ 
personality, from which some personalities deviate. In fact, this understanding of personality as 
neurochemical itself creates new ‘problem’ populations of those who refuse to understand and 
act on themselves through neurochemistry (Rose 2007). Thus, within the market of personality, 
personality tests and diagnostic tools construct ever more differentiated populations and ever 
more possibilities and ways to be not ‘normal’.
According to psychiatric diagnostic classification systems, such as DSM-5 and ICD-10, there 
are multiple ways for personality to be disordered, including ‘multiple personality disorder’. 
Here personalities can be ‘odd or eccentric’, ‘dramatic, emotional or erratic’, and ‘anxious or 
fearful’ (American Psychiatric Association 2000). Furthermore, one of the ways that ‘personality’ 
may be pathological or ‘abnormal’ is for it to be ‘too normal’, a ‘normotic personality’ consti-
tuted by ‘the numbing and eventual erasure of subjectivity, in favour of a self that is conceived as 
a material object among other man-made products in the object world’ (Bollas 1987: 135). Yet as 
‘personality’ increasingly becomes a commodity, perhaps the normotic personality becomes less 
pathological and more a recipe for success in the neoliberal market economy.
These personality groupings (as eccentric or erratic, borderline or schizoid) are umbrella 
terms that cover people who happen to have in common sets of behaviours that are considered 
antisocial, meaning that personality types are deduced from the behaviour that they are sup-
posed to explain (Parker et al. 1995). Furthermore, such attempts to pinpoint distinct personality 
types, such as the psychopathic personality, often overlook the fact that what is considered to be 
antisocial is understood in specific social contexts that may change over time (Levenson 1992). 
This is problematic, as Levenson (1992) points out, because if deviance is understood through 
a failure to conform, then those people who, for example, opposed Apartheid in South Africa, 
could be seen as deviant and thus ‘disordered’. In addition, values which may be anti-social (in 
that they are harmful to the social body), such as destroying the long term sustainability of the 

China Mills
66
economy for quick profits, may actually be seen as ‘normal’ because they reflect current political 
commitments (Levenson 1992).
Hacking (1995) uses the metaphor of an ecological niche to think through the fact that in 
certain times, in certain places, certain experiences are understood as ‘symptoms’ of certain kinds 
of ‘illness’ – meaning that they are ‘transient’ not for the individual’s life but within social life, and 
are, for a time, experienced as ‘real’. Taking this further, Hacking (2006) elaborates on the subject 
positions made available within the ecological niches of ‘mental illness’, the bringing into being 
of specific ways of being a person that may have not been possible before. Hacking explores 
this through the label of ‘multiple personality disorder’, providing two alternative lenses through 
which to explore questions over the ‘reality’ of this disorder. Thus, we either assume that, ‘A. 
There were no multiple personalities in 1955; there were many in 1985’. Or that, ‘B. In 1955 
this was not a way to be a person, people did not experience themselves in this way, they did 
not interact with their friends, their families, their employers, their counsellors, in this way; but 
in 1985 this was a way to be a person, to experience oneself, to live in society’ (Hacking 2006). 
Thus, multiple personality disorder became a way to be a person, illustrating for Hacking (2006: 
2; also see Hacking 1995) the mechanisms by which ‘our sciences create kinds of people that in 
a certain sense did not exist before’ . . . a process of ‘making up people’. Thus, even if ‘personality’ 
is a social construct, it is often lived and experienced as if it were ‘real’, meaning that ‘we give 
the concept of “personality” real existence through the way in which we live it and act it out in 
our encounters with each other’ (Burr 1995: 29). And while some personality types may flourish 
for a time within an ecological niche and then disappear, others are more ‘sticky’ (Rosenhan 
1973) and stay ‘for life’. The ‘for life-ness’ of psychiatric diagnosis is illustrated in Tucker’s (2009: 
9) concerns about the pervasiveness of diagnostic identities, such as ‘schizophrenic’, and how, 
compared to more transient and fluid identity categories, they become the dominant identifying 
feature in multiple contexts, carrying with them ‘identity-threatening connotations’.
Thus, ‘personality’ psychology is enmeshed with technologies that disseminate particular 
ways of being: the personality tests and diagnostic check lists that provide us with a language for 
naming and understanding our ‘personality’ (‘normal’ or not), affecting how we come to relate 
to ourselves and to others (Rose 1996). This language, which increasingly shifts from a ‘psycho-
babble’ to a ‘biobabble’ . . . ‘has pervasive consequences for the ways we view and experience 
ourselves and not just for the labels we give to our discontents’ – it shapes our most intimate 
relations with our ‘selves’ (Healy 2004: 10). Thus, the ‘personality’, so ‘fundamental to our con-
cept of what it means to be a person’ (Burr 1995: 17) (although as we have seen, this depends on 
who is considered to fall within ‘our’), shapes our views about what life is and about the ways 
that society should or could be organized. And therefore,
Through minimising the influence of the social, our culture has fostered a climate where 
the internal world of the individual has become the site where the problems of society are 
raised and where it is perceived they need to be resolved.
(Furedi 2006: 1)
Here, social ‘problems’ come to be reconfigured as individual ‘problems’, which, when framed as 
being caused by ‘disordered’ personalities whose biochemicals have gone awry, construct possi-
bilities for us to transform ourselves through medication – to take pills for life’s ills. This becomes 
particularly evident in the diagnosis of Borderline Personality Disorder, which is given to far 
more women than men, and often to women who have experienced childhood sexual abuse. 
This means the diagnosis, through locating the ‘problem’ as inside women and divorced from the 

Personality
67
social context in which the diagnosis is made, ‘individualizes and pathologizes women for their 
responses to oppression’ (Shaw and Proctor 2005: 483).
Furthermore, the concept of ‘personality’ works to enable certain ways of being and of 
understanding, and overlooks or disallows other, alternative frameworks. As we have seen, the 
dominance of personality psychology from the ‘West’ (the minority world), often transposed 
onto the Majority World, overlooks understandings of situate personality as entangled with 
the polis and the cosmos, with webs of relations and ancestors, or with the land on which we 
live (Mills 2014). In their privileging of unified autonomous selves and personalities made 
up of traits and types, these theories disallow ways of understanding personalities as multiple 
and fragmentary; personality as a ‘congealed moment of social process’ (Sloan 2009: 70); or 
as ‘an effect of memory and our search for meaning and pattern in our relationships’ (Burr 
1995: 30).
If personality psychology often works to serve the status quo, and to encourage individuals to 
work on themselves instead of transforming society, then it becomes urgent to ask, ‘How can we 
theorize about personality in a manner that contributes to the construction of a humane and just 
society?’ (Sloan 2009: 57). Oullette (2008) suggests the answer to this may lie in the development 
of a critical personality psychology, to be achieved (an effort already partly underway) through a 
recasting of the history of personality theory to include: approaches and theorists usually over-
looked or excluded (Teo 2005); scholarship outside of, and sometimes critical of, psychology; 
research on existential issues; narrative and historical research that understands people within a 
web of social relations; psychoanalytic approaches that understand people as socially enmeshed 
and not biologically determined; and work that seeks to understand people as embedded within 
often violent social contexts and power relations, for example, globalization, capitalism, and war. 
Drawing on these resources, for Oullette (2008: 1–2) it is possible to imagine an agenda for a 
‘critical personality psychology that is responsive to pressing social justice concerns, capable of 
working with and for those who have been socially marginalized and neglected in research, and 
critical of mainstream psychology’.
A key element in the project of rethinking ‘personality’ may also need to engage with issues 
including: what language (and whose language) can we, and could we, speak of knowing our-
selves? Who are we referring to when we say ‘we’ – who is included and who is excluded? 
And how can we ‘be’ ‘otherwise’? By re-imagining ‘personality’, we may also be rethinking the 
organization of social structures and global power imbalances; and thus re-imagining ourselves, 
and the multiple possibilities for living (together) otherwise.
Further reading
Hacking, I. (2006) ‘Making up people’, London Review of Books, 28(16), 23–26, http://www.generation-online.
org/c/fcbiopolitics2.htm
Rose, N. (2003) ‘Neurochemical Selves’, Society, 41(1), 46–59, http://www.lse.ac.uk/sociology/pdf/
Rose-NeurochemicalSelves-Society03.pdf
Sloan, T. (2009) ‘Theories of personality’, in D. Fox and I. Prilleltensky (eds) Critical Psychology: An Introduc-
tion. London: Sage.
Stevens, R. (ed) (1996) Understanding the Self. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Website resources
BBC Science: Human Body and Mind – Personality tests and surveys: http://www.bbc.co.uk/science/
humanbody/mind/index_surveys.shtml
Foucault and ‘Technologies of the Self’: http://www.theory.org.uk/ctr-fou6.htm

China Mills
68
healthtalk.org – A resource run by DIPEx, with more than 2,000 videos, audio clips, and interviews with 
people and families, who have a wide range of health conditions, including first-hand experiences of 
people living with the label of ‘personality disorder’: healthtalk.org
Ian Hacking’s ‘Making Up People Project’: http://www.ianhacking.com/makinguppeople.html
References
Adorno, T. W., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D. J., and Sanford R. N. (1950) The Authoritarian Personality. 
New York: Harper and Row.
Allport, G. W. (1937) Personality: A Psychological Interpretation. Oxford: Holt.
American Psychiatric Association (2000) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) IV-TR. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Barthes, R. (1989) ‘Leaving the movie theater’, in R. Barthes The Rustle of Language (trans. R. Howard). 
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California.
Baudrillard, J. (1988) ‘Simulacra and Simulations’, in M. Poster (ed.) Jean Baudrillard, Selected Writings. Stan-
ford: Stanford University Press.
Bollas, C. (1987) The Shadow of the Object. Psychoanalysis of the Unthought Known. Columbia University Press: 
New York.
Burr, V. (1995) An Introduction to Social Constructionism. London and New York: Routledge.
Cattell, H.E.P. and Mead, A. D. (2008) ‘The sixteen personality factor questionnaire (16PF)’, in G. Boyle, G. 
Matthews and D. H. Saklofske (eds) The SAGE Handbook of Personality Theory and Assessment, Volume 2: 
Personality Measurement and Testing. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Cattell, R. B. (1946) The Description and Measurement of Personality. New York: World Books.
Craib, I. (1998) Social Theory: Experiencing Identity. London: SAGE.
Dean, M. (1999) Governmentality: Power and Rule in Modern Society. Thousand Oaks, London and New 
Delhi: Sage.
Eysenck, H. J. (1947/1998) Dimensions of Personality. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Foucault, M. (1988) ‘Technologies of the self’, in L. H. Martin, H. Gutman and P. H. Hutton (eds) Technolo-
gies of the Self: A Seminar with Michel Foucault. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Freud, S. (1933) New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis. London: Penguin.
Fromm, E. (1942/2001) The Fear of Freedom. London and New York: Routledge.
Furedi, F. (2006) ‘Save us from the politics of behaviour’, Spiked Online, http://www.spiked-online.com/
newsite/article/1638#.UnaIBVP0-uI
Hacking, I. (1995) Rewriting the Soul: Multiple Personality and the Sciences of Memory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Hacking, I. (2006) ‘Making up People’, London Review of Books, 28(16), 23–26, http://www.generationonline.
org/c/fcbiopolitics2.htm
Healy, D. (2004) ‘Shaping the intimate: influences on the experience of everyday nerves’, in Social Studies 
of Science, 34, 219–245.
Hook, D. (2004) ‘Governmentality and technologies of subjectivity’, in D. Hook (ed.) Critical Psychology. 
Lansdowne: UCT Press.
Jung, C. G. and Baynes, H. G. (1921) Psychological Types. London: Kegan Paul Trench Trubner.
Kakar, S. (1982) Shamans, Mystics and Doctors: a Psychological Inquiry into India and its Healing Traditions. New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Kelly, G. A. (1955) The Psychology of Personal Constructs. New York: Norton.
Levenson, M. R. (1992) ‘Rethinking psychopathy’, Theory & Psychology, 2(1), 51–71.
Martin, E. (2007) Bipolar Expeditions: Mania and Depression in American Culture. Princeton and Oxford: 
Princeton University Press.
Maslow, A. H. (1943) ‘A theory of human motivation’, Psychological Review, 50, 370–396.
Mbiti, J. S. (1969) African Religions and Philosophy. London: Heinemann.
McCrae, R. R. and Costa, P. T., Jr. (2008) ‘The Five-Factor Theory of personality’, in O. P. John, R. W. 
Robins and L. A. Pervin (eds) Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research (3rd Edn). New York: Guilford.
Mkhize, N. (2004) ‘Psychology: an African perspective’, in D. Hook (ed.) Critical Psychology. Lansdowne: 
UCT Press.
Mills, C. (2014) Decolonizing Global Mental Health: the Psychiatrization of the Majority World. London and New 
York: Routledge.

Personality
69
Ouellette, S. C. (2008) ‘Notes for a critical personality psychology: making room under the critical psychol-
ogy umbrella’, Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2(1), 1–20.
Parker, I., Georgaca, E., Harper, D., McLaughlin, T. and Stowell-Smith, M. (1995) Deconstructing Psychopa-
thology. London: Sage.
Pettigrew, T. F. and Cherry, F. (2012) ‘The intertwined histories of personality and social psychology’, in  
K. Deaux and M. Snyder (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Personality and Social Psychology. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Rose, N. (1996) Inventing Ourselves: Psychology, Power and Personhood. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Rose, N. (2003) ‘Neurochemical selves’, Society, 41(1), 46–59.
Rose, N. (2004) ‘Becoming neurochemical selves’, in N. Stehr (ed.) Biotechnology: Between Commerce and 
Civil Society. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Rose, N. (2006) ‘Disorders without borders? The expanding scope of psychiatric practice’, BioSocieties, 1, 
465–484.
Rose, N. (2007) The Politics of Life Itself: Biomedicine, Power, and Subjectivity in the Twenty-First Century. Prince-
ton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Rosenhan, D. L. (1973) ‘On Being Sane in Insane Places’, http://psychrights.org/articles/rosenham.htm
Shaw, C. and Proctor, G. (2005) ‘Women at the margins: a critique of the diagnosis of borderline personality 
disorder’, Feminism & Psychology, 15, 483–490.
Skinner, B. F. (1953) Science and Human Behavior. London: Pearson Education,
Sloan, T. (2009) ‘Theories of personality’, in D. Fox and I. Prilleltensky (eds) Critical Psychology: An Introduc-
tion. London: Sage.
Teo, T. (2005) The Critique of Psychology: from Kant to Postcolonial Theory. New York: Springer.
Tucker, I. (2009) ‘ “This is for Life”: a discursive analysis of the dilemmas of constructing diagnostic identi-
ties’, Forum: Qualitative Social Research (FQS), 10(3) Art. 24.
Wetherell, M. (1996) Identities, Groups and Social Issues. Buckingham: Open University Press; and London: Sage.

70
Formed amid emerging European nation-states at the tail end of their colonial powers, psy-
chology – and perhaps particularly British psychology – was deeply involved in providing the 
state with instruments for surveying and evaluating the state of its colonial populations, as well 
as assessing its home-grown workers and conscripts for waging its wars. As further evidence 
for the relation between cultural and methodological orientations, we should also not forget 
how many of the key statistical tests and criteria for ‘significance’ that continue to structure 
psychological research were invented by British psychologists such as Galton (who was Dar-
win’s cousin), Pearson, and Spearman. These British architects of quantitative psychology were 
also advocates of eugenics (Rose 1985), a fact that – along with the recognition by 1980 that 
Cyril Burt, another key British psychologist (in fact the first British person to be employed as 
a psychologist) closely associated with the highly controversial debates over the heritability of 
IQ had forged his results (Hearnshaw 1979) – invites some sober reflection on British social 
science practices.
Similar fault lines of reformulation and transition have attended cross-national migrations 
of key psychological models. The selective reception and insertion of Piaget’s genetic episte-
mological framework into English-language contexts offers an exemplary case study of such 
processes (Burman 1996a, 2008a). This also includes the suppression of Piaget’s links with 
psychoanalysis (Schepeler 1993). His clinical or critical interview, a flexible language and 
context-sensitive approach, was rendered into a standardized test apparatus that presumed a 
general, uniform sequence of ages and stages. This move not only made the logical error of 
shifting Piaget’s project from the epistemological to the psychological domain (Lourenco and 
Machado 1996), but it also thereby allied it to the modernist project of progress. Although 
Piaget was not averse to addressing the wider political implications of his model (particularly 
in relation to questions of democracy and societal development, Piaget 1933; see Vidal 1987), 
the preoccupation with training or acceleration through an assumed stable, unilinear devel-
opmental trajectory was famously derided by Piaget and the Geneva school as ‘the American 
question’ (Bryant 1984).
While, undoubtedly, methodological differences were in part responsible for such misinter-
pretations (eventually Piaget and his co-workers refused to debate with researchers who had 
7
Developmental psychology
The turn to deconstruction
Erica Burman

Developmental psychology
71
not used his methodological approach to investigating children’s understanding), these clearly 
also map on to wider cultural and political differences in the domains of application. English 
empiricism combined with an antipathy to theory, giving rise to a decontextualized (although, 
as we have seen, highly culturally inscribed) model of the subject, which then became the most 
compatible theoretical underpinning for a scientistic framework for legitimizing psychology 
(Norton 1981). Along with other anthropologically inflected accounts of action and skilled 
behaviour (Rogoff 2003), and the interpretive turn (Harré 1983), these gave rise to the ‘crisis’ in 
social psychology of the 1970s (Parker 1989). But if ‘deconstructing developmental psychology’ 
has emerged as a specifically British form of critiquing developmental psychology, then this is 
because of a particular set of cultural-political ties between British academics and French theory.
Wider English-language currents
Before exploring these ties, it is important – especially given the influence of US psychology 
on British psychology – to acknowledge other English language resources that informed crit-
ical and alternative debates in developmental psychology. By the 1970s and 1980s, versions 
of Vygotsky were in circulation (notably as introduced by Bruner, Wertsch, and Cole), while 
activity theory was being taken up especially in northern Europe and, though it took slightly 
different forms, in the US too, along with the increasing arguments for ecological psychology 
(Bronfenbrenner 1979; Bronfenbrenner et al. 1986) and attention to communities of practice 
and situated practices (Lave and Wenger 1991; Rogoff 2003). These brought a range of resources 
that increasingly challenged the individualism and decontextualization of ‘the’ developing psy-
chological subject.
In the US, Klaus Riegel’s (e.g. 1976) attempts to formulate a dialectical psychology were 
among the first attempts to connect critiques of models of individual development with those of 
societal development, fuelling new ‘ideology critiques’ (see also Buck-Morss 1975; Broughton 
1981a, 1981b). Kessen’s 1979 article ‘The American child and other cultural inventions’ gen-
erated an important set of interdisciplinary debates, as the landmark volume edited by Kessel 
and Siegel (1983) testifies (both Kessel and Kessen were co-authors with Bronfenbrenner in 
1986). Kessen later addressed how shifting cultural-political currents were reflected in changing 
models of infancy and child research (Kessen 1993), and Broughton’s (1987) important (but 
under-referenced) collection marked out new critical territory. The number of critical con-
ceptual and historical analyses of developmental psychology (e.g. Vandenberg 1993) in the early 
volumes of the journal Theory & Psychology (the editorial base of which – significantly – contin-
ues to be Canada) highlight how this issue was, and continues to be, seen as of significance (e.g. 
Tsou 2006; Vianna and Stetsenko 2006).
More widely, debates about social constructionism (e.g. Gergen 1973; and Shotter 1980) ena-
bled deconstructionist ideas to take root (notwithstanding the diverse claims structured within 
different varieties of constructionism, Danziger 1997). In the UK, attempts to ‘reconstruct’ psy-
chology preceded its deconstruction, providing important critical perspectives on psychology 
(e.g. Armistead 1974) with reflections also in developmental psychology and education (Wood-
head 1999). In the UK, developmental psychology critiques that challenged asocial cognitive 
approaches to understanding children emerged, bringing a new emphasis on contextualization 
(Donaldson 1978). Volumes such as Richards (1974) provided wider interdisciplinary framing 
of such criticisms, and the follow-up text edited by Richards and Light (1986) consolidated 
this (and included a key chapter by Urwin 1986). Such intellectual work occurred alongside, 
and of course was influenced by, the current of political turmoil in the 1960s, including the 
rise of second wave feminism, and the black power and gay liberation movements, which were 

Erica Burman
72
marked by radical engagements with psychology via such publications as Rat, Myth and Magic 
and Humpty Dumpty.
Changing the subject of psychology and the French Turn
While ‘deconstruction’ as an approach is associated specifically with Derrida (1978), the term 
has been taken up much more broadly within English-language contexts to describe a critical 
approach that reflects the wider ‘turn to the text’ in social science contexts and – in the con-
text of psychology – is associated with the rise of discursive and other interpretive approaches 
from the mid-1980s onwards. While Derridean analysis subverts and destabilizes the prevail-
ing binaries structuring psychology as a prime exemplar of Western logocentrism (nature/
culture; female/male; passion/reason; black/white, etc.), the term became a shorthand for a 
wider critical movement, mobilizing political, cultural, and philosophical arguments to highlight 
the cultural-political problems structured within psychological frameworks and the continu-
ing impacts of their legacies. This current took an overtly political reading of Derrida’s work, 
also widely taken up by feminists, and at the time largely functioning under the rubric of 
‘post-structuralism’ (e.g. Weedon 1987; see also Burman and Maclure 2005).
The new post-structuralist and deconstructionist approaches generated a new theoretical 
lexicon that specifically challenged prevailing psychological categories and frameworks. These 
included shifting from discussing ‘self’ to ‘subject’ and ‘subjectivity’; from ‘identity’ to ‘identifi-
cation’ – to emphasize the flexibility, partiality, and instability of these processes. While I have 
so far indicated various contributory routes into ‘deconstructing developmental psychology’, 
the publication in 1977 of a new journal entitled Ideology & Consciousness (self-published by its 
editorial collective) was critical in the UK context. Subtitled (on the back) A Marxist Journal, 
it aimed to ‘advance political and theoretical struggle’ around both social theory and current 
domains of practice, seeking ‘to develop alternative approaches and methods for understand-
ing the social relations in which we are engaged’ (1977: 1). Significantly, the first theme iden-
tified for this project was ‘The critique of psychological theories and practices such as those 
of, or derived from, Piaget, Skinner, Chomsky, Bernstein and so forth . . . making visible their 
epistemological presuppositions and premises, and by examining the practices which they 
inform’ (1).
While Ideology & Consciousness was addressed to a wider remit of disciplines, the co-authored 
book Changing the Subject applied its critical perspectives specifically to psychology, the double 
meaning of its title encapsulating its argument of the need both to change the discipline of 
psychology and to formulate a materialist theory of subjectivity capable of social change (Hen-
riques et al. 1984/1998).
Key resources and concepts
Having reviewed the introduction of particular forms of ‘deconstruction’ in English-language 
psychology that have implications for critical psychological work, I will now move on to high-
light some key concepts and resources this set in motion.
Foucault’s ideas profoundly influence deconstructionist approaches to psychology, as my 
account of Rose’s (1985) historical analysis already indicates. Foucault’s accounts of the emer-
gence of key institutions by which the modern state governs the boundary between normal 
and abnormal (the prison, the mental hospital) include those directly affecting the assessment of 
children and families (the school, the child guidance clinic). Other important English-language 
accounts mobilizing historical analysis to critically re-read current theoretical presuppositions in 

Developmental psychology
73
psychology include Morss (1990) on the significance of the selective readings of Darwin which 
suppressed his focus on variation in favour of adaptation, and Steedman (1995) on how the trope 
of the child, and in particular the girlchild, came to personify interiority in Western culture. As 
already indicated, Marxism is a somewhat more hidden or controversial resource within such 
accounts, but is claimed by some, including Parker (2007) and Newman and Holzman (1993), 
and alluded to by Morss (1996).
In particular, the notion of ‘the psy-complex’ has been particularly fruitful. This was formu-
lated contemporaneously in 1985 by both David Ingleby and Nikolas Rose to highlight the 
emergence of psychology within modernizing state apparatuses as an administrative technology 
of assessment and surveillance. This analysis points to developmental psychology as a key techni-
cal knowledge mobilized by social policymakers to assess and mould children as future worker 
citizens – a trend continued by some of the radical educational literature focusing on the notion 
of ‘developmentality’ (Fendler 2001). ‘The psy-complex’ as a mode of (self ) knowledge address-
ing reflexive, self-regulating subjects (or governmentality, Rose 1990) forms the basis for more 
recent analyses in terms of psychologisation (De Vos and Gordo López 2010).
On the other hand, there has been a longstanding and explicit feminist engagement with 
deconstruction, across disciplines as well as specifically in relation to psychology (Spivak 1990; 
Elam 1994). Feminists have long critiqued both the effects and terms of psychological models (of 
the child, of the family, etc.), ranging from highlighting the cultural and gendered assumptions 
structured into models of rational autonomy as the pinnacle of psychological development (e.g. 
Walkerdine 1988) through to the radicalized presumptions of models of motherhood (Phoenix 
1987, see also Burman 1996b). The longstanding and sustained character of feminist critiques of 
developmental psychology (e.g. Phoenix et al. 1991) has rarely been explicitly named, with the 
Miller and Kosofsky Scholnick (2000) volume a notable exception. It is significant that, in its 
early days, interest in discursive approaches was strongly associated with feminist interventions 
(see also Squire 1990; Burman 1990, 1996a).
Psychoanalysis has been a third resource informing deconstructionist critiques of devel-
opmental psychology. Harris (1987) illustrates how a psychoanalytic understanding of mental 
functioning as surpassing consciousness not only challenges the cognitive underpinnings of 
rationality and puts into question the unitary character of the subject, but also highlights its links 
with industrial capitalism. While many deconstructionists were drawn to a Lacanian version of 
psychoanalysis (especially via its feminist rehabilitation, see Mitchell 1974; Grosz 1990), Bradley 
(1989, 1993) mobilised Kleinian theory to challenge the romance of the tranquil adorable baby 
and Urwin (1984/1998, 1986) offered both original syntheses of Lacanian and developmental 
perspectives and historical analyses of the relations between developmental psychology and 
psychoanalysis in Britain (Urwin and Sharland 1992). As elsewhere in social theory, psychoa-
nalysis has informed the reflexive turn that challenges objectivist claims and instead insists that 
knowledge presumes a situated knower, a view from somewhere (that is usually the standpoint 
of the dominant), which brings into focus the question of the emotional investments structured 
within particular concepts of childhood, as well as challenging psychology’s claims to specific 
expertise by highlighting the relationship between commonsense everyday cultural assumptions 
and supposedly technical disciplinary knowledge.
This strand of work also links with discussions of psychoanalytic culture (Parker 1997) and 
psychologization and the ‘affective turn’ under neoliberalism (De Vos and Gordo López 2010). 
But while in some contexts psychoanalysis may function as ‘the repressed other of psychology’ 
(Burman 2008b: 5), its critical character has to be read as a contingent resource mobilized in 
relation to particular times and places (as is appropriate to any genuine notion of deconstruc-
tion); obviously, positioning psychoanalysis as a critical alternative to psychology fails to work 

Erica Burman
74
in contexts (such as many South American countries) where psychoanalysis has been the main 
form of psychology, and has been allied with repressive regimes.
After deconstruction?
A frequent response to deconstructionist debates is to ask what should be put in place of the 
existing forms of developmental psychology. Here Foucault’s (1977: 230) point that ‘to imagine 
another system is to extend our participation in the present system’ is apt. Nevertheless, without 
reconstructing or revising current models, deconstructing developmental psychology facilitates 
new agendas and alliances that prompt action and reflection, even if they refuse a reconstruction 
or rescue of the discipline. While space limits permit only very brief treatment, I will end by 
indicating some current opportunities for engagement and intervention that have implications 
for how a ‘critical developmental psychology’ might work.
First, critical and deconstructionist debates in developmental psychology offer new possi-
bilities of alliance and engagement with the emerging discipline of childhood studies that has 
been influential in Britain ( James and Prout 1990; Jenks 2005). Heavily influenced by sociology, 
anthropology, and history, these debates have been marked by a strong antipathy to traditional 
developmental psychology, seen as the originator of a model of the child as deficient, and only 
concerned with what the child will become in later life. Critical developmental psychology 
approaches offer a new position for debate about the role and status of psychology within this 
important field, a further context for which has been the passing of the United Nations Con-
vention on the Rights of the Child in 1989. While the rise of concern with children’s rights has 
met with some provocative criticisms in political theory (see Pupavac 2002), a focus on chil-
dren’s participation and engagement within psychological research certainly brings new critical 
agendas to developmental work.
Critical and deconstructionist ideas have also generated equivalent debates within education, 
both methodologically (Davies 1994; Lather 1999; Maclure 2005) and in terms of reinterpret-
ing educational policy (Dahlberg et al. 1999; Dahlberg and Moss 2005) to import a concern 
with ethical and politically engaged practice (MacNaughton 2005) and also to highlight the 
relevance of postcolonial theory (Tuhiwai Smith 1999; Cannella and Viruru 2004). They invite 
attention to the production of attributions of knowledge about, or to, children, including dest-
abilizing claims to ‘give voice’ to children (Alldred and Burman 2005; Jackson and Mazzei 
2009). Many opportunities arise for collaboration and coordination between parents and across 
professions working with children and families, as indicated also by Billington’s (1996, 2000, 
2006) work in educational psychology, and offer connections with debates emerging in dis-
ability studies (Marks 1996; Greenstein, in press). Such alliances make material the call to go  
beyond developmental psychology’s abstraction from specific contexts and to attend instead to 
its plural, diverse forms. This is turn requires an engagement with cultural theory and anti-racist, 
feminist, postcolonial, and queer practice ( Janssen 2010), addressing how cultural representations  
of childhood function within contemporary politics (Baird 2008; Stockton 2009; Hutnyk 2004; 
Castañeda 2002).
A third strand of inquiry invites a reconnection with the project envisaged by Riegel and 
others to move from local critique to international coalitions via addressing the political econ-
omy of development. For better or worse, current discourses of development connect children 
to national and international policy contexts, and criticisms of the limits of developmental 
thinking arising from economic development discussions are equally relevant to, and indeed 
extend the remit of critique within, developmental psychology (Sachs 1992; Mehmet 1995). 

Developmental psychology
75
Equivalent questionings of the trajectory of development apply across individual, societal, and 
state levels, but perhaps it is at the most macro level that we see the limits of notions such as ‘pro-
gress’ that occupied so central a place in modern developmental psychological theorizing (Salva-
dori 2006; Saith 2006). The attention to colonial histories and current impacts of globalization 
has the merit of both connecting and topicalizing the diverse contexts of English-language 
developmental psychology, and connecting them with forms of developmental psychology. 
Developmental psychological knowledge is increasingly mobilized within transnational policies 
(Kumar and Burman 2009), and critical deconstructionist critiques are increasingly relevant (see 
also Burman 2008c).
Fourth, shifting developmental psychology’s focus from the singular developing child to con-
texts for children’s diverse developments not only brings the gendered labour of development 
onto the research and policy agenda, but also facilitates connection with explicitly feminist 
and women-centred approaches. This would help to counter the covert gender blindness or at 
times explicit antifeminism of some childhood studies, which in turn warrants the longstanding 
feminist suspicion of child-focused interventions (as noted by Thorne 1987; Burman 2008d). 
Instead, we can see emerging crossdisciplinary feminist engagement with forms and functions of 
childhood policies and practices, and their relations with feminist agendas in contexts as diverse 
as the US, the UK, and Australia (Burman and Stacey 2010; Castañeda 2002).
Finally, a key challenge facing these deconstructionist approaches lies in resisting the revival 
of empiricism structured within the return of evolutionary psychology, which coincides with a 
global political context of economic recession and increasing emphasis on the unchangeability 
of social and individual conditions. In particular, new collusions between psychology and psy-
choanalysis are claimed to be warranted by new brain imaging technologies. Here deconstruc-
tionists need to turn their attentions to unravelling the mobilization of spurious methodological 
and theoretical claims linking attachment theory with the diagnosis and prediction of attach-
ment disorders (e.g. Fonagy 2001). These threaten to combine with other ‘child fundamental-
isms’ (Baird 2008) that not only escalate normative definitions of who is deemed fit to parent 
via claims to scientificity prompted by the technology, but paradoxically also in that process 
compromise the very theories that are said to inspire them.
Note
This chapter, extracted and adapted from a much longer chapter published in French (Burman 
2012), focuses on the development of a critical tradition in developmental psychology through 
the use of ‘deconstruction’ in English-speaking countries.
Further reading
Burman, E. (2008) Deconstructing Developmental Psychology (2nd Edn). London and New York: Brunner 
Routledge.
Stainton Rogers, R. and Stainton Rogers, W. (1992) Stories of Childhood: Shifting Agendas of Child Concern. 
Lewes: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Website resources
Faraday Institute Uses and Abuses of Biology references: http://www.faraday.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk/uab/
reading.php
Mumsnet popular accounts of motherhood and childhood: http://www.mumsnet.com/

Erica Burman
76
References
Alldred, P. and Burman, E. (2005) ‘Hearing and interpreting children’s voices: discourse analytic contri-
butions’, in S. Greene and D. Hogan (eds) Researching Children’s Experience: Approaches and Methods. 
London: Sage.
Armistead, N. (ed.) (1974) Reconstructing Social Psychology. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Baird, B. (2008) ‘Child politics, feminist analyses’, Australian Feminist Studies, 23(7), 291–305.
Billington, T. (1996) ‘Pathologising children: psychology in education and acts of government’, in E. Burman, 
G. Aitken, P. Alldred, R. Allwood, T. Billington, A. Gordo-Lopez, C. Heenan, D. Marks, and S. Warner. 
Psychology, Discourse Practice: from Regulation to Resistance. London: Taylor and Francis.
Billington, T. (2000) Separating, Losing and Excluding Children. London: Falmer Press.
Billington, T. (2006) Working with Children: Assessment, Intervention and Representation. London: Sage.
Bradley, B. (1993) ‘A serpent’s guide to children’s “theories of mind” ’, Theory & Psychology, 3(4), 497–521.
Bradley, B. S. (1989) Visions of Infancy. Oxford: Polity Blackwell.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979) The Ecology of Human Development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bronfenbrenner, U., Kessel, F., Kessen, W. and White, S. (1986) ‘Toward a critical social history of develop-
mental psychology: a propaeduetic discussion’, American Psychologist, 41(11), 1218–1230.
Broughton, J. (1981a) ‘Piaget’s structural developmental psychology I: Piaget and structuralism’, Human 
Development, 24, 78–109.
Broughton, J. (1981b) ‘Piaget’s structural developmental psychology III: logic and psychology’, Human 
Development, 24, 195–224.
Broughton, J. (ed.) (1987) Critical Theories of Psychological Development. New York: Plenum Press.
Bryant, P. (1984) ‘Piaget, teachers and psychologists’, Oxford Review of Education, 10(3), 251–259.
Buck-Morss, S. (1975) ‘Socio-economic bias in Piaget’s theory and its implications for cross-cultural stud-
ies’, Human Development, 18, 35–45.
Burman, E. (1990) ‘Differing with deconstruction: a feminist critique’, in I. Parker and J. Shotter (eds). 
Deconstructing Social Psychology. London: Routledge.
Burman, E. (1996a) ‘Continuities and discontinuities in interpretive and textual approaches to develop-
mental psychology’, Human Development, 39, 330–349.
Burman, E. (1996b) ‘Deconstructing developmental psychology: a feminist approach’, Nordisk Udkast, 2(1), 
3–18.
Burman, E. (2008a) ‘Developmental psychology’, in W. Stainton Rogers and C. Willig (eds) Handbook of 
Qualitative Psychology. London and Thousand Oaks; Sage.
Burman, E. (2008b) Deconstructing Developmental Psychology (2nd Edn). London and New York: 
Brunner-Routledge.
Burman, E. (2008c) Developments: Child, Image, Nation. London and New York: Brunner-Routledge.
Burman, E. (2008d) ‘Beyond “women vs. children” or “womenandchildren”: engendering childhood and 
reformulating motherhood’, International Journal of Children’s Rights, 16(2), 177–194.
Burman, E. (2012) ‘Déconstruction de la psychologie de développement dans les pays anglophones’, Bul-
letin de Psychologie, 65(5), 405–418.
Burman, E. and Maclure, M. (2005) ‘Deconstruction as a method of research: stories from the field’, in B. 
Somekh and C. Lewin (eds) Research Methods in the Social Sciences. London: Sage.
Burman, E. and Stacey, J. (eds) (2010) ‘The child and childhood in feminist theory’, Feminist Theory (special 
issue), 11(3), 227–339.
Cannella, G. and Viruru, R. (2004) Childhood and Postcolonization. New York and London: Taylor and Francis.
Castañeda, C. (2002) Figurations: Child, Bodies, Worlds. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Dahlberg, G. and Moss, P. (2005) Ethics and Politics in Early Childhood Education. London and New York: 
Taylor and Francis.
Dahlberg, G., Moss, P. and Pence, A. (1999) Beyond Quality in Early Childhood Education and Care: Postmodern 
Perspectives. London and New York: Taylor and Francis.
Danziger, K. (1997) ‘The varieties of social constructionism’, Theory & Psychology, 7(3), 399–416.
Davies, B. (1994) Poststructuralist Theory and Classroom Practice. Geelong, Australia: Deakin University Press.
Derrida, J. (1978) Writing and Difference. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul/Chicago University Press.
De Vos, J. and Gordo López, A. (eds) (2010) Psychologisation under scrutiny (special issue) Annual Review 
of Critical Psychology, 8, http://www.discourseunit.com/arcp/8/htm
Donaldson, M. (1978) Children’s Minds. London: Fontana.
Elam, D. (1994) Feminism and Deconstruction: Ms. en Abyme. London and New York: Routledge.

Developmental psychology
77
Fendler, F. (2001) ‘Educating flexible souls: the construction of subjectivity through developmentality and 
interaction’, in K. Hultqvist and G. Dahlberg (eds) Governing the Child in the New Millenium. New York 
and London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Fonagy, P. (2001) Attachment and Psychoanalysis. New York: The Other Press.
Foucault, M. (1977) ‘Revolutionary action: “until now” ’, in M. Foucault. Language, Countermemory, Practice. 
New York: Cornell University Press.
Gergen, K. (1973) ‘Social psychology as history’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 26, 309–320.
Greenstein, A. (in press) Inclusive Radical Pedagogy: Affirming Subjectivities, Mobilising for Change. London: 
Routledge.
Grosz, E. (1990) Jacques Lacan: A Feminist Introduction. London: Routledge.
Harré, R. (1983) Personal Being: A Theory for Individual Psychology. Oxford: Blackwell.
Harris, A. (1987) ‘The rationalisation of infancy’, in J. Broughton (ed.) Critical Theories of Psychological Devel-
opment. New York: Plenum Press.
Hearnshaw, L. (1979) Cyril Burt: Psychologist. London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Henriques, J., Hollway, W., Urwin, C., Venn, C. and Walkerdine, V. (1984/1998) Changing the Subject: Psychol-
ogy, Social Regulation and Subjectivity. London: Routledge.
Hutnyk, J. (2004) ‘Photogenic poverty: souvenirs and infantilism’, Journal of Visual Culture, 3(1), 77–94.
Ideology & Consciousness: A Marxist Journal (1977), 1, 1.
Ingleby, D. (1985) ‘Professionals as socializers: the “psy complex” ’, Research in Law, Deviance and Social Con-
trol, 7, 79–109.
Jackson, A. Y. and Mazzei, L. A. (eds) (2009) Voice in Qualitative Inquiry: Challenging Conventional, Interpretive, 
and Critical Conceptions in Qualitative Research. London and New York: Routledge.
James, A. and Prout, A. (eds) (1990) Constructing and Reconstructing Childhood: Contemporary Issues in the Soci-
ological Study of Childhood. London: Falmer Press.
Janssen, D. (2010) ‘The semiotic predicament of developmental psychology’, Subjectivity, 3(4), 382–402.
Jenks, C. (ed.) (2005) Childhood (2nd Edn). London: Routledge.
Kessel, F. and Siegel, A. (eds) (1983) The Child and Other Cultural Inventions. New York: Praegar.
Kessen, W. (1979) ‘The American child and other cultural inventions’, American Psychologist, 34(10), 815–820.
Kessen, W. (1993) ‘Avoiding the emptiness: the full child’, Theory & Psychology, 3(4), 415–427.
Kumar, M. and Burman, E. (2009) ‘Subaltern perspectives on UN MDGs’, Journal of Health Management, 
11(1), 1–14.
Lather, P. (1999) Getting Smart: Feminist Pedagogy and Research with/in the Postmodern, New York: Routledge.
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge, New York, and 
Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.
Lourenco, O. and Machado, A. (1996) ‘In defense of Piaget’s theory: a reply to 10 common criticisms’, 
Developmental Review, 103(1), 141–164.
Maclure, M. (2005) Discourse in Educational and Social Research. Buckingham: Open University Press.
MacNaughton, G. (2005) Doing Foucault in Early Childhood Studies: Applying Poststructural Ideas. Abingdon 
and New York: Routledge.
Marks, D. (1996) Disability: Controversial Debates and Psychosocial Perspectives. London; Routledge.
Mehmet, O. (1995) Westernizing the Third World: the Eurocentricity of Economic Development Theories. London 
and New York: Routledge.
Miller, P. and Kosofsky Scholnick, E. (eds) (2000) Toward a Feminist Developmental Psychology. New York and 
London: Routledge.
Mitchell, J. (1974) Psychoanalysis and Feminism: Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Morss, J. (1990) The Biologising of Childhood. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Morss, J. (1996) Growing Critical: Alternatives to Developmental Psychology. London; Routledge.
Newman, F. and Holzman, L. (1993) Lev Vygotsky: Revolutionary Scientist. London and New York: Routledge.
Norton, D. (1981) ‘The myth of British empiricism’, History of European Ideas, 1(4), 31–44.
Parker, I. (1989) The Crisis in Social Psychology and How to End It. London: Routledge.
Parker, I. (1997) Psychoanalytic Culture: Psychoanalytic Discourse in Western Society. London and Thousand 
Oaks: Sage.
Parker, I. (2007) Revolution in Psychology: from Alienation to Emancipation. London: Pluto Press.
Phoenix, A. (1987) ‘Theories of gender and black families’, in G. Weiner and M. Arnot (eds) Gender Under 
Scrutiny. London: Hutchinson.
Phoenix, A., Woollett, A. and Lloyd, E. (eds) (1991) Motherhood: Meanings, Practices and Ideologies. London: Sage.
Piaget, J. (1933) ‘Social evolution and the new education’, Education Tomorrow, 4, 3–25.

Erica Burman
78
Pupavac, V. (2002) ‘The international children’s rights regime’, in D. Chandler (ed.) Re-thinking Human 
Rights: Critical Approaches to International Politics. London: Palgrave.
Riegel, K. (1976) ‘The dialectics of human development’, American Psychologist, 31(10), 698–700.
Richards, M. (ed.) (1974) The Integration of the Child into a Social World. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Richards, M. and Light, P. (eds) (1986) Children of Social Worlds, Oxford: Polity.
Rogoff, B. (2003) The Cultural Organization of Development. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Rose, N. (1985) The Psychological Complex: Psychology, Politics and Society in England 1869–1939. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Rose, N. (1990) Governing the Soul: the Shaping of the Private Self. London: Routledge.
Sachs, W. (ed.) (1992) The Development Dictionary: A Guide to Knowledge as Power. London: Zed Press.
Saith, A. (2006) ‘From universal values to Millennium Development Goals: lost in translation’, Development 
and Change, 37(6), 1167–1199.
Salvadori, M. (2006) Progress: Can We do Without It? London: Zed Press.
Schepeler, E. (1993) ‘Jean Piaget’s experiences on the couch: some clues to a mystery’, International Journal 
of Psycho-Analysis, 74, 255–273.
Shotter, J. (1980) ‘Action, joint action and intentionality’, in M. Bremner (ed.) The Structure of Action. 
Oxford: Polity Press.
Spivak, G. C. (1990) ‘Practical politics of the open end’, in S. Harasym (ed.) The Postcolonial Critic: Interviews, 
Strategies, Dialogues. London: Routledge.
Squire, C. (1990) ‘Feminism as antipsychology’, in E. Burman (ed.) Feminists and Psychological Practice. 
London: Sage.
Steedman, C. (1995) Strange Dislocations: Childhood and the Idea of Human Interiority 1780–1930. London: 
Routledge.
Stockton, K. (2009) The Queer Child. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Thorne, B. (1987) ‘Re-visioning women and social change: where are the children?’, Gender and Society, 
1(1), 85–109
Tsou, J. (2006) ‘Genetic epistemology and Piaget’s philosophy of science: Piaget vs. Kuhn on scientific 
progress’, Theory & Psychology, 16(2), 203–224.
Tuhiwai Smith. L. (1999) Decolonizing Methodologies. London: Zed Press.
Urwin, C. (1984/1998) ‘Power relations and the emergence of language’, in J. Henriques, W. Hollway,  
C. Venn, C. Urwin, and V. Walkerdine. Changing the Subject. London: Routledge.
Urwin, C. (1986) ‘Developmental psychology and psychoanalysis: splitting the difference’, in M. Richards 
and P. Light (eds) Children of Social Worlds. Oxford: Polity/ Blackwell.
Urwin, C. and Sharland, E. (1992) ‘From bodies to minds in childcare literature: advice to parents in 
inter-war Britain’, in R. Cooter (ed.) In the Name of the Child: Health and Welfare 1880–1940. London: 
Routledge.
Vandenberg, B. (1993) ‘Developmental psychology, God and the good’, Theory & Psychology, 3(2), 191–205.
Vianna, E. and Stetsenko, A. (2006) ‘Embracing history through transforming it: contrasting Piagetian versus 
Vygotskyan (Activity) theories of learning and development to expand constructivism within a dialec-
tical view of history’, Theory & Psychology, 16(1), 81–108.
Vidal, F. (1987) ‘Jean Piaget and the liberal protestant tradition’, in M. Ash and M. Woodward (eds) Psychol-
ogy in Twentieth Century Thought and Society. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Walkerdine, V. (1988) The Mastery of Reason. London: Routledge.
Weedon, C. (1987) Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Theory. Oxford: Blackwell.
Woodhead, M. (1999) ‘Reconstructing developmental psychology – some first steps’, Children and Society, 
13, 3–19.

79
What is social psychology? The kind of answer you will get to this question will depend on who 
you ask, the epistemological and theoretical perspective they hold, and it will, to a large extent, 
also depend on the region of the world they live in and the university or faculty they work in. 
Social psychology is not a unified discipline; there is not one social psychology, but many social 
psychologies. However, despite the diversity of the field today, the positivistic approach is more 
pervasive and dominant than other approaches. This is the perspective which is usually taught 
in standard psychology courses and textbooks in most parts of the world and it is this version 
of social psychology that informs various applied fields, of which organizational behaviour is 
one of the most popular. Organizational social psychology involves the application of social psy-
chological theories and methods to understand, inform, and ultimately improve organizational 
practices. Organizations are ubiquitous to everyday life and are the main instruments of capital-
ism. As long as social psychology is deployed to solve management problems, a critique of social 
psychology must include a solid critique of organizational social psychology.
This chapter will begin with a short historical overview, showing that social psychology was 
born out of an early interest in crowds or groups (Stainton Rogers 2011). It will then review 
the critiques made against mainstream social psychology, concentrating on the social identity 
perspective. The final part of the chapter will expand on the critical agenda by focusing on the 
applied field of organizational social psychology. The chapter will end by suggesting that organi-
zational social psychology should renounce its fixation with groups within organizations and pay 
serious attention to critical management scholars who point to the relationship between broader 
societal ideologies and organizational life.
A longstanding interest in groups
Social psychology as we know it today began to appear between the late nineteenth century and 
early twentieth century. A group of people who contributed significantly to the establishment 
of social psychology as an independent field of study was the so-called folk psychologists. In the 
1860s, Heymann Steinthal and Moritz Lazarus studied the psychology of ordinary people and 
collectives. Their work was driven by the basic principle that individuals who belong to the 
same group tend to think in a collective rather than an individual manner. The interest in the 
8
Social psychology
A commentary on organizational research
Parisa Dashtipour

Parisa Dashtipour
80
collective mind was reinforced by Gustave Le Bon (1895/1947), who drew on Tarde’s (1890) 
concept of suggestibility and the ‘group mind’ to claim that in crowds people lose their indi-
viduality and capacity for independent rational thinking and become subjected to the irrational 
wills of the crowd. These very early theorists and their interest in group and collective behaviour 
have been significant in the later development of social psychology. In 1908, the psychologist 
McDougall published what is often seen as one of the first social psychological textbooks in 
English (McDougall 1908/1960). Drawing on other social scientists, such as Le Bon, McDougall 
was significant in helping to establish social psychology as an independent discipline that would 
scientifically investigate crowds (Farr 1986). In the book The Group Mind (1920) he claimed that 
collectives that are relatively organized generate mental forces that are not exactly the same as 
the sum total of the attitudes of each individual group member.
However, soon enough, the interest in group and collective phenomena began to diminish as 
the discipline focused more on the individual. Allport (1927) dismissed the group mind thesis by 
arguing that the locus of study in social psychology should be individuals, because it is individ-
uals and not groups that act, think, and feel. In his book Social Psychology (1924), he proposed a 
behaviourist approach based on the experimental method and underpinned by the assumption 
that social psychology should be concerned with observable behaviour and not waste its ener-
gies on unobservable mental states. The behaviourist approach faded away in the 1940s when, 
during and after World War II, a number of notable European Gestalt psychologists fled to the 
USA and established a different type of experimental approach that was less based on behaviour-
ism and more on concepts such as group dynamics and group norms. Social psychology was thus 
yet again dominated by a focus on groups. Kurt Lewin, who has been a prominent figure within 
the field of organizational behaviour, was interested in the impact of groups on perception and 
action. Lewin, alongside Muzafer Sherif, established experimental social psychology as we know 
it today (Stainton Rogers 2011). In the 1940s and the decades to follow, social psychological 
theories and approaches developed as a response to the sociopolitical issues of the time, such as 
the Holocaust. The experiments conducted by Muzafer Sherif, Solomon Ash, and later, Stanley 
Milgram and Philip Zimbardo explored issues of influence, conformity, and obedience, and 
could therefore be considered as critical in orientation (Hepburn 2003: 20).
Criticizing the critical work
Despite the critical potential of earlier work, the positivist perspective prevents social psychol-
ogy from capturing real-world human experience. Many contemporary social psychology text-
books, such as Hogg and Vaughan (2002) – which is one of the most popular textbooks available 
on the market – introduce the discipline with Allport’s (1935) (in)famous definition of social 
psychology: social psychology is ‘the scientific investigation of how the thoughts, feelings and 
behaviours of individuals are influenced by the actual, imagined or implied presence of others’ 
(Hogg and Vaughan 2002: 2). This definition highlights two issues. The first is the focus on sci-
ence and the second is the social-individual division. Social psychologists tend to insist that their 
work is scientific, and they imply that experiments, or quantitative studies, should be prioritized 
over other research methods. Science is an approach concerned with hypothesis testing and cau-
sality, and it values ‘objective’ observation. In standard social psychology courses and textbooks, 
science is viewed as an alternative approach to dogma (e.g. Hogg and Vaughan 2002: 6). Students 
are often taught that the scientific experimental method is the most suitable method, as it leads 
to objective generalizable knowledge about human behaviour. But the problem with experi-
ments is that they create a false divide between the social and the individual, and this division 
is implicit in Allport’s definition. In search for generalizable results, experiments tend to take 

Social psychology
81
individuals away from their social context, which leads to a decontextualized understanding of 
mind and behaviour.
A relatively large group of social psychologists today reject positivism and refuse to believe 
in generalizable statements. Social psychology is therefore, as Harré (1997) states, characterized 
by two conflicting perspectives: one that aims to arrive at causal, universal explanations to 
human experience, and another one which is critical of universalist claims and aims to explore 
the context-specific nature of mind and behaviour by emphasizing culture and language. These 
two approaches are often called psychological social psychology and sociological social psychology. It is 
generally agreed that the latter approach is dominant in Europe and the former in the USA.
To a large extent, it was the so-called crisis in the discipline that led to the solidification of 
these two strands and to the development of critical social psychology (Spears 1997). The crisis 
is often stated to have begun with Israel and Tajfel’s (1972) criticism of mainstream individualist 
approaches. Another scholar who has been significant in setting the terms of the debate is Ger-
gen (1973), who challenged the reliance on positivism, arguing that social psychology is more 
akin to history than to the natural sciences. One of the main issues that concerned scholars at 
the time was that social psychology had become little else than a technical scientific endeavour 
that was far removed from real-world issues (Hepburn 2003). Researchers were criticized for 
being too focused on individual cognitive processes, and for employing narrow theoretical and 
methodological perspectives. Even though the crises did not lead to any serious solutions to the 
problems that were raised (Augoustinos and Walker 1995), they did contribute to the develop-
ment of a specifically ‘European’ social psychology that was explicitly social in its approach. The 
late Serge Moscovici (1972), one of the pioneers of this European perspective, was also a critic 
of North American research because of its individualist and capitalist underpinnings.
One paradigm that emerged out of the crisis was the social identity theory (for reviews of 
this theory, see Brown 2000; Hornsey 2008; Reicher et al. 2010; Tajfel and Turner 1986). This 
theory was initially developed to make sense of the findings of a series of famous experiments 
known as the ‘minimal group paradigm’ which focused on intergroup behaviour (Billig and 
Tajfel 1973; Tajfel 1970; Tajfel et al. 1971). Later, self-categorization theory (Turner 1985; Turner 
et al. 1987) was developed as a branch of social identity theory and explored group processes 
in general. The influence of social identity theory has in recent years increased and it is today 
one of the most popular perspectives in social psychology (Hornsey 2008). This theory is often 
perceived as a critical approach, partly because it was born out of an interest in prejudice, 
oppression, conflict, and social change. It also challenges much of the individualism in social 
psychology by emphasizing the impact of the social group on psychology. Despite this critical 
edge, however, the theory largely centres on cognitive processes. Parker (1997) points out that, 
ironically, individual psychology and cognitive processes have become increasingly important in 
European research on social identity and groups. Social identity theory tends to present con-
textual and social issues as external to the individual, existing merely as a set of stimuli to which 
the individual responds. Self-categorization theory in particular tends to break the world down 
into separate levels and variables for use in experimental manipulation and statistical analysis 
(Condor 2003), and relations between groups are thought to exist as a series of outside stimuli 
that are cognitively processed within the individual mind. For example, ‘maleness, masculinity, 
gender differences are all described as a “set of relations being represented”. They constitute the 
input to a representational process occurring within the individual’ (Brown and Lunt 2002: 9). 
Researchers have also challenged the universalistic assumptions that underlie the social identity 
paradigm. Although some of Tajfel’s writings cautioned against universal psychological expla-
nations and ‘truth claims’, ‘social identity theory is a universal theory, both in terms of its key 
concepts and its core assumptions about individual motivations’ (Billig 1996: 346).

Parisa Dashtipour
82
Discontented with the cognitivism, individualism, and universalism of mainstream European 
social psychology, a group of scholars influenced by social constructionism and discourse the-
ory have developed something which is termed discursive social psychology. Discursive social 
psychology is a vast field and is itself deeply divided between, for example, those who adopt a 
‘bottom-up’ approach and focus on the intricate details of everyday discourse (e.g. Potter and 
Wetherell 1987) and those who promote a more ‘top-down’ approach by emphasizing the sig-
nificance in exploring what societal discourses do to us (e.g. Parker 1992) (see Branney 2008: 
576). What both of these perspectives share is a focus on language and discourse and a dedication 
to qualitative research. The discursive perspective has been an important critical strand; it has 
challenged mainstream approaches, including the social identity paradigm, for neglecting com-
munication and language (Condor 1996; Wetherell 1996: 280, see also the discursively orien-
tated social identity research by Reicher and Hopkins 1996; 2001). From the discursive point of 
view, language is constitutive of social life and thus social psychology is defined as what happens 
between people and in language, rather than within individual minds. While the bottom-up 
version of discursive social psychology has in recent years become more part of the mainstream 
(Parker 2012), those unhappy with discursive psychologists’ prioritization of discourse over sub-
jectivity (e.g. Frosh 2001) have contributed to the development of yet another critical approach 
referred to as ‘psychosocial studies’ (Frosh 2003; Frosh et al. 2003; Gough 2004; see also Henri-
ques et al. 1984/1998; for a review of this field, see Frosh 2010, chapter 7).
Organizational social psychology
The above-mentioned challenges to mainstream social psychology have been important in 
demonstrating the continued prevalence of individualism and cognitivism, and they have helped 
to disrupt the faith in experiments as the ideal method. In this section, I expand on the critique 
of mainstream social psychology by examining some of the ways in which the discipline has 
been applied to understand organizational behaviour. This is significant because social psychol-
ogy is not simply an academic exercise. As a component of the ‘psy-complex’ (Ingleby 1985; 
Rose 1989), it participates in the regulation of everyday life, including organizational life. It is 
largely by examining how the discipline has been applied that we can make explicit the ideo-
logical basis of its knowledge production.
Contemporary social psychology focuses on a variety of topics, including attitudes, per-
ception, social influence, and prejudice (see for example, Hewstone et al. 2012). Applied social 
psychology involves the practical application of theories, research methods, and intervention 
techniques to shed light on and solve various real-world social problems. Applied fields include 
immigration, education, gender relations, and mental health. The discipline has been particularly 
influential in the area of organizational behaviour. It could be stated that this interest in organi-
zations is as old as social psychology itself; its seeds may be found in Steinthal and Lazarus’ work 
on the influence of social organization on individual mentality. What concerns social psychology 
is often considered as directly relevant to organizations. Organizational behaviour – a field of 
study which is becoming increasingly popular (Knights and Willmott 2012) – is to a significant 
extent shaped by research and theories that originate in social psychology. The latter has had a 
massive impact on the way in which organizational issues are understood and addressed. Social 
psychologists attempt to particularly understand the psychological factors underpinning indi-
viduals’ behaviour in organizations. Areas of interest include leadership, group processes, motiva-
tion, organizational change, organizational culture, and organizational performance.
Courses in social and organizational psychology are often presented as different than the more 
traditional organizational or industrial psychology perspectives because they take into account 

Social psychology
83
the social and contextual influences on performance (see for example Social-Organizational Psy-
chology course description at Columbia University: http://www.tc.columbia.edu/orgpsych/
index.asp?Id=General+InformationandInfo=What+is+Social-Organizational+Psychology-
%3F). Despite this emphasis on context, organizational social psychology risks psychologizing 
organizational phenomena when it claims to ‘use psychological insight to build an understand-
ing of the minds of organizational members’ (De Cremer et al. 2011: 6). Furthermore, insofar 
as it aims to ‘provide conceptual tools and theories to tackle . . . managerial and organizational 
challenges’ (De Cremer et al. 2011: 5), social psychology could be regarded as acting in the 
interest of management. This is evident in the assistance that social psychology claims to offer 
organizations, especially in managing outliers that do not fit the stated organizational vision. 
As De Cremer et al. state, ‘when individual beliefs differ from organizational beliefs, it becomes 
critical to know how to merge those beliefs into a central, motivating culture’ (De Cremer et al. 
2011: 7).
Social identity theory is, however, a potentially critical approach to organizational social 
psychology. In the decades since Ashforth and Mael’s (1989) influential paper, there has been an 
enormous interest in the application of social identity theory to organizations (see for example, 
Albert et al. 2000; Haslam 2004; Haslam et al. 2003; Herriot and Scott-Jackson 2002; Hogg and 
Terry 2001; Van Dick 2001). In organizational studies of identity, social identity theory is today 
the most well-known and influential approach (Alvesson et al. 2008). Social identity theorists 
have been driven by a concern for both the psychological and the social aspects of organizational 
life, and are therefore seen as opposed to the individualism of the organizational/industrial 
psychology perspective. Furthermore, in contrast to the latter, the application of social identity 
theory to organizations is based on the assumption that issues of power, politics, and conflict 
are central to organizational and working lives and should therefore be highlighted and studied, 
rather than glossed over.
In Psychology in Organizations – a book which is nowadays listed as essential reading in organ-
izational social psychology courses – Haslam (2004) reworks some of the most popular organi-
zational topics from the perspective of social identity theory. Haslam shows that much of what 
traditionally has been perceived as an outcome of individual psychology, such as motivation, 
commitment, decision-making, leadership, and stress are actually an effect of group processes. 
This is an important book in social psychology, not least for its critical outlook and its challenge 
of some aspects of managerial doctrine. Haslam states that the psychological internalization of 
the group means that individuals can ‘engage in meaningful, integrated and collaborative organ-
izational behaviour . . .  The fact that groups transform the psychology of the individual is seen 
not as a necessary evil but as an essential good’ (17). Social identity theory goes against tradi-
tional theories – including Janis’ (1982) idea of ‘group think’ – by emphasizing that the influence 
of groups may lead to creative and socially enriching practices. On the one hand, this idea can 
be seen as progressive given that identification with a group is critical for the development of 
‘collective consciousness’, social solidarity, and social cohesion, and for the occurrence of collec-
tive action. If people in organizations define themselves as individuals, rather than as members 
of groups, they are more likely to be driven by a motivation to enhance themselves as individ-
uals, to focus on their personal success, and the attainment of personal resources. When social 
identity is salient, however, people are more likely to strive for collective gains, are more prone 
to be sensitive to other people’s opinions, and show loyalty and commitment. The emphasis on 
groups and social identity is thus significant, especially as it challenges the mainstream focus 
on individual competition and the glorification of career development and personal financial 
and material growth. There is, however, a risk that this turns into an idealization of the group. 
We should be wary of the fact that the process of identification – viewing oneself as part of a  

Parisa Dashtipour
84
group  – that social identity theory often highlights as associated with positive outcomes is 
exactly what is necessary for the manipulation and control of employee behaviour and sub-
jectivity. Any theorization of identity should centre on the relationship between identity and 
control of employees (Alvesson and Willmott 2002). One of the reasons why social identity 
theory has not adequately made this control aspect more explicit may be due to its positivist 
approach that views identity largely as a given, rather than as the continuous project of power. 
Thus, although it attempts to highlight politics and conflict as determinant factors in organi-
zational life, its ultimate aim is to predict behaviour and to provide remedies to organizational 
‘problems’. Regardless of well-intentioned challenges to the managerial prerogative and despite 
a focus in political processes, it still based on an instrumentally rational view of the organization.
Just like much of the general literature on social identity theory, Haslam’s book is permeated 
with a tension between the desire to remain dedicated to a critical agenda – one that takes 
seriously the political and social embedding of mind and behaviour – and the persistence of a 
research program that claims to explain and define human experience, and that therefore takes 
part in the managerial mission to direct and control behaviour. Social psychologists participate 
in the political life of organizations in the very moment they state that theirs is not a project 
about politics (see Haslam 2004: 226). Politics is exercised when research claims to offer practical 
solutions to managerial concerns, such as motivation, group productivity, and decision-making 
(see Haslam 2004: 227). Notwithstanding the good intentions of the social psychologist, sug-
gestions such as ‘productivity on a group task will increase to the extent that group goals are 
congruent with a salient social identity’ (2004: 227) can be deployed in an attempt to manip-
ulate and change behaviour within organizations in ways that further the interests of certain 
groups. In the very beginning of his book, Haslam justifies the need for social identity theory 
by appealing to the discourse of efficiency (Haslam 2004: 1). The application of social identity 
theory remains thus, to a large extent, a technical exercise, and ultimately aimed at improving 
management outcomes. Despite its critical potential, the social identity approach to organiza-
tion studies is in the end a functionalist one, driven by an assumption that there is a relationship 
between identity and behaviour and therefore managers can utilize identity in order to generate 
behaviour that is to the benefit of the organization.
Conclusion: critical management studies as inspiration
When investigating its ‘applied’ aspect, the role of ideology and power in social psychological 
research and theory becomes readily apparent. Organizational social psychology is largely driven 
by a desire to develop general universal laws about how people in organizations function. Even 
those perspectives that attempt to bring to light the dominance of context do not avoid employ-
ing a discourse permeated by generalizable truth-claims about how organizations work and how 
they can perform better.
Organizational social psychology often adopts a rather restricted understanding of the social 
and of politics. Despite recognizing that politics is endemic to organizational life, it is often 
‘micro-politics’ – the politics that occurs between people or groups within organizations – 
which is of concern. As a result, the way in which broader structural factors, including an 
examination of how historical and cultural forces, shape identities within organizations tends 
to get overlooked. Analysis that focuses on problems within organizations and neglects wider 
structural issues will inevitably be partial. Organizational social psychology needs to pay serious 
attention to critical management scholars who have in the past few decades posed a challenge 
to traditional theories of management (Alvesson and Willmott 1992). These scholars oblige 
us to consider the ‘system-wide’, neoliberalist ideologies that influence management logics, 

Social psychology
85
perceptions, and cognitions within organizations. Trying to comprehend social psychological 
processes in organizations without seriously recognizing such dominant ‘extra-organizational’ 
dynamics will inevitably be a futile exercise. Rather than being preoccupied with instrumental 
concerns, organizational social psychology needs to be driven by emancipatory interests. Fur-
thermore, instead of deploying energies into producing theories, methods, and prescriptions in 
the hope that they will offer ‘solutions’ to managerial problems – instead of being preoccupied 
with prediction and control – social psychologists should aim to reveal the politically charged, 
messy, contradictory, and ambiguous side of organizational life under capitalism.
Further reading
Haslam, A. (2004) Psychology in Organizations: the Social Identity Approach. London: Sage.
Hepburn, A. (2003) An Introduction to Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Stainton Rogers, W. (2011) Social Psychology (2nd Edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Website resources
Mead project. Classical writings by social psychologists, including Allport and Sherif: http://www.brocku.
ca/MeadProject/inventory5.html
Social Psychology Network. Links to a wide variety of social psychology websites. It is a good source for 
exploring the kind of issues that social psychologists are interested in and the type of research they do: 
http://www.socialpsychology.org/
References
Albert, S., Ashforth, B. E., and Dutton, J. E. (2000) ‘Organizational identity and identification’, Academy of 
Management Review, Special issue, 25.
Allport, F. H. (1924) Social Psychology. Boston, New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Allport, F. H. (1927) The Group Fallacy in Relation to Social Science. Hanover, NH: The Sociological Press.
Allport, F. H. (1935) ‘Attitudes’, in C.M. Murchison (ed.) Handbook of Social Psychology. Worcester, MA: 
Clark University Press.
Alvesson, M., Ashcraft, K. L., and Thomas, R. (2008) ‘Identity matters: reflections on the constructions of 
identity scholarship in organization studies’, Organization, 15(5), 5–28.
Alvesson, M. and Willmott, H. (eds) (1992) Critical Management Studies. London: Sage.
Alvesson, M. and Willmott, H. (2002) ‘Identity regulation as organizational control: producing the appro-
priate individual’, Journal of Management Studies, 39(5), 619–44.
Ashforth, B. E., and Mael, F. (1989) ‘Social identity theory and the organization’, Academy of Management 
Review, 14, 20–39.
Augoustinos, M., and Walker, I. (1995) Social Cognition: an Integrated Introduction. London: Sage.
Billig, M. (1996) ‘Remembering the particular background of social identity theory’, in W. P. Robinson 
(ed.) Social Groups and Identities: Developing the Legacy of Henri Tajfel. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Billig, M., and Tajfel, H. (1973) ‘Social categorization and similarity in intergroup behavior’, European Jour-
nal of Social Psychology, 3, 27–52.
Branney, P. (2008) ‘Subjectivity, not personality: combining discourse analysis and psychoanalysis’, Social and 
Personality Psychology Compass, 2, 574–590.
Brown, R. (2000) ‘Social identity theory: past achievements, current problems and future challenges’, Euro-
pean Journal of Social Psychology, 30(6), 745–748.
Brown, S. D., and Lunt, P. (2002) ‘A genealogy of the social identity tradition: Deleuze and Guattari and 
social psychology’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 1–23
Condor, S. (1996) ‘Social identity and time’, in W. P. Robinson (ed.) Social Groups and Identities: Developing 
the Legacy of Henri Tajfel. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Condor, S. (2003) ‘ “The least doubtful promise for the future?” The short history of Tajfel’s “sociopsy-
chological” approach to laboratory experimentation’, in J. Laszlo and W. Wagner (eds) Theories and 
Controversies in Societal Psychology. Budapest: New Mandate.

Parisa Dashtipour
86
De Cremer, D., van Dick, R. and Murnighan, K. (eds) (2011) Social Psychology and Organizations. New York: 
Routledge.
Farr, R. (1986) ‘The social psychology of William McDougall’, in Changing Conceptions of Crowd Mind and 
Behaviour. New York: Springer.
Frosh, S. (2001) ‘ “Things that can’t be said”: psychoanalysis and the limits of language’, International Journal 
of Critical Psychology, 29–83.
Frosh, S. (2003) ‘Psychosocial studies and psychology: is a critical approach emerging?’, Human Relations, 
56, 1545.
Frosh, S. (2010) Psychoanalysis Outside the Clinique: Interventions in Psychosocial Studies. Basingstoke Hamp-
shire: Palgrave Macmillan.
Frosh, S., Phoenix, A., and Pattman, R. (2003) ‘Taking a stand: using psychoanalysis to explore the position-
ing of subjects in discourse’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 42, 39–53.
Gergen, K. (1973) ‘Social psychology as history’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 26, 309–320.
Gough, B. (2004) ‘Psychoanalysis as a resource for understanding emotional ruptures in the text: the case 
of defensive masculinities’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 43, 245–267.
Harré, R. (1997) ‘Social life as rule-governed patterns of joint action’, in C. McGarty and S. A. Haslam (eds) 
The Message of Social Psychology. Oxford: Blackwell.
Haslam, A. (2004) Psychology in Organizations: the Social Identity Approach. London: Sage.
Haslam, S. A., van Knippenberg, D., Platow, M. and Ellemers, N. (eds) (2003) Social Identity at Work: Devel-
oping Theory for Organizational Practice. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Henriques, J., Hollway, W., Urwin, C., Venn, C. and Walkerdine, V. (1984/1998) Changing the Subject. Lon-
don: Methuen.
Hepburn, A. (2003) An Introduction to Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Herriot, P. and Scott-Jackson, W. (2002) ‘Globalization, social identities and employment’, British Journal of 
Management, 13, 249–57.
Hewstone, M., Stroebe, W. and Jonas, K. (2012) An Introduction to Social Psychology. Chishester: John Wiley 
and Sons.
Hogg, M. A. and Terry, D. J. (eds) (2001) Social Identity Processes in Organizations. Philadelphia, PA: Psychol-
ogy Press.
Hogg, M. A. and Vaughan, G. M. (2002) Social Psychology (3rd Edn). Harlow: Prentice Hall.
Hornsey, M. J. (2008) ‘Social identity theory and self-categorisation theory: a historical review’, Social and 
Personality Psychology Compass, 2, 204–222.
Ingleby, D. (1985) ‘Professionals as socializers: the “psy complex” ’, Research in Law, Deviance and Social Con-
trol, 7, 79–109.
Israel, J. and Tajfel, H. (eds) (1972) The Context of Social Psychology: A Critical Assessment. London: Academic 
Press.
Janis, I. L. (1982) Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy Decisions and Fiascoes (2nd Edn). Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Knights, D. and Willmott, H. (2012) ‘Introduction’, in D. Knights and H. Willmott (eds) Introducing Organi-
zational Behaviour and Management (2nd Edn). Hampshire: Cengage Learning.
Le Bon, G. (1895/1947) The Crowd: a Study of the Popular Mind. London: Ernest Benn.
McDougall, W. (1908/1960) An Introduction to Social Psychology (23rd Edn). New York: University Paper-
backs, Imprint of Methuen and Co (London) and Barnes and Noble (New York).
McDougall, W. (1920) The Group Mind: a Sketch of the Principles of Collective Psychology with Some Attempt 
to Apply them to the Interpretation of National Life and Character. Cambridge, UK: The University Press.
Moscovici, S. (1972) ‘Society and theory in social psychology’, in J. Israel and H. Tajfel (eds) The Context of 
Social Psychology. London: Academic Press.
Parker, I. (1992) Discourse Dynamics: Critical Analysis of Social and Individual Psychology. London and New 
York: Routledge.
Parker, I (1997) Psychoanalytic Culture: Psychoanalytic Discourse in Western Society. London: Sage.
Parker, I. (2012) ‘Discursive social psychology now’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 51(3), 471–477.
Potter, J. and Wetherell, M. (1987) Discourse and Social Psychology: Beyond Attitudes and Behaviour. London: Sage.
Reicher, S. and Hopkins, N. (1996) ‘Self-category constructions in political rhetoric: an analysis of Thatch-
er’s and Kinnock’s speeches concerning the British miners’ strike (1984–5)’, European Journal of Social 
Psychology, 26, 353–371.
Reicher, S. and Hopkins, N. (2001) ‘Psychology and the end of history: a critique and a proposal for the 
psychology of social categorization’, International Society of Political Psychology, 22(2), 383–407.

Social psychology
87
Reicher, S., Spears, R. and Haslam, S. A. (2010) ‘The social identity approach in social psychology’, in  
M. Wetherell and C. Talpade-Mohanty (eds) The Sage Handbook of Identities. London: Sage.
Rose, N. (1989) Governing the Soul: the Shaping of the Private Self. London: Routledge.
Spears, R. (1997) ‘Introduction’, in T. Ibáñez and L. Íñiguez (eds) Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Stainton Rogers, W. (2011) Social Psychology (2nd Edn). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Tajfel, H. (1970) ‘Experiments in intergroup discrimination’, Scientific American, 233, 96–102.
Tajfel, H., Billig, M., Bundy, R. P. and Flament, C. (1971) ‘Social categorization and intergroup behaviour’, 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 1, 149–177.
Tajfel, H. and Turner, J. C. (1986) ‘The social identity theory of intergroup behaviour’, in S. Worchel and 
L. W. Austin (eds) Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Tarde, G. (1890) La Philosophie Penale. Lyon: Storck.
Turner, J. C. (1985) ‘Social categorisation and the self-concept: A social cognitive theory of group behav-
iour’, in E. J. Lawler (ed.) Advances in Group Processes. Greenwich, CT: Jai Press.
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M., Oakes, P., Reicher, S. and Wetherell, M. (eds.) (1987) Rediscovering the Social Group: 
A Self Categorisation Theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Van Dick, R. (2001) ‘Identification in organizational contexts: linking theory and research from social and 
organizational psychology’, International Journal of Management Reviews, 3, 265–8.
Wetherell, M. (1996) ‘Constructing social identities: the individual/social binary in Henri Tajfel’s social psy-
chology’, in W. P. Robinson (ed.) Social Groups and Identities: Developing the Legacy of Henri Tajfel. Oxford: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.

88
The earliest traces of psychology as a field of knowledge can be found in the domain of philos-
ophy. Since the classical age, philosophers have reflected on the human being, human nature, the 
relation of the human being to their context, and on thought as the expression of their insertion 
in the world.
It was only in the second half of the nineteenth century that psychology separated from phi-
losophy, emerging as an autonomous scientific discipline. Historical and social conditions – the 
promotion of the bourgeoisie and of scientific knowledge by the power structure – put an end 
to metaphysical speculation and gave rise to a scientific approach to the natural world and the 
human being. The autonomy achieved by scientific disciplines such as physiology, astronomy, 
and biology, provided psychology with a model for its own development, linked to a model of 
study of the natural sciences (Seidmann 2000).
At the dawn of experimental psychology, Wundt (1879 in Seidmann 2000) overcame the 
resistance to consider psychology a science by making it possible, it seemed, to measure and 
quantify the contents of consciousness. Psychological phenomena were explained according to 
the canonical experimental sciences of those days, which were grounded in the positivist epis-
temology prevailing in the medical and biological sciences. The experimental method would 
later be complemented with psychometric tests and standardized questionnaires to study all 
psychological functions. As Cole (1999) explained, there was a search for a unified science and 
a unified methodology, modelled after the natural sciences.
As a result of this influence, the twentieth century saw a strengthened psychology that con-
tributed to creating room for knowledge, control, and naturalization, thus leading to descriptions 
of human phenomena based on values of normality and abnormality. Patterns were systematized 
for organizing human perception, learning, and development, and these patterns were claimed 
to be true and valid for every person, everywhere, and in every historical period.
As a normal social science, psychology reproduced the principles of classical psychiatry, thus 
pathologizing subjective suffering. However, it focused not only on clinical practice, but also on 
the evolutionary processes of human development such as birth, adolescence, old age, sexuality, 
pain, and death. What mattered was evaluating and measuring psychological processes in terms 
of certain ‘normal’, general, and transcultural parameters. Everyday life began to be organized 
according to explanatory narratives of feelings and events as normal or abnormal – evaluated as 
9
Abnormal psychology
A psychology of disorders
Susana Seidmann and Jorgelina Di Iorio

Abnormal psychology
89
good or bad, respectively. Normality was regarded as an expected way of living, modelled from 
outside in terms of how frequent or rare the observed behaviours were.
These principles became points of reference for qualifying as abnormal everything that was 
imperfect, inconvenient, and infrequent, thereby preventing members of society from devel-
oping in ways considered ‘satisfactory’. In addition to describing what things were like, the 
theoretical aspects of psychology prescribed what things should be like. Normality denoted the 
type of mental activity by means of which knowledge, abilities, habits, attitudes, and even ideals 
were acquired, retained, and utilized. Thus, persons could gradually adapt and be adapted to the 
environment.
Academic structures reproduced the knowledge/power structures that had validated knowl-
edge about people. The courses of study of psychology first had a distinctive biological, exper-
imentalist, and positivist character, associated with the approach to pathology and then to a 
further pathologization of the existing naturalist models.
Such definitions of the normal and the abnormal have given rise to a branch of psychology 
that focuses on the behaviours developing from these pre-established patterns. The theoretical 
concept of normality stems from practical applications in which behaviours are defined in terms 
of health and illness. Psychiatry was considered the discursive basis for psychology to define 
what is and what is not normal in the different contexts where people interact – the family, 
the school, the workplace, the courts. This has opened the door to the pharmacology market: 
medication to treat depression or combat anxiety, pills to reduce excesses, anguish, insomnia, 
weariness, manias, and obsessions, and even to lessen behaviour or learning problems in children. 
What is considered pathological is medicalized by providing biological explanations for social 
and psychological phenomena. Such a process stemmed from the dominant medical power and 
knowledge which arose from relational systems that expanded within psychology and other 
fields of knowledge and intervention over human beings.
Abnormal psychology reflects the modernist vision characterizing the twentieth century, 
which aimed to know a ‘rational, orderly and accessible self’ (Gergen 1992) by defining nor-
mality in terms of three distinct, but complementary aspects: normality as health, denoting the 
absence of symptoms, disorders, or disabilities; normality as an ideal, that which is optimum, 
desirable, harmonious; and normality as average, that which is statistically common – what the 
majority does, has, or is. Grounded in the developments of biology, this field of psychology seeks 
the constitutive mechanisms of the person assimilated to a machine, in particular a computer.
Disruption, difference, and excess gave rise to correcting and normalizing knowledges and 
technologies within psychology. Relying on experimental procedures, the identification of gen-
eral psychological laws, and the use of inferential statistics enabled research and approaches to 
evolve unaffected by social and historical transformations. Although some approaches do not 
ignore culture, they assign it a minor role, that of an ‘independent variable or as an aspect beyond 
the framework of the discipline, and put aside the central role played by social and cultural phe-
nomena in the construction of the human reality’ (Gergen 1994: 34).
Abnormal, pathological, and dangerous: the social  
construction of the diagnostic criteria
Abnormal psychology as a dominant model in psychology provides rigid definitions of illness, 
considered to be individual disorders, or even disabilities requiring a specific cure. It is central to 
find a way to act upon and remove whatever disturbs the normal development of events. These fixed 
definitions only permit restricted responses for the action (Gergen 1996). Therefore, the model 
involves treating mental illnesses on the basis of stable formulas – medicalization, segregation, 

Susana Seidmann and Jorgelina Di Iorio
90
and hospitalization  – which are considered timeless and which disqualify other approaches. 
The abnormal, then, is a shortcoming to be suppressed, rather than a number of problems to be 
understood.
Normal and abnormal grew out of categories that explained health and illness, with prevailing 
biological – that is, ‘biologicizing’ as the making of something into a biological category – and 
individualistic accounts. From this perspective, psychological disorders are defined as psycho-
pathological symptoms that have an impact on multiple areas of everyday life. Illness is, from 
this point of view, a natural, biological event, not a sociohistorical one. Within the framework 
dictating symptom-diagnosis-treatment, diagnostic classification manuals such as DSM IV and 
CIE-10 classify everyday life on the assumption that all behaviour is susceptible to definitions 
of disorder (Carpintero 2011). This implies that the types of mental suffering which indeed 
exist – certain behaviours, ways of thinking, and emotions that may seem strange as they depart 
from the socially dominant model – may be legitimated as normal at a given historical moment.
The idea of normality appears as the result of an individual condition or situation, and not as 
a social construction. Such a definition is common currency in a psychology that corresponds 
to the hegemonic medical model (Menéndez 2009). This model refers to the practices, knowl-
edges, and theories of what is known as scientific medicine. Since the end of the seventeenth 
century, scientific medicine has managed to subordinate a whole set of practices, knowledges, 
and ideologies, which were dominant until then, and to be recognized as the only scientifically 
legitimated way to address an illness. Biologism – a reduction of understanding to biological 
conceptions – constitutes the factor ensuring that the model is supposedly in keeping with 
scientific rigor, and also the differentiating and hierarchical factor that places itself above other 
explanatory models. What is immediately manifested is pondered upon without reference to the 
social relations that determine the phenomenal nature of an illness.
According to Foucault (2005), a disciplinary mechanism came to be built around the illness, 
whereby diagnosis is constructed without subjecting it to a truth test. The diagnosis carries 
personal, juridical, and social stigmas that, given their presumed risks, create the category of 
abnormality. That which is considered pathological meets with hostility and mistrust. In addi-
tion, the fear that generates the atypical results produces overdiagnosis of the pathology as a way 
to control reality. Stigmas are generated because of the need to create categories as a way to be 
protected from the intolerance to the different. Thus, new explicative realities are socially built.
Goffman (1963/1970) usefully conceptualized stigma by referring to negative physical, men-
tal, or social attributes that are socially created to categorize individuals. A discrepancy arises 
between the virtual social identity and the real identity, because some aspects attributed to the 
other fail to conform to the widespread and socially accepted stereotype. Thus, an attribute 
stigmatizing the other ensures the normality of those to whom the attribute is attached, thus 
fostering distance and clashes in social relations. The other is no longer perceived as a whole, 
but rather belittled for having discredited attributes. The stigma banishes the other from ‘normal’ 
everyday life, which entails a process of social exclusion. Whatever is regarded as irregular must be 
corrected, excluded, and eventually even locked up.
Normalizing certain social groups requires implementing surveillance devices supported 
by power mechanisms: controlling individuals, diagnosing them, classifying their mental struc-
tures, and putting into action specific techniques (Foucault 2006) wherever it is that difference 
emerges (school, family, work, sexuality). Therefore, there is an underlying ideological position 
in this normalizing concern, which in ‘moral’ terms (from the Latin ‘mores’, customs) describes 
what things are like and prescribes what must be done to keep them that way.
This governance of individuals, children, families, and sexuality, among other phenomena, that 
characterizes abnormal psychology is associated with the concept of power. Power, as a social 

Abnormal psychology
91
relation, involves the ways in which the others are defined, that is, the discourses that enable 
certain social actors to influence asymmetrically the decisions and lives of others. The imple-
mentation of a ‘truth’ present in the representation of the world, the subjects, and the relations 
between them, has oppressive and constraining effects on certain social groups. It is these power 
relations that produce the effects of truth (Foucault 2012).
There is a great controversy about the boundary between the normal and the pathological, 
depending on the parameters considered for each historical period. As has been described, the 
normal and the abnormal were constituted as explanatory categories of health and illness. Fol-
lowing Canguilhem (2005), we see that health and illness do not differ in essence, as ancient 
doctors may have believed, and they should not be regarded as separate principles, as entities 
vying over the living organism, because it is only in a matter of degree that these two ways of 
being differ.
From our perspective, both situations are constituted by cultural definitions. They are con-
structed in intersubjective relations, giving rise to different realities. Abnormal psychology deals 
with those who are ‘mad’, different, and those who contravene definitions of reality and there-
fore pose a threat to the status quo. Marginalization in social life has taken on different appear-
ances (Foucault 1964/1967): the leper in the Middle Ages; the insane in the Modern Age; the 
poor, the lawbreakers, the drug users, and those with different sexual practices in the present 
time. All of them must be excluded as they pose a threat to the prevailing definition of reality, 
which is undoubtedly always in line with a certain kind of political definition describing the 
world of social relations.
In short, strangers are expelled or confined in social spaces where they cause no discomfort 
to those who label them. In this way, the abnormal easily bears the burden of the stigma, given 
the otherwise unfounded fear aroused by difference and segregation. The human being in these 
conditions finds it difficult to accept diversity. Diversity is not regarded as the expression of an 
epoch or the way of living of a social group, but as imposed by the dominant power models.
The relations between the normal and the abnormal are also present in the field of education. 
Duschatzky (2007) shows two ways of constructing reality: teaching through the institution-
alized school and teaching at the margins of collective life. The former is ruled by a stringent 
normative order, which plans everything that might occur. It is the discourse of the must be pro-
ducing an idealized is, where the resentment of exclusion arises. The latter creates subjectivities 
that reject institutional rules. These errant subjectivities are connected with what befalls the social 
process, and are able to transform it productively in a shared project, these subjectivities develop 
social bonds. They are the teachers who reach out to the community, in search of the students 
who dropped out of school – those considered abnormal by the establishment. They situate them 
in their own context of everyday experience and propose activities based on their needs and 
potentials. It is a post-state experience, a reorganization of the power machinery.
The mental health field is also riddled with political positions that create new forms of social 
relations, given the empowerment of users of the mental health system, psychiatric hospitals in 
particular. The Frente de Artistas del Borda (an artists’ association of Borda Hospital in Buenos 
Aires) (1984), la Colifata Radio Station (1991), PREA (Rehabilitation and Assisted Discharge 
Programme 2000), and El Pan del Borda (‘Borda´s Bread’) (2002), among others, constitute pro-
posals that challenge the social imaginary of insanity and contribute to dehospitalizing patients 
through participation and involvement. Despite these innovative experiences, for those socially 
defined as abnormal a great distance persists between a socially attributed objective reality and 
individually assumed subjective reality.
Socialization processes (Berger and Luckmann 1972) entail a distribution of knowledges and 
roles in terms of what is established as ‘adequate’ in a social structure. However, ‘abnormality’, 

Susana Seidmann and Jorgelina Di Iorio
92
or ‘inadequacy’, turns into a biographical possibility when discrepancies arise between what is 
attributed and what is assumed. Berger and Luckmann (1972) posited that society would pro-
vide the therapeutic mechanisms to treat those ‘abnormal’ cases. Such a claim ensures that true 
or potential deviants remain within institutionalized definitions of reality. This requires a body of 
knowledge that includes a theory of deviation, a diagnostic apparatus, and a conceptual system 
for the ‘cure’ of the souls: that is, ‘abnormal psychology’.
The resistance of the abnormal facing the hegemony  
of the normality
Following Foucault (2012), we now understand that dominant positions also make resist-
ant positions emerge as alternatives to what is socially legitimated and validated within the 
sciences. Here we have some grounding for a critical psychological response to the problems 
we have described. This tension between the ‘hegemonic’ (or dominant system of ideas) and the 
non-hegemonic within psychology may be summarized by four antinomies or themata (Mos-
covici 2004) expressing central controversial themes: subject/object, structure/process, nature/
culture, and simplicity/complexity.
The subject/object pair refers, on the one hand, to the way in which psychology defines the 
situations or phenomena that it addresses. While the latter position, ‘object’, stresses definitions 
marked by deficit, the former focuses on capabilities and possibilities. On the other hand, it 
refers to the relation to what is to be understood, which implies the neutrality/implication, dis-
tance/proximity pairs from the observer’s perspective on the observed. This first pair is in turn 
associated with the structure/process pair, involving psychological explanations about what is 
observed, manifested, measurable, as opposed to a psychology interested in social processes, in 
the historical understanding of what is produced, negotiated, and maintained in social exchanges.
The nature/culture tension involves explanations of human behaviours stressing either the 
acquired or the inborn. Finally, the simplicity/complexity pair integrates the pairs mentioned 
above by referring to coexisting ways of understanding that reduce explanations about mental 
life to the causal and predetermined, as opposed to a paradigm marked by multicausality and 
recursiveness.
Thus, diverging, and still current, logics of thought have emerged within psychology, with 
which human activity and suffering are defined: object/structure/nature/simplicity vs. subject/pro-
cess/culture/complexity. When it comes to mental suffering, the first logic, which is typical of nor-
malizing discourse, is represented by asylum practices. Although existing worldwide discourses 
sound inclusive and respectful of human rights (CELS 2008), they are still naturalized and legally 
accepted strategies to dispose of the strangers who jeopardize the ‘established’ reality. For the 
asylum system, being different is considered a social failure, and it is the target of an enormous 
wave of social violence, ‘a relation of oppression and violence between power and non-power, 
resulting in the exclusion of the latter by the former’ (Basaglia 1972). This infringement creates 
a group of ‘citizens without rights’, whose social relations are not characterized by horizontal 
reciprocity, but by the stigma, that is, ‘the object of violence’. This does not so often occur with 
affluent citizens, as economic power also involves technical power.
It is in this situation of social subjection that new models of social inclusion emerge: com-
munity psychological experiences that stress the courage and the need for active participation, 
where those who are different become key actors in their own lives, thus strengthening their 
genuine potentials. The pioneering experiences of therapeutic communities in England in the 
1940s were one critical response to the dominant official psychology. In Trieste, Italy, Franco 
Basaglia (1972) defined the therapeutic approach as ‘dialectically living the contradictions of 

Abnormal psychology
93
reality’, describing how the distance between the normal and the abnormal is linked to the 
values of those who attach the labels.
Other critical voices emerged during the 1960s, also in England, including Cooper, Laing, 
and Esterson, who advocated antipsychiatry as a repercussion of the great social movements tak-
ing place in France and other countries at the time, which go under the name of ‘May 1968’. 
David Cooper, for example, argued that ‘schizophrenia’ was a label leading inexorably to vio-
lence and exclusion. He regarded this designation as a ‘microsocial crisis’, in which the ‘schiz-
ophrenic patient’ was confirmed in his or her different, pathological, and strange identity, in a 
relational context marked by a strong family influence on the illness.
In Argentina, Enrique Pichon Rivière, one of the distinguished founders of the Asociación 
Psicoanalítica Argentina (Argentine Psychoanalytical Association) in the 1940s, later moved 
away from that association and perspective. He criticized traditional psychiatry and proposed 
a new psychopathology, including new clinical approaches and harsh political criticism of the 
psychiatric establishment at the beginning of the 1950s. His political observations were based on 
the effects of repressive policies on the psychotic patients ‘stored’ in asylums. Their segregation, 
marginalization, and pathologies originated within the institutional dynamics. He developed 
social psychiatry through the restorative creation of associative bonds among the patients, who 
took on new active roles as a means to recover their health. This is how several therapeutic com-
munities were created to foster the active participation of patients.
Another experience with medical authority that makes it possible to reflect upon the social 
conditions in the production of normality/abnormality is the well-known Rosenhan (1988) 
experiment; ‘Mentally healthy’ persons, or ‘pseudopatients’, who pretended they were hearing 
voices, were admitted in mental hospitals. After a period of time, when the symptoms had dis-
appeared, they were diagnosed with schizophrenia in remission and discharged. There was no 
doubt about their illness condition among the psychiatrists, and thus the possibility that these 
patients were healthy was ruled out. Rosenhan argued that the physicians were more likely to 
consider a healthy person ill, than to consider an ill person healthy, which implies that not being 
aware of the illness would be more dangerous than not being aware of health. This highlighted 
the social construction process of different realities, by means of which the person considered 
‘ill’ is unable to shed this designation, given the stigma that difference carries in interpersonal 
relations and the difficulty in acknowledging social responsibility in its creation.
Challenges: the ethical-political dimension in psychology
The epistemological question about the nature of the relation between psychology and what it 
seeks to know – human activity – makes it possible to understand how the ‘other’ is conceived, 
thus raising new questions associated with ethical-political considerations within the discipline. 
This dimension involves the definition of the other and his or her inclusion in the production 
of knowledge: who is the other? What is his or her place? Who knows something and how is 
it known?
Since its origins as a scientific discipline, psychology has attempted to normalize human life 
according to criteria based on a certain notion of biological development. This has given rise to 
studies that define it from the perspective of evolutionary development, which would be unaf-
fected by historical social transformations. Although other studies have taken into account such 
transformations in the construction of subjectivity, they consider them pathological or social 
problems beyond the scope of the discipline (Di Iorio and Lenta 2013).
The hegemonic perspective of normalization, which reproduces the idea of a single possible-  
desirable subject, detrimentally affects those who do not meet the expectations of those with 

Susana Seidmann and Jorgelina Di Iorio
94
the power to define objects and subjects (Frigerio 2006). Medicalization, which then turned 
into psychologization of social problems, was the format developed for social control in the 
discursive hegemony of psychology. As opposed to configurations positioned in normalization, 
the rendering of people into passive beings, reduction to the individual level, and objectification, 
there are proposals arising from a transdisciplinary understanding, which embrace plurality and 
subjects that are active in their contexts.
The tension between social reproduction and transformation correlates with discursive 
hegemony in psychology. Some epistemological and ideological aspects constitute unspoken 
agreements related to historical, cultural, and sociopolitical matters in which psychology takes 
part. No neutrality exists in science, because methods and designs indicate how to understand 
and evaluate just as they fundamentally reveal the logic behind the production of meaning guid-
ing the process of knowledge construction.
It is a challenge to accept the other as someone unexpected and unequal, and to prefer 
dialogue over segregation (Wiesenfeld 2000). In this way, resistance would focus on the crea-
tion of participatory projects and strengthen the ability to build new ways to address unequal 
conditions. Participation, defined as ‘a value, a process, a technique and an activity’ (Sánchez 
Vidal 1996), entails a sense of active belonging to a social activity or process, a high level of 
commitment to its goals, and political and ethical support, inasmuch as it advocates change, 
improvement in the quality of life and access to rights.
Further reading
Basaglia, F. (1972) La Institución Negada: Informe de un Hospital Psiquiátrico. Barcelona: Seix Barral.
Castel, R. (1984) La Gestión de los Riesgos: De la Antipsiquiatría al Post-Análisis. Barcelona: Anagrama.
CELS (2008) Vidas Arrasadas: La Segregación de las Personas en los Asilos Psiquiátricos Argentinos. Un Informe 
Sobre Derechos Humanos y Salud Mental en la Argentina. Buenos Aires: siglo veintiuno editores.
Duschatzky, S. (2007) Maestros Errantes: Experimentaciones Sociales en la Intemperie. Buenos Aires: Paidós.
Foucault, M. (2001) Los Anormales. Madrid: Ediciones Akal.
Gergen, K. (2007) Construccionismo Social: Aportes para el Debate y la Práctica. Bogotá: Universidad de los 
Andes.
Montero, M. (2001) ‘Ética y política en Psicología: Las dimensiones no reconocidas’, Athenea Digital: Revista 
de Pensamiento e Investigación Social, 0, 1–10.
Rosenhan, D. (1988) ‘Acerca de estar sano en un medio enfermo’, en P. Watzlawick (1988) La Realidad 
Inventada. Buenos Aires: Gedisa.
Website resources
On the ‘democratic psychiatry’ tradition which includes the ‘antipsychiatry’ perspective of R. D. Laing 
and approaches to deinstitutionalisation by Franco Basaglia in Italy, Asylum: The Magazine of Democratic 
Psychiatry: www.asylumonline.net
On the hearing of voices (usually treated as a first-rank symptom of schizophrenia in medical psychiatry), 
the international support network ‘Intervoice’: www.intervoiceonline.org
On mental health and human rights (about medicalization and non-drugs approaches on mental health, 
stigmatization, and discrimination): http://www.cchrint.org/ and www.cels.org.ar
On social constructionism: http://www.taosinstitute.net/
References
Basaglia, F. (1972) La Institución Negada. Informe de un Hospital Psiquiátrico. Barcelona: Seix Barral.
Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. (1972) La Construcción Social de la Realidad. Buenos Aires: Amorrortú.
Canguilhem, G. (2005) Lo Normal y lo Patológico. México: Siglo XXI.
Carpintero, E. (2011) La Subjetividad Asediada. Medicalización para Domesticar al Sujeto. Buenos Aires: Topia 
Editorial.

Abnormal psychology
95
CELS (2008) Vidas Arrasadas. La Segregación de las Personas en los Asilos Psiquiátricos Argentinos. Un Informe 
Sobre Derechos Humanos y Salud Mental en la Argentina. Buenos Aires: siglo veintiuno editores.
Cole, M. (1999) Psicología Cultural. Una Disciplina del Pasado y del Futuro. Madrid: Morata.
Di Iorio, J. and Lenta, M. (2013) La construcción de una perspectiva ética-relacional en las investigaciones del 
campo de la infancia y adolescencia. Proceedings of the Fifth World Congress for the Rights of Children 
and Adolescence: Infancia, Adolescencia y Cambio Social. Ministerio de Desarrollo Social. Presiden-
cia de la Nación pp. 173–178, http://vcongresoinfancia.sanjuan.gov.ar/ebook/index.html#1/z ISBN 
978-987-27770-8-1
Duschatzky, S. (2007) Maestros Errantes. Experimentaciones Sociales en la Intemperie. Buenos Aires: Paidós.
Foucault, M. (1964/1967) La Historia de Locura en la Época Clásica. México: Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Foucault, M. (2005) El Poder Psiquiátrico. Buenos Aires: Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Foucault, M. (2006) Seguridad, Territorio y Población. Buenos Aires: Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Foucault, M. (2012) El Poder, una Bestia Magnífica. Sobre el Poder, la Prisión y la Vida. Buenos Aires: siglo 
veintiuno editores.
Frigerio, G. (2006) ‘Hacer del borde el comienzo del espacio’, en G. Frigerio (coord.) Infancias y Adolescen-
cias. Teorías y Experiencias en los Bordes. Buenos Aires: Noveduc.
Gergen, G. (1996) La Terapia Como Construcción Social. Madrid: Paidós.
Gergen, K. (1992) El yo Saturado. Barcelona: Paidós.
Gergen, K. (1994) Realities and Relationships: Soundings in Social Constructionism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
Goffman, E. (1963/1970) Estigma: La Identidad Deteriorada. Buenos Aires: Amorrortú.
Menéndez, E. (2009) De Sujetos, Saberes y Estructuras. Introducción al Enfoque Relacional en el Estudio de la Salud 
Colectiva. Buenos Aires: Lugar Editorial.
Moscovici, S. (2004) ‘O conceito de THEMATA’, en S. Moscovici. Representações Sociais. Investigacões em 
Psicologia Social (2nd Edn). Petrópolis: Ed. Vozes.
Rosenhan, D. (1988) ‘Acerca de estar sano en un medio enfermo’, en P. Watzlawick (1988) La Realidad 
Inventada. Buenos Aires: Gedisa.
Sánchez Vidal, A. (1996) Psicología Comunitaria. Bases Conceptuales y Métodos de Intervención. Barcelona: EUB.
Seidmann, S. (2000) Historia de la Psicología Social, Facultad de Psicología, UBA. Buenos Aires: Departa-
mento de Publicaciones.
Wiesenfeld, E. (2000) ‘Entre la prescripción y la acción: La brecha entre la teoría y la práctica en las 
investigaciones cualitativas’, Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social, http://www.
qualitative-research.net/index.php/fqs/article/view/1099/2419

96
Forensic psychology operates at the interface between psychology and the law. In recent years, 
there has been a growing interest in this area of psychology. This is not least because the appli-
cation of psychology to understanding criminals and criminal behaviour has been increasingly 
popularized through fictional television programmes, movies, and books. For example, most 
people know about criminal ‘profiling’ through reference to the work of the FBI’s Behavioral 
Research and Instruction Unit (BRIU) at Quantico, USA, in programmes such as ‘Criminal 
Minds’; in reference to individual depictions of maverick psychology profilers in programmes 
such as the British ‘Cracker’; or in films and books such as the era-defining ‘The Silence of the 
Lambs’. These fictional media representations shape our perceptions and beliefs about crime 
and justice, and the role of the forensic psychologist. For example, when ‘Cracker’ was first aired 
on British TV (1993–1996) one British University noted that, although the overall number of 
applications to their undergraduate psychology programme did not increase, over 90 per cent 
of applicants during this period referenced forensic psychology as a reason they wanted to study 
psychology – previously, forensic psychology had been mentioned in a minority of applications 
(Entwisle, personal communication 1996). In fact, ‘offender profiling’ represents a small part of 
forensic psychology.
Forensic psychology includes all aspects of psychology that are applicable at each stage and in 
each context of legal and criminal processes (Canter 2010). This is in respect to understanding 
both offenders and victims of crime and working with criminals in terms of investigation, risk 
assessment, conviction, containment, punishment, treatment, and rehabilitation. The term ‘foren-
sic psychologist’ is used to refer to any psychologist who works with criminals and to those that 
work within or with the criminal and civil justice systems. Some psychologists undergo specific 
training in forensic psychology and usually work in prisons. Some are clinical psychologists who 
specialize in forensic work, such as working with mentally disordered offenders or within child 
protection. Clinical forensic psychologists tend to have a wider remit and a more consistent 
engagement with matters of mental ill-health.
Critical forensic psychology refers to a particular form of forensic psychology that recognizes 
that all knowledge is socially constructed and marked by vested interests. It is a response to 
mainstream forensic psychology, which often fails to articulate its vested interest, and in so doing 
often simply reproduces, rather than challenges, the status quo. Critical forensic psychology can 
10
Forensic psychology
Clinical and critical
Sam Warner

Forensic psychology
97
be understood as ‘A response to modern psychology from the inside that enriches its discipline. 
It is a deconstructive moment in its institution that is not anarchic but affirmative, in the sense 
that it attempts to think it through’ (Larner 2002: 16).
This, then, represents an approach that is both critical in its desire to question the other-
wise assumed truths of forensic psychology (such as who represents the criminal classes), and 
applicable in its sustained attempt to provide an analytic of practice that enables rather than 
undermines (e.g. Warner 2009). In this chapter, I begin by exploring the relationship between 
disciplinary power and the State, and the reproduction of socially structured inequality. I then 
consider key aspects of forensic practice with so-called mentally disordered offenders that can 
be transformed through a commitment to progressive, socially located, and recovery orientated 
interventions. This involves recognizing the foundational role of personal history in the produc-
tion of the mentally disordered offender, which I explore in respect of training, risk assessment, 
and intervention.
Disciplinary power and the iteration of inequality
According to Foucault (1977), discipline is an aggregate of power, which regulates the behaviour 
of individuals in any social context. This is achieved by systematic organization of space, time, 
and activity, and is enforced through complex practices of surveillance (O’Farrell 2005). Intern-
ment in prisons, youth offending institutions, and secure mental hospitals function to shore up 
binary mechanisms of exclusion. As Foucault (1977: 196) argues:
Generally speaking, all the authorities exercising individual control function according to 
a double mode; that of binary division and branding (mad/sane; dangerous/harmless; nor-
mal/abnormal); and that of coercive assignment of differential distribution (who he is; 
where he must be; how he is to be characterized; how he is to be recognized; how a con-
stant surveillance is to be exercised over him in an individual way, etc.). The constant divi-
sion between the normal and the abnormal, to which every individual is subjected, [and] 
the existence of a whole set of techniques and institutions for measuring, supervising and 
correcting the abnormal brings into play the disciplinary mechanisms to which the fear of 
[difference and perceived threat are directed].
Disciplinary power is directed to branding and altering the so-called abnormal individual. 
Through this process of iterative identification, the normative boundaries of society are main-
tained. Subjects, under the law, learn who they are not and who they should be, and by inter-
nalizing this disciplinary gaze they become self-disciplining. Forensic psychologists are therefore 
agents of the State that operate as part of the discursive mechanisms of control, which police the 
boundaries between what is constituted as right and wrong, normal and abnormal. If forensic 
psychologists are to do more than reproduce division and inequality it is crucial to recognize 
how division and inequality structure the field of criminality.
Constructing criminality: disadvantages and disparities
We are not all equal subjects under the law. This is evidenced by disparities in sentencing and 
incarceration of prisoners and mentally disordered offenders. Men commit more indictable 
offences than do women and there are vastly more men incarcerated in prison than there are 
women. For example, in the UK women make up about 5 per cent of the prison population 
(Women’s Breakout 2015).

Sam Warner
98
According to the UK Office for National Statistics, as few as one in four adults experi-
ence some form of mental disorder (the Mental Health Foundation/MHF 2007). Yet people 
with mental health problems are disproportionately represented in prison populations. The 
MHF estimates that up to 90 per cent of British prisoners have a diagnosable mental illness, 
substance abuse problem, or, frequently, both. Male prisoners in the UK are 14 times more 
likely to have a mental disorder than men in general, and female prisoners are 35 times  
more likely than women in general. This is reflected in other Westernized economies. For 
example, Kristof (2014) reports that more than half of all prisoners in North America have 
mental health problems, and this rises to three-quarters of female inmates. As such, Kristof 
argues, incarceration – or criminalization – is an unintended effect of mental distress. Torrey 
et al. (2014) report that US prisons now hold 10 times more mentally ill people than state 
hospitals do. There is some evidence to suggest that the overrepresentation of people with 
serious mental health problems in prisons is linked to policies of deinstitutionalization and the 
retraction of psychiatric hospitals. This phenomenon has been described as transinstitutional-
ization (see Seth 2011).
There are also disproportionate numbers of prisoners from Black and minority ethnic (BME) 
backgrounds. For example, the NAACP (2014) reports that African Americans are incarcerated 
at nearly six times the rate of white offenders. This proportion split has also long been reflected 
in prison statistics for the UK (see Osmanand and Harris 2002). Although women are often 
treated as if they are more ‘mad than bad’ and directed into secure hospitals and away from 
prisons, BME women are disproportionately represented in prisons and may thus be thought of 
as being treated as more ‘bad than mad’, and in effect deserving of punishment rather than treat-
ment (see Warner 2009). For example, Candler and Austin (2014) report that in North America 
nearly two-thirds of women on parole are white, whilst nearly two-thirds of those confined in 
prisons and jails belong to an ethnic or racial minority.
Poverty is also implicated in experiences of injustice. According to Open Democracy 
(2014: 1), ‘poverty is a multidimensional phenomenon encompassing a chronic lack of 
resources, capabilities, choices, security and power, all building on each other in a feedback 
loop of disadvantage’. Not only does poverty lead to an increased need for survival-crime, 
poverty also disadvantages defendants in many countries where legal aid is being cut and a 
two-tier system of justice is established. Typically, men and women in prisons are poor, have 
limited education, limited access to employment, have disrupted relationships, and are likely 
to be victims of crime (see Candler and Austin, ibid.) – often reporting histories of violence 
and abuse.
For women offenders in particular, domestic and sexual violence is a frequent feature of their 
lives. Women’s Aid (Norman and Barron 2011) provides evidence that between 50 per cent and 
80 per cent of women in UK prisons have experienced sexual abuse and/or domestic violence. 
This is also reflected in secure mental health services, where up to 100 per cent of female men-
tally disordered offenders report histories of sexual abuse (Wilkins and Warner 2001).
It is clear that disadvantage structures the landscape of containment. As such, any radical 
intervention requires a society-wide programme of change that addresses economic, gender, and 
race inequalities. At the very least, forensic psychologists must be ready to challenge discrimina-
tion through recognizing prisoners and mentally disordered offenders as people-in-context and 
refusing the too-ready individualization and internalization of criminality and mental disorder. 
This then provides the grounds for a critical forensic psychology that is orientated to socially 
locating people and their difficulties, in order to identify, challenge, and resist practices of differ-
entiation and discrimination.

Forensic psychology
99
Reformulating expertise and experience: centralizing  
the voice of the service-user
In order to reformulate the landscape of forensic psychology, it is necessary to revise traditional 
notions of knowledge and expertise. I have demonstrated that we are not all equal subjects 
before the law. Rather, the practices of law tend to rely on and reinforce already established 
social inequalities. Knowledge about prisoners and mentally disordered offenders is never neu-
tral but, as indicated, is shaped by vested interests. It has long been argued by feminist theorists, 
such as Haraway (1991), that a more complete knowledge of any given subject is achieved by 
viewing that same subject from subjugated positions that can provide critique of dominant 
understandings that otherwise function as the truth. Such an approach necessitates a departure 
from objectivity to an explicit engagement with partiality. It is about being clear about one’s 
own vested interests – the communities of knowledge – that can be used to inform a critical 
understanding of forensic work (see Warner 2009). For example, feminism can be used to focus 
attention on gender inequalities in treatment and provision for incarcerated men and women. 
Because women make up a minority of the prison estate, their experiences and needs have too 
often been overlooked in the design and implementation of carceral services. Recently, attempts 
have been made to identify the particular needs of women offenders. For example, in the UK, 
the government commissioned an investigation into this issue (Corston 2007; House of Com-
mons Justice Committee 2013) and this has led to the development of guidance for working 
with women offenders around issues of particular significance and salience. For example, fol-
lowing the Corston Report, Women’s Aid (2011) produced guidance for supporting women 
offenders who have experienced domestic and sexual violence. Increasingly, it is being recog-
nized that male offenders are also often traumatized by childhood experiences of interpersonal 
and sexual violence (e.g. see Douglas et al. 2013).
It is important, therefore, to develop targeted services for both dominant and marginalized 
offenders. Our ability to finesse service design and delivery is enhanced when adults and young 
people who are made subject to forensic psychology are enabled to contribute their under-
standings to the knowledge-base. The value of accessing service-user experience and expertise 
is increasingly being recognized and has led to the steady growth of the use of survivor-experts 
in illuminating the territory of trauma, mental health, and incarceration. For example, Wish, 
established in the UK in 1987, is a national, user-led charity working with women with mental 
health needs in prison, hospital, and the community. Wish (2014: Website homepage) provides:
independent advocacy, emotional support and practical guidance at all stages of a woman’s 
journey through the Mental Health and Criminal Justice Systems. Wish acts to increase 
women’s participation in the services they receive, and campaigns to get their voice heard 
at a policy level. It is unique in its long-term commitment to each individual, as they move 
through hospitals, prison and the community.
It is not only charities that value user-perspectives. Increasingly, universities work hard to inte-
grate user contributions into their training programmes. This is evidenced in current approaches 
to training practitioners to work with people diagnosed with personality disorder, a significant 
subgroup of mentally disordered offenders. For example, both the undergraduate and mas-
ter’s programmes in ‘personality disorder’ run by the Open University in the UK, place the  
service-user at the centre of the student’s learning experience by involving service-users at every 
stage of development, design, and delivery of courses. This partnership approach underpins a richer, 
more contextualized understanding of service-users. In respect to mentally disordered offenders, 

Sam Warner
100
including those diagnosed with a personality disorder, this has coincided with a dispersal of focus 
from a here-and-now concern with offence triggers and cycles, to a more nuanced approach that 
aims to include direct work around past experiences of abuse and neglect that may act as primary 
influences on subsequent offending behaviour.
Assessing risk: the role of social framework evidence
A critical forensic psychology not only views offenders as persons-in-context, but also fully 
recognizes the need to contextualize the knowledge-base of experts and the opinions they give. 
No longer is it possible to hide behind the cloak of expertise (trust me; trust my test). Rather, 
experts are enjoined to explicate from where their opinion is derived: the various sources of 
information (the person him/herself, and the verbal and written reports of others), and the 
various forms of knowledge (theory, research, and practice) through which information may be 
read and evaluated. The type of report produced through this process of triangulation is detailed 
and nuanced. Ambiguity is engaged with, rather than seen as a problem to be avoided (Warner 
2009). Risk assessments are never definitive, and are always time-limited (circumstances keep 
changing). This means that any ‘prediction’ of risk must be socially located and indicate under 
what circumstances, when approached in which ways, how offenders may act, and hence what 
they might need in each of those various scenarios to ensure safety and positive development.
Anticipating different possible futures and articulating the various levels of risk and need 
therein is not just a feature of a post-structuralist forensic psychology. It is fundamental to 
most current risk assessments. For example, the HCR-20 V3 (Douglas et al. 2013) is the latest 
version of a comprehensive professional guideline for violence or threat assessment and man-
agement, and is the most widely used risk assessment in the world. It is based on the structured 
professional judgement model and incorporates data on key historical, clinical, and risk factors 
associated with violence. The aim is to provide a framework through which to structure clinical 
judgement. The three identified aspects cover past, present, and future factors, respectively, and 
the aim is to identify risks associated with different future scenarios and the different manage-
ment strategies associated with each situation. The HCR-20 V3 encourages assessors to pro-
vide situated knowledge about mentally disordered offenders. A critical forensic psychology 
would go further to articulate the social knowledge frameworks (Raitt and Zeedyk 2000) that 
underpin the reference points used to structure clinical judgements. For example, if I talk about 
mental illness or personality disorder, I explain my understandings about the reductive effects of 
diagnosis and why it can be more helpful to directly address the underlying experiences (setting 
conditions and triggers) that push service-users into so-called symptomatic behaviour. I do not 
assume that I share with the Courts a common understanding of mental distress.
Addressing current need: relational security  
and harm minimization
Whether in secure mental hospital, prison, or out in the community, a partial aim of any inter-
vention with offenders is to reduce risk of recidivism and increase their potential for rehabili-
tation. Increasingly, there is recognition that mental pathology is not solely located within the 
individual but is a function of the environment individuals inhabit. Some environments are more 
toxic and challenging than others. As such, any critical forensic psychology must be socially situ-
ated and orientated to enabling safer, less harmful contexts for care. At its most bleak, some have 
argued that prisons are simply a new form of slavery. For example, Pelaez (2014) notes that in 
America a prison population of up to 2 million – mainly Black and Hispanic men – are working 

Forensic psychology
101
in various industries for very little money. Additionally, there is considerable evidence that both 
male and female offenders are subject to violence and sexual assault within secure environments 
(e.g. Wolff and Shi 2009; Warner 2009 respectively) and that self-harm and suicide increase on 
incarceration (e.g. Hawton et al 2013; Warner 2013). It is crucial, therefore, that secure services 
make every effort to safeguard their residents. This means having robust measures to counter 
exploitation and violence. It also involves having detailed policies that enable safety and which 
minimize the toxicity of the environment.
A key principle of secure mental health services is that individuals should be managed in 
the least restrictive environment possible in order to facilitate their safe recovery (NHS 2013). 
Increasingly, safety is understood to be a function of a range of security measures encompassing 
physical, procedural, and relational aspects. Relational aspects are the most difficult to define, but 
can be thought of as the quality of care provided by forensic services, linked to resource availa-
bility (Kennedy 2002). Facilities that provide individuals with safe, local, and supportive environ-
ments that enable good links and clear pathways into and out of secure and community services 
are preferable. This is one aspect of a harm minimization approach that is currently being used 
to work with people who self-harm. Whilst secure services often have a duty of care that means 
they are legally bound to stop inmates self-harming, relational aspects of harm minimization are 
increasingly being adopted within secure services. Harm minimization is recognized by the UK 
as a legitimate intervention regarding self-injury (NICE 2011).
From a harm-minimization perspective, self-injury is understood to fulfil an adaptive func-
tion in managing feelings (either when they overwhelm or when people have become too 
numb). It is therefore counter-productive to stop people self-harming, because this can engen-
der a greater need for self-harm. Hence, people are encouraged to utilize the least harmful 
method of self-injury that works for them and harm cessation is only used when service-users 
are judged to be actively suicidal. Harm minimization can be enabled behaviourally (in terms 
of having a clean cutting instrument, for example); cognitively (in terms of understanding one’s 
own triggers and how the body works); and emotionally (in terms of giving due considera-
tion to how environments and professional relationships increase or decrease the likelihood of 
self-injury). Forensic psychologists can be instrumental in enabling greater safety by helping 
service-providers to reflect on how they make service-users feel, and by enabling service-users 
to understand their own triggers, both in terms of issues in the present and in terms of unre-
solved trauma from the past (see Warner and Spandler 2012).
Addressing underlying issues: trauma and abuse
As indicated, for very many offenders in secure services, violence and abuse have been rela-
tively constant features of their lives. Traditionally, treatment for violent and sex offenders has 
been cognitive-behavioural in orientation, ‘here and now’ based, and offence-focused (e.g. UK 
Ministry of Justice 2010). Addressing unresolved trauma associated with early experiences of 
victimization was viewed as sanctioning avoidant-behaviour on the part of offenders. Yet there 
is some recognition (from within largely a critical forensic perspective) that without a compre-
hensive and holistic intervention that encompasses a whole-life approach, any cognitive behav-
ioural programme will have limited impact. This is because the past is always implicated in the 
construction of needs, desires, and behaviours in the present. Attention to the past enables the 
‘why’ questions of behaviour, the unconscious motivations, to be addressed alongside the more 
conscious pathways into offending. This type of approach has been used with young people who 
engage in sexually harmful behaviour by the children’s charity service Barnardos in the UK. 
They adopt an attachment-based approach that builds strength in the client through enabling 

Sam Warner
102
a more positive and secure sense of relationship. This enables the client to address underlying 
trauma, which is instrumental in provoking and maintaining the harmful behaviour. In this 
way, offences are not ignored, but rather are located within a psychosocial complex. Such an 
approach is client-focused, rather than formulaic.
The majority of women in prisons have committed a non-violent offence – about 80 per 
cent in the UK (Women’s Breakout 2015). As noted, very many women in secure services 
have been victimized in childhood and into adulthood. It is crucial that they access psychology 
services that can enable them to make sense of their experiences in the past and the present, 
address unresolved trauma, and build different futures for themselves and their families. Women 
are primary caregivers for children. As little as 9 per cent of children are cared for by their fathers 
while their mothers are in prison, and this can have a devastating impact on women and children 
alike (ibid). It is little wonder that women in secure care exhibit high rates of self-harm. Again, 
it is important that any intervention address concerns in the past and the present. If women are 
not in safe environments, they cannot begin to reflect on earlier experiences of powerlessness 
and abuse. Nevertheless, women in secure care value the opportunity to talk about issues such 
as child sexual abuse. And systems that are issue-based rather than diagnosis-led are preferred 
by many incarcerated service-users. This is because they directly focus attention towards those 
factors that prompted the journey into secure care in the first place (e.g. Warner 2009).
Conclusions
Forensic psychology is radicalized when it encourages a situated approach to understanding 
offenders. Offending behaviour is produced in psycho-political space, and intervention has to 
take account of all contextualizing aspects. Without a full appreciation of socio-structural econ-
omies that position some individuals as being more at risk of offending and more at risk of 
carceral detention, forensic psychology will be no more than a mechanism of State disciplinary 
power. Forensic psychologists have the opportunity, however, to be instrumental in developing 
services that ensure offenders are understood in their whole-life contexts. This involves both 
understanding the need to address early life abuse and trauma, as well as making every effort to 
ensure present-life safety and future opportunities. This, then, is about creating environments 
that not only minimize harm, but aim to transform survival into recovery.
Further reading
Foucault, M. (1971/1992) Madness and Civilisation: a History of Insanity in the Age of Reason. London: 
Routledge.
Renzetti, C. (2013) Feminist Criminology. London: Routledge.
Website resources
FBI’s Behavioral Research and Instruction Unit: http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cirg/investigations-and- 
operations-support/briu
Training in forensic and clinical psychology in the UK: www.bps.org.uk
References
Candler, S. R. and Austin, A. (2014) Race, Class and Gender of Prisoners. London: Sage.
Canter, D. (2010) Forensic Psychology: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Corston, J. (2007) The Corston Report: The Need for a Distinct, Radically Different, Visibly-Led, Strategic, Propor-
tionate, Holistic, Woman-Centred, Integrated Approach. London: The Home Office.

Forensic psychology
103
Douglas, K. S., Hart, S. D., Webster, C. D. and Belfrage, H. (2013) HCR-20: Assessing Risk for Violence (3rd 
Edn). Vancouver: Mental Health, Law and Policy Institute, Simon Fraser University.
Entwisle, J. (1996) Applications for the degree of psychology, Personal Communication.
Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison. New York: Vintage Books.
Haraway, D. (1991) Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. London: Routledge.
Hawton, K., Linsell, L., Adeniji, T., Sariaslan, A. and Fazel, S. (2013) ‘Self-harm in prisons in England and 
Wales: an epidemiological study of prevalence, risk factors, clustering and subsequent suicide’, The 
Lancet, 383(9923), 1147–1154.
House of Commons Justice Committee (2013) ‘Women Offenders: After the Corston Report’, Sec-
ond report of Session 2013–14, http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201314/cmselect/
cmjust/92/92.pdf
Kennedy, H. G. (2002) ‘Therapeutic uses of security: mapping forensic mental health services by stratifying 
risk’, Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 8, 433–443.
Kristof, N. (2014) ‘Inside a mental hospital called jail’, The New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/ 
2014/02/09/opinion/sunday/inside-a-mental-hospital-called-jail.html
Larner, G. (2002) ‘Towards a critical psychology’, Critical Psychology, 7, 9–29.
Mental Health Foundation (2007) The Fundamental Facts: The Latest Facts and Figures on Mental Health. 
London: The Mental Health Foundation.
Ministry of Justice (2010) ‘What works with sex offenders?’, http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/
information-access-rights/foi-disclosure-log/prison-probation/foi-75519-annex-a.pdf
NAACP (2014) Criminal Justice Fact Sheet, http:/action.naacp.org/page/s/naacp-criminal-justice
NHS (2013) Standard Contract for Medium and Low Secure Mental Health Services (Adults) Schedule 2, 
The Services, A Service Specifications. London: NHS Commissioning Board.
NICE (2011) Self-harm (Longer Term Management). London: NICE.
Norman, N. and Barron, B. (2011) Supporting Women Offenders Who Have Experienced Domestic and 
Sexual Violence, Bristol: Women’s Aid Federation of England.
O’Farrell, C. (2005) Michel Foucault. London: Sage.
Osmanand, S. and Harris, P. (2002, December 29) ‘Black people six times more likely to be jailed than 
whites’, The Guardian, http://www.theguardian.com/society/2002/dec/29/raceequality.raceintheuk
Pelaez, V. (2014) ‘The Prison Industry in the United States: Big Business or a New Form of Slavery’, 
www.globalresearch.ca/the-prison-industry-in-the-united-states-big-business-or-a-new-form-of- 
slavery/8289
Raitt, F. E. and Zeedyk, S. (2000) The Implicit Relation of Psychology and Law: Women and Syndrome Evidence. 
London: Routledge.
Seth, J. P. (2011) ‘Does transinstitutionalization explain the overrepresentation of people with serious men-
tal illnesses in the criminal justice system?’, Community Mental Health Journal, 47(6), 716–722.
Torrey, E. F., Zdanowicz, M. T., Kennard, A. D. et al. (2014) ‘The treatment of persons with mental illness in 
prisons and jails: a state survey. A joint report of the Treatment Advocacy Center and the National Sheriffs’ 
Association’, http://tacreports.org/storage/documents/treatment-behind-bars/treatment-behind-bars.pdf
Warner, S. (2009) Understanding the Effects of Child Sexual Abuse. London: Routledge.
Warner, S. (2013) ‘[Self-harm]: from State control to State support’, Asylum: the magazine for democratic psy-
chiatry, 20(2), 13–15.
Warner, S. and Spandler, H. (2012) ‘New strategies for practice-based evidence: a focus on self-harm’, Qual-
itative Research in Psychology, 9(1), 13–26.
Wilkins, T. M. and Warner, S. (2001) ‘Women in special hospitals: understanding the presenting behaviour of 
women diagnosed with borderline personality disorder’, Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 
8(4), 289–297.
WISH (2014) ‘Homepage’, http://womenatwish.org.uk
Wolff, N. and Shi, J. (2009) ‘Contextualization of physical and sexual assault in male prisons: incidents and 
their aftermath’, Journal of Correct Health Care, 15(1), 58–82.
Women’s Breakout (2015) ‘Key facts’, http://www.womensbreakout.org.uk/about-us/key-facts/

This page intentionally left blank

Part Ib
Radical attempts to question 
the mainstream

This page intentionally left blank

107
11
Qualitative methods
Critical practices and prospects 
from a diverse field
Brendan Gough
Qualitative research in psychology is not inherently critical; in fact, it can (and has been) used to 
test and confirm theory-driven quantitative research, and to buttress mainstream psychological 
concepts. But: throughout the history of the discipline, and especially since the late 1960s, quali-
tative research has often offered alternative ways of doing psychology, of critiquing the discipline, 
promoting marginalized voices, and prompting social change. These critical interventions have 
taken myriad forms, and we now have a field of qualitative research which is diverse, fragmented, 
and rapidly evolving. Before exploring current critical trends in qualitative research, however, 
it is important to provide a context for the historically recent emergence and proliferation of 
(critical) qualitative methods.
Although psychology as a discipline was founded on a natural science model in nineteenth-  
century Germany, qualitative human science research has been conducted since the early days. 
In Wundt’s (1921) Volkerpsychologie, for example, two strands of psychological science were envi-
sioned: one featuring experimental research (e.g. on perception), the other focusing on complex 
psychological functions and requiring observation and interpretation. Despite the dominance 
of behaviourism in the early twentieth century, and cognitivism in the latter part, qualitative 
research was championed by various scholars situated broadly within social psychology, includ-
ing William James, Wilhelm Dilthey, John Dewey, and Gordon Allport (see Marecek 2003). 
Another key figure of course was Sigmund Freud, whose incendiary psychoanalytic approach 
presented a distinctive (and controversial) blueprint for qualitative research in the form of the 
clinical interview/case study, and more latterly forms of psychosocial research (e.g. Henriques 
et al. 1984/1998).
It was not until the late 1960s and early 1970s, however, that the idea of doing research qual-
itatively began to take hold and make progress from the margins of psychology towards (but not 
reaching) the centre. This period in Western history is associated with collective protest, unrest, 
and social change, and in this climate scientific psychology was targeted by a variety of critics 
within and outside the discipline. For example, humanistic psychologists in the USA lamented 
the experimental fixation on measurement, prediction, and control, and the concomitant reduc-
tion of human experience to performance on a narrow set of predefined tests. Instead, they 
advocated methods which encouraged research participants to describe their experiences in 

Brendan Gough
108
written accounts, for example, or verbally during interviews, thus granting research participants 
more freedom, respect, and dignity compared to laboratory experiments; in fact, the human-
istic impulse in this work was concerned with improving as well as understanding individual 
experience (e.g. ‘flow’ or ‘peak’ experience: Csikszentmihayli 1990). These early critiques and 
‘experiments’ with alternative, qualitative methods were variously influenced by US American 
human potential pioneers (Rogers; Maslow) and continental philosophers (e.g. Husserl; Heide-
gger; Sartre; Merleau-Ponty). The critiques led to the development of humanistic, existential, 
and phenomenological forms of qualitative research, most notably in the USA (e.g. Giorgi 2009: 
Descriptive Phenomenological Method), but also in the UK (e.g. Smith 2004: Interpretative 
Phenomenological Analysis). Feminist researchers have also been at the forefront of develop-
ing experiential methods, writing subjectivity into research, and promoting reflexive, partici-
patory approaches (e.g. Gilligan et al. 2003: Listening Guide). Semi-structured interviews (e.g. 
Smith 1995) are the method of choice here for collecting data, promising a democratic, flexible 
research encounter in which both researcher and participant interests can be satisfied.
Another type of psychology critique was arguably more radical and political. Here the focus 
was on psychology as a disciplining institutional force, complicit in the subjugation of ‘prob-
lematic’ subjects, ranging from women, gay and lesbian groups, and minority ethnic groups to 
the mentally ill, the disabled, and the disenfranchised. The deployment of psychological tools 
to assess, categorize, and treat these groups was decried by many scholars and activists outside 
the discipline, informed by feminism, Marxism, antipsychiatry, and anti-racist and LGBT move-
ments. Feminist scholars, for example, began to challenge the androcentrism and misogyny 
embedded in much psychology theory and research (Haraway 1991), and began to pioneer 
alternative, women-centred approaches to research where women’s voices were foregrounded 
and gender stereotypes dismantled (e.g. Gilligan 1982). In the 1980s, the critical and research 
endeavours centred around discourse and representation in the midst of a more general ‘lin-
guistic’ or ‘postmodern’ turn in social theory, influenced by the work of Michel Foucault. Dis- 
course analytic research emerged as a way of interrogating prevailing societal discourses and 
their effects, particularly on marginalized groups. Feminist researchers were again at the fore-
front of these developments (see Wilkinson and Kitzinger 1996), deconstructing discourses of 
heterosexuality and sex difference perpetuated by psychology, medicine, and other institutions 
which constituted women as subordinate to men. In general, there was a rejection of biolog-
ical arguments about ‘natural’ differences (between men and women; between racial groups; 
between gay and straight, etc.), and an embrace of a broad ‘social constructionist’ stance towards 
the world, informing the nature of qualitative research (Burr 1995). Although qualitative inter-
views feature in constructionist qualitative research, other data collection/selection methods 
have been used, with a focus on social interaction and discursive (re)production, including focus 
groups and naturalistic conversations (both off- and online), as well as media texts (newspapers/
magazines/online content).
So, we can make a (crude) distinction between ‘experiential’ and constructionist qualita-
tive research (see Madill et al. 2000), with the former often regarded as more individualist and 
less critical, and the latter construed as more socially oriented and critical. However, this is a 
complex debate, which obviously depends on the definition of critical, and it is not difficult to 
find examples of experiential research which critiques mainstream psychological theory (e.g. 
Flowers and Buston 2001), or constructionist research which does not explicitly identify with 
critical psychology (e.g. some conversation analytic work – see Parker 2005). It is probably 
best to think of a continuum wherein specific projects rather than methodologies (discourse 
analysis; grounded theory; phenomenology, etc.) can be located, not least because there is so 

Qualitative methods
109
much variation (and sometimes conflict) within a given methodological terrain. The situation 
currently is one of ever-increasing diversity and innovation which can only be incompletely 
categorized (see Madill and Gough 2008), one where the use of visual, mobile, and online qual-
itative methods is accelerating (see Reavey 2011).
Review
It is fair to say that critical psychological research has been mainly associated with particular 
methodologies: discursive, narrative, psychosocial – and particular agendas e.g. feminist, LGBT, 
and anti-racist informed action research projects. To reiterate: this is not to say that qualita-
tive research using grounded theory methods, thematic analysis, or phenomenology cannot be 
regarded as critical – there are examples of such approaches being deployed to critical ends – but 
in general these approaches are (and have been) more easily assimilated into mainstream psycho-
logical discourse and practice.
Discursive research is varied, both within (social) psychology and across the social sciences 
(see Wetherell et al. 2001). The focus here is on critical forms of discursive research which are 
associated with UK social psychology from the late 1980s (e.g. Potter and Wetherell 1987). 
A distinction is typically made between discursive psychology (e.g. Edwards and Potter 1993), 
which re-specifies psychological phenomena (thoughts, memories, attitudes, emotions, and so 
forth) as discursively constructed during social interactions, and critical of Foucauldian inspired 
discourse analysis, which focuses on the reproduction, reworking, and resistance to salient soci-
etal discourses (e.g. Parker 2002; Hook 2001). There has been much debate concerning these 
two traditions, especially during the 1990s; for example, discursive psychology has been criti-
cized for failing to fully examine the political implications of psychological discourse (e.g. Parker 
2015), while Foucauldian discourse analysis has been charged with flooding data analysis with 
the analyst’s own categories (see Potter 1997). Several discourse analysts have opted to take a 
hybrid approach, drawing on concepts and practices from both traditions to progress detailed yet 
critical analyses (see Wetherell 1998).
It is worth illustrating how different discursive approaches can produce a critical impact. Dis-
cursive psychology presents a thoroughgoing critique of mainstream psychology by relocating 
‘cognition’ from inside the head into a social, public domain; as Edwards (2005: 260) comments, 
discursive psychology works to ‘avoid psychological theorizing in favour of analysis based in the 
pragmatics of social action’. There is a critically useful focus on the rhetorical strategies used 
to present viewpoints as factual or natural, ‘practical ideologies’ (Wetherell et al. 1987) used to 
rationalize a status quo in which certain privileged groups benefit while others are subordinated. 
According to this approach, for example, ‘prejudice’ moves from cognitive deficit (e.g. perceptual 
shortcuts) to the realm of discourse, social interaction, and argumentation. A recent study by 
Goodman and Burke (2011), for example, highlights the complexity of prejudice in practice by 
focusing on Facebook posts about asylum-seeking and immigration to the UK. In their data, 
the authors point to the contemporary taboo against prejudice (Billig 1988) as opponents of 
asylum-seekers work to position themselves as reasonable by, say, presenting their opposition in 
economic and practical (not racist) terms – a phenomenon referred to as ‘discursive deracializa-
tion’ (Augoustinos and Every 2007).
Foucauldian discourse analysis, in contrast, identifies broader societal discourses promoted 
within institutional sites (media, government, legal, medicine, and so on) through myriad ‘texts’ 
(interviews, media content, government policies, for instance) with an emphasis on how such 
discourses ‘interpellate’ or capture people within particular positions and relationships (e.g. Parker 

Brendan Gough
110
2002; Hook 2001). This work is informed by Foucault and other social theorists (e.g. Louis 
Althusser) with a central focus on subjectification, or how people become inscribed as particular 
types of subject (mother, criminal, patient, victim, as probable types), and the constraints (and 
possibilities) which are implied with each subject position. A psychiatric discourse, for example, 
will classify certain unusual practices as ‘abnormal’, whereupon the subject in question may then 
be cast as ‘mentally ill’ and subjected to a psycho-chemical treatment regime. To varying degrees, 
subject positions can be resisted, depending on the discursive – and material – resources avail-
able to the subject within a given social location. Thus, a dual emphasis on Foucault’s couplets: 
discourse/power, power/resistance. A particular concern here is with psychologization – the 
pervasive cultural and institutional reproduction of people as unitary rational subjects in charge 
of their own destinies, whose ‘attitudes’ and ‘personalities’ shape their life opportunities. The 
term ‘psy-complex’ has been adopted here (Rose 1998) to describe the reach and significance of 
this phenomenon within neoliberal consumerist societies (see also De Vos 2012). All manner of 
issues, from unemployment to health and well-being are now construed in terms of individual 
choice and responsibility, as if social and structural constraints were invisible. The growth of the 
‘positive psychology’ movement (Peterson and Seligman 2004) underlines these points. Positive 
psychology reimagines the humanistic psychology project pioneered by Rogers and Maslow 
but with a focus on the measurement and promotion of certain character traits, or ‘virtues’ 
(Peterson and Seligman 2004). The discourses which structure such texts have been analyzed by 
McDonald and O’Callaghan (2008), who argue that positive psychology represents a new form 
of governmentality and ‘psy-expertise’ which conforms to neoliberal economic and political 
principles. This is social control at a distance, promoting self-regulation and the development 
of a neoliberal character which is independent, enterprising, dynamic, flexible, and productive.
Forms of narrative research have also been defined and deployed in critical ways. Critical 
narrative analysis moves away from experience-centred approaches towards a more culturally 
oriented treatment of narratives, informed by critical theorists such as Foucault (see Andrews 
et al. 2008). The focus on stories and storytelling implies an agent (or narrator) who uses sto-
ries to make meaning and apply structure to experience, albeit with the form and content of 
narratives to some extent shaped and constrained by context and resources. Langdridge (2007), 
for example, advocates a ‘critical narrative analysis’ which respects research participant accounts, 
notes politically significant aspects of narratives, and invokes analyst concepts in order to situ-
ate and challenge wider discourses which inform narratives presented. Similarly, Andrews et al. 
(2008) advocate a narrative analysis which centres around social change: ‘Narratives themselves 
can be important components of social change, and narrative research may contribute to social 
change . . . to address medical, social and educational problems, to build communities and resolve 
crises, to aid reconciliation and to improve understanding in situations of conflict and change’ 
(www.uel.ac.uk/cnr). Critical narrative analysis has been applied in various settings; for exam-
ple, Hall (2011) uses a feminist narrative analysis to identify positive stories from survivors of 
childhood maltreatment (see also Crossley 2000), while Murray (2008) prioritizes a psychosocial 
approach which involves community as well as personal stories in the promotion of healthy 
neighbourhoods.
The term ‘psychosocial’ is widely used within qualitative research (and even mainstream 
psychology) so we must take care to specify what this means and how particular psychosocial 
research projects may elaborate a critical analysis. From a critical perspective, a psychosocial 
approach dispenses with a distinction between the individual and the world they inhabit: the 
two are inextricably intertwined. For some scholars, the preoccupation with language in discur-
sive approaches makes for an impoverished subject, where biography, emotion, and embodiment 
are downplayed. In the words of Hollway and Jefferson (2000: 19): ‘meanings are both common 

Qualitative methods
111
and unique, social and biographical, discursive and defended’. Scholars such as Hollway have 
turned to psychoanalytic theory to ‘fill’ this ‘empty’ subject (e.g. Henriques et al. 1984/1998), 
although the reliance on and nature of psychoanalytic concepts varies between researchers, and 
the psychoanalytic turn is rejected by several psychosocial scholars (e.g. Finn and Henwood 
2009; Edley 2006). Psychoanalytically constituted qualitative research builds in a focus on early 
experience (e.g. Hollway and Jefferson 2000), but risks privileging the psychological over the 
social, and does not generally take on board insights from constructionist and discursive psy-
chology. Other researchers draw on psychoanalytic theory without losing sight of social and dis-
cursive contexts, including Frosh and colleagues in their work on masculinities (e.g. Frosh, et al. 
2002), and Gough’s (2009) case study of a father-son relationship. Other psychosocial researchers 
eschew the psychoanalytic altogether, preferring discursive or relational appropriations of sub-
jectivity: ‘imaginary positions and psychodiscursive practices’ (Wetherell and Edley 1999); ‘per-
sonal histories that involve relational and inter-generational tensions and connections’ (Finn and 
Henwood 2009). To some extent, this range of psychosocial research can be regarded as critical 
in producing analyses of subjectivity which are situated, complex, and dynamic, and which stand 
in contrast to simplistic, reductionist psychological theories of self. It is also worth mentioning 
other, more theoretical (but critical) adaptations of psychoanalytic (particularly Lacanian) theory 
within social psychology (e.g. Parker 2011; Hook and Neill 2008).
Another field of (mainly) qualitative research which is explicitly critical in design, agenda, 
and impact is action research. The actual methods are less important than the social change(s) 
intended, and indeed quantitative and mixed methods have been used to progress a number 
of community projects (see Brydon-Miller 1997). A succinct definition of action research is 
offered by Kagan et al. (2008: 32): ‘[it] attempts to combine understanding, or development of 
theory, with action and change through a participative process, whilst remaining grounded in 
experience’. A key component of action research is collaboration with group/community mem-
bers, fostering a democratic environment where participants (co-researchers) have an equal say 
and help conceive the problem/s to be addressed and the research methods to be adopted (see 
Rheinharz 1992). There is a methodology historically influenced by social psychologist Kurt 
Lewin and radical educationalist Paolo Freire which is termed ‘Participatory Action Research’ 
(PAR) and which explicitly pursues positive social change among marginalized communities. 
For example, Fine and Torre (2006) describe a PAR project focusing on the impact of college 
in prison on the women students, the prison environment, and prisoners’ post-release outcomes. 
Other PAR projects have worked with young adults using psychiatric services (Delman 2012), 
residents of care homes for older people (Ottmann et al. 2011), and indigenous groups living in 
rural and remote communities (Wearing et al. 2010).
Reflections
Given the sheer diversity of qualitative research methods, and the debates between different 
advocates of different methodologies (and between different versions of the same broad meth-
odology), it would be foolish to make a general claim about the critical nature of qualitative 
research. At the same time, the critical dimension of a given (qualitative) research project can 
take many forms, such as challenging a mainstream psychological construct (e.g. discursive psy-
chology work on memory), using interviews and focus groups to give voice to a particular 
community (e.g. feminist work with sex workers), or deconstructing media representations of 
a minority group (e.g. asylum seekers). So, specific qualitative methods for data collection and 
analysis can be used for specific critical ends; no given qualitative method(-ology) is inherently 
critical – it depends on how the method is deployed. Sometimes the critical character of a 

Brendan Gough
112
qualitative research project can be announced clearly, focusing on language and power (e.g. 
Mapping the Language of Racism: Discourse and the Legitimation of Exploitation; Wetherell and Potter 
1992), while on other occasions the critical element can be softer, focusing on narrative and/or 
experience (e.g. “I was terrified of being different”: exploring gay men’s accounts of growing up 
in a heterosexist society’; Flowers and Buston 2001).
Whatever qualitative methods are used, to qualify as critical there should be a critique, 
whether implicit or explicit, of mainstream psychological concepts and methods, and an artic-
ulation of alternative (not complementary) theory. Critical qualitative research may highlight 
the messy, fluid, and unquantifiable nature of phenomena (e.g. Hollway and Jefferson 2000); cast 
light on researcher subjectivity – and how this can be deployed as a resource rather than viewed 
as a source of ‘contamination’ or ‘bias’ (see Gough and Madill 2012); situate ‘psychological’ 
events in relevant social, cultural, and biographical contexts, evoking a psychosocial, relational 
stance which undermines the psychologization of everyday life (see De Vos 2012); experiment 
with research processes and presentation, including reflexive, performative and democratic for-
mats, thus condemning mainstream attempts at ‘scientific’ procedures and writing traditions 
(e.g. QI); and expose the role of psychology in subjectifying categories of people within insti-
tutions (e.g. medicine, media, education) (Parker and Spears 1996). Critical qualitative research 
may assume an experiential or constructionist stance in order to challenge taken-for-granted 
‘knowledge’ through giving voice to research participants and publicizing alternative knowl-
edges concerning the topic in question. It can foster resistance to dominant discourses and 
promote social change through collaborative research projects, involving community members 
in tackling local, ‘real-world’ issues. As well as helping to transform the lives of people on the 
margins, critical qualitative research can change the discipline of psychology. In tandem with 
the rise in qualitative research in the last twenty-five years or so, the discipline of psychology has 
been evolving into a more pluralistic, inclusive, and accommodating space. That is not to down-
play the continued dominance of quantitative research and associated quality metrics, the rise 
of cognitive neuroscience, or the all-pervasive psychologization on offer, but there is evidence 
of qualitative methods penetration within institutional settings (e.g. the British Psychological 
Society: Qualitative Methods in Psychology Section; the American Psychological Association: 
Society for Qualitative Inquiry in Psychology), some success with mainstream journals (e.g. 
Psychological Methods; Health Psychology), critical/qualitative speakers being given a platform at 
mainstream psychology conferences, and so on.
In textbooks and journal articles on qualitative research, there is often a concern about 
quality – how can we assess ‘validity’ or ‘rigour’? There is widespread agreement that established 
modes of validating quantitative research are inappropriate for qualitative research (measuring 
inter-rater reliability, etc.). In recent years, quality criteria checklists have been generated for 
qualitative researchers (e.g. Elliott et al. 1999), with items such as ‘triangulation’, ‘participant val-
idation’, ‘reflexivity’, ‘transferability’, and ‘negative case analysis’ being touted. But: which criteria 
work best for critical qualitative research endeavours? This is a complex question. For example, 
participant validation, in which research participants (e.g. interviewees) are invited to comment 
on draft analyses in order to give their approval (or not) seems to be a straightforward means of 
empowering participants in the research process. However, in many cases participants may feel 
reluctant to evaluate the analysis, perhaps deferring to the perceived authority of the researcher, 
or out of politeness, or due to lack of time or interest. It depends in part on the extent to which 
the participants were involved in the research project as a whole – were they simply interviewees 
with little or no role in project conception and design or implementation, or did they act as 
co-researchers, as in many action research projects? The notion of triangulation, whereby differ-
ent sources of data or different points of view are ‘triangulated’ to yield a common perspective/

Qualitative methods
113
analysis, clearly values consensus and uniformity over diversity and conflict, and from a critical 
position we might question whose ideas are being showcased – and whose are silenced or 
marginalized.
The issue and practice of reflexivity is also vexed. Reflexivity has been mooted as the 
defining feature of qualitative research, a counterpoint to the dispassionate subject of science, 
detached from research processes and products (see Finlay and Gough 2003). However, there 
are many different ‘reflexivities’ which may or may not be construed as critical. In an important 
early paper which helped to define the terms of the debate, Wilkinson (1988) distinguishes 
between three forms of reflexivity: personal, professional, and disciplinary. Within the personal 
category, researchers reflect on their investment in the research topic and monitor the impact at 
different stages of the research process: in this way, the research is contextualized for the reader. 
In the professional mode, researchers attend to their practice as researchers – what methods of 
persuasion are used to recruit research participants? How do participants and researchers react 
to each other during the research encounter? Why are some interviews/focus groups so differ-
ent? And so on. Variability within and between different research stages underlines the social, 
intersubjective nature of research projects. The third level, disciplinary reflexivity, concerns how 
the researcher positions themselves with respect to the discipline within which they are work-
ing (or working against): why have particular theories/methods/practices been adopted, and 
what do these choices imply about the type of research being conducted and the nature of the 
knowledge produced?
So, reflexive qualitative research is critical in that it rejects the mainstream stance of researcher 
detachment and articulates alternative visions of research which cast light on processes and 
practices typically rendered invisible. However, there is a danger that reflexive researchers are so 
engaged with self-analysis that wider research questions and problems concerning, say, margin-
alization and social change, are glossed over or forgotten about entirely. Thus, a certain amount 
of discipline may be required, a ‘one step up’ reflexivity which does not degenerate into an 
endless introspective spiral (see Pels 2000).
Limits
The growth and increasing acceptance of qualitative methods within psychology is both a cause 
for celebration and concern. In light of the expansion in journals and texts publishing qualitative 
research, psychology students and researchers are more exposed to and appreciative of qualitative 
methods. However, we also live in the age of neuroscience, and neuropsychology is dominant 
across psychology curricula, with qualitative methods shunted to the sidelines or simply not 
taught in some departments. Similarly, although mainstream psychology journals (produced 
under the auspices of the APA and the BPS, for example) do publish some qualitative research, 
this is still limited, and in the main only a narrow range of methods are featured, primarily 
‘thematic’, experiential methods. In addition, qualitative research is often used in the service 
of mainstream psychological theories to add colour to quantitative data by providing extracts 
which are themed according to a priori theoretical drivers. The use of qualitative methods is 
therefore largely selective and strategic – a technical deployment which glosses over complexity, 
subjectivity, and fluidity. Indeed, a so-called post-positivist frame is used to judge the ‘validity’ 
of qualitative research, drawing on ‘measureable’ indicators such as inter-rater reliability. This 
means that only sanitized, realist forms of qualitative research which complement rather than 
undermine existing psychological theory are included in mainstream journals, leaving other 
specialist and interdisciplinary journals to consider constructionist and critical forms of qual-
itative research which deconstruct the psychological. This situation is mirrored in psychology 

Brendan Gough
114
departments, where qualitative research articles, especially those published outside mainstream 
psychology journals, are devalued or misunderstood in the drive for papers in ‘high impact’ 
journals for inclusion in institutional research audit (the Research Excellence Framework in the 
UK). As a result, qualitative psychologists are often not returned in these assessment exercises, 
or are returned in other units where there is more acceptance and recognition of qualitative 
methods (e.g. social work and social policy; public health). Clearly, this situation has implications 
for career progression and achievement for critical, qualitative psychologists.
So, the situation of apparent (but actually conditional) acceptance of qualitative research in 
psychology generates something of a dilemma for the critical psychologist – to push for greater 
recognition of diverse qualitative methods within psychology, and in doing so push forward 
critical agendas, or to forgo psychology altogether and communicate with critical colleagues in 
interdisciplinary arenas where psychologization is abhorred? There are pros and cons of both 
approaches, of course, and there is no reason why both pathways cannot be adopted by the same 
person on different occasions. Any breakthroughs in publishing qualitative research in main-
stream journals are potentially significant – it remains to be seen whether, say, discourse analysis 
becomes a ‘psychological’ method of choice rather than an approach favoured by colleagues 
and critics in other disciplines. On the other hand, if we ignore the discipline of psychology 
and collaborate with scholars elsewhere, there is potential to break new ground, methodologi-
cally, theoretically, and critically. Interdisciplinary conferences and journals built around specific 
themes provide opportunities for innovation and expansion of concepts which would otherwise 
not be possible. Journals such as Qualitative Research and Qualitative Inquiry feature papers from 
across the social and human sciences and contribute to the interrogation and development 
of qualitative research practice and performance. Finding a home, a department where critical, 
qualitative research is respected – and a wider community where critical qualitative research can 
be discussed – can be fraught, and for some critical qualitative psychologists this can be inside 
psychology, while for others this is within alternative (inter)disciplinary places.
Further reading
Camic, P., Rhodes, J., and Yardley, L. (eds) (2003) Qualitative Research in Psychology: Expanding Perspectives in 
Methodology and Design, Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Madill, A. and Gough, B. (2008) ‘Qualitative Research and Its Place in Psychological Science’, Psychological 
Methods, 13(3), 254–271.
Parker, I. (2005) Qualitative Psychology: Introducing Radical Research. London: Routledge.
Website resources
British Psychological Society: Qualitative Methods in Psychology Section (QMiP): http://www.bps.org.
uk/networks-and-communities/member-networks/qualitative-methods-psychology-section
Qualitative Research in Psychology (a leading journal in the field): http://www.tandfonline.com/toc/uqrp20/
current
Society for Qualitative Inquiry in Psychology: https://www.facebook.com/qualpsy
References
Andrews, M., Squire, C. and Tamboukou, M. (eds) (2008) Doing Narrative Research. London: Sage.
Augoustinos, M. and Every, D. (2007) ‘The language of “race” and prejudice: a discourse of denial, 
reason, and liberal-practical politics’, Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 26, 123–144.
Billig, M. (1988) ‘The notion of prejudice: some rhetorical and ideological aspects’, Text, 8, 91–110.
Brydon-Miller, M. (1997) ‘Participatory action research: psychology and social change’, Journal of Social 
Issues, 53(4), 657–666.

Qualitative methods
115
Burr, V. (1995) An Introduction to Social Constructionism. London: Routledge.
Crossley, M. L. (2000) Introducing Narrative Psychology: Self, Trauma and the Construction of Meaning. Bucking-
ham, UK: Open University Press.
Csikszentmihayli, M. (1990) Flow: The Psychology of Peak Experience. New York: Harper and Row.
Delman, J. (2012) ‘Participatory action research and young adults with psychiatric disabilities’, Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 35(3), 231–234.
De Vos, J. (2012) Psychologisation in Times of Globalisation. London: Routledge.
Edley, N. (2006) ‘Never the twain shall meet: a critical appraisal of the combination of discourse and psy-
choanalytic theory in studies of men and masculinity’, Sex Roles, 55, 601–608.
Edwards, D. (2005) ‘Discursive psychology’, in K. L. Fitch and R. E. Sanders (eds) Handbook of Language and 
Social Interaction. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Edwards, D. and Potter, J. (1993) ‘Language and causation: a discursive action model of description and 
attribution’, Psychological Review, 100, 23–41.
Elliott, R., Fischer, C. T. and Rennie, D. L. (1999) ‘Evolving guidelines for publication of qualitative research 
studies in psychology and related fields’, British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 38(3), 215–229.
Flowers, P. and Buston, K. (2001) ‘ “I was terrified of being different”: exploring gay men’s accounts of 
growing-up in a heterosexist society’, Journal of Adolescence, 24(1), 51–65.
Fine, M. and Torre, M. E. (2006) ‘Intimate details: participatory action research in prison’, Action Research, 
4(3), 253–269.
Finlay, L. and Gough, B. (eds) (2003) Reflexivity: a Practical Guide for Researchers in Health and Social Sciences. 
Oxford: Blackwell Science.
Finn, M., and Henwood, K. (2009) ‘Exploring masculinities within men’s identificatory imaginings of 
first-time fatherhood’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 48(3), 547–562.
Frosh, S., Phoenix, A. and Pattman, R. (2002) Young Masculinities: Understanding Boys in Contemporary Society. 
London: Palgrave.
Gilligan, C. (1982) In a Different Voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gilligan, C., Spencer, R., Weinberg, K. and Bertsch, T. (2003) ‘On the listening guide: A voice-centered 
relational model’, in P. Camic, J. Rhodes and L. Yardley (eds) Qualitative Research in Psychology: Expanding 
Perspectives in Methodology and Design. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Giorgi, A. (2009) The Descriptive Phenomenological Method in Psychology. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University 
Press.
Goodman, S. and Burke, S. (2011) ‘Discursive deracialization in talk about asylum seeking’, Journal of Com-
munity and Applied Social Psychology, 21(2), 111–123.
Gough, B. (2009) ‘A psycho-discursive approach to analysing qualitative interview data, with reference to 
a father-son relationship’, Qualitative Research, 9(5), 527–545.
Gough, B. and Madill, A. (2012) ‘Subjectivity in psychological science: from problem to prospect’, Psycho-
logical Methods, 17(3), 374–384.
Hall, J. M. (2011) ‘Narrative methods in a study of trauma recovery’, Qualitative Health Research, 21(1), 3–13.
Haraway, D. (1991) Simians, Cyborgs and Women: the Reinvention of Nature. New York: Routledge.
Henriques, J., Hollway, W., Urwin, C., Venn, C. and Walkerdine, V. (1984/1998) Changing the Subject: Psychol-
ogy, Social Regulation and Subjectivity. London: Routledge.
Hollway, W. and Jefferson, T. (2000) Doing Qualitative Research Differently: Free Association, Narrative and the 
Interview Method. London: Sage.
Hook, D. (2001) ‘Discourse, knowledge, materiality, history: Foucault and discourse analysis’, Theory & 
Psychology, 11, 521–547.
Hook, D. and Neill, C. (2008) ‘Perspectives on Lacanian subjectivities’, Subjectivity, 24, 247–255.
Kagan, C., Burton, M. and Siddiquee, A. (2008) ‘Action research’, in C. Willig and W. Stainton Rogers (eds) 
The Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research in Psychology. London: Sage.
Langdridge, D. (2007) Phenomenological Psychology: Theory, Research and Method. Harlow, UK: Pearson.
Madill, A. and Gough, B. (2008) ‘Qualitative research and its place in psychological science’, Psychological 
Methods, 13(3), 254–271.
Madill, A., Jordan, A. and Shirley, C. (2000) ‘Objectivity and reliability in qualitative analysis: realist, contex-
tualist, and radical constructionist epistemiologies’, British Journal of Psychology, 91, 1–20.
Marecek, J. (2003) ‘Dancing through minefields: toward a qualitative stance in psychology’, in P. Carnic,  
J. Rhodes, and L. Yardley (eds) Qualitative Research in Psychology: Expanding Perspectives in Methodology and 
Design. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
McDonald, M. and O’Callaghan, J. (2008) ‘Positive psychology: A Foucauldian critique’, The Humanistic 
Psychologist, 36(2), 127–142.

Brendan Gough
116
Murray, M. (2008) ‘Narrative psychology’, in J. A. Smith (ed.) Qualitative Psychology: a Practical Guide to 
Research Methods (2nd Edn). London: Sage.
Ottmann, G., Laragy, C., Allen, J. and Feldman, P. (2011) ‘Co-production in practice: participatory action 
research to develop a model of community aged care’, Systemic Practice and Action Research, 24(5), 
413–427.
Parker, I. (2002) Critical Discursive Psychology. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Parker, I. (2005) Qualitative Psychology: Introducing Radical Research. London: Routledge.
Parker, I. (2011) Lacanian Psychoanalysis: Revolutions in Subjectivity. London and New York: Routledge.
Parker, I. (2015) Critical Discursive Psychology (2nd Edn). Basingstroke: Palgrave.
Parker, I. and Spears, R. (eds) (1996) Psychology and Society: Radical Theory and Practice. London: Pluto Press.
Pels, D. (2000) ‘Reflexivity: one step up’, Theory, Culture & Society, 17(3), 1–25.
Peterson, C., and Seligman, M.E.P. (2004) Character Strengths and Virtues: A Handbook and Classification. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Potter, J. (1997) ‘Discourse and critical social psychology’, in T. Ibáñez and L. Íñiguez (eds) Critical Social 
Psychology. London: Sage.
Potter, J. and Wetherell, M. (1987) Discourse and Social Psychology: Beyond Attitudes and Behaviour. London: Sage.
Reavey, P. (ed.) (2011) Visual Methods in Psychology: Using and Interpreting Images in Qualitative Research. 
Hove: Psychology Press
Rheinharz, S. (1992) Feminist Methods in Social Research. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rose, N. (1998) Inventing Ourselves: Psychology, Power, and Personhood. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Smith, J. A. (1995) ‘Semi structured interviewing and qualitative analysis’, in J. A. Smith, R. Harré and L. Van 
Langenhove (eds) Rethinking Methods in Psychology. London: Sage.
Smith, J. A. (2004) ‘Reflecting on the development of interpretative phenomenological analysis and its con-
tribution to qualitative research in psychology’, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 1, 39–54.
Wearing, S., Wearing, M., and McDonald, M. (2010) ‘Understanding local power and interactional pro-
cesses in sustainable tourism: exploring village-tour operator relations on the Kokoda Track, Papua 
New Guinea’, Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 18(1), 61–76.
Wetherell, M. (1998) ‘Positioning and interpretative repertoires: conversation analysis and post-structuralism 
in dialogue’, Discourse & Society, 9(3), 387–416.
Wetherell, M. and Edley, N. (1999) ‘Negotiating hegemonic masculinity: imaginary positions and 
psycho-discursive practices’, Feminism & Psychology, 9(3), 335–57.
Wetherell, M. and Potter, J. (1992) Mapping the Language of Racism: Discourse and the Legitimation of Exploita-
tion. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Wetherell, M., Stiven, H. and Potter, J. (1987) ‘ “Unequal egalitarianism”: a preliminary study of discourses 
concerning gender and employment opportunities’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 59–71.
Wetherell, M., Taylor, S. and Yates, S. J. (eds) (2001) Discourse as Data: A Guide for Analysis. London: Sage/
OUP.
Wilkinson, S. (1988) ‘The role of reflexivity in feminist psychology’, Women’s Studies International Forum, 
11(5), 493–502.
Wilkinson, S. and Kitzinger, C. (eds) (1996) Feminism and Discourse: Psychological Perspectives. London: Sage.
Wundt, W. (1921) Probleme der Völkerpsychologie. Suttgart: Kröner.

117
Theoretical psychology is a sub-discipline and a practice that has a place within as well as out-
side of mainstream psychology. Arguably, research psychologists and practitioners apply, develop, 
and reflect on theory all the time, implicitly or explicitly. In that sense, most psychologists are 
to a certain degree theoretical psychologists. In a more academic sense, one could argue that 
psychologists who think about theory are theoretical psychologists. Theoretical psychology has 
become meta-theoretical and thinking about theory is not constrained to logical or analyti-
cal thinking, but includes philosophical, sociological, political, economic, critical, and historical 
reflexivity about theory and practice in psychology, or the discipline and profession of psychol-
ogy. Because metatheory is reflective of theory and practice and often challenges established 
notions, theoretical psychology is also critical.
The term critical itself has at least three different meanings: For natural-scientific psycholo-
gists, the idea of critical thinking refers to the application of scientific thinking to the world; 
for hermeneutic-oriented psychologists or psychologists who follow traditional philosophical 
programs, critical thinking about psychology means challenging the hidden assumptions and 
the problematic dominance of scientific psychology (Slife et al. 2005); critical psychologists 
who understand themselves as following a political-economic tradition challenge psychology 
on the background of power, politics, and society (e.g. Parker and Spears 1996). In the following 
sections, I lay out some core issues for critical psychologists by using a traditional philosophical 
distinction, arguing that theoretical psychology needs to reflect on ontological, epistemological, 
ethical-political, aesthetic, and substantive issues in psychology.
Ontology-laden reflections
Thinking about the nature of psychology
Any theoretical discussion would be too narrow if it focused solely on a discipline that was 
founded in the second half of the nineteenth century. From the discipline of psychology one needs 
to distinguish what can be understood as psychological topics (e.g. memory) that have been dis-
cussed for centuries or even longer around the world (in the West, the classical Greeks already 
systematically debated psychological issues) (see Richards 1996). Yet psychological topics are 
12
Theoretical psychology
A critical-philosophical outline of core issues
Thomas Teo

Thomas Teo
118
not only covered in the discipline of psychology but also in anthropology, sociology, education, 
political science, economics, and so on. Finally one needs to mention professional psychology, or 
the application of psychological knowledge in practice through experts, which emerged on a 
large scale only in the second half of the twentieth century in some Western nations. From a 
historical point of view, theoretical psychologists have paid most of their attention to the aca-
demic discipline.
From a reconstructive background, one notices that the subject matter of psychology has 
changed over time: psychology has at various times embraced, for instance, the soul, conscious-
ness, mental life, subjectivity, behaviour, experience, cognition, and the brain as its core. Yet 
critical psychologists are less interested in an a priori defined subject matter than they are in 
the question of how the academic discipline and professional psychology have contributed to 
the subjectification of individuals (e.g. Rose 1996). There is a relationship among the knowl-
edge produced in psychology, the self-understanding of persons, and power. What psychologists 
define, research, and conclude defines the very identities of subjects, a process which cannot be 
understood without power. For example, the possibility of labeling somebody a ‘moron’, which 
used to be a technical term at the beginning of the twentieth century in the United States, was 
not only a tool of supposedly objective description but also a tool of exclusion and social policy 
(see Gould 1996). Once an individual accepts such a label for himself or herself, subjectification 
and psychologization have been ‘successful’ (see also De Vos 2012).
More traditional topics in theoretical psychology on the nature of the discipline concern 
questions about the unified or fragmented status of the discipline, and about the healthy or 
crisis-ridden development of psychology. This has led to major debates, with peaks in the 1930s 
and 1970s, about the crisis and fragmentation of psychology, debates which have never died out 
(Goertzen 2008). Although there exists a consensus in critical discourses about the problematic 
status of mainstream psychology and its sub-disciplines, there is no consensus as to whether 
psychology should be a unified, fragmented, or pluralistic discipline. For example, German crit-
ical psychologists tried to overcome the fragmentation of psychology by developing a con-
ceptual network of core categories that grasp the subject matter comprehensively, historically, 
and objectively (Holzkamp 1983). Social-constructionist critical psychologists have argued that 
unification is impossible, may reflect a monotheistic approach to the world, and that pluralism 
is an inherent feature of psychology because there exist diverse approaches on how to grasp 
psychological matters (Kirschner 2006). Ward (2002) argued that the lack of unification, or the 
disorganized and unfocused state of psychology, which theoretical psychologists have identified 
as sources of its crisis, has contributed to the success of the discipline because it has allowed 
easy alliances and quick adaptations to various needs. From a critical perspective it is of interest 
how psychology has become a successful commodity that can be advertised, marketed, sold, and 
consumed.
What does it mean to be human?
One stream of theoretical reflection focuses on the limited understanding of human nature 
in psychology. It has been argued that mainstream psychology operates with a mechanistic, 
atomistic, and reductionistic model of human mental life and that important ideas representing 
human subjectivity are based on technological or physiological models. As a methodological 
consequence, the focus on variables and on isolated aspects of the human mind does not do 
justice to the integrated character of mental life in concrete individuals in their conduct of life 
in everyday reality, which always takes place in history, culture, and society. Conceptualizing 
the sociohistorical reality as a stimulus environment to which one reacts or as an external 

Theoretical psychology
119
variable with effects does not make sense because individuals are embedded in such contexts 
(Holzkamp 1983).
Another stream of reflection focuses on providing a positive answer by suggesting that human 
nature is basically societal, an idea that was emphasized by K. Marx (1818–1883), and is shared by 
hermeneutic philosophers (e.g. Taylor 1989) and hermeneutic psychologists (Martin et al. 2010), 
as well as critical psychologists (e.g. Holzkamp 1983). For current theoretical psychologists the 
tasks remain: how to conceptualize society, how to compare and integrate the concept of society 
with the concepts of culture and history, and how to think about the ‘embeddedness’ of individ-
uals in such contexts. Different categories have different implications and a critical concept of 
society implies a reflection on power and inequality and on their consequences in psychology.
To a lesser degree, critical psychologists have tried to answer the traditional question of 
what it means to lead a happy life. In classical Greek theories happiness meant a life of reason; 
in Christian theories it meant rejoicing and serving God; in liberal theories happiness meant a 
free life based on a cultivated and interested mind (in subjects ranging from nature, arts, history, 
the past, present, and future, to collective themes); and in conservative individualistic theories of 
human nature happiness meant to submit to authority (if you are powerless) or to aim for (abso-
lute) power (if you are powerful). With J. J. Rousseau (1712–1778) we find a shift from happiness 
to the question of the sources of unhappiness. Whereas Rousseau considered unhappiness as a 
result of civilization, Karl Marx (1983) saw unhappiness as a result of alienation in a capitalist 
economy. Some critical psychologists have taken this issue again to the heart by suggesting that 
psychology should aim for well-being (Prilleltensky 2012), which suggests that wellness is a 
value that is linked to what it means to be human.
From a historical point of view, theoretical psychologists understand psychology as a project 
that co-defines or co-constructs what it means to be human (see also Smith 2007). S. Freud 
(1856–1939), B. F. Skinner (1904–1990), evolutionary psychologists, humanistic psychologists, 
neuroscientists, as well as critical psychologists, have attempted to define what it means to 
be human. All have contributed to the psychologization of society, meaning that we do not 
understand ourselves and human problems through social, political, or economic categories 
or theories but through psychological ones. The ‘success’ of psychology in the twentieth and 
twenty-first century consists in redefining what it means to be a human, and more importantly, 
in changing the self-understanding of individuals based on theories, concepts, methods, and 
practices of psychology. Indeed, psychology has changed what it means to be human and, in that 
sense, human nature.
The nature of psychological concepts
This problem has been debated in the context of whether psychological concepts are natural 
or human kinds. Danziger (1997) has demonstrated that psychological concepts have a history, 
culture, and society, neither falling from the heavens, nor discovered, but constructed for social 
purposes. Hacking (1994) identified a looping effect between individuals and concepts, meaning 
that people begin to understand themselves through those scientific concepts and reinforce the 
study of those categories through science. Martin and Sugarman (2009) summarized the litera-
ture in arguing that psychological concepts are socially constituted, value-laden, and that there 
is reactivity between concepts and subjects. Critical psychologists add that this reactivity needs 
to be understood on the background of control, surveillance, and power.
The problem of psychological concepts can be located more generally within the problem 
of the nature of language. Traditional views on language suggest that statements about the world 
and about mental life are determined by specific characteristics of the world and mental life. 

Thomas Teo
120
Social constructionist psychologists have argued that words do not mirror the world and that the 
way we describe the world is the outcome of politics, culture, and relationships (Gergen 2009). 
Based on a late-Wittgensteinian philosophy of language, social constructionists have argued that 
the rules of the system of language are learned, shared, and used by individuals within a given 
community and that words gain their meaning within game-like relationships.
Epistemology-laden reflections
The consequences of ‘positivism’ in psychology
Some critics have labelled mainstream psychology as positivist. This is not a completely accurate 
description if one takes the history and goals of positivism into account, but there are common-
alities that mainstream psychologists share that reflect certain aspects of positivism. Mainstream 
psychology can be characterized as a psychology of variables (Holzkamp 1983), meaning that 
psychological concepts are transformed into measurable variables, the functional relationship of 
which is assessed through correlational, experimental, or other studies. The idea of establishing 
this functional relationship goes back to Ernst Mach (1838–1916), the Austrian physicist and 
pioneer of positivism (Winston 2001). This does not mean that psychologists who do not use 
variables in their research are automatically critical, as they can be non-mainstream yet tradi-
tional (e.g. some humanistic approaches).
Another important legacy of positivism in psychology is the methodologism of psychology 
(Teo 2005), meaning the primacy of method. This suggests that methodological concerns are 
more important than substantive reflections. Danziger (1985) called it a methodological imperative 
that guides the discipline of psychology. A resulting abstract formalism in research can be iden-
tified in journal articles that are often void of meaningful content because the focus on meth-
odology makes mainstream psychology ahistorical, asocial, and acultural. Indeed, mainstream 
psychology attempts to exclude subjectivity through various strategies, including deception 
(Pettit 2013). Critical psychologists such as Holzkamp (1983) have argued that objectivity in 
psychology means to include subjectivity.
Mainstream psychologists assume that they mirror the outside world without bias and that 
they conduct empirical studies without preconceived notions, theories, or values. Paradoxically, 
positivist philosophers of science understood that empirical research is theory-laden. In focusing 
on method and methodology and in excluding the context of discovery (why a researcher is 
interested in a research question), the context of interpretation (the quality of discussion), and 
the context of application, the mainstream excludes ontology, epistemology, ethics, and aesthet-
ics and assumes value-neutrality, including the notion that psychological knowledge is without 
politics, culture, and society. Yet the seemingly sterile knowledge that is often produced in psy-
chology is not neutral but has political ramifications (Teo 2008).
The alignment of psychology with the natural sciences, which was also a political move 
in the nineteenth century for a ‘new’ science, made psychologists think that they produce 
natural-scientific explanations. However, a closer look at the many so-called explanations in 
psychology shows that explanations in psychology are in fact interpretations that are grounded in 
particular cultural-historical contexts. The assumption that data are objective, without an under-
standing of the hermeneutic surplus that goes into the construction and interpretation of data, 
has, for instance, led to epistemological violence against a variety of groups in the history of psy-
chology (Teo 2008). For example, interpreting data of difference in terms of a Zeitgeist or a par-
ticular academic community led to the fact that Blacks, women, gays, persons with disability, and 
so on, were constructed as inferior. Epistemological violence was committed because data were 

Theoretical psychology
121
interpreted by an academic community to the detriment of a specific group, even when alterna-
tive and equally viable interpretations of difference were possible. Sadly, these violent interpreta-
tions of data were presented as knowledge, handed down to the media, the public, and to students.
Social categories and knowledge production
Social epistemologies, adopted by many critical psychologists, suggest that social characteristics 
(gender, class, culture, modernity, etc.) play a role in how we access the social and even the nat-
ural world. Critical psychologists argue that an ensemble of societal, historical, and cultural relations 
and one’s situation influence what psychologists study (topics, problems, objects, events, theories, 
methodologies, concepts, hypotheses, applications, histories, etc.) and why they study it; these 
characteristics influence how they study it (data, methods, reliability, validity, tests, measurements, 
samples, observations, statistics, etc.); and these characteristics influence how results are inter-
preted and the applications that are derived from research.
Colonialism and psychological knowledge
In recent years, postcolonial ideas have gained traction in critical discourses, particularly in some 
social sciences and humanities (e.g. Jabri 2013). Some critical psychologists have engaged with 
the topic (e.g. Hook 2012). Indeed, the discipline of psychology is fraught with forms of racism, 
ethnocentrism, and hidden colonialism. Colonial interests also are responsible for most early psy-
chological knowledge about colonized people (Richards 2012). An imperialist strategy that uni-
versalizes knowledge (common in psychology) was combined with coercion, sometimes with 
inclusion, but never with hearing and learning from the conceptual frameworks of the colonized 
people (Said 1979). Even when it is admitted that European history is not world history, the 
onus is placed on historians from the periphery to address the centre, whereas the centre does 
not need to address the periphery (Chakrabarty 2000). In Western psychology, there exists the 
assumption that the most dominant psychology, American psychology, is also world psychology, 
and that, for instance, clinical categories can be used without modifications around the world.
The project of indigenous psychology emerged from a postcolonial critique of Western psy-
chology while assuming that indigenous psychological knowledge is more relevant to the local 
population than are imported theories (Enriquez 1992). One can even go further in arguing 
that not only China’s or India’s psychologies are indigenous but that the same concept applies 
to European or American knowledge. This argument is based on the notion that all psycholog-
ical concepts are culturally embedded, including critical psychologies (Teo 2013), and that the 
only way of addressing this problem is by participating in forms of reflexivity that have become 
common in certain disciplines of the social sciences but are still marginal in a discipline that 
understands itself as a natural science. On the other hand, critical psychologists have pointed out 
that reflexivity needs to be practiced carefully (Burman 2006).
Ethical-practical work
Should psychologists care about resistance?
In psychology, is and ought are inherently intertwined (see also Brinkmann 2011; Sloan 2000). 
Some psychologists working under severe conditions of inequality, poverty, and oppression have 
suggested that praxis must have primacy over theory. For Martín-Baró (1994), the theories 
of the North should not define the problems of Latin America, but rather South American 

Thomas Teo
122
problems should demand and guide their own theorization. His preferential option for the poor 
calls for a primacy of praxis that works on the objective needs of the majority of the people. It 
calls on psychologists to work on the liberation from the social structures that oppress people. 
Psychology needs to theorize inequality and social injustice and focus its energy on such issues. 
Similarly, Paulo Freire (1997) wanted to raise awareness about oppression, a process he called 
conscientization.
For Foucault (1997), liberation is impossible because we are all trapped in the same game of 
oppression. Instead of trying to escape that game, we have the option to resist the rules of the 
game. Resistance then becomes a practice of freedom and includes such simple acts as saying 
‘no’ to a rule presented to ‘me’. According to Foucault, we can also resist in struggles against 
forms of ethnic, social, and religious domination; against forms of exploitation in the production 
sphere; and against the submission of subjectivity, which has become more prevalent in the West.
On a more general level, theoretical psychologists need to theorize the science-politics nexus. 
Although there is no scientific reason why a commitment to a ‘good politics and good science’ 
scenario should be rejected – a rejection that would be based on an ethical-political decision 
itself – the theoretical problem remains about the elements of good science and good politics 
(see Teo 2005). While theorizing this problem, critical psychologists continue to challenge the 
idea that science is devoid of politics and is value-free or value-neutral. Such assumptions of 
value-neutrality are based on ignorance (philosophical) where researchers are unaware of the 
interconnection of science (psychology) and politics; on denial (psychological) where a desired 
separation of science and politics leads one to deny the real influence that politics has on one’s 
own science; or on an immunization strategy (ideological) in order to protect research from 
identifying its political embeddedness.
The role of money and values in the psy-disciplines
The most obvious outside influence is the role that financial interests play in spheres of psy-
chology, psychiatry, psychotherapy, psychoanalysis, and so on. A prominent example discussed in 
recent years is the analysis of the relationship between Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) 
panel members and the pharmaceutical industry (e.g. Cosgrove and Krimsky 2012). Theoreti-
cal psychologists need to develop ethical-political arguments for why corporate money-driven 
classifications are problematic and detrimental to persons (see Granek 2013).
Another more recent example of the relationship between power, money, and values can be 
seen in the American War on Terror, when so-called enhanced interrogation techniques (i.e. 
torture strategies such as waterboarding) were performed under the supervision of psychologists 
(Soldz 2008). The American Psychological Association (APA), the largest professional organiza-
tion for psychologists in the world, which is, according to its ethical code, committed to doing 
no harm, quickly abandoned its principles under the Bush presidency. The preemptive obedi-
ence that the association displayed was in contrast to other American professional organizations. 
The fact of collaboration raises important ethical-political questions about the discipline of 
psychology as well as its practitioners. Theoretical psychologists need to address this willingness 
of the APA to abandon its principles, the dependency of American psychology on government 
funding, and the culture that perpetuates the belief that psychology can be impartial.
Is psychology about problem-solving or problem-making?
Žižek (2006) pointed out that critical thinkers need to challenge the questions that are 
asked. I have argued that science in psychology is often not about problem-solving but about 

Theoretical psychology
123
problem-making (Teo 2005) and that one should begin with questions that contain assump-
tions (is group x inferior to group y?). The process of problem-making can be called problem-
atization. Psychologists can participate in a political problematization of a group (or person), 
a theoretical problematization, but also – a point that most empirical psychologists do not 
understand – in the empirical problematization of a group. If one tests whether ‘one quarter 
Indian blood individuals’ perform worse on IQ tests than ‘pure Whites’, over and over again, 
and if one finds differences, then that empirical work, its naturalism-laden questions, and the 
resulting interpretation all lead to the problematization of a group that was constructed in the 
first place.
Epistemological violence is not only an epistemological but also an ethical-political problem. 
Psychologists need to reject a psychology about and choose a psychology for and with people (e.g. 
they need to shift from understanding ‘race’ as a problem to understanding the problems that 
minority individuals encounter in a given sociocultural context). For such arguments, critical 
social scientists have developed methodologies of the oppressed (Sandoval 2000), and critical 
psychologists have endorsed methodologies that challenge the status quo and aim for social 
justice (e.g. Fine 2006).
Aesthetic challenges
Art has a more ambiguous status in theoretical and critical reflections. Critical psychologists 
need to show that art offers innovative ways to address social problems. Traditional continental 
philosophers such as Gadamer (1960/1997) have argued that art is a form of truth that cannot 
be captured via the natural-scientific route and that aesthetic experience is a form of practical 
knowledge. Yet art has also been perceived as a tool for the expression of the upper classes, and 
cultural capital has been seen as an important concept for understanding how distinctions are 
fabricated (Bourdieu 1984). Horkheimer and Adorno (1982) have pointed out that the mass 
production of art did not lead to the possibility of freedom but to its opposite, and that art has 
been commercialized to its extremes, has been defrauding the masses, and has been reduced to 
amusement in capitalist societies. It is difficult for the critical theoretical psychologist to theorize 
venues for liberating aesthetic experiences that are not simultaneously elitist.
A model, albeit one that needs historical updating, would be of art talking about art. In 
Peter Weiss’s (1975) novel the reader can follow working class teenagers in Germany from 
1937 to 1945 and their appropriation of mainstream art into an anti-fascist aesthetics of 
resistance. More than one hundred pieces of art – including paintings, literature, theatre, and  
architecture – are discussed to allow the critical reader new ways of theorizing resistance with-
out focusing on fabricating distinctions in the interests of the powerful. But one does not need 
to limit aesthetic experience and resistance to the concept of class and one can address violence 
in the context of minorities (see, e.g. the work by Charlotte Salomon; 1917–1943), gender  
(see, e.g. the paintings by Nancy Spero 1926–2009; or by Griselda Pollock, born 1949),  
politics (see, e.g. the institution critique by Hans Haacke, born 1936), ‘race’ (see, e.g. the sil-
houettes by Kara Walker, born 1969), or immigrants. Doris Salcedo (born 1958) installed a 
long crack in the floor of the Tate Modern and called it Shibboleth to represent the border 
that separates the outsider, the foreigner, or the immigrant from the one who claims that he 
belongs here. Theoretical and critical psychologists could look at the artwork of Wim Delvoye 
(born 1965) who, with his Cloaca, shows how a capitalist art market can literally produce 
‘shit’ and sell it packaged neatly to the market. Indeed, art is still an undertheorized domain 
in theoretical and critical psychology, even though Foucault (e.g. 1988) drew attention to an 
aesthetics of existence some time ago.

Thomas Teo
124
Substantive deliberations
Critical theoretical psychology can be described as deconstructive and reconstructive. However, the-
oretical psychology can also be constructive when developing new critical concepts and theories. 
Arguably, one important task for theoretical psychology is to develop a theory of subjectivity 
(see also Schraube and Osterkamp 2013), a term that refers to the psychological experiences, 
activities, and possibilities of a concrete subject in the conduct of life. For that reason, such a 
theory needs to be interdisciplinary. A theoretical analysis of subjectivity reveals that subjectivity 
is contextually embedded in the world, meaning it is cultural-historical, socioeconomic, active, 
and embodied. Subjectivity needs to be analyzed on the background of intersubjectivity that is 
dialogical and empathetic. A critical concept of subjectivity based on the (mental) life of con-
crete subjects needs to include agency, reflexivity, and praxis as well as the body (e.g. habitus, 
performativity, etc.; see Butler 1989) and what it means to live in a neoliberal world. A theory of 
subjectivity needs to include the process of subjectification, or the ways in which history, society, 
and culture contribute to the creation of the appearance of an autonomously experienced sub-
ject. Finally, a theory of subjectivity needs to theorize the fact that subjectivity as a lived expres-
sion ends with death, but that it may continue to operate in products, materialities, imaginations, 
and memories. Thus, a theory of subjectivity needs to include epistemologies, ontologies, ethics, 
and aesthetics of nothingness.
Further reading
Marvakis, A., Motzkau, J., Painter, D., Ruto-Korir, R., Sullivan, G., Triliva, S. and Wieser, M. (eds) (2013) 
Doing Psychology under New Conditions. Concord, Canada: Captus.
Parker, I. (ed.) (2011) Critical Psychology. London: Routledge.
Website resources
International Society for Theoretical Psychology: http://psych.ucalgary.ca/istp/index.html
Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology: http://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/teo/index.aspx
Subjectivity: http://www.palgrave-journals.com/sub/index.html
References
Bourdieu, P. (1984) Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. London: Routledge and Kegan.
Brinkmann, S. (2011) Psychology as a Moral Science: Perspectives on Normativity. New York: Springer.
Burman, E. (2006) ‘Emotions and reflexivity in feminised education action research’, Educational Action 
Research, 14, 315–332.
Butler, J. (1989) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge.
Chakrabarty, D. (2000) Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Cosgrove, L. and Krimsky, S. (2012) ‘A Comparison of DSM-IV and DSM-5 panel members’ financial 
associations with industry: a pernicious problem persists’, PLOS Medicine, 9.
Danziger, K. (1985) ‘The methodological imperative in psychology’, Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 15, 
1–13.
Danziger, K. (1997) Naming the Mind: How Psychology Found its Language. London: Sage.
De Vos, J. (2012) Psychologisation in Times of Globalisation. London: Routledge.
Enriquez, V. G. (1992) From Colonial to Liberation Psychology: the Philippine Experience. Diliman, Quezon City: 
University of the Philippines Press.
Fine, M. (2006) ‘Bearing witness: methods for researching oppression and resistance—a textbook for criti-
cal research’, Social Justice Research, 19, 83–108.
Foucault, M. (1988) Politics, Philosophy, Culture: Interviews and Other Writings 1977–1984. New York: 
Routledge.

Theoretical psychology
125
Foucault, M. (1997) Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth. The Essential Works of Michel Foucault 1954–1984, Volume 
1. New York: The New Press.
Freire, P. (1997) Pedagogy of the Oppressed (New Revised 20th-Anniversary Edition). New York: Continuum.
Gadamer, H.-G. (1960/1997) Truth and Method. New York: Continuum.
Gergen, K. J. (2009) Relational Being: Beyond Self and Community. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goertzen, J. R. (2008) ‘On the possibility of unification: the reality and nature of the crisis in psychology’, 
Theory & Psychology, 18, 829–852.
Gould, S. J. (1996) The Mismeasure of Man (Revised and Expanded). New York: Norton.
Granek, L. (2013) ‘Disciplinary wounds: has grief become the identified patient for a field gone awry?’ 
Journal of Loss and Trauma, 18, 275–288.
Hacking, I. (1994) ‘The looping effects of human kinds’, in D. Sperber, D. Premack, and A. J. Premack (eds) 
Causal Cognition: A Multi-Disciplinary Approach. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Holzkamp, K. (1983) Grundlegung der Psychologie [Foundation of Psychology]. Frankfurt am Main, Ger-
many: Campus.
Hook, D. (2012) A Critical Psychology of the Postcolonial: the Mind of Apartheid. London: Psychology Press.
Horkheimer, M. and Adorno, T. W. (1982) Dialectic of Enlightenment. New York: Continuum.
Jabri, V. (2013) The Postcolonial Subject: Claiming Politics/Governing Others in Late Modernity. London: 
Routledge.
Kirschner, S. R. (2006) ‘Psychology and pluralism: toward the psychological studies’, Journal of Theoret-
ical and Philosophical Psychology, 26, 1–17.
Martin, J. and Sugarman, J. (2009) ‘Does interpretation in psychology differ from interpretation in natural 
science?’ Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 39, 19–37.
Martin, J., Sugarman, J. and Hickinbottom, S. (2010) Persons: Understanding Psychological Selfhood and Agency. 
New York: Springer.
Martín-Baró, I. (1994) Writings for a Liberation Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Marx, K. (1983) The Portable Karl Marx (Selected, Translated in Part, and with an Introduction by E. Kamenka). 
New York: Penguin Books.
Parker, I. and Spears, R. (eds) (1996) Psychology and Society: Radical Theory and Practice. London: UK,  
Pluto.
Pettit, M. (2013) The Science of Deception: Psychology and Commerce in America. Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press.
Prilleltensky, I. (2012) ‘Wellness as fairness’, American Journal of Community Psychology, 49, 1–21.
Richards, G. (1996) Putting Psychology in its Place: An Introduction from a Critical Historical Perspective. New 
York: Routledge.
Richards, G. (2012) ‘Race’, Racism and Psychology: Towards a Reflexive History. London: Routledge.
Rose, N. (1996) Inventing Our Selves: Psychology, Power, and Personhood. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Said, E. W. (1979) Orientalism. New York: Random House.
Sandoval, C. (2000) Methodology of the Oppressed. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Schraube, E. And Osterkamp, U. (eds) (2013) Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject: Selected Writings of 
Klaus Holzkamp. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Slife, B. D., Reber, J. S. and Richardson, F. C. (2005) Critical Thinking about Psychology: Hidden Assumptions and 
Plausible Alternatives. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Sloan, T. (ed.) (2000) Critical Psychology: Voices for Change. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Smith, R. (2007) Being Human: Historical Knowledge and the Creation of Human Nature. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Soldz, S. (2008) ‘Healers or interrogators: psychology and the United States torture regime’, Psychoanalytic 
Dialogues. Special Issue: Coercive Interrogations and the Mental Health Profession, 18, 592–613.
Taylor, C. (1989).Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Teo, T. (2005) The Critique of Psychology: from Kant to Postcolonial Theory. New York: Springer.
Teo, T. (2008) ‘From speculation to epistemological violence in psychology: a critical hermeneutic recon-
struction ’, Theory & Psychology, 18, 47–67.
Teo, T. (2013) ‘Backlash against American psychology: an indigenous reconstruction of the history of Ger-
man psychology’, History of Psychology, 16, 1–18.
Ward, S. C. (2002) Modernizing the Mind: Psychological Knowledge and the Remaking of Society. Westport, CT: 
Praeger.

Thomas Teo
126
Weiss, P. (1975) Die Ästhetik Des Widerstands [Aesthetics Of Resistance], Frankfurt Am Main, Germany: 
Suhrkamp.
Winston, A. (2001) ‘Cause into function: Ernst Mach and the reconstruction of explanation in psychology’, 
in C. D. Green, M. Shore and T. Teo (eds) The Transformation of Psychology: Influences of 19th-Century Phi-
losophy, Technology, and Natural Science. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Žižek, S. (2006) ‘Philosophy, the “unknown knowns,” and the public use of reason’, Topoi: An International 
Review of Philosophy, 25, 137–142.

127
There is an argument that humanistic psychology is the original critical psychology. It was 
founded in response to and as a critique of the first two dominant forces of psychoanal-
ysis and behaviourism, hence its moniker ‘third force psychology’; it questions reduction-
ism and atomism; it is heavily influenced by phenomenology and challenges the notion of 
‘reality’; and it represents subjectivist as distinct from objectivist approaches to psychological 
and social science, that is, nominalist views of ontology or the essence of things, volunta-
ristic views of human nature, anti-positivistic epistemologies, and ideographic methodolo-
gies. It has also shaped and promoted new forms of critical psychological practice, including: 
consciousness-raising and encounter groups, radical approaches to psychiatry (RAP) in RAP 
centres, red therapy, and ecotherapy.
Whilst origins of humanistic psychology date back to the early 1960s, the origins of human-
ism date back to the classical civilizations of China, Greece, and Rome, whose values were 
renewed in the European Renaissance – and, in context, as Aanstoos (2003) has observed: ‘con-
temporary humanistic psychology can be seen as the third wave of humanism’. In her Humanist 
Anthology, which contains writings from the sixth century BCE (those of the ancient Chinese 
philosopher, Lao Tze) to the twentieth century CE, Knight (1961: xiii) suggested that three 
beliefs mark humanism: that there is no supernatural God; that ‘man’ must face his problems 
with his own intellectual and moral resources; and ‘[t]hat authority, supernatural or otherwise, 
should not be allowed to obstruct inquiry in any field of thought’.
Carl Rogers, a key figure in the development of humanistic psychology, put this last point 
well when, in defence of experientialism, he wrote: ‘Neither the Bible nor the prophets – nei-
ther Freud nor research – neither the revelations of God nor man – can take precedence over my 
own direct experience’ (Rogers 1967: 24). For Knight, these three humanistic beliefs give rise to 
two corollaries: that virtue is a matter of promoting human well-being and that the mainsprings 
of moral action are social instincts: ‘those altruistic, co-operative tendencies that are as much part 
of our innate biological equipment as are our tendencies toward aggression and cruelty’ (xiii).
Although she wrote this half a century ago, just before the founding of the third force of 
humanistic psychology, Knight’s analysis still holds true and offers a useful frame within which 
we may locate the theory and practice of humanistic psychology today.
13
Humanistic psychology
A critical counter culture
Keith Tudor

Keith Tudor
128
A (very) brief history of humanistic psychology
In the 1950s, a number of psychologists, most notably Abraham Maslow, were finding it difficult 
to get published due to the dominance in psychology of behaviourism. In response to this situa-
tion, Maslow began to contact other like-minded psychologists and, in 1954, compiled a mailing 
list of about 125 people with a view to exchanging papers. In the early 1960s the individuals on 
this list became the first subscribers to the Journal of Humanistic Psychology, which was launched 
in 1961 (see DeCarvalho 1990). Maslow called the list ‘the Eupsychian Network’ because, as he 
later reflected (Maslow 1962/1968: 237):
all these groups, organizations and journals are interested in helping the individual grow 
toward fuller humanness, the society grow toward synergy and health, and all societies and 
all peoples move toward becoming one world and one species. This list can be called a 
network because the memberships overlap and because these organizations and individuals 
more or less share the humanistic and transhumanistic outlook on life.
DeCarvalho (1990) has dated the emergence of humanistic psychology as a ‘third force’ in 
American psychology to November 1964, when an invitational conference was held (28th–30th 
November) in a small country inn in Old Saybrook, Connecticut. It was attended by 18 people, 
and chaired by Robert Knapp from Wesleyan University, Connecticut, with Norma Rosenquist, 
the Secretary of the American Association of Humanistic Psychology (AAHP), and Miles Vich, 
the Editor of the Journal of Humanistic Psychology, in attendance. It is worth noting what those 
individuals brought to that conference and, more broadly, to a psychology that they identified 
as humanistic: George Allport; Jacques Barzun; James Bugental; Charlotte Bühler; Victor But-
terfield; Rene Dubos; George Kelly; Alvin Lasko; Abraham Maslow; Floyd Matson; Rollo May; 
Carl Moustakas; Gardner Murphy; Henry Murray; Carl Rogers; Edward Shoben; and Robert 
White. For more on the history of humanistic psychology, see DeCarvalho (1990, 1991), Moss 
(1999), Schneider et al. (2001), and Cain (2002), and, for a collection of papers on the future of 
humanistic psychology, see House et al. (2013).
With a theory or theories of human nature based on the organism and self which view the 
individual as a unique, truth-seeking, integrated, and self-regulating whole with a right to auton-
omy with responsibility; an emphasis on human capacities and potentialities; with concepts of 
the person which included being aware, creative, embodied, holistic, and responsible, having free 
choice, making sense and meaning, and, as primarily social beings, a powerful need to belong, 
humanistic psychology offered a critique both of the pessimistic Freudian view of humans as 
driven by a nature and desires beyond their control and of behaviourism’s determinism and 
reductionism. With its aims of therapy and of growth based on self-awareness and actualization 
(or the view that the organism tends to actualize), which includes authenticity, an autonomy 
which acknowledges interdependence, emotional competence, completion, the furtherance of 
creativity, respect for difference, integrity, and wholeness, humanistic psychology offered a cri-
tique of the limited aims of insight (psychoanalysis), and social adjustment (behaviourism). With 
its emphasis on the centrality of the therapeutic relationship as the primary agent of therapeutic 
change, founded on the therapist’s contactfulness and engagement, genuineness or authentic-
ity, nonjudgemental acceptance, and empathy, humanistic psychology offered a resource for 
overcoming alienation; this also functioned as a critique of the one-person psychology of both 
classical psychoanalysis and behaviourism, and the one-sided, one-up power position of both the 
psychoanalyst and the behaviourist. With its emphasis on holism, interrelationship, and context, 
humanistic psychology offered the possibility of a culturally attuned practice which embedded 

Humanistic psychology
129
and embodied life experience in social context, and challenged the cultural neutrality of both 
psychoanalysis and behaviourism.
Humanistic psychology and positive psychology
This summary might suggest that humanistic psychology is a positive psychology and, indeed, 
it was Maslow (1954) who first used the term in the last chapter of his book Motivation and 
Personality, entitled ‘Toward a positive psychology’, in which he outlined a research agenda 
which has much in common with more recent iterations of the concept (Seligman 1999). 
Whilst some psychologists point to the humanistic origins of positive psychology (Resnick 
et al. 2001), others are less keen to acknowledge the roots and commonalities between the two, 
and, indeed, are more concerned with distinguishing between the humanistic and the positive. 
Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi (2000) have been highly critical of humanistic psychology on 
the basis, they claim, that it has generated no research tradition, is narcissistic, and is antiscien-
tific. These claims have been well refuted by Taylor (2001: 16) who, in turn, offers a critique 
of the restricted and restrictive meaning of the ‘positive’ in positive psychology based on its 
unquestioning acceptance of (scientific) positivism, and, therefore, a reductionist epistemology; 
its reliance on positive reinforcement and, thus, behaviourism; and ‘the somewhat naively dual-
istic opposite of anything negative, especially with regard to bad behaviour and faulty cognitive 
thought processes’.
Where we are now
Fifty years on, humanistic psychology is well established. It is a recognized tradition with a num-
ber of schools of therapy or modalities (e.g., biodynamic, gestalt, person-centred, psychodrama, 
psychosynthesis, transactional analysis), with well-established training courses or programmes. It 
has generated a considerable literature, including three professional journals (see below for titles), 
and has a presence within mainstream organizations, including the American Psychological 
Association (Division 32) and the United Kingdom Council for Psychotherapy (UKCP) (its 
Humanistic and Integrative Psychotherapy College).
With this growth and influence has come both a maturity and a certain loss of identity. 
Originally founded as a ‘discontent’ in response to both psychoanalysis and behaviourism, the 
early meetings of the AAHP (later the Association of Humanistic Psychology (AHP)) were 
marked by a tendency to define itself in terms of what it was not – although it is worth not-
ing that Maslow (1962), who coined the phrase ‘third force’ psychology, described humanistic 
psychology as ‘epi-behavioural’ and ‘epi-Freudian’ (epi meaning ‘building upon’). As Bugental 
(1964: 22) put it: ‘Humanistic psychology generally does not see itself as competitive with the 
other two orientations; rather, it attempts to supplement their observations and to introduce 
further perspectives and insights’. The aspiration that humanistic psychology builds on the other 
two forces and is supplementary and, perhaps, complementary finds expression in much more 
dialogue and respect between the different forces, orientations, or traditions (see, for example, 
McWilliams 2005; Orange 2010; Loewenthal and Samuels 2014). At the same time, this has led 
to a certain loss of distinction between the three forces and a certain merging – and blurring – 
of differences. Also, whilst there is a sense in which some practitioners in the psy-professions 
(counselling, psychiatry, psychology, and psychotherapy) define themselves as humanistic, and 
though in the early days (from the mid-1960s into the mid-1980s) it was possible to train specif-
ically as a humanistic practitioner/therapist, these days more people identify with their particular 
and specific modality or sub-modality (biodynamic, gestalt, etc.) and not more generally as 

Keith Tudor
130
‘humanistic’. For instance, of the total of 7,500 psychotherapists registered with the UKCP, only 
181 identify themselves as a ‘humanistic psychotherapist’, and of these only a few identify only 
as such. The vast majority of psychotherapists (over 3,000) who belong to organizations in the 
UKCP’s Humanistic and Integrative Psychotherapy College identify themselves by one specific 
modality (or more) and not as a ‘humanistic psychotherapist’.
Radical humanism
There are a number of forms, types, or branches of humanism, and they are not all radical. 
Whilst humanism has been associated with secularism, a philosophy or stance which embraces 
human reason, ethics, social justice, and philosophical naturalism, there are also forms of religious 
humanism (Buddhist, Christian, and Judaism) which, by and large, emphasize the inherent dig-
nity of all human beings, the humanity (rather than the deity) of religious figures, and alterna-
tives to theism. Other forms of humanism include Renaissance humanism, African humanism, 
socialist humanism, transhumanism, and post-humanism. From a sociological point of view, 
the intellectual origins of radical humanism – the radical humanistic paradigm as identified by 
Burrell and Morgan (1979) – may be traced to the tenets of German idealism and the work of 
Immanuel Kant, who considered the ultimate reality of the universe spiritual rather than mate-
rial in nature. This perspective led radical humanists to focus on the essentially alienated state of 
mankind, a perspective which has been picked up by radical therapists in transactional analysis 
and early gestalt therapists, and is also represented by many indigenous practitioners.
Other key concepts and theories associated with radical humanism include: objective ideal-
ism (from Georg Hegel and the early work of Karl Marx); French existentialism (deriving from 
the work of Johann Fichte and Edmund Husserl, and most clearly expressed in the work of 
Jean-Paul Sartre); anarchism individualism (Max Stirner); and critical theory (based on the soci-
ology of both Georg Lukács and of Antonio Gramsci, and the work of the Frankfurt School). 
What distinguishes radical humanism from other forms of humanism in humanistic psychology 
is first (echoing the radical humanist critique of secular humanists and, specifically, their fixation 
on the anti-religious aspect of their thinking) its reflexivity about humanism itself; and, sec-
ond, its explicit political/social/cultural analysis and stance. I illustrate this with regard to three 
contributions which humanistic psychologists (a term I use broadly to encompass practitioners 
in the psy-professions) have made to the field of psychology – regarding the therapeutic rela-
tionship, the education of therapists, and research in therapy – and through which they have 
questioned mainstream psychology and, thereby, helped to have developed what may be thought 
of as a critical humanistic psychology.
The therapeutic relationship
It is now commonplace to acknowledge that research in therapy suggests that the therapeutic 
relationship is the key factor in the outcome of therapy. As Samuels (2013: xi) has recently 
reported it: ‘It’s the relationship, stupid!’ What is less common is an acknowledgement of the fact 
that the work of humanistic psychologists, and specifically that of Jessie Taft with regard to the 
therapeutic relationship (Taft 1933), predates the more recent interest in what has been referred 
to as ‘the relational turn’ (see Greenberg and Mitchell 1983) by half a century.
Influenced by George Mead and Otto Rank, Taft coined the term ‘relationship therapy’, a 
phrase with which Rogers (1942) described his ‘newer psychotherapy’ which began to ­emphasize 
the significance of the therapeutic relationship over particular therapeutic techniques. Rogers 
went on to conduct research into this and, as a result, formulated certain relational ‘therapeutic 

Humanistic psychology
131
conditions’ (Rogers 1957, 1959) which, in turn, have been the subject of further research. More 
recently, and in the spirit of reflexivity, a colleague and I have critiqued the nominalism and 
reification of the therapeutic relationship, suggesting instead that this is better conceptualized as 
an activity which has continuity and, therefore, better represented as ‘therapeutic relating’ (see 
Summers and Tudor 2000).
The emphasis on the facilitative and even curative nature of the therapeutic relationship – or 
relating – derives from the humanistic view of human nature and especially the concept of the 
organism (which cannot be understood separate from its environment) (see Tudor and Worrall 
2006) and, arguably, a self which, as it develops, becomes ever more engaged with others and the 
world. This sense of interconnectedness is reflected in the importance of the social group (Adler) 
and human kinship (Maslow), of relationship with the other (Buber), of the trend to homonomy 
or belonging alongside that of autonomy (Angyal), and of Mitwelt or the social world (Bin-
swanger). From this it may be understood that, despite the criticism levelled at humanism and, 
more broadly, Western psychology, of an over-emphasis on the individual and a self-obsessed self, 
humanistic psychology actually represents the person and a psychology which are concerned 
with self-and-other and the world. In order to represent this, I have added to Stark’s (1999) tax-
onomy of one-person, one-and-a-half person, and two-person psychology, a ‘two-person-plus 
psychology’ (Tudor 2011) which acknowledges the impact of the external world and the client’s 
context on and in the therapeutic encounter.
Finally, given the centrality of power to critical analysis, it is significant that a number of 
humanistic psychologists have addressed the issue of power in the therapeutic relationship, nota-
bly Rogers (1977/1978), Steiner (1981), and, more recently, Proctor (2002).
Education
Humanism has been hugely influential on the field of education. The literae humaniores – literally, 
‘more humane literature’ – was the name given to the undergraduate course at the University 
of Oxford which focused on the Classics (also known as ‘Greats’) i.e., Ancient Rome, Ancient 
Greece, Latin, ancient Greek, and philosophy. The spirit of a more humane and liberal or free 
education (from the Latin liber meaning ‘free’) was based on the mediaeval concept of the liberal 
arts and the liberalism of the Age of Enlightenment, and was generally viewed as encompassing: 
the classics, (English) literature, the humanities, and moral virtues. Humanistic tenets have been 
applied to elementary and secondary education, including social justice as a primary focus of 
praxis (e.g. Greene 1975; Nemiroff 1992).
In the field of psychology, Rogers was one of the few founders of a school of or approach 
to therapy to have also written about education, and his book Freedom to Learn (Rogers 1969, 
and subsequent editions) still stands as a radical approach to education and, not least, the educa-
tion of therapists. The person-centred approach to education: i) acknowledges that the student 
or trainee tends to actualize as they experience and negotiate their learning; ii) supports the 
inherent directionality of the experiencing student; and iii) is based on the co-creation by the 
student/s and teacher/trainer/s of certain facilitative conditions to support the learning envi-
ronment. As such, this approach
represents a radical shift in educational philosophy and practice which is antithetical to 
concepts of education which create a dependent relationship between ‘expert’ teacher 
and ignorant student, which are curriculum led, and which seek to ‘ambush’ the student 
through formal examination.
(Tudor and Merry 2002: 45)

Keith Tudor
132
What follows from this is a particular concern about the process of education. Rogers (1983) 
identified the aims of what he referred to, significantly, as a ‘more human education’ as, typically, 
being a movement: towards a climate of trust in the classroom; towards a participatory mode of 
decision-making in all aspects of learning by all participants; towards helping students prize 
themselves; towards developing excitement and curiosity in intellectual and emotional discov-
ery; and towards developing in teachers the attitudes of facilitating learning and helping personal 
growth. The outcome or goal of what he referred to as ‘democratic education’ included assisting 
students to become individuals who are able to take self-initiated action and to be responsible 
for those actions; who are capable of intelligent choice and self-direction; who are critical learn-
ers, able to evaluate the contributions made by others; who have acquired knowledge relevant to 
the solution of problems; who, even more importantly, are able to adapt flexibly and intelligently 
to new problem situations; who have internalized an adaptive mode of approach to problems, 
utilizing all pertinent experience freely and creatively; who are able to cooperate effectively with 
others in these various activities; and who do work, not for the approval of others, but in terms 
of their own socialized purposes (Rogers 1951).
This represents the outcome of a critical pedagogy (see Freire 1972) or, more accurately, an 
andragogy which, in its focus on the adult facilitation of adult learners, encourages and indeed 
demands critical thinking and praxis.
Research
Humanistic psychology has contributed to a different paradigm of research. As humanism 
emphasizes personal and subjective experience, so its research has tended to focus on describing 
what happens in and with, rather than to the person.
The humanistic research tradition dates back arguably to William James (1942–1910), 
and certainly to other more recent influences, including the following: (1) from the early 
20th century, gestalt psychologists, such as Max Wertheimer, Wolfgang Köhler, and Kurt 
Koffka – who studied perception, psi phenomenon, productive theory, and developmen-
tal psychology; (2) from the 1930s to the 1960s, personologists and, specifically, Henry A.  
Murray*, whose work gave rise to projective testing; (3) from the 1950s, the personality social 
psychologists, including Gordon Allport, Gardner Murphy, Abraham Maslow, Carl Rogers, 
and others, whose work gave rise to numerous assessment measures regarding personality 
and therapy, including quantitative Q-sorts, and all of whom were particularly concerned to 
frame their work in scientific terms, but who also disputed traditional and monotheistic 
views of ‘science’; (4) from the early 1960s, the development of research methods based on 
phenomenology, and, specifically, the work of Clark Moustakas, who developed the heuristic 
research method, and, in doing so, acknowledged that his work was explicitly influenced 
by that of Rogers; and (5) from the late 1960s, the scientific research on meditation and 
its techniques – which Taylor (2001: 20) has suggested ‘clearly shows the extent to which 
humanistic psychology has spawned a significant research tradition’. Based on nominalist  
(as distinct from ‘realistic’) views of ontology, and on voluntaristic (as distinct from deter-
ministic) views of human nature, humanistic psychology draws on anti-positivistic episte-
mologies (such as phenomenology), and ideographic or symbolic methodologies (such as 
heurism) and related methods (such as Moustakas’ six phases of heuristic research). Human-
istic psychology thus represents a psychology and research theory and practice that pro-
motes, in Rogers’ words, ‘a human science’, and that is critical of mainstream models, such 
as the medical/psychiatric model, and its assumptions, such as the compartmentalizing of 

Humanistic psychology
133
people into ‘parts’ and part symptoms, and its methods, such as randomized control trials, 
which aim to control for certain elements of life and interventions.
In all three areas – concerning the therapeutic relationship (or therapeutic relating), the 
education of therapists, and research in therapy – humanistic psychology has questioned main-
stream psychology and, thereby, contributed to the development of a countercultural, critical 
and humanistic psychology.
How useful is humanistic psychology?
Humanistic psychology has been – and still is – useful in offering alternative views to a main-
stream psychology which is still dominated by and, in a number of ways, perpetuates conserv-
ative and even reactionary views of the person and society. It has been useful in challenging 
psychoanalysis and psychodynamic psychotherapy, with the result that a number of analytic 
authors have made bridges between these two ‘forces’ (see Gomez 2004; McWilliams 2005; 
Orange 2010). It has been useful in challenging behaviourism, with the result that some behav-
ioural psychologists are talking and writing more about the therapeutic relationship in cognitive 
and behavioural therapies (see Gilbert and Leahy 2009).
Here I highlight three specific contributions that make humanistic psychology useful and 
critical.
Its emphasis on holism and wholeness
As individuals actualize their potentialities, they become more fully human and closer to what 
Maslow (1971/1993) described as ‘values of Being’, the first of which he identified as ‘whole-
ness’. As Aanstoos (2003: 121) has acknowledged: ‘this holistic vision is precisely what is most 
needed to resolve crucial issues of the next generation, including globalization, health, ecology, 
and spirituality’.
Its acknowledgement of health
That there is health alongside illness, salutogenesis alongside pathogenesis, sanology alongside 
pathology, and so on, acknowledges the inherent directionality, actuality, and potentiality of the 
social human organism. This promotes a view of the contactful, engaged, authentic, empathic, 
active, reflective (reflexive), and critical human being described (somewhat differently) by Maslow 
and Rogers. According to Rogers (1977/1978), the ‘political person’ is someone who has both 
courage and responsibility, whilst the ‘person of tomorrow’ (Rogers 1980) has, amongst other 
qualities, a certain scepticism (regarding science and technology) and is anti-institutional.
Its increasing concern with the ecological
Humanistic psychology is meeting the criticism (as noted below) levelled at humanism of its 
undue focus on humans, and at humanistic psychology of its undue promotion of autonomy 
and independence. A search of all articles published in the Journal of Humanistic Psychology over 
the past 52 years revealed that the word ‘interdependence’ appeared 26 times in the past 14 years 
(2000–2013), compared with 27 times in the previous four decades (1961–1999). This concern 
that we are interdependent (human) beings offers more links not only to others, but also to 
other traditions, such as indigenous wisdom traditions, as well as to the planet itself.

Keith Tudor
134
Limits and limitations
The most obvious and fundamental limitation of humanism is that, as its name suggests, its con-
cerns are confined to the human realm – and, indeed, the use of the word ‘realm’ may reflect an 
assumption of sovereignty of humans over the nonhuman world. That humanism and human-
istic psychology is anthropocentric and open to the charge of ‘speciesism’ has been discussed 
by Shapiro (1990) and Fisher (2002). Perhaps a measure of the response to this criticism is the 
increasing interest in the interface between humanistic psychology and ecopsychology and, 
indeed, whether ecopsychology and the various forms of ecotherapy are a form of ‘humanistic’ 
psychology in the broader sense of the term (see Tudor 2013b).
A second limitation – and critique – of humanistic psychology is that it is – or was – highly 
individualistic. This was perhaps most clearly epitomized in Fritz Perls’ gestalt prayer: I do my 
thing and you do your thing / I am not in this world to live up to your expectations, / And 
you are not in this world to live up to mine. / You are you, and I am I, and if by chance we 
find each other, it’s beautiful/ If not, it can’t be helped (Perls 1969: 4). Whilst this certainly 
reflected something of the man himself and a certain self-obsession in the 1960s culture of 
narcissism (see Lasch 1979), within a few years other humanistic therapists had responded to 
Perls’ prayer with alternatives which described a more engaged and interconnected view of the 
‘I’ (see Tubbs 1972).
A third critique is that humanistic psychology and its therapies have, by and large, not ful-
filled their critical and/or radical promise. Despite its initial critique of both psychoanalysis and 
behaviourism, many humanistic therapies and therapists have taken on much that is psycho-
analytic (e.g. the unconscious, transference and countertransference, projective identification), 
and behavioural (e.g. contracts, feedback, modelling), with little critical reflection, assessment, 
or even awareness of the origins and implications of the words and concepts they use. Despite 
the fact that humanistic psychology originally questioned psychologies whose model of science 
was taken from physics (see AHP 1963), and suggested ‘a human science’ (Rogers 1967), and a 
science ‘at the edge’ (Brockman 2003), many of its exponents presented their theory in tradi-
tional, ‘scientific’ ways (see, notably, Rogers 1959). Despite the countercultural influences on the 
emergence of humanistic psychology, such as feminism and other radical political movements, 
humanistic psychologists and therapists have, with rare exceptions (such as the Independent 
Practitioners’ Network in the United Kingdom), tended to organize themselves in traditional 
associations – and, indeed, have often been leading exponents of the increasing professionaliza-
tion of the psychological therapies and of professional recognition through statutory regulation 
and state registration. Some might speculate that these examples only reflect the inherent con-
servatism of the humanistic project; others will argue that humanism and humanists have simply 
had to adapt and protect in order to survive in a psychological world and in psy-professions 
dominated by the first two forces of psychology.
Such critiques and reflections are crucial in order for those of us who define ourselves as 
humanistic psychologists or therapists – or humanists (see Tudor 2013a) – to continue to reflect 
critically and to maintain both a humane and critical psychology and praxis.
Looking forward
In the past two years there have been a number of acknowledgements of the fiftieth anniversary 
of early occasions in humanistic psychology and last year, many of us acknowledged the meeting 
in Old Saybrook. This has been a time of looking back and reassessing the origins and impact 
of this third force in psychology, yet its greatest contribution lies ahead. If it is to be a critical 

Humanistic psychology
135
one, humanistic psychology has to maintain its reflexivity. In his preface to Toward a Psychology 
of Being, Maslow (1962/1968: ii-iv) wrote: ‘I consider Humanistic, Third Force Psychology to be 
transitional, a preparation for a still “higher” Fourth Psychology, transpersonal, transhuman, cen-
tered in the cosmos rather than in human needs and interest, going beyond humanness, identity, 
self-actualization, and the like’. Whether present or future generations will judge that we have 
achieved this or not, Maslow’s statement reflects the aspirational and ‘inside out’ therapeutic 
perspective represented by a contemporary and critical humanistic psychology.
Further reading
Association of Humanistic Psychology Practitioners (1998/2009) UKAHPP Core Beliefs Statement, www.
ahpp.org/about/core.htm
Maslow, A. H., Rogers, C. R. and May, R. (1986) Politics and Innocence: A Humanistic Debate. San Francisco, 
CA: Saybrook Publishing Company.
Website resources
The Humanistic Psychologist: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hthp20
Journal of Humanistic Psychology: http://jhp.sagepub.com/
Self and Society: An International Journal of Humanistic Psychology: http://ahpb.org/index.php/about-self- 
society/
References
Aanstoos, C. M. (2003) ‘The relevance of humanistic psychology’, Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 3, 
121–132.
Association of Humanistic Psychology (AHP) (1963) Newsletter 1.
Brockman, J. (ed.) (2003) The New Humanists: Science at the Edge. London: Sterling.
Bugental, J.F.T. (1964) ‘The third force in psychology’, Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 4(1), 19–26.
Burrell, G., and Morgan, G. (1979) Sociological Paradigms and Organisational Analysis. London: Heinemann.
DeCarvalho, R. J. (1990) ‘A history of the “third force” in psychology’, Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 30, 
22–44.
DeCarvalho, R. J. (1991) The Founders of Humanistic Psychology. New York: Praeger.
Cain, D. J. (ed.) (2002) Humanistic Psychotherapies: Handbook of Research and Practice. Washington, DC: Amer-
ican Psychological Association.
Fisher, A. (2002) Radical Ecopsychology: Psychology in the Service of Life. Albany, NY: State University of New 
York Press.
Freire, P. (1972) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Gilbert, P. and Leahy, R. L. (eds) (2009) The Therapeutic Relationship in the Cognitive Behavioral Psychotherapies. 
Hove: Routledge.
Gomez, L. (2004) ‘Humanistic or psychodynamic: what is the difference and do we have to make a choice?’, 
Self and Society, 31(6), 5–19.
Greenberg, J., and Mitchell, S. A. (1983) Object Relations in Psychoanalytic Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Greene, M. (1975) ‘Curriculum and cultural transformation: a humanistic view’, Cross Currents, 25, 175–186.
House, R., Kalisch, D. and Maidman, J. (eds) (2013) The Future of Humanistic Psychology. Ross-on-Wye: 
PCCS Books.
Knight, M. (1961) Humanist Anthology. London: Barrie and Rockliff.
Lasch, C. (1979) The Culture of Narcissism. New York: Warner Books.
Loewenthal, D., and Samuels, A. (eds) (2014) Relational Psychotherapy, Psychoanalysis and Counselling: Apprais-
als and Reappraisals. London: Routledge.
Maslow, A. H. (1954) Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper and Row.
Maslow, A. H. (1962/1968) Towards a Psychology of Being. New York: Van Nostrand.
Maslow, A. H. (1971/1993). ‘Self-actualizing and beyond’, in The Farther Reaches of Human Nature. Har-
mondsworth: Penguin Arkana.

Keith Tudor
136
McWilliams, N. (2005) ‘Preserving our humanity as therapists’, Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Train-
ing, 42(2), 139–151.
Moss, D. (1999) Humanistic and Transpersonal Psychology: A Historical and Biographical Sourcebook. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Press.
Nemiroff, G. H. (1992) Reconstruction Education: Toward a Pedagogy of Critical Humanism. New York: Bergin 
and Garvey.
Orange, D. M. (2010) Thinking for Clinicians: Philosophical Resources for Contemporary Psychoanalysis and the 
Humanistic Psychotherapies. New York: Routledge.
Perls, F. S. (1969) Gestalt Therapy Verbatim. Lafayette, CA: Real People Press.
Proctor, G. (2002) The Dynamics of Power in Counselling and Psychotherapy: Ethics, Politics and Practice. Ross-on-
Wye: PCCS Books.
Resnick, S., Warmoth, A. and Serlin, I. A. (2001) ‘The humanistic and positive psychology connection: 
implications for psychotherapy’, Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 41, 73–101.
Rogers, C. R. (1942) Counseling and Psychotherapy: Newer Concepts in Practice. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1951) Client-Centered Therapy. London: Constable.
Rogers, C. R. (1957) ‘The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic personality change’, Journal of 
Consulting Psychology, 21, 95–103.
Rogers, C. R. (1959) ‘A theory of therapy, personality and interpersonal relationships, as developed in the 
client-centred framework’, in S. Koch (ed.) Psychology: A Study of a Science, Volume 3: Formulation of the 
Person and the Social Context. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rogers, C. R. (1967) On Becoming a Person. London: Constable.
Rogers, C. R. (1969) Freedom to Learn. Columbus, OH: Charles E. Merrill.
Rogers, C. R. (1977/1978) Carl Rogers on Personal Power. London: Constable.
Rogers, C. R. (1980) A Way of Being. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1983) Freedom to Learn for the 80s. Columbus, OH: Charles E. Merrill.
Samuels, A. (2013) ‘Foreword’ in R. House, D. Kalisch, and J. Maidman (eds) The Future of Humanistic Psy-
chology. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.
Seligman, M.E.P. (1999) ‘The president’s address’, American Psychologist, 54, 1099–1109.
Seligman, M.E.P., and Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000) ‘Positive psychology: an introduction’, American Psy-
chologist, 55, 5–14.
Schneider, K. J., Bugental, J.F.T. and Pierson, J. F. (2001) The Handbook of Theory, Research and Practice. San 
Francisco, CA: Sage.
Shapiro, K. J. (1990) ‘Animal rights versus humanism: the charge of speciesism’, Journal of Humanistic Psy-
chology, 30(2), 9–37.
Stark, M. (1999) Modes of Therapeutic Action. New York: Jason Aaronson.
Steiner, C. S. (1981) The Other Side of Power. New York: Grove Press.
Summers, G., and Tudor, K. (2000) ‘Cocreative transactional analysis’, Transactional Analysis Journal, 30(1), 
23–40.
Taft, J. (1933) The Dynamics of Therapy in a Controlled Relationship. New York: Macmillan.
Taylor, E. (2001) ‘Positive psychology and humanistic psychology: a reply to Seligman’, Journal of Humanistic 
Psychology, 30, 22–44.
Tubbs, W. (1972) ‘Beyond Perls’, Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 12(2), 5.
Tudor, K. (2011) ‘Understanding empathy’, Transactional Analysis Journal, 41(1), 39–57.
Tudor, K. (2013a) ‘From humanism to humanistic psychology and back again’, in R. House, D. Kalisch, and 
J. Maidman (eds) The Future of Humanistic Psychology. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.
Tudor, K. (2013b) ‘Person-centered psychology and therapy, ecopsychology and ecotherapy’, Person-Centered 
and Experiential Psychotherapies, 12(4), 315–329.
Tudor, K., and Merry, T. (2002) Dictionary of Person-Centred Psychology. London: Whurr.
Tudor, K., and Worrall, M. (2006) Person-Centred Therapy: A Clinical Philosophy. London: Routledge.

137
Although political psychology has a well-established place in some regions of the world, the 
definition of its field is contested. That means political psychology is an interesting space for 
research. Having blurred boundaries is not a problem; sciences are not closed. But the lack of a 
clear border between political psychology and political science, an aspect that has accompanied 
political psychology since the 1970s, is nowadays considered by some political psychologists as 
problematic. Deutsch and Kinvall consider that it is ‘defined not only by its subject-matter’, but 
also characterized by the ‘interrelationship between political and psychological processes’ (2002: 
17), and in this they follow the steps of Stone (1974), and Hermann (1986). At the same time, 
and in the same book (Monroe 2002), Krosnick and McGraw (2002) denounce the acceptance 
of a twofold idea of political psychology, one made up of psychological political science and 
political psychology, and argue that those domains should have as boundaries ‘the fundamental 
priorities of the research enterprise’. For them, political psychology should then be ‘true to its 
name’ (Krosnick and McGraw 2002: 79–80). Political psychology’s authenticity would then 
reside in the presence of psychological values and goals, and, as happens in science, it is still 
under construction.
The lack of psychological perspectives in some political researches, as well as the proximity of 
political science, is not only an Anglo-Saxon problem. In papers in the specific field of political 
psychology at many international conferences, one can find that some of them hardly touch 
political aspects on the one hand, or ‘psychology’ is just mentioned in the title, a word simply 
helping them to be included in the programme, on the other. Certainly, political issues concern 
political psychology, while also being of interest for political science, but this is often without a 
clear psychological perspective in either the realm of theory or methodology. The iterative con-
dition of political problems makes it possible that certain problems need to have the dimension 
of both political psychology and political science. It seems that blurred boundaries will be with 
us for a long time.
The origins of political psychology
Political psychology was first established in France at the beginning of the twentieth century by 
the sociologist Gustav Le Bon (1911/1971) as a way to deal with the psychological effects of 
14
Political psychology
Critical approaches to power
Maritza Montero

Maritza Montero
138
politics in social life. He defined political psychology as a science of government charged with 
avoiding or controlling mistakes and errors, so frequent and so costly, that were made by politi-
cians in government. A few years later in the USA, a different line of political work was created, 
which combined psychopathology and politics and emphasized the life histories and psycho-
pathological aspects of politicians in charge of the most important tasks in the State. Harold 
Lasswell, whose clinical and political work Psychopathlogy and Politics is considered the main pillar 
for US political psychology, did not exactly mention ‘political psychology’ as such, but rather 
politics, political science, political biography, political agitators, political convictions, and the 
State, and proposed a notion of psychopathology linked to personality studies. He also looked 
to the possibility that politicians be instructed in the judicious or wise employment of their 
minds in order to reduce prejudices and to develop a logical way of thinking by self-observation 
and questioning. That sort of political psychology did not produce a corresponding successful 
practice, but it certainly influenced psychologists. Both authors, Le Bon and Lasswell, therefore 
had a critical idea of what was happening with politics, and proposed ways to correct it. In Ger-
many, a platform for the critical construction and analysis of political ideas and behaviour was 
developed by the Frankfurt School, a group of politically oriented philosophers and sociologists 
directed by Max Horkheimer. Their centre was the Institute for Social Research, first in Weimar, 
later in Frankfurt, and they produced a line of thought characterized by studying critical works 
of philosophers such as Kant, Hegel, and Marx, and, contemporaneous to the researchers in the 
Institute, Lukács and Heidegger. Psychoanalytical and psychological ideas which were charac-
terized by the Institute’s critique of mainstream developments were presented. When Nazism 
forced these researchers to flee their country (mainly to the United States), they contributed to 
the first substantial psychological analysis of ideology and its effects on the psyche, which were 
then analysed by psychologists. The Authoritarian Personality (Adorno et al. 1950/1964) is an 
important example of this line of work.
The Frankfurt School also developed lines of critique regarding the way in which human 
beings construct knowledge and how social life and its conditions affect them, thus opening a 
critical view of society and the creation of social conditions that produce images of reality influ-
enced by dominant ideologies. Those ideological images have positive or negative effects, and 
there is always the possibility of transforming society by way of the activation of human interests. 
Their critique pointed to the constraints created at the same time that those images were con-
structed, thus producing benefits for some people while leaving others out. What is considered 
good and what is considered bad also here depends on the possibilities human people have to 
voice their problems and to propose and discuss ideas.
Le Bon wanted to prevent or avoid politicians’ errors and mistakes, and Lasswell presented a 
perspective treating them as mental health problems. Despite these motives, the proposals do not 
seem to have been taken much into account, and many politicians still do what they have always 
done. In this form political psychology, along with the other social sciences, does not seem to 
have had any impact, much less have been studied by many politicians. The Nazi party did not 
want to learn the teaching of the Frankfurt School, but was keen enough to persecute them. 
One of their aims was to eradicate the Institute in Frankfurt; they dispersed its main participants, 
brilliant researchers who had to seek refuge in order to save their lives.
What has political psychology done since these beginnings?
Despite these failures in the realm of politics, political psychology has over the years been feed-
ing into social psychology, social sciences, and classical research methods absolutely necessary 
in almost all branches of psychology, such as questionnaires, interviews, surveys, case studies, 

Political psychology
139
scales, and biographical methods. Since the 1960s, there have been studies into how political 
opinions and ideas are constructed, for example. Psychologists interested in political psychology 
have engaged in research on the political socialization of children, and into the influence of 
parents and peers. Studies of national identities and nationalism, conservatism and liberalism, 
elections and electoral campaigns, voting, the character of presidents and the political behaviour 
of important politicians were, and still are, popular. In some cases, research related to dictators, 
oppressive governments, their deeds and their effects, their policies and political behaviour (and 
sometimes even their private behaviour), have dire consequences for authors. Critical views then 
may come from outside the countries concerned, but even abroad there is what can be called 
self-censorship. Sometimes, even important journals of political psychology have tried to assume 
a ‘neutral’ position, rejecting the publication of articles related to dictatorships, totalitarian gov-
ernments, the segregation of certain ethnic groups, or anti-capitalist criticism. This can be reflec-
tion of fear (if the journal or editorial house is in the country or has economic contacts with 
that country or place). Fear of having an opinion, or fear that one might offend some powerful 
group, may be an important factor in determining what is and what is not published. In relation 
to these issues, power and its asymmetric nature in politics and daily life is always present and 
needs to be addressed in ‘critical’ approaches to political psychology.
Poverty, as a global condition presented in local situations, and present all over the world, is 
also an area of research for political psychology, though it has not been one of the most salient in 
conferences and handbooks (Carr and Sloan 2003). Poverty is a complex phenomenon accom-
panied by exclusion, and it is present not only in ‘underdeveloped’ countries, but in almost all 
regions of the world. It can have an economic core, or can be produced by crises due to natural 
phenomena or political disasters such as wars, oppression, and segregation. It can be related to 
both individual and social issues such as teenage pregnancy or lack of education.
Politics and power
The most important problem of politics concerns the use of power. Power is an essential part of 
human life. People need it to be able to achieve positive benefits, both for society or for individ-
uals. The German sociologist Max Weber coined a definition of power in the first quarter of the 
twentieth century, arguing that it is: ‘the probability of imposing one’s own will, within a social 
relationship, even against every resistance and whatever it may be the foundation of that proba-
bility’ (1925/1964: 228). In spite of the inclusion of the word ‘probability’ in this definition, the 
power is its main condition. That asymmetry is expressed in the idea that in social relationships, 
some individuals, people, groups, gender, ethnic groups, and so on, prevail over others. This even 
in spite of the many examples that history presents us regarding the fall and decadency of those 
who considered that they had immanent power.
The Weberian conception of power has also been adopted in an almost universal way. It 
prevailed during the past century and is the most popular today, in psychology as everywhere. 
Even a radical psychologist like Ignacio Martín-Baró used this conception: he wrote, that power  
is “the condition of social relations based in the diferential possesion of resources allowing 
some people to achieve their class or personal interests, impossing them to others” (1989,  
p. 101). By 1989 he introduced the notion of a difference in resources, as well as attending to the 
fact that serving the goals and interests of an actor may actually be as important as their ‘will’. 
Nevertheless, he was always concerned with the asymmetry between partners in a relationship 
(Martín-Baró 1984).
Power is neither unilateral nor immanent. It is not some essential aspect that some people are 
born with, and that other people will never have. That conception of power is an ideological 

Maritza Montero
140
conception, one which presents it as some kind of gift of command, or as if it were an object. 
Perceiving power as a thing or as a place also expresses a form of alienation in which things or 
positions are superior to the people that created them. It does make it possible to distinguish and 
to challenge public manifestations of power, but makes hard to see that power at work in small 
groups, in daily relationships between peers, in families or within couples, the places where power 
is actually displayed, sometimes leaving its mark forever. But there are also places where people 
can develop resources leading to power.
A concern with asymmetric power, in contrast, is based on the idea that some people, groups, 
or social categories are powerless. Power then is seen as a continuum, one of its poles marked 
by its concentration, and the other defined by its absence. The first has force while the other 
is weak, thus reinforcing inequality in social systems and inequality in politics, since that basic 
definition presents it as the capacity to manage government, acquiring power to solve problems, 
to decide about them, to organize society. Asymmetrical power resides in imbalance and con-
centration of what is necessary and socially wanted at one particular pole, and in the possibility 
to have control over those on the other side of the social relationship. Those relations have dif-
ferent aspects according to the ways of exerting dominion. They can be force relationships based 
on the possession of more weapons and military forces, or of more political force according to 
the place of key actors in hierarchies and the support coming from other members of society, 
thus gaining control and direction within the political system. They can be conflictive relationships 
where there are different and contrasting ideas between groups in such a way that the autonomy 
of one group collides with the decisions of the others.
Asymmetry leads to a dead end for political change. Power should be exerted in order to 
produce well-being, by distributing, in the best possible way, knowledge, goods, and services, so 
that all members of the group have access to them. Marxist theories of ideology have explained 
how obstacles are put in the way of this equitable process: an asymmetrical situation through 
the production of ideas that could be induced in the poorer sections of society, in such a way 
that those people convince themselves that certain conditions in social organization are not only 
necessary, but also the right and only way.
Asymmetry in power
There are anti-democratic asymmetries, totalitarian and dictatorial asymmetries, and democratic 
asymmetries. In the last system, ‘democratic asymmetries’, innovative ideas are not always well 
received because of fear of change and threats to power positions. Psychological and psycho-
biological researchers have studied political domination and submissive behaviours, as well as 
leadership and the psychology of specific leaders. The idea of power being the natural privilege 
of one, or a few, or of a particular group or nation, has been influential in politics as an ideo-
logical notion.
At the end of the 1970s and beginning of the 1980s, an organizational perspective was pre-
sented in France, with a theoretical-methodological analysis of strategic power relationships (Cro-
zier and Friedberg 1977: 69). Although these relationships sustain resources, allowing each one 
to manipulate the other, they also allow each of them to have access to desired resources. Crozier 
and Friedberg’s strategy here resides in ‘the margin of liberty that each part possesses compro-
mised in a relation of power’, thus generating a greater flexibility in power relationships and also, 
at times, greater tension. For them, power is characterized as being linked to exchange and, con-
sequently, to negotiation. This is due to their emphasis on instrumental relations, which impli-
cate many affective phenomena conditioning their development. That relation is non-transitive 
and reciprocal, marked by the force one actor searches for in order to take something from the 

Political psychology
141
other, but it does not mean that both of the participants will necessarily and passively accept it. 
The power relationship, according to Crozier and Friedberg, resides in the extent of the zone of 
doubt created by the liberty and autonomy of each actor.
The problem here, and in Friedberg’s (1993) later work, is the lack of balance in a relationship. 
Balance is not an entropic modality, although it uses imbalance as a play of contrasting capacities, 
thus producing a negantropic (the contrary of entropic) arrangement. Everything people do tends 
towards imbalance, and such is the case with asymmetric power. But, at the same time, people 
need to generate symmetry not only to have access to goods, but also to freedom and independ-
ence. Exactly the same are searched for in conditions of asymmetry, but with the condition that 
some have access to a great amount of the goods in a specific place or even around the Earth. That 
same inequality exists in the quality of the behaviour exchanged within the asymmetrical space, 
and Friedberg (1993) refers to something he calls ‘the Other’, and introduces the idea that there 
is a relational and non-transitive nature of power; for him, power is not separable from relation-
ships. Power can only be transitive: ‘It depends on the relation, not on the hierarchy’ (1993: 114).
This is the part where the non-mentioned excluded, oppressed, abandoned, outsiders (the 
‘Others’ in general) enter. If they do not know how to negotiate, how to trade, how to organ-
ize themselves, or how to know what their resources are, they can be lost or duped. Friedberg 
then says that ‘Negotiation does not need to be consciously lived by the participants (in it)’ 
(1993: 115). That is why, in liberation psychology, consciousness is the most important aspect to 
develop political, ethical, and psychological understanding and action. For Friedberg, ‘There is 
a non-reducible nexus between power and interdependence between power and cooperation’ 
(1993: 115). So, power can be bilateral and multilateral, and there should be something like 
negotiation. Exchange is necessary, because the relation will not exist without it. He then con-
structs a new definition of power, saying: ‘Power can be and should be defined as the capacity of 
an actor of structuring processes of interchange more or less enduring, in his favour, exploiting 
the difficulties and needs of a situation to impose favourable interchange terms for his interest’ 
(1993: 117). That is an example of the nature of balance as used in asymmetrical power.
Power is found in social structures and in asymmetry of resources. That asymmetry is the 
main unbalancing aspect in power relationships, and the possibility to overcome asymmet-
ric power and is an aspect acknowledged by James and Craig (1979), Lukes (1974/2007),  
Serrano-García and López-Sánchez (1994), and Montero 2003. If asymmetry were not present 
there would be no political corruption. All people need to exert power, and do it in many 
non-corrupt ways in their everyday life. Michel Foucault was quite right when he said that 
power is omnipresent and immanent, that it comes from everywhere (Foucault 1984: 113).
Asymmetry derives from the intention and deeds directed to the use of it as only for one 
person or for only a specific group or nation. The problem itself resides in politics, and in the 
possibility that all human beings have of exerting power in such a way that they can force other 
human people to submit to their will. It also lies in the privatization of knowledge, in the crea-
tion of social classes, in the distinction between groups according to knowledge, and even in the 
health conditions of people. It is present in the classification and evaluation of people in line with 
decisions made by some groups and without the participation of other groups who are qualified 
to judge, and without considering the capacities that those classified may themselves have. What 
is produced then is a form of social organization according to the specific interests of a few.
Symmetry in power
Since the 1960s, the idea of symmetry in power has had some supporters. The fact is that those 
who seem to be dispossessed, deprived of all power, and who have a lower place in society, being 

Maritza Montero
142
denied not only physical but also the intellectual access to knowledge and other goods within 
a society, are also able to overcome their condition. Between the 1980s and 1990s, the notion 
of power was revised, moving from mere radical denunciation of asymmetrical power effects 
without any movement trying to change it, to critical conceptions which aimed at bringing out 
its problems and overcoming its oppressive characteristics.
In 1974, for example, Steven Lukes presented a ‘radical view’ of power, and then in 2007 
he reviewed that book, presenting an idea of power that could be considered as a defence of 
symmetry. Lukes proposed a form of power that was not mainly based on obedience by way of 
menace and sanctions, power that was carried out from places of authority, by force, influence, 
and manipulation. His ideas take a non-Weberian path, and instead present a ‘tri-dimensional’ 
view of power, defined as dispositional, as ‘an aptitude or capacity that can be exerted or not’ 
(Lukes 1974/2007: 130).
For him, power is a condition pertaining to the whole of humanity. Power is everywhere in 
multiple ways, and every human being has the potential ability to generate power to do things, 
to transform society and to undo it. Power is then a capacity, but not the exercise of that capacity, 
and one could be powerful by satisfying and promoting other people’s interests. The problem 
then resides in considering power as the ‘imposition of inner inhibitions’ (Lukes 1974/2007), 
meaning processes such as habituation, in the sense described by Bourdieu (1972), naturalization 
(the way that beliefs, wishes, and ways of behaving are induced by external agents and come to 
be part of one’s own personality), and alienation-ideologization (in such a way that domination 
and obedience are obtained as if by people’s own free will). People accept such conditions of 
power as the ‘natural’ way to be, not being aware of the origin of such ideas and behaviour, and 
they then accept power within social situations, considering it necessary, natural, and indispen-
sable, even as protecting society, and they thereby internalize their subordinated status as a con-
sequence of power (Lukes 1974/2007: 52). However, at the same time, Lukes insists that social 
actors be considered as dynamic, and emphasizes the way that actors can have motivations in 
spite of oppression and deprivation; they may produce unexpected changes in society in spite 
of dictatorships.
Power in action
Power is manifested in many ways. It is present in the first steps in life, in the most trivial daily 
tasks; it is everywhere. At every moment in society, its members are exerting some kind of power 
or are the object of that exertion. That omnipresent condition makes it necessary to rethink 
what power is and how it should be used, and it is necessary to know that every human being 
suffering from the abuse of power also has powerful resources that may produce transformation 
and changes at any moment and any place: ‘Power is a problem not only when it is abusively 
used, in a dominant and oppressive way, but also when one ignores that one possess it’ (Montero 
2003). Theories of ideology help us to see this relationship between power and hegemony as 
being bound up with distorting effects which lead to relationships in which a person can be the 
subject of submission or be used as an instrument to obtain ends one has not elected. That kind 
of behaviour may be so habitual that it becomes socially naturalized.
In the field of political psychology in Puerto Rico, Irma Serrano-García and Gerardo 
López-Sánchez (1994, 1991) produced a model of the ‘symmetric’ position of power. First, they 
locate the difference in access to resources that provides the material basis of social relation-
ships. To that, as has been done by other researchers, they add a conception of power as a social 
relation. They define power as: ‘A personal or indirect daily interaction in which people mani-
fest their social consensus and the ruptures between their experiences and their consciousness’ 

Political psychology
143
(Serrano-García and López-Sánchez 1994: 178). They emphasize that there is a materially 
defined historical relationship which is prior to any specific interaction, and in this relationship 
there are agents in a conflict which is created by the control and exclusive use of a resource 
which can be material or immaterial, dominated by one and wanted by the other. That material 
base includes objects and services, as well as institutions in charge of their distribution.
A central concept in their theory is that of consciousness, a fundamental concept for psychol-
ogy, defined as the ‘individual or group apprehension of the prevailing ideology’ (Serrano-García 
and López-Sánchez 1994:181). That consciousness may be either ‘submissive and practical’, or 
‘critically integrating’, or ‘critically liberating’. The importance of consciousness resides in the 
fact that the power relation is based on it, since there is the need that the agent deprived of 
access to a resource recognizes and constructs the situation as unequal, producing dissatisfaction. 
The agent must feel a necessity to have that resource and so covet it. In this way Serrano-García 
and López-Sánchez constructed a theory of power with a psychosocial base, placing its origins 
in psychological processes linked to a relationship creating a mode of social action and a mode 
of being a social actor. The level of consciousness alerts us to the inequality produced by the 
differential in handling resources, and leads us to an understanding that one can have access to 
the resources as well as to an awareness that social situations are changeable and dynamic, thus 
impelling the actors to change them according to their interest. This conception of change is 
central to critical political psychology.
Relationships are considered in their social context as a part of a wider network of relations 
that should be taken into account. There are therefore three prerequisites for this understanding 
of those internal processes that not directly observable until the desired resource is identified: 
‘necessities and aspirations’; ‘consciousness of the asymmetry of resources’; and ‘identification of 
desired resources’. Manifestations of interest in consciousness originate the relation and conflict 
keeps it going (Serrano-García and López-Sánchez 1994). This theory draws attention both to 
the interested agent and to the controlling agent. There is power in the agent controlling and 
dominating a resource, and in the agent that feels the inequality. Identifying that situation opens 
the way to a different relationship that will produce answers and changes, although that is not 
always easy to obtain. Some power relations may involve a struggle for years and even centuries 
(an example of which is slavery).
It is necessary for critical political psychologists, among others, to keep open the possibility 
of accessing resources, and it is also necessary to keep to the forefront of our work a conception 
of the levels of satisfaction and aspirations of the people, something that is neither achieved by 
decree nor by popular consensus. In such circumstances one should explore the fears, myths, 
helplessness, suspicion, and insecurity that may be at the base of apparent indifference. The 
rhythm of change in social groups, their history and context, should also be included.
Conclusions
Critical aspects of political psychology should be a rich territory for a critical study. Politics, 
government, and citizenship are aspects of work that usually develop debates and critical analysis, 
but academic political psychology is, so far, very cautious or not much interested in those fields. 
There are, however, political psychologists that do very interesting work about such processes. 
Marx and Engels’ works are increasingly well-known among those who are ‘critical’ in political 
psychology, and the same can be said of the work of Gramsci, Lukács, and those working in the 
tradition of the Frankfurt School as well as those who use Foucault’s ideas. Social construction-
ism, for example, was quickly embraced by the psychological community, even if many only did 
lip service to it. I have concentrated on ‘power’ in this chapter because it concerns politics and 

Maritza Montero
144
is an important phenomenon through which to advance social equality, fairness, and respect. 
These aims of critical work confront the naturalization of the idea that power can only be on 
one side of society, which has the natural capacity to impose ideas and norms on everyone else. 
Asymmetrical power and its social, economic, and psychological consequences are political as 
well as political-psychological problems.
Further reading
Carr, S. C. and Sloan, T. S. (2003) Poverty and Psychology: From Global Perspective to Local Practice. New York: 
Kugler Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Monroe, K. R. (2002) Political Psychology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Website resources
Journal of Social and Political Psychology: http://jspp.psychopen.eu/index.php/jspp
Psychology in Society archives: http://www.pins.org.za/
References
Adorno, T. W., Frenkel-Brunswick, E., Levinson D. J. and Sanford, R. N. (1950/1964) The Authoritarian 
Personality. New York: Science Editions.
Bourdieu, P. (1972) Equisse pour un Theorie de la Pratique. Geneve-Paris: Librarie Droz.
Carr, S. C. and Sloan, T. S. (2003) Poverty and Psychology: from Global Perspective to Local Practice. New York: 
Kugler Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Crozier, M. and Friedberg, E. (1977) L’Acteur et le Système. France: Editions du Seuil.
Deutsch, M. and Kinvall, C. (2002) ‘What is political psychology?’, in K. R. Monroe (ed.) Political Psychology. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Foucault, M. (1984) Un Diálogo Sobre el Poder. Buenos Aires, Argentina: Alianza.
Friedberg, E. (1993) Le pouvoir et la règle. Paris: Seuil.
Hermann, M. G. (1986) ‘What is political psychology?’, in M. G. Hermann (ed.) Political Psychology. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
James, H. and Craig. M. (1979) Synergic Power: Domination and Permissiveness. Berkeley, CA: ProActive Press.
Krosnick, J. A. and McGraw, K. M. (2002) ‘Psychological political science versus political psychology’, in 
K. R. Monroe (ed.) Political Psychology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lasswell, H. (1963) Psychopathology and Politics. New York: Viking Press: Paidós.
Le Bon, G. (1911/1971) La Psychology Politique. Paris: Colin.
Lukes, S. (1974/2007) El poder. Un enfoque radical. Madrid: Siglo XXI.
Martín-Baró, I. (1984) ‘Procesos psíquicos y poder’, in O. D'Adamo, V. García Beaudoux and M. Montero 
(Orgs.) Psicología de la Acción Política. Buenos Aires, Argentina: Paidós.
Martín-Baró, I. (1989) Sistema, Grupo y poder. San Salvador, El Salvador: UCA Ed.
Monroe, K. R. (2002) Political Psychology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Montero, M. (2003) Teoría y práctica de la psicología comunitaria: La tensión entre comunidad y sociedad. Buenos 
Aires, Argentina: Paidós.
Serrano-García, I. and López-Sánchez, G. (1991) ‘Community interventions in Puerto Rico: The impact of 
social-community psychology’, Applied Psychology: An International Review, 40(2), 201–208.
Serrano-García, I. and López-Sánchez, G. (1994) ‘A different perspective of power and social change in 
Community Social Psychology’, in M. Montero (ed.) Community Social Psychology. Guadalajara, México: 
Universidad de Guadalajara.
Stone, W. F. (1974) The Psychology of Politics. New York: Free Press.
Weber, M. (1925/1964) Economía y sociedad. México, FCE.

145
In this chapter we address the topic of community psychology from a critical standpoint. First, we 
briefly explicate ‘critical’ frames of reference influential within community psychology and, in 
particular, the one within which we engage here as authors critical within and of community 
psychology. We then clarify what we are talking about when we discuss community psychology 
by reference to influential characterizations which are dominantly regarded as authoritative. 
We then consider some opportunities afforded by community psychology for enabling and 
promoting critique within and of the disciplinary practices of ‘psy’ and of oppressive practices. 
Finally, we consider problems with community psychology when considered within a critical 
frame of reference.
Critical frames of reference within community psychology
Max Horkheimer positioned critical psychology as concerned with liberation of ‘human beings 
from the circumstances that enslave them’ (Horkheimer 1982: 244). Most community psycholo-
gists would agree with that but disagree about what enslaves human beings and so about what 
freedom from enslavement would entail. Many community psychologists claim that human 
beings are enslaved when their capacity for agentic self-determination as individual social and 
moral persons-in-context is restricted and disabled by powerful social forces, such as those 
operating through inequality, poverty, unemployment, or racism, with negative consequences 
for ‘wellness’ and social justice. Most versions of community psychology could be claimed to 
be ‘critical’ in the sense that they claim a commitment to ‘liberation’ of people from patho-
genic, socially unjust enslavement through social and structural intervention which ‘empowers’ 
(e.g. Dalton et al. 2001, 2007; Nelson and Prilleltensky 2010; Orford 1992; Rappaport 1977). 
Whether these versions do actually liberate is quite another matter, of course.
Some community psychologists are fundamentally concerned with ‘enslavement’ by capital-
ism and draw heavily upon Marx, Marxian, and/or Marxist texts. Horkheimer (1982), one-time 
Director of the Institute for Social Research, more widely known as the Frankfurt School, 
whose members combined interests in Marxism, psychoanalysis, and anti-positivism, and Klaus 
Holzkamp (1983), former Professor at the Free University of Berlin, who is often positioned 
as a founder of ‘critical psychology’, are both still influential in some versions of community 
15
Community psychology
Subjectivity, power, collectivity
David Fryer and Rachael Fox

David Fryer and Rachael Fox
146
psychology. Kagan et al. (2011), for example, who titled their recent book Critical Community 
Psychology, write with regard to using ‘critical’ that they have ‘set up two ideal types, with a 
clear bias as to the one that we are more comfortable with’ (12). The ‘more comfortable’ type 
for them is introduced by reference to ‘the Frankfurt School of Marxist intellectuals concerned 
with questions of culture and its relation to society (e.g. Adorno, Horkheimer, Marcuse, Fromm, 
Habermas)’ writing that in that context ‘what is meant by the term “critical” is an approach that 
tries to understand a social reality through introduction of another, more penetrating frame of 
reference, one that has to do with a general theory of human society (or at least late capitalist 
society) understood in terms of contradictions between different social interests and economic 
processes of exploitation, capital accumulation, and so on’ (12). Marxism is also a powerful influ-
ence on the work of contemporary South African community psychologists Seedat et al. (2001), 
who included a chapter entitled ‘Towards a Marxist community psychology’ in their textbook 
of community psychology.
Other community psychologists, including the authors of this chapter, position enslavement 
within a frame of reference which draws upon the work of Michel Foucault and has been devel-
oped by scholars like Joao Biehl, Judith Butler, and Nikolas Rose. Whilst they do not all accept 
the term ‘postmodern’, they are critical in many respects of modernist frames of reference and 
regard enslavement as having multiple loci of accomplishment, including compliance achieved 
through subjection/re-subjectivation, oppressive power-knowledge systems which take both 
productive and restrictive forms, and the broader project of governmentality (Fryer and Stambe 
2014a; Fryer and Stambe 2014b;; Marley and Fryer 2014; Nic Giolla Easpaig et al. 2014; Stambe 
et al. 2012).
Some versions of critique within community psychology are mutually inconsistent. Main-
stream community psychology is problematic from both Marxist and Foucauldian standpoints. 
Marxist community psychologies are problematic from a Foucauldian standpoint because the 
Marxist approach to power is regarded as problematic and Marxism is regarded as a modernist 
grand narrative riddled with governmentality-achieving prescriptions and proscriptions. From 
a Marxist point of view, Foucauldian critique is positioned as problematic. Kagan et al. (2011: 
12) characterized ‘another common use of “critical” ’. . . ‘at its worst (and most postmodern) as 
“almost” meaning ‘ “say what you like” . . . part of the “society of the spectacle”, of consumerism, 
of capitalism itself’.
What we are talking about when we discuss  
‘community psychology’?
In a popular United Statesian community psychology textbook, Nelson and Prilleltensky 
(2005, 2010) summarize ‘themes that have been consistent over time’ in community psychology. 
According to Nelson and Prilleltensky, community psychology is distinguished from ‘traditional 
applied psychology’ by: ecological levels of analysis; problems being ‘reframed in terms of social con-
text and cultural diversity’; focus upon ‘competence/strengths’; early, preferably preventative, intervention 
to promote ‘competence and wellness’; emphasis on ‘self-help/community development/social action’; 
positioning of the ‘client’ as an ‘active participant who exercises choice and self-direction’; positioning of 
the professional as a ‘resource collaborator (scholar-activist)’; and an ‘emphasis on social ethics, emanci-
patory values and social change’ (2005: 5). Similar accounts of community psychology can be found 
in most United Statesian textbooks (e.g. Dalton et al. 2001, 2007; Kloos et al. 2012; Levine and 
Perkins 1997; Rappaport 1977).
This account is mirrored on the website of the Society for Community Research and Action – 
Community Psychology (SCRA), Division 27 of the American Psychological Association 

Community psychology
147
(http://www.scra27.org/about). The SCRA ‘vision’ includes the statement that SCRA will 
have an ‘impact on enhancing well-being and promoting social justice for all people by fostering collab-
oration where there is division and empowerment where there is oppression’. The SCRA ‘mission 
statement’ and the society’s four principles also include the following terms: ‘its members are 
committed to promoting health and empowerment and to preventing problems’; ‘respect for diversity 
among peoples and settings’; ‘Human competencies and problems are best understood by viewing 
people within their social, cultural, economic, geographic, and historical contexts’; ‘active collaboration among 
researchers, practitioners, and community members’ ; and ‘promote competence and well-being’. The ver-
sion of community psychology found in Nelson and Prilleltensky (2005, 2010) and on the 
SCRA web pages is again mirrored extraordinarily closely by the entry on community psychol-
ogy in Wikipedia.
Individual international textbooks echo this account. For example, in Community Psychology 
and Social Change: Australian and New Zealand Perspectives, Thomas and Veno (1996: 25) summa-
rize the core values and principles for an Australian and New Zealand community psychology 
as: ‘empowerment, social justice, diversity and cultural pluralism, cultural awareness, social innova-
tion, evaluation, community development and participation, collaboration and partnership, an ecological 
approach, systems perspectives, prevention and localisation’.
‘What do people actually do when they are doing community psychology?’, Orford (1992: 
8,4) asks rhetorically, in his influential British textbook. He answers that his Table 1 ‘provides 
one answer in brief, and the remaining chapters of this book . . . provide the same answer at 
much greater length’. Roughly summarized, the chapters address: ecological levels of analysis and 
intervention; social support; power and control; methodological eclecticism; collaborative working; prevention; 
organizational change; self-help and non-professional help; and community empowerment.
One could continue ad infinitum, giving examples of similar accounts of community psy-
chology. Does this constitute a form of convergent validity? Have versions of community  
psychology sprung up independently in different places at different times and converged on the 
most effective and coherent ways to ‘do’ community psychology? We pursue such issues later but 
for now we consider the following:
Some opportunities afforded by community psychology for critique
Whenever and wherever it is taught, community psychology can open a space in the under-
graduate psychology degree for engagement in critique by under- and postgraduates, when 
critical psychology would be much more difficult or impossible to get into the syllabus. For 
example, in terms of content, through community psychology, the teacher has the poten-
tial to introduce into the undergraduate psychology syllabus at least traces of: ‘history of the 
present’ of psychology; philosophy of science; sociology of knowledge; text based research 
methods; emancipatory disability research; feminist theory; anti-psychiatry; Marxist thinking; 
post-structural thinking; and decolonizing methodology. Community psychology provides 
opportunities to begin critique of: the dogma of value-free science; intellectual colonization; 
positivism; universalism; victim blaming approaches; the medical model of disability; and the 
hegemonic psy construction and reproduction of the decontextualized individual. Through 
how community psychology is taught, there is the potential to provide opportunities for 
undergraduates to appreciate that vast amounts of sophisticated effective work addressing ‘psy-
chological oppression’ is done by people without psychology, or indeed any, degrees. The 
existence of an approach which is conceptually, methodologically, and politically different 
from the mainstream but also itself mainstream in that it is recognized as a legitimate part of 
the discipline (by Section status in the British Psychological Society, by College status in the 

David Fryer and Rachael Fox
148
Australian Psychology Society and eligibility for practice endorsement with the Psychology 
Board of Australia, by Division status in the American Psychology Association, by Associate 
Membership status of the European Federation of Psychologists’ Associations in the case of 
the European Community Psychology Association [http://www.efpa.eu/associate-members] 
etc.) communicates to students the possibility of employment in community psychology with 
potential to engage in aspects of critique. Courses in community psychology in higher educa-
tion institutions also potentially allow the employment of critical psychologists to teach com-
munity psychology. Community psychology conferences provide spaces for critical subgroups 
to meet and debate. Community psychology Sections or Divisions or Colleges can allow critical 
voices to potentially influence national policy. Community psychology forums (e.g. https://
www.jiscmail.ac.uk/cgi-bin/webadmin?A0=COMMUNITYPSYCHUK) can provide spaces 
for the development of critique and solidarity. In practice, the radicality of critique which has 
flourished in such spaces has so far been modest and community psychologists are as prone, 
maybe more, to close critique down as any other manifestations of the psy-complex, but com-
munity psychology affords opportunities for critique at least in theory. Most importantly, 
community psychology can sometimes survive, albeit against tremendous odds, where criti-
cal psychology would be less likely to survive and create spaces for resistance. A community 
psychology master’s programme has been established at Birzeit University in the West Bank, 
in which community psychology is positioned as taking a stand against repression and state 
violence, and naming the source of oppression and doing so under military occupation. As the 
developer of this programme, Makkawi puts it as(this volume): ‘envisioning critical psychology 
in the Arab World in general, is better conceived through critical community psychology as an 
emerging alternative to colonial psychology’.
Community psychology: some problems
As shown above, there are huge numbers of uncannily similar or even near identical definitions 
and explications of community psychology, explicitly or implicitly, in textbooks, in journal 
articles, on professional society websites, on forums, given by lecturers in class, or implicit in the 
practices, procedures, and techniques of practitioners. These apparently authoritative definitions 
are repeated by the most famous and well-travelled celebrity professors in invited presentations 
at prestigious conferences, in the most cited textbooks and the journals which count most in the 
Key Performance Indicator stakes. But how is such authority to define and explicate constituted 
and legitimated? Whose interests are served by the legitimation of such definitions and expli-
cations? Should that authority be resisted? What are the consequences of such community psy-
chological knowledge claims, related practices, technologies, enunciated values, organizational 
structures, means of subjection and governmentality and so forms of power thus constituted and 
deployed in theory and action?
Within our critical frame of reference, some definitions and explications being repeated 
more often, in more forums, with more assurance than others tells us more about the commu-
nication and other privileges of the definers than it does about the definitions: the dominant 
definitions of community psychology are the definitions of the most powerful vested interests.
The most prestigious community psychology journals are United Statesian (American Jour-
nal of Community Psychology and Journal of Community Psychology). The majority of community 
psychology textbooks are written by United Statesian authors. There are more graduate courses 
generating credentialed community psychologists in the United States than anywhere else. The 
most powerful community psychology professional organization (SCRA) is United Statesian. 
In turn the SCRA, which has its own dedicated and influential formal, Journal of Community 

Community psychology
149
Psychology, and informal magazine, The Community Psychologist, convenes the biggest national 
biennial conference of community psychology, manufactures the most awarded community 
psychology academics, and promotes community psychology origin stories which position the 
beginnings of community psychology in the USA amid domestic US political events.
Not surprisingly, a United Statesian version of community psychology has become globally 
dominant. This is not disputed even by United Statesian community psychologists, but neither is 
it positioned by them as problematic. Writing in the influential Handbook of Community Psychol-
ogy, edited by Rappaport and Seidman (2000), Wingenfeld and Newbrough were able to refer 
to community psychology, or closely related work, in: Aotearoa/New Zealand, Argentina, Asia, 
Australia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, El Salvador, Germany, Hong Kong, Israel, 
Italy, Mexico, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Poland, Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo, 
South Africa, Spain, the UK, the USA, and Venezuela. Reading Reich et al., (2007) would lead 
one to add: Cameroon, Ghana, Greece, India, Japan, Portugal, Spain, and Turkey to that list. That 
would still exclude France and Palestine, where interesting current developments are locally 
identified as community psychological, and Austria, where a version of community psychology 
was, arguably, developed in the 1930s (Fryer 2008a; Jahoda and Fryer 1998).
Wingenfeld and Newbrough (2000: 779) discursively positioned United Statesian commu-
nity psychology as ‘a sub-discipline of psychology’ ‘created at a conference’ in the USA. They 
assert that ‘the development of community psychology in most of the countries discussed here 
was stimulated by internal social needs, developments, and conceptualizations and influences from 
the U.S. sources’ (780). Only in two countries do they argue otherwise: ‘Poland and Cuba are the 
two countries where influences from U.S. community psychology have been minimal’ (Win-
genfeld and Newbrough 2000: 780). That may have been the case in 2000, but not today: 
International Community Psychology: History and Theories (Reich et al. 2007) contains a chapter on 
community psychology in Poland (Bokszczanin et al. 2007). It has only one reference: Dalton 
et al. (2001). The authors refer to a survey they did of psychology departments in Polish uni-
versities, inviting respondents to provide ‘their own definition of community psychology’ (352). 
The authors wrote: ‘to assess the fidelity of these definitions, we used as an anchor a broad defi-
nition of community psychology as a discipline seeking to understand and to enhance quality 
of life for individuals, communities, and society’, adding in a footnote ‘we chose Dalton et al.’s 
definition because of its elegant inclusiveness of the multitude of aims and values generally asso-
ciated with community psychology in the West’ (352).
Orford (1992: 4) admits of  Table 1, which he says provides the source of answers to the ques-
tion of what people actually do when they are doing community psychology, that ‘this table is 
taken, much modified, from one in Rappaport’s (1977) book’. In like vein, Raviv et al. (2007) 
wrote in Community Psychology in Israel: ‘the principles of community psychology, to which we 
shall refer throughout the chapter, are based on the principles delineated by Levine and Perkins 
(1997) and mainly include early identification, prevention, mental health consultation, crisis 
intervention, and the use of community resources and strengths’ (Reich et al. 2007: 335). Here 
we see US community psychology being transposed lock, stock, and barrel to Israel.
The contrast between Israeli United Statesian community psychology and Palestinian com-
munity psychology, as explicated by Makkawi (2009), is very stark. Writing in the Journal of 
Critical Psychology, Counselling and Psychotherapy, Palestinian community psychologist Ibrahim 
Makkawi suggests ‘it is possible to place the various traditions of community psychology on a 
continuum, where at the individualistic and reductionist end of the continuum we can locate 
the USA school of community psychology, whereas, at the transformative and liberationist end 
of the continuum we locate the Latin American school of community psychology’ (Makkawi 
2009: 76). He continues: ‘the Palestinian experience with protracted colonialism, occupation 

David Fryer and Rachael Fox
150
and oppression shares a great deal of similarities and interrelated international colonial practices 
with the people of Latin America as well as that of South Africa’ (Makkawi 2009: 77).
Wingenfeld and Newbrough (2000) also assert: ‘community psychology in the United States 
strongly influenced Australia and New Zealand’, that in Canada ‘the re-emergence of commu-
nity psychology in the 1970s was associated with influences of community psychology in the 
U.S.’ (following the abandonment in the 1950s of ‘a community orientation and strong emphasis 
on prevention initiated by Canadian pioneers’!). ‘Abandonment’ of one community orientation 
and replacement by a United Statesian community orientation is, of course, in need of criti-
cal historical scrutiny in the context of discussion of intellectual colonisation. Wingenfeld and 
Newbrough (2000: 780, 782) also assert that ‘the Interamerican Society for Psychology provided 
the vehicle for interchange between U.S. and Latin American psychologists about work in the 
community’. An indication of the urge to dominate the definition, explication, and constitution 
of community psychology is provided by the vigorous defence and reinstatement of a United 
Statesian approach to community psychology in response to challenges to it made transparent 
on Wikipedia. For an instructive lesson regarding the symbolic importance of this issue to some, 
see the history of changes via the ‘view history’ tab and in particular: http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Talk:Community_psychology.
As most versions of community psychology found around the world summarized at the start 
of this chapter are in large part a product of United Statesian intellectual colonization, it is not 
surprising that they have much in common. It might be argued that this is not a problem if the 
United Statesian intellectual export is effective, unproblematic, and of universal relevance.
We do not believe this dominance is unproblematic. The United Statesian form of com-
munity psychology not only draws on the mainstream Anglo-Saxon positivist modernist psy-
chological disciplinary tradition, literatures, and frames of reference, rather than critical ones 
(Coimbra et al. 2012: 139), but also reinscribes and reinforces acritical psy.
The United Statesian intellectual export of community psychology is especially problematic 
in the way it engages with oppression and power. Whilst some United Statesian community psy-
chologists position their approach as opposing oppression at a community level, engaging with, 
for example, the consequences of: homelessness (Toro et al. 2008); disability (White 2005); and 
heteronormativity (Harper 2005), engagement with ‘power’ is often uncritical, despite claims to 
the contrary. In a critical examination of one framing of power within an influential community 
psychology frame of reference by Prilleltensky (2008), Fryer (2008b: 243) concluded: ‘the notion 
of power recommended has been found to be ill-defined, circular, question-begging, problem-
atic in terms of community psychology with its dependence on need satisfaction, rooted in 
an underlying interpersonal relationship model, infected with individualism and psychologism, 
and problematically stuck within the old debate about agency and structure. It is suggested that 
power is better understood as a property, or dynamic, of social systems than of the individuals 
within it and that the apparent power of individuals is best understood as the subjective man-
ifestation of the societal distribution of power’. See Fryer and Laing (2008) for a critique of a 
mainstream acritical community psychology approach to disabling practices; and Fryer 2014; 
Fryer and Stambe 2014a; Fryer and Stambe 2014b for critiques of mainstream psychological 
work on unemployment.
Dominant community psychology rhetoric emphasizes transparency and accountability, but 
acritical community psychologists seldom problematize the disempowerment embedded within 
their own fields and practices. As Parker (2007: 144–145) observed, pragmatic issues to do with 
community psychologists being obliged to ‘gain access’ to a community and to avoid being 
thrown out so that they can complete work agreed in advance as a condition of funding usu-
ally result in ‘patterns of violence’ remaining hidden and preexisting systems of power in the 

Community psychology
151
community, sometimes oppressive power systems, being left unchallenged or even reinforced. 
Fox (2013) reveals some such structures of power and problematic practices in community 
research with young people, and argues that academic community psychological research is 
hampered by dominant discourses in research itself as well as the field. Coimbra et al. (2012) sug-
gest that ‘community’ can be used to justify othering and subordination and that the very notion 
of community, and how it is deployed, is in need of critique. Although community psycholo-
gists tend to emphasize action, intervention, and prevention, at least rhetorically, to a far greater 
extent than critical psychologists, much of the action of community psychologists is politically 
conservative, ideologically problematic, and acritical in theorization. More progressive and more 
important social action research is arguably done by: critical feminist psychologists (e.g. Burman 
and Chantler 2005); community activists (e.g.; Fryer, D. and McCormack 2012; Fryer, D. and 
McCormack 2013; McCormack 2009); emancipatory disability activists (e.g. Oliver 1992); and 
survivors of psychiatry (Stambe and Fryer 2014; Stambe et al. 2012).
In conclusion
Foucault (1978/1990: 266) states that ‘critique is the movement by which the subject gives himself 
[sic] the right to question truth on its effects of power and question power on its discourses of 
truth’. Our bigger project in relation to community psychology means, in terms of this, that when 
we use the word ‘truth’ in relation to community psychology we use it as a verb: we are thus inter-
ested not in which community psychology claims are ‘true’ but rather: which community psychol-
ogy statements have been truthed (given the status of truth); how the community psychological 
‘truthing’ was or is warranted (how community psychology authority was or is constructed and 
deployed); which regimes of truth have been enacted by community psychologists and what the 
consequences are for whom in which ways; whose interests are served by truthed community psy-
chology statements, and the power relations which are inseparable from interconnected community 
psychological claims that have been truthed; which interconnected systems of truthed community 
psychological claims have been ‘knowledged’ (given the status of knowledge), and which commu-
nity psychological practices and techniques have been evidentialized (given the status of ‘known 
evidence-based effectiveness’).
For us, the dominant, ubiquitous, mainstream version of community psychology discussed 
above, which is widely claimed by its proselytizers to: promote wellness; liberate; promote social 
justice; and to ‘empower’, is actually, as Seedat et al. (2001: 4) assert, characterized by ‘discrim-
inatory approaches’, ‘hegemonic and epistemological domination’, and ‘an accommodationist 
position seeking greater influence within the mainstream fraternity’ and does not challenge 
the ‘restrictions and outcomes imposed by exploitative economic arrangements and dominant 
systems of knowledge production’, instead drawing on the mainstream Anglo-Saxon positivist 
modernist psychological disciplinary tradition, literatures, and frames of reference, rather than 
critical ones. It is problematic in all the above respects but, compared with Marxist and Fou-
cauldian versions, most problematic because it is a re-inscription of a superficially liberalized 
version of the mainstream psy-complex, ‘the heterogeneous knowledges, forms of authority and 
practical techniques that constitute psychological expertise’ (Rose 1999: vii), with its origins in 
the United States, indeed, a version of psy which may turn out to be integral to governmen-
tality through subjection and compliance in the twenty-first century under a neoliberal order. 
As Whitmarsh (2013: 303) observes, ‘compliance is . . . becoming a principal public health issue 
of the twenty-first century, and compliance posits a figure with a responsibility to continu-
ally work to discipline the self into a biomedical subject’. Increasingly, Whitmarsh observes, 
global health expertise and governance organizes ‘around a cultural and psychological concept 

David Fryer and Rachael Fox
152
of the community. Compliance techniques attempt to affect community behaviours and cul-
tural attitudes . . . expertise on predispositions’ (prevention approaches) ‘intersects with the cur-
rent emphasis on access to “information” to fashion a new subject of compliance’. Within a 
critical frame of reference, people – community members or community psychologists – do 
not live outside, or prior to, community psychological power-knowledge but rather are con-
tinuously (re)constituted by being ‘power-known’ and coming to ‘know’, and be, themselves, 
i.e. power-knowledging themselves discursively through the discourses and associated disposi-
tifs available to and inescapable by them, including community psychological discourses and 
dispositifs. Subjectivity, whether of community members or community psychologists, is not, 
within our critical frame of reference, a problematic alternative to objective knowledge, as it is 
to positivist-inspired acritical quantitative community psychologists, nor a source of authenticity, 
as it is to post-positivist acritical qualitative social scientists who appeal to the notion of ‘lived 
experience’, but rather a continuously reproduced phenomenon whose social constitution and 
reconstitution is to be explained and whose implications are to be subjected to critique.
Although United Statesian community psychology is problematic, much important work is 
going on in the USA in relation to understanding subjection/resubjectivication and compli-
ance. Butler’s work is foundational. As Butler (1997:2) writes: ‘“Subjection” signifies the process 
of becoming subordinated by power as well as the process of becoming a subject. Whether by 
interpellation, in Althusser’s sense, or by discursive productivity, in Foucault’s, the subject is 
initiated through a primary submission to power’. Butler observes that ‘although Foucault iden-
tifies the ambivalence in this formulation, he does not elaborate on the specific mechanisms of 
how the subject is formed in submission’. Butler pursues this issue through critical scholarship, 
but Biehl (2005) pursues it through critical anthropological research involving ‘on-the-ground 
study of a singular Other’ in which he uncovered the ‘immense parcelling out of the specific 
ways communities, families and personal lives are assembled’, exploring ‘how inner worlds are 
remade under the impress of economic pressures’ (Biehl 2005:8), and how ‘inner and outer states 
are inescapably sutured’ (Biehl 2005:10) (see also Biehl, Good, and Kleinman 2007). The most 
sophisticated, progressive, and exciting contemporary community psychology in the sense of 
approaches which engage with subjectivity, power, and collectivity are arguably not done today 
by community psychologists, or by psychologists at all, but transdisciplinary critical activists and 
scholars.
Further reading
Biehl, J. (2005) Vita: Life in a Zine of Social Abandonment. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Website resources
British Psychological Society Community Psychology Section: http://cps.bps.org.uk/
Society for Community Research and Action/Division 27 of the American Psychological Association: 
http://www.scra27.org/
UK Community psychology discussion list: http://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/cgi-bin/webadmin?A0=COMM 
UNITYPSYCHUK
Wikipedia definition of community psychology: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_psychology
References
Biehl, J. (2005) Vita: Life in a Zine of Social Abandonment. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Biehl, J., Good, B. and Kleinman, A. (2007) Subjectivity: Ethnographic Investigations. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.

Community psychology
153
Bokszczanin, A., Kaniasty, K. and Szarzynska, M. (2007) ‘Community psychology in Poland’, in S. Reich,  
M. Riemer, I. Prilleltensky and M. Montero (eds) International Community Psychology: History and Theo-
ries. New York: Springer.
Burman, E. and Chantler, K. (2005) ‘Domestic violence and minoritisation: legal and policy barriers facing 
minoritised women leaving violent relationships’, International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, 28, 59–74.
Butler, J. (1997) The Psychic Life of Power: Theories in Subjection. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Coimbra, J., Duckett, P., Fryer, D., Makkawi, I., Menezes, I., Seedat, M. and Walker, C. (2012) ‘Rethinking 
community psychology: critical insights’, The Australian Community Psychologist, 24(2), 135–142.
Dalton, J. H., Elias, M. J. and Wandersman, A. (2001) Community Psychology: Linking Individuals and Commu-
nities. Stamford, CT: Wadsworth.
Dalton, J. H., Elias, M. J. and Wandersman, A. (2007) Community Psychology: Linking Individuals and Commu-
nities (2nd Edn). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Foucault, M. (1978/1990) ‘What is critique?’ in S. Lotringer (ed.) The Politics of Truth. Los Angeles: 
Semiotexte.
Fox, R. (2013) ‘Resisting participation: critiquing participatory research methodologies with young peo-
ple’, Journal of Youth Studies, 16(8), 986–999.
Fryer, D. (2008a) ‘Some questions about the history of community psychology’, Journal of Community Psy-
chology, 36(5), 572–586.
Fryer, D. (2008b) ‘Power from the people? Critical reflection on a conceptualisation of power’, Journal of 
Community Psychology, 36(2), 238–245.
Fryer, D. (2014) ‘Unemployment’, Encyclopaedia of Critical Psychology. New York: Springer.
Fryer, D. and Laing, A. (2008) ‘Community psychologies: What are they? What could they be? Why does 
it matter? A critical community psychology approach’, Australian Community Psychologist, 20(2), 7–15.
Fryer, D. and McCormack, C. (2012) ‘The war without bullets: socio-structural violence from a critical 
standpoint’, Global Journal of Community Psychology Practice, 3(1), http://www.gjcpp.org/en/resource.
php?issue=10andresource=50.
Fryer, D. and McCormack, C. (2013) ‘Psychology and poverty reduction’, Australian Community Psychologist, 
25(1), 7–2.
Fryer, D. and Stambe, R. (2014a) ‘Neo-liberal austerity and unemployment: critical psychological issues’, 
The Psychologist, 27(4), 244–248.
Fryer, D. and Stambe, R. (2014b) ‘Work and the crafting of individual identities from a critical standpoint’, 
Australian Community Psychologist (details pending).
Harper, G. (2005) ‘A journey towards liberation: confronting heterosexism and the oppression of lesbian, 
gay, bisexual and transgendered’, in G. Nelson and I. Prilleltensky (eds) Community Psychology: in Pursuit 
of Liberation and Well-being. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
Holzkamp, K. (1983) Grundlegung der Psychologie. Frankfurt: Campus.
Horkheimer, M. (1982) Critical Theory. New York: Seabury Press.
Jahoda, M. and Fryer, D. (1998) ‘The simultaneity of the unsimultaneous: a conversation between Marie 
Jahoda and David Fryer’, Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 8, 89–100.
Kagan, C., Burton, M., Duckett, P., Lawthom, R. and Siddiquee, A. (2011) Critical Community Psychology. 
Chichester: BPS Blackwell.
Kloos, B., Hill, J., Thomas, E., Wandersman, A. Elias, M. J. and Dalton, J. H. (2012) Community Psychology: 
Linking Individuals and Communities (3rd Edn). Stamford CT: Wadsworth.
Levine, M. and Perkins, D. (1997) Principles of Community Psychology: Perspectives and Applications. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
McCormack, C. (2009) The Wee Yellow Butterfly. Glendaruel: Argyll Publishing.
Makkawi, I. (2009) ‘Towards an emerging paradigm of critical community psychology in Palestine’, The 
Journal of Critical Psychology, Counselling and Psychotherapy, 9(2), 75–86.
Marley, C. and Fryer, D. (2014) ‘Social change through critical knowledge work: the case of ADHD’, The 
Journal of Critical Psychology, Counselling and Psychotherapy, 14, 11–19.
Nelson, G. and Prilleltensky, I. (2005) Community Psychology: in Pursuit of Liberation and Well-being (1st Edn). 
Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
Nelson, G. and Prilleltensky, I. (2010) Community Psychology: in Pursuit of Liberation and Well-being (2nd Edn). 
Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
Nic Giolla Easpaig, B., Fryer, D., Linn, S. and Humphrey, R. (2014) ‘A queer-theoretical approach to com-
munity health psychology’, Journal of Health Psychology, 19, 117–125.
Oliver, M. (1992) ‘Changing the social relations of research production?’, Disability, Handicap and Society, 
7(2), 101–114.

David Fryer and Rachael Fox
154
Orford, J. (1992) Community Psychology: Theory and Practice. Chichester: Wiley.
Parker, I. (2007) Revolution in Psychology: Alienation to Emancipation. London: Pluto Press.
Prilleltensky, I. (2008) ‘The role of power in wellness, oppression, and liberation: the promise of psychopo-
litical validity’, Journal of Community Psychology, 36(2), 116–136.
Rappaport, J. (1977) Community Psychology: Values, Research and Action. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston.
Rappaport, J. and Seidman, E. (eds) (2000) Handbook of Community Psychology. New York: Kluwer ­Academic/
Plenum Publishers.
Raviv, A., Zeira, M. and Sharvit, K. (2007) ‘Community psychology in Israel’, in S. Reich, M. Riemer,  
I. Prilleltensky, and M. Montero (eds) International Community Psychology: History and Theories. New York: 
Springer.
Reich, S. M., Riemer, M., Prilleltensky, I. and Montero, M. (eds) (2007) International Community Psychology: 
History and Theories. New York: Springer.
Rose, N. (1999) Governing the Soul: The Shaping of the Private Self. London: Free Association Books.
Seedat, M., Duncan, N. and Lazarus, S. (eds) (2001) Community Psychology: Theory, Method and Practice. South 
African and Other Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stambe, R. and Fryer, D. (2014) ‘Photovoice: doing assessed research as an undergraduate from a critical 
standpoint’, in SAGE Research Methods Cases. London: Sage. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.4135/97814
4627305013509770.
Stambe, R., Fryer, D., Dauncey, S. and Hicks, S. (2012) ‘Is “mental illness” a barrier to getting involved?’, Asy-
lum: An international magazine for democratic psychiatry, psychology and community development, 19(3), 9–11.
Thomas, D. and Veno, A. (eds) (1996) Community Psychology and Social Change: Australian and New Zealand 
Perspectives (2nd Edn). Palmerston North: The Dunmore Press.
Toro, P., Tulloch, E. and Ouellette, N. (2008) ‘Stress, social support, and outcomes in two probability samples 
of homeless adults’, Journal of Community Psychology, 36, 483–514.
White, G. W. (2005) ‘Ableism’, in G. Nelson and I. Prilleltensky (eds) Community Psychology: in Pursuit of 
Wellness and Liberation (2nd Edn.). London: MacMillan.
Whitmarsh, I. (2013) ‘The ascetic subject of compliance: the turn to chronic diseases in global health’, in 
J. Biehl and A. Petryna (eds) When People Come First: Critical Studies in Global Health. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Wingenfeld, S. and Newbrough, J. R. (2000) ‘Community psychology in international perspective’ in  
J. Rappaport and E. Seidman (eds) Handbook of Community Psychology. New York: Kluwer Academic/
Plenum Publishers.

155
For most psychologists and the professional public at large, organizational psychology is seen 
as a derivative of – or even a synonym for – work psychology. From the very first volume of 
the Annual Review of Psychology in 1950 until well into the late 1990s, key words such as work, 
industrial, personnel, organization, training, development, and engineering would continually be 
present in review titles that had as their focus questions arising in work-based relationships in 
large, hierarchical businesses, and government and military bureaucracies. For critical psychology 
this focus – which still continues to inform courses, classes, and textbooks – poses a number of 
issues and concerns. By associating organization with work and the latter with paid employment 
in large hierarchical bureaucracies (the basis of much of the earlier discussion about the wel-
fare state), not only do work and organizational psychologists ignore the many other ways that 
people seek to sustain livelihoods (Spink, P. 2011) but they also ignore the many other reasons 
for which people gather together. Worse still, when they eventually do get around to these and 
related issues the answer is – more often than not – to seek solutions framed by the same original 
assumptions: that is, of a specific type of economic relationship with an entity – organization – 
within which behaviour takes place.
The shift
The shift from organization as a descriptor of an everyday social activity – organizing – which 
happens in schools, churches, communities, choirs, football teams, social movements, and fam-
ily outings to its current role as a generic title for that which all of these are seen to have in 
common – organizations – is subtle and takes place slowly over much of the second half of the 
twentieth century. This shift is a result of at least three different disciplinary processes: first, the 
drift of organizational studies from the various areas of the humanities and the social sciences to 
the business schools, along with a massive increase in grants and career opportunities; second, a 
drift away from the more complex public and social issues that were around in some of the early 
studies of organizational processes, such as, for example, Selznick’s study of the Tennessee Valley 
Authority in the 1940s (Selznick 1949). Whilst the first two are influences external to psychol-
ogy, they nevertheless had significant impact in terms of the formation of the wider field with 
which organizational psychologists identified themselves and within which they would also seek 
16
Organizational psychology 
and social issues
The place of the place
Mary Jane Paris Spink and Peter Kevin Spink

Mary Jane Paris Spink and Peter Kevin Spink
156
work. The third is an internal process for which nobody else can be blamed: the individualiza-
tion of social psychology and the consequent uncoupling of the person from social process, one 
of the overall themes of this volume.
The result is a very restricted, individually focused, hierarchical, and work-related notion of 
organization that places psychologists in a difficult position when it comes to the complexity 
of dealing with the area of social issues. The viewpoint is that of ‘within’ organizations where 
what is ‘outside’ is a client, consumer, market, or society. There may be some discussion of 
inter-organizational issues – influenced by intergroup relations literature – and the difficult 
challenges posed for those who are in daily contact with the public, but the inside location of 
the viewpoint is clear. It is for this reason that our critique begins in the organizational field but 
is addressed to psychology as a whole.
Today, increasingly, psychologists are involved in many different spheres of public action. In 
communities, in public agencies, as activists and volunteers, they cross with not only the actions 
of governments for the public but also those actions that the public develop for the public and 
those that they develop when pressuring public sector agencies and governments to act on 
public concerns (including the formation of those concerns). How do they deal with these very 
different, highly complex, and certainly far from hierarchical settings in which policies, plans, 
and actions crisscross each other and in which they are required at times to play some very key 
roles? In their undergraduate programs, most of them will at some point in time have at least 
one course or seminar on organizational psychology in which any one of very similar textbooks 
will be used, all of which will focus on people in organizations (mainly business, rarely public, 
and at times voluntary or third sector). Is it these courses and seminars that will inform their 
actions or is there an alternative?
In this chapter we set out the case for an alternative position that, we argue, requires the 
re-coupling of our notions of personhood with those of place. For this discussion, we draw on 
our own work in two linked areas: that of everyday organizational studies and the relationship 
between public sector organizations and community based organizations in service provision 
and poverty reduction in rural and urban settings (Spink, P. 2003; Spink, P. and Best 2009) and 
that of the use of the language of risk in everyday affairs with specific reference to people 
living in areas subject to water based hazards and land slippage (Spink M. J. P. 2007; Spink,  
M. J. P. 2010). We argue from a theoretical post-constructionist perspective in which materialities 
and socialities are seen as co-present in different political ontologies, which may cooperate, be 
imposed or negotiated in different ways. But we also argue from the experiences of recent years 
where the complexity of social, material, and institutional vulnerability has been very present in 
our studies in densely populated areas in São Paulo, Brazil.
We begin with a phrase ‘The head thinks where the feet walk’ coined by a Catholic priest and 
activist in Jardim Ângela, part of the extended south zone of the Municipality of São Paulo, where 
a significant part of the population built their own houses – and their churches – from scratch. 
This is a process that has been repeated all over Latin America, where it is estimated that in 
many large urban conurbations somewhere in the region of 50 per cent of housing is self-built 
(Hernánadez et al. 2012; Ward et al. 2014).
His point is doubly incisive. First as a reminder that we are a walking species, we spend all 
our time connected to the ground in some way, we do not drift around in the air and when we 
fly we do so in machines within which we stand or sit. Second as a reference to the difference 
in location between the policy specialists who work in the offices of São Paulo City Hall in 
the city’s downtown area and the residents of Jardim Ângela, some thirty kilometres away and 
between two and four hours by bus, depending on the traffic. We use his phrase as a pointer to 
the need to critically reconnect psychology to the materiality, sociality, and institutionality of 

Organizational psychology and social issues 
157
the places where our feet move and that are constitutive of psychological action. We argue that 
understanding how place is performed by very distinctive and often competing and heteroge-
neous networks of humans and nonhumans (‘actants’, to use Latour’s [2005] approach), with a 
multiplicity of conflicting social languages, provides a very different approach to questions of 
territoriality from those presumed in the traditional person-environment dualism, helping us not 
only to rethink and reposition organizational psychology but also much of psychology at large.
A place for the place in critical psychology
In 1960, Lynch published the results of his many walks and conversations with people about 
the cities in which they lived (Boston, New Jersey, and Los Angeles). Instead of starting from 
official plans and maps he got people to draw their maps; to describe where they went; what 
they would tell visitors to see and what they pointed out as relevant as they walked together 
around the block. From these he identified certain recurring elements: paths; edges; districts; 
nodes; and landmarks that went to make up their cities – the different public images held by 
different groupings of citizens. ‘Paths’ are the channels through and along which people move; 
‘edges’ are the limits, boundaries, breaks, and distinctions which can also become barriers; ‘dis-
tricts’ are the big chunks of two dimensional space which people are inside (and also outside); 
‘nodes’ are points of convergence, crossover, strategic spots for convergence; and ‘landmarks’ 
are external references, singled out amongst others for various reasons. Around the same time, 
psychology was beginning – with a push from the earlier behaviour setting studies (Barker and 
Wright 1951) and Kurt Lewin’s (1952) psychological ecology – to make its own incursions into 
a new field that would receive great visibility from Craik’s 1970 ‘New directions in psychology’ 
article on environmental psychology. Unfortunately, and despite Craik’s arguments for assuming 
a more ‘molar’ approach to the environment and behaviour and to the author’s preference for 
an ecological perspective that valued the intricate patterning of behavioural and environmen-
tal relations, the new directions assumed the dominant model of simple causality and strong 
individuality: concern was either with what people do to the environment or with what the 
environment does to people. This implicit definition of the field continues to inform current 
environmental psychology texts, in which the discussion of place continues largely absent (cf. 
Steg et al. 2012).
Whilst noting that the opportunity was lost, it is worth registering, in defence of many of 
those involved, that at that time, the very idea of studying everyday life in everyday habitats was 
a peripheral concern for many of the other social sciences, not just psychology. Garfinkel (1967), 
for example, was heavily criticized by his sociological colleagues for taking practical reasoning 
seriously and suggesting that sociology had got it wrong by treating the average person as 
socially incompetent. Habermas’s work on discursive competence would only appear in Eng-
lish in the 1980s along with De Certeau’s treatise on the practice of everyday life and the very 
interesting companion volume, in co-authorship with Giard and Mayol, on the micro-histories 
of everyday arts (1998). In anthropology, it would be the burst of activity brought by the dis-
cussion of social networks that led the way to everyday action and common sense in the early 
1970s (Boissevain 1974; Geertz 1983). In history it would be the switch away from the history 
of kings and queens to what was termed history from below that would build the bridges to the 
booming European Social Theory arena (see Burke 1992) and to the structuration arguments 
that would turn consciousness into an assumed competence in a discursively performed world 
(Giddens 1979).
For psychology, any alternative path at this time would have been a very difficult and lonely 
one. Indeed, it was to require a tremendous effort by the European networks to bring social 

Mary Jane Paris Spink and Peter Kevin Spink
158
psychology anywhere close to a potentially critical stance, but here, at least by the 1990s, there 
were opportunities for new approaches (Billig 1982; Edwards and Potter 1992; Ibañez and 
Iñiguez 1997; Parker and the Bolton Discourse Network 1999).
New possibilities for dialogue
Place is an elastic word that can be stretched in many directions and given many nuances. It 
can be different parts of one of Lynch’s maps (the place where I work or live; where we have 
lunch); a sociohistorical reference (the place where I come from or where it happened); or a 
specific localization of a person or object (everything in its right place; my place at the table; 
they know their place), as well as the action of placing. It has linkages with social spaces and areas 
(the market place, or as a synonym for a small square) and in organizational terms to positions in 
hierarchy and to employment (who will take my place as Company President). Place, as a social 
construct, as Cresswell suggests (2004: 11), is a way of ‘seeing, knowing and understanding the 
world. When we look at the world as a world of places we see different things’. A map location 
can be expressed precisely in latitude and longitude, but the name of a town, village, region, or 
landmark will give the same location a very different sense of meaning. In Portugal, the word 
for place (lugar) is also used to refer to the smallest part of the civic and political institutional 
structure. Yet places can be immense – as for example when ecologists evoke the idea of our 
tiny planet located in the cosmos – as well as minute, as in the line from the A. A. Milne poem: 
‘a place on the stairs where I always sit’.
Despite its apparent elasticity, place is not a term to be treated lightly. It is as central a concept 
to human geography as culture is to anthropology and, probably, identity to psychology. And, 
like the other disciplines, it has also suffered from the disputes around different forms of science. 
Geography also went through periods of positive science in which place was seen in terms of 
spatial laws and statistics, but fortunately today authors from humanistic (Tuan 1977), Marxist 
(Harvey 1996), and postmodern (Soja 1989) positions provide us with intriguing entry points to 
a debate that also includes many of the other social sciences (see Hubbard and Kitchin 2004 for 
an overview). Place also draws attention to space, which to most of psychology is understood as 
something permanent, out there, preexisting, empty, and waiting to be occupied. However, even 
a moment’s reflection on the notions of anthropological space will show that any space – such 
as the space where small communities gather to pray – has no a priori existence as a vacant 
lot waiting to be occupied, but rather, as Lefebvre (1991: 26) states: ‘(Social) space is a (social) 
product’.
For psychology, these various offers of dialogue help us to think about how place is performed 
in different ways by different crisscrossing networks of people, materialities, social organizations, 
and institutions. Take for example the apparently simple view of lived-in experience that most 
of us have somewhere at home: the map. Maps for most of us are assumed descriptors of the 
way things are, as in, ‘look it up on the map’, or ‘you can find us on the GPS’; they are ways of 
locating places. However, far from describing reality, maps are high-powered performers and 
shapers of our lived-in experience, as a brief look at the main chapter headings from Wood’s 
The Power of Maps demonstrates (1992): maps work by serving interest; maps are embedded in a 
history they help construct; every map shows this . . . but not that; the interest the map serves is 
masked; the interest is embodied in the map in signs and myths.
Let us take as an example the district of Jardim Ângela, which has a population of over 
300,000 and occupies the larger half of one of the 32 sub-municipal administrative districts 
in which the Municipality of São Paulo is divided. It, like a number of the other districts in 
the expanded south zone, borders the Gurapiranga Reservoir and occupies part of its water 

Organizational psychology and social issues 
159
catchment area. Ângela, as it is often referred to, went through a housing explosion from the 
1960s onwards, fuelled by restrictive legislation on agriculture in the catchment area which 
led to small farmers selling out and moving away, and the industrial boom in São Paulo which 
brought may thousands in search of work to a city without any planning for the necessary hous-
ing. As a result, people bought formal or semiformal small plots of land from intermediaries who 
took over agricultural plots or, in the impossibility of payment, occupied public land alongside 
rivers or on hillsides. When people tell their histories they describe very similar processes. ‘We 
first dug a well to get down to the water, then we built a room and then bit by bit we carried on, 
when we had the money, the time and as the family expanded’. The landscape of Jardim Ângela 
and its co-district Jardim São Luis is highly undulated and today it is marked by high-density 
occupation that seems to occupy all available possibilities – and impossibilities – of location. 
Despite the heavy subtropical rainfall in summer months, there are no sloped roofs. The tops are 
flat and unfinished and are very key parts of the property, either for holding social gatherings or 
for, when necessary, building more rooms: (social) space is indeed a (social) product.
Self-building did not only apply to housing but also to most everything else. These were areas 
of the outskirts of São Paulo that were largely ignored by the municipal government and those 
present had to fend for themselves. Many of them were religious people – Brazil has a large 
Catholic population – and were used to the church playing an important role in the community. 
They built their own places for worship that in turn strengthened the communities and were 
key elements in the São Paulo Catholic Church’s 1970s option for liberation theology. With 
municipal government absent, social mobilization through the ecclesiastical base communities 
and the trade unions was the route to providing basic services and pressuring for place-based 
public investment: water, electricity, sewage, schools, health, and transport, amongst others, were 
many of the themes that people recall.
In Jardim Ângela, there are plenty of maps that can be found if you are prepared to dig 
around the many different service providers in today’s São Paulo Municipality. But as our earlier 
comments would suggest, this does not mean that they are describing anything similar. On the 
contrary, they are performing very different ways of being. Take for example urban mobility. 
There is a São Paulo road map, similar to every other city, but in Ângela there are some parts 
with roads (paths in Lynch’s approach) along which people move that are not on the map. The 
big central road, like the backbone of a fish, moves through the districts to cross the Pinheiros 
River and to connect to the São Paulo train and metro ‘system’ – which until very recently was 
largely a loose mess of unconnected bits until it too was given a map which, for those unfamiliar 
with the day-to-day of urban mobility in the megacities of the Third World, looks very much 
like the London Tube map. However, to those in the know, life hangs on the big central road 
down which fleets of buses flow – unless there is an accident or a protest and everything stops – 
and from there to trains, where the same thing can happen.
The São Paulo State Water Company (SABESP) also has maps, which are very difficult to 
find but which determine catchment areas and places of investment. Health services have their 
internal organization with a health centre for every 20,000 inhabitants, and there are maps for 
State Schools (secondary), Municipal Schools (primary), and private schools. There are maps 
of bus routes, maps of housing density developed by the Municipal Housing Secretariat and 
for Jardim Ângela and its co-district Jardim São Luis, maps of the more than 50 areas in which 
people are living at risk of land slippage and flooding (a very real and present risk). The state 
police have their maps and, as violence is a constant theme in the region, there are also maps 
of violence. The Catholic Church also has its parish maps that group territory and populations 
and these too will change over time as parishes grow and are divided. The problem is: (a) that 
many of the maps are not available either for lack of public access or simply a lack of interest in 

Mary Jane Paris Spink and Peter Kevin Spink
160
turning lists into locations; (b) the maps, lists, and locations use different distributions and forms 
of territorial organization; and (c) as a result, the maps don’t talk to each other. As a way of 
creating pressure on local authorities, we began to talk about invisible cities, places that existed 
but that were being excluded from the day-to-day of the wider lived-in city. There was nothing 
new in this comment. Part of this region was the birthplace of a wave of youth-based cultural 
movements, community poetry reading, and RAP groups from which emerged the expression 
and a reference to a key ‘edge’ in Lynch’s terms: ‘the world is different on this side of the bridge’ 
(a reference to a key bridge over the Pinheiros river).
Then, following Lynch, there are the maps that people use as they move around and perform 
their lived-in place: both the regular daily movement from house to work, to the crèche or 
school, to the very few state lottery agencies or even fewer banks to pay bills, to the supermarket 
or the neighbouring shop; of where the floods reach or where and when it is safe to walk at 
night.
Complexity: modes of ordering and heterogeneous networks
Our first incursions into Jardim Ângela were guided by our past experiences in studies of pub-
lic policy, social movements, and governamentality. As such, it made good sense to choose an 
anchorage in some existing organization and the Forum em Defesa da Vida seemed to fit the 
bill. The Forum has a historical link to one of the Catholic Church leaders and has been very 
active in local social movements that have helped to give Ângela a more humane image – it was 
at one point considered the most violent region in the world.
First meeting – first surprise. The Forum is an open event with diverse participants who, at 
each meeting, introduce themselves in equally diverse manners and forms of positioning: for 
example, territorial belonging (I am a resident of xxx), rank (I represent the city hall), political 
activism (I am a member of the movement for popular housing), or profession and program (I 
am a social worker at the yyy centre). Each of them is a link to a network of actants (Latour 
2005), some humans, some nonhuman (as spokespersons of sewage, rain, buses, and vulnerable 
houses). There are many layers of discourses, institutions, and practices. Choosing one point 
of view, one social organization, one service provision agency, or any other nodal point in the 
diversity of actants that are present in this territory would be too much of a simplification and 
we wanted to understand the intricacy of action, without reducing what was obviously complex.
Complexity is another of those slippery words that are easy to use as an adjective but very 
difficult to face straight on in a research program: how to work with complexity? Fortunately, 
this is the question addressed by many of the authors of chapters in the book edited by Mol 
and Law (2002): how not to reduce research to one only point of view; how to work with what 
Bakhtin (1984) referred to as multivocality?
Traditionally, this sort of diversity in social action has been handled through perspectivism, 
the acceptance that there are many points of view, some of which allow for dialogue and some 
that are in competition. However, this would result in layering, some points of view being more 
accepted or legitimate than others. Working with multivocality and the complexity of everyday 
events requires an ontological reconfiguration through which reality itself is multiple – ‘not 
plural: multiple’ (Mol 1999: 75) – because it is performed in a diversity of practices. As such, 
attention must shift from versions of reality to forms of coordination, to modes of ordering that 
coexist:
Often it is not so much a matter of living in a single mode of ordering or of ‘choosing’ 
between them. Rather it is that we find ourselves at places where these modes join together. 

Organizational psychology and social issues 
161
Somewhere in the interferences something happens, for although a single simplification 
reduces complexity, at the places where different simplifications meet, complexity is cre-
ated, emerging where various modes of ordering (styles, logics) come together and add up 
comfortably or in tension, or both.
(Mol and Law 2002: 11)
Or do not add up, as when modes of ordering are so fragmented that response to problems 
related to environmental vulnerabilities cannot be properly addressed. In Brazil’s southern hem-
isphere subtropical summer, we have many episodes of monsoon-type rain and in areas prone 
to risks of landslide and flooding, as in Jardim Ângela (and other peripheral areas of the city of 
São Paulo), contingency plans are drawn up by the Civil Defence. This should be a coordinated 
effort involving social services and health authorities as well as the civil defence apparatus. In 
January 2014, heavy rain caused flooding of some of the streams that crisscross the territory. 
Mary Jane was invited to visit one of these areas and, in the company of staff from one of the 
local social organizations (this was not an area for an unknown person to walk alone), witnessed 
the devastation that had happened. In this specific area the houses had been built in impossible 
places, precariously located on the edge of the river bank or even on pillars on top of the water 
(obviously without any sewage or fresh water connections). The story told by residents was of 
fear as the waters rose and invaded their houses, of loss of belongings, of total abandonment 
by the public authorities. Emergency action was left to the initiative of local residents and to 
the staff of this one social organization. And to top it all, when the wet belongings, mattresses, 
and beddings were piled up on the street in protest, the police reacted with tear gas and rubber 
bullets. It was to be several days before more formal help arrived, along with lists and forms to 
be compiled and filled.
Social services and health services, as well as civil defence, are all regionalized in different 
ways at sub-municipal level. So, what does this single event tell us about complexity? Firstly, 
that there are many strands of this heterogeneous network that have to be unravelled. The many 
rivers and mountains in the territory tell us of geological vulnerability and, hence, the question: 
why do people build houses in such terrain? This strand takes us to urban planning (or lack of it) 
and to discriminatory processes that push the poor to the periphery of cities like São Paulo. But 
it also takes us to discourses of the environmentalists and the green political parties, where pres-
ervation of the environment and concerns about future supply of water and clean air abound. 
However, this is also a place where people live, people for whom Jardim Ângela is home and 
where public services must be provided: education, health, social services, police, and transport. 
Each has its own agenda with modes of ordering that might add up. Others have agendas that 
are in competition: how to build more houses in areas of preservation; how to enlarge roads in 
built up areas; how to encourage community policing if drug lords have control.
Social issues, as we have suggested, do not float around in the air but are intrinsic parts of 
ordinary places that are constantly performed in multiple ways, including the urban, the rural, 
the mountainous, the coastal and, in our example, the water basin. To work with the connections 
and disconnections between heterogeneous networks of bits and pieces, with their socialities, 
materialities, and institutionalities, requires walking away from the idea of a given place which 
psychology can take as a generic context and assuming the difficulty and the challenge of its 
multiple textualities as, for example, in the different social languages of planners, human rights 
advocates, community workers, mothers, and young people, amongst many others. This will 
have consequences for what we study, how we carry out our studies, and with which disciplines 
we talk about our work. Even more difficult will be the challenge of rescuing organizational 
psychology from the hole it has put itself into.

Mary Jane Paris Spink and Peter Kevin Spink
162
Further reading
Hubbard, P. and Kitchin, R. (2004) Key Thinkers on Space and Place. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Augé, M. (1995) Non-places: An Introduction to Supermodernity. London: Verso.
Website resources
Latin American Housing Network (University of Texas – Austin): www.lahn.utexas.org
The Observatory of the Metropoles (Brazil): www.observatoriodasmetropoles.net
The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction: www.unisdr.org
References
Bakhtin, M. M. (1984) Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Barker, R. G. and Wright, H. E. (1951) One Boy’s Day: A Specimen Record of Behaviour. Oxford: Harper.
Billig, M. (1982) Ideology and Social Psychology. Oxford: Blackwell.
Boissevain, J. (1974) Friends of Friends: Networks, Manipulators and Coalitions. Oxford: Blackwell.
Burke, P. (1992) History and Social Theory. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Craik, K. H. (1970) ‘Environmental psychology’, in T. M. Newcombe (ed.) New Directions in Psychology IV. 
New York: Holt, Rhinehart and Winston.
Cresswell, T. (2004) Place: A Short Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell.
De Certeau, M. (1998) The Practice of Everyday Life: Volume 2. Living and Cooking. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press.
Edwards, D. and Potter, J. (1992) Discursive Psychology. London: Sage Publications.
Garfinkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology. New York: Prentice Hall.
Geertz, C. (1983) Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology. New York: Basic Books.
Giddens, A. (1979) Central Problems in Social Theory: Action, Structure and Contradiction in Social Analysis. Lon-
don: Macmillan.
Harvey, D. (1996) Justice, Nature and the Geography of Difference. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Hernández, F., Kellet, P. and Allen, L. K. (2012) Rethinking the Informal City: Critical Perspectives from Latin 
America. New York: Berghahn Books.
Hubbard, P. and Kitchin, R. (2004) Key Thinkers on Space and Place. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Ibañez, T. and Iñiguez, L. (eds) (1997) Critical Social Psychology. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Latour, B. (2005) Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-network Theory. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Lefebvre, H. (1991) The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewin, K. (1952) ‘Psychological ecology’, in D. Cartwright (ed.) Field Theory in Social Science: Selected Theo-
retical Papers by Kurt Lewin. London: Tavistock Publications.
Lynch, K. (1960) The Image of the City. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mol, A. (1999) ‘Ontological politics: a word and some questions’, in J. Law and J. Hassard (eds) Actor Network 
Theory and After. Oxford: Blackwell.
Mol, A. and Law, J. (eds) (2002) Complexities: Social Studies of Knowledge Practices. Durham and London: Duke 
University Press.
Parker, I. and the Bolton Discourse Network (1999) Critical Textwork: An Introduction to Varieties of Discourse 
and Analysis. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Selznick, P. (1949) TVA and the Grass Roots: A Study of Politics and Organization. Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press.
Soja, E. J. (1989) Postmodern Geographies: the Reassertion of Space in Critical Social Theory. London: Verso.
Spink, M.J.P. (2007) ‘The language of risk in psychology: a social constructionist analysis of a psychological 
debate’, Interamerican Journal of Psychology, 41, 151–160.
Spink, M.J.P. (2010) ‘Social psychology and health: assuming complexity’, Quaderns de Psicología, 12(1), 
7–21.
Spink, P. (2003) ‘Poverty and place’, in S. C. Carr and T. S. Sloan (eds) Poverty and Psychology: From Global 
Perspective to Local Practice. New York: Kluwer/Plenum.
Spink, P. (2011) ‘Whatever happened to work: from the centrality of shoes, ships and sealing-wax to the 
problems posed by flying pigs’, Athenea Digital, 11(3), 3–24.

Organizational psychology and social issues 
163
Spink, P. and Best, N. (2009) ‘Local democratic governance, poverty reduction and inequality: the hybrid 
character of public action’, IDS Bulletin, 40(6), 1–12.
Steg, L. van de Berg, A. E. and de Groot, J.I.M. (2012) Environmental Psychology: An Introduction. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Tuan, Y. (1977) Space and Place: the Perspective of Experience. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Ward, P. M., Jiménez Huerta, E. R. and Di Virgilio M. M. (2014) Housing Policy in Latin American Cities: 
A New Generation of Strategies and Approaches for 2016 UN-Habitat III. London: Routledge.
Wood, D. (1992) The Power of Maps. New York: Guilford Press.

164
The term ‘counselling psychologist’ had appeared as a recognized professional title in the USA 
as early as 1951 (Munley et al. 2004). Ironically, the UK became home to the person-centred 
approach (PCA), which was initially the main driving force behind the growth of counselling, at 
the same time as its influence in the USA began to wane. Arguably, its original anti-authoritarian 
flavour was welcomed by Americans in the 1950s, but subsequently declined as psychothera-
peutic practice came to be dictated by medical authorities and insurance companies. The PCA 
flourishes quietly amongst voluntary and educational counselling agencies and in private prac-
tice in the UK, but has now been eclipsed by the rise of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) 
in the NHS (e.g. House and Loewenthal 2008), by the ethos of evidence-based practice (e.g. 
Chwalisz 2003; Corrie 2009; Levant and Hasan 2008), the National Institute for Health and 
Clinical Excellence (NICE), and Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) (e.g. 
Mollon 2009). At the time of writing (autumn 2013), certain forms of humanistic therapy and 
counselling are shaping themselves up for rigorous research in order to demonstrate their com-
parable effectiveness. It seems doubtful whether Rogers’ legacy – sometimes hailed as a ‘quiet 
revolution’ – can live up to its radical promise (Grogan 2013).
What counselling psychology offers that is radically different
We will enumerate ten ways in which counselling psychology’s distinctive features help differ-
entiate it from the modernist ‘regimes of truth’ that still dominate mainstream academic and 
professional psychology. We have been deliberately optimistic in the section that follows, as a 
prelude to the more critical and equivocal analysis that follows it.
	 1	 Counselling psychology straddles the fields of counselling/therapy and Psychology, such that at its 
best, counselling psychology can weave together into a potent therapeutic offer and prac-
tice the best aspects of both fields. This might sound like an implausible claim to those 
who have rejected psychology wholesale, and see it as essentially irredeemable. There are 
certainly those who strongly question whether it is remotely possible for a genuinely crit-
ical approach to be in any way effective at the level of the individual (e.g. Brown 1994;  
Fook 1993).
17
Counselling psychology
Critical achievements, possibilities, 
and limitations
Richard House and Colin Feltham

Counselling psychology
165
	 2	 Counselling psychology is a way of institutionally humanizing at least one area of the psychology 
field when the discipline of psychology is (usually accurately) challenged by critical psy-
chologists for its positivistic, pathologizing, objectivist worldview. Again, for those who 
view psychology as already essentially irredeemable (e.g. Parker 2007), this will seem a lame 
point. Yet given that psychology as a discipline not only exists, but does not appear to be on 
the verge of an existential meltdown and disappearance from modern culture, it is arguably 
important for critically inclined psychologists to support any wedges into the discipline that 
can encourage values and practices that undermine mainstream psychology’s core assump-
tions and taken-for-granted regimes of truth.
	 3	 Through its theoretical commitments, counselling psychology at least offers the possibility of a flexible, 
pluralistic approach to therapeutic help (but see Moller 2011), which is certainly a necessary (if by 
no means sufficient) condition for a genuinely radical-critical praxis. Cooper and McLeod’s  
(2010) landmark text on pluralism in counselling and psychotherapy is not without its 
problems (House 2011; Samuels 1997). Yet what is interesting about these developments is 
that counselling psychology has actually been very proactive in showcasing its own explicit 
commitment to diversity and pluralism (e.g. Milton 2011; Moller 2011), which is a marked 
departure from the parochial ‘schoolism’ that typically dominates the non-integrative ther-
apy world (Feltham 1997).
	 4	 Counselling psychology has some limited potential to be a less ‘professionalized’ practice compared 
to mainstream psychology, so at least there is the prospect of a progressive ‘post-professional’ 
practice beginning to emerge from within the counselling psychology field (cf. Illich 1977; 
House 2010), which seems significantly less likely in the more clinically oriented and pro-
fessionalized field of clinical psychology. Since the 1990s, we have both written about the 
therapy professionalization issue at some length in the literature, and House (e.g. 2010), 
Denis Postle (e.g. 2012), and others have been foregrounding a move towards what, fol-
lowing Ivan Illich (1977), they call ‘post-professional’ therapy practice. Now not too much 
should be made of this as, in the UK at least, counselling psychology is statutorily Health 
and Care Professions Council (HCPC)-regulated in the same way as is the rest of profes-
sional psychology.
	 5	 Counselling psychology explicitly embraces a nonmedical model ontology. In our view this is an 
important commitment within counselling psychology that critical psychologists should 
welcome. We are aware of the difficulty in generalizing across countries and continents here: 
our own experience is in Britain, but we are aware that in a US context, for example, Pril-
leltensky and Nelson (2002: 85) write of counselling psychology emphasizing ‘mainstream, 
western, capitalist values of individualism, instrumentality, conformity, and efficiency . . . , 
[with] counselling psychology, as traditionally practised, . . . firmly supporting the societal 
status quo’.
	 6	 Counselling psychology encourages explicit engagement with multicultural perspectives and difference, 
especially within US counselling psychology (see, for example, Goodman et al. 2004; Ivey 1995; 
Vera and Speight 2003), with an attendant potential for transcending the narcissistic West-
ern individualism for which individualized therapy has so often been criticized (e.g. Cloud 
1998; Wallach and Wallach 1983). Counselling psychology explicitly acknowledges the cru-
cial importance of difference and uniqueness (as opposed to the nomothetic, normalizing/
standardizing mentality of much of mainstream psychology), and so again, there is consid-
erable ‘potential space’ for incursions into, and subversions of, the prevailing Eurocentric 
ideology and regimes of truth that dominate mainstream psychology.
	 7	 Counselling psychology tends to encourage a (humanistic) openness to different approaches and prac-
tices. We have already referred to this openness, and it seems that any branch of psychology 

Richard House and Colin Feltham
166
that explicitly privileges an authentically open engagement with a broad range of ideas 
(which includes, crucially, a willingness to question and even ‘deconstruct’ prevailing ortho-
doxies [Parker 1999]) must be potentially fertile ground for radical ideas and perspectives to 
take root and, eventually, flourish. We are of course aware of the dangers of using approv-
ingly the term ‘humanistic’ in any text on critical psychology! (one of us, R. H., would call 
himself a broadly ‘critical-humanistic’ practitioner, and the other, C. F., might be called a 
‘critical friend’ of humanistic psychology – see Feltham 2013a; House et al. 2013; and also 
Totton 2010 and Weatherill 2004).
	 8	 Counselling psychology has the potential to embrace a strong social justice orientation, especially in 
the USA, which makes it particularly amenable to counselling psychology practices. Ivey 
and Collins (2003) write about ‘liberation psychology’ (see also Watts 2001). A decade ago 
Ivey and Collins could bemoan the fact that ‘counseling psychology has been too hesitant 
to promote social change and social action’ (2003: 291), yet they then go on in their paper to 
outline how ‘liberation psychology’ (Martín-Baró 1996) can be directly incorporated into 
clinical practice (292–4). Also, writing a decade ago in relation to the USA, we find Vera and 
Speight (2003) arguing that counselling psychologists have not given sufficient attention 
to issues of oppression and social justice in their practice, training, and research. For them, 
social justice-informed praxis should be collaborative, socially relevant, action-orientated, 
and have a community focus.
	 9	 Counselling psychology often embraces issues around feminism, racism, and sexual difference. There 
has certainly been attention given to issues of feminist engagements, racism, and sexual 
diversity in US counselling psychology (e.g. Moradi et al. 2002; Moradi 2012; Neville and 
Carter 2005) – with, for example, themes like the fusion of feminism and social justice 
being actively explored and theorized (Moradi 2012: 1134–6). There is also little doubt that 
the strong challenge to the ‘psychopathologizing’ mentality (Parker et al. 1995; see above) 
that counselling psychology claims to embrace is genuine and informed (see, for example, 
Larsson et al. 2012; Milton et al. 2010; Milton 2012; Parpottas 2012).
	10	 Counselling psychology’s ontology gives it the potential to connect with the radical linking of moder-
nity/late capitalism, and emotional/psychological suffering, as depicted in the work of (for exam-
ple) David Michael Levin (1987a, b), Tod Sloan (1995, 1996), and Colin Feltham (2007). 
Before these latter works, ‘modernity’ had not been discussed at any length within psychol-
ogy. For Sloan, for example, modernist therapy, which focuses on ‘altering behaviour pat-
terns and belief systems’, has major shortcomings (1995: 64). Dokecki’s useful 1999 review 
article refers to how Sloan (1995, 1996) traces the influence of modernity on human devel-
opment, and its possible contribution to the genesis of ‘psychopathology’ – or modernity’s 
colonization of the life world, as he puts it. This is a corrosive process whereby the system of 
material production invades the personal and intersubjective realms, and it is a mechanism 
by which advanced capitalist society stabilizes itself. Its crises in the economic sphere are 
deflected into the life world realms of culture, society, and personality. Among the prices 
paid for this stability are the loss of meaning, the destruction of solidarity [community], and 
psychological crisis (Sloan 1996: 65, as quoted in Dokecki 1999: 16).
Reflections on how useful counselling psychology has been
Maintaining the historical distinction between counselling and counselling psychology, it is 
almost certainly the case that critical psychology has had no impact on the former and little 
on the latter – though there are significant pockets of radicalism in at least some counselling 

Counselling psychology
167
psychology training courses (we write from some personal experience here). This is not to 
say that critique of the counselling enterprise has been missing, but that it has not primarily 
issued from, or made much use of, the critical psychology literature. Critiques of counselling 
have included those made by outsider commentators such as journalists; those in cognate dis-
ciplines like sociology, political science, and philosophy (e.g. Furedi 2004); allied professionals 
such as psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, and psychotherapists (e.g. Eysenck 1952; Parker 1999; 
Persaud 2001); insiders critical of the professionalization agenda (e.g. House 2010; House and 
Totton 2011); and to some extent by dissatisfied ex-clients (e.g. France 1988; Sands 2000). The 
iatrogenic class biases of at least some therapeutic treatments have also been usefully highlighted 
(e.g. Hollingshead and Redlich 1958; see also Walsh 1988). All such latter critiques have been 
met with a mixture of individual soul-searching and limited professional openness. Where they 
have effected some change can be seen in the introduction or extension of research method-
ology modules, ethical and complaints procedures, and some attention to conventional ‘equal 
opportunities’ monitoring.
In so far as counselling psychology has emerged as genuinely new and useful, its challenge to 
clinical psychology and its privileged ‘scientific’ status and aspirations constitute a paramount fac-
tor. As discussed above, counselling psychology and its practice have moved away from a psycho-
pathologizing stance and associated diagnosis and labelling, from a psychopharmacology-friendly 
stance, and from a medical treatment ethos. Counselling psychology has instead, on the whole, 
adopted the counselling values of respect for client self-determination, accurate attention to the 
client’s phenomenal world, and her or his identified aspirations.
Counselling psychology has often been delivered in a variety of nonmedical settings, includ-
ing the voluntary sector. It has also resisted, up to a point, the pull of quantitative research, of 
evidence-based practice and the ‘external locus of control’ generally, promoting instead varie-
ties of qualitative research and practice-based evidence (e.g. Corrie 2009; Milton 2012). Until 
recently counselling psychology had resisted the routine use of assessment and evaluation instru-
ments (CORE, PHQ9, GAD7, etc.) in everyday practice in favour of optimal client autonomy, 
relational depth, and trust (Knox et al. 2013).
Counselling psychology has all along lived with the problem of a proliferation of theoretical 
models, but the main clusters are found in psychodynamic, humanistic, existential, social learning 
and CBT, systemic, constructivist, eclectic, integrative, and pluralistic models. This has had the 
negative effect of the counselling psychology field being presented as incoherent psychobabble; 
but viewed more positively, it can also be seen as a more ‘postmodern’, anti-monolithic reflec-
tion of personalities, cultures, and worldviews. Many counselling psychologists regard their work 
as drawing selectively on all the above models, as well as on insights from feminist, multicultural, 
gay affirmative, and transpersonal therapies. While all this famously appeared to Hans Eysenck 
(1952) as a ridiculous, unscientific, and untestable ‘mish-mash’, today such pluralism finds favour 
with postmodern thinking, multiculturalism, and even within the rhetoric of ‘patient choice’. It 
has certainly undermined the hegemony of early twentieth century Psychology.
Exactly how useful such counselling psychology has been in practice in the service of its 
clients is, of course, another matter. Almost certainly, the creation and promotion of counsel-
ling rather than psychiatry, clinical psychology, and psychotherapy, has been a public relations 
success. Ordinary people have been drawn to trust counselling who were intimidated by the 
quasi-medical psy-professions. However, the evidence is not overwhelming that clients get the 
results they hope for, notwithstanding a general research consensus that about 80 per cent of all 
talking therapy is successful (Cooper 2008). The repeated finding of high levels of satisfaction 
appears to confirm that clients feel taken seriously and listened to deeply (so-called transtheoret-
ical common factors; e.g. Wampold 2001), even when their ‘presenting concern’ is not necessarily 

Richard House and Colin Feltham
168
resolved. And while traditional psychotherapy was once advanced as a once-and-for-all reso- 
lution of personal problems, users of (commonly quite brief ) counselling now often return for 
more, or try out different counsellors. Counselling is popular, it is desired and non-stigmatic. It 
is frequently preferred to medication by mental health service users.
Returning, however, to some of the sources of our critiques above, we cannot avoid the 
problem of perceived successful outcomes versus concealed or denied aspects of the bigger 
picture. In the view of two British clinical psychologists, the late David Smail (e.g. Smail 1998) 
and David Pilgrim (Pilgrim 1992), and the American professor of social work William Epstein 
(Epstein 1995), the theoretical structure of all the talking therapies is unconvincing; the con-
firmatory bias of research essentially renders it meaningless, it is sometimes argued, and all 
psychological therapy is much more oriented towards middle-class than working-class people. 
Overall, counselling psychology is regarded as a sticking plaster for epidemic levels of social 
distress, as a convenient fiction for politicians hoping to avoid massive economic problems, and 
as another source of ‘opium for the masses’. Even politicians have come to esteem counselling 
and therapy, it seems, at least in its CBT/IAPT form, as promising cheap solutions to psycho-
logical disabilities costing huge amounts in unemployment and sickness payments. Counselling 
psychology in this sense is perhaps useful, but negatively so.
Limitations
One of the primary values of counselling is acknowledgment of unique subjectivities and a rela-
tional framework. By their nature, no academic or professional disciplines can readily facilitate 
this. Traditional academic psychology, clinical and counselling psychology, humanistic psychol-
ogy, and critical psychology exist largely in the context of institutions, in-group hierarchies, 
generalized theories, published texts, and academic and professional rituals. By contrast, the 
intersubjective or inter-human requires no psychology as such at all. Or perhaps even these are 
partly enmeshed in theories of mind and folk psychology. But the Buberian I–Thou encounter 
not only requires no psychology – it shuns and transcends it. Psychology is arguably always 
wordy, its very etymology implying a removed study of the soul or psyche, an anchoring in 
the logocentric, not primarily the experiential. Thinkers as different as Jiddu Krishnamurti and 
Jean-Paul Sartre have argued as much.
A number of possible interpretations occur with regard to the validity of counselling and 
critical psychology. (1) Those working in such roles, bearing these titles and deriving financial 
profit from them, can be said to be obliged to pretend that they value them, to ‘play the game’, 
while actually scorning them or holding them lightly. (2) Psychologists may sincerely believe 
there is a beneficial link between psychological theory and experience, whether indeed there 
actually is or not. (3) Psychology may indeed contain at least some genuine and useful insights 
into human experience and behaviour. (4) It may be that all the psychologies of which we 
speak here are, to different degrees or equally, subject to severe scepticism. Anyone who chooses 
to become a psychologist probably begins at point 3, and some will move to points 1 or 2. 
A few will move to point 4 and likely towards a critical psychology position. But some who 
are interested in the human psyche will never embrace psychology at all, or only tangentially 
(Feltham 2013b), while others may take an anti-psychology turn (e.g. Newnes 2013). Different 
courses and sub-disciplines within psychology, interacting with different personalities and pro-
fessional experiences, will cast different perspectives. In other words, there is no single science 
of psychology but rather a multitude of interpretations, and there is no single, agreed version of 
counselling or critical psychology. There is also no consensus on the legitimate or useful scope 
and limits of scepticism.

Counselling psychology
169
Critical psychology leans towards the revolutionary, at least rhetorically. Critical psychologists 
in their own eyes are probably the ‘good guys’, the psychologists with greater moral integrity, 
political insight, and commitment, compared with their status quo peers. But how many of them 
are vigorously anti-capitalist, barefoot therapists, or social activists? Similarly, counselling psy-
chologists probably deem themselves more aligned than their psychiatrist and clinical psycholo-
gist colleagues with real human experiences and needs, with subjectivity, and against oppressive 
scientism. But how many of them are more loving or more effective than counsellors or psy-
chotherapists who are not psychologists? Critical psychology, in its academic discourse, typically 
uses a language that is alienating for working-class people. Counselling psychologists employed 
in the NHS are on a salary scale that can go up to about £70,000 p.a. when the current average 
UK salary is £26,500; and those in counselling psychology private practice often charge £80 
or more an hour, or approximately twice the amount charged by many counsellors. What kind 
of language should a critical counselling psychologist use, and how much should she earn? Sol-
idarity with other struggling human beings arguably requires communication by plain language, 
and some sharing of the stress of low incomes, rather than exercising philanthropy from above.
Conclusion
[C]ritical . . . counselling psychology needs to attend also to relational and collective values 
to situate problems in their socio-political context. [It] needs to consider social ethics as 
well as the ethics of individual practice . . . [and] to incorporate values of empowerment 
and social justice.
(Prilleltensky and Nelson 2002: 85)
We are all too aware of the Eurocentric orientation of this chapter: this is in part because we are 
both white British (male) ‘middle-class’ practitioner-writers whose only concerted experience 
is in the UK (C. F. and R. H.) and Denmark (C. F.); but also because we have too little space 
in this chapter to do justice to the range and depth of discussion that would be needed for an 
adequate cross-cultural exploration of critical counselling psychology. But it goes without saying 
that any full engagement would need to embed the discussion across different cultures, with all 
the local particularities that cultural difference entails.
The reader will probably have the sense by now that we are, to varying degrees, somewhat 
ambivalent about the critical or radical credentials (or the potential thereof ) of counselling psy-
chology. On the one hand, from the ‘inside the tent pissing out’ position (to which neither of us 
has a natural affinity), some kind of plausible case can be made for counselling psychology being 
a kind of proto-critical Trojan horse infiltrating psychology’s conventional regimes of truth, as 
we have tried to do earlier. On the other hand, from the ‘outside the tent pissing in’ position (in 
which we are both more comfortable), there are significant doubts about having any realistic 
impact.
The issue of professionalization is also crucial. Certainly in Britain, from an anti- 
professionalization standpoint (e.g. House and Totton 2011), counselling psychologists have been 
unlucky to have been snared by Health and Care Professions Council statutory regulation, when 
the rest of the counselling and psychotherapy managed to escape such regulation. However, this 
does mean that counselling psychologists who in principle oppose HCPC regulation of, and 
surveillance intrusion into, their practice do have an avenue and a practitioner label under which 
they can pursue their therapeutic work.
Ultimately, perhaps, one’s view on the critical possibilities of counselling psychology will turn 
upon one’s attitude to psychology as a discipline. If we take the very radical position that any 

Richard House and Colin Feltham
170
engagement with psychology as an academic or a professional-practitioner discipline is neces-
sarily wrong-headed and wasted energy, then the conversation will necessarily end at that point. 
But if we are wishing to find ways of infiltrating mainstream psychology with critical, progres-
sive thinking and practice that at least offers some hope of challenging oppression, exploitation, 
and human suffering, then counselling psychology (perhaps in a creative alliance with commu-
nity and humanistic psychology) is arguably as good a place as any to start; and we have tried to 
outline what some of those critical possibilities might be in this chapter.
Further reading
Feltham, C. (2013) Counselling and Counselling Psychology: A Critical Examination. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS 
Books.
Milton, M. (ed.) (2010) Therapy and Beyond: Counselling Psychology Contributions to Therapeutic and Social 
Issues. Chichester: John Wiley.
Prilleltensky, I. and Nelson, G. (2002) ‘Clinical and counselling settings: making a difference with disadvan-
taged clients’, in Doing Psychology Critically: Making a Difference in Diverse Settings. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Website resources
Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 2, 2000; Theme issue: ‘Action Research’: http://www.discourseunit.
com/annual-review/arcp-2-action-research/
Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 8, 2010; Theme issue: ‘Psychologisation under scrutiny’: http://www.
discourseunit.com/annual-review/arcp-8-psychologisation-under-scrutiny/
Journal of Critical Psychology, Counselling and Psychotherapy ( JCPCP): http://www.pccs-books.co.uk/
products/category/journal-of-critical-psychology-counselling-and-psychotherapy-jcpcp
Moreira, V. (2005) ‘Critical psychopathology’, Radical Psychology: http://www.radicalpsychology.org/
vol4-1/moreira.html
Prilleltensky, I and Prilleltensky, O. (2003) ‘Synergies for wellness and liberation in Counseling Psychology’, 
The Counseling Psychologist, 20 (10), 1–9: search on Google Scholar: ‘Prilleltensky’, ‘Synergies’, ‘Wellness’, 
‘Counseling Psychology’
References
Brown, L. S. (1994) Subversive Dialogues: Theory in Feminist Therapy. New York: Basic Books.
Chwalisz, K. (2003) ‘Evidence-based practice: a framework for twenty-first-century scientist-practitioner 
training’, The Counseling Psychologist, 31(5), 497–528.
Cloud, D. L. (1998) Control and Consolation in American Culture and Politics: The Rhetoric of Therapy. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cooper, M. (2008) Essential Research Findings in Counselling and Psychotherapy: The Facts are Friendly. 
London: Sage.
Cooper, M. and McLeod, J. (2010) Pluralistic Counselling and Psychotherapy. London: Sage.
Corrie, S. (2009) ‘What is evidence?’, in R. Woolfe, S. Strawbridge, B. Douglas and W. Dryden (eds) Hand-
book of Counselling Psychology (3rd Edn). London: Sage.
Dokecki, P. R. (1999) ‘Making life choices amid the ruins of modernity’, The Community Psychologist, 32(1), 
15–17.
Epstein, W. (1995) The Illusion of Psychotherapy. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Eysenck, H. J. (1952) ‘The effects of psychotherapy: an evaluation’, Journal of Consulting Psychology, 16(5), 
319–324.
Feltham, C. (1997) ‘Challenging the core theoretical model’, Counselling, 8(2), 121–5, reprinted in  
R. House and N. Totton (eds) Implausible Professions (2nd Edn). Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books, 2011.
Feltham, C. (2007) What’s Wrong With Us?: The Anthropathology Thesis. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Feltham, C. (2013a) ‘The past and future of humanistic psychology’, in R. House, D. Kalisch and J. Maid-
man (eds) The Future of Humanistic Psychology. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.

Counselling psychology
171
Feltham, C. (2013b) Counselling and Counselling Psychology: A Critical Examination. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS 
Books.
Fook, J. (1993) Radical Casework: a Theory of Practice. London: Allen and Unwin.
France, A. (1988) Consuming Psychotherapy. London: Free Association Books.
Furedi, F. (2004) Therapy Culture: Cultivating Vulnerability in an Uncertain Age. London: Routledge.
Goodman, L. A., Liang, B., Helms, J. E., Latta, R. E., Sparks, E. and Weintraub, S. R. (2004) ‘Training coun-
seling psychologists as social justice agents: feminist and multicultural principles in action’, The Coun-
seling Psychologist, 32(6), 793–836.
Grogan, J. (2013) Encountering America: Humanistic Psychology, Sixties Culture and the Shaping of the Modern 
Self. New York: Harper Perennial.
Hollingshead, A. B. and Redlich, F. C. (1958) Social Class and Mental Illness. New York: Wiley.
House, R. (2010) In, Against and Beyond Therapy: Critical Essays Towards a ‘Post-professional’ Era. Ross-on-
Wye: PCCS Books.
House, R. (2011) ‘Pluralistic, post-professional, postmodern? A debate whose time has come’, Therapy Today, 
22(1), 38–40.
House, R., Kalisch, D. and Maidman, J. (eds) (2013) The Future of Humanistic Psychology. Ross-on-Wye: 
PCCS Books.
House, R. and Loewenthal, D. (eds) (2008) Against and for CBT: Towards a Constructive Dialogue? Ross-on-
Wye: PCCS Books.
House, R. and Totton, N. (eds) (2011) Implausible Professions: Arguments for Pluralism and Autonomy in Psycho-
therapy and Counselling (2nd Edn). Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.
Illich, I. (1977) ‘Disabling professions’, in I. Illich, I. K. Zola, J. McKnight, J. Caplan and H. Shaiken, Disabling 
Professions. London: Marion Boyars.
Ivey, A. (1995) ‘Psychotherapy as liberation: toward specific skills and strategies in multicultural counseling 
and therapy’, in J. Ponterroto, J. Casas, L. Suzuki and C. Alexander (eds) Handbook of Multicultural Coun-
seling. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ivey, A. E. and Collins, N. M. (2003) ‘Social justice: a long-term challenge for counselling psychology’, The 
Counseling Psychologist, 31(3), 290–298.
Knox, R., Murphy, D., Wiggins, S. and Cooper, M. (eds) (2013) Relational Depth: New Perspectives and Devel-
opments. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Larsson, P., Brooks, O. and Loewenthal, D. (2012) ‘Counselling psychology and diagnostic categories: a 
critical literature review’, Counselling Psychology Review, 27 (3), 55–67.
Levant, R. F. and Hasan, N. T. (2008) ‘Evidence-based practice in psychology’, Professional Psychology: 
Research and Practice, 39(6), 658–662.
Levin, D. M. (1987a) ‘Psychopathology in the epoch of nihilism’, in D. M. Levin (ed.) Pathologies of the Mod-
ern Self: Postmodern Studies on Narcissism, Schizophrenia, and Depression. New York: New York University 
Press.
Levin, D. M. (ed.) (1987b) Pathologies of the Modern Self: Postmodern Studies on Narcissism, Schizophrenia, and 
Depression. New York: New York University Press.
Martín-Baró, I. (1996) Writings for a Liberation Psychology (2nd Edn). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Milton, M. (2011) ‘A response to Moller (2011): diversity still requires epistemological clarity’, Counselling 
Psychology Review, 26(3), 89–91.
Milton, M. (ed.) (2012) Diagnosis and Beyond: Counselling Psychology Contributions to Understanding Human 
Distress. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.
Milton, M., Craven, M. and Coyle, A. (2010) ‘Understanding human distress: moving beyond the concept 
of “psychopathology” ’, in M. Milton (ed.) Therapy and Beyond: Counselling Psychology Contributions to 
Therapeutic and Social Issues. Chichester: John Wiley.
Moller, N. (2011) ‘The identity of counselling psychology in Britain is parochial, rigid and irrelevant but 
diversity offers a solution’, Counselling Psychology Review, 26(2), 8–14.
Mollon, P. (2009) ‘The NICE guidelines are misleading, unscientific and potentially impede good psycho-
logical care and help’, Psychodynamic Practice: Individuals, Groups and Organisations, 15(1), 9–24.
Moradi, B. (2012) ‘Feminist social justice orientation: an indicator of optimal functioning’, The Community 
Psychologist, 40(8), 1133–1148.
Moradi, B., Subich, L. M. and Phillips, J. C. (2002) ‘Revisiting feminist identity development theory, 
research, and practice’, The Community Psychologist, 30(1), 6–43.

Richard House and Colin Feltham
172
Munley, P. H., Duncan, L. E., McDonnell, K. A. and Sauer, E. M. (2004) ‘Counseling psychology in the 
United States of America’, Counseling Psychology Quarterly, 17(3), 247–271.
Neville, H. A. and Carter, R. T. (2005) ‘Race and racism in counselling psychology: research, training, and 
practice’, The Community Psychologist, 33(4), 413–418.
Newnes, C. (2013) Clinical Psychology: a Critical Examination. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.
Parker, I. (ed.) (1999) ‘Deconstruction and psychotherapy’, in I. Parker (ed.) Deconstructing Psychotherapy. 
London: Sage.
Parker, I. (2007) Revolution in Psychology: Alienation to Emancipation. London: Pluto Press.
Parker, I., Georgaca, E., Harper, D., McLaughlin, T. and Stowell-Smith, M. (1995) Deconstructing Psychopa-
thology. London: Sage.
Parpottas, P. (2012) ‘A critique on the use of standard psychopathological classifications in understanding 
human distress: the example of “schizoid personality disorder” ’, Counselling Psychology Review, 27(1), 
44–50.
Persaud, R. (2001) ‘The wisest counsel?’, in P. Milner and S. Palmer (eds) Counselling: the BACP Counselling 
Reader, Volume 2. London: Sage.
Pilgrim, D. (1992) ‘Psychotherapy and political evasions’, in W. Dryden and C. Feltham (eds) Psychotherapy 
and Its Discontents. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Postle, D. (2012) Therapy Futures: Introducing the PsyCommons. London: Wentworth Publishing Resources.
Prilleltensky, I. and Nelson, G. (2002) ‘Clinical and counselling settings: making a difference with disadvan-
taged clients’, in Doing Psychology Critically: Making a Difference in Diverse Settings. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Samuels, A. (1997) ‘Pluralism and psychotherapy: what is good training?’, in R. House and N. Totton (eds) 
Implausible Professions. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.
Sands, A. (2000) Falling for Therapy. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sloan, T. (1995) Damaged Life: the Crisis of the Modern Psyche. London: Routledge.
Sloan, T. (1996) Life Choices: Understanding Dilemmas and Decisions. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Smail, D. (1998) How to Survive without Psychotherapy. London: Constable.
Totton, N. (2010) The Problem with the Humanistic Therapies. London: Karnac.
Vera, E. M. and Speight, E. M. (2003) ‘Multicultural competence, social justice, and counselling psychology: 
expanding our roles’, The Community Psychologist, 31(3), 253–272.
Wallach, M. A. and Wallach, L. (1983) Psychology’s Sanction for Selfishness: the Error of Egotism in Theory and 
Therapy. San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman.
Walsh, R.T. (1988) ‘The dark side of our moon: the iatrogenic aspects of professional psychology’, Journal 
of Community Psychology, 16(2), 244–248.
Wampold, B. E. (2001) The Great Psychotherapy Debate: Models, Methods, and Findings. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum.
Watts, R. (2001) ‘Exploring liberation psychology’, The Community Psychologist, 34(1), 27–28.
Weatherill, R. (2004) Our Last Great Illusion: a Radical Psychoanalytical Critique of Therapy Culture. Exeter: 
Imprint Academic.

173
Health psychology has been often defined as the aggregate of specific educational, scientific, and 
professional contributions to the discipline of psychology aiming for the promotion and main-
tenance of health, the prevention and treatment of illness, and the identification of aetiological 
and diagnostic correlates of health, illness, and related dysfunctions. We can see what the first 
generation of health psychologists thought to be important from this definition. Intervention 
targeting those who are identified as risky, and entry to health care services and policies, have 
been the focus for mainstream health psychology, along with the study of causes of illness.
In ‘developed’ countries, it has long been pointed out that diseases such as diabetes, car-
diac disease, cerebrovascular disease, and cancer are related to the behaviour of patients. It was 
assumed that if psychologists could change behaviour that ‘causes’ such illnesses, people could 
enjoy healthy lives and medical expense could be reduced significantly. Health psychology 
started to grow rapidly in the late 1970s, mainly in the US, and in Europe shortly after. Health 
psychology has established its status as a specialized area that treats issues of physical health in 
the US, the UK, and other English-speaking countries. In other countries, including Japan, it is 
recognized as a sub-discipline of psychology in psychological circles, but it has not been recog-
nized in medical circles and in society at large (Igarashi 2005).
The development of health psychology
A disciplinary history serves to legitimate the role and authority of health psychology in health 
care. Although some describe its roots tracing back to the age of ancient Greece (e.g. Belar 
et al. 2013), the area was formed and termed ‘health psychology’ in the 1970s when increasing 
expenditure and change in health care delivery became a major subject of discussion. Behaviour 
medicine, medical sociology, health economics, medical anthropology, and others had established 
their interest in health issues in parallel with health psychology. The discipline of health psy-
chology has been constructed in competition with these rivals for the status of expert, showing 
its usefulness to concerned parties and society at large. Health psychologists needed to position 
themselves to win the struggle for survival and they succeeded in doing this. Deficiencies of 
and disenchantment with the biomedical model of illness, escalating costs of health care, the 
epidemic of HIV, an awareness of the role that behaviour plays in health, and an increasing 
18
Health psychology
Towards critical psychologies 
for well-being and social justice
Yasuhiro Igarashi

Yasuhiro Igarashi
174
ideology of health as the responsibility of the individual facilitated psychology’s entry into issues 
of medical care (Lyons and Chamberlain 2005).
It seems to be relatively clear now that political economy, race, gender, culture, and other 
external factors significantly affect health and illness, but that research with large-number ques-
tionnaires sometimes fails to capture experience concerning health. In the 1990s, some health 
psychologists started to critique mainstream health psychology and proposed alternative ways 
of doing health psychology (e.g. Stainton Rogers 1996). Critical psychology informed these 
approaches, but this ‘critical psychology’ is so diverse (e.g. Dafermos et al. 2013), it would be 
better to refer to critical psychologies. Themes, methods, and theoretical resources for research 
and practice are diverse, depending on what critical psychologists work on (Parker 2011; Teo 
2014). However, critical psychologists in different parts of the world broadly share the following 
two stances towards psychology. On the one hand, critical psychologists try to bring about a 
psychology that contributes to the happiness and welfare of people, especially those who suffer 
from abuse of psychology and who are in weak positions in power relations. On the other hand, 
this psychology yields new theory, research, methodology, therapy, education, and ways of relat-
ing to society to resolve problems that spring from existing mainstream approaches to health, 
including approaches from within mainstream health psychology.
Health is an issue of concern for all of us. It is concerned with our experience of the body 
and closely relates to our subjectivity. However, health and the regulation of the body for ‘health’ 
are the focus of administration by authorities, and this places a series of demands on criti-
cal psychologies. Critical health psychology can inform health psychology in many important 
dimensions, and because it is a newcomer in psychological circles generally, the mainstream has 
not yet mobilized to exclude emerging critical trends. It has been clear that mainstream health 
psychology cannot achieve the goal of ‘health for all’, and critical health psychology has now 
been recognized as one of four main approaches, alongside clinical health psychology, public 
health psychology, and community health psychology (Marks 2002a).
The Journal of Health Psychology (launched in 1996) committed itself to the promotion of 
critical health psychology as one of its editorial policies (Marks 1996). Textbooks were published 
very early on (e.g. Crossley 2000; Lyons and Chamberlain 2005; Marks 2002b; Murray 2004; 
Murray and Chamberlain 1999) and more have appeared recently (Horrocks and Johnson 2012; 
Marks et al. 2011; Rohleder 2012). Biennial conferences of the International Society for Crit-
ical Health Psychology attract scholars who work in a wide range of health-related areas from 
multiple cultures to discuss new research.
Critical health psychology and its contributions
Health psychology has developed rapidly in the US and Europe, drawing on existing theories 
and methods of social, clinical, and cognitive psychology. But in the 1990s, it became clear to 
some psychologists that it had not achieved the goal of ‘health for all’ because of the limita-
tions of its cognitive-behaviourist methodology. Critical health psychology started to challenge 
health psychology’s individualism, cognitivism, positivism, reductionism, and other basic tenets. 
US American psychology achieved its paradigm or dominant methodology based on tenets 
of neo-behaviourism with the categories of variables (independent, intervening, and depend-
ent variables) and operational definition in the 1930s (Danziger 1997). This became widely 
accepted in many countries after the Second World War, particularly in places where the United 
States had a strong influence (Igarashi 2006). At that time, psychology was considered to be a 
psychology of the organism, and so mental processes of human and animals were treated in the 
same way. Neo-behaviourism developed into cognitive-behaviourism with the rise of computer 

Health psychology
175
science and cognitive psychology, which became more popular in the 1950s and 1960s. It has 
become the mainstream in the US and in countries where US American psychology dominates 
research and application. However, psychology cannot be viewed simply as the psychology of 
the organism any longer because the difference between human beings and animals, particu-
larly over the use of language, has become a focus of attention in different fields of psychology 
(including discursive and critical psychology). Psychology has come to be considered as a psy-
chology of person in general, whether it is treated as such explicitly or implicitly. Even here, 
though, it was for a long time presumed that gender, culture, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, 
sexuality, and other dimensions of the person do not make a significant difference in an indi-
vidual’s mental process.
A consequence is that this ostensibly ‘general’ psychology is actually the psychology of male, 
white, middle-class, heterosexual individuals – those treated as the invisible norm in research – 
and this is something that is questioned, of course – by different forms of critical psychology. 
Critical psychology attends to the way that the dominant culture and values in a society enter 
into psychological approaches, methods, and products in some way or another. Looking back at 
the history of psychology and the production and application of psychological knowledge, it is 
clear that psychology has not been merely a pure intellectual pursuit of the mind (e.g. Richards 
2009). It has also been a tool for social control and management of individuals’ conduct, and 
has worked as a ‘technology of the self’ (Foucault 1976). Health psychology, launched as a new 
branch of this mainstream psychology in the US, disseminated these assumptions about the 
human being to non-Western countries, including Japan.
Mainstream health psychology devotes itself to research on cognitions and behaviour con-
cerning ill-health, attempting to predict targeted behaviour by adopting quantitative methods 
in the framework of a so-called bio-psycho-social model (Crossley 2000). This still-dominant 
form of health psychology tends to reduce questions of health and illness to instrumental, tech-
nical problems of management and control. It has not actively grappled with the problems of 
contemporary society. Rather, it has tended to perpetuate these problems by providing stopgap 
measures.
Critical health psychology has made efforts to overcome these shortcomings in the following 
ways.
Beyond individualism
It is natural for cognitive-behaviourism to explain a person’s behaviour and mind at the level 
of the person, and so it is also natural for mainstream health psychology to treat health and 
illness at the level of a person. Mainstream health psychology has concentrated its practice on 
the development of individualistic and rationalistic education-type packages, designed by the 
experts to change individual behaviours (Murray and Chamberlain 2014). But critical health 
psychologists point out that the behaviour of individuals is not solely determined in their mind 
but is largely influenced by family, community, institutions, media, and political economy. The 
‘bio-psycho-social’ model (Engel 1977) has been deployed as a slogan to propel health psychol-
ogy, and this strategy was successful to an extent. But, in fact, health psychology has not actually 
included the ‘social’ to any great extent. The relation between the biological and the psycholog-
ical and the social has not been theorized effectively, and the model has been criticized for its 
superficial treatment of the three components. We have not been able to understand health and 
ill-health any more by using that slogan (Stam 2000).
We need to take the social or external factors seriously to understand issues of health, as 
ecological systems theory does, for example (Bronfenbrenner 1979). Health behaviour is related 

Yasuhiro Igarashi
176
to lifestyle, and lifestyle is formed in a personal, familial, social, cultural, political, economic, and 
global context.
Poverty as the major cause of ill-health and death
Health inequality and poverty are major themes to work on to achieve the goal of ‘health for 
all’. At the end of the twentieth century, the World Health Organization had already reported 
that those living in absolute poverty are five times more likely to die before reaching the age 
of five, and two and half times more likely to die between the ages of 15 and 59, than those in 
higher-income groups (World Health Organization 1999). According to Jha and Mills (2002), 
one-tenth of the deaths in developing countries (about 1.6 million) are caused by diseases such 
as measles, diphtheria, and tetanus that are vaccinated for in developed countries. The top causes 
of death in developing countries, such as diarrhoeal diseases, tuberculosis, neonatal infections, 
premature birth, and low birth weight, are associated with poverty such as malnutrition and low 
immunity, and poor health care services (World Health Organization 2002). The major impacts 
of poverty on health are caused by the absence of safe water, sanitation, adequate diet, secure 
housing, basic education, income generating opportunities, and access to medication and health 
care (Lyons and Chamberlain 2005).
The linkages between poverty and ill-health are not confined to developing countries. Health 
inequalities in ‘developed’ countries are also significant. It is widely known that socioeconomic 
status and position in the social hierarchy affect heavily the health of the working class and the 
marginalized (Marmot et al. 1984). Health inequalities are based on socioeconomic status in all 
societies; rich people can easily have good health, but poor people are more likely to have poor 
health. Furthermore, whether a person is wealthy or not is not the only cause of health inequal-
ities. We need to consider inequalities in terms of class, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, and other 
attributes. These are associated with social and material exploitation that the weak or minorities 
suffer from. We need to consider the effects of institutional racism, gender discrimination, cor-
porate globalization, degradation of the environment, destruction of the public sector, dangerous 
workplace conditions, and neighbourhood characteristics (Marks et al. 2011). We should never 
forget that we live in a world in which poverty and inequalities in wealth and access to resources 
are the major causes of ill-health (Campbell and Murray 2004). In dealing with these structural 
issues, we have to squarely address the problems that globalization and the world economy have 
on health and ill-health.
Beyond cognitivism and positivism
Mainstream health psychology has focused on cognition and its relation to health behaviours of 
individuals (e.g. smoking, drinking, diet, exercise, unsafe sex), along with positivist measurement, 
largely with self-report questionnaires and elaborate statistical analyses to validate its findings. 
Those in the mainstream believe that psychologists can specify cognitive variables and beliefs, 
which are supposed to cause particular behaviours, as the ‘health belief model’ and the ‘theory of 
planned behaviour’ do. After the mapping and measurement of these illness cognitions, they were 
reified through the development of standardized questionnaires (Murray and Chamberlain 2014).
Following identification of the psychological causes of unhealthy behaviour, interventions 
were developed which targeted these variables with the aim of reducing these behaviours, as 
‘cognitive behavioural therapy’ does. As such, mainstream health psychology draws on main-
stream social and clinical psychology. In a sense, health psychology has been rather ‘ill-health 
psychology’ (Marks 1996). In contrast, critical health psychologists consider that with that 

Health psychology
177
positivist approach we cannot understand the lived experience or subjectivity of being healthy 
or ill and how these are socially and culturally constructed.
New methodologies and new philosophy of health psychology
The limitations of mainstream health psychology and its methodology have been increasingly 
evident. Its reliance on self-report measures and their ability to assess the complexity of health 
behaviour has been critiqued (e.g. Mielewczyk and Willig 2007). Critical health psychology, 
on the other hand, has been searching for new methodologies to explore the meanings of 
experiences concerning health. In the 1990s, critical health psychology began to carry out 
research using qualitative methods such as interviews, focus groups, discourse analysis, and other 
approaches departing from mainstream health psychology’s reliance on quantitative methods, 
especially questionnaires (e.g. Murray and Chamberlain 1999). Presumptions of cognitivism, 
reductionism, positivism, and individualism behind the research, intervention, and theory of 
mainstream health psychology and its ‘methodolatry’ (Chamberlain 2000) were put under scru-
tiny. Viewed from the perspective of the history of psychology, this constitutes a part of the qual-
itative research movement that started in areas of social sciences, including psychology, in 1980s.
Critical health psychology shares an interest in various critical-theoretical ideas, such as 
post-structuralism, social constructionism, feminism, Marxism, psychoanalysis, and postcolonial-
ism. New research methods that contribute to understanding subjectivities and to social change 
are being explored. Some psychologists who work in community settings do research with 
participatory action research, for example.
Beyond the psychology of male, white, middle class,  
and heterosexual
To achieve the goal of ‘health for all’, health psychologists need to go beyond ethnocentrism, 
actually a form of egocentrism that hampers taking the side of those who suffer from ill-health 
and health inequality. Tracing the history of the discipline of psychology, we can see it has not 
been ‘neutral, objective, pure scientific discipline’ (e.g. Richards 2009). In a sense, mainstream 
psychology can be depicted as the psychology of male, white, middle class, and heterosexual that 
has been the mainstream of psychological circles and of the society at large, and those who don’t 
belong to such categories can suffer from ill-health and health inequality much more easily than 
those that belong to the mainstream or majority. This means that we need more diverse psychol-
ogies from the perspectives of non-Western cultures, women, poor people, ethnic minorities, 
sexual minorities, and others.
The challenges for critical health psychology
Critical psychology can inform health psychology in important respects. Doing health psy-
chology critically includes ethical, ideological, methodological, philosophical, and professional 
engagement with issues related to health (Vinck and Meganck 2006). We can see this in rela-
tion to practical examples. On March 11, 2011, a mega-quake and tsunami attacked the east of 
Japan, and these events caused the accident at the Fukushima No. 1 nuclear power plant. Many 
people suffered from the tsunami and the nuclear disaster. The accident was rated at level seven, 
the worst major accident on the International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale, the same 
rating as the accident at Chernobyl. Psychologists started to provide psychological services, 
especially for mental health care, soon after the quake. But those who work on the issue of the 

Yasuhiro Igarashi
178
health threat of radiation contamination on the side of the victims of the disaster are still very 
few, although psychological effects are considered the most important by radiation protection 
experts, along with physical effects, genetic effects, and others. It is a hot issue in society. Central 
and local governments, conservative politicians, a large majority of business leaders, and leaders 
in the circle of nuclear power engineering and related areas play up the safety of nuclear power 
generation, saying that the level of radiation contamination is low and will not cause substan-
tial health damage. But even radiation protection experts cannot tell us what effects low level 
radiation contamination will have on long-term health. ‘The objective scientific truth’ on the 
effects of low-dose contamination has not been discovered yet. It will be established only after 
the lifelong health surveys of residents of the contaminated area. What is clear now is that the 
Fukushima disaster is the test case that the world is watching (⁜渠Japan Times 2012). Viewed from 
the perspective of discourse analysis, different versions of realities concerning nuclear power 
generation and the health effects of radiation exposure are now being constructed by those who 
want to promote nuclear power generation and those who oppose it. It seems difficult for Japa-
nese psychologists to work on the side of those suffering from the disaster. Up to this time, only 
a few health psychologists have carried out such research or practice. A critical psychological 
intervention is needed.
Critical health psychologists have been focused on issues of poverty as the most significant 
cause of ill-health in the world. But up to the present time, we cannot say they have succeeded 
in making substantial changes either in developed or developing countries. Issues of power 
disparity in economic, political, and cultural spheres are closely related to poverty. We still need 
innovative new theories and methodologies for research, practice, and education that can tackle 
these tough structural problems and the philosophy of psychology that supports them.
Viewed from the perspective of theoretical psychology as a meta-discipline of psychology 
that includes the history, philosophy, and sociology of psychology (e.g. Stam 2012), health psy-
chology has the potential to make change in North American mainstream psychology beyond 
its role as a specialized area treating health and illness. To achieve social change for health, health 
psychologists have to be able to reconcile their roles as health professionals with their roles as 
critical agents (Prilleltensky 2003). We have to find ways of reconciling the two sets of skills 
and aims. Prilleltensky (2003), for example, urges critical health psychologists to ask themselves 
three important questions from the perspective of the health professional: how does our special 
knowledge of wellness inform our social justice work? How does our ameliorative practice 
inform our transformative practice? And how does our insider role of wellness promoter in the 
helping system inform our outsider role as social critic? It is a task for critical health psycholo-
gists to think over these questions in their daily activities.
It is a difficult challenge to make social change for health and well-being, but a psychology 
that has the principal aim of contributing to resolving social problems and increasing social 
justice would be a revolutionary new discipline in this world. Besides the dichotomy of indi-
vidual and society that hampers a psychological approach to sociopolitical issues, we can point 
out other presumed dichotomies in US mainstream psychology, such as division between mind 
and body, between cognition and emotion, between theory and practice, and between person 
and environment (Holzman 2012). Critical health psychology focuses on issues of body and 
embodiment to understand experience and subjectivity concerning health and health behav-
iour. It does harm to artificially divide mind from body, cognition from emotion, and a person’s 
mind from their society. Today some historians of psychology think that US American main-
stream psychology is an example of indigenous psychology that is particular to US American 
society and culture (e.g. Brock 2006). Findings obtained from research and practice done from 
an undivided perspective would bring about innovative theory and methodology in the future.

Health psychology
179
Reflexivity: doing health psychology critically
Reflexivity is a hot topic for critical psychologists, but the term is interpreted in several ways 
(Finlay and Gough 2003). To think over what health psychology actually is, as this chapter aims 
to do, is a reflexive endeavour. It is critically important to reflect on characteristics of meth-
odology, theory, and institutions of health psychology to see possibilities and challenges and to 
propose new ways of doing psychology that will contribute to health for all. We have to reflect 
on our ethnocentrism, or, rather, egocentrism, that hampers our ability to take the side of those 
who suffer the effects of powers that operate in this world. Health psychology has been rapidly 
developing in Japan since the late 1980s. The number of affiliates of the Japanese Association 
of Health Psychology mounted to over 2000 in 2014. But theories and methods that Japanese 
health psychologists use are wholly introduced from mainstream health psychology in the US 
and Europe. Research and practice from an original Japanese perspective or from the perspective 
of critical health psychology are scarce, although economic and social disparities and poverty 
among the weak, especially women, single-parent families, and children, have become seri-
ous objects of public concern in the last decade. Health psychology research and practice that 
implements real Japanese culture and values, which can contribute to the health and well-being 
of people in their actual lives, is seriously needed. In this context of a lack of reflexivity, such 
tragicomic events can happen as inviting a leading US American health psychologist to deliver 
lectures in East Asia on his work mainly with US American undergraduate students as subjects, 
without mentioning any cultural differences in health cognitions and behaviours. When asked 
about the effects of these cultural differences, he replied that although this is an important 
theme, it remains for future research.
Reflexivity is indispensable to doing health psychology critically, and there are political 
implications for this too. For example, it was reported that psychologists, two of them one-time 
presidents of the American Psychological Association (APA), who played a crucial role in estab-
lishing health psychology in its early days and who have contributed to its development through 
research on ‘learned helplessness’ and ‘positive psychology’ were also involved in the imple-
mentation of ‘enhanced interrogation techniques’, psychological torture against ‘illegal enemy 
combatants’ in the war on terrorism after 2001 (Democracy Now! 2009; Eban 2007; New York 
Times 2009). The harsh conditions of the interrogation are visualized in M. Davis’ movie Doctors 
of the Dark Side (2011) Psychology has been infamous for its association with torture since the 
1950s (McCoy 2012; Roberts 2007). It is also reported that the APA has strong connections 
with US defence and military sectors (Huffington Post 2009). As the special issue of American 
Psychologist entitled ‘Comprehensive Soldier Fitness’ (Seligman and Matthews 2011) suggests, 
psychology is now developing relations with these bodies (Salon.com 2010). Psychology can 
be used either to promote health or to break it down. Applications of psychology that cause 
ill-health violate the ethical principles of any health professionals. Critical health psychology 
needs at least to begin with tackling its own discipline, and the ways that discipline colludes in 
ill-health, if it is to be able to build genuine alternatives.
Further reading
Journal of Health Psychology (2006), Special issue on critical health psychology, 11 (3).
Lyons, A. C. and Chamberlain, K. (2005) Health Psychology: A Critical Introduction. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.
Marks, D. F., Murray, M., Evans, B. and Estacio, E. V. (2011) Health Psychology: Theory, Research, Practice (3rd 
Edn). London: Sage.
Murray, M. (ed.) (2014) Critical Health Psychology (2nd Edn). London: Palgrave.
Rohleder, P. and Lyons, A. C. (2014) Qualitative Research in Clinical and Health Psychology. London: Palgrave.

Yasuhiro Igarashi
180
Website resources
American Psychological Association Division 38: http://www.health-psych.org/index.cfm
International Society of Critical Health Psychology: http://www.ischp.net/
International Society for Theoretical Psychology: http://psychology.ucalgary.ca/istp/
References
Belar, C. D., McIntyre, T. M. and Matarazzo, J. D. (2013) ‘Health psychology’, in I. B. Weiner (ed.) Handbook 
of Psychology. Somerset, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Brock, A. (ed.) (2006) Internationalizing the History of Psychology. New York: New York University Press.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979) The Ecology of Human Development: Experiments by Nature and Design. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Campbell, C., and Murray, M. (2004) ‘Community health psychology: promoting analysis and action for 
social change’, Journal of Health Psychology, 9, 187–195.
Chamberlain, K. (2000) ‘Methodolatry and qualitative health research’, Journal of Health Psychology, 5, 
285–296.
Crossley, M. (2000) Rethinking Health Psychology. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.
Danziger, K. (1997) Naming the Mind: How Psychology Found its Language. London: Sage.
Dafermos, M., Marvakis, A., Mentinis, M., Painter, D. and Triliva, S. (2013) ‘Critical psychology in a 
changing world: building bridges and expanding the dialogue (Special issue)’, Annual Review of Critical 
Psychology, 10.
Davis, M. (2011) Doctors of the Dark Side. New York: Shelter Island.
Democracy Now! (2009, April 21) ‘The story of Mitchell Jessen and Associates: how a team of psycholo-
gists in Spokane, WA, helped develop the CIA’s torture techniques’, http://www.democracynow.
org/2009/4/21/the_story_of_mitchell_jessen_associates
Eban, K. (2007, July 17) ‘Rorschach and Awe’, Vanity Fair, http://www.vanityfair.com/politics/features/ 
2007/07/torture200707
Engel, G. L. (1977) ‘The need for a new medical model: a challenge for biomedicine’, Science, 196, 129–136.
Finlay, L., and Gough, B. (2003) Reflexivity: A Practical Guide for Researchers in Health and Social Sciences. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Foucault, M. (1976) The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception. London: Psychology Press.
Holzman, L. (2012) ‘The methodology of social therapy: Marx and Vygotsky’, Japanese Qualitative Psychology 
Forum, 4, 119–123, http://ci.nii.ac.jp/vol_issue/nels/AA12555460/ISS0000490731_en.html.
Horrocks, C. and Johnson, S. (eds) (2012) Advances in Health Psychology: Critical Approaches. New York: Pal-
grave Macmillan.
Huffington Post. (2009, June  16) ‘Torture, psychology, and Daniel Inouye: The true story behind  
psychology’s role in torture’, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/bryant-welch/torture-psychology-  
and-da_b_215612.html
Igarashi, Y. (2005) ‘Health psychology in Japan: collective construction of a discipline’. The European Health 
Psychologist, 7(2), 12–13.
Igarashi,Y. (2006) ‘Role of critical psychology in Japan: protest against positivistic psychology and search for 
new knowledge of the mind’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5, 21–31, http://www.discourseunit 
.com/arcp/5
Japan Times (2012, March 12) ‘ “Invisible enemy” stalks Fukushima: unknown risks of low-level radiation 
weigh heavily on locals’, http://japantimes.co.jp/print/nn20120312/f1/html
Jha, P., and Mills, A. (2002) Improving Health Outcomes of the Poor: the Report of Working Group 5 of the Com-
mission on Macroeconomics and Health. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Lyons, A. C. and Chamberlain, K. (2005) Health Psychology: A Critical Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Marks, D. F. (1996) ‘Health psychology in context’, Journal of Health Psychology, 1, 7–21.
Marks, D. F. (2002a) ‘Freedom, power, and responsibility: contrasting approaches to health psychology’, 
Journal of Health Psychology, 7, 5–19.
Marks, D. F. (ed.) (2002b) The Health Psychology Reader. London: Sage
Marks, D. F., Murray, M., Evans, B., and Estacio, E. V. (2011) Health Psychology: Theory, Research, Practice (3rd 
Edn). London: Sage.

Health psychology
181
Marmot, M. G., Shipley, M. J. and Rose, G. (1984) ‘Inequalities in death-specific explanations of a general 
pattern?’, Lancet, 1, 1003–1006.
McCoy, A. W. (2012) Torture and Impunity. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Mielewczyk, M. and Willig, C. (2007) ‘Old clothes and an older look: the case for a radical makeover in 
health’. Theory & Psychology, 17, 811–837.
Murray, M. (ed.) (2004) Critical Health Psychology. London: Palgrave.
Murray, M., and Chamberlain, K. (eds) (1999) Qualitative Health Psychology: Theories and Methods. London:  
Sage.
Murray, M. and Chamberlain, K. (2014) ‘Health psychology’, in T. Teo (ed.) Encyclopedia of Critical Psychol-
ogy. New York: Springer.
New York Times. (2009, August 12) ‘2 U.S. architects of harsh tactics in 9/11’s wake’, http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/08/12/us/12psychs.html?pagewanted=alland_r=0
Parker, I. (ed.) (2011) Critical Psychology (4 Volumes). London and New York: Routledge.
Prilleltensky, I. (2003) ‘Critical health psychology needs psychopolitical validity’, Health Psychology Update, 
12, 2–11.
Richards, G. (2009) Putting Psychology in its Place: Critical Historical Perspectives (3rd Edn). London: Routledge.
Roberts, R. (ed.) (2007) Just War: Psychology and Terrorism. Ross-On-Wye: PCCS Books.
Rohleder, P. (2012) Critical Issues in Clinical and Health Psychology. London: Sage.
Salon.com (2010, October 15) ‘ “War on terror’ psychologist gets giant no-bid contract. The Army has 
handed a $31 million deal to Dr. Martin Seligman, who once blasted academics for “forgetting 9/11” ’. 
http://www.salon.com/2010/10/14/army_contract_seligman/
Seligman, M.E.P. and Matthews, M. D. (2011) ‘Comprehensive soldier fitness (Special issue)’, American 
Psychologist, 66(1), 2011
Stainton Rogers, W. (1996) ‘Critical approaches to health psychology’, Journal of Health Psychology, 1, 65–77.
Stam, H. J. (2000) ‘Theorizing health and illness: functionalism, subjectivity and reflexivity’, Journal of Health 
Psychology, 11, 273–284.
Stam, H. J. (ed.) (2012) Theoretical Psychology (8 Volumes). London: Sage.
Teo, T. (ed.) (2014) Encyclopedia of Critical Psychology (4 Volumes). New York: Springer.
Vinck, J. and Meganck, J. (2006) ‘Do we need critical health psychology or rather critical health psycholo-
gists?’ Journal of Health Psychology, 11, 391–393.
World Health Organization (1999) Poverty and Health. Report by the Director-General. Executive Board, 
RB105/5.
World Health Organization (2002) Investing in health: A Summary of the Findings of the Commission of Mac-
roeconomics and Health.

182
This chapter traces the historical emergence and development of Black psychology as an alter-
native intellectual and applied tradition in the United States of America, and its attempts to offer 
a critical rendering of a psychology of blackness that acts as a counterpoint to a mainstream, West-
ern white psychology. In so doing, the chapter highlights the historical, cultural, and material 
conditions involving the systematic marginalization of African Americans as a primary impetus 
for the development of Black psychology; explores the cultural and philosophical elements that 
have formed the foundational tenets of Black psychology; describes some of the manifest out-
comes and influences of Black psychology on psychology as a discipline; examines some of the 
resonances with other black psychologies internationally; and concludes with a reflective critique 
of the strengths and limitations of Black psychology, especially in an era of transnationalism and 
globalization, in which cosmopolitanism and the increased marginalization and exploitation of 
minorities ironically coexist.
Historical emergence of Black psychology
The fundamental premise of Black psychology is the recognition and assertion that Western, 
Euro-American models of psychology have serious challenges around their applicability to 
understanding the experiences of black people, given their location and immersion in a norma-
tive culture of whiteness. In this context and using such models, the black experience is ostensibly 
characterized as an aberration, deviant, pathogenic, and driven towards the production of deficits 
in psychological functioning (Baldwin 1986; Guthrie 2004; Karenga 1996). The early roots of 
Black psychology in the United States of America can be traced back to the 1920s, when Francis 
Sumner became the first African American to obtain a PhD in psychology. African American 
psychologists started to conduct and publish research that contested claims of black inferiority 
(Karenga 1996), many of which had their basis in forms of racialized thinking that were premised 
on social Darwinism, instinct theory, the eugenics movement, and Mendelian genetics (Guthrie 
2004). The 1930s witnessed a further development in this movement, with African American 
psychologists arguing for the importance of an appropriate and socially relevant psychology 
within educational settings, thereby promoting alternative models of human development, 
learner assessment, and impact on the training of educators (Karenga 1996). Not only did this 
19
Black psychology
Resistance, reclamation, and redefinition
Garth Stevens

Black psychology
183
further advance research, but also focused on countering the inferiorizing effects of economic 
marginalization, political disenfranchisement, and racial segregation as embodied in the Jim Crow 
laws amongst a new generation of young African Americans in educational settings.
By the 1960s and 1970s, the influence of the Civil Rights Movement, Black Nationalism, 
and Black Radicalism all further advanced the trajectory of this intellectual tradition. Inde-
pendent publishing fora such as the Journal of Black Studies and the Journal of Black Psychology 
were established, and African American psychologists organized themselves into independent 
organizations, the most notable of which was the Association of Black Psychologists (Karenga 
1996). Ontologically and epistemologically, this period also witnessed the consolidation of a 
thrust towards alternative philosophical and conceptual understandings of the black experience, 
and represented a more fundamental rupture with mainstream, Western psychological models 
that were considered Euro-American and submerged in whiteness. For this reason, Akbar (2004) 
notes that Black psychology has not been a homogenous intellectual tradition, and can be char-
acterized by various developments, such as the ‘traditional’, ‘reformist’, and ‘radical’ schools of 
thought that Karenga (1996) describes. In the first instance, Black psychology, while critiquing 
the effects of racist segregation and white supremacist ideology, did so within the dominant 
epistemological frameworks of Western psychology and was somewhat reactive in attempting 
to combat charges of black inferiority.
While acknowledging many of the negative manifestations of racism within the black expe-
rience, several theorists directed their critiques at the white establishment for generating an 
incubatory environment for such negative manifestations amongst African Americans, while 
continuing to hold that the Western conceptual frameworks for understanding human develop-
ment could still apply to blacks and whites, but that the optimal conditions for such development 
were not always present for African Americans (Grier and Cobbs 1968). The reformist school of 
Black psychology witnessed a tendency to similarly critique the deleterious effects of racism in 
the United States of America, but instead argued for the importance of community engagement 
within black populations, the development of self-reliance, the promotion of black pride, and 
emotional and psychological emancipation (Cross 1971). Here, connections to Black Conscious-
ness as a psychological process amongst individuals and groups, as well as a political current that 
underpinned the Civil Rights Movement and Black Nationalism (King and Washington 1992), 
are apparent. The radical school of Black psychology has more consistently argued for ruptur-
ing with knowledge systems that themselves are implicated in the production of difference and 
hierarchies, the importance of a psychology of liberation that emphasizes the contribution of 
pathogenic societies to psychological ill-health in contexts of racist oppression, the centrality 
of collective resistance to such systems of inequality, and the development of an Afrocentric 
psychology that relies on African conceptual and philosophical foundations to understand the 
black experience (Akbar 2004; Kambon 2004; Nobles 2004). This has ultimately led to more 
contemporary debates around the distinctions and connections between Black psychology and 
African psychology – a relationship that is addressed later in this chapter. Radical Black psychol-
ogy’s resonances with the works of Fanon (1967, 1968, 1970), Bulhan (1985), and Martín Baró 
(Montero and Sonn 2009), amongst others, are evident, generating linkages with the psychology 
of oppression, colonial and postcolonial psychosocial conditions, and liberation psychology.
A critical alternative to mainstream psychology
Throughout its evolution, Black psychology has embodied certain elements that are consistent 
with what we today consider to be critical psychology. It has variously attempted to provide 
a socially and contextually relevant conceptualization of the lived experiences of black people 

Garth Stevens
184
within a cultural milieu through the use of standpoint methodology; has provided the basis 
for an empowering praxis amongst marginalized black communities; and is enabling of the 
restoration of humanity amongst alienated populations through offering new interpretations of 
their lived experiences as well as through centring social transformation and liberation within 
its broader project. In keeping with Jackson’s (1979) ‘reactive’, ‘innovative’, and ‘inventive’ char-
acterization of Black psychology, and Karenga’s (1996) categorization of the schools of thought 
in Black psychology as being ‘traditional’, ‘reformist’, and ‘radical’, three broad characterizations 
of Black psychology’s criticality can also be surfaced and illuminated. Bearing in mind that 
Black psychology has evolved over the past ten decades, and cognizant that how we define 
criticality is historically, temporally, and contextually contingent, it has (1) described the inju-
rious psychosocial sequelae of racism, (2) re-appropriated, re-interpreted, and reclaimed aspects 
of the lived experience of blacks that have been systematically pathologized in mainstream, 
Euro-American psychology, and (3) begun the process of ontological and epistemological rup-
ture and emancipatory redefinition.
In the first instance, the sequelae of living as a marginalized group within a racially segregated 
and racist social formation were clearly illuminated in the research conducted within Black 
psychology. Several key identified psychosocial problems that tended to be strongly associated, 
either literally or in the collective social imaginary, with black communities, were understood 
in relation to experiences of discrimination, oppression, and exploitation. Three seminal exem-
plars included a focus on the self-perception of African American children, the phenomenon of 
violence within black communities, and the proliferation of substances and their abuse within 
such communities. Clark and Clark (1939a, 1939b, 1940) undertook a series of research exper-
iments with African American children, illustrating how segregation in particular had impacted 
negatively on patterns of racial identification, misidentification, disidentification, and prefer-
ence amongst these children. Similarly, Grier and Cobbs (1968) suggested that high levels of 
violence within communities could be understood in terms of the rage that African Ameri-
cans felt and enacted in response to their experiences and perceptions of racist discrimination 
within the United States of America. With regard to levels of substance abuse, authors such as 
Harper (1976) also articulated an argument that suggested that alcohol use and abuse amongst 
African Americans could be traced back to their experiences of an oppressive social system in 
which they needed to relieve their pain, muster courage, and overcome their sense of frustration 
(Harper and Dawkins 1977).
Much of this early descriptive research was seen as reactive (Karenga 1996), in so far as it 
spoke to the white establishment about the bedevilling nature of racism, and essentially sug-
gested a reflective stance in which they needed to consider sacrificing white privilege, as the 
fate of black communities was both a source of potential strife for black and white America 
alike (Clark 1970). However, in relation to critical psychology, it is important to recognize that 
this kind of contribution made significant incursions into mainstream Euro-American psychol-
ogy. Utilizing dominant epistemological frameworks and theoretical approaches, this research 
generated a legitimate intellectual argument outside of the formal political arena to give voice 
to the challenges experienced by African Americans in a racist society. Also, the impact of the 
work by Clark and Clark (1939a, 1939b, 1940) in no small measure contributed to the outcome 
of the Brown vs. Board of Education judgement by the US Supreme Court, which essentially 
integrated schooling in the United States of America and ruled that formal racial segregation in 
this context was in fact unconstitutional. This research also served as a platform for later, more 
radical, researchers and theorists in their arguments for liberatory approaches to psychology. 
Here, Bulhan (1985) utlized Harper’s (1976) work in exploring the rates of substance abuse as a 
consequence of a psychology of oppression, through a reading of Fanon’s work. Similarly, Killing 

Black psychology
185
Rage, a seminal contribution by hooks (1996) on the hostile affective experience of blacks in 
response to feelings of powerlessness in contexts of racism, can also be read as a more sophisti-
cated and nuanced expansion of the earlier work by Grier and Cobbs (1968), titled Black Rage.
In the second instance, Black psychology engaged in a form of re-appropriation, 
re-interpretation, and reclamation of certain aspects of the black experience that had been pejo-
ratively evaluated in mainstream, Euro-American psychology. Much of the research on African 
Americans during the first half of the twentieth century had suggested that black children had 
a generalized exposure to overstimulated environments that were not conducive to intellectual 
enrichment, that their coping skills were a reflection of certain forms of cultural deprivation 
and were therefore underdeveloped, and that the non-nuclear nature of family organization and 
structure somehow predisposed these children to pathogenic environmental circumstances that 
resulted in deficits in psychosocial functioning (White 2004).
Euro-American psychology’s preoccupation with developmental pathways and intelligence 
amongst minorities was also reflected in the research into African American children. White 
(2004) notes that the mainstream psychological gaze may have revealed higher levels of noise, 
multiple and cross-cutting conversational patterns, and apparently less access to reading materials 
amongst African American children in their early home environments – all of which seemed 
inimical to appropriate psychological development within the mainstream paradigm. However, 
he goes on to suggest that many of these children have the ability to discriminate information, 
to recall large amounts of information through their exposure to music, and acquire elements of 
an oral tradition at an early age. Similarly, both White (2004) and Akbar (2004) have noted how 
the behavioural repertoires of children within African American communities do not reflect 
cultural deficits in coping within a world that is dominated by white cultural normativity, but 
instead show a great deal of real-world ‘street smarts’ in having to cope with both the systemic 
and community threats and dangers to survival. They both cite the manner in which African 
American children in impoverished communities often have to navigate state intervention by 
welfare workers, the police, and even the psychosocial ills associated with gangsterism in many 
communities.
Furthermore, White (2004) also identifies how the black family has frequently been pathol-
ogized by virtue of its structural nonconformity to the middle-class nuclear family model. In 
utilizing this kinship structure as the normative baseline, researchers have often tended to over-
exaggerate the apparent absence of paternal figures, the matriarchal nature of the black family, 
and the supposed encumbrances of the presence of the extended family network. However, 
White (2004), in the tradition of Poster (1978), highlights how exposure to multiple caregivers 
and role models may allow for greater role switching in rearing children, extend the emotional 
care provided to children, allow for more flexible social roles to emerge within these children, 
and reduce their susceptibility to the tense authority-love relationship between children and 
parents in classic, middle-class nuclear families. This specific element of criticality allows for 
the rejection of and resistance to certain ‘enrichment’ programmes directed towards addressing 
the ‘intellectual impoverishment’ of African American children, as well as those that strove to 
impose particular normative notions of ‘family values’ onto many black families. Instead, this 
form of criticality encourages forms of community interventions and mobilization that reflect 
an ‘authentic’ black experience, rejects imposed forms of pathologization, and emphasizes Black 
Consciousness-driven interventions as one such vehicle for countering the self-hatred associated 
with racism, with a greater degree of confidence and cultural revitalization (Poussaint 1966).
In the third instance, Black psychology more deliberately undertook to rupture with the 
ontological and epistemological foundations of mainstream, Euro-American psychology. In so 
doing, it has attempted to critique the solipsistic nature of this dominant worldview within 

Garth Stevens
186
mainstream psychology, and to redefine it in relation to Afrocentricity (Akbar 2004; Baldwin 
1986; Kambon 2004; Nobles 2004). In turn, this has impacted the very nature of the epistemic 
trajectory of Black psychology today, shaping its research foci and applied processes as well. 
This was largely determined by the fact that Black psychology’s evolution was partly located as 
a reactive process in relation to the mainstream, or at its best, was linked to the appropriation 
and reinterpretation of the major tenets of Euro-American psychology in relation to blackness. 
This clearly raised a debate within Black psychology as to the very definition of this intel-
lectual and applied tradition – was a Black psychology to be defined purely in relation to its 
focus on the black experience as a counter-ethnocentric enterprise in opposition to the white 
ethnocentrism of mainstream psychology; was it to speak only to an African American expe-
rience; was it to speak to a broader African experience; and to what extent was it to contest 
the very philosophical, theoretical, and applied underpinnings of mainstream psychology as a 
knowledge-power matrix that generated specific hierarchical knowledges in the service of val-
uing the white experience over the black experience (Baldwin 1986)? In attempting to define 
this alternative worldview of an African (Black) psychology, black psychologists invariably traced 
the history of Black America to the involuntary diaspora associated with the Atlantic slave trade, 
and consequently, to an Afrocentric worldview that they argued continued to influence the 
lived experiences of African Americans and Africans more broadly in contemporary society. 
Baldwin (1986: 243) defines African (Black) psychology as ‘a system of knowledge (philoso-
phy, definitions, concepts, models, procedures and practice) concerning the nature of the social 
universe from the perspective of African Cosmology. “African Cosmology” thus provides the 
conceptual-philosophical framework for African (Black) Psychology’.
Several key components of this African cosmological worldview can be distilled. The first is 
that the relationship between human beings and nature is characterized as interdependent and 
inseparable, and consciousness and well-being are therefore generated in a harmonious relation-
ship to nature and others. As a consequence, the relational orientation within this worldview 
is seen to be socially affiliative, with an emphasis on group connectivity, cooperation, survival, 
and shared participation as a second component. Extended kinship relations are thus valued and 
seen to be integral to the development of a common humanity, with the individual as subject 
not existing separately from this connectivity. Third, social activity is not understood in terms of 
individual goals, but rather as a vehicle towards symbiotic functioning with others in the collec-
tive, in the service of this collective, and therefore as part of the process of becoming a human 
being within a social milieu. Fourth, the orientation to time is also not conceived of as linear, 
but rather as a cyclical process in which the past is always referred to in the present as we strive 
towards integrating historical lessons from others into a more harmonious way of living in the 
present and the future. Last, the generation and acquisition of knowledge is not considered an 
individual pursuit in which we amass skills to simply know and master the external world, but 
is viewed as being communally relevant, has a moral value, and is premised on the idea that the 
essence of human beings is not material, but is located in a spiritual metaphysics (Akbar 2004; 
Baldwin 1986; Kambon 2004; Nobles 2004; Mkhize 2004).
What is immediately apparent from this alternative worldview is that the effects on how we 
conceive of an African (Black) psychology, are quite profound, in so far as it critically challenges 
the dominant ontological and epistemological underpinnings of mainstream, Euro-American 
psychology. The nature and process of research itself has to be reconsidered, as the very objects 
and subjects of research are conceptualized as a unity, and therefore have implications for defin-
ing our research problematics and for conducting research. Similarly, conceptions of health are 
not situated within an individualistic, liberal humanistic frame, but are rather rooted within a 
collective interdependence. Interventions and forms of psychological practice therefore need to 

Black psychology
187
accommodate this relational orientation. Finally, an orientation towards collective survival also 
means that this alternate worldview is likely to have at its centre an anti-oppressive orientation, 
especially in a global and historical context of white normativity and African (Black) margin-
alization and oppression.
Resonances with other Black psychologies
While the particular form of Black psychology discussed in this chapter thus far refers primarily 
to its historical emergence, evolution, and development within the context of the United States 
of America, this is by no means the only configuration of black psychology to exist interna-
tionally. There are indeed resonances with several developments in other parts of the world, that 
are variously referred to as decolonizing psychology (Sonn et al. 2013), postcolonial psychology 
(Hook 2012; Stevens, Duncan, and Hook 2013), liberation psychology (Nicholas and Cooper 
1990; Seedat 1997; Stevens 2001; Stevens, Duncan, and Sonn 2013), indigenous psychology 
(Smith 1999), peace psychology (Wessels and Monteiro 2001), community psychology (Nelson 
and Prilleltensky 2005; Seedat, Duncan, and Lazarus 2001; Stevens 2007), and of course, African 
psychology ­(Manganyi 1973; Mkhize 2004). Importantly, these configurations of psychology are 
historically, materially, and contextually contingent, and have thus emerged under very specific and 
varied social ­conditions. Nevertheless, the resonances across these formulations of psychology will 
become apparent in several chapters later in this book, leading us to perhaps consider the idea of 
black psychologies that have similar critical objectives, but are nonetheless heterogeneous in character.
Revisiting Black psychology today – a reflective critique
From the above, it is evident that Black psychology’s historical and ongoing presence on 
the landscape of international psychology has been premised on and sustained by its critical 
objectives and intentions to counteract the negative social, cultural, and psychological effects 
associated with racist prejudice, discrimination, segregation, marginalization, oppression, and 
exploitation. In this regard, it remains a critical alternative to mainstream, Euro-American psy-
chology today, based primarily on its ability to utilize forms of strategic essentialism in a global 
context of increasing marginalization of black minorities. Spivak (1988) notes that this mode of 
organisation involves a recognition of the heterogeneity of affiliative groups, but the intentional 
essentialization of those groups in the service of their defence or advancement in particular 
political, social, cultural, or economic contexts in which they may be under threat. To this 
end, Black psychology has indeed deployed forms of strategic essentialism that have effectively 
defended the black experience in contexts of inferiorization, have promoted the uniqueness 
of this experience in a manner that renders it positive and constructive, and have also actively 
advanced the black experience as ontologically distinct and autonomous.
However, despite its contributions to critical psychology as an epistemic tradition, there are 
nevertheless several potential limitations to Black psychology that need to be taken cognizance 
of. The first relates to the fact that strategic essentialism itself may have a range of unintended 
consequences, such as the generation of narrow, insular, in-group, and inter-group relations. In 
highly racialized contexts, the defensive and advancing functions of strategic essentialism may 
regress into deep racialized divisions as group relations invariably draw on the most promi-
nent ideological markers of difference in such contexts. Under these circumstances, strategic 
essentialism may have the inadvertent effect of re-inscribing racialized relations, rather than 
minimizing them (Alexander 1985). Second, while recognizing Bhabha’s (1994, 1996) view 
that subalterns have the ability to challenge and subvert dominance within relations of power, 

Garth Stevens
188
through engaging in counter-hegemonic practices to contest their social exclusion and margin-
alization as part of an organic liberatory praxis, there are also critical limitations to such practices. 
Spivak (1988) notes that there are significant dangers in re-inscribing the marginalized position 
of subalterns when they are assumed to be homogeneous collectives. Vahabzadeh (2008) also 
cautions that the voices of subalterns can quite insidiously and rapidly become ideologically 
appropriated and hegemonically re-grounded, thereby resulting in more complex and insidious 
ways of co-opting and subordinating those who are already subordinated. Gilroy (2010), for 
example, illustrates how opposition to the legacies of slavery, racism, and the associated negative 
constructions of blackness are easily appropriated into new modes of production and capital 
accumulation (e.g. the commoditization of black aspirational values in market economies).
Within Black psychology, this may in part also be evident in the manner in which cer-
tain epistemological orientations mimic and reproduce the very epistemological traditions of 
mainstream, Euro-American psychology when attempting to critique it. Finally, in the era of 
transnationalism, cosmopolitanism, globalization, and voluntary diasporic communities, caution 
needs to be exercised around the ways in which identities may sometimes be constructed as 
unitary and stable. Rather, we see increasing manifestations of multifaceted identities that are 
not stable, but rather reflect intersectionalities (Crenshaw 1991), hybridities (Bhabba 1994), 
creolization (Erasmus 2001), entanglement (Nuttall 2009), and a cultural dynamism (Mkhize 
2004; Said 1978) that all contribute to more complex identity configurations. In such contexts, 
Black psychology must be mindful of the potential for unwittingly reifying and romanticizing 
the black or African experience, and has to be responsive to these new formations of identity 
and subjectivity if it is to retain its critical edge.
Further reading
Belgrave, F. Z. and Allison, K. W. (2010) African American Psychology: From Africa to America (2nd Edn). Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hayes III, F. W. (ed.) (2000) A Turbulent Voyage: Readings in African American Studies. Oxford, UK: Rowman 
and Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
Nobles, W. W. (1986) African Psychology: Towards its Reclamation, Reascension and Revitalisation. New Jersey: 
Institute for Advanced Study.
Teo, T. (2005) The Critique of Psychology: From Kant to Postcolonial Theory. New York: Springer.
Website resources
Apartheid Archive Project: www.apartheidarchive.org
The Association of Black Psychologists: www.abpsi.org
The Australian Indigenous Psychologists Association: www.indigenouspsychology.com.au
The Journal of Black Psychology: http://jbp.sagepub.com
Task Force on Indigenous Psychology: www.indigenouspsych.org
References
Akbar, N. (2004) ‘The evolution of human psychology for African Americans’, in R. L Jones (ed.) Black 
Psychology (4th Edn). Hampton, VA: Cobb and Henry Publishers.
Alexander, N. (1985) Sow the Wind. Johannesburg: Skotaville.
Baldwin, J. A. (1986) African (Black) psychology: issues and synthesis, Journal of Black Studies, 60(3), 235–249.
Bhabha, H. K. (1994) The Location of Culture. London: Routledge.
Bhabha, H. K. (1996) ‘Unsatisfied: notes on vernacular cosmopolitanism’, in L. Garcia-Moreno and P.C. 
Pfeiffer (eds) Text and Nation: Cross-disciplinary Essays on Cultural and National Identities. Columbia, SC: 
Camden House.
Bulhan, H. A. (1985) Frantz Fanon and the Psychology of Oppression. New York: Plenum Press.

Black psychology
189
Clark, K. B. (1970) ‘Beyond the dilemma’, Journal of Religion and Health, 9(4), 307–315.
Clark, K. B and Clark, M. P. (1939a) ‘Segregation as a factor in the racial identification of negro preschool 
children: a preliminary report’, Journal of Experimental Education, 11, 161–163.
Clark, K. B and Clark, M. P. (1939b) ‘The development of consciousness of self and the emergence of racial 
identification in negro preschool children’, Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 591–599.
Clark, K. B and Clark, M. P. (1940) ‘Skin colour as a factor in racial identification of negro preschool chil-
dren’, Journal of Social Psychology, 11, 159–169.
Crenshaw, K. W. (1991) ‘Mapping the margins: intersectionality, identity politics, and violence against 
women of color’, Stanford Law Review, 43(6), 1241–1299.
Cross, W. (1971) ‘Negro-to-black conversion experience: toward a psychology of black liberation’, Black 
World, 20(9), 13–27.
Erasmus, Z. (ed.) (2001) Coloured by History, Shaped by Place. Cape Town: Kwela Books and SA History 
Online.
Fanon, F. (1967) Black Skins, White Masks. New York: Grove Press.
Fanon, F. (1968) The Wretched of the Earth. New York: Grove Press.
Fanon, F. (1970) A Dying Colonialism. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Gilroy, P. (2010) Darker than Blue. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Grier, W. H. and Cobbs, P. M. (1968) Black Rage. New York: Bantam Books.
Guthrie, R. V. (2004). ‘The psychology of African Americans: an historical perspective’, in R. L. Jones (ed.), 
Black Psychology (4th Edn). Hampton, VA: Cobb and Henry Publishers.
Harper, F. D. (1976) Alcohol Abuse and Black America. Washington, DC: Howard University Press.
Harper, F. D. and Dawkins, M. P. (1977) ‘Alcohol abuse in the black community’, The Black Scholar, 8(6), 
23–31.
Hook, D. (2012) A Critical Psychology of the Postcolonial: The Mind of Apartheid. New York: Routledge.
hooks, b. (1996) Killing Rage. New York: Holt.
Jackson, G. G. (1979) ‘The origin and development of black psychology: implications for black studies and 
human behaviour’, Studia Africana, 1(3), 270–293.
Kambon, K.K.K. (2004) ‘The worldviews paradigm as the conceptual framework for African/Black psy-
chology’, in R. L. Jones (ed.) Black Psychology (4th Edn). Hampton, VA: Cobb and Henry Publishers.
Karenga, M. (1996) ‘Black psychology’, in K.P. Monteiro (ed.) Ethnicity and Psychology. Dubuque, IA: Ken-
dall/Hunt Publishing Company.
King, M. L. and Washington, J. M. (1992) I Have a Dream: Writings and Speeches that Changed the World, (40th 
Anniversary Edn). New York: HarperCollins.
Manganyi, N. C. (1973) Being-Black-in-the-World. Johannesburg: Ravan.
Mkhize, N. (2004) ‘Psychology: an African perspective’, in D. Hook, N. Mkhize, P. Kiguwa, and A. Collins 
(eds) Critical Psychology. Lansdowne and Cape Town: UCT Press.
Montero, M. and Sonn, C. C. (eds) (2009) Psychology and Liberation: Theory and Applications. New York: 
Springer.
Nelson, G. and Prilleltensky, I. (eds) (2005) Community Psychology: in Pursuit of Liberation and Well-being. 
London: Macmillan/Palgrave.
Nicholas, L. J. and Cooper, S. (eds) (1990) Psychology and Apartheid. Cape Town: Vision Publications.
Nobles, W. W. (2004) ‘African philosophy: foundation for black psychology’, in R. L. Jones (ed.) Black Psy-
chology (4th Edn). Hampton, VA: Cobb and Henry Publishers.
Nuttall, S. (2009) Entanglement: Literary and Cultural Reflections on Post-Apartheid. Johannesburg: Wits Uni-
versity Press.
Poster, M. (1978) Critical Theory of the Family. New York: The Seabury Press.
Poussaint, A. F. (1966) ‘The negro American: his self-image and integration’, Journal of the National Medical 
Association, 58(6), 419–423.
Said, E. (1978) Orientalism. London: Penguin.
Seedat, M., Duncan, N., and Lazarus, S. (eds) (2001) Community Psychology: Theory, Method and Practice. Cape 
Town: OUP.
Seedat, M. A. (1997) ‘The quest for a liberatory psychology’, South African Journal of Psychology, 27(4), 
261–270.
Smith, L. T. (1999) Decolonising Methodologies: Researching and Indigenous Peoples. Dunedin, NZ: University 
of Otago Press.
Sonn, C. C., Stevens, G., and Duncan, N. (2013) ‘Decolonisation, critical methodologies and why stories 
matter’, in G. Stevens, N. Duncan, and D. Hook (eds) Race, Memory and the Apartheid Archive: Towards a 
Transformative Psychosocial Practice. London/Johannesburg: Palgrave Macmillan/Wits University Press.

Garth Stevens
190
Spivak, G. (1988) ‘Can the subaltern speak?’ in C. Nelson and L. Grossberg (eds) Marxism and the Interpreta-
tion of Culture. Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Stevens, G. (2001) ‘Racism and cultural imperialism in the training of black psychologists in South Africa: 
identity, ambiguity and dilemmas of praxis’, in N. Duncan, A. van Niekerk, C. de la Rey, and M. See-
dat (eds) ‘Race’, Racism, Knowledge Production and Psychology in South Africa. New York: Nova Science 
Publishers.
Stevens, G. (2007) ‘The international emergence and development of community psychology’, in N. Dun-
can, B. Bowman, A. Naidoo, J. Pillay, and V. Roos (eds) Community Psychology: Analysis, Context and 
Action. Cape Town: UCT Press.
Stevens, G., Duncan, N. and Hook, D. (eds) (2013) Race, Memory and the Apartheid Archive: Towards a Trans-
formative Psychosocial Praxis. London/Johannesburg: Palgrave Macmillan/Wits University Press.
Stevens, G., Duncan, N. and Sonn, C. C. (2013) ‘Memory, narrative and voice as liberatory praxis in the 
apartheid archive’, in G. Stevens, N. Duncan and D. Hook (eds) Race, Memory and the Apartheid Archive: 
Towards a Transformative Psychosocial Praxis. London/Johannesburg: Palgrave Macmillan/Wits University 
Press.
Vahabzadeh, P. (2008) ‘The conditions of subalternity: reflections on subjectivity, experience and hegem-
ony’, Socialist Studies/Études Socialistes, 3(2), 93–113.
Wessels, M. and Monteiro, C. (2001) ‘Psychosocial interventions and post-war reconstruction in Angola: 
interweaving western and indigenous approaches’, in D. J. Christie, R. V. Wagner, and D. D. Winter (eds) 
Peace, Conflict and Violence: Peace Psychology for the 21st Century. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
White, J. L. (2004) ‘Toward a black psychology’, in R. L. Jones (ed.) Black Psychology (4th Edn). Hampton, 
VA: Cobb and Henry Publishers.

191
In 1968 Naomi Weisstein wrote that ‘Psychology has nothing to say about what women are 
really like, what they need and what they want, especially because psychology does not know’ 
(1968/1993: 197). This quote might well be the most cited declaration in the story of ‘the 
psychology of women’. Integral to critical engagements with mainstream psychology has been 
the conviction that psychology has failed spectacularly to have anything to say about women, 
or indeed anyone who varied from the white, Western, middle-class, heterosexual, able-bodied, 
male. It was in response to mainstream psychology’s conceptualization of this normalized indi-
vidualized subject that the psychology of women began to form, many decades ahead of Weis-
stein’s cogent and classic challenge.
Milar (2000) has argued that, from its inception as a new science, psychology was particularly 
receptive to the admission of women. This she attributes to the coincidence of the establish-
ment of psychology as an academic discipline with major developments in women’s education 
in the USA. In fact, women were first elected to the American Psychological Association in 
the year after it was founded. Although this initial hospitality wavered, particularly during the 
mid-twentieth century, the number of women pursuing psychological studies has increased 
substantially in recent decades. For instance, it has been reported that between 1970 and 2005 
the number of psychology PhDs awarded to women in the USA grew from 20 per cent to 72 
per cent (Cynkar 2007) in what has been termed the ‘feminization’ of psychology. Moreover, 
Alice Eagly and colleagues have argued that recent years ‘have produced a psychology that 
encompasses understanding of the mind and behavior of both sexes, clearly a major advance for 
psychological science’ (2012: 16).
Background
In early psychological research, the representation of women was not generally favourable when 
compared to males. This has been documented in Stephanie Shields’ 1975 review of the exten-
sive body of work on sex differences in mainstream psychology. Shields argues that psychological 
interest in sex differences was stimulated by the emergence of the functionalist movement in 
the United States in the late 1800s, which began to converge with a growing focus on intelli-
gence. The popularization of ideas from phrenology and neuroanatomy were used to consider 
20
Psychology of women
Questions of politics and practice
Rose Capdevila and Lisa Lazard

Rose Capdevila and Lisa Lazard
192
sex differences in gross appearance, structure, and size of the brain. Whilst conclusions drawn 
frequently highlighted women’s inferiority in relation to men, the claims of male superiority 
were subsequently grounded in explanations provided by evolutionary theory. The exploration 
of sex differences from an evolutionary perspective turned its focus on variability – deviations 
from the average or norm – which, it was argued, was greater amongst men than women. Since 
variability was already established as a key mechanism for evolution, it is perhaps not surprising 
that this was taken as evidence in support of the variability hypothesis that men were naturally 
more progressive than women.
This early work was not without criticism. Mary Whiton Calkins (1896) challenged pro-
ponents of the ‘variability hypothesis’, such as Joseph Jastrow and Havelock Ellis, on the basis 
that theirs’ was an attempt to make ‘a distinction between masculine and feminine intellect per 
se, and this seems to me futile and impossible, because of our entire inability to eliminate the 
effect of environment’ (1896: 430). Helen Thompson Woolley (1903) was particularly critical 
of how physical variation was often taken as evidence for intellection variation in an array of 
mental abilities, diligently explicating how social influences could account for sex differences. 
Analogously, in assessing the methodological rigour of such work, Leta Stretter Hollingworth 
(1914) drew attention to the ways in which social factors had an effect on interpretations of 
data. However, in spite of the professional stature and prominence of these women, the call for 
the investigation of the relationship between social issues and sex differences was largely ignored 
and research drawing conclusions centring on women’s innate inabilities in comparison to men 
continued.
In the 1920s, whilst in Germany, Karen Horney (1967) began to challenge Freudian theories 
of female psychology. She considered psychology as a discipline to be androcentric and, like 
Calkins, Woolley, and Hollingworth, argued that insufficient attention was given to the soci-
ocultural determinants of gender differences. She argued that the concept of penis envy was 
demeaning to women. If it existed at all, she contended, it was rooted not in a wish to possess a 
penis, but rather in a desire for the status and recognition afforded to men by the culture.
It was within the context of what has been termed the second wave of feminism, how-
ever, that these individual challenges to mainstream psychology became formalized. Against the 
backdrop of the political activities of feminist and women’s movements, the 1960s and 1970s 
saw an increased problematization of sex difference research as well as psychology’s treatment 
of women more generally. In her book The Feminine Mystique, Betty Friedan (1963) suggested 
that rather than questioning problematic and prejudicial views towards women, social science 
served to legitimize them. Similarly, in her classic paper ‘Psychology constructs the female’ (cited 
at the beginning of this chapter), Naomi Weisstein elaborated on the problematic representation 
of gendered capabilities in psychological theory. Using studies from social psychology, Weisstein 
outlined how social expectations (rather than biological sex per se) impact behaviour in empir-
ical work. Interpretations drawn from women behaving in line with social expectations shaped 
and produced representations of the feminine as ‘inconsistent, emotionally unstable, lacking in 
strong conscience or superego, weaker, “nurturant” rather than productive, “intuitive” rather 
than intelligent . . . suited to the home and the family. In short, the list adds up to a typical 
minority group stereotype of inferiority’ (Weisstein 1968/1993: 221). She powerfully demon-
strated the impact of social context on how women become understood in psychology, as well 
as the negative implications that such expectations have.
As Rutherford and Granek have stated, as the seventies commenced ‘the psychology of 
women coalesced as a distinct field’ (2010: 27). This played out, in part, through the proliferation 
of publications explicitly identified with this area, specifically the birth of Psychology of Women 
Quarterly. Concurrently, this period also saw the establishment of independent professional 

Psychology of women
193
bodies (e.g. the Association for Women in Psychology in 1969) as well as the creation of legit-
imate spaces within the regulatory bodies of professional psychology (e.g. Division 35 of the 
American Psychological Association in 1973).
‘Womanless’ psychology
As it was establishing itself, the psychology of women became particularly focused on how 
women and women’s experiences were routinely made invisible, made abnormal, or patholo-
gized in psychology. Crawford and Marecek (1989) use the term ‘womanless’ to describe the 
gendered state of affairs operating within the discipline. More specifically, they tell a now-familiar 
story in which women were underrepresented in participant samples, so research findings not 
only failed to describe female experience but were used to established criteria for assessment 
based on incomplete data. For Crawford and Marecek, these ‘womanless’ practices served to 
create the impression that ‘women are uninteresting or unworthy of study’ (1989: 149).
One consequence of these practices was that women were judged against a norm devel-
oped around men’s experiences. Carol Tavris argued that women had been ‘mismeasured’ by 
psychology: ‘In any domain of life in which men set the standard of normalcy, women will be 
considered abnormal’ (1993: 149). To illustrate her case, Tavris pointed to the presentation of 
psychological findings indicating women have lower self-esteem than men. She argued that it 
would be equally accurate to describe the findings as indicating that men are more conceited 
than women. (1993: 152). Correspondingly, research on helping behaviour initially seemed to 
indicate that women were less helpful than men until it was pointed out that this was an artefact 
of the way in which the term ‘help’ has been defined in these studies (Eagly and Crowley 1986).
The critique of psychology’s failure to acknowledge women as professionals and participants 
together with the normalization of male experience were accompanied by an indictment of 
both psychiatry and psychology for their pathologization of women (Chesler 1972). Broverman 
et al.’s classic study (1970), in which women and men reporting identical symptoms were given 
very different diagnoses, illustrated unequivocally the impact of gender on clinical judgments. 
More recently, feminist researchers have argued that diagnoses such as PMS and postpartum 
depression pathologize women’s everyday experience (e.g. Nicolson 1986; Ussher 1991).
These criticisms were underwritten by a more fundamental and epistemological challenge to 
psychology, which was allied with what has been termed ‘the crisis in social psychology’ (Parker 
1989). Carolyn Sherif (1979/1998) attacked the discipline for failing to respond to the demon-
strations of bias in research and theory provided by the women’s movement. She argued that 
‘the orthodox methods of studying and interpreting sex differences were capable of delivering 
only mischievous and misleading trivia’ (1979/1998: 58). A more basic critique of psychological 
methods was required, as the existing approach risked reinforcing psychology’s aspirations to be 
an objective ‘science’ at the cost of other ‘ways of knowing’.
‘Just add women’
The impact of second wave feminism, with its slogan ‘the personal is political’, in shaping the 
growth of the psychology of women should not be underestimated. More precisely, relationality 
(and specifically the devaluation of it as a feminine preoccupation) became theoretically central 
to classic work unpacking women’s subordination. For example, in her seminal text Toward a 
New Psychology of Women, Jean Baker Miller (1976) pointed to how feminine traits become 
devalued in comparison to masculine ones. She argued that male superiority hinges on this rela-
tion and, as such, men require women to embody the feminine. Miller suggested that to disrupt 

Rose Capdevila and Lisa Lazard
194
the status quo, feminine characteristics of relationality and emotionality needed to be reima-
gined as advantages. Based on this reasoning, she proposed the relational model of development 
which, as the phrasing suggests, positions relationships as the cornerstone to human progression.
Sandra Bem (1974) also attempted to reconceptualize the relationship between what was 
feminine and what was masculine. In her work, Bem aimed to address the issues of women’s 
‘inferiority’ by displacing the question of sex differences. She argued that femininity and mascu-
linity, rather than being two extremes of the same dimension, as was generally held, were indeed 
two separate dimensions. She suggested that ‘strongly sex-typed individuals might be seriously 
limited in the range of behaviors available to them as they move from situation to situation’ 
(1974: 155), implying that scoring highly on both dimensions, and thus androgyny, was more 
indicative of mental health.
Similarly, Carol Gilligan (1982) attempted to reposition the feminine as equal in importance 
to the masculine through celebrating relationality as well as other ‘differences’ between men and 
women. Gilligan, a student of Lawrence Kohlberg, noted that the research that underpinned 
Kohlberg’s highly influential theory of moral development, which postulated an ethic of justice, 
had been conducted on all male samples. As such, resonant with our earlier point around the 
normalization of men’s experience, according to this theory women were found to be deficient 
in moral reasoning. Through her research with women, Gilligan postulated an alternate ethic, 
one of care, that was more frequently described by women.
Whilst feminist analyses have exposed biases in method and interpretation, however, they 
themselves have become subject to feminist critique. In her review of feminist challenges to main-
stream psychology, Sue Wilkinson (1997) points to some of the limitations of these problematiza-
tions. Wilkinson argued that the earliest and probably still the most dominant feminist approach, 
the promotion of good scientific practice by removing research bias, simply served to reinforce 
the status quo – ‘beating the boys at their own game’, rather than questioning the game itself.
Wilkinson went on to point out how many of these critiques focus on the individual rather 
than the social and political pathologies, reinforcing already existing biases and, effectively, vic-
tim blaming. An example would be accounts of women’s ‘fear of success’ due to internali-
zation oppression (e.g. Horner 1972, or see Sandberg 2013 for a more recent, but resonant, 
approach). Likewise, Gilligan’s postulation of a ‘different voice’ was critiqued for its implication 
that ‘woman’ might be a naturally existing, homogenous category comprised of those who speak 
with the same voice in spite of numerous markers of difference such as age, class, (dis)ability, 
ethnicity, and sexuality.
Psychology, women, feminist psychology – troubling  
the boundaries
Up to this point, we have not distinguished between feminist psychology and the psychology 
of women. This belies crucial points of difference across research that fall under these umbrella 
terms. Whilst the sustained critique of sexism in psychological practice, research, and theory has 
always characterized the psychology of women, the terminology itself has, from its very incep-
tion, been subject to dispute.
A key point of difference is that, unlike feminist psychological work, research on the psy-
chology of women is not necessarily political in its aims or focus. Erica Burman has argued 
that the ‘psychology of women’ was a ‘call for a woman-centered psychology . . . aimed to 
speak of and for the specificity of women’s experiences of psychology’ (1998: 2). For Burman, 
its depoliticized stance, ‘threatened to perpetuate mainstream psychology and recuperate femi-
nist interventions into psychology’s practices’ (1998: 2; see also Wilkinson 1997). Thus, perhaps 

Psychology of women
195
unsurprisingly, the label has produced tensions around where people are positioned in relation 
to particular political commitments.
The classic paper by Mary Parlee already expressed early concerns that the term did not 
work to exclude studies which perpetuated problematic representations of women, going so 
far as to call the psychology of women a ‘conceptual monstrosity’ (1975: 120). Parlee drew on 
Nancy Henley’s (1974) distinction between psychology ‘of’, ‘for’, and ‘against’ women, all of 
which Henley considered to be encompassed by the term ‘psychology and women’, to move 
forward the enterprise of developing psychological work that challenged gender inequalities. 
Psychology against women described work conducted primarily by mainstream psychology and 
which Weisstein’s classic analysis, mentioned earlier, called attention to. Psychology for women 
referred to feminist work which attempted to reinterpret old assumptions and ask new questions 
about women and women’s lives.
Parlee’s view on the term the ‘psychology of women’ was not uniformly shared. Martha Med-
nick was supportive of the categories of psychology for and against women because ‘Psychology 
against women is the prod for the development of the field, and psychology for women is the 
lesson that the old facts must be reinterpreted, that new questions must be asked, and that some 
theories may serve as guides to productive research while others cannot’ (1976: 766). However, 
she also argued that there were good grounds for using the term ‘psychology of women’ which, 
she contended, was no more conceptually difficult than the term child psychology.
Despite continued debate around the terminology, ‘psychology of women’ continues to be 
the umbrella term used for an array of work attempting to understand aspects of women’s lives, 
and it remains the case that many researchers working under this particular banner are not sup-
portive of the politically neutral positioning of it within psychology, the authors of this chapter 
among them. Similarly, Paula Nicolson (1995), Sue Wilkinson (1997), and Erica Burman (1998), 
all of whom have provided cogent and eloquent accounts of the risks inherent in the term, have 
served as chairs of the Psychology of Women Section of the British Psychological Association. 
The divergences between these two approaches, whilst at times startlingly apparent, are most 
often difficult to distinguish. As Nicolson has mooted, it is possible that ‘a psychology of women 
is better understood as a dynamic product of gender/power relations’ (1995: 132).
Reconceptualizing ‘women’
Whilst stabilizing the boundaries around the psychology of women may be beyond what we 
can reasonably expect to accomplish in this chapter, there have been a number of attempts to 
reconceptualize psychology which have arisen, in part, in response to mainstream psychology’s 
failed attempts to have something to say about women.
As has been discussed, running through the history of mainstream psychology has been its 
focus on sex difference research, which proliferated across a wide range of topics such as moral 
reasoning (e.g. Kohlberg 1981; Gilligan 1982), aggression (e.g. Buss 1961; Maccoby and Jacklin 
1974), and prosocial behaviour (Eagly and Crowley 1986; Latane and Dabbs 1975) to name but a 
few. Much of this research retains, implicitly or explicitly, dichotomous understandings of women 
and men which frequently position one group (most often women) as lacking socially valued 
abilities, skills, and characteristics in comparison to the other. Rhoda Unger (1979). in ‘Toward 
a redefinition of sex and gender’, argued for the need of a distinction between ‘sex’, to denote 
biological characteristics, and ‘gender’, to refer to those that are sociocultural. This move was 
intended to both disrupt the power of biology and open up the question of ‘sex differences’ to 
interrogation by allowing for a conceptual shift from the individual to the social context, which 
was seen to give rise to particular masculinities, femininities, and gendered social arrangements.

Rose Capdevila and Lisa Lazard
196
However, the vocabulary of ‘gender’ has lost much of its disruptive power. This has arguably 
been a result of its overuse and conflation with the biological category of ‘sex’. Gender is now 
used in all cases to distinguish male and female, and it has become common to refer to the ‘gen-
der’ of a baby (see also Haig 2004). Furthermore, ‘gender’ has become the socially acceptable 
shorthand for referring to women and women’s issues which, arguably, re-inscribes the kind 
of biases it was initially set to challenge. According to Fine and Gordon, ‘this almost exclusive 
construction of gender-as-difference functions inside psychology as a political and scientific 
diversion away from the questions of power, social context, meaning, and braided subjectivities’ 
(1989: 151).
The critique of the focus on sex-difference extends to other aspects of ‘difference’ research. 
Michelle Fine and Judi Addelston (1996) have cautioned against explanations that use ‘sameness’ 
and ‘difference’, as institutional power depends on using both discourses. Indeed, they argue, 
the power of institutional narratives, as well as those of resistance, lies in the way they can avail 
themselves of manifold discourses. Can this conceptualization be seen to address Carolyn Sher-
if’s 1979 query: ‘Why have demonstrations of theoretical and research bias . . . been no more 
effective than they have been in correcting theory and research practice?’ (1979/1998: 59).
Rather than theorize in terms of ‘difference’, much work in the psychology of women lat-
terly has taken an approach based in intersectionality (Crenshaw 1991) to counter psychology’s 
historical ‘analysis-of-variance’ approach to understanding complex identities. Avtar Brah and 
Ann Phoenix have argued that ‘the concept emphasizes that different dimensions of social life 
cannot be separated out into discrete and pure strands’ (2004: 76).
These moves to reconceptualize the discipline have been most often underwritten by a sus-
tained critique of positivism (see, for instance, Hare-Mustin and Marecek 1988). The argument 
follows that it is psychology’s ‘scientific’ approach that is, in itself, the problem. Mainstream 
psychology continues to insist on a hypothetico-deductive approach which purposefully strips 
away context, and the naïve positivist belief in a ‘value-free’ science. This more essential feminist 
critique of psychological research methods was closely intertwined with the crisis in social psy-
chology and a move to more qualitative approaches.
A psychology of women?
Although the impact of the sustained analysis of how the trajectories of oppression have been 
maintained through routine scientific methods has undoubtedly been critical to rethinking 
mainstream psychology, this is not to say that methodological critique is the only accomplish-
ment of the psychology of women. As Burman notes, such work has had some impact not only 
‘in academic psychology courses on gender and psychology, and especially the psychology of 
women’ but also, ‘in the statutory sector of health and welfare provision with the funding and 
organization of specialist services for women, including women’s therapy centres’ (1998: 1). 
Commitment to creating inclusionary spaces and challenging practices of inequality is notable 
in some of the work carried out by those working under this rubric. For example, in 2010, the 
Psychology of Women section aligned with the Sexualities section of the British Psychologi-
cal Society (BPS) to trouble and protest against the Division of Clinical Psychology’s decision 
to invite controversial speaker Kenneth Zucker to their annual conference. Kenneth Zucker 
endorses the problematic therapy practice of encouraging intersex and transgender children and 
adolescents into heterosexualized gender ‘appropriate’ roles (see Tosh 2011).
We should be cautious, however, in applying the boundaries of sameness and difference to 
the field itself; the psychology of women encompasses a myriad of political, epistemological, and 

Psychology of women
197
methodological approaches to a broad range of subtopics associated with this area of research. 
Given this, it is perhaps unsurprising that in answer to the question ‘What is the psychology of 
women?’ one can conceivably elicit a range of responses, from the study of in-group variations, 
to the experiences mediated by the female sex variable, to the social, political, and symbolic  
(re)production of womanhood. Alongside other scholars and practitioners working in this area, 
we understand ‘the psychology of women’ as a project rather than simply as a topic that can be 
lined up next to the wide array of subject matter that the discipline has in its focus. To complicate 
matters further, the goals of this project depend on who (as well as where and when) you ask, for 
the participants differ with respect to specific theoretical, epistemological, and political positions. 
With that caveat in place, we would suggest that, in a broad sense, the psychology of women 
is a body of work/action that aims to ‘remediate psychology’s omissions and distortions with 
respect to women . . . that is, scrubbing the scientific practices of sexism’ (Crawford 1998: 61). At 
the same time, it should be an expression of a political commitment to challenge and transform 
relations of power which maintain myriad inequalities experienced by women. To what extent 
does this latter commitment work as a descriptor for the field? Given the fractured landscape 
of the psychology of women we would hesitate to suggest that a simple answer is forthcoming.
Indeed, over twenty years ago, Arnold Kahn and Jan Yoder (1989) suggested that the political 
conservatism of much of the field has curtailed transformation of gender politics. They argued 
that, not only had the psychology of women failed to meet its goals, but, in their view, it was no 
longer even striving to do so. More recently, Rutherford et al. have suggested that many believe 
the psychology of women to have become stuck, that ‘positivist commitments effectively mute 
its political project, rendering it acceptable to mainstream psychology yet short of its transform-
ative vision’ (2010: 460). Yet Alice Eagly et al. (2012), based on their analysis of fifty years of 
research publications, concluded that the study of women and gender has become a major focus 
of psychological science.
The process of translating ideas in order to position them as legitimate can often run the risk 
of losing critical messages (Capdevila 2007). Is the lens of critical psychology what is needed to 
unpack the political impact of the positioning of the psychology of women? What are the crite-
ria for judging success? Whither goes the psychology of women then? Is it not the case that all 
aspects of the discipline, including the mainstream, have been required to recognize the situated-
ness and limitedness of white, Western, middle-class, heterosexual, able-bodied, male psychology 
(e.g. Bhavnani and Phoenix 1994; Goodley and Lawthom 2006; Mohanty 1984; Rutherford 
et al. 2011)? With Rutherford and Granek (2010) we might well argue that ‘Keeping psychology 
of women true to its feminist roots is a continuing challenge’ (2010: 36). However, the question 
might be, is it a worthy challenge or one for which the time has passed?
Further reading
Burman, E. (ed.) (1998) Deconstructing Feminist Psychology. London: Sage.
Scarborough, E. and Furumoto, L. (1987) Untold Lives: The First Generation of American Women Psychologists. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Tavris, C. (1992) The Mismeasure of Woman: Why Women Are not the Better Sex, the Inferior Sex or the Opposite 
Sex. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Website resources
Classics in the History of Psychology, Special Collections, an Historical View of Some Early Women Psy-
chologists and the Psychology of  Women: http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Special/Women/
Psychology’s Feminist Voices: http://www.feministvoices.com/

Rose Capdevila and Lisa Lazard
198
References
Bem, S. L. (1974) ‘The measurement of psychological androgyny’, Journal of consulting and clinical psychology, 
42(2), 155.
Bhavnani, K. K. and Phoenix, A. (1994) ‘Shifting identities shifting racisms’, Feminism & Psychology, 4(1), 
5–18.
Brah, A. and Phoenix, A. (2004) ‘Ain’t I a woman? Revisiting intersectionality’, Journal of International Wom-
en’s Studies, 5(3), 75–86.
Broverman, I. K., Broverman, D. M., Clarkson, F. E., Rosenkrantz, P. S. and Vogel, S. R. (1970) ‘Sex-role ste-
reotypes and clinical judgments of mental health’, Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 34(1), 1–7.
Burman, E. (1998) ‘Deconstructing feminist psychology’, in E. Burman (ed.) Deconstructing Feminist Psy-
chology. London: Sage.
Buss, A. H. (1961) The Psychology of Aggression. New York: Wiley.
Calkins, M. W. (1896) ‘Community of ideas of men and women’, Psychological Review, 3, 426–430.
Capdevila, R. (2007) ‘I did it my way: the implications of methodological choices in critical work’, in V. Van 
Deventer, M. Terre Blance, E. Fourie, and P. Segalo. (eds) Citizen City: Between Constructing Agent and 
Constructed Agency. Concord, Canada: Captus University Publications.
Chesler, P. (1972) Women and Madness. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Crawford, M. (1998) ‘The reciprocity of popular culture’, in E. Burman (ed.) Deconstructing Feminist Psy-
chology. London: Sage.
Crawford, M. and Marecek, J. (1989) ‘Psychology reconstructs the female: 1968–1988’, Psychology of Women 
Quarterly, 13(2), 147–165.
Crenshaw, K. W. (1991) ‘Mapping the margins: intersectionality, identity politics, and violence against 
women of color’, Stanford Law Review, 43(6), 1241–1299.
Cynkar, A. (2007) ‘The changing gender composition of psychology’, Monitor on Psychology, 38(6), 46.
Eagly, A. H. and Crowley, M. (1986) ‘Gender and helping behavior: a meta-analytic review of the social 
psychological literature’, Psychological Bulletin, 100(3), 283.
Eagly, A. H., Eaton, A., Rose, S. M., Riger, S. and McHugh, M. C. (2012) ‘Feminism and psychology: analysis 
of a half-century of research on women and gender’, American Psychologist, 67(3), 211.
Fine, M. and Addelston, J. (1996) ‘Containing questions of gender and power: the discursive limits of 
“sameness” and “difference’’⁜’, in S. Wilkinson (ed.) Feminist Social Psychologies: International Perspectives. 
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Fine, M., and Gordon, S. M. (1989) ‘Feminist transformations of/despite psychology’, in M. Crawford and 
M. Gentry, (eds) Gender and Thought. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Friedan, B. (1963) The Feminine Mystique. New York: W.W. Norton and Company Inc.
Gilligan, C. (1982) In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development. Boston: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Goodley, D. and Lawthom, R. (2006) Disability and Psychology. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Haig, D. (2004) ‘The inexorable rise of gender and the decline of sex: social change in academic titles, 
1945–2001’, Journal Archives of Sexual Behavior, 33(2), 87–96.
Hare-Mustin, R. T. and Marecek, J. (1988) ‘The meaning of difference: gender theory, postmodernism, and 
psychology’, American Psychologist, 43(6), 455.
Henley, N. (1974) ‘Resources for the study of psychology and women’, RT: Journal of Radical Therapy, 4, 
20–21.
Hollingworth, L. (1914) ‘Variability as related to sex differences in achievement’, American Journal of Soci-
ology, 19, 510–530.
Horner, M. S. (1972) ‘Toward an understanding of achievement-related conflicts in women’, Journal of Social 
issues, 28(2), 157–175.
Horney, K. (1967) Feminine Psychology. New York: W.W. Norton and Company, Inc.
Kahn, A. S. and Yoder, J. D. (1989) ‘The psychology of women and conservatism: rediscovering social 
change’, Psychology of Women Quarterly, 13, 417–432.
Kohlberg, L. (1981) Essays on Moral Development: the Philosophy of Moral Development. San Francisco, CA: 
Harper and Row.
Latane, B. and Dabbs, J. M. (1975) ‘Sex, group size and helping in three cities’, Sociometry, 38, 180–94.
Maccoby, E. E. and Jacklin, C. N. (1974) The Psychology of Sex Differences. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University 
Press.
Mednick, M.T.S. (1976) ‘Some thoughts on the psychology of women: comment on Mary Brown Parlee’s 
“review essay: psychology” (Vol. 1, No. 1)’, Signs, 1(3), 763–770.

Psychology of women
199
Milar, K. S. (2000) ‘The first generation of women psychologists and the psychology of women’, American 
Psychologist, 55, 616–619.
Miller, J. B. (1976) Toward a New Psychology of Women. Boston: Beacon Press.
Mohanty, C. T. (1984) ‘Under Western eyes: feminist scholarship and colonial discourses’, Boundary, 2(12), 
333–358.
Nicolson, P. (1986) ‘Developing a feminist approach to depression following childbirth’, in S. Wilkinson 
(ed.) Feminist Social Psychology: Developing Theory and Practice. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Nicolson, P. (1995) ‘Feminism and psychology’, in J. A. Smith, R. Harré, and L. Van Langenhove (eds) 
Rethinking Psychology. London: Sage.
Parker, I. (1989) The Crisis in Modern Social Psychology and How to End It. London: Routledge.
Parlee, M. B. (1975) ‘Psychology’, Signs, 1(1), 119–138.
Rutherford, A., Capdevila, R., Undurti, V. and Palmary, I. (eds) (2011) Handbook of International Feminisms: 
Perspectives on Psychology, Women, Culture, and Rights (International and Cultural Psychology). New York: 
Springer.
Rutherford, A. and Granek, L. (2010) ‘Emergence and development of the psychology of women’, in  
J. C. Chrisler and D. R. McCreary (eds) Handbook of Gender Research in Psychology. New York: Springer.
Rutherford, A., Vaughn-Blount, K., and Ball, L. C. (2010) ‘Responsible opposition, disruptive voices: science, 
social change, and the history of feminist psychology’, Psychology of Women Quarterly, 34(4), 460–473.
Sandberg, S. (2013) Lean in: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead. New York: Random House.
Sherif, C. W. (1979/1998) ‘Bias in psychology’, Feminism & Psychology, 8, 58–75.
Shields, S. A. (1975) ‘Functionalism, Darwinism and psychology of women: a study of social myth’, American 
Psychologist, 30(7), 739–754.
Tavris, C. (1993) ‘The mismeasure of woman’, Feminism & Psychology, 3(2), 149–168.
Thompson, H. B. (1903) The Mental Traits of Sex. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tosh, J. (2011) ‘ “Zuck Off!” a commentary on the protest against Ken Zucker and his “treatment” of child-
hood gender identity disorder’, Psychology of Women Section Review, 13(1), 10–16.
Unger, R. K. (1979) ‘Toward a redefinition of sex and gender’, American Psychologist, 34(11), 1085–1094.
Ussher, J. M. (1991) Women’s Madness: Misogyny or Mental Illness? Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts 
Press.
Weisstein, N. (1968/1993) ‘Psychology constructs the female; or the fantasy life of the male psychologist 
(with some attention to the fantasies of his friends, the male biologist and the male anthropologist)’, 
Feminism & Psychology, 3(2), 194–210.
Wilkinson, S. (1997) Feminist psychology’, in D. Fox and I. Prilletensky (eds) Critical Psychology: An Intro-
duction. London: Sage.

200
The conventional history of psychology’s engagement with sexualities describes the gradual 
progression from the darkness of unscientific prejudice, in which psychology theorized homo-
sexuality as sick and/or perverse, to the sunny uplands of rigorous, evidence-based research 
(Kitzinger 1987: 8). Using sound data, testable theory, and more enlightened attitudes, psycholo-
gists now value people with differing sexualities as normal and healthy members of a pluralistic 
society, with LGBTQ psychology committed to sexual emancipation, self-affirmation, and the 
eradication of homophobia.
Informed by post-structuralist, feminist, and queer theory, and science and technology stud-
ies, critical psychology rejects this history of psychology’s enlightenment. It is a truism that all 
psychological knowledge, indeed all scientific knowledge, is a product of human thought and 
consequently constructed rather than absolute (Gergen 1985; Kitzinger 1987: 2). But, as Rose 
(1998: 55) notes, ‘truth’ emerges not only from social construction, but also from social contes-
tation, in which ‘evidence, results, arguments, laboratories, status and much else are deployed as 
resources in the attempt to win allies and force something into “the true” ’. Consequently, the 
history of the psychology of sexualities must be seen not as a gradual refinement of understand-
ing, but as a continual struggle to deploy resources (though we might add to Rose’s list other 
material contexts [Braidotti 2006: 137] and technologies [Gordo López and Cleminson 2004] 
that contribute to the production of knowledge).
This contested theorizing of human sexuality can be seen in its different treatments by 
psychology over the past 150 years. In the nineteenth century, psychiatry’s medical model of 
homosexuality established sexuality within an individualistic framework of normality/pathol-
ogy (Weeks 2012: 128–9), against a backcloth of societal prejudice, punitive laws against homo-
sexuality vigorously policed, and a fundamentalist Christian establishment that regarded all sex 
outside (heterosexual) marriage as sinful. During this period, homosexuality was seen as an 
organic disorder to be treated by a variety of interventions, a perspective reflected until 1973 in 
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), and in the classification of 
homosexuality as a mental disorder until 1990 in the World Health Organization’s International 
Classification of Diseases.
A liberal humanist perspective on different sexualities emerged early within psychology, 
marking a decisive break with these medicalized approaches in psychiatry. The British Society 
21
From ‘lesbian and gay 
psychology’ to a critical 
psychology of sexualities
Pam Alldred and Nick Fox

From ‘lesbian and gay psychology’
201
for the Study of Sex Psychology, founded in 1913, was a talking shop for social philosophers, 
feminists, liberal, and free-thinking medical professionals to debate a range of issues concerning 
sexuality (Hall 1995; Weeks 2012: 233). In 1921, the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene 
advocated legalizing homosexual acts between consenting adults, redefining homosexuality as 
delinquency rather than degeneracy, and emphasizing its psychological causes and hence the 
possibility of psychological treatments (Weeks 2012: 280).
Liberal humanism shaped two threads in the psychology of sexualities: a ‘scientific’ psychol-
ogy that (supposedly) stepped back from moral judgements about sexual choices or behaviours 
to apply value-free scientific research approaches to ‘explain’ these patternings; and an ‘affirm-
ative’ psychology that modelled homosexuality as a ‘normal, natural and healthy sexual prefer-
ence or lifestyle’ (Kitzinger 1987: 33). The former produced developmental, social, and health 
psychologies of sexuality. The latter, affirmative, trend produced ‘lesbian and gay psychology’ 
(Kitzinger 1999), and more recently ‘LGBT’ (Clarke and Peel 2007) psychology and ‘gay affirm-
ative’ therapy (Langdridge 2007).
LGBT psychology provided a resource for thinking new subject-positions associated with 
different sexualities, and as such, was important in contributing to an emergent identity politics 
around LGBT sexualities (Clarke and Braun 2009: 238–9; Rich 1980), often in quite vehement 
tones, as Wilkinson (1997: 188) has noted. Within this affirmative psychology, studies docu-
mented the experiential character of LGBT lifestyles (Clarke and Spence 2012; Lucas-Carr and 
Krane 2011; Nadal and Corpus 2012), supplying a basis for political and cultural opposition to 
heteronormativity and homophobia, based upon shared identities that reflected sexual orien-
tation (Garnets and D’Augelli 1994). LGBT health psychology, in contrast with medicalized 
perspectives on sexuality, has sought to make different sexualities ‘healthy’ or good experiences 
(for a review, see Fish 2009), and to identify the health and social care support needs of LGBT 
people (Pitts et al. 2009).
Psychology and sexuality: a critical perspective
Critical psychology has criticized mainstream psychological research on sexualities on three 
grounds: that it individualizes sexuality; that it downplays the importance of social, economic, 
and political context in how sexuality manifests; and perhaps most importantly, that it obscures 
the part that psychological knowledge itself had in producing individualized and individualizing 
LGBT sexualities and sexual identities in the contemporary West. Kitzinger’s (1987: 33) account 
of the production of psychological knowledge of lesbianism began with the medicalized model 
that emerged in the nineteenth century, but continued into the present, with a profound cri-
tique of the liberal humanist discourse on sexualities, a perspective that was ‘widely applauded 
by the gay and parts of the feminist movements’ as a means to counter anti-gay sentiment and 
as an affirmation of gay and lesbian cultures.
Kitzinger’s critical history showed how the earlier disease terminology described lesbians 
either as products of disturbed childhoods or genetic mishap. By constructing lesbianism as 
pathology, the human sciences supplied a means to control and manage this sexual orientation 
(Kitzinger 1987: 39–40). Turning to the humanized, ‘affirmative’ lesbian and gay psychology that 
later emerged, she then argued that, despite the identity-political uses to which this affirmative 
model has been put, it, like the pathological model, continued to individualize sexuality, remov-
ing it from its social and political context. This concealed the structures and processes of power 
that produce privilege and oppression in relation to gender and sexuality, handing responsibility 
for any problems faced by women firmly back to them rather than assessing the social forces 
at work (34–35). Kitzinger suggested that liberalism and humanism both played a key part in 

Pam Alldred and Nick Fox
202
emphasizing the self over the social, and depoliticizing many aspects of social life. Since she 
wrote her critique, neoliberal political ideology has ratcheted up this individualism, including 
the manifestation of right-wing libertarian gay identity politics and a ‘new homonormativity’ in 
the US (Duggan 2002), and the projection of homophobia onto the ‘liberal’ West’s racial other 
( Jivraj and de Jong 2011; Rasmussen 2012; Rothing and Svendsen 2011).
Another insight into psychology’s individualization and de-politicization of sexuality may 
be found in Foucault’s genealogical approach, which regarded the history of knowledge not 
as a continuous process, but comprising discontinuous ‘epistemes’ or systems of thought, each 
with its own internal logic, underpinned by specificities of power, and enabling particular ways 
of thinking about topics. Foucault wrote extensively about the discourses that have produced 
different sexualities in various contexts and historical periods, providing a valuable resource for 
a critical history. His approach revealed the social, economic, and political forces that produced 
different manifestations of human sexuality, and exposed the contribution of the human sciences 
in establishing how contemporary sexualities are understood. Effects of power, for Foucault 
(1982: 781), are ‘linked with knowledge, competence, and qualification’, but also to ‘secrecy, 
deformation, and mystifying representations imposed on people’.
In his history of sexuality, Foucault (1981, 1987, 1990) showed how in different cultures, 
sexual conduct was defined within strict, though entirely contingent limits, ranging from the 
institutionalization and celebration of paedophilia in ancient Greece to today’s revulsion toward 
it. He described four discourses on sexual bodies that emerged towards the end of the eight-
eenth century: the recognition of the female body as ‘saturated with sexuality’ and thus prone to 
psychiatric disorder; the discovery of an immature sexuality in children that must be regulated; 
the economic and political problematization of reproduction that made child-bearing an issue 
for society, and thereby ‘responsibilized’ couples; and the view that sexual instincts were separate 
from other biological or psychological drives and subject to specific anomalies and specific cor-
rective technologies (Foucault 1981: 103–5).
Together these discourses established the possibilities for modern normative perspectives on 
gender roles, child sexuality, sexual identity, monogamy, and mental health. The very familiarity 
of these discourses for the reader today suggests that what Foucault has offered here is an alter-
native understanding of the foundational premises of the psychology of sexuality. This founda-
tion underpins the differing perspectives that psychology has brought to its understanding of 
sexuality, from the early pathological models grounded in Victorian moralistic fear of sexual 
deviance, through Freudian and subsequent models of sexual development, to the emergence 
of liberal-humanistic laissez-faire concerning sexualities and genders in the latter part of the last 
century.
For Foucault, the ‘liberalisation’ of attitudes to sexuality in the last century did not mark 
a progressive move away from repression. Rather, this represented continuity with the earlier 
repression, within a ‘new technology of sex’ that since the 1800s established sex not only as a 
secular concern, but also a concern of the state and of all individuals within it (Foucault 1981: 
116). Instead he argued that successive scientific and psychological theories of sexuality were 
simply further manifestations of a ‘scientia sexualis’ (52) that subjected sexuality to a proliferation 
of discourses and interventions. These have, if anything, increased surveillance and disciplining of 
sexual activity and desire (Foucault 1981: 36; Henriques et al. 1984/1998: 220–222; Rasmussen 
2006).
From this perspective, the individualized model of sexuality promulgated by the 
‘psy-disciplines’ (Rose 1998) has contributed to the disciplining of sexualities, and is complicit 
in producing the Western understanding of what sexuality is, and the limits of what may be 
thought ‘sexual’. It follows that liberal humanism, despite its best intentions to acknowledge 

From ‘lesbian and gay psychology’
203
and affirm differing sexualities (hence ‘LG’, then ‘LGBT’ psychology), has actually conspired to 
expose the darkest corners of sexuality to observation, codification, and therapeutic interven-
tions. Rather than being a positivistic exercise in exposing the truth about human sexuality, the 
sexuality knowledge-production process in psychology and the other human sciences is itself 
productive of how sexualities are understood more widely by people and by social organizations 
and institutions.
Critical psychology has analyzed contemporary perspectives on sexuality as revealed in sci-
entific and lay texts and accounts (including interview transcripts). These studies have sought to 
elucidate the social forces that surround sexualities, based on the view that the concepts people 
use in their language and communication ‘do not simply spring from our heads, but come from 
the surrounding social institutions and relations in which they are embedded’ (Spears 1997: 5). 
Studies have examined the underlying premises in psychological theories of sexuality, while 
others have explored the discursive production of sexual identities and conventions of sexual 
conduct arguments in lay understandings of LGBT sexualities. Many but not all of these studies 
have used discourse analytic approaches.
Studies of professional discourses on sexuality include Burman’s (2008) analysis of 
‘child-centred’ guidance for professionals working with children in residential settings. This 
revealed an underlying disease model for understanding homosexual behaviour that reflected 
a naturalized and essentialized, biological view of gender and sexuality and orchestrated a nor-
mative regime of care. Clarke (2002) identified four discourses concerning lesbian and gay 
parenting in psychological theory, and assessed the logic underpinning the specific relations 
of sameness and difference from heterosexual parenting that these discourses reflected, and the 
interests each served. A discourse on parent-child relationships undermined the potential to 
construct a psychology of any particular gendered/sexual identity category (Alldred 1999), 
while the rhetorical force behind criticisms of lesbian mothers came not from any psychological 
theory but in one instance from class hatred and xenophobia (Alldred 1998).
Among studies that have analyzed sexuality discourses in people’s contemporary accounts, 
Hollway (1998) extracted three coexisting but competing and contradictory discourses from 
interviews and media reports, around: the male sexual drive, monogamy and family life, and 
sexual permissiveness. These, she suggested, together produced the subject-positions of hetero-
sexual men and women in their interactions, and were co-opted in struggles to redefine subjec-
tivities. Barker (2005) identified two discourses on polyamorous identities: one that constituted 
polyamory in relation to monogamy, and a second that regarded it as either a ‘natural’ human 
behaviour or founded upon a personal choice. In an assessment of the anti-normative premises 
of gay liberation in the 1960s, Weeks (2012: 365) argued that ‘narratives around coming out, 
sexual pleasure, identity and relationships stimulated by gay liberation created new communi-
ties of meaning and communication, and a dynamic for self-transformation’. Kitzinger’s (1987) 
Q-sort factor analytical methodology found that lesbian women’s accounts of the provenance of 
their sexual identities could be differentiated into five distinct factors: personal fulfilment, con-
sequence of romantic attachments, private sexual preference, conscious/unconscious reaction 
against patriarchy, and due to inadequacy or failing.
The subject, anti-humanism, and resistance
These social constructionist and post-structuralist analyses of psychological and lay discourses 
have demonstrated how sexuality, sexual subjectivity, and sexual orientation have been shaped 
by socially-contingent systems of thought, to produce both specific knowledgeabilities, and 
subjectivities and sexualities in bodies. They point to the part that social, economic, and political 

Pam Alldred and Nick Fox
204
contexts play in producing sexual conduct, sexual identities, and even sexual desire. They also 
revealed how liberal humanist psychology established two associated psychological discourses 
on sexualities. The first, which might be labelled positivist or ‘scientific’ (and is perhaps more 
‘liberal’ than ‘humanist’), regards sexualities as facts to be unpacked by scientific methods, to 
provide findings that can better inform understanding of sexuality and potentially inform either 
policy or therapy, for instance, in relation to homophobia and associated bullying. The second is 
a more self-conscious LGBT affirmative psychology that majors on the humanism, and while 
still using scientific methods, has a stronger orientation towards producing outputs that can be 
used to meet the needs of LGBT people, individually and collectively.
Critical psychology’s criticism that both these discourses produce individualized notions of 
sexual identities is particularly evident when studying sexuality empirically. ‘Sexual orientation’ 
(even with categories pluralized beyond a binary) cannot serve as an essential identity to guar-
antee anything about experience, subjectivity, desire, or behaviour: sexual desires that might be 
taken to define a category of self may not be exclusive, may shift over time, may reflect actual 
(perhaps shifting) relationships, do not circumscribe behaviour, and occur in the context of 
what is imaginable in a particular society and time. Indeed, a stable or coherent psychologi-
cal self must be questioned by narratives of ‘coming out’, some of which might shore up the 
notion of authentic desire or might disrupt this by multiple coming outs and re-identifications 
(e.g. Plummer 1995). Imagining a psychology of bisexuality – of commonalities in the psychic 
investments, emotional, and sexual patternings of bisexual men and women – may be particu-
larly problematic. What might be common to that identity if neither hetero- nor homosexual 
‘object choice’ can be excluded from this psychological subject?
A critical psychology perspective also questions the individualizing underpinning of LG/
LGBT psychology’s other principle terrain: the societal treatment of different sexualities. Hom-
ophobia cannot be seen simply as an irrational fear in the minds of sexual majorities, but as 
produced by cultural discourses, practices, and social formations. Monk (2011) points to three 
discourses underpinning reformist responses to homophobic bullying: ‘child abuse’, ‘the child 
victim’, and ‘the tragic gay’. These mobilize compassion and inclusivity within education, but at 
the same time individualize and de-politicize homophobia. Similarly, UK sex education policy 
includes coverage of sexual orientation under the (special) needs of pupils of different sexual 
orientations, rather than as an educational need of all pupils or as a social justice issue that 
schools must embrace (Alldred and David 2007).
These critiques are underpinned by a more foundational difference between critical and LGBT 
affirmative psychologies concerning the social component of sexualities. Affirmative LGBT psy-
chology is keen to acknowledge the oppressive forces of the social, but might view these as 
constraints upon some irreducible essence of human sexuality that sparks desire for the other, 
whoever or whatever that other might be. This ‘anthropocentric’ (Braidotti 2006: 40) view accepts 
uncritically the human body and ‘individual’ as the privileged site where sexuality happens (along 
with other aspects of human ‘being’), supplying the foundation for claims for the authenticity of 
how sexual identities are experienced. This view is quite pervasive: sexual desires seem so per-
sonal, so ‘internal’ to a body, that it may appear self-evident that human sexuality is an individual 
attribute, albeit one that is subject to all kinds of discipline, coercion, and control by social forces.
Critical psychology sees this interaction between ‘sexuality’ and social context differently, 
rejecting sexual essentialism, and regarding the manifestations of sexuality as products of histori-
cally and culturally specific systems of thought and practices. Discourses on sexuality have shaped 
sexual conduct and disciplined sexual desire; even the limited categories by which sexualities are 
differentiated may be called into question (Lambevski 2005: 580). These categories, rather than 
teasing out difference, in fact deny difference in order to typify a body in terms of a single narrow 

From ‘lesbian and gay psychology’
205
characteristic: the object of its sexual desire. Sexuality, along with other social stratifications such 
as class, gender, and race, aggregates dissimilar individuals ‘only by repressing the highly complex 
differentials that compose any being’ (Colebrook 2013: 35, see also Rose 1989: 123).
Ontological non-essentialism necessarily dissolves any conception of an ‘internal’ or prior 
sexuality or sexual identity, seeing these instead as epiphenomena of the constructive work of 
discourses in producing subjectivity (Henriques et al. 1984/1998: 117) and the ‘effect of an 
internal core or substance . . . on the surface of the body’ (Butler 1990: 136). Taken to its logical 
conclusion, this socialized ontology would imply humans and bodies buffeted by social forces 
(Burman 2008) into a range of arbitrary sexualities and sexual desires constituted by lay and 
professional discourses, leaving in doubt any ontological basis for resistance, as well as under-
mining the foundation for sexual identity politics. Theorizing resistance through a notion of a 
sexual energy or even a biological drive that escapes or is prior to discourse merely reintroduces 
essentialism, while Butler (1999) notes that the Foucauldian project of inaugurating ‘bodies and 
pleasure’ as a counter-discourse and rallying point for resistance to the discourses of sexuality 
and sexual desires marks either a utopian return to the pre-modern, or a fetishization of the 
‘break’ from discourse as itself the source of pleasure. This debate has been pursued in recent 
queer and feminist theoretical debates (Allen and Carmody 2012; Jagose 1996).
In an effort to overcome the theoretical limitations of both essentialized and deterministic 
understandings of sexuality and sexual desire, some feminist and queer theorists have conse-
quently sought an alternative, materialist approach to bodies and desire, often drawing upon the 
work of Deleuze and his sometime collaborator Guattari. While broadly cognate with Foucault’s 
materialist historiography, this ontology offers some advantages in the ways it theorizes resist-
ance (Conley 2000: 35). Agency is replaced with a focus upon ‘affects’ (which in this context 
simply refer to the ability to affect or be affected), and those affects (including desires) that 
produce capacities conventionally regarded as ‘sexual’, may be characterized as constitutive of a 
‘sexuality-assemblage’ (Fox and Alldred 2013). Sexuality, in this anti-humanist formulation, must 
be understood not as an attribute of a body, nor as an ‘energy’ or the ‘infrastructure’ for desire 
(Deleuze and Parnet 2002: 101), but as a productive flow of affects within a sexuality-assemblage. 
This formulation means that sexuality is nonhuman, impersonal, non-genital, and may produce 
‘subversive and unforeseeable expressions’ (Beckman 2011: 11) in political movements, in busi-
ness, in the law, and in social relations ‘not normally considered sexual at all’ (Deleuze and 
Guattari 1984: 293). However, at the level of human bodies, this manifests itself in a relatively 
narrow range of sexual capacities. Powerful aggregating social forces limit how elements affect 
and are affected, constraining and codifying sexual conduct, desire and identity-positions. Social 
institutions such as religion, medicine, and the State play a part, as do ideas and ideologies such 
as love, monogamy, chastity, and sexual liberation, social prejudices and biases, as well as the sci-
entific knowledges of sexuality described earlier.
This analysis offers an analytical advantage in its ability to theorize both power and resistance 
to power. While Foucault’s understanding of a progressively totalizing regime of power/knowl-
edge denies a possibility of ‘sexual liberation’, the Deleuzian model holds open the potential 
for the aggregative shackles of the sexuality-assemblage to be loosened, and a body to achieve a 
sexual ‘line of flight’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1988: 9) from a stable state or identity. We discuss how 
this capacity for resistance informs a critical politics of sexuality in the final section of this chapter.
Critical psychology and the politics of sexuality
A critical psychology of sexualities can be regarded either as a swingeing attack on the main-
stream, including the affirmative LGBT psychology that has emerged over the past thirty years, 

Pam Alldred and Nick Fox
206
or as the next step in the development of a progressive psychology that seeks not only to 
understand the world but also to change it for the better. On one hand, the critiques offered 
earlier implicate psychology in its liberal humanist manifestation as both establishing an appar-
ently value-free ‘scientific’ discourse on human behaviour and human thought, and in colluding 
in the production of individualistic identity-positions based upon discrete sexual orientations. 
On the other hand, for some writers, the addition of these critical perspectives deriving from 
feminism, post-structuralism, and anti-humanism can queer LGBT psychology, establishing an 
LGBTQ psychology that deconstructs its earlier liberal humanist commitments (Clarke and 
Braun 2009: 238). However, as Clarke and Braun (245) go on to note, feminist and LGBTQ 
psychologists have sometimes doubted the contribution critical psychology can make to social 
change.
As has been seen, critical psychology mounts two challenges to the mainstream, including 
LGBT psychology. First, it rejects a view of psychological science as a neutral approach to 
explaining sexualities; rather, psychological theories of sexuality are shot through with socially 
constituted and historically specific concepts. Second, it undermines essential and non-social 
understandings of human sexuality and sexual identity, revealing that the apparent emancipation 
and self-actualization of a range of sexualities and sexual identity-positions following earlier 
repression is actually a sexual subjectification that has produced reflexive and self-governing 
sexual subjects (Foucault 1987: 5; Rose 1989). The emergence of subjectivities as lesbian, gay, 
bi, polyamorous, and so forth, is not a cause for uncritical celebration, but an indicator of the 
anonymous workings of power upon the actions and thoughts of humans.
These conclusions suggest that critical psychology can neither fall back upon science and 
rationality as the basis for struggles against oppression and discrimination, nor can it uncriti-
cally support struggles for liberation or assertion of ‘rights’ for people holding different sexual 
identity-positions assumed to be stable, essential, and so guaranteed. While seeking to question 
heteronormativity and challenge homophobia, its analysis does not consider sexual identities as 
reflections of an individual’s authentic sexuality, to be encouraged to full actualization through 
political activism and/or personal growth. ‘Liberatory’ struggles are illusory, simply producing 
subjectivities that are ever more imbued with discourses that mediate technologies of power and 
authority, for example, of a ‘rescued’ identity marked by its otherness while kindly regarded with 
tolerance and compassion.
This analysis places critical psychologists in a quandary. Affirmative liberal humanism 
embraced essentialist ideas of the location of sexuality within human bodies, and used this as 
the basis for radical criticism of societal imbalances and prejudices in relation to both women 
and to non-heterosexualities. Critical psychology, informed by discourse analysis and especially 
by the pessimism of Foucault’s genealogical conclusions concerning sexual ‘liberation’, rejected 
essentialism, but as a consequence lost purchase in terms of engagements with people’s struggles 
against discrimination (Kitzinger 1999). One solution has been Spivak’s (1990) advocacy of 
‘strategic essentialism’, which effectively bracketed issues of ontology (for instance of gender or 
sexualities) in order to build strategic alliances around essentialist notions such as ‘woman’ or 
‘lesbian’, in order to advance a common cause such as challenging patriarchy or heteronorma-
tivity. Butler (1993: 222) advocates a double move to provisionally institute the categories ‘with-
out which one cannot move’ at the same time as opening the category ‘as a site of permanent 
political protest’.
Earlier we introduced an anti-humanist, materialist perspective that we feel suggests a way 
forward, which offers a means to think sexuality without the ‘humanist enticements’ (Grosz and 
Probyn 1995: xiii) that have associated sexuality with notions of agency, individualism, and free 
will. This materialist ontology of sexuality shares Foucauldian understandings of the action of 

From ‘lesbian and gay psychology’
207
power, but crucially sees a more dynamic interplay within assemblages that opens up the pos-
sibilities for aggregative forces to be resisted, enabling new capacities and desires to emerge, for 
bodies to affect and be affected in ways that they have never done before, and in ways that may 
not even be considered ‘sexual’. It replaces Foucault’s pessimism about the possibility of resist-
ance to discourse with an optimistic recognition that this ‘affect economy’ (Clough 2008) of 
power and resistance is going on all around, investing the daily sexual lives of us all with possibil-
ities for new sexualities and genders. Queer theorists such as Grosz (1994) and Braidotti (2006) 
have given a cautious welcome to Deleuzian anti-humanism, as a means to ‘clear the ground 
of metaphysical oppositions and concepts’ and invoke ‘a difference that is not subordinated to 
identity’ (Grosz 1994: 164).
A non-anthropocentric approach to the study of sexualities shifts attention from accounts 
of sexual identities to exploration of the human and nonhuman elements and affective flows 
in sexuality assemblages, the aggregative and the singular affects, and the capacities for action, 
feeling, and desire that affective flows produce. Methodologically, it augments critical psycholo-
gy’s focus upon texts, allowing studies to use a wide range of sources and a variety of methods, 
including observation, interviews, and survey methods. But, perhaps significantly, it reintroduces 
a new politics of sexualities, in which the aggregative actions of power can be challenged and the 
dis-aggregating possibilities of resistance to power fostered. This materialist perspective opens 
up possibilities for sexual subjects to find a ‘line of flight’ away from the constraints of particular 
sexual identities, and into a new politics of sexualities.
Further reading
Clarke, V. and Peel, E. (2007) ‘From lesbian and gay psychology to LGBTQ psychologies. A journey into 
the unknown (and unknowable)?’, in V. Clarke and E. Peel (eds) Out in Psychology, Chichester: Wiley.
Kitzinger, C. (1987) The Social Construction of Lesbianism. London: Sage.
Kitzinger, C. (1999) ‘Lesbian and gay psychology: is it critical?’ Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 1, 50–66.
Website resources
Gender Across Borders  – A  feminist activist site that has relevant material on sexuality: http://www. 
genderacrossborders.com/category/queer-issues/
The Sexualization Report, compiled by Feona Attwood, Clare Bale, and Meg Barker based on contributions 
from over thirty academic experts, drawing on research from a wide range of subject areas, including 
medicine, health and social care, media and communication studies, cultural studies, psychology, sociology,  
education, and gender and sexuality studies: http://thesexualizationreport.wordpress.com
Sociosite  – A  website that lists journals, organizations, and some key texts: www.sociosite.net/topics/ 
gender.php
References
Alldred, P. (1998) ‘Making a mockery of family life? Lesbian mothers in the British media’, Journal of Lesbian 
Studies, 2(4), 9–21.
Alldred, P. (1999) ‘Fit to Parent’: Psychology, Knowledge and Popular Debate, PhD: University of East 
London, UK.
Alldred, P. and David, M. (2007) Get Real about Sex: The Politics and Practice of Sex Education. Maidenhead: 
Open University Press.
Allen, L. and Carmody, M. (2012) ‘⁜“Pleasure has no passport”: re-visiting the potential of pleasure in sexu-
ality education’, Sex Education, 12(4), 455–468.
Barker, M. (2005) ‘This is my partner, and this is my . . . partner’s partner: constructing a polyamorous iden-
tity in a monogamous world’, Journal of Constructivist Psychology, 18(1), 75–88.
Beckman, F. (2011) ‘Introduction: what is sex? An introduction to the sexual philosophy of Gilles Deleuze’ 
in F. Beckman (ed.) Deleuze and Sex. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

Pam Alldred and Nick Fox
208
Braidotti, R. (2006) Transpositions. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Burman, E. (2008) Deconstructing Developmental Psychology. London: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble. London: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1993) Bodies That Matter: on the Discursive Limits of ‘Sex’. New York: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1999) ‘Revisiting bodies and pleasures’. Theory, Culture Society, 16, 11–20.
Clarke, V. (2002) ‘Sameness and difference in research on lesbian parenting’, Journal of Community and 
Applied Social Psychology, 12, 210–222.
Clarke, V. and Braun, V. (2009) ‘Gender’ in D. Fox, I. Prilleltensky and S. Austin (eds) Critical Psychology: an 
Introduction. London: Sage.
Clarke, V. and Peel, E. (2007) ‘From lesbian and gay psychology to LGBTQ psychologies. A journey into 
the unknown (and unknowable)? in V. Clarke and E. Peel (eds) Out in Psychology. Chichester: Wiley.
Clarke, V. and Spence, K. (2012) ‘⁜‘‘I am who I am”⁜? Navigating norms and the importance of authenticity in 
lesbian and bisexual women’s accounts of their appearance practices’, Psychology of Sexuality, 4(1), 25–33.
Clough, P. T. (2008) ‘The affective turn: political economy, biomedia and bodies’, Theory, Culture & Society, 
25, 1–22.
Colebrook, C. (2013) ‘Face race’, in A. Saldanha and J. M. Adams (eds) Deleuze and Race. Edinburgh: Edin-
burgh University Press.
Conley, V. A. (2000) ‘Becoming-woman now’, in I. Buchanan and C. Colebrooke (eds) Deleuze and Feminist 
Theory. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1984) Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. London: Athlone.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1988) A Thousand Plateaus. London: Athlone.
Deleuze, G. and Parnet, C. (2002) Dialogues II. London: Continuum.
Duggan, L. (2002) ‘The new homonormativity: the sexual politics of neo-liberalism’, in R. Castronovo 
and D. D. Nelson (eds) Materializing Democracy: Toward a Revitalized Cultural Politics. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
Fish, J. (2009) ‘Our health, our say: towards a feminist perspective of lesbian health psychology’, Feminism & 
Psychology, 19(4), 437–453.
Foucault, M. (1981) The History of Sexuality, Volume 1: The Will to Knowledge. Harmondsworth: Pelican.
Foucault, M. (1982) ‘The subject and power’, Critical Inquiry, 8(4), 777–795.
Foucault, M. (1987) The History of Sexuality, Volume 2: The Use of Pleasure. Harmondsworth: Peregrine.
Foucault, M. (1990). The History of Sexuality, Volume 3: The Care of the Self. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Fox, N. J. and Alldred, P. (2013) ‘The sexuality-assemblage: desire, affect, anti-humanism’, Sociological Review, 
61 (4), 769–789.
Garnets, L. D. and D’Augelli, A. R. (1994) ‘Empowering lesbian and gay communities: a call for collabora-
tion with community psychology’, American Journal of Community Psychology, 22(4), 447–470.
Gergen, K. J. (1985) ‘The social constructionist movement in modern psychology’, American Psychologist, 
40(3), 266–275.
Gordo López, A. J. and Cleminson, R. M. (2004) Techno-Sexual Landscapes: Changing Relations Between Tech-
nology and Sexuality. London: Free Association Books.
Grosz, E. (1994) Volatile Bodies. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Grosz, E. and Probyn, E. (1995) ‘Introduction’, in E. Grosz and E. Probyn (eds) Sexy Bodies. London: 
Routledge.
Hall, L. A. (1995) ‘Disinterested enthusiasm for sexual misconduct: The British Society for the Study of Sex 
Psychology, 1913–47’, Journal of Contemporary History, 30(4), 665–686.
Henriques, J., Hollway, W., Urwin, C., Venn, C. and Walkerdine, V. (1984/1998) Changing the Subject: Psychol-
ogy, Social Regulation and Subjectivity. London: Routledge.
Hollway (1998) ‘Gender difference and the production of subjectivity’, in J. Henriques et al. (eds) Changing 
the Subject: Psychology, Social Regulation and Subjectivity. London: Routledge.
Jagose, A. (1996) Queer Theory: An Introduction. New York: New York University Press.
Jivraj, S. and de Jong, A. (2011) ‘The Dutch homo-emancipation policy and its silencing effects on queer 
Muslims’, Feminist Legal Studies, 19(2), 143–158.
Kitzinger, C. (1987) The Social Construction of Lesbianism. London: Sage.
Kitzinger, C. (1999) ‘Lesbian and gay psychology: is it critical?’ Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 1, 50–66.
Lambevski, S. A. (2005) ‘Bodies, schizo vibes and hallucinatory desires – sexualities in movement’, Sexual-
ities, 8(5), 570–586.
Langdridge, D. (2007) ‘Gay affirmative therapy: a theoretical framework and defence’, Journal of Gay and 
Lesbian Psychotherapy, 11(1–2), 27–43.

From ‘lesbian and gay psychology’
209
Lucas-Carr, C. B. and Krane, V. (2011) ‘What is the T in LGBT? Supporting transgender athletes through 
sport psychology’, The Sport Psychologist, 25, 532–548.
Monk, D. (2011) ‘Challenging homophobic bullying in schools: the politics of progress’, International Journal 
of Law in Context, 7(2), 181–207.
Nadal, K. L. and Corpus, M.J.H. (2012) ‘“Tomboys” and “Baklas”: experiences of lesbian and gay Filipino 
Americans’, Asian American Journal of Psychology, 4(3), 166–175.
Pitts, M. K., Couch, M., Mulcare, H., Croy, S., and Mitchell A. (2009) ‘Transgender people in Australia and 
New Zealand: health, well-being and access to health services’, Feminism & Psychology, 19, 475–495.
Plummer, K. (1995) Telling Sexual Stories: Power, Change and Social Worlds. London: Routledge.
Rasmussen, M. L. (2006) Becoming Subjects: Sexualities and Secondary Schooling. London: Routledge.
Rasmussen, M. L. (2012) ‘Pleasure/desire, sexularism and sexuality education’, Sex Education, 12(4), 469–481.
Rich, A. (1980) ‘Compulsory heterosexuality and lesbian existence’, Signs, 5(4), 631–660.
Rose, N. (1989) Governing the Soul. London: Free Association Books.
Rose, N. (1998) Inventing Our Selves: Psychology, Power, and Personhood. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Rothing, A. and Svendsen, S.H.B. (2011) ‘Sexuality in Norwegian textbooks: constructing and controlling 
ethnic borders?’ Ethnic and Racial Studies, 34(11), 1953–1973.
Spears, R. (1997) ‘Introduction’, in T. Ibañez and L. Iñiguez (eds) Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Spivak, G. C. (1990) The Post-Colonial Critic: Interviews, Strategies, Dialogues. London: Routledge.
Weeks, J. (2012) Sex, Politics and Society: The Regulations of Sexuality Since 1800 (3rd Edn.) Harlow: Pearson 
Education.
Wilkinson, S. (1997) ‘Prioritising the political: feminist psychology’, in T. Ibañez and L. Iñiguez (eds) Critical 
Social Psychology. London: Sage.

This page intentionally left blank

Part Ic
Adjacent parts of psy-complex

This page intentionally left blank

213
An anthem to the Merry Pranksters and road rebels of the 1960s, One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s 
Nest celebrates the romantic impulses of the period. Published in 1962 and made into a film in 
1975, Ken Kesey’s tale of the asylum secured a lasting place in the social imaginary. His vision 
of institutional confinement registers ambient anxieties in the culture, but Kesey was particu-
larly attuned to psychological currents in American manhood. The crisis of the story unfolds 
as McMurphy, who maneuvered to get into the state hospital to escape jail time, discovers that 
most of his fellow patients entered the facility voluntarily. Under the control of the repressed 
and repressive Nurse Ratched, the men on the ward choose to stay even when given the chance 
to leave. Chief, a Native American hospitalized for catatonia who emerges as the sentient ally of 
the rebellious McMurphy, emancipates himself from the control of Nurse Ratched at the film’s 
conclusion. After the lobotomized McMurphy is wheeled onto the ward, mentally castrated for 
orchestrating a rebellion, Chief performs a mercy killing by smothering the tragic hero. Gath-
ering up the strength within his massive frame, he then extracts a hydrotherapy machine from 
its plumbing fixtures and hurls it through a barred window of the day room. In the final scene, 
Chief jumps through the window casing and runs toward the Oregon hills, with a glorious 
sunrise over the Cascades signalling the dawn of a new era.
This allegorical tale concludes with the liberation of the one Good Man from the pernicious 
control of the (maternal) asylum, foreclosing on the question of where people go when they 
leave. In undertaking a documentary titled Guilty Except for Insanity, set at the same state hospi-
tal where Cuckoo’s Nest was shot, I was particularly interested in working with this ambivalent 
subtext of the film – the representation of the state hospital as both sanctuary from a threatening 
external world and as site of coercive confinement. Unlike the prison, the psychiatric gaze of the 
asylum penetrates the internal world of the inmate, operating up close. Our film project began 
from the premise that the social control models that inform much of the antipsychiatry move-
ment overlook a range of needs related to connection and care, as well as progressive currents 
in the changing terrain of Western psychiatry. The power of psychiatry may be in its license to 
dispense opiate to the masses. But this dispensing is a response to real human distress.
22
Alienists and alienation
Critical psychiatry in search of itself
Janice Haaken

Janice Haaken
214
Psychiatry, psychology, and the psy-complex
Termed ‘alienists’ in the nineteenth century, doctors specializing in psychiatry during that grand 
era of the asylum generally worked as superintendents, treating a loosely categorized assemblage 
of misfits that shared the condition of mental alienation (Shorter 1997). Later abandoned as a 
term, the nineteenth century alienist might find an uncanny recognition of his work in the 
protestations of the next century. For the antipsychiatrists of the 1960s and 1970s, the mentally 
ill were indeed suffering from social alienation. Madness was cast as both symptom and resist-
ance to the capitalist industrial age. The movement drew its animus from uprisings around the 
world against the old regimes, from colonialism, imperialism, and capitalism, to patriarchy. As 
Sherry Turkle (1981: 153) observes of the post-1968 scene in France, the strains of the poli-
tics of madness taken up by various radicals, Lacanians, and antipsychiatry intellectuals ‘have 
become so interwoven that it is hard to tell where one leaves off and the other begins’. While 
the anti-education and anti-incarceration movements similarly confronted institutional power, 
antipsychiatry projects registered opposition to the ‘soft power’ of the modern state. Psychiatry 
holds a unique position as a medical specialty licensed by the state to intervene – sometimes 
coercively  – in human behaviour. Although the profession carries little prestige within the 
medical field, psychiatry carries enormous social symbolic weight in popular culture, from films 
and television to music, because of this intimate association with mind control. The authority 
granted psychologists to develop and administer mental tests, a technology deeply involved in 
regimes of social control, operates less visibly than does the seductive biopower of psychiatry.
Pat Bracken and Philip Thomas (2010) trace the history of critical psychiatry from Thomas 
Szasz to Michel Foucault, drawing out distinctions between the antipsychiatry of Szasz and the 
critical methods of Foucault. The authors are leaders in the Critical Psychiatry Network in the 
UK and internationally (http://criticalpsychiatry.co.uk), an organization that produces critiques 
and promotes alternatives to the medical management of madness. In taking up the work of 
Szasz, a key figure in the antipsychiatry movement of the 1960s and 1970s, Bracken and Thomas 
draw out the conservative implications of his position: ‘For Szasz, if the patient’s suffering can 
be matched with an abnormal scan or laboratory result, then it can be regarded as “genuine” . . . 
otherwise it is essentially malingering and the implication is that doctors should walk away’ 
(221). Rather than walking away, Bracken and Thomas call for a ‘postpsychiatry’ that recognizes 
the constraints of the medical model in understanding mental suffering.
In assessing the political work of the critical psychiatry movement, Bracken and Thomas 
identify three primary objectives: (1) targeting the heavy influence of the pharmaceutical indus-
try on the theory and practice of psychiatry; (2) developing a theory of mental suffering that 
takes into account issues of meaning; and (3) working in alliance with the user/survivor move-
ment. In this chapter, I take up these three areas of critical practice, drawing out insights from 
the history of antipsychiatry and the lessons they hold for a contemporary progressive politics of 
mental care. In moving through these points, I also draw on examples from projects carried out 
by my community research and documentary film teams.
Drugs and the psy-complex
In my Social Action Research course, I began one class by showing a documentary video on 
psychiatry that casts the profession as a form of crypto-fascism. Students were generally very 
positive about the video and its malevolent portrayal of mind-doctors, and particularly enthused 
about the video’s condemnation of massive drugging of school children. Incorporating gothic 
images of the old asylums as historical backdrop, the film instructs on how modern psychiatrists 

Alienists and alienation
215
exercise more seductive and hidden forms of control than the more commonplace loboto-
mies, electroshock treatments, and leather restraints of the past. The video seemed to resonate 
with what students recalled of their readings of Foucault the previous week. So it seemed true 
enough.
When I  announced that the film was produced by Scientologists, students were gener-
ally either confused or embarrassed. What emerged was a discussion of criteria for evaluating 
arguments. Among the criteria was the principle of approaching with some suspicion argu-
ments that rely heavily on all-or-nothing claims, heavy emotional appeals, or presentation of 
counter-arguments for the sole purpose of dismissing them. This principle also extended to the 
demonizing of Scientology. We talked about accusations circulating in the survivor movement 
that some groups were serving as front organizations for the Church of Scientology. MindFree-
dom Oregon, a leader in the global Mad Pride movement, responded in 2012 to this charge and 
its implicit neo-McCarthyism (see www.mindfreedom.org). Political alliances among marginal-
ized groups open space for solidarity and resistance, but they also give rise to forms of paranoia 
and persecution. Another example taken up by the class draws on field research on ethical 
conflicts faced by clinicians working in war zones. In the course of producing the documentary, 
Mind Zone: Therapists Behind the Front Lines, I interviewed an Army major and psychiatrist who 
worked in a clinic in Kandahar, Afghanistan. Hunched over the PC where he carried out his 
morning telemedicine consults, he explained the frustrations of doing psychiatry in a war zone. 
Since service members undergo drug screening during enlistment, many of them stop taking 
their meds until they get into theatre. He said that he routinely asks soldiers having emotional 
reactions whether they were on psychiatric medications before coming into service. Although 
lying during recruitment and enlistment is grounds for disciplinary action, the doctor was clearly 
sympathetic with these soldiers. There is a long and noble history of men lying about their age 
or health problems to get into the military. Being on psychoactive drugs can put service mem-
bers and their units at risk, but the doctor also framed psychoactive drugs as a disability rights 
issue. Many of these soldiers perform very well, he contended, and should be able to keep doing 
their jobs. More common are those cases where soldiers are prescribed medication to tolerate 
the acute anxiety and stress of living in a combat zone. Drug use thrives on the battlefield, and 
it is better to have controlled substances than the uncontrolled ones. Heroin, marijuana, and 
alcohol, key ingredients of the combat cocktail of the Vietnam era, are less available in these 
wars. Sniffing aerosol is one way that soldiers self-medicate, he adds, but it’s a terribly toxic way 
of escaping the misery of war.
In my own teaching, and clinical and community work on psychiatry, I focus on the public 
discourse over ‘good drugs’ versus ‘bad drugs’ and how the distinction is ideologically loaded. 
The normalizing of prescribed psychoactive medications has been accompanied by a patholo-
gizing of recreational drugs, particularly those used in poor communities. The medical marijuana 
campaign in the United States is instructive on this point. Through its demonstrated benefits in 
alleviating a number of chronic pain conditions, marijuana crosses a moral divide from deviant 
to therapeutic use – a divide heavily policed by the state and the medical profession. Marijuana 
dispensaries display an array of products, each with claims of unique benefits, and catering to 
individual consumer tastes. While S.A.N.E. justifiably frames legalization of marijuana as an 
advance, the campaign enlists the discourse of health-promoting drugs to make its case, secur-
ing legitimacy by assimilating into the medical model and leaving unchallenged the catego-
ries themselves. While old white people can now legally smoke a bowl in many states to ease 
their aches and pains, blacks and other racial minorities continue to serve prison time for drug 
charges, including marijuana. Prisoners incarcerated on drug offenses constitute half of the fed-
eral prison population, 60 per cent of which are racial minorities (www.sentencingproject.org). 

Janice Haaken
216
In intervening in public debates over psychoactive drugs, Joanna Moncrieff and David Cohen 
(2009) argue that the focus of critique should be on how they really work in the body and brain 
and on challenging the scientific claims of Big Pharma. In a paper pointedly titled, ‘How do 
psychiatric drugs work?’ the authors argue for an approach that is ‘drug-centered’ rather than 
‘disease-centered’. Psychiatry and the pharmaceutical industry have colluded in promoting the 
idea that drugs target specific disorders and that this biochemical precision distinguishes the 
many good drugs of the present from the bad ones of the past. In actuality, psychoactive drugs 
have broad systemic effects and a long list of serious side effects. Moncrieff and Cohen suggest 
that progressive psychiatrists play an important role in demystifying psychopharmacology and 
the marketing discourses that surround them. This demystification must extend into the endless 
‘war on drugs’ as well, however, and to exposing the racial politics of the drug economy. The 
moral divide between the clinical psychiatrist and the drug dealer reflects class and race differ-
ences, including the employment opportunities at various levels of the business of dispensing 
chemical relief.
Diagnosis and disordered minds
Introducing the politics of diagnosis to psychology students inevitably invites discussion of 
stigma, and how psychiatry promotes stigma because it labels people. Although the limits of 
labelling theory are soon apparent, the topic provides a segue to riveting stories about psychol-
ogy as a potentially subversive discipline. During the deinstitutionalization movement of the 
1970s, many social and clinical psychologists joined forces with antipsychiatry in leaving the 
controlled laboratories of the university and entering institutions for the purpose of studying 
real-life social settings. Psychologist David Rosenhan and his students were part of this vibrant 
scene. In one of their most cited studies, they got themselves admitted to state psychiatric hos-
pitals by faking symptoms of schizophrenia. Shortly after admission, the researchers stopped 
expressing signs of psychosis. But staff continued to view their behaviour through the diagnos-
tic lens of psychosis, even describing their note-taking as ‘writing behaviour’ consistent with 
delusional thinking. Rosenhan (1973) concluded that the single best predictor of a diagnosis is 
a previous diagnosis, and that once a diagnosis is established, confirmation bias governs clinical 
observations.
This line of critical psychological research tends to reduce the complexity of diagnostic 
processes, however, including of how diagnostic signs circulate within a wider system of social 
signifiers. Indeed, the simulation of symptoms in Rosenhan’s study registered a more central 
problem in psychiatry than what the researchers envisioned. As Foucault (2008) argues in his 
discussion of simulated hysterical fits at the Salpêtrière under the administration of Charcot, 
psychiatry emerged as a specialty within medicine and separate from neurology through its 
specific occupational role in detecting simulated illness. Indeed, Foucault concludes that ‘The 
whole history of psychiatry can be said to be permeated by this problem of simulation’ (136).
Thomas Szasz (1995) emerged as a leading antipsychiatry voice in the 1970s, dismissing the 
concept of mental illness as a ‘myth’. But Szasz went beyond the social cognitive orientation of 
labelling theory to talk more directly about power. In framing odd or disturbing behaviour as an 
illness of the mind, he argues, doctors wrested control from the clergy in controlling deviance. 
Szasz situates this transfer of authority from clergy to medicine in the nineteenth century as an 
outgrowth of broader social forces, disagreeing with Foucault over the material conditions that 
gave rise to the medical model. Beyond differences in their historical analyses, Szasz and Fou-
cault were part of a larger critical project that challenged the progressive narrative of psychiatry. 
The prototypical textbook story traces the origins of the discipline from Philip Pinel’s liberation 

Alienists and alienation
217
of the lunatics during the French Revolution through its various battles with superstition and 
religious thinking to humane treatment of the mentally ill. Szasz (1995: 2) situates psychiatry as 
a transfer of authority within the terms of secular modernity, where doctors secured authority 
as agent of the state to confine a person not charged with crimes but otherwise bothersome, 
‘rendering him childlike, and justifying controlling and caring for him against his will’. The 
history of psychiatry told by Foucault (2008) brings these same elements of rationalized coer-
cion and control into the analysis. The classification and diagnosis of symptoms within medical 
taxonomies and the search for anatomical-pathological etiologies represented the two points of 
psychiatry’s ‘materialist guarantee’ – its claim as arbiter of truth within the framework of science. 
However, ‘Psychiatric practice developed in the shelter of these two discourses but it never used 
them . . . it never really put it to work’ (134). Foucault’s intervention here is to unhinge this 
‘materialist guarantee’ of psychiatry as a profession grounded in science from its actual material 
practices. He traces the history of mechanical restraints used in asylums, for example, and how 
these methods had little to do with the scientific discourses circulating at the time.
If psychiatry operates as a border-broker that perpetually fails to bring human activity into 
alignment with the social order, it also represents a fertile site for resistance. As a theorist and 
practitioner aligned with the radical psychiatry movement of the 1970s, Peter Sedgwick (1982) 
takes a different stance in opposing a key principle of antipsychiatry – that the concept of mental 
illness simply advances the power of medicine. He argues that the scientific separation of mental 
and physical illness, and particularly the absolutist position of Szasz, leaves unexamined the histor-
ical contingencies that produce categories of medical disease. Further, the idiom of mental illness, 
no less than physical illness, registers distress and a claim on the culture for some form of care, 
whether through folk remedies or Western methods. Antipsychiatry theorists approach mental 
suffering from considerable remove, Sedgwick contends, rather than from the ‘hard seat of the 
waiting room or the casualty department’s stretcher’ (28). In arguing for patients’ rights to care 
within the framework of health and social welfare, Sedgwick cautions against over-politicizing 
psychosis. He is particularly critical of R. D. Laing’s casting of symptoms of schizophrenia as 
‘life-enhancing’, and Laing’s transition from insisting on the meaningfulness of schizophrenic 
communication to the position that psychosis represents transcendence of a falsifying reality. 
Tracking the theoretical moves of leading theorists in antipsychiatry, Sedgwick is particularly 
attuned to how antipsychiatry may turn to the right, a concern borne out by the anti-state and 
anti-social welfare positions of the libertarian wing of the movement.
Relations of psychiatric knowledge production
Pat Bracken (2012) argues that ‘One of the most important questions facing psychiatry today 
concerns its relationship to the emerging international service user movement’. The historical 
dynamics of this relationship – where psychiatric patients and ex-patients resist the conditions of 
their care – have been largely overlooked in critical revisionist projects. Yet this is an important 
part of psychiatry’s story, dating back to the nineteenth century asylums and the clinics where 
psychiatry emerged as a branch of medicine. Indeed, the service user movement could be cast as 
the repressed ‘third term’ in the history of mental health care. Asylum literature includes a rich 
legacy of autobiographical accounts of madness. But it also includes accounts of patients col-
lectively challenging the authority of their doctors. In the United States, the patient-published 
monthly periodical, Opal, at the Utica State Lunatic Asylum in upstate New York, is one such 
early example. First published in 1850, the Opal chronicled, through poetry, short essays, and 
stories, various problems with the asylum system and grievances against doctors. A recurring 
motif centres on demands for ‘truthfulness toward the insane’, and their refusal to be cast as 

Janice Haaken
218
hopeless cases (Eghigian 2010). As one patient describes the state of affairs, ‘There is a certain 
point of recovery when the disordered mind seeks to discriminate between that which is false 
and that which is true in his condition’ (The Opal 1852/2010: 137). Prefiguring ideas taken up 
in the antipsychiatry and recovery movements, the author maps a course of healing that departs 
from the medical model. While the doctor insists on the patient relinquishing his delusions, the 
patient asserts the right to preserve the creative and productive elements of madness, to ‘find a 
counselor . . . to guide his trembling steps through the maze he is treading’ (137). In tracing the 
relational side of psychiatry, Foucault (2008) overlooks dynamic shifts in the positions of patients 
by focusing on the moves of the doctors. His analysis foregrounds the perpetual battle of wills 
between doctor and patient, with the authority exercised by mad-doctors as a form of ‘moral 
orthopedics’ (8). The mentally ill – the misfits – came under the authority of the alienists as 
the ‘residue of all residues’, the ‘unassimilable to all of society’s educational, military and police 
disciplines’ (54).
Foucault (2008: 269) brings the hysteric on to the stage in his analysis of Jean-Martin Char-
cot, even as the physician dominates the picture. The power of the hysteric operates as mere 
Echo to Narcissus. Foucault describes what he terms the game of mirrors between the doctor and 
his medical subjects as a mutually confirmatory gaze: back wards mental patients were able to 
achieve visibility while confirming the medical authority of the doctor. Under Charcot, the 
hysteric says, ‘thanks to me, you are recognized as a doctor’. The power of the hysteric is in the 
erotic excess of her performance. Giving the man what he wanted, the displays of hysterical 
fits ultimately overwhelm the capacity of the doctor to contain them. Foucault declares his 
own allegiances in this dramatic battle of wills: ‘We salute the hysterics as the true militants of 
­antipsychiatry’ (254).
In saluting the hysteric, Foucault turns away too quickly from the performance and the 
various parties in attendance. The game of mirrors does reflect the power of doctors, but it 
also includes popular movements that enlist the mental patient in staging their own revolts. 
Schizophrenia captured the gaze of 1970s antipsychiatry in part because reality itself was under 
scrutiny. The mind-expansion culture operated as palpable context, with LSD and other hallu-
cinogenics going beyond recreational use to carry philosophical and transcendent import. While 
the critical difference between self-induced and non-voluntary hallucinations was downplayed 
or dismissed, often in egregiously irresponsible ways, this mind-expansion movement did claim 
from psychiatry a place for exploring exceptional states. Yet much like Charcot’s hysterics, the 
psychotic patient is cast in a drama choreographed by forces not of his or her own making.
In the 1990s, multiple personality disorder (MPD) similarly captured the public stage, displac-
ing the hysteric as a prototypical feminine condition. The multiple served as clinical medium for 
an emerging class of trauma therapists, many of whom were taking on the medical establishment 
by exposing the depths of fragmentation in the psyche that exceeded the reach of conventional 
treatments (Haaken 1998; Nathan 2011). This era in psychiatry is instructive for the forma-
tion of patient/practitioner alliances as well. Women diagnosed as multiples occupied many of 
the same conference stages as their therapists, finding their voice by sharing the podium and 
co-authoring papers and books on the MPD condition. The righteousness of the MPD cam-
paign, advanced in the interest in exposing hidden histories of child sexual abuse, blinded many 
therapists to how their own grievances against the psychiatric establishment were channelled 
through patients. These therapeutic partnerships revived the ethos of antipsychiatry romantic 
revolt against medical control over madness, while locating the source of madness in repressed 
histories of sexual abuse rather than the divided psyches produced by capitalism. As schizophre-
nia and other psychotic conditions fell below the threshold of clinical interest in the United 
States, the mesmerizing multiple served to re-libidinize psychiatry. The stories of the chronically 

Alienists and alienation
219
mentally ill were far less dramatic, less riveting in their daily struggles with reality, than were 
those of the lively multiple (Haaken 1998). As the threshold for responding to suffering rose, so 
too did the demands for a captivating performance of madness.
Beyond antipsychiatry
The cult classic film King of Hearts, released in 1966, registers the romantic ethos of the antipsy-
chiatry movement in its casting of the inhabitants of the asylum as the only real sane people in 
an insane world. Much like One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, representations of madness operate 
allegorically to advance a social critique. For many of the practitioners who developed alterna-
tive therapeutic communities during the 1970s, representations of psychosis similarly served a 
larger political agenda. In countless revolutionary enclaves of the 1960s and 1970s, opposition to 
psychiatry caught fire because New Left culture was itself deeply involved in producing psycho-
logical theories and practices. ‘The personal is the political’ emerged as a feminist anthem, but 
this same ethos infused countercultural groups and socialists drawn to Marxist-psychoanalysis, 
liberation theology, and anti-racist and anti-colonial struggles. Resistance to commodity culture, 
capitalism, and to the bureaucratic and authoritarian systems of old left regimes required radi-
cally new ways of thinking about mind and consciousness, about boundaries between normalcy 
and madness, and about who decides on how the differences are drawn.
David Ingleby (1981: 97) was among the cautionary voices within the antipsychiatry move-
ment, pointing to the totalizing tenor of opposition to the medical model – an approach that 
readily migrates to a position that ‘invalidates the concept of mental care’. If the only answer is 
resistance, Ingleby asks, what pressure does this impose on distressed people? For Ingleby, the 
critical project centres on recognizing the contradictions of any program of reform – of both 
recognizing an ethical responsibility to intervene in human suffering and confronting how such 
interventions may reproduce the very conditions of that suffering.
In opposition to this dialectical stance, Francoise Castel, Robert Castel, and Anne Lovell (1982) 
reject the possibility of a truly socialized psychiatry, concurring with Foucault that reforms tend 
to reproduce the illusion of progress. Enlisting the rhetorical strategy of Szasz, they argue that 
‘The counterpart of the myth of deinstitutionalization was the myth of community care’ (124). In 
their assessment of this terrain, Castel et al. conclude that ‘Community psychiatry in the United 
States is part of a complex ensemble of services performing “functions of control, surveillance and 
normalization”⁜’ (169). But the myth of progress may be reflexively invoked to check any efforts 
at meaningful social change. Minority groups made claims on public clinics and hospitals in the 
1960s and 1970s and service workers, including psychiatrists and psychologists, joined forces with 
the community in organizing around the conditions of care (Kupers 1982). A dialectical approach 
to the history of psychiatry attends to these contradictory currents of the professions and how 
everyday people enlist mental health discourses to make new demands on the system.
In a study carried out by Jimena Alvarado Chavarría, a graduate student on the Guilty Except 
for Insanity project team, the aim was to understand how participants in a coalition of con-
sumer/psychiatric survivors conceptualized their work as mental health activists. The themes 
that emerged from this study cluster around the aims of critical psychiatry identified by Bracken 
and Thomas (2010) in their framing of a political agenda. Alvarado Chavarría (2012) interviewed 
ten long-term activists with the Oregon Mental Health Consumer and Psychiatric Survivor 
Coalition (OCSC), a group that seeks ‘To establish a statewide network of people who iden-
tify as having a psychiatric diagnosis, and/or who feel labeled by one; to share ideas; provide 
mutual support; work toward common goals; strengthen peer-run organizations; and advocate 
for positive change in the mental health system’ (Oaks 2009). While the members recognize 

Janice Haaken
220
participation of consumer/survivors on organization boards as a mark of progress, they also 
stress that such metrics of empowerment can be deceptive. Serving on boards often involves 
participating in decisions that are antithetical to progressive reform – decisions that may further 
marginalize vulnerable groups because they operate within the institutional medical model. 
Building a progressive mental health movement means finding common ground among survi-
vor/consumer groups, particularly around their shared insistence on the self-determination and 
complexity of people diagnosed with psychiatric disorders (see www.mindfreedom.org). As one 
participant describes her position on the medical model, the important question is the relational 
context where diagnostic terms circulate.
There are times you have to say, ‘this person is a person who was diagnosed with, or labelled 
with. I like that better than saying, ‘this person is a person with schizophrenia’. This person 
is actually a person who was labelled or diagnosed by someone as schizophrenic. 
(Alvarado Chavarría 2012: 86)
Movements generate ideas that go beyond their eras of historical possibility even as they 
reflect the constraints of those same eras. The antipsychiatry literature served as vital incubator to 
the revolts of the 1960s and 1970s and left a rich legacy of ideas that might inform contemporary 
practices. As one example, the Hearing Voices movement registers the insights of antipsychiatry 
while avoiding its romantic excesses. In refusing the commodified world of polypharmacy in 
the marketplace of ‘choice’, the Hearing Voices campaign insists on the communicative value 
of psychotic symptoms (http://www.intervoiceonline.org). This aim of working with auditory 
hallucinations as both disabling and meaningful, as idiosyncratic and as register of ambient cul-
tural anxieties, departs from the antipsychiatry lionizing of psychosis. The Occupy Movement, 
short-lived as it was, also brought onto the public stage the affinity between marginalization and 
madness. In the era of finance capital, with its manic flight from human suffering throughout 
the globe, unity was founded on disparate and desperate groups of people reclaiming the city 
squares. In the various occupied spaces, a culture of appreciation for misfits, for deviant ways of 
processing reality, prevailed for this short period of time. Providing food and shelter for street 
people, as well as activity within a holding environment, brought into view the failures of the 
social welfare system to provide meaningful care. Groups of malcontents, the increasing ranks of 
people overrun by global capital and its pathological vision of progress, have a perpetual way of 
finding each other and of creating new ways of fighting the dominant reality principle. But the 
ideals that animate these struggles, the desires that break on through to the other side, inevitably 
give rise to charges from the next generation of both romantic excess and failure of imagination. 
And both charges are frequently found to be true.
Further reading
Double, D. (ed.) (2006) Critical Psychiatry: The Limits of Madness. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Holland, K. (2012) ‘The unintended consequences of campaigns designed to challenge stigmatising rep-
resentations of mental illness in the media’, Social semiotics, 22(3), 217–236.
Hopton, J. (2006) ‘The future of critical psychiatry’, Critical Social Policy, 26(1), 57–73.
Lafrance, M. N. and McKenzie-Mohr, S. (2013) ‘The DSM and its lure of legitimacy’, Feminism & psychology, 
23(1), 119–140.
Website resources
Critical Psychiatry Network: www.criticalpsychiatry.co.uk
International Critical Psychiatry Network (ICPN): http://www.criticalpsychiatry.net

Alienists and alienation
221
Mad in America: Science, Psychiatry and Community: www.madinamerica.com
MindFreedom: www.mindfreedom.org
References
Alvarado Chavarría, M. J. (2012) ‘Let’s try to change it: psychiatric stigmatization, consumer/survivor activ-
ism, and the link and Phelan model’. Portland State University, http://archives.pdx.edu/ds/psu/7988
Bracken, P. (2012) ‘Psychiatric power: a personal view’, Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine, 29(1), 55–58, 
http://www.madinamerica.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/Psychiatric-power-a-personal-view.
pdf
Bracken, P. and Thomas, P. (2010) ‘From Szasz to Foucault: on the role of critical psychiatry.’ Philosophy, 
Psychiatry, & Psychology, 17(3), 219–228.
Castel, F., Castel, R. and Lovell, A. (1982) The Psychiatric Society. New York: Columbia University Press.
Eghigian, E. (2010) From Madness to Mental Health: Psychiatric Disorder and Its Treatment in Western Civiliza-
tion. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Foucault, M. (2008) Psychiatric Power: Lectures at the College of France 1973–1974. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Haaken, J. (1998) Pillar of Salt: Gender, Memory, and the Perils of Looking Back. New Brunswick, NJ, Rutgers 
University Press.
Ingleby, D. (1981) Critical Psychiatry: The Politics of Mental Health. New York: Pantheon Books.
Kupers, T. (1982) Public Therapy: The Practice of Psychotherapy in the Public Mental Health Clinic. New York: 
Free Press.
Moncrieff J. and Cohen, D. (2009) ‘How do psychiatric drugs work?’ British Medical Journal, 338, 1963–1963.
Nathan, D. (2011) Sybil Exposed: The Extraordinary Story Behind the Famous Multiple Personality Case. New 
York: Free Press.
Oaks, D. (2009) ‘OCSC: building a state-wide coalition!’ Consumer/Survivor Synergist, 4(2), http://www.
mhaoforegon.or
Opal (1852/2010) ‘The Opal: a monthly periodical of the lunatic asylum, devoted to usefulness, edited 
by the patients of the Utica State Lunatic Asylum (1850–1860)’, in E. Eghigian (ed.) From Madness to 
Mental Health: Psychiatric Disorder and Its Treatment in Western Civilization. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press.
Rosenhan, D. (1973) ‘On being sane in insane places’, Science, 179, 2560–258, http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/
docs/icb.topic625827.files/On_Being_Sane_In_Insane_Places-1.pdf
Sedgwick, P. (1982) Psycho Politics: Laing, Foucault, Goffman, Szasz, and the Future of Psychiatry. New York: 
Harper and Row.
Shorter, E. (1997) A History of Psychiatry: from the Era of the Asylum to the Age of Prozac. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons.
Szasz, T. (1995) ‘The origin of psychiatry: the alienist as nanny for troublesome adults’, History of Psychiatry, 
6(21), 1–19.
Turkle, S. (1981) ‘French anti-psychiatry’, in D. Ingleby (ed.) Critical Psychiatry: the Politics of Mental Health. 
New York: Pantheon Books.

222
Psychotherapists occupy an ambiguous position in late modern Western societies. On the indi-
vidual level, they are entrusted agents of change when the outcome of therapy is efficacious. Yet 
on a societal level, psychotherapy may unwillingly function as an allying conservative institution 
for forces adrift in late capitalism. This latent conflict both between the individual and society, 
and between professional ethics and social responsibility is in this chapter discussed through the 
process of individualization, as it illustrates the dilemmas surrounding individual interventions 
as Western societies’ preferred answer to human suffering under shifting living conditions. In 
particular, previous responses from feminist therapists are discussed, and I maintain that some of 
the challenges they have struggled with are vital for anyone wanting to act ethically and think 
critically about psychotherapy both inside and outside the office door.
I want to start off this chapter by giving a brief discussion of psychotherapy and psychol-
ogy as adjacent traditions. They are in reality different yet partly overlapping practices, as not 
all psychotherapists are psychologists and not all psychologists are psychotherapists. But in the 
public perception, they appear to be increasingly confused with each other. From the point of 
view of critical psychology their mix-up is not only a frequently occurring error, but also a quite 
convenient muddle for mainstream psychology, in that their forceful combination would appear 
to be reinforcing psychology’s ideological role in Western contemporary society through the 
psy-complex that shapes subjectivity through contingent psychological truths (Rose 1985). But 
let us try to start untying this knot by first looking more closely at the ground that psychology 
and psychotherapy primarily cover.
The psychology−psychotherapy alliance
The influential American Psychological Association’s (2013) current definition of psychology 
reads as follows: ‘Psychology is the study of the mind and behavior. The discipline embraces all 
aspects of the human experience − from the functions of the brain to the actions of nations, 
from child development to care for the aged’. Standard introductions to psychotherapy, on 
the other hand, will tell you that psychotherapy refers to therapeutic interaction or treatment 
restricted to a trained professional and a client, a couple, a family, or a group of people (see 
Lambert 2013 for an introduction). The usual aim of psychotherapy is to increase an individual’s 
23
Psychotherapists
Agents of change or maintenance men?
Ole Jacob Madsen

Psychotherapists
223
sense of well-being, to help a client with a specific problem, or to improve relationships between 
two or more people, such as a couple or a family. The confusion starts perhaps with the fact 
that although there is a wide array of psychotherapeutic goals, treatment techniques, durations 
of therapy and so on, a common denominator appears to be that a psychotherapist nonetheless 
draws on some version of psychology that espouses an idea about human problems, their root 
cause, and their potential resolution. Yet a psychotherapist need not be a psychologist, but can 
in fact be any kind of qualified mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist, clinical social 
worker, licensed counsellor, or other trained practitioner. Hence, not all psychotherapists are 
psychologists.
What further compounds the misunderstanding is that a larger number of psychologists 
within the field of psychology are now practising psychotherapy than before. Historically, clini-
cal psychology was, in the 1930s, a rather small and undistinguished specialty within psychology, 
and psychotherapy was a less frequent activity among clinical psychologists (Garfield 1981). 
Psychiatry was the dominant profession in psychotherapy. This all changed with the great num-
ber of casualties from World War II, which suddenly created a need for an institutionalization 
of clinical psychology (Capshew 1999), and subsequently a requirement for a training model in 
clinical psychology that would result in the scientist practitioner model (Boulder model). The 
latter become the dominant mode of training in professional psychology, as it remains today 
(Benjamin 2005). In the latter half of the 1970s, most battles with psychiatry had been won, as 
clinical psychologists became the chief distributors of psychotherapy (Buchanan 2003). The role 
clinical psychology holds within psychology has also completely changed: in the United States 
in 2010, a vast portion of the 170,200 psychologist positions were found in clinical, counsel-
ling, and school settings (152,000) that fairly often involve the practise of psychotherapy (U.S. 
Department of Labor 2013). In the UK in 2013, out of 19,033 registered psychologists, around 
9,500 were registered as clinical psychologists, making them the largest sub-division (Division 
of Clinical Psychology 2013).
The public image of the intimate scientific practitioner
After psychoanalysis became popular in the United States, following Sigmund Freud’s sole visit 
in 1909, the public stereotype of psychologists has been that of a practitioner conducting psy-
chotherapy by silently listening to the woes of a patient reclining on a couch (Benjamin 2005). 
The subsequent escalation of clinical psychology means that this stereotype is finally starting 
to catch up with the prototype, couch or no couch, as Benjamin reasons. Although psychology 
comprises a vast field of scientific knowledge, and only a portion holds a direct relevance to clin-
ical psychology, the archetype of the psychotherapist continues to dominate in the public per-
ception. For instance, in popular cartoons and newspaper caricatures it is almost always a classical 
analyst seated behind the client lying on the couch that is pictured, even two decades after Time 
Magazine asked the question ‘Is Freud dead?’ (Gray 1993) and the verdict was a resounding ‘Yes’.
The skewed idea of the psychotherapeutic situation as the only working situation for a 
psychologist is not only reserved to the cartoon pages; it is also not uncommon to come across 
it within higher education. Cardiff University (2013) gives a presentation of the subject of 
sociology for non-sociologists on their web pages by using a basic cartoon series to underline 
how sociology is different from the life sciences. Physics, chemistry, biochemistry, and biology 
are all represented by a person staring into a microscope at different kinds of objects, anatomy is 
embodied as one figure pinching another, and sociology shows a researcher bowing to a cloud 
of ‘social collectivity’, whereas psychology is illustrated by a figure standing over another figure 
lying on a divan.

Ole Jacob Madsen
224
Of course, it is not unlikely that the traditional social representation of psychology within 
cartoons simply has had a spillover effect on higher education in this case, but my own experi-
ence from academia is that you will often come across researchers from other disciplines who 
struggle to understand what psychology is, other than psychotherapy.
What then to make of the public’s tangled perception of psychology and psychotherapy? 
Instead of putting forward the common complaint you hear from time to time from profes-
sional psychologists, that they (the public) do not understand us (cf. Benjamin 1986), I want to 
ponder over how psychology and psychotherapy come to reinforce each other. It seems that 
their coexistence allows psychotherapists today to operate under the impression that what they 
do in therapy is derived directly from the latest scientific, neutral discoveries about the human 
mind (or brain). Cushman (1995: 2) maintains that psychotherapy is ‘thought of as a scientific 
practice, yet it is anything but standardized or empirical’. Unfortunately this status means that 
the effects of psychotherapy tend to be gravely overrated, and clinical treatment can sometimes 
serve as an excuse for not implementing more costly and comprehensive interventions (cf. Alex-
ander 2008). Psychologists, however, are currently flourishing throughout the Western media 
and popular culture (De Vos 2012), presumably because psychology is believed to be a more 
intimate and thus relevant science for people, thanks to the archetypical image of the helpful 
therapist. A comparable academic discipline such as sociology throughout the first years of this 
century seemed to be less noticeable and less in demand by the public (Giddens 2006), ostensi-
bly because sociologists do not have the benefit of being associated with a helping profession or 
simply a natural employment constituency. However, the persistent alliance between psychology 
and psychotherapy, despite its great success, should worry us, according to the sociology of 
individualization (Beck and Beck-Gernsheim 2002; Beck 1992), as psychology’s success story 
may be based on a troublesome trend of development in the Western modernized world, which 
is destined to create only more human suffering in the future and may be irreversible, unless 
psychologists and psychotherapists come to realize how they might unwillingly reinforce such 
forces.
Psychotherapy and individualization
The late German sociologist Ulrich Beck (1992) is renowned for his book Risk Society, which 
was published just before the nuclear accident in Chernobyl on April 29, 1986. This tragic event 
emphasized Beck’s warning that Western societies must come to terms with reflexive modernity 
to cope with uncertainty and the risks latent in industrialized and complex late-modern civili-
zations. The reason is that Western societies’ problems have become so complex that politicians 
and societal planners cannot be expected to have the insight into the increasingly diversified 
fields of knowledge that is required in order to take appropriate preventive action. Readings 
of Risk Society in the direct aftermath of the Chernobyl disaster undoubtedly had engineers in 
mind with respect to Beck’s assertion that future crises must be prevented by the professions 
themselves. Less noted is that fact that Beck (1992) also addressed the role of clinical psychol-
ogy and psychotherapy and the problem of individualization in the wake of the development 
within the welfare states of the West, where reflexive modernization came to dissolve the tradi-
tional parameters of industrial society such as class, gender, and the old-style family roles. Beck 
emphasizes that in the present day risk society people are being freed from feudal bonds in great 
numbers. Throughout the modern period, the individual is progressively becoming the main 
reference point as a result of institutionalized individualism: ‘The Western type of individualized 
society tells us to seek biographical solutions to systemic contractions’ (Beck and Beck-Gernsheim 
2002: xxii). Historical consciousness about these roots is of vital importance for whoever comes 

Psychotherapists
225
into contact with the human consequences that stem from this radically new situation for the 
individual. It is here we find the trusted institution that is psychotherapy:
It is important to recognize this in its historic dimension, because this socio-historical 
change takes place as a private, personal conflict. Psychology (and psychotherapy), which 
trace the suffering now being referred to them en masse back to the individual history of 
early childhood socialization, are becoming short-circuited.
(Beck 1992: 118–119)
Beck warns against the framing of people’s problems in therapist offices in a manner that views 
their individual biographical histories as the sole path to the cause and onset of, and solution 
to, their suffering. He adds that psychology has yet to undertake a satisfactory sociohistorical 
revision of its ways of thinking and intervening, which is necessary to prevent it from displacing 
the causes for problems onto the people who suffer from them. Thus, psychotherapy holds a 
significant position in late modern society, and must perform a kind of balancing act between 
the level of the individual and that of society.
If we are to take Beck’s challenge for clinical psychology and psychotherapy seriously, we 
must also critically examine his point of departure. In sociology it is somewhat uncontroversial 
today to assess Beck’s examination of the risk society and individualization as sweeping and at 
times a simplification (cf. Brannen and Nilsen 2005; Mythen 2005). First of all, anyone with 
the slightest familiarity with psychotherapy will undoubtedly complain that it can hardly be 
said to be one thing, and that among therapists you have a range of variance in technique, 
personal style, treatment philosophy, and so on. Beck, in the quoted passage, on the other hand, 
seems to be under the impression that all psychologists are likely to relate the client’s suffer-
ing back to his or her early childhood. This priority given to childhood in psychotherapeutic 
treatment is most commonly associated with conventional psychoanalysis, where childhood expe-
riences and possible trauma often is at the forefront (Freud 2003). Regardless, psychotherapy 
can by no means be reduced to clinical work on the client’s childhood experiences. Multiple 
popular directions in therapy can be found that are predominantly focused on the present 
and on the client’s future possibilities, like cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) (Dobson 2010) 
and narrative therapy (White and Epston 1990). Still, the risk of individualization is not simply 
resolved by pointing out to that there is much more to psychotherapy than fixations on the 
client’s biography.
In order to exploit this dilemma beyond fixations on childhood, I have elaborated on Beck’s 
perspective by creating a fictional case about a Norwegian office cleaner named Tove who 
works for a multi-corporate company (Madsen 2014). Tove is responsible for the cleaning of a 
larger section in one of the company’s office complexes. The company is looking into cutting 
costs in all areas and has therefore launched an efficiency improvement plan that also affects 
Tove’s daily workload, as she is expected to cover a much larger base than before.
Tove struggles with the new demands for several weeks, until one morning when she can-
not manage to get out of bed and go to work. Her body refuses to carry out the signals the 
brain is sending and Tove gradually realizes that she has all the classical signs of burnout from 
work-related stress. Tove is put on a sick leave by her general practitioner. After a short period 
of time Tove is then offered psychotherapeutic follow-up as one of the steps her employer 
implements for getting employees to return to work. In my fictional case, Tove’s therapist is an 
excellent professional who during just a handful of consultations manages to turn Tove’s situa-
tion around by applying a combination of CBT and narrative therapy. The therapist helps Tove 
recognize unhelpful negativist thought patterns, and to increase gradually the amount of positive 

Ole Jacob Madsen
226
thoughts and positive self-narratives that, according to these theories, will influence a person’s 
emotional and behavioural life. No mention is made of Tove’s childhood; the therapist instead 
helps Tove to look ahead, draws on her resources, and assists her in the creation of more adaptive 
coping strategies at work.
Not long afterwards, Tove is back at work and now successfully manages the new demands 
of her job. Tove is pleased. Her employer is content. The therapist is satisfied by a job well done. 
Despite the general contentment of all parties involved, I would hold that the solution to Tove’s 
case by psychotherapy might still be problematic, because the question of whether her employer 
was right in implementing an efficiency improvement plan is effectively swept under the carpet. 
The case is also meant to illustrate how an institution like psychotherapy might become an 
extremely useful ally for forces in late capitalism as a place where the consequences of human 
exploitation are sent, and then reprogrammed to adapt to the same societal conditions they came 
from. Of course, one could argue that rationalization is sometimes necessary and that it is in 
everybody’s interest that people quickly adapt to changing demands. However much this may be 
the case, my main point (as shown previously by Sampson [1983]) is rather that psychotherapy 
can never become wholly neutral; it is reciprocally intertwined with whatever goes on outside 
the office walls. The dilemma surrounding psychotherapy as preserving societal changes is that 
it is not adequately intercepted by the code of ethics of, for instance, psychologists and psychi-
atrists. For instance, the Hippocratic Oath basically obliges psychotherapists to give individual 
consolation to anyone who crosses their doorstep. An equivalent professional reflex for looking 
beyond the individual’s problem is virtually non-existent. Cushman (1990) has reasoned that it 
looks as if psychotherapists’ job descriptions simply do not permit them to question the socio-
political conditions under which their clients live.
Alternative approaches to psychotherapy
How can psychotherapists seriously address the problem of individualization that essentially is 
relevant for all variants, regardless of treatment philosophy? This latent conflict where modern 
societies’ contradictions and unsolved problems emerge in the therapist’s office has not gone 
unnoticed in psychotherapy in past decades. The individualism of conventional therapy was 
in the early 1970s challenged by family therapy through the work of practitioners like Gregory 
Bateson and Paul Watzlawick, who took an interest in interpersonal issues and transactional 
patterns (Marecek and Hare-Mustin 2009). However, in recent years, family therapy appears 
to be falling further and further behind in the competition with popular, individually directed, 
evidence-based methods like CBT (Fishman 2008). Community psychology evolved out of the 
mental health movement in the 1960s and emerged as an ecological reaction to overly individ-
ual clinical interventions, with an ambition of taking on the sociopolitical causes of psychologi-
cal suffering in the workplace, such as in local communities (cf. Sarason 1974; Rappaport 1987). 
Yet well-intentioned projects to help people in their local communities have a tendency to 
reproduce all the familiar patterns, as psychologists report that the demand for individual, clinical 
intervention in the population prevents them from doing much systemic and preventive work 
(cf. Heggland et al. 2013). Within critical psychology there are also practitioners who currently 
conduct psychotherapy in everyday life, interventions founded on the principle that traditional 
therapy cannot fulfil its purpose unless it taps into the client’s social network and local resources 
(cf. Dreier 2008). Time will tell whether such a nomadic approach to psychotherapy can gain 
broad support.
These movements all indirectly own up to the problems of individualization, but it is perhaps 
within the tradition of feminist therapy that we find the most pronounced attempts to come to 

Psychotherapists
227
terms with individualization, without altogether abandoning individual consolation. Within the 
fields of women’s studies and mental health studies a critique of psychotherapy similar to that 
provided by Beck has been in general circulation ever since the 1970s (see Bondi and Burman 
2001 for an overview). Women’s studies scholar Kathy Davis (1986) has previously explored the 
critique of therapy for individualizing women’s problems by studying a recorded therapy session. 
The client is a married, pregnant woman in her early twenties. The young woman starts off by 
telling the therapist she has been very upset lately, and Davis gives a fascinating excerpt and 
interpretation of how her problems are reformulated in therapy. Her dissatisfaction is related to 
an uneven distribution of responsibilities and a lack of space for her own interests, which is set 
to become a greater burden as she is soon to become a fulltime housewife instead of a student 
as she was before. The therapist in question gradually convinces the client that the ‘real’ problem 
is that she has put up a façade and not been able to talk openly and honestly about her feelings. 
Davis argues that another path was possible, whereby the therapist related the problems to the 
inequalities between husband and wife. She concludes by referring to feminist alternatives to 
traditional therapy that state that ‘a client’s “problems of fit” do not have to be reduced to some-
thing wrong with her. The social and political dimension of these difficulties could have been 
maintained as part and parcel of her current distress’ (Davis 1986: 71). Yet that did not take place 
in the therapy session at hand, and Davis therefore urges that further attention be paid to how 
individualization is unwittingly being helped by the trusted artefact of psychotherapy.
Running out of steam
A private practitioner of psychotherapy in the United States since 1989, Dana Becker has also 
made several notable contributions to the field of feminist psychotherapy. Becker (2005) main-
tains that as the notion of psychotherapy for the ‘normal’ has been institutionalized for half a 
decade, and has been directed especially towards women, it is time to question how the therapeutic 
culture has served them in terms of the broader social and political problems they face. Yet part 
of psychology and psychotherapy’s success lies in the ability to stow painful questions like these 
away. The professionalism of psychotherapy by clinical psychology grew out of Americans’ his-
torical rejection of authority ‘and the science that undergirded professionalization provided the 
expert with a unique understanding of the world that protected him from insinuations of politi-
cal, partisan, or personal motives or bias and left him accountable to very few’ (Becker 2005: 57). 
In her multiple works, Becker pursues how popular psychological concepts like ‘empowerment’ 
and ‘stress’ seep into American society’s popular lingo of people’s potentials and problems. The 
concept of ‘empowerment’ reflects and reinforces how the idea of collective emancipation from 
unfavourable sociopolitical living conditions is nowadays reduced to individual psychological 
self-actualization (Becker 2005). In that the popular idea of ‘stress’ plays an ideological part in 
drawing the outside in, we end up believing that we must change ourselves in order to adjust 
to societal conditions, instead of changing the living conditions (Becker 2013). ‘Stress’ helps to 
avoid the issue of gender equality in society, as an entire industry, from mindfulness courses to 
medication, prevails in order to ‘help’ the women that strangely appear to have much more of 
this dangerous disease than their husbands. The psy and stress discourse is also part of an evident 
feminist backlash today that is eager to tell women ‘they can’t have it all’, according to Becker.
Hence, the problems of individualization that Beck and Davis addressed in the mid-1980s 
appear to be unresolved today. It should be mentioned that Becker writes from an American 
context where gender roles might be less adventurous than, for instance, in the Nordic countries 
that are recognized as having the highest level of gender equality in the world (although pro-
gress is still reported to be slow within family life [cf. Magnusson and Marecek 2012]). In their 

Ole Jacob Madsen
228
master’s thesis from Umeå University, newly graduated psychologists Julia Narvola and Fanny 
Skarin (2012) investigated how six psychotherapists practising in Sweden negotiated therapeutic 
and feminist discourses in their daily work with female victims of violence. One of their main 
findings was that the different subject positions these discourses permit make it difficult for 
practitioners to successfully incorporate the feminist perspective into their work from day to 
day, despite sympathy for feminism. Narvola and Skarin (2012) therefore conclude that clinically 
oriented research in feminist therapy in general is lacking, and as a result critical and feminist 
perspectives lack legitimacy and credibility in therapy. The challenge today is to build on the 
decades of critique of psychology and psychotherapy’s individualizing pitfalls and successfully 
transform these insights into practical programmes that are of use to therapists and their clients 
in their struggle to cope with everyday life.
Critical psychotherapy: a contradiction in terms?
Part of the problem regarding therapeutic interventions and individualization stems perhaps 
from the unavoidable fact that psychology is the science of the individual, and, as Parker (2007) 
has summed it up, is always poisonous. Psychotherapists, whenever allying themselves with 
psychological theories of human suffering, will unavoidably be drawn to explain the client’s 
problems in individualistic terms. Yet the subject matter in psychotherapy might actually be 
the least of its problems, as the institutional conditions and codes surrounding psychotherapy 
will inevitably influence the outcome. In a welfare state like Norway, many rights are triggered 
only if the client has received a medical or psychiatric diagnosis. This way of organizing rights 
creates a situation wherein psychotherapists must treat the client’s problems, formally speaking, 
as belonging to him or her. Legal ownership helps to create an incentive for giving biographical 
answers, which often means the latest biological-neurological scientific discoveries. For instance, 
the child psychiatric diagnosis ADHD (which has increased dramatically in Norway in recent 
decades [Hinshaw et al. 2011]) will prompt the right to funding for special education in state 
schools. Whereas no diagnosis, but a recommendation that certain measures be carried out in 
the classroom, just means that the school must make the best of the situation as it is. Similarly, 
a general practitioner must diagnose a patient as clinically suffering from depression if he or 
she is to be given a medical certificate to take to their employer, while a full description of 
the depressing working conditions that surround the employee will trigger nothing. When the 
rights follow the individual, the understanding of the client’s problems and resolution appears 
gradually to follow. Thus resilient incentives may influence the underlying understanding of the 
client’s suffering and ultimately the outcome of therapy.
Conclusion
Ironically, regardless of the school of thought, psychotherapy is at bottom about change. Why 
‘ironically’? Because psychotherapy may in fact guarantee the perseveration of the status quo, as 
it is quintessentially a conservative institution (Cushman 1990) and its practitioners do not have 
the necessary training or the professional backing to start questioning the sociopolitical condi-
tions surrounding the individual clients they set out to help. In addition, its scientific partner in 
crime, psychology, deals by and large with allegedly universal structures in the brain. Giddens 
(2006) not long ago asked, in a commentary in The Guardian, why sociology today frequently 
comes up short in relation to psychology in terms of popularity in higher education. He links 
the relative strength of psychology to the impotence many people of today have come to feel 
about the future. When utopia is temporarily lost, sociological thinking born of the political and 

Psychotherapists
229
economic revolutions of the nineteenth century seems to suffer with it, as opposed to psychol-
ogy, which has always dealt with the enduring aspects of the human condition, according to 
Giddens. Thus, it is possible to interpret the psy-complex or therapeutic culture that currently 
forms the ontological centre of the Western world (Illouz 2008), where psychotherapy is ever 
more popular, as the only societal institution left where people dare to dream about revolutions. 
Exactly as the early critics of the therapeutic sensibility feared half a century ago (cf. Rieff 1987; 
Lasch 1991) ‘psychological man’s’ diminishing expectations towards the social reality he and 
she live under, help to guarantee that revolutions beyond the private, individual sphere remain 
nothing but a forgotten and ridiculed dream.
Further Reading
Beck, U. and Beck-Gernsheim, E. (2002) Individualization: Institutionalized Individualism and its Social and 
Political Consequences. London: Sage.
Becker, D. (2005) The Myth of Empowerment: Women and the Therapeutic Culture in America. New York: New 
York University Press.
Cushman, P. (1995) Constructing the Self, Constructing America: A Cultural History of Psychotherapy. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Davis, K. (1986) ‘The process of problem (re)formulation in psychotherapy’, Sociology of Health and Illness, 
8, 44–74.
Website resources
Encyclopedia of Critical Psychology (2013). The website provides lexical articles about psychological con-
cepts authored by critical psychologists: http://www.springerreference.com/docs/navigation.do?m= 
Encyclopedia+of+Critical+Psychology+(Behavioral+Science)-book162
Ingleby, D. (1970) ‘Ideology and the human sciences: Some comments on the role of reification in psychol-
ogy and psychiatry’: http://human-nature.com/free-associations/ingleby.html
References
Alexander, B. K. (2008) The Globalization of Addiction: A Study in Poverty of the Spirit. New York, Oxford 
University Press.
American Psychological Association. (2013) ‘How does the APA define “psychology”?’, http://www.apa.
org/support/about/apa/psychology.aspx#answer
Beck, U. (1992) Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. London: Sage.
Beck, U. and Beck-Gernsheim, E. (2002) Individualization: Institutionalized Individualism and Its Social and 
Political Consequences. London: Sage.
Becker, D. (2005) The Myth of Empowerment: Women and the Therapeutic Culture in America. New York: New 
York University Press.
Becker, D. (2013) One Nation under Stress: The Trouble with Stress as an Idea. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Benjamin, L. T. (1986) ‘Why don’t they understand us? A history of psychology’s public image’, American 
Psychologist, 41, 941–946.
Benjamin, L. T. (2005) ‘A history of clinical psychology as a profession in America (and a glimpse at its 
future)’, Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 1–30.
Bondi, L. and Burman, E. (2001) ‘Women and Mental Health: a Feminist Review’, Feminist Review, 68, 
6–33.
Brannen, J. and Nilsen, A. (2005) ‘Individualisation, choice and structure: a discussion of current trends in 
sociological analysis’, The Sociological Review, 53, 412–428.
Buchanan, R. D. (2003) ‘Legislative warriors: American psychiatrists, psychologists, and competing claims 
over psychotherapy in the 1950s’, Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 39, 225–49.
Capshew, J. H. (1999) Psychologists on the March: Science, Practice, and Professional Identity in America, 1929–1969. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.

Ole Jacob Madsen
230
Cardiff University (2013) Cartoon, http://www.cf.ac.uk/socsi/contactsandpeople/harrycollins/sociology- 
of-science.html
Cushman, P. (1990) ‘Why the self is empty: toward a historically situated psychology’, American Psychologist, 
45, 599–611.
Cushman, P. (1995) Constructing the Self, Constructing America: A Cultural History of Psychotherapy. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Davis, K. (1986) ‘The process of problem (re)formulation in psychotherapy’, Sociology of Health and Illness, 
8, 44–74.
De Vos, J. (2012) Psychologisation in Times of Globalisation, London: Routledge.
Divison of Clinical Psychology. (2013) ‘About the Division of Clinical Psychology (DCP)’. http://dcp.bps.
org.uk/dcp/dcp_home.cfm
Dobson, K. S. (ed.) (2010) Handbook of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapies. New York: Guilford.
Dreier, O. (2008) Psychotherapy in Everyday Life. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Academic Press.
Fishman, H. C. (2008) ‘Wither family therapy: the next 50 years’, Context, 3, 3.
Freud, S. (2003) An Outline of Psychoanalysis. London: Penguin.
Garfield, S. L. (1981) ‘Psychotherapy: a 40-year appraisal’, American Psychologist, 36, 174–183.
Giddens, A. (2006) ‘A call to arms’, The Guardian, http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/
nov/26/post682
Gray, P. (1993) ‘The assault on Freud’, Time, http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,979704, 
00.html
Heggland, J. E., Gärtner, K. and Mykletun, A. 2013. Kommunepsykologsatsningen i et folkehelseperspektiv [The 
Community Psychology Aiming from the Perspective of Public Health]. Oslo: The Norwegian Institute 
of Public Health.
Hinshaw, S. P., Scheffler, R. M., Fulton, B. D., Aase, H., Banaschewski, T., Cheng, W., Mattos, P., Holte, A., 
Levy, F., Sadeh, A., Sergeant, J., Taylor, E. and Weiss, M. D. (2011) ‘International variation in treatment 
procedures for ADHD: social context and recent trends’, Psychiatric Services, 62, 459–464.
Illouz, E. (2008) Saving the Modern Soul: Therapy, Emotions, and the Culture of Self-help. Berkeley, CA: Univer-
sity of California Press.
Lambert, M. J. (ed.) (2013) Bergin and Garfield’s Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behavior Change. Hoboken, 
NJ: Jon Wiley.
Lasch, C. (1991) The Culture of Narcissism: American Life in an Age of Diminishing Expectations. New York: 
Norton.
Madsen, O. J. (2014) The Therapeutic Turn: How Psychology Altered Western Culture. London: Routledge.
Magnusson, E. and Marecek, J. (2012) Gender and Culture in Psychology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Marecek, J. and Hare-Mustin, R. T. (2009) ‘Clinical psychology: the politics of madness’, in D. Fox, I. Pril-
leltensky and S. Austin (eds) Critical Psychology: An Introduction (2nd Ed.). London: Sage.
Mythen, G. (2005) ‘Employment, individualization and insecurity: rethinking the risk society perspective’, 
The Sociological Review, 53, 129–149.
Narvola, J. and Skarin, F. (2012) ‘Skiljelinjer mellan feministisk kritik och praktik. Sex terapeuters förhandlingar 
mellan terapeutiska och feministiska diskurser i arbetet med våldsutsatta kvinnor’ [Divinding lines between feminist 
criqitue and clinical practice], Master’s thesis, Umeå University, Umeå.
Parker, I. (2007) Revolution in Psychology. Alienation to Emancipation. Pluto Press: London.
Rappaport, J. (1987) ‘Terms of empowerment/exemplars of prevention: toward a theory for community 
psychology’, American Journal of Community Psychology, 15, 121–148.
Rieff, P. (1987) The Triumph of the Therapeutic: Uses of Faith after Freud. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press.
Rose, N. (1985) The Psychological Complex. Psychology, Politics and Society in England 1869–1939. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Sampson, E. E. (1983) Justice and the Critique of Pure Psychology. New York: Plenum Press.
Sarason, S. B. (1974) The Psychological Sense of Community: Prospects for a Community Psychology. San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass.
U.S. Department of Labor. (2013) Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2012–13 Edition: Psychologists. Bureau of 
Labor Statistics, http://www.bls.gov/ooh/life-physical-and-social-science/psychologists.htm
White, M. and Epston, D. (1990) Narrative Means to Therapeutic Ends. New York: Norton.

231
The premier demand upon all education is that Auschwitz not happen again.
(Adorno 1971: 1)
Contemporary institutionalized understandings of education as a disciplinary field differ from 
historical concepts of education. Contemporary institutionalized psychology too differs from 
broader, historical understandings of psychology. Education and psychology share a similar tra-
jectory as discrete disciplinary forms arising during the last one hundred and fifty years or so, 
but while both generate discourses around development, learning, behaviour, language and, 
more recently, emotion, psychology, variously conceived, has penetrated its erstwhile partner 
through the practices of a more vigorous positivist ‘science’. The industrialized and more recent 
post-industrial reframing of a dilemma with which education and psychology have both histor-
ically been concerned – as to the kind of lives and societies we should aspire – underpins much 
of this chapter. Elements of a shared history, together with the potential mutuality of critical 
approaches to psychology, pedagogy, and progressive education are briefly explored and thrown 
into relief against their contemporary institutionalized forms.
Codifying psychology in education
It could be argued that following the opening of Wundt’s own experimental laboratory in 1879, 
educational psychology almost became synonymous with psychology itself. Since it was impos-
sible to take all the children to the laboratory, however, the school itself became a site for sys-
tematic psychological investigation and experimentation. Measurement, rank, and the category 
became established as preferred technological functions (Billington 1996), and in the early years 
of the twentieth century, educational psychology constructed a disciplinary boundary upon 
nonhuman conceptuo-technical devices in order to convince as to its ‘scientific’ credentials, 
for example, standardization, deviation, variance, correlation and thus its suitability to manage 
populations.
So-called psychological tests enabled the process of entry into the workforce to be subject 
to early regulation and the opportunity provided by schools as a site for scrutiny and examina-
tion – with children as a captive audience – was too good to ignore. By 1920, many children 
24
Education and psychology
Change at last?
Tom Billington and Tony Williams

Tom Billington and Tony Williams
232
in schools across industrialized countries were being subjected not only to testing in reading, 
spelling, and arithmetic (Thorndike 1913–14) but to a whole range of professional practices 
which purported to examine various ‘abilities’ or ‘mental deficits’ in verbal and visual reasoning, 
language, memory, and sense perception (Brown and Thomson 1921; Burt 1909, 1921; Goddard 
1911a; Miner 1918; Shrubsall 1911; Whitley 1911).
The vigour in US psychology at the beginning of the twentieth century matched the vigour 
of its economy, and there was considerable enthusiasm for so-called intelligence tests. One of 
the principal architects behind the development of psychometric tests devised to measure such 
constructs was James Cattell (1860–1944) who had also studied with Wundt. Following the 
conceptualization of  ‘g’ (Spearman 1904), Binet and Simon’s original Tests (1905, 1914) and the  
later US version (Terman et al. 1917, the ‘Stanford-Binet’), the discourses of  ‘mental age’ and ‘IQ’  
gained in currency. These were pivotal moments in the history of both psychology and educa-
tion, not only in the US but across Europe and its dominions. A psychology had been created in 
which a mean, or normalization, could be sought which would allow with statistical precision 
the identification of the ideal individual and by inference, thereafter, all manner of individual 
differences according to age and ‘ability’.
Educational psychology aspired to become the ultimate ‘science’ of child measurement 
although, of course, it never actually succeeded in moving beyond the merely technological. 
Educational psychology had offered itself as a solution to a problem of government – how 
to regulate the boundaries of childhood, even personhood? It provided a supposedly rational 
antidote to the unreason suspected in the category child (i.e. as potentially resistant to forms of 
governmentality) and demonstrated how, for example, problematic children who might com-
monly have been described previously in lay terms as ‘idiots’ or ‘imbeciles’, could now, via the 
‘scientific’ methods offered by psychological testing, formally be categorized as such (Binet and 
Simon 1914; Goddard 1911b; Shrubsall 1923). Educational psychology thus followed a path into 
the belly of government, a journey made previously by psychiatry; both disciplines practised an 
alchemy in which individual lives could be transformed into formal categories of difference 
which were then concretized as transgressive according to law. Many children could legally 
be considered ‘uneducable’ and legitimately excluded from the ‘mainstream’. Special education 
was born.
The tests were crude, partial, and unable to recognize the vast array of other variables which 
pertain in any human situation (environmental, contextual, economic, political, social, etc.) 
and a critical educational psychology argues that this remains the case today. Within the space 
of about twenty years, however, authorities in Europe and the US had acquired a seemingly 
rational means of managing the population from a very early age and of creating a structure 
of education in which social mobility could be regulated. Most children would be expected 
to remain within their social sphere but some would move outside, either to enhanced or 
restricted opportunities i.e. in respect of future economic status. All this would be controlled 
by a psychometric testing which promised to fix not only a child’s ‘mental age’ or ‘IQ’ but 
thereafter their life chances too.
The Hadow Report on psychological testing in education in Britain (Board of Education 
1924) provides insights into first, the origins of psychology in education in Britain, second, the 
ways in which psychological testing became an authoritative form of practice allied to the pro-
cesses of government, and third, how many of the educational discourses of the time adopted 
psychologized discourses which were infused with the principles of positivism and eugenics.
Others involved in psychology and education at the time made different theoretical choices, 
for example, James and Dewey in the US, Steiner (1861–1925) in Europe, and Susan Isaacs 

Education and psychology
233
(1885–1948) in the UK. It is thus incumbent upon us within our current context to be une-
quivocal about the status accorded to Cyril Burt’s legacy, which should be subject to contempo-
rary critique, not least since his claims proved to be hopelessly inaccurate:
It is my personal conviction that the main outlines of our human nature are now approx-
imately known, and that the whole territory of individual psychology has, by one worker 
or another, been completely covered in the main.
(Burt, in Hearnshaw 1979: 49)
With little credible evidence other than personal conviction, Burt thus adopted an anti-scientific 
position and went on to contribute to a colonialist passion for racial explanations and the surge 
of interest in eugenics (Chitty 2007).
Sir Francis Galton’s commitment to hereditability had clear racial connotations. For example, 
during his travels in Africa he had written thus of a first meeting with one particular group of 
people: ‘I found that some had trousers, some coats of skin, and they clicked, and howled, and 
chatted, and generally behaved like baboons. I looked on all these fellows as a sort of primitive 
link with civilization’ (Brookes 2004: 112). Burt’s own later assumptions and preferences were 
injected into education via psychologized discourses which can lay little claim to objectivity, ‘It 
is important to recognize the presence of hereditary mental differences even among the races of 
civilized Europe’ (Burt 1913: 199). Psychological discourse in the UK thus came to reinforce a 
culture of measurement which created the opportunity to attack any child who might prove a 
burden on the economic wealth of the nation. However, the tests were riven with social and cul-
tural bias, based upon reductionist psychological discourses of hereditability, fixed intelligence, 
and mental deficiency which not only remain unproven but continue to corrode individual lives 
and potentials.
In one of his six seminal reports on education for the British government, Henry Hadow 
set out specifically to map the latest thinking on the implementation of psychological tests 
in schools (Board of Education 1924). The 248-page document provides a detailed account 
of thinking of the time regarding concepts such as ‘ability’ and ‘intelligence’ (with voices for 
and against), and provides in itself the basis for critique of the early relationship between psy-
chology and education. Hadow’s meticulous scholarly account included analyses of the use of 
psychological testing in schools in over 20 countries; those consulted included psychologists 
such as William Brown, C. S. Myers, George Miles, Charles Spearman, Susan Isaacs, and Edward 
Thorndike.
While Burt was commissioned to write sections of the report, Hadow (Vice-Chancellor of 
our own University at Sheffield) was careful to maintain intellectual control over a critique in 
which he suggested the need for due caution regarding the more excessive claims being made by 
the positivist enthusiasts. Despite such cautionary counsel, however, Burt continued for decades 
to place energetically before successive British governments papers which encouraged the use 
of psychological testing across the school system wherever selection was required (Burt 1959).
Psychology in education: the foundations for re-construction
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to provide an inventory of the ways in which education 
and psychology have been mutually reinforcing, but the following are a few of the most signif-
icant. The works of J. B. Watson (1878–1958) and B. F. Skinner (1904–1990) came to dominate 
many of the practices of successive generations of teachers, psychologists, and policy makers, 

Tom Billington and Tony Williams
234
encouraging the development and application of a multitude of behaviour modification deriv-
atives in schools. Piaget (1896–1980) similarly influenced generations of professionals through 
his theories of children’s learning, not least through the impact on school curricula and systems 
of his development narratives according to age. Albert Bandura’s (1925-) social learning theory 
stood somewhere in between these behaviourist and cognitivist paradigms, while education has 
at times been receptive to ideas from, for example, Urie Bronfenbrenner (1917–2005) on eco-
logical systems theory, Howard Gardner (1943-) on multiple intelligences, Reuven Feuerstein 
(1921-) on dynamic assessment, and Martin Seligman (1942-) on positive psychology. In the 
respective contributions of these last four authors it is possible to detect a number of theoretical 
problems concerning the manifestations of behaviourist and cognitivist psychological discourses 
in education during much of the twentieth century, for example concerning: the concept of 
intelligence itself, and beyond to its irreducibility to a single and indeed fixed figure (Gardner, 
Feuerstein); a focus on deficit (Feuerstein, Seligman); and analyses which either isolated or 
dehumanized the individual i.e. as being impervious to environmental variables and potential 
change – social, cultural, political, economic (Feuerstein and Bronfenbrenner).
Critical psychology sensitizes us to the ways in which educational and other authorities not 
only regulate – which is not necessarily a problem – but also effectively exclude, which is, espe-
cially given a creeping unease as to the quality of the ‘science’ upon which those (social) prac-
tices are being justified. Arguably one of the most outstanding ‘achievements’ of psychology in 
education during the twentieth century was the development of the technical means by which 
selected individuals could be confirmed and positioned as defective, deviant, or as a member of 
a transgressive category (disability or special need). Rather than becoming lost in the minutiae 
of the most recent DSM-5 (APA 2013) in respect to a plethora of individual psychopathologies, 
however, we would like to conclude our chapter by highlighting a tradition of psychologists and 
educationalists whose work has sought not only to resist the reduction of psychology in educa-
tion to the regulation of social exclusion but also to attempt to reclaim more ancient traditions 
of science, education, and psychology in research and practice.
Lev Vygotsky (1896–1934) and Jerome Bruner (b.1915), in different ways, each unsettled 
understandings of the relationship between individual functioning and the world as depicted 
by positivist accounts of human beings, and their ideas were applied across educational research 
and practice during the last decades of the twentieth century. Vygotsky became highly popular 
and influential with those psychologists and teachers who wanted to resist reductionist, individ-
ualized, or pathologized accounts of the person, in particular, relating to matters of language or 
learning. His theory of  ‘ZPD’, the zone of proximal development (1986) has informed teaching 
and learning practices through its demands for consideration of people’s functioning within 
social contexts, and has in turn led to a number of specific theoretical and practical derivatives 
such as sociocultural activity theory (Leadbetter 2008; Daniels et al. 2009). Bruner’s (1966) 
conceptualization of learning (‘scaffolding’) bore similarities with the ZPD but he was also to 
develop rich analyses of thinking and knowing which demanded consideration of concepts 
frequently overlooked since James, for example, in relation to meaning-making and matters of 
representation (Bruner 1986).
Both Vygotsky and Bruner, each in their own way, envisaged a psychology which was impos-
sible to contain within isolated individuals, although, while Vygotsky was perhaps more intrin-
sically social, Bruner was focused on the uniquely human. In recent years, narrative approaches 
have inspired many psychologists and teachers to aspire to less disabling forms of practice by 
demanding that analyses become more sensitive not only to the importance of language but 
to the dynamic nature of human being (Berliner 1992; Bruner 1991; Riessman 2002; White 
and Epston 1990). Erica Burman’s (2008) utilization of deconstruction as a tool for critiquing 

Education and psychology
235
development narratives, together with her exploration of a feminist agenda, has also had a signif-
icant impact on contemporary global discourse in educational and other settings by re-affirming 
the essentially debilitating nature of existing institutions and practices. Isaac Prilleltensky has 
targeted policy and practice issues by, for example, emphasizing critical approaches and the pos-
sibility of community solutions (Fox, Prilleltensky, and Austin 2009; Nelson and Prilleltensky 
2005), while Ben Bradley has similarly utilized emerging critiques of psychological paradigms 
to provide alternatives in respect of professional training (2005). There are in addition increasing 
numbers of psychologists working in education who have committed to the development of 
critical psychological research and practice – Billington (2000), Bird (1999), Corcoran (2014), 
Gallagher (2003), Goodley and Lawthom (2006), Goodman (2010), Kincheloe (2006, 2008), 
Mercieca (2011), Martin and McLellan (2013), Neilsen and Kvale (1999), Newman and Holz-
man (1993), Sloan (2000), Todd (2014), Vassallo (2013), Williams (2013). 
Education has its own tradition of critical studies, of course, which in large part continues to 
owe its legacy to Dewey and, subsequently, to Paulo Freire (1921–1997) who adopted a more 
piercingly political and economic critique to inform a community activism. Freire’s (1972) 
critical pedagogy perhaps best fits with the kind of critical approaches adopted elsewhere in 
this volume, influenced as it was by a more clearly defined politicized analysis and commentary. 
Examples of the many other educationalists who have inserted critical educational discourse 
into contemporary epistemological as well as political contests include Allen (2012), Ball (2012), 
Carr and Kemmis (1986), Davies (1994), Duncan-Andrade and Morrell (2008), Giroux (2011), 
Lingard and Rizvi (1997), Martin, Sugarman and McNamara (2000), Phoenix (2009), Riley 
(1983), Said (1977), Slee (2011),Vavrus and Bartlett, eds. (2009), Walkerdine, Lucey and Mel-
ody (2002), and Willis (1981). Further direct challenges to specifically psychologically defined 
discourses include those of Drummond and Yarker (2013) and Wrigley (2013), who provided 
critiques of the conceptualizations of intelligence and ability while Stronach (2006) as well as 
Ecclestone and Hayes (2009) critiqued the therapeutic turn and new emotionalism in education.
Towards a critical, scientific psychology and education
Whether as researchers or applied psychologists, we are confronted with postmodern dilemmas 
of choice between particular activities and practices in preference to others. Adorno’s call to 
arms with which we opened the chapter links to ancient ideas about the purpose of education 
as having the potential to contribute to public and private good, preventing atrocities, and 
implicitly encouraging virtuous lives. The dominant narratives of psychology in education of 
the last one hundred years, however, seem far removed from such lofty considerations, reduced 
as they have frequently been to accounts of mechanized mind and behaviour. So how should 
psychology and education share discursive spaces? What ideas should we select and encourage? 
How should we go about our work?
Critical thrusts during the last 30 years or so have questioned the scientific credibility of 
positivist approaches, for example, their ability to gain purchase on the following: the dynamic 
nature of all human processes and situations; the problematic nature of language and representa-
tion; and the intrinsically relational (and embodied) nature of all human experience.
While primarily targeted at researchers, however, Parker (2005) among others ensures that 
contemporary practitioners too, whether in psychology or education, can access the neces-
sary materials to begin conceptualizing and building critical practice and research which can 
engage with the above. There are new challenges to face, though, not least through techno-
logical change, which seems likely to demand that Education will again be the recipient of 
technologically informed, psychological incursions, this time from neuroscience, specifically 

Tom Billington and Tony Williams
236
concerning the nature of human development and the brain. Unfortunately, there are already 
signs that education may be resistant to the more complex possibilities offered by some crit-
ical neuroscientific literature, such as the questions concerning embodied processes of mind 
and meaning to be found in, for example, Broks (2003), Choudhury and Slabny (eds.) (2012), 
Rose and Abi-Rached (2013), and Tallis (2008). Concepts such as process, context, and value 
in relation to learning and development, although available for hundreds of years (e.g. Spinoza 
1677/1989), are once again likely to confuse however, and simplistic discourses are already being 
filtered down from their more cautious and complex origins by the demands of governmen-
tality (for example, Immordino-Yang and Damasio [2007]; Trevarthen and Aitken [1994]). The 
prefix ‘neuro’ seems likely to supplement ‘psycho’ as the powerful cultural signifier and there is 
a danger that potentially exciting research might be oblivious to critique and thus leave the old 
power relations intact i.e. between knower and known.
In his social constructionist accounts of human relations, Ken Gergen develops a Deweyan 
position in which ‘the primary aim of education [will be] to enhance the potentials for partic-
ipating in relational processes – from the local to the global’ (2009: 243), while in considering 
the critical practice of psychologists in the future, Billig points to a danger that ‘social science 
writing talks of things when it needs to describe people, both the powerless and the powerful’ 
(Billig 2013).
There has been insufficient space to introduce fellow participants into this account but their 
contributions have been tacit, whether children, parents, teachers, or professional trainees. Crit-
ical approaches thus need to embrace epistemology, ontology, and the political, since together 
they take us further towards acknowledgment of the complexity of human relations of which 
psychological discourses in education have frequently been intolerant. Even when adopting a 
critical stance, individual relations, for researchers, practitioners, and other participants (research 
and practice with, not on) will continue to be at risk from the abuses of power which can infect 
those practices of diagnosis and psychopathologization, which are impervious to critique and 
which result in educational discrimination and exclusion, the consequences of incomplete, inad-
equate, or non-science.
Further reading
Burman, E. (2008) Deconstructing Developmental Psychology(2nd Edn). Hove: Routledge.
Chitty, C. (2007) Eugenics, Race and Intelligence in Education. London: Continuum.
Dewey, J. (1938) Experience and Education. New York: Collier Books.
Freire, P. (1972) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Website resources
Education in England – The History of Our Schools: http://www.educationengland.org.uk/
The Taos Institute: http://www.taosinstitute.net/
References
Adorno, T. (1971) ‘Education after Auschwitz’, http://www.deschoolingclassroom.tkh-generator.net/
wp-content/uploads/2009/12/adorno-education_after_auschwitz.pdf
Allen, A. (2012) ‘Using Foucault in education research’, British Educational Research Association, http://www.
bera.ac.uk/resources/using-foucault-education-research
APA (2013) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 5. New York: The American Psychiatric Association.
Ball, S. J. (2012) Foucault, Power and Education. London: Routledge.
Berliner, D. C. (1992) ‘Telling the stories of educational psychology’, Educational Psychologist, 27, 143–152.

Education and psychology
237
Billig, M. (2013) ‘Noun of thorns’, The Higher Education, http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/
social-sciences-usage-is-preventing-the-discipline-speaking-truth-unto-power-warns-michael- 
billig/2005344.article
Billington, T. (1996) ‘Pathologizing children: psychology in education and acts of government’, in  
E. Burman, G. Aitken, P. Alldred, R. Allwood, T. Billington, B. Goldberg, A. J. Gordo Lopez, C. Heenan,  
D. Marks and S. Warner, Psychology Discourse Practice: From Regulation to Resistance. London: Taylor and 
Francis.
Billington, T. (2000) Separating, Losing and Excluding: Narratives of Difference. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Binet, A. (1905) ‘New methods for the diagnosis of the intellectual level of subnormals’, L’Année Psy-
chologique, 12, 191–244.
Binet, A. and Simon, T. (1914) Mentally Defective Children. London: Edward Arnold.
Bird, L. (1999) ‘Towards a more critical educational psychology’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 1(1), 
21–33.
Board of Education (1924) (Hadow Report) ‘Report of the consultative committee on psychological 
tests of educable capacity and their possible use in the public system of education’. Board of Education. 
London: HMSO
Bradley, B. (2005) Psychology and Experience. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Broks, P. (2003) Into the Silent Land: Travels in Neuropsychology. London: Atlantic Books.
Brookes, M. (2004) Extreme Measures: The Dark Visions and Bright Ideas of Francis Galton. London: Bloomsbury.
Brown, W. and Thomson, G. (1921) The Essentials of Mental Measurement. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Bruner, J. S. (1966) Toward a Theory of Instruction. New York: Norton.
Bruner, J. S. (1986) Actual Minds, Possible Worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bruner, J. S. (1991) ‘The narrative construction of reality’, Critical Inquiry, 18(1), 1–21.
Burman, E. (2008) Deconstructing Developmental Psychology. (2nd Edn). Hove: Routledge.
Burt, C. (1909) ‘Experimental tests of general intelligence’, British Journal of Psychology, 3, 94–177.
Burt, C. (1913) ‘The inheritance of mental characters’, The Eugenics Review, 4, 168–200.
Burt, C. (1921) Mental and Scholastic Tests. London County Council Report, 2052: PS King and Son.
Burt, C. L. (1959) ‘The examination at eleven plus’, British Journal of Education Studies, 7, 99–117.
Carr, W. and Kemmis, S. (1986) Becoming Critical: Education, Knowledge and Action Research. London: 
RoutledgeFalmer.
Chitty, C. (2007) Eugenics, Race and Intelligence in Education. London: Continuum.
Choudhury, S. and Slabny, J. (eds) (2012) Critical Neuroscience: a Handbook of the Social and Cultural Aspects of 
Neuroscience. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Corcoran, T. D. (ed.) (2014) Psychology in Education: Critical Theory-Practice. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Daniels, H., Edwards, A., Engestrom, Y. and Ludvigsen, S. (eds) (2009) Activity Theory in Practice: Promoting 
Learning across Boundaries and Agencies. London: Routledge.
Davies, B. (1994) Poststructuralist Theory and Classroom Practice. Geelong: Deakin University Press.
Drummond, M. J. and Yarker, P. (eds) (2013) ‘This way out: teachers and pupils escaping from fixed-ability 
thinking and practice’, Forum, Special Issue 55(1).
Duncan-Andrade, J. M. and Morrell, E. (2008) The Art of Critical Pedagogy: Possibilities for Moving from Theory 
to Practice in Urban Schools. New York: Peter Lang.
Ecclestone, K and Hayes, D. (2009) ‘Changing the subject: the educational implications of emotional 
well-being’, Oxford Review of Education, 35(3), 371–389.
Fox, D., Prilleltensky, I. and Austin, S. (eds) (2009) Critical Psychology: an Introduction. London: Sage.
Freire, P. (1972) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Gallagher, S. (2003) Educational Psychology: Disrupting the Dominant Discourse. New York: Peter Lang.
Gergen, K. J. (2009) Relational Being. New York: Oxford University Press.
Giroux, H. A. (2011) On Critical Pedagogy. Critical Pedagogy Today Series. London: Continuum.
Goddard, (1911a) ‘The grading of backward children’. Training School Bulletin. Vineland.
Goddard, (1911b) ‘Mental development and measurement of the levels of intelligence’, Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 498–508.
Goodley, D. and Lawthom, R. (eds) (2006) Disability and Psychology: Cultural Introductions and Reflections. 
London: Palgrave MacMillan
Goodman, G. S. (2010) Educational Psychology Reader: the Art and Science of How People Learn. New York: 
Peter Lang.
Hearnshaw, L. (1979) Cyril Burt – Psychologist. London: Hodder and Stoughton.

Tom Billington and Tony Williams
238
Immordino-Yang, M. H. and Damasio, A. R. (2007) ‘We feel, therefore we learn: the relevance of affective 
and social neuroscience to education’, Mind, Brain and Education, 1(1), 3–10.
Kincheloe, J. L. (2006) ‘A critical politics of knowledge: analyzing the role of educational psychology in 
educational policy’, Policy Futures in Education, 4 (3), 220–235.
Kincheloe, J. L. (2008) Critical Pedagogy Primer. New York: Peter Lang.
Leadbetter, J. (2008) ‘Activity theory and the professional practice of educational psychology’, in B. Kelly, 
L. Woolfson, J. Boyle (eds) Frameworks for Practice in Educational Psychology: A Textbook for Trainees and 
Practicioners. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Lingard, R. and Rizvi, F. (1997) Educational Policy and the Politics of Change. London: Routledge.
Martin, J. and McLellan, A-M. (2013) The Education of Selves: How Psychology Transformed Students. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Martin, J., Sugarman, J. and McNamara, J. (2000) Models of Classroom Management II: Principles, Practices and 
Critical Considerations (3rd Edn). Calgary: Detselig.
Mercieca, D. (2011) Beyond Conventional Boundaries: Uncertainty in Research and Practice with Children. Rot-
terdam: Sense Publishers.
Miner, J. B. (1918) Deficiency and Delinquency: an Interpretation of Mental Testing. Warwick and York.
Neilsen, K. and Kvale, S. (1999) ‘Current issues in apprenticeship’, Nordisk Pedagogik, 17(3), 160–169.
Nelson, G. and Prilleltensky, I. (eds) (2005) Community Psychology: in Pursuit of Liberation and Well-being. 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave MacMillan.
Newman, F. and Holzman, L. (1993) Lev Vygotsky: Revolutionary Scientist. London: Routledge.
Parker, I. (2005) Qualitative Psychology: Introducing Radical Research. Maidenhead: Open University/
McGraw-Hill.
Phoenix, A. (2009) ‘De-colonizing practices: negotiating narratives from racialized and gendered experi-
ences of education’, Race Ethnicity and Education 12 (1), 101–114.
Riessman, C. K. (2002) ‘Doing justice: positioning the interpreter in narrative work’, in W. Patterson (ed.) 
Strategic Narrative: New Perspectives on the Power of Personal and Cultural Storytelling. Lanham, MA and 
Oxford, UK: Lexington Books.
Riley, D. (1983) War in the Nursery: Theories of the Mother and Child. London: Virago.
Rose, N. and Abi-Rached, J. M. (2013) Neuro: the New Brain Sciences and the Management of Mind. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rose, S.P.R. (2006). The 21st. Century Brain: Explaining, Mending and Manipulating the Mind. London: Vintage.
Said, E. (1977) Orientialism. London: Penguin.
Shrubsall, F. C. (1911) ‘The examination of mentally defective children’, School Hygiene, 2, 609–612.
Shrubsall, F. C. (1923) ‘Delinquency and mental defect III’, British Journal of Medical Psychology, 3(3), 179–187.
Slee, R. (2011) The Irregular School: Exclusion, Schooling and Inclusion. London: Routledge.
Sloan, T. (ed.) (2000) Critical Psychology: Voices for Change. London: Palgrave.
Spearman, E. (1904) ‘⁜“General intelligence”, objectively determined and measured’, American Journal of 
Psychology, 15, 201–293.
Spinoza (1677/1989) Ethics. London: JM Dent and Sons.
Stronach, I. (2006) ‘The therapy culture: cultivating vulnerability in an uncertain age’, British Educational 
Research Journal, 32(2), 333–335.
Tallis, R. (2008) The Kingdom of Infinite Space: a Fantastical Journey Around Your Head. London: Atlantic Books.
Terman, L. M., Lyman, G., Ordahl, L., Galbreath, N. and Talbert, N. (1917) The Stanford revision and extension 
of the Binet-Simon scale for measuring intelligence. Baltimore: Warwick and York.
Thorndike, E. L. (1913–14) Educational psychology, 3 Volumes. London: Kegan Paul.
Todd, L. (2014) ‘Critical dialogue, critical methodology: bridging the research gap to young people’s par-
ticipation in evaluating children’s services’, in G. Porter, J. Townsend and K. Hampshire (eds) Children 
and Young People as Knowledge Producers. London: Routledge.
Trevarthen, C. and Aitken, K. J. (1994) ‘Brain development, infant communication and empathy disorders: 
intrinsic factors in child mental health’, Development and Psychopathology, 6(4), 597–633.
Vassallo, S. (2013) Self-regulated Learning: An Application of Critical Educational Psychology. New York: 
Peter Lang.
Vavrus, F. and Bartlett, L. (eds) (2009) Critical Approaches to Comparative Education: Vertical Case Studies from 
Africa, Europe, the Middle East, and the Americas. London: Palgrave.
Vygotsky, L. (1986) Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Walkerdine, V., Lucey, H. and Melody, J. (2002) Growing up Girl: Psychosocial Explorations of Gender and Class. 
London: Palgrave; New York: New York University Press.

Education and psychology
239
White, M. and Epston, D. (1990) Narrative Means to Therapeutic Ends. New York: Norton.
Whitley, M. T. (1911) ‘An empirical study of certain tests for individual differences’, Archives of Psychology, 
No. 19. New York: The Science Press.
Williams, A. (2013) ‘Critical educational psychology: fostering emancipatory potential within the thera-
peutic project’, Power and Education, 5(3), 304–317.
Willis, P. (1981) Learning to Labour: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class Jobs. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Wrigley, T. (2013) ‘Beyond “ability”: some European alternatives’, Forum, 55 (1), 59–72.

240
The relationship between the defined purpose of social work and the theoretical, legal, and 
political scaffolding that supports the profession presents a series of tensions and dilemmas. The 
International Federation of Social Work provides the following definition for contemporary 
social work:
The social work profession promotes social change, problem solving in human relationships 
and the empowerment and liberation of people to enhance well-being. Utilising theories 
of human behaviour and social systems, social work intervenes at the points where people 
interact with their environments. Principles of human rights and social justice are funda-
mental to social work.
(International Federation of Social Work 2012)
The concepts and practice of ‘social change’ and ‘problem solving in human relationships’, when 
placed under the conceptual lenses of empowerment, liberation, principles of human rights, and 
social justice, should distinguish social work from other professional disciplines. However, social 
work utilizes ‘theories of human behaviour’, for example, theories of psychology that clash with 
the imperative to promote the empowerment and liberation of people, and to adhere to prin-
ciples of human rights and social justice. Taking up the notion of social work as an agent that 
‘intervenes at the points where people interact with their environments’, and placing this with the 
history and origins of social work as a profession, raises a number of challenging questions, not 
least because these origins continue to have a strong influence on the constitution and function 
of contemporary social work. The heart of the issue is that it is precisely at, and in, the points 
where people interact with their environments that social injustice can be located. Thus, questions 
about the mode and purpose of social work interventions are pivotal if social work aims to be 
concerned with social justice. This chapter provides a critical analysis of the instruments used by 
social work, such as the theory and models of psychology (Ingleby 2006), and offers an alternative 
range of theoretical lenses, such as Black feminist theory, in response to the following questions:
. . . what is the degree of autonomy of our profession? What kind of a power does it exer-
cise? What alliances does it entertain? Where does the knowledge that we develop truly 
25
Social work
Oppression and resistance
Suryia Nayak

Social work
241
come from and what aims does it accomplish? What kind of a world is sustained by the 
professional activities of social workers? Do we not automatically adopt a number of ways 
that function to control, to contain, to render us subservient to the logic of power relations 
established elsewhere, outside the discipline? What margin exists for developing knowledge 
and action of a different kind?
(Chambon et al. 1999: 266)
The profession of social work originated in the nineteenth century, in the Poor Law. It is to be 
noted that parts of the 1601 Poor Law Act were not finally repealed until 1967, and fundamental 
principles of the Poor Law Amendment Act of 1834 continue to prevail (Charlesworth 2011); 
for example, the belief that the poor are responsible for their poverty, and the belief that in order 
to deter fecklessness, the state should provide below-subsistence living conditions. The parallels 
between the rationale, conditions, and practices of splitting up families inside the workhouse, 
and the rationale, conditions, and practices of splitting up families through social work inter-
ventions of safeguarding, warrant critical analysis. The roots of social work are bound up with 
the historical development of the idea of charity and charitable institutions. Tracing the roots of 
social work through the etymology of the word ‘charity’ is revealing because it brings us to the 
idea of benevolence for the poor, good will, and kindness to those less fortunate. This apparently 
benign disposition (which continues to permeate contemporary social work) must be scruti-
nized in terms of power dynamics, colonization, and mechanisms of regulation. An example of 
this is the way in which social work is located in the relationship between the vulnerable, the 
poor, the mad, the deviant, and society with a primary function of keeping social order (Doel 
2012: 4–13). In this light, social work intervenes in, and at, the points where people’s interac-
tions with their environments are seen to be a menace. Thus, it is no coincidence that these 
social work interventions rest on a theoretical platform that supports the edict of social order. It 
could be argued that the dynamic between social work and psychology functions to quell any 
potential threat to social order posed by the ‘vulnerable’ and, as such, social work is implicated 
in the psy-complex (Fox et al. 2009; Hook et al. 2004; Parker 1999; Parker and Revelli 2008; 
Rose 1998). Furthermore, it could be argued that social work’s alliances with, and allegiance to, 
theoretical and practice models designed to sustain social order by suppressing threats to that 
order leaves little room for social work to be the threatening menace it needs to be as a cham-
pion of social justice.
Dividing practices
The origins of the social work casework approach can be traced back to the Charity Organisa-
tion Society founded in 1869, which directed that:
Caseworkers should investigate the causes of the problem. This involved a home visit, an 
interview, and an investigation or enquiry to establish ‘deservingness’. Written case notes were 
kept for analysis and record.
(Howe 2009: 16, italics in original)
Although limited resources and increased referral numbers have placed constraints on case-
work, it remains a key mechanism of social work practice in the twenty-first century. The 
predicament of the casework approach is that it tends to produce an investigation that locates 
the cause of the problem with the individual, within the context of their home. There is an 
implicit assumption that the mechanism of ‘an interview’ or relationship-based encounter 

Suryia Nayak
242
is able to obtain the relevant information for ‘the empowerment and liberation of people’ 
(International Federation of Social Work 2012). The predicament is that many of the theories 
of human behaviour adopted by social work and utilized within the casework method are 
founded on ‘dividing practices’ (Foucault 1975, 1982) that serve to re-inscribe and legitimize 
an ‘ “individual-society” dualism’ (Parker and Spears 1996: 4). Psychology is an example of a 
theoretical framework used extensively within social work that is constituted of, produces, 
and reproduces, numerous and intersecting dualisms, splits, and borders. These are manifest 
in social work assessment processes to ascertain good enough parenting, form the basis for 
observations in contact centres and residential care institutions, and constitute expert witness 
court reports with powerful repercussions. These dualisms revolve primarily around a split 
between individuals and the oppressive social structures they inhabit. The socially constructed 
borders between the mad and sane, normal and abnormal, good and bad, and right and wrong 
are examples of conceptual splits that are foundational to psychology and, by association, are 
rampant within social work. These conceptual splits are part of what Foucault was talking 
about when he stated that:
. . . the production of discourse is at once controlled, selected, organised and redistributed 
by a certain number of procedures whose role is to ward off its powers and dangers, to gain 
mastery over its chance events, to evade its ponderous, formidable materiality.
(Foucault 1981: 52)
Thus, the tension for social work is that, on the one hand, it purports to be an agent of social 
change with an emphasis on tackling unequal power relations, and on the other hand, social 
work is implicated in the control, selection, organization, and redistribution of discourse that 
actually produces unequal power relations.
The ‘number of procedures’ that Foucault speaks of include socially constructed ideolog-
ical, diagnostic, and material borders and splits. However, these conceptual splits are precisely 
the splits that emancipatory approaches such as Black feminist theory fight against in order 
to confront abuses of human rights and the oppression of those identified as the mad, abnor-
mal, bad, and wrong (Lorde 1980: 114). Black feminist scholarship details the daily reality of 
fragmentation due to multiple and intersecting ideological, political, emotional, disciplinary, 
geographical, and demographical borders. For example, the Black feminist activist Audre Lorde 
identifies the ways in which these fragmented pieces of identity and experience are repre-
sented in a hierarchy, where hierarchies breed hierarchies or fragmentation further fragments 
(Lorde 1983).
The question for social work is whether it is a force for the empowerment and liberation of 
people based on principles of human rights and social justice, or a force for the implementation 
of questionable socially constructed hierarchical splits. The task for social work is to scrutinize its 
relationship with theories of human behaviour, namely psychology, that contradict imperatives 
to work for the liberation of people. For too long now, social work has settled for a form of crit-
ical analysis that merely names inherent tensions and dilemmas rather than using these tensions 
as sites for insurrection. Epstein puts it well:
Doublespeak is characteristic of twentieth-century communication . . . In social work non-
influential influencing is its communicative art, its specialty. It has evolved complex ration-
ales and methods for appearing to sew together influencing and not influencing, without 
the seams showing too much. A polished style evolved to conceal this basic dissonance 
within social work. For example, it is common to state the intentions of social work as 

Social work
243
helping people to accommodate to the status quo and as challenging the status quo by 
trying to bring about social change.
(Chambon et al. 1999: 8–9)
In other words, social work cannot settle for a convincing and deceptive mask of 
person-centeredness (Sudbery 2010) to cover up a host of contradictions, particularly when 
those contradictions involve the human rights and emancipation of oppressed groups. Social 
work would do well to take heed of Lorde’s warning that ‘ . . . the master’s tools will never dismantle 
the master’s house’ (Lorde 1979: 112; emphasis in original). Thus, social work needs to be cautious 
of using a theoretical base founded on borders and conceptual splits to dismantle the oppressive 
consequences of borders and conceptual splits.
In sharp contrast, a radical social work approach that implements critical psychology believes 
that:
The problems of madness and misery, then, lie not inevitably in any inherent impairment of 
perception, emotion or conduct . . . Instead they are located in the contexts they inhabit, par-
ticularly in intolerant norms and the fetish for rationality. Once this epistemological tack is 
taken then warranted paternalism to those with psychological afflictions melts away.
(Pilgrim and Rogers 2008: 36)
It is exactly the ‘intolerant norms and the fetish for rationality’ that Pilgrim and Rogers refer 
to that form the backbone of the psy-complex. Foucault’s analysis of the production and func-
tion of ideology and surveillance within the psy-complex argues that these are instrumental 
in creating and maintaining the categories and the criteria of ‘the normal’, ‘the healthy’, and 
‘the well-adjusted’ individual/community (Chambon et al. 1999: 107). These categories and 
criteria are based on individualism, essentialism, and normalization, and work to dislocate indi-
viduals from ‘the contexts they inhabit’ (Pilgrim and Rogers 2008: 36). The implication is that 
the discipline, practice, and productions of social work exist because of, are constituted by, and 
are contingent upon, boundaries. However, boundaries are highly problematic (Thiongo 1996: 
120). Any human rights-based critical analysis of the reasons why individuals are placed on social 
work caseloads would find that it is precisely because socially constructed boundaries produce 
problems and these boundaries maintain problems. However, too often the theoretical base, 
training, and practice of social work locates the problem within the ‘inherent impairment of 
perception, emotion or conduct’ (Pilgrim and Rogers 2008: 36) of individuals on their caseload. 
The point Pilgrim and Rogers make is that this dislocation of the individual from the contexts 
they inhabit is part of the legitimization of psychology’s paternalism and, as such, also serves the 
same purpose for social work.
In contrast, the starting point for critical psychology is: ‘ . . . that the social does not have to be 
used in contrast to the individual, or a background against which individuals act, but can be seen 
as constituting their very being’ (Parker and Spears 1996: 4). Therefore, ideological representa-
tions of the individual as separated from social relationships must be challenged because social 
structures create psychic structures (Oliver 2001: 34). The issue for social work becomes one of 
how to use its professional function to target with far more precision the core of the problem 
located in the constitutive relationships between the individual and their social contexts. Probyn 
summarizes the issue succinctly, stating that ‘ . . . the space and place we inhabit produce us’ (Pro-
byn 2003: 294). The imperative here is at least twofold, namely that the discipline and practice 
of social work is produced out of the theoretical space and place that it inhabits, and that the 
individuals on social work caseloads are also products of the space and place that they inhabit. 

Suryia Nayak
244
Butler’s (1999) theory of performativity adds further clarification about how this process works 
by explaining that ‘[w]ithin speech act theory, a performative is that discursive practice that 
enacts or produces that which it names’ (Butler 1993: 13). The implications of this for social 
work include the following factors:
The situation of individuals, in every sense of the word, is not a product of nature, but 
a product of discursive practice. So, perhaps social work caseloads should be made up of 
named, oppressive, discursive practices that need altering rather than named individuals;
Discursive practices are unstable social, historical, cultural, economic, and political arte-
facts (Burr 1995: 3–5). So, perhaps social work should be suspicious of any instruments 
of assessment, methods of intervention, and positions of professional identity that seek to 
establish a fixed, stable truth;
Performativity is not a one-off act, but works through repetitive re-inscriptions (Butler 
1999: xv). So, perhaps social work should look at the production and function of repetition 
in all of its manifestations within the profession, and in particular, in relation to individuals 
on their caseloads and the ways in which social work oils the wheels of repetition;
The contingent instability of the contextualized artefact (namely, the artefact of social 
work), the production of communication (e.g. between social work and service-users), and 
the inevitable space represented in the hyphen in the term ‘re-inscription’ are opportunities 
for subversion. So, perhaps rather than seeing the inevitable gaps, fissures, and instability 
inherent in all repetitions as a reason for increased social work regulation, surveillance, and 
control, social work could use the gaps as a mechanism for liberation and empowerment. 
In other words, social work could be ‘the boundary event’ (Minh-ha 2011) utilizing the 
happenings within boundaries, borders, splits, and gaps as an event for human rights and 
social justice.
Implicated technologies of social work
In relation to the theoretical foundations of contemporary social work, the International Fed-
eration of Social Workers states:
Social work bases its methodology on a systematic body of evidence-based knowledge 
derived from research and practice evaluation, including local and indigenous knowledge 
specific to its context. It recognizes the complexity of interactions between human beings 
and their environment, and the capacity of people both to be affected by and to alter 
the multiple influences upon them including bio-psychosocial factors. The social work 
profession draws on theories of human development and behaviour and social systems to 
analyse complex situations and to facilitate individual, organizational, social and cultural 
changes.
(International Federation of Social Work 2012)
Any deconstruction of this statement must take into account that ‘There can, of course, be no 
apolitical scholarship’ (Mohanty 1984: 19). Therefore, no ‘systematic body of evidence-based 
knowledge derived from research and practice evaluation, including local and indigenous 
knowledge specific to its context’ can claim neutrality (Chambon et al. 1999: 261). The signif-
icance of this point is that the body of knowledge used to analyze phenomena, and the phe-
nomena itself, are mutually constitutive and mutually contingent. Actually, the ‘systematic body 

Social work
245
of evidence-based knowledge derived from research and practice evaluation’ is an aspect of the 
‘technologies’ (Foucault 1977) used and developed by social work. Rose acknowledges that:
The notion of technology may seem antithetical to the domain of human being . . . How-
ever, our very experience of ourselves as certain sorts of persons – creatures of freedom, of 
liberty, of personal powers, of self-realization – is the outcome of a range of human technol-
ogies, technologies that take modes of being human as their object. Technology, here, refers 
to any assembly structured by a practical rationality governed by a more or less conscious 
goal. Human technologies are hybrid assemblages of knowledges, instruments, persons, sys-
tems of judgement, buildings and spaces, underpinned at the programmatic level by certain 
presuppositions about, and objectives for, human beings.
(Rose 1996: 313)
Perhaps the work of Menzies Lyth (1959) on the functioning of social systems as a defence against 
anxiety could be used to enable a detailed analysis of the technologies and tactics deployed 
by social work to disavow the anxiety of its position, role, and function. The manoeuvres of 
the social work apparatus include: fragmentation of the subject (manifest in separated branches 
of social work practice); increased, and increasing, proximity between social workers and their 
service-users (disproportionate amounts of time spent completing records as compared with 
time spent with the service-user); the use of officialdom (standardized assessment pro formas and 
impossible stipulated time frames); and disrupted lines of responsibility and accountability (the 
subject of all serious case reviews, or put another way, a matter of life and death).
The imperative for social work is to take account of the technological instruments it uses 
‘to analyse complex situations’ (International Federation of Social Work 2012) because these 
will determine the way that social work facilitates ‘individual, organizational, social and cul-
tural changes’ (International Federation of Social Work 2012). In other words, because ‘ . . . an 
optics is a politics of positioning’ and ‘Instruments of vision mediate standpoints . . .’ (Haraway 
1988: 288), even the standpoints of  ‘local and indigenous knowledge’ (International Federation 
of Social Work 2012) are implicated. This is clear in Haraway’s claim that ‘The standpoints of 
the subjugated are not “innocent” positions’ (Haraway 1988: 286). Social work metanarrative 
statements about service-user participation, partnership, and local, grassroot standpoints have 
to be scrutinized from the position that all metanarratives (including those about liberation, 
empowerment, human rights, and social justice) are implicated. The rationale for this is artic-
ulated by Caselli:
The metanarrative assertion, however, also presents itself as an authoritative claim, as if it 
could escape the very game of which it is part and could guarantee the reality or unreality 
of what is written. Although there is no ground to decide what is artificial, since the claim 
belongs to the same fictional world that it denounces, the rhetoric creates the illusion that, 
by judging what the narrator has just said, it stands on a higher ground. The metanarrative 
statement occupies an ambiguous position, as it is implicated in the narrative it criticises and 
it also stands above it in order to judge it.
(Caselli 2005: 105)
It is simply not enough for social work to stand on the ‘higher ground’ of an explicit value base 
of empowerment and social justice as a basis for judging the narrative, practices, and knowl-
edge base of other professions. Application of Casselli’s point to social work would result in an 
insistence that social work is implicated in, and part of, ‘the very game’ it is meant to denounce.

Suryia Nayak
246
No event
The event of emancipatory social change comes with a host of complexities that social work 
needs to occupy. Let us be clear that this is not just a theoretical matter; it is actually, and just 
as (if not more) importantly, an ethical matter. Derrida explains the dialectic: ‘ . . . if I decide 
because I know, within the limits of what I know and know I must do, then I am simply deploying 
a foreseeable program and there is no decision, no responsibility, no event’(Borradori 2003: 118; 
emphasis in original).
The implications here are that if social work deploys ‘a foreseeable program’ of professional 
theory, policy, and legislation as a basis for intervention, it falls into the trap of ‘no decision, no 
responsibility, no event’. A prime example of this is the issue of recognition; for example, social 
work’s recognition of neglect, vulnerability, and risk according to a priori criteria becomes a 
performative re-inscription of the status quo. Keating elucidates the problem, stating that: ‘No 
question to the stranger is pure because we already assimilate their being into terms that we can 
arrange into our own conceptions of being’ (Keating 2004).
Perhaps this could be the starting point of all social work reflective practice, supervision, 
and training, where the impetus is to use non-defensive reflection to critically evaluate pro-
cess. Application of this to the social work casework approach and research (much of which is 
adapted and adopted from psychology) designed to ‘investigate the causes of the problem’ (Howe 
2009: 16, italics in original) calls the whole process into question. The dialectic becomes one of 
how to investigate what has already been assimilated in terms of, and conceived as, a ‘problem’. 
The underlying tensions within this dialectic are at work in the recognition and identification 
of the ‘authentic’ service-user, and are particularly manifest in the professional body requirement 
for service-user involvement in the design, delivery, and evaluation of social work training. Per-
haps social work should heed the words of Spivak on the problem of the construction, consti-
tution, and claim of authenticity:
. . . what I find useful is the sustained and developing work on the mechanics of the consti-
tution of the Other; we can use it to much greater analytic and interventionist advantage 
than invocations of the authenticity of the Other.
(Spivak 1988: 294; emphasis in original)
Conclusion
The critical analysis of social work (including its affiliations with, and reliance on, psychology) 
presented in this chapter serve a dual purpose of highlighting the problems that social work 
must occupy and confront, and in doing so, this forms a starting point for formulating (albeit 
an implicated formulating) strategies for social justice. It seems that negotiating ‘ . . . a channel 
between the “high theoretical” and the “suspicious of all theories” ’ (Boyce Davies 1994: 43) 
can be achieved by exploring the relevance of theoretical frameworks used by social work in 
dialogical relation to the activism of theories that are overtly concerned with the liberation 
of the oppressed, such as Black feminist theory. Indeed, it is more than a task of seeking out 
particular theories; it is a task of asking why some theories are privileged and other theories 
foreclosed. For example, why is psychology privileged as a legitimate theoretical basis for social 
work interventions while Black feminist theory is rarely (if ever) cited, articulated, and used as 
a legitimate theoretical basis for social work interventions? Of course, this question takes on 
particular significance in the light of the disproportionate numbers of Black people on social 
work caseloads. Hill Collins is in no doubt that ‘The shadow obscuring this complex Black 

Social work
247
women’s intellectual tradition is neither accidental nor benign’ (Hill Collins 2000: 3). Minh-ha 
summaries the task as:
. . . a constant questioning of our relationship to knowledge, to way we reserve, transmit or 
bring it to bear on our daily activities. Our ongoing critical view of the system is motivated, 
not be a mere desire to blame, to right the wrongs and to oppose for opposition’s sake. 
Rather, it is motivated by the necessity to keep power and knowledge (ours and theirs) 
constantly in check for our own survival.
(Minh-ha 2011: 125)
In terms of the ‘theories of human development and behaviour and social systems’ (International 
Federation of Social Work 2012) that constitute the technologies and instruments of vision used 
within social work to intervene ‘at the points where people interact with their environments’, 
perhaps social work could learn something from Black feminist theory and methodology. The 
principles of Black feminist theory and methodology could be summarized in the following way:
That Black feminist theory is constituted of the dialectic. In other words, Black women 
have formulated, crafted and communicated their theory out of, and because of, oppression.
(Hill Collins 2000)
That Black feminist theory is constituted of the dialogical. In other words, Black women 
have formulated, crafted and communicated their theory out of, and because of, active 
engagement with struggles for social justice.
(Hill Collins 2000)
That Black feminist theory goes beyond ‘ . . . the encouraged mediocrity of our society . . .’
(Lorde 1978: 54)
This chapter began with a set of questions for social work and concludes with a different set of 
questions that seek to overturn how problems are traditionally constructed:
How, under what conditions, and in what forms can something like a subject appear in the 
order of discourse? What place can it occupy in each type of discourse, what functions can 
it assume, and by obeying what rules? In short, it is a matter of depriving the subject (or its 
substitute) of its role as originator, and of analyzing the subject as a variable and complex 
function of discourse.
(Foucault 1969: 118)
Further Reading
Brown, W. (2008) Regulating Aversion: Tolerance in the Age of Identity and Empire. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Chambon, A., Irving, A,. and Epstein, L. (1999) Reading Foucault for Social Work. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press.
James, J. and Sharpley-Whiting, T. D. (eds) (2000) The Black Feminist Reader. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers Ltd.
Lorde, A. (1984) Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches. Trumansburg: The Crossing Press.
Website resources
Sara Ahmed – Feminist Blog: http://feministkilljoys.com/
SWAN (Social Work Action Network): www.socialworkfuture.org

Suryia Nayak
248
References
Borradori, G. (2003) ‘Autoimmunity: real and symbolic suicides – a dialogue with Jacques Derrida’, in  
G. Borradori (ed.) Philosophy in a Time of Terror: Dialogues with Jürgen Habermas and Jacques Derria. Chi-
cago: The University of Chicago Press.
Boyce Davies, C. (1994) Black Women, Writing and Identity: Migrations of the Subject. London: Routledge.
Burr, V. (1995) An Introduction to Social Constructionism. London: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1993) Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex.” New York: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1999) ‘Preface’, in J. Butler Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (3rd Edn). New 
York: Routledge.
Caselli, D. (2005) Beckett’s Dantes: Intertextuality in the Fiction and Criticism. Manchester: Manchester Uni-
versity Press.
Chambon, A., Irving, A. and Epstein, L. (1999) Reading Foucault for Social Work. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press.
Charlesworth, L. (2011) Welfare’s Forgotten Past: A Socio-Legal History of the Poor Law. Abingdon: Routledge-  
Cavendish.
Doel, M. (2012) Social Work: The Basics. Abingdon: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (1969) ‘What is an author?’, in P. Rabinow (ed.) The Foucault Reader: An Introduction to Fou-
cault’s Thought. London: Penguin Books.
Foucault, M. (1975) The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception. New York: Vintage.
Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. London: Allen Lane.
Foucault, M. (1981) ‘The order of discourse’, in R. Young (ed.) Untying the Text: A Post-Structuralist Reader. 
Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd.
Foucault, M. (1982) ‘The subject and power’ in, H. L. Dreyfus and P. Rabinow (eds) Michel Foucault: Beyond 
Structuralism and Hermeneutics (2ndEdn). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fox, D. R., Prilleltensky, I. and Austin, S. (eds) (2009) Critical Psychology: an Introduction (2nd Edn). London: 
Sage Publications Ltd.
Haraway, D. (1988) ‘The persistence of vision’, in K. Conboy, N. Medina and S. Stanbury (eds) Writing on 
the Body: Female Embodiment and Feminist Theory. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hill Collins, P. (2000) Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment. (2nd 
Edn) London: Routledge.
Hook, D., Mkhize, N., Kiguwa, P., Collins, A., Burman, E. and Parker, I. (eds) (2004) Critical Psychology. 
Lansdowne, South Africa: UCT Press.
Howe, D. (2009) A Brief Introduction to Social Work Theory. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
International Federation of Social Work (2012) Definition of Social Work, http://ifsw.org/policies/
definition-of-social-work/
Ingleby, E. (2006) Applied Psychology for Social Work. Exeter: Learning Matters Ltd.
Keating, P. (2004) ‘The conditioning of the unconditioned: Derrida and Kant’, Borderlands, 3(1), http://
www.borderlands.net.au/vol3no1_2004/keating_conditioning.htm
Lorde, A. (1978) ‘Uses of the erotic: the erotic as power’, in A. Lorde Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches. 
Trumansburg: The Crossing Press.
Lorde, A. (1979) ‘The master’s tools will never dismantle the master’s house’, in A. Lorde Sister Outsider: 
Essays and Speeches. Trumansburg: The Crossing Press.
Lorde, A. (1980) ‘Age, race, class, and sex: women redefining difference’, in A. Lorde Sister Outsider: Essays 
and Speeches. Trumansburg: The Crossing Press.
Lorde, A. (1983) ‘Eye to eye: black women, hatred and anger’, in A. Lorde Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches. 
Trumansburg: The Crossing Press.
Menzies Lyth, I. (1959) ‘The functions of social systems as a defence against anxiety: a report on a study of 
the nursing service of a general hospital’, Human Relations, 13, 95–121.
Minh-ha, T. T. (2011) Elsewhere, Within Here: Immigration, Refugeeism and the Boundary Event. New York: 
Routledge.
Mohanty, C. T. (1984) ‘Under Western eyes: feminist scholarship and colonial discourses’, in C. T. Mohanty 
Feminism without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity. Durham: Duke University Press.
Oliver, K. (2001) Witnessing: Beyond Recognition. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Parker, I. (1999) ‘Critical psychology: critical links’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 1, 3–18.
Parker, I. and Revelli, S. (eds) (2008) Psychoanalytic Practice and State Regulation. London: Karnac Books, Ltd.
Parker, I. and Spears, R. (1996) Psychology and Society: Radical Theory and Practice. London: Pluto Press.

Social work
249
Pilgrim, D. and Rogers, A. (2008) ‘Socioeconomic disadvantage’, in R. Tummey and T. Turner (eds) Critical 
Issues in Mental Health. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Probyn, E. (2003) ‘The spatial imperative of subjectivity’, in K. Anderson, M. Domosh, S. Pile and N. Thrift 
(eds) Handbook of Cultural Geography. London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Rose, N. (1996) ‘Identity, genealogy, history’, in P. du Gay, J. Evans and P. Redman (eds) Identity: A Reader. 
London: Sage Publications.
Rose, N. (1998) Inventing Our Selves: Psychology, Power, and Personhood. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Spivak, G. C. (1988) ‘Can the subaltern speak?’, in C. Nelson and L. Grosberg (eds) Marxism and the Inter-
pretation of Culture. Basingstroke: Macmillan.
Sudbery, J. (2010) Human Growth and Development: an Introduction for Social Workers. London: Routledge.
Thiongo, N. W. (1996) ‘Borders and bridges: seeking connection between things’, in F. Afzal-Khan and  
K. Seshadri-Crooks (eds) The Pre-occupation of Postcolonial Studies. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

250
A central trope in self-help is that within you there is concealed an other and better Self that you 
can and need to unearth. ‘Dare to be yourself’ amounts to ‘Being your best self’, or so we read 
on the Psychology Today website (http://www.psychologytoday.com/basics/self-help). However, 
this Self is not just the old familiar Self you have lost along the way: self-help promises you 
an extra gain. In Psychology Today’s five-step guide to self-help (a guide to the guides which of 
course reads itself as a self-help guide – the claim is that with this meta-guide you will become 
‘a far wiser consumer’ [sic] of self-help), it says: ‘you want to learn something that you didn’t 
already know’, and so you need an expert: ‘the chances are that you’ll learn more from people 
who have gained respectability in their field’. (Whitbourne 2012). You are moreover advised to 
google the author of the self-help guide for his academic ‘credentials’. A guarantee of good schol-
arship should allow you to separate serious, research-based self-help guides from the ‘watered 
down’ versions written by ghost writers for the popular press (Whitbourne 2012).
Here a remarkable similarity between self-help and psychology as such becomes clear. In the 
same way as self-help urges you to search for a better and new Self and to get rid of your bad, 
weak, or shy self, the discipline of psychology has its devils to fight and to expel. That is, psychol-
ogy has to get rid of its false appearances and watered-down doubles: it has to struggle with the 
popular psychology and/or bad psychology in which people erroneously believe.
Starting from this observation, this chapter will guide you through the fields of self-help and 
popular psychology so as to answer the question how these adjacent parts of the psy-complex 
use and reinforce mainstream psychology. The wager is that self-help and popular psychology 
can teach us something about mainstream psychology. For, as already should be clear in this short 
introduction, the central paradigm of self-help, of getting in touch with your true self, is but the 
logical upshot of (mainstream) psychology’s foundational claim of being able to reveal the reality 
of the human being. In short: psychology’s presupposition that ultimately we have the wrong 
idea of what we are (our allegedly flawed folk-psychology) and that psychological science can 
correct this, is essentially the backbone of self-help’s promise that you can find your true inner 
core. Moreover, here it is already clear that psychology’s supposed valuable and useful knowledge 
begs to be popularized: psychology’s fundamental drive is to go public in order to set straight 
the flawed pre- or para-scientific self-assessments of the human being. This is why the attempt 
to oppose or correct popular psychology is a fight of psychology against its own shadows. Just 
26
Self-help
And pop psychology
Jan De Vos

Self-help
251
consider that the popular book 50 Great Myths of Popular Psychology (Lilienfeld et al. 2010) is in 
its own right popular psychology. Even only as a form of irony it cannot escape the discursive 
scheme of the genre (the book uses the typical lists – e.g. ‘The 10 Sources of Psychological 
Myths: Your Mythbusting Kit’, note also the typical trope of direct address).
The turn of the screw of this chapter will of course be that if one exposes popular psychology 
as the Mr. Hyde of psychology, one necessarily stays within psychobabble, understanding pop psy-
chology as the symptom or the hidden, if not obscene, truth of psychology. But perhaps this twist 
has a bonus value, that is, it might teach us something about true defiance for critical psychology.
Self-help
The self-help discourse hinges on the presupposition that you can become the loving, commu-
nicative, balanced . . . person who is now just lurking underneath your skin – pretty much as US 
interventionism has been said to want to liberate the freedom loving, liberal-democratic Amer-
ican slumbering within each Pakistani, Iraqi, or Syrian (Žižek 2003). Here we have a strange 
wedding of the particular and the general: while self-help promotes hyper-individuality (Rimke 
2000: 67), the precious inner core we should look for is eventually shared with everybody. The 
paradoxical message is ‘become your unique self’ with a millions-sold bestseller. Self-help passes 
from ‘help from within’ to ‘help from without’ (Cherry 2008) and requires external textual 
authority and expert knowledge (Rimke 2000). In this true catch-22 (Bröckling 2005), your 
unique Self is a ready-to-wear standard product.
But is this critique not met with online self-help guides and their sophisticated interactive 
web technology, allowing for flexible, tailor-made, and more empowering and emancipatory 
forms of self-help? A closer analysis reveals that such tailored interactivity is above all illusory. 
The personalized advice and custom-built exercises on such web modules are merely the out-
come of fixed algorithms providing a strictly guided activity: if you answer this, we send you to 
that part of the website. Consider for example the website Fit in Your Head, which prides itself on 
its interactive and personalized approach based on a self-judgment test. A closer scrutiny reveals 
that despite the complex flow chart (see Willaert and Van den Brande 2008), there are only six 
ways to go through the module. From the four subtests, only test 1 (resilience) and test 2 (level of 
complaints) lead to differentiated advice (test 1 has three feedback possibilities, test 2 only two). 
The feedback of test 3 (coping) and 4 (life-style) is for the same for everybody. Not surprisingly, 
the authors themselves argue that their advice is based on ‘general and obvious knowledge’ 
(Levrau and Stevens 2007: 6).
This frequent recourse to the obvious in self-help – just do a google search on the phrase 
‘as we all know’ on websites such as Psychology Today or Psychcentral – should be questioned. Did 
Louis Althusser not consider the obvious as ideology at its sharpest (Althusser 1971)? In the same 
vein, Ian Parker contends that psychology in the guise of pop psychology operates as a form of 
ideology as it puts forward its ‘commonsense about the nature of the self’ (Parker 2010: 108). 
This becomes very tangible when the advice of Fit in Your Head, after promoting a ‘healthy sex 
life’, ‘meaningful relations’, and a ‘holistic life-approach’, eventually ends up putting forward reli-
gion and prayer as positive assets (Levrau and Stevens 2007: 18). This popping up of religion in 
self-help should not surprise us. Remember how Michel Foucault traced the religious discourse 
in the psy-complex, e.g. how the practice of confessing still structures psychotherapeutic formats 
(Foucault 1978). Self-help equally testifies to this religious heritage, if only in the soft-spoken 
and pastoral tone many of these manuals adopt. Or consider how more often than not self-help 
promises a kind of purification, as if self-help concerns a ‘rite de passage’ one has to go through 
to reach the other side.

Jan De Vos
252
But here the question becomes: what is this enlightened and redeemed position that self-help 
holds out? Here we can turn to Heidi M. Rimke’s argument that, in the passage from relying 
on oneself to relying on the expert, one is eventually called upon to become an expert of one’s 
own selfhood (Rimke 2000). Hence, as Nikolas Rose notes, that though the psy-disciplines play 
a key role in actively constructing certain forms of Self (Rose 1990), they above all concern the 
construction of a vantage point from where to look upon that equally constructed self. Self-help 
is the creation of a Self ontologically separated from itself and in this process the subject is 
‘enjoined to turn the psy diagnostic gaze upon itself’ (Hazleden 2003). In other words, in passing 
through the practice of self-help, you are supposed to form part of the psy-complex, looking 
upon yourself, the others, and the world from an Olympian, academic psychologist perspective.
The radical conclusion here is that the ‘lay person’ in this way is, above all, a fiction. Psychol-
ogy’s dictum this is who you are positions the subject not as the one he/she supposedly is, but as 
the one looking (as a proto-psychologist) at the one he/she supposedly is. The lay person is an 
artefact of psychology. The same holds for ‘folk psychology’: the discipline of psychology consti-
tutes itself through supposing that there are lay persons with a folk psychology, which scientific 
psychology can enlighten. Unfortunately, so it seems, folk psychology is tenacious, as it tends to 
adopt academic psychology and transform it in so-called popular psychology.
Popular psychology
Let us start with the observation that popular psychology is not always the enemy. Bibliotherapy, 
including the use of self-help manuals and popular psychology books, has become a mainstream 
practice within many forms of psychotherapy (see e.g. Norcross 2006; Rasmussen and Ewoldsen 
2013). This is little surprising, as most psychotherapies adhere to the central adagio of self-help: 
it is you who has to change, the professional is only a guide. Psychotherapy is always already 
self-help. Or, put differently, if the psy has expertise, it resides in telling that you are the expert 
yourself. The paradox is of course that while psychotherapy promotes self-help, the trump card 
of self-help manuals is psychotherapy: in the end it might not help, and you’d need real psycho-
therapy and real psychology.
If at the horizon of this double bind the figure of ‘real psychology versus popular psychology’ 
arises, the question becomes, in the case of psychology taking up the fight with popular psy-
chology, who is actually targeted? For, in the abovementioned book 50 Great Myths of Popular 
Psychology, most of the myths in need of debunking originate in the psy-sciences themselves and 
not in the lay audience. The contentions that people use only 10 per cent of their brains, that 
subliminal messages can influence consumers, or that adolescence is a turbulent period (Lilienfeld 
et al. 2010) are all theses stemming from academic psychology itself. Other myths under attack 
are actually alternative views or even critiques from within the psy-sciences or from adjacent dis-
ciplines. See e.g. the alleged myth that IQ tests ‘are biased against certain groups of people’. The 
authors counter the critiques of the IQ-concept with the following argument: ‘Far from being 
an arbitrary construct that depends entirely on how we choose to measure it, there’s consensus 
among most experts that intelligence is (. . .)’ (Lilienfeld et al. 2010: 83). One could rephrase this 
argument as follows: IQ is not an arbitrary construct because most of us say it is not. At the least, here 
the partition between scholarly psychology and popular psychology is doubtful. Eva Illouz speaks 
in this respect of a continuity between professional and popular psychology (Illouz 2008: 7) as 
she observes that both address the ‘self’ using similar metaphors and narratives. (Illouz 2008: 13).
Is not the conclusion therefore that psychology cannot but interpenetrate everyday life, and 
that this is, moreover, the very way that it constitutes itself as a discipline? Perhaps this is why 

Self-help
253
APA president George Miller pleaded to ‘give psychology away’ (Miller 1969), a call echoed by 
his successor Ronald Levant’s call to turn psychology ‘into a household word’ (Levant 2007). 
Psychology’s raison d’être is to occupy what it supposes to be the field of the lay. Carl Rogers, 
for example, expressed his hope that people with ‘no particular interest in the field of counseling 
or psychotherapy will find that the learnings emerging in this field will strengthen them in their 
own living’ (in Illouz 2008: 13–14). In short, the main praxis of psychology is to spread itself, is 
to psychologize: scholarly psychology is popular psychology.
The gist of all this is that psychology, in lacking a model (in both theory and praxis) of its 
own, has to borrow its paradigms, and the main one, it can be argued, is schooling and education 
(De Vos 2012). Hence, as psychology is psycho-education and schools its subjects in the theo-
ries of psychology, the jump is quickly made to self-help and popular psychology. No wonder, 
then, that the latter is in turn thoroughly impregnated by the educational paradigm. Self-help 
is about homework, written assignments and, in the understanding of Norcross, ‘information 
gathering and understanding’ (Norcross 2006: 184). Popular psychology books, in turn, resemble 
textbooks of psychology.
This schoolification of society can be criticized for littering the field of everyday life, the 
public sphere, citizenship, and, eventually, politics. Illouz, for example, laments that the therapeu-
tic persuasion has emptied the Self of its communal and political content and cannot provide 
us with an intelligible way of linking the private Self to the public sphere (Illouz 2008: 2). One 
could be tempted here to defend or even try to recapture an authentic and pre-psychologized 
public and private sphere. However, suffice to recall Althusser’s remark that the differentiation 
between the public and the private is always already ideological (Althusser 1971), to which we 
could add that the modern partition of the public and the private necessitated the discipline of 
psychology to ground it. Hence the risk that a critique which tries to rescue the old public/
private divide unknowingly relapses in a classic psychologizing discourse. Just consider how the 
French sociologist Alain Ehrenberg argues that therapeutic culture leads to a rising number of 
cases of depression (Ehrenberg 2009). Thus, Ehrenberg’s critique reaffirms the psychological 
discourse it rallies against: psychology is bad for the psyche. In turn, Illouz’s (2008) sociological 
critique on the therapeutic ethos seems in need of returning to the notion of ‘agency’, which 
she grounds in the realm of emotions: ‘Cultural sociology has surprisingly failed to devote 
serious attention to what is perhaps the central missing link connecting structure and agency, 
namely emotion’ (Illouz 2008: 11). There she seems to plead for a different psychology against 
the falsifications of mainstream psychology, and hence risks merely repeating academic psychol-
ogy’s fight against popular psychology.
At the least, critical approaches of psychology should not miss the power of the psycho-
logical premise, as they are often overtaken by it. Moreover, it is this tenacity, and proba-
bly the inevitability, of the psy-factor which makes mainstream psychology, and hence also 
self-help and popular psychology, so easily able to incorporate the critiques. Gjyri Helen Werp, 
editor-in-chief of a women’s magazine in Norway with a strong focus on self-esteem and 
self-improvement, for example, writes in an editorial that ‘It’s not about all of us running 
around trying to be superhuman. Nobody can be anybody else, but we can all be better’ (cited 
in Madsen and Ytre-Arne 2012). Pop psychology here testifies to being nuanced and even 
critical of mainstream psychology’s false promises or coercive advice. In a similar way, Kristin 
Neff’s self-help book Self-Compassion: Stop Beating Yourself Up and Leave Insecurity Behind is a 
critique of ‘the relentless search for high self-esteem’ having become ‘a virtual religion’ (Neff 
2011). Scott Cherry hence rightfully remarks that critique strengthened or even boosted the 
genre of self-help (Cherry 2008).

Jan De Vos
254
. . . and psychology
This little tour through self-help and popular psychology has taught us that Rimke’s contention 
that in self-help the individual becomes the sole ontological pivot of experience (Rimke 2000) 
is actually a key principle in mainstream psychology as such. The psychologized subject becomes, 
in a Von Munchausen way, its own ontological guaranty as it is enjoined to become its own 
expert. Psychology’s this is who you are thus not only calls into life a spectre-like, phoney subject, 
but creates the vantage point from where to contemplate and even manipulate this homunculus. 
Hence, if the Foucauldian argument is that self-help is the pinnacle of the modern subject gov-
erning itself (instead of being held in check or directed by external powers) (e.g. Rimke 2000), 
then it is clear that this self-governing does not concern the becoming of that what you are said 
to be. Rather, psychology’s you have a wrong idea of what you are invites you to escape from being 
lured by your alleged false self-conceptions, in order to . . . lure your own Self. That is, with the 
help of expert knowledge you can manipulate your cognitions, feelings, or beliefs. With psy-
chology you indeed become another person: you become the therapist/governor of your Self.
If in this way the subject of psychology is actually called upon to leave his psyche behind –  
for he or she is supposed to transcend his or her psychological level in order to contem-
plate and manipulate it – self-help and popular psychology show us that the psychologization 
effected by the psy-sciences in point of fact amounts to a de-psychologization, or perhaps better, 
a de-subjectivation. To make this point, let me refer once again to Rimke: she contends that 
psychology’s subjects are in the grip of the illusion that they can escape from the constraints 
and regulations of social relations (Rimke 2000). (Popular) psychology, so to speak, is escapism 
at its sharpest. One can argue that self-help invites you to engage above all in pseudo-activity: 
you have to fill in surveys, complete check-lists, do homework, or do practical exercises so 
as to remain passive on the social, political, and hence also the subjective front. The self-help 
book must persuade you to actually do the exercise, reproaching you for your detachment, 
non-engagement, your betting on your score. You have to participate in the action, even if you 
remain critical or cynical (see also Salecl 2009). Put differently: self-help and popular psychology 
testify of expelling of the subject in its sociopolitical dimension. It is in this way that we can 
understand Rimke’s remark that self-help concerns above all ‘social, not psychological, rules 
of conduct’, fetishizing and glorifying ‘the liberalized and psychologized “individual” ’ (Rimke 
2000: 70). Here self-help lays bare that the psy-sciences as such are far removed from dealing 
with the subject and its psyche, as they deal with the construction of the psychological individual 
by hailing the subject to occupy the role of the proto-psychologist, thus preventing the subject 
from dealing with the social circumstances which both alienate and form him.
Self-help and popular psychology, moreover, show that as there is no psyche in psychology, 
psychology is also without knowledge. Scott Cherry describes how the self-help book addresses 
the reader, e.g. by progressing textually from they, over we, to you (e.g. the typical phrase because 
you are important) (On the use of direct address see also Kress and van Leeuwen 1999). A var-
iant is Neff, who in her book on Self-compassion starts with a confessional I then moves to 
you (Neff 2011.) Put differently: in the end the they and the we disappear and the isolated and 
idiosyncratic you stays behind. Cherry furthermore remarks that the reader must realize that 
reading and knowledge are not enough; eventually the text of the self-help book itself is devoid 
of value (Cherry 2008). Just as in the knowledge society, knowledge becomes superfluous – if 
not redundant, it is all about capacities and skills – and self-help manuals in the end deconstruct 
the knowledge of the psy-sciences. Here the drama of the psy-sciences is enacted: by giving 
psychology away (in self-help and popular psychology) psychology enacts its own emptiness; it 
deconstructs itself, or, put in more mundane terms, it gives shit away.

Self-help
255
I deliberately used here somewhat gross terms in order to make the point that in self-help 
and popular psychology discourses, a vulgar and obscene aspect of the psy-sciences becomes 
particularly clear. In self-help we end up with the isolated, idiosyncratic, and hence denuded 
you. Psychology’s interpellation look this is what you are effects a drawing out of the inner to 
the outer, folding over the private to the public. Psychology puts your alienated psychologized 
you on the scene, which is of course the literal meaning of the ‘ob-scene’. This is how we can 
understand that, as Rimke and Brock observe, the celebration of self-revelation entails that the 
latter takes place through the gamut of public media (Rimke and Brock 2011). In this psychoporn, 
as it can been called (De Vos 2009), the idiosyncratic and denuded You becomes the ultimate 
commodity: just consider the popular psy-entertainment shows on television, like Dr. Phil, The 
Dr. Oz Show, or The Oprah Winfrey Show. Psychology not only objectifies and lays bare who you 
really are (denuded from your false folk psychology), it also offers you the vantage point from 
where to savour and enjoy your or another person’s naked psyche as the ultimate late-modern 
commodity.
And the neurological turn?
The concluding question is: does the neurological turn bring a shift in the field of self-help 
and popular psy-science? For, if psychology’s scientific status always remains questionable, the 
neuroscientific claim of being based on firm objective data seems to bring us to rather different 
grounds. As a proclaimed real science, neuroscience might thus not have to enact its own decon-
struction in order to (pseudo)empower the lay person. Moreover, neuroscience might even 
effect a return to the inner as inner and the private as private: neuroscience puts the psyche back 
inside, that is, in your brain. Hence, if Me and my Self was an odd couple, Me and my brain seems 
a bit more straightforward: the soft Self is traded with the hard and material brain.
However, here things already get complicated. The brain is not exactly hard; neuroscientists 
consider the brain malleable and plastic. From here the step is easily made to the ‘trainable 
brain’ as Brenninkmeijer calls it, to be worked upon with special nutrition, sports and games, 
light-and-sound machines, and electric or magnetic brain stimulants (Brenninkmeijer 2010). In 
this way it seems that neuro-self-help and its array of (semi)commercial, (semi)academic, and pop-
ular resources offering exercises, devices, or even alternative drugs to balance or to boost one’s 
brain, is after all only the old hat. Some authors indeed note that neuro-self-help above all repro-
duces earlier commonplace self-help literature (Ortega and Vidal 2007). Or, as Steven Poole 
argues: ‘it is self-help armoured in hard science’ (Poole 2012). Similar to popular psychology, we 
now have ‘popular neurology’, ‘folk neurology’, and neuromyths which are of course in need of 
being debunked. (See for example a webpage of The Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development [OECD] dedicated to the debunking of neuromyths in education: http://
www.oecd.org/edu/ceri/neuromyths.htm).
Perhaps a minor shift can be discerned in the fact that neuro-self-help, at first sight, prompts 
less pseudo-hyperactivity than its psy-predecessor: as the chemicals come in, the modification of 
behaviour becomes a more passive issue. In this way neuro-self-help seems to realize an upward 
mobility in the capitalistic rationale of self-help: instead of being the hard working labourer of 
your Self, you now can be the stakeholder of your brain, letting the sound, the lights, the waves, 
or the chemicals do the job. You only have to collect the surplus. However, with this provision, 
many authors point out that ‘rewiring your brain’ (as runs the title of Arden 2010), is not that 
easy. In the case of addiction (drug abuse, gambling . . .), for example, it is hard to go against 
the grain of the nucleus accumens or the pleasure centre (Arden 2010: 8). Rewiring your brain 
requires effort, but if you persevere things will require less and less effort: ‘After a new behavior, 

Jan De Vos
256
thought, or feeling has been established, it takes less energy to keep it going’ (Arden 2010: 19). 
Or, eventually your initial investments will pay off. As self-help and popular psychology arguably 
serve capitalism, neuro-self-help can be said to offer the rationale for the latest, more flexible 
and ethereal production and consumption modes. Rimke and Brock, for example, point to the 
role of the psy-sciences in ‘the increasing focus on individual responsibility’ and ‘the dismantling 
of public services’ (Rimke and Brock 2011). Nikolas Rose for his part speaks of the ‘entrepre-
neurial self’ (Rose 1996).
However, if the paradoxes of the formula ‘Me working on my Self’ of psy-self-help still could 
be held more or less in check (both instances could be regarded as a two different parts of one 
and the same psyche), this problematic mono-duality is due to manifest itself more sharply in 
the neurological turn. Brenninkmeijer, for example, contends that the idea of people working 
on their brains implies a paradoxical distinction between the Self and the brain (Brenninkmeijer 
2010). But perhaps it might be more fruitful to expand this paradoxical mono-duality into a tri-
angle so that we would have (1) Me (the entrepreneur); (2) the brain (the material resources); and 
(3) the Self (the produced commodity of subjectivity). Let us consider more closely one by one 
the three corners of the triangle, starting with the latter. It is clear that it is at the site of the Self 
and subjectivity that the surplus has to be realized. Or as the book Rewire Your Brain states: ‘The 
book will guide you through the process of rewiring your brain so that you can change your life’ 
(Arden 2010). The neurological turn in mainstream psychology, and, concomitantly, the neu-
rological turn in self-help and popular human science, testify how in late-modern post-Fordist 
production modes the central commodity and the central mode of generating surplus is subjec-
tivity itself. The Train Your Brain-paradigm is perfectly aligned with the direct production of sub-
jectivity and social relations envisioned in the post-Fordist production and consumption modes.
However, to make it fully clear, it is only in the second corner of the triangle (where, alleg-
edly materiality is situated) that the shift is realized from the psy- to the neuro-paradigm. In 
terms of the psy-paradigm, self-help, and popular psychology Theodor W. Adorno was right to 
declare: ‘The denial of objective truth by recourse to the subject implies the negation of the 
latter’ (Adorno 1978: 63). In this constellation the point was not to deny the psyche or the 
subjective, but to search for another place/approach of and for the subject. As Ian Parker put it: 
‘we need to develop a response to social problems which works at the interface of the personal 
and the political instead of pretending that society is something separate from us’ (Parker 1999: 
104). However, in the light of the neuroturn, we might need to rephrase Adorno as follows: the 
(alleged) full purchase on the objective truth by recourse to the subject implies the full commodification of 
the latter.
Hence, today, the crucial task of critical psychology, or maybe we should say, of the critique of 
the psy-neurosciences, is that we need to develop a response to social problems by readdressing 
materialism. That is, we have to engage in a critique of the neurological turn and argue that 
current mainstream theories and praxes of the brain are far removed from a truly materialist 
approach. Just consider that the neuroturn often enough turns out to be a virtual turn. The 
brain not only can be said to reside above all virtually and iconographically in the colourful 
digitalizations, it also opens up to the virtual space: when what you experience, think, or feel 
is nothing more than electric impulses and chemical reactions, reality receives another status, if 
not, redoubles. At the least we need to think why the current neurodiscourse is co-originary 
with the immaterialization and virtualization of our life world, where the late-modern subject 
moves primordially through virtual environments such as Facebook, Twitter, and online gaming.
It could be argued that the first corner of the above sketched triangle might provide a critical 
alternative to think of the material. For is not this, as such, empty space, the hard kernel sur-
viving the shift from the psy- to the neurodiscourse, the ideal candidate to situate a decentred 

Self-help
257
materialism? For this Me, as a kind of zero-level of subjectivity situated beyond both its brain 
and its psychology (the Self, subjectivity) might be the very hard material kernel of the subject 
resisting both psychologization and neurologization. Here we can connect to the Marxist tradi-
tion of understanding how the supposedly immaterial (e.g. the fetish-character of money) can 
have very tangible and material effects in the social, economic, and political sphere. At the very 
least a critique of the contemporary psy-neurosciences should concern a critique of materiality 
and should deal with that hard kernel of zero-level of subjectivity, as the latter can be considered 
to be the condition for a viable conceptualization of agency which would allow us to think of 
the subject as embedded socially and politically. I expand on this idea of a decentred materialism 
of the zero-level of subjectivity in (De Vos 2014). This critique should oppose the current natu-
ralization of subjectivity which in the end amounts to a virtualizing and a commodification of 
the zero-level of subjectivity in late capitalism.
Further reading
De Vos, J. (2012) Psychologisation in times of Globalisation. London: Routledge.
Madsen, O. J. (2014) The Therapeutic Turn. How Psychology Altered Western Culture. London: Routledge.
Parker, I. (2007) ‘Critical psychology: what it is and what it is not’, Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 
1(1), 1–15.
Website resources
Annual Review of Critical Psychology, Volume 8: Psychologisation under Scrutiny: http://www.discourseunit.
com/annual-review/arcp-8-psychologisation-under-scrutiny/
Basic Research on the Self has good references to critical approaches towards self-help: www.janhenderson.
com/self/the-history-of-self-help-some-books-to-read/
Brain Bullet works ‘effortlessly’ because you only need to install this software that will flash subliminal 
messages while you work or do other stuff on your computer: http://www.brainbullet.com/
‘446,986 Self Improvement Resources – Find the Right One for You’: www.selfgrowth.com/
Keep Your Brain Alive is one of the most well-known ‘neurobics’ resources: www.keepyourbrainalive.com/
index.html
References
Adorno, T. W. (1978) Minima Moralia. London: Verso.
Althusser, L. (1971) ‘Ideology and ideological state apparatuses (notes towards an investigation)’, in Lenin 
and Philosophy and Other Essays. London: New Left Books.
Arden, J. B. (2010) Rewire Your Brain: Think Your Way to a Better Life. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Brenninkmeijer, J. (2010) ‘Taking care of one’s brain: how manipulating the brain changes people’s selves’, 
History of the Human Sciences, 23(1), 107–126.
Bröckling, U. (2005) ‘Gendering the enterprising self: subjectification programs and gender differences in 
guides to success’, Distinktion: Scandinavian Journal of Social Theory, 6(2), 7–25.
Cherry, S. (2008) ‘The ontology of a self-help book: a paradox of its own existence’, Social Semiotics, 18(3), 
337–348.
De Vos, J. (2009) ‘On cerebral celebrity and reality TV. Subjectivity in times of brain-scans and psychotain-
ment’, Configurations, 17(3), 259–293.
De Vos, J. (2012) Psychologisation in Times of Globalisation. London: Routledge.
De Vos, J. (2014) ‘Which materialism? Questioning the matrix of psychology, neurology, psychoanalysis and 
ideology critique’, Theory & Psychology, 24(1), 176-192.
Ehrenberg, A. (2009) The Weariness of the Self: Diagnosing the History of Depression in the Contemporary Age. 
Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Foucault, M. (1978) The History of Sexuality, Volume 1. New York: Vintage.
Hazleden, R. (2003) ‘Love yourself: the relationship of the self with itself in popular self-help texts’, Journal 
of Sociology, 39(4), 413–428.

Jan De Vos
258
Illouz, E. (2008) Saving the Modern Soul: Therapy, Emotions, and the Culture of Self-help. Berkeley,CA: Univer-
sity of California Press.
Kress, G. and van Leeuwen, T. (1999) ‘Representation and interaction: designing the position of the viewer’, 
in A. Jaworski and N. Coupland (eds) The Discourse Reader. London: Routledge.
Levant, R. F. (2007) ‘Making psychology a household word’, The Psychologist, 20(6), 366–367.
Levrau, F. and Stevens, V. (2007) ‘Theoretische onderbouwing van het gebruik van zelfeducatie aan de hand 
van een zelfbeoordelingstest en van advies op maat als verdieping van de Vlaamse campagne ‘Fit in je 
hoofd – goed in je vel’: Vlaams Instituut voor Gezondheidspromotie.
Lilienfeld, S. O., Lynn, S. J., Ruscio, J. and Beyerstein, B. L. (2010) 50 Great Myths of Popular Psychology: Shat-
tering Widespread Misconceptions about Human Behavior. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Madsen, O. J., and Ytre-Arne, B. (2012) ‘Me at my best: therapeutic ideals in Norwegian women’s maga-
zines’, Communication, Culture and Critique, 5(1), 20–37.
Miller, G. A. (1969) ‘Psychology as a means of promoting human welfare’, American psychologist, 24(12), 
1063–1075.
Neff, K. (2011) Self-compassion: Stop Beating Yourself Up and Leave Insecurity Behind. New York: William 
Morrow.
Norcross, J. C. (2006) ‘Integrating self-help into psychotherapy: 16 practical suggestions’, Professional Psychol-
ogy: Research and Practice, 37(6), 683–693.
Ortega, F. and Vidal, F. (2007) ‘Mapping the cerebral subject in contemporary culture’, Reciis, Electronic Jour-
nal of Communication Information and Innovation in Health, 1(2), 255–259.
Parker, I. (1999) ‘Deconstructing diagnosis: psychopathological practice’, in C. Feltham (ed.) Controversies in 
Psychotherapy and Counselling. London: Sage.
Parker, I. (2010) Lacanian Psychoanalysis. Revolutions in Subjectivity. London: Routledge.
Poole, S. (2012, September 6) ‘Your brain on pseudoscience: the rise of popular neurobollocks’, The New 
Statesman, http://www.newstatesman.com/culture/books/2012/09/your-brain-pseudoscience
Rasmussen, E., and Ewoldsen, D. R. (2013) ‘Dr. Phil and Psychology Today as self-help treatments of mental 
illness: a content analysis of popular psychology programming’, Journal of health communication, 18(5), 
610–623.
Rimke, H. M. (2000) ‘Governing citizens through self-help literature’, Cultural studies, 14(1), 61–78.
Rimke, H. M., and Brock, D. (2011) ‘The culture of therapy: psychocentrism in everyday life’, in D. Brock, 
R. Raby and M. Thomas (eds) Power and Everyday Practices. Toronto, ON: Nelson.
Rose, N. (1990) Governing the Soul: the Shaping of the Private Self. New York and London: Routledge.
Rose, N. (1996) Inventing our Selves: Psychology, Power, and Personhood. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Salecl, R. (2009) ‘Society of choice’, differences, 20(1), 157–180.
Whitbourne, S. K. (2012) ‘Five things you need to know about self-help books’, Psychology Today, http://
www.psychologytoday.com/blog/fulfillment-any-age/201205/five-things-you-need-know-abou
t-self-help-books
Willaert, K., and Van den Brande, I. (2008) ‘Valideringsstudie vlaams publiekscampagne “fit in je hoofd”: 
Validiteit en betrouwbaarheid van de zelfbeoordelingstest’. ISW Limits.
Žižek, S. (2003) ‘Today, Iraq. Tomorrow . . . Democracy’, In These Times, http://inthesetimes.com/article/565/
today_iraq_tomorrow_democracy

Part II
Varieties of critical psychology

This page intentionally left blank

261
Activity theory has been characterized by Yrjö Engeström as ‘the best kept secret of academia’ 
(Engeström 1993: 64). In the last decades the number of publications on activity theory has 
increased rapidly, and various applications of activity theory to different systems (learning, work, 
information systems, etc.) and disciplines (psychology, linguistics, cognitive science, anthropol-
ogy, etc.) have taken place (Engeström et al. 2005; Sannino and Nocon 2008). Roth (2004: 1) 
argues that ‘activity theory no longer is the secret that it was in 1993’. However, if we take into 
account Nissen’s (2011) statement about the existence of directly opposite readings of the Rus-
sian legacy of activity theory, we can conclude that activity theory remains a secret of academia. 
As Hegel pointed out ‘The familiar or well-known in general, because it is well known [bekkant] 
is not known [erkannt]’ (Hegel and Yovel 2005: 125).
The paradox is that although activity theory has emerged as an attempt to overcome the 
crisis of traditional psychology, nowadays the expansion of activity theory is connected with 
the acceptance of an uncritical, technical, instrumental view of the concept of activity as a 
simplifying, functionalist scheme. What can activity theory offer for an understanding of human 
development from a critical standpoint? Is it possible to reconsider activity theory from the 
perspective of critical psychology?
Definitions and sources of the concept of activity
In contemporary sociocultural literature, the question of the meaning and character of activity 
theory arises. Is activity theory an umbrella term with different approaches or a single theory? 
Holzman (2006) pointed out that there is no unified activity theory, but a wide variety of 
approaches that have been inspired by Vygotsky. Holzman describes different articulations of 
activity theory:
a general conceptual system with these basic principles: the hierarchical structure of activity, 
object-orientedness, internalization/externalization, tool mediation and development; the-
oretical approaches that place culture and activity at the center of attempts to understand 
27
Activity theory
Theory and practice
Manolis Dafermos

Manolis Dafermos
262
human nature; . . . a non-dualistic approach to understanding and transforming human life 
that takes dialectical human activity as its ontology.
(Holzman 2006: 6)
Other thinkers reject the interpretation of activity theory as an ‘eclectic grouping of multiple 
theories’ (Sannino et al. 2009: 1). Engeström and other scholars (Engeström 1987; Engeström 
et al. 1999) argue that in accordance with activity theory, the concept of activity should be 
considered as the primary unit of analysis, or as ‘the basic unit of concrete human life’ (Sannino 
et al. 2009: 1). To answer this and many other open-ended theoretical questions, we first have to 
examine the origin of the concept of activity and the historical development of its meanings. 
The introduction of the concept of activity in the field of psychology can be understood only 
if we take into account the social and scientific context of its formation.
The concept of activity has its philosophical roots in nineteenth century German clas-
sical philosophy (especially in Hegel’s philosophy) and Karl Marx’s works (Blunden 2010). 
Marx’s Theses on Feuerbach is worth a special mention. Indeed, Marx, in the 1st Thesis on 
Feuerbach, criticized all previous materialism for seeing reality ‘only in the form of the object 
[Objekts], or of contemplation [Anschauung], but not as human sensuous activity, practice 
[Praxis], not subjectively’ (Marx 1975/2005: 3). The introduction and expansion of the con-
cept of activity in psychology was realized in the context of Soviet psychology. First of all, 
we should take into account the social context of the development of Soviet psychology in which 
the concept of activity developed. The historical period immediately after the October 
revolution was ‘a period of creative turmoil and one of great enthusiasm for the arts and 
sciences. And there was a lot of experimentation in cultural and political life’ (Sannino et al. 
2009: 8). The situation of science that emerged after the October revolution was described 
by Luria:
This atmosphere immediately following the Revolution provided the energy for many 
ambitious ventures. An entire society was liberated to turn its creative powers to construct-
ing a new kind of life for everyone. The general excitement, which stimulated incredible 
levels of activity, was not at all conducive, however, to systematic, highly organized scientific 
inquiry.
(Luria 1979: 3)
The concept of activity acquired new dimensions and meanings as a theoretical and practical 
project in the context of radical social transformation. Moreover, the concept of activity was 
one of the key concepts elaborated in the context of Soviet psychology as an attempt to build 
a ‘new psychology’. Neither the introspective psychology of consciousness nor behaviourism 
could cope with the theoretical and practical issues that arose in the context of transformative 
social practice. Introspective psychology focused only on the immediate data of consciousness; 
behaviourism reduced the activity of organisms to the reactions to external stimuli (Rubinstein 
1987). Existing psychological theories could not face the social challenges and acute issues that 
emerged in social practice.
Two sources of the concept of activity in psychology can be distinguished. Sechenov’s psy-
chophysiological reflex theory is the first major source of the concept of activity. The term 
‘activity’ acquired the meaning of physiological activity of organisms. In the context of Soviet 
physiology, several theories on physical activity of organisms have emerged: Pavlov’s theory 
of Higher Nervous Activity, Anokhin’s theory of functional systems, Bernstein’s physiology of 

Activity theory
263
activity, Ukhtomsky’s theory of the dominant under the influence of Sechenov’s psychophysio-
logical reflex theory (Bedny and Karwowski 2007). In Soviet psychology the concept of activity 
acquired a different meaning under the influence of German classical philosophy, and especially 
Marxism, which became the second major source of the concept of activity.
[T]he term ‘deyatel’nos’t’ or ‘activity’ refers to the human mobilization around conscious 
goals in a concrete, external world. Inasmuch as only humans can establish conscious goals, 
only humans can be the subjects of activity. This emphasis on conscious goals in activ-
ity theory implies that that human activity develops less from human biology, than from 
human history and culture.
(Bedny and Karwowski 2004: 136)
The focus on the cultural, social, and historical dimension of human activity is the main con-
tribution of the second source of the concept of ‘activity’. Wertsch (1985: 210) notes that ‘the 
Russian term “deyatel’nos’t” has no adequate English equivalent’. The term ‘activity’ refers mainly 
to physical activity, behaviour. The Russian term ‘deyatel’nos’t’ corresponds to the German term 
‘tätigkeit’ rather than the term ‘aktivität’ (Kaptelinin 2005). The term ‘deyatel’nos’t’ includes both 
external and internal aspects of human activity. All of these aspects of activity of concrete indi-
viduals have developed in human history and culture. The term ‘deyatel’nos’t’ came from German 
classical philosophy and Marxism and was transformed in the context of Soviet psychology and 
philosophy.
Versions of activity theory
In the 1920s, psychologists in the Soviet Union used the term ‘behaviour’. For example, in 1925 
Vygotsky wrote his famous work ‘Consciousness as a problem of psychology of behaviour’. 
However, even though the term ‘activity’ was used, it acquired a different meaning than that 
term in contemporary activity theory. As Veresov pointed out, the term ‘deyatel’nos’t’ was used 
not in the sense of Tätigkeit i.e. as ‘the practical, socially organized, object-related, goal-directed 
activity of an individual . . . but in that of Aktivität, in line with typical and traditional usage in 
the physiology and psychology of the time’ in Vygotsky’s texts between 1924 and 1927. ‘Vygot-
sky used this term in the same sense as Ivan Pavlov (higher neural activity – vysshaya nervnaya 
deyatelnost)’ (Veresov 2005: 40–41).
In contrast to the behavioural scheme of relationship ‘stimulus-response’ (stimulus-reflex), 
Vygotsky proposed a method for the investigation of an instrumental act. The link between 
A and B is connected to stimulus-response. A psychological tool is used when people attempt 
to solve the problem in a different way than of stimulus-response connection. Vygotsky used 
the concept ‘instrumental act’ and not the concept ‘activity’ with the meaning it acquired in the 
later development of activity theory. In the context of an ‘instrumental act’ a psychological tool 
as a middle term appears between subject and object. Vygotsky argued that symbols and signs, as 
psychological tools, mediate psychological processes in the same way that material tools mediate 
overt human labour activity. Tools and instruments are used by humans for transformation of the 
material world. Symbols and signs are used by people for the regulation of their own psycholog-
ical processes: ‘In the instrumental act man masters himself from the outside-via psychological 
tools’ (Vygotsky 1987: 87).
The concept of activity had a crucial character within the research programme of Kharkov 
school members (i.e. Leontiev, Galperin, Zaporozhets, and others) and it is considered by them 

Manolis Dafermos
264
as a means of bringing psychology ‘out of the close world of consciousness’ (Haenen 1993: 
77). Unlike Vygotsky, who emphasized the crucial role of speech, Galperin and other Kharkov 
school members focused on the investigation of the content of human practical activity.
The real relationships between activity theory and cultural-historical psychology were com-
plex and contradictory. In the early 1930s in the Soviet Union, cultural-historical psychol-
ogy and activity psychology emerged as interconnected but independent research programs. 
Cultural-historical psychology emerged as the study of the development of higher mental 
functions (Veresov 2010). Activity psychology emerged as the study of the external, objective 
activity and its influence on the development of mental activity. According to Leontiev (1981), 
activity contributes to the orientation of subjects in the world of objects. Activity is not an 
aggregate of reactions, but a system of processes which deal with the vital relationships of 
organisms to their environment. Leontiev distinguished two meanings of the term ‘activity’. 
The term ‘activity’ is used to describe biological and physiological processes. In this meaning, 
activity is identified with the reactivity of organisms, their ability to respond to stimulus. In 
psychology the term ‘activity’ refers to the particular relationships of the individuals to their 
environments. The second meaning of the term ‘activity’ is connected with the reflection of 
reality by subjects.
Leontiev adopted activity as an object of psychological investigation and attempted to inves-
tigate its inner structure. The three-level (or three-component) structure of activity includes: 
activity, actions, and operations. Activity is governed by its motives. Actions are subordinated to 
conscious goals. Operations are influenced by the conditions of its accomplishment. Leontiev 
(1978) introduced the concept of ‘object oriented activity’ (predmetnaja dejatelnost). One kind of 
activity is distinguished from others by its object. The object of an activity is presented as its true 
motive. Human activity exists in the form of a chain of actions. An action is directed toward a 
goal. Each action has operational aspects connected with the concrete conditions in which it 
can be achieved.
Another version of the psychological theory of activity was introduced and developed by 
Rubinstein. In 1934, Rubinstein’s paper ‘Problems of psychology in the works of Karl Marx’ 
devoted to the analysis of an early Marx work, the Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts (written 
in 1844), was published. Rubinstein argued that the Marxian notion of human activity is the 
starting point of the reconstruction of psychology. Human activity is Man’s objectification of 
himself, ‘the process of revelation of its essential powers’ (Rubinstein 1987: 114). Human beings 
and their psyches are formed in the processes of human activity. Changing the world, human 
beings simultaneously change their own essential powers. The Economic and Philosophic Manu-
scripts of 1844 marked the emergence of the method of scientific investigation of Marx. How-
ever, it is only the starting point of scientific investigation of the political economy of capitalism. 
In Marx’s Das Kapital the method of scientific investigation reached a qualitatively new level 
of development. In Marx’s Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts many of the most important of 
Marx’s ideas had not yet appeared, such as the notion of the dual character of labour, the distinc-
tion between abstract and concrete labour.
Rubinstein suggested ‘the principle of unity of consciousness and activity’ which ‘synthesized 
in one formula the four tenets of dialectical psychology . . . the special nature of the psyche, 
its active role in human behaviour, the historicity of consciousness and the plasticity of man’s 
abilities’ (Payne 1968: 149). The appearance and formation of psychological processes takes place 
within the activity only in the process of the continuous interaction between the individual 
with the world around him (Rubinstein 2000). Consciousness and, more generally, psycho-
logical processes, not only arise from activity, but also form and transform within the activity. 
Rubinstein disagreed with the identification of psychological processes with the internal and 

Activity theory
265
activity with something external. Activity – in the same way as psychological processes – is a 
concrete unity of external and internal. In contrast to functionalism, Rubinstein attempted to 
study not only discrete psychological functions (such as perception, memory, speech, emotion, 
thinking), but also human psychism (‘psychika’) as a whole in its ontogenesis.
The relation between internal and external activity is one of the principal points of con-
troversy between Leontiev and Rubinstein. Rubinstein criticized Leontiev’s conception of 
internalization as a transformation of external activity to internal, psychic activity. According 
to Rubinstein (1973), all the external conditions determine the impact on the thinking only 
refracted through the internal conditions. External causes act through internal conditions. For 
Rubinstein, Leontiev overstressed the dependence of internal activity on external activity, while 
not revealing the inner structure and content of psychic activity itself. One of the consequences 
of Leontiev’s approach to internalization is the reduction of learning to the assimilation of fixed 
knowledge, of predetermined products and results of the process of cognition. Rubinstein crit-
icized the perspective of reduction of learning to a purely reproductive process, to the simple 
appropriation of ready-made products of culture and the elimination of the production of new 
knowledge and new forms of activity. One of Rubinstein’s main achievements is connected 
with his focus on the active, creative role of the subjects and their non-reproductive, innovative 
activity.
Rubinstein suggested a more dialectical approach than Leontiev, one which demonstrates the 
complex interconnection of the internal and external activity, and highlights the importance of 
subjects in the creative learning process. However, in Rubinstein’s activity theory, as in Leon-
tiev’s theory, there is not a concrete analysis of activity in the particular sociocultural contexts 
and the description of the particular sociocultural and educational conditions of the transition 
from the reproductive to creative learning process.
In the 1960s, the reconsideration of activity theory had started. Many Soviet psychologists 
carried out and published the results of their investigations into the relations between the exter-
nal activity of children and their correspondent psychological actions. D. Elkonin elaborated an 
original theory of psychic development based on the principle of leading activity. V. V. Davydov 
focused on the investigation of collective learning activity, considering internalization as a mode 
of individual appropriation of forms of collective activity. Galperin developed his theory of the 
stepwise formation of mental actions (Dafermos 2014).
Cultural-historical activity theory
Cultural-historical activity theory (CHAT) has become one of the most popular in Anglo-Saxon 
literature over the last two decades. Different versions of cultural-historical activity theory can 
be found (e.g. Stetsenko and Arievitch 2004; Yamagata-Lynch 2010). However, there are some 
similarities between multiple versions of CHAT. In contrast to approaches emphasizing differ-
ences between cultural-historical psychology and activity theory, ‘the basic impulse underlying 
a CHAT approach is to reject this either/or dichotomy’ (Cole and Engeström 2007: 485). 
Vygotsky, with his concept of cultural mediation, was identified by Engeström (2001) as the 
first generation of cultural-historical activity. A. N. Leontiev is presented as the founder of the 
second generation of cultural-historical activity theory. The ‘third generation’ has introduced 
new conceptual tools such as dialogue, multiplicity of perspectives, the interrelations between 
defined activity systems, etc., to expand the theoretical framework of activity theory.
Engeström’s periodization creates the risk of interpretation of cultural-historical activity the-
ory in the light of presentism: ‘Presentist history has been described as linear, progressive, contin-
uous, justificationist, or, in short, whiggish – failing to concentrate upon understanding the past 

Manolis Dafermos
266
in its true historical context’ (Buss 1979: 14). Presentism leads to an examination of the ‘third 
generation’ of cultural-historical activity theory as if it were merely a linear culmination of the 
first and second generations (that is, of Vygotsky’s and Leontiev’s theories). The consideration 
of Vygotsky’s and Leontiev’s theories exclusively from the standpoint of the present conjunc-
ture of cultural-historical activity theory, and the exclusion of Rubinstein’s version of activity 
theory, results in decontextualized accounts of the historical development of cultural-historical 
psychology and activity theory.
Cole and Engeström describe the following basic theoretical principles used by CHAT: 
mediation through artefacts; activity as the essential unit of analysis; the cultural organization of 
human life; adoption of a genetic perspective; an emphasis on the social origins of higher psy-
chological functions; and the ethical and strategic contradiction of intervention research. Some 
of these principles are associated with cultural-historical psychology (which include a focus on 
mediation through artefacts, adoption of a genetic perspective, social origins of higher psycho-
logical functions and the cultural organization of human life) and other principles with activity 
theory (for example, a focus on activity as the essential unit of analysis).
Cole and Engeström consider Vygotsky’s and Leontiev’s writings compatible and plausible 
and prefer to refer to them as cultural-historical activity theory (Cole 1996; Cole and Engeström 
2007). The proponents of the canonical approach consider activity theory as a continuation of 
cultural-historical psychology (Davydov and Radzikhovskii 1985; Radzikhovskii 1979). The 
canonical approach of the development of the ‘school of Vygotsky-Leontiev-Luria’ has been 
criticized by several authors for ignoring the serious differences between Vygotsky’s research 
programme and the Kharkov group’s research programme (Yasnitsky 2011). Toomela (2000) 
emphasizes differences, discontinuities, and gaps that exist between cultural-historical activity 
theory and Leontiev’s activity theory. According to Toomela (2000: 357), Leontiev’s activity the-
ory ‘was a “dead end” detour of cultural historical psychology grounded by Vygotsky’. Toomela 
argues that for Vygotsky the most important ‘unit of analysis’ was not the concept ‘activity’, but 
the concept ‘sign meaning’. The eclectic combination of elements or components from different 
approaches leads to theoretical confusion and questionable practice.
Hakkarainen (2004: 4) argues that Western CHAT accepts ‘a multidisciplinary approach 
while the Russian activity approach is more or less psychological’. A  multidisciplinary 
approach to activity theory has developed at the Center for Activity Theory and Develop-
mental Work Research (University of Finland, Helsinki) led by Yrjö Engeström. Vygotsky, 
Luria, and Leontiev worked in the context of psychology as a discipline, while the represent-
atives of CHAT developed a multidisciplinary research program.
Many scholars argue that the concept of activity is interdisciplinary by nature (Blunden 2010; 
Davydov 1999). However, bringing different disciplines together on the basis of activity theory 
creates many theoretical and methodological questions. For example, Langemeyer and Roth 
(2006) argue that Engeström’s version of CHAT neglects essential aspects of dialectics which are 
connected with the understanding of contradictions. Moreover, they point out that ‘Engeström’s 
notion of activity (and its triangular representation) proves rather indifferent about the broader 
societal relations that determine practice and by which human activities develop historically’ 
(Langemeyer and Roth 2006: 28).
Activity theory from a critical psychology perspective
The mainstream reception and implementation of activity theory in North Atlantic psychology 
and pedagogy has been criticized. Ratner (2006) argues that, with few exceptions, activity the-
orists generally ignore concrete historical forms of organization of social life.

Activity theory
267
They do not consider concrete activities such as alienated work, or formal education in 
capitalist society, and the kind of subjectivity that is operative within them . . . they rarely 
comment on the need for reforming the concrete educational system (e.g., power relations 
among administrators, teachers, and students; working conditions of teachers; social rela-
tions between teachers and students.
(Ratner 2006: 37)
Many activity theorists operate general categories such as subject, object, motive, etc. in a 
functionalist way, without considering their concrete historical forms and their internal con-
tradictions as a driving force of the development. Marx did not investigate activity in general 
as an abstract concept, but as labour activity. Marx used such terms as ‘labour’, ‘the productive 
life’, ‘work’, ‘the process of labour’, and ‘the labour process’ ( Jones 2009). Moreover, Marx 
did not investigate labour activity in general, but labour activity in a particular sociocultural 
context, that of the capitalist mode of production. In contrast to the Finnish/Anglo-Saxon 
tradition of activity theory, which is based on Engeström’s conceptualization, which empha-
sizes the structural dimensions of activity systems, the German tradition, based on Holzkamp’s 
conceptualization, emphasizes the subject’s perspective in theory and methodology. The 
task of reconstructing categories of psychology as science, which was posed by Holzkamp, 
was associated with the reconstruction of subjects in their real lives and their emancipation. 
The elaboration of the concept of subjectivity as a reflective agency was one of the main 
achievements of German critical psychology. Holzkamp, on the basis of a reconsideration of 
Leontiev’s version of activity theory, offered a sketch of historicization of the human psyche 
through connecting biological phylogenesis, historical development of society, and individual 
development.
‘Practice research’ emerged as an attempt at the further development of German critical 
psychology through bridging the gap between research methodology and practice. Practice 
research is based on the production, appropriation, and transformation of knowledge in situated 
research practices. The concept of practice research was developed under the influence of the 
theory of situated activity as well as post-structuralism (Nissen 2000). The theory of ‘situated 
activity’ emerged in opposition to the traditional cognitive approach, which separates mind from 
the social world. It emphasizes cultural-historical forms of located, conflictual, and meaningful 
activity. In contrast to formalistic views of the activity, the situated approaches are invented to 
contextualize everyday local practices of people and their engagement in processes of human 
activity (Lave 1993). On the basis of situated approaches, the concept ‘community of practice’ 
has been elaborated. The concept ‘community of practice’ refers to a group of individuals creat-
ing their shared identities through participating and contributing to activities of their commu-
nity (Wenger et al. 2002).
Conclusions
Undoubtedly, the situated approach to activity has offered a creative perspective for bridging the 
gap between critical research and alternative practice in various fields (education, psychotherapy, 
social work, etc.), but it ‘can be criticized as influenced by relativist postmodern trends’ (Nissen 
2000: 145). Postmodern relativism can lead to the total rejection of all kinds of ‘grand narra-
tives’ of the social world as abstract, formal, and meaningless entities and the celebration of the 
fragmentized, local, situated practices. The relativization of social practice could undermine the 
emancipatory potential of activity theory. For this reason, it is important to elaborate a dialectical 
framework for the activity theory in order to conceptualize ‘relations between persons acting 

Manolis Dafermos
268
and the social world’ (Lave 1993: 5). Dialectics as a way of thinking brings into focus the dynamic 
and contradictory nature of reality which is not constituted by ready-made things, but complex 
processes: ‘To say that activity is dialectical is to appreciate something of the synthetic work that 
the performance of contradiction always accomplishes’ (Parker 1999: 64).
It is difficult to deal with many theoretical and methodological problems of activity the-
ory which remain still unsolved without the elaboration of a dialectical framework. Some of 
these issued have been identified: ‘the nature and role of transformation in activity systems, the 
relation of collective and individual activity, the relation of activity theory to other theories of 
human conduct, and the relation of the biological and social in existence’ (Roth 2004:7).
In conclusion, we would like to restate Vygotsky’s idea that ‘practice sets the task and serves as 
the supreme judge of theory, as its truth criterion’ (Vygotsky 1987: 305–306). Hence, we should 
recognize that a crucial challenge for activity theory from a critical standpoint is to detect real 
ways for connecting critical theorizing with transformative practice at local, national, and inter-
national levels. This challenge has already been posed by Marx in his Eleventh Theses on Feuerbach: 
‘Philosophers have hitherto only interpreted the world in various ways; the point is to change 
it’ (Marx 1975/2005: 4).
Further reading
Chaiklin, S. and Lave J. (eds) (1993) Understanding Practice: Perspectives on Activity and Context. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Jones, P. E. (2009) ‘Breaking away from Capital? Theorising activity in the shadow of Marx’, Outlines, 1, 
45–48.
Rubinstein, S. (1987) ‘Problems of psychology in the works of Karl Marx’, Studies in Soviet Thought, 33, 
111–130.
Website resources
Center for Activity Theory and Developmental Work Research (CATDWR): http://www.edu.helsinki.
fi/activity/
International Society for Cultural and Activity Research: http://www.iscar.org
References
Bedny, G. and Karwowski, W. (2004) ‘Activity theory as a basis for the study of work’, Ergonomics, 47(2), 
134-153.
Bedny, G. and Karwowski, W. (2007) A Systemic-Structural Theory of Activity: Applications to Human Performance 
and Work Design. Boca Raton: CRC Press/Taylor & Francis.
Blunden, A. (2010) An Interdisciplinary Theory of Activity. Leiden and Boston: Brill.
Buss, A. R. (1979) A Dialectical Psychology. New York: Irvington Publishers.
Cole, M. (1996) Cultural Psychology: A Once and Future Discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cole, M. and Engeström, Y. (2007) ‘Cultural-historical approaches to designing for development’, in  
J. Valsiner and A. Rosa (eds) The Cambridge Handbook of Sociocultural Psychology. Cambridge, NY: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Dafermos, M. (2014) ‘Soviet psychology’, in T. Teo (ed.) Encyclopedia of Critical Psychology. New York: 
Springer.
Davydov, V. V. (1999) ‘A new approach to the interpretation of activity structure and content’, in S. Chaiklin, 
M. Hedegaard and U. J. Jensen (eds) Activity Theory and Social Practice. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press.
Davydov, V. V. and Radzikhovskii, L. A. (1985) ‘Vygotsky’s theory and the activity-oriented approach in 
psychology’, in J. Wertsch (ed.) Culture, Communication and Cognition: Vygotskian Perspectives. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Engeström, Y. (1987) Learning by Expanding: An Activity-Theoretical Approach to Developmental Research. Hel-
sinki: Orienta-Konsultit Oy.

Activity theory
269
Engeström, Y. (1993) ‘Developmental studies of work as a testbench of activity theory: the case of primary 
care medical practice’, in S. Chaiklin and J. Lave (eds) Understanding Practice: Perspectives on Activity and 
Context. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Engeström, Y. (2001) ‘Expansive learning at work: toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization’, Jour-
nal of Education and Work, 14(1), 133–156.
Engeström, Y., Miettinen, R. and Punamaki, R. L. (eds) (1999) Perspectives on Activity Theory. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Engeström, Y., Lompscher, J. and Rückriem, G. (eds) (2005) Putting Activity Theory to Work: Contributions from 
Developmental Work Research. Berlin: Lehmanns Media.
Haenen, J.P.P. (1993) Piotr Gal’perin: His Lifelong Quest for the Content of Psychology, Doctoral thesis, Amster-
dam, Vrije Universiteit te Amsterdam.
Hakkarainen, P. (2004) ‘Editor’s introduction: challenges of activity theory’, Journal of Russian and East 
European Psychology, 42(2), 3–11.
Hegel, G.W.F., and Yovel, Y. (2005) Hegel’s Preface to the Phenomenology of Spirit. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Holzman, L. (2006) ‘What kind of theory is activity theory? Introduction’, Theory & Psychology, 16(1), 5–11.
Jones, P. E. (2009) ‘Breaking away from Capital? Theorising activity in the shadow of Marx’, Outlines, 1, 
45–48.
Kaptelinin, V. (2005) ‘The object of activity: making sense of the sense-maker’, Mind, Culture, & Activity, 
12(1), 4–18.
Langemeyer, I. and Roth, W. M. (2006) ‘Is cultural-historical activity theory threatened to fall short of its 
own principles and possibilities as a dialectical social science?’, Outlines, 2, 20–42.
Lave, J. (1993) ‘The practice of learning’, in S. Chaiklin and J. Lave (eds) Understanding Practice: Perspectives on 
Activity and Context. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Leontiev, A. N. (1978) Activity, Consciousness, and Personality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Leontiev, A. N. (1981) Problems of the Development of Mind. Moscow: Progress.
Luria, A. (1979) The Making of Mind: A Personal Account of Soviet Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Marx, K. (1975/2005) ‘Theses on Feurbach’, in K. Marx and F. Engels, Collected Works, London and New 
York: Lawrence  & Wishart  & International Publishers, http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1845/theses/index.htm
Nissen, M. (2000) ‘Practice research: critical psychology in and through practices’, Annual Review of Critical 
Psychology, 2, 145–179.
Nissen, M. (2011) ‘Activity theory: legacies, standpoints, and hopes: a discussion of Andy Blunden’s An 
Interdisciplinary Theory of Activity’, Mind, Culture, & Activity, 18, 374–384.
Parker, I. (1999) ‘Against relativism in psychology, on balance’, History of the Human Sciences, 12(1), 61–78.
Payne, T. R. (1968) ‘The development of Soviet psychological theory: the case of S. L. Rubinštejn’, Studies 
in Soviet Thought, 8(2/3), 144–156.
Radzikhovskii, L. A. (1979) ‘Analysis of L. S. Vygotsky’s legacy by Soviet psychologists’, Voprosy psikhologi, 
6, 58–67.
Ratner, C. (2006) Cultural psychology: a perspective on psychological functioning and social reform. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Roth, W. M. (2004) ‘Activity Theory and Education: an Introduction’, Mind, Culture, and Activity, 11(1), 1–8.
Rubinstein, S. (1973) Problems of General Psychology. Moscow: Pedagogika.
Rubinstein, S. (1987) ‘Problems of psychology in the works of Karl Marx’, Studies in Soviet Thought, 33, 
111–130.
Rubinstein, S. (2000) Foundations of General Psychology. Sankt Piterburg: Piter.
Sannino, A., Daniels, H., and Gutierrez, K. D. (2009) ‘Activity theory between historical engagement and 
future-making practice’, in A. Sannino, H. Daniels and K. D.Gutierrez (eds) Learning and Expanding with 
Activity Theory. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Sannino, A. and Nocon, H. (2008) ‘Introduction: activity theory and school innovation’, Journal of Educa-
tional Change, 9(4), 325–328.
Stetsenko, A. and Arievitch, I. (2004) ‘The self in cultural-historical activity theory: reclaiming the unity of 
social and individual dimensions of human development’, Theory & Psychology, 14(4), 475–503.
Toomela, A. (2000) ‘Activity theory is a dead end for cultural-historical psychology’, Culture & Psychology, 
6(3), 353–364.
Veresov, N. (2005) ‘Marxist and non Marxist aspects of the cultural-historical psychology of L. S. Vygotsky’, 
Outlines, 1, 39–49.

Manolis Dafermos
270
Veresov, N. (2010) ‘Introducing cultural historical theory: main concepts and principles of genetic research 
methodology’, Cultural – historical psychology, 4, 83–90.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1987) ‘The historical meaning of the crisis of psychology’, in R. Rieber, and J. Wolloc (eds) 
The Collected Works of L. S.Vygotsky. New York and London: Plenum Press.
Wenger, E., McDermott, R., and Snyder, W. M. (2002) Cultivating Communities of Practice: A Guide to Man-
aging Knowledge. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1985) Vygotsky and Social Formation of Mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Yamagata-Lynch, L. C. (2010) Activity Systems Analysis Methods for Understanding Complex Learning Environ-
ments. New York: Springer.
Yasnitsky, A. (2011) ‘Vygotsky circle as a personal network of scholars: restoring connections between peo-
ple and ideas’, Integrative Psychological and Behavioral Science, 45(4), 422–457.

271
Much recent work in cultural-historical activity theory has been concerned with mediation, 
zones of proximal development, activity, language, concept formation, and abstract thinking, to 
name a few key issues. This work has provided an important corrective to positivist psychol-
ogy, which has concentrated on describing operation, structure, and processes within individ-
ual heads. Through the efforts of cultural-historical activity theory researchers, it has become 
increasingly clear that any account of human higher mental functions development must be 
studied within its social, historical, and cultural context. Human higher mental functions are 
developed historically, formed socially, shaped culturally, and carved by the social relations of 
production. This leads to the urgent need for an integrated developmental theory. Hegel was 
one of the first developmental theorists who offered a systematic theory of conceptual devel-
opment. His dialectic can be seen as a general theory of human higher mental functions. There 
are important structural similarities between dialectical and developmental psychology of higher 
mental functions. To achieve these similarities, we need to re-formalize Hegel’s idealistic dialec-
tic and Marx’s materialist dialectic, a truly impressive project on which few attempts have been 
made (by, among others, Wallon, Politzer, Vygotsky, and Sève). My own position is that Marx’s 
materialist dialectic is completely incompatible with Hegel’s idealist dialectic, a proposition that 
Marx and others have sharply disagreed with.
In this chapter, much attention is paid to central concepts of dialectics such as negation, con-
tradiction, ‘Aufheben’ (simultaneous preservation and transcendence of categories in the process 
of change), negation of negation, conflict, quantity, quality, unity, and struggle. Hegel’s dialectic 
deals with the dynamics of conceptual structures whereas Marx’s dialectic deals with real social 
structures. For Hegel, dialectic is a general theory of the development of conceptual structures. 
Hegel argued that ‘Wherever there is movement, wherever there is life, wherever anything is 
carried into effect in the actual world, there is Dialectic at work’ (Hegel 1892: 148). He discov-
ered and presented ‘some’ of the necessary tools to understand dialectics and the dialectics of 
nature, society, and thought, and for that we should be grateful. But Hegel also obscured and 
distorted other necessary aspects of dialectical method by presenting his ‘dialectic’ in a classical 
idealist form, subordinating materiality to ideality. Hegel both revealed many laws of dialec-
tical logic and buried them under the idealist frame of disorder. He applied the dialectic to 
28
Marxist psychology and dialectical 
method
Mohamed Elhammoumi

Mohamed Elhammoumi
272
consciousness, history, logical categories, and history of philosophy. Hegel’s Phenomenology is spe-
cifically concerned with the development of knowledge, as well as with stages of consciousness.
The years 1905–1925 saw an attempt to use the Hegelian Marxist dialectics as an instrument 
of knowledge and action. These years were the most important for breakthroughs in Marxist 
thinking. The struggle of this period, as described by Lenin in 1908, was an attempt to restore 
the dialectical concepts of totality and historical process. In the light of these struggles, Vygotsky 
attempted to build a psychology structured on the scientifically based method of Marx’s dia-
lectical materialist method. Dialectical materialist method is above all an analysis of the logical 
thought of contradictions and an analysis of social relations. It has a rich understanding of the 
historical development of human higher mental functions as a contradictory process. The task 
of Marxist psychology is to discover the possibilities of the development of human intellectual 
abilities. Vygotsky’s cultural-historical analysis of human higher mental functions was, therefore, 
an attempt toward a dialectical Aufheben, able simultaneously to negate, preserve, supersede, and 
transcend the contradiction between human higher mental functions and the concrete totality 
of the living concrete reality. The introduction of dialectics into a cultural-historical activity 
research program opens fertile terrain for the study of human higher mental functions. In this 
sense, culture, history, and social factors will be treated as active variables, not simply as a blank 
cheque signed and endorsed by history, culture, and society. This chapter regards the names 
of Hegel, Feuerbach, and Marx as milestones in the history of the dialectical method and the 
interpretation of human higher mental functions. It is through the use of dialectical method that 
cultural-historical activity theory will overcome the present dominant versions that emphasize 
opposition between description and explanation of human higher mental functions.
Lev Vygotsky
In the last three decades, Lev Vygotsky was celebrated as one of the most important psycholo-
gists of our time. Yet Vygotsky’s dialectical method is relatively unknown in the English-speaking 
world (see Blunden 1997; Parker 2007; Sève 1975, 1968/1978, 1989, 2002, 2008). Although 
several of his writings were available during the last two decades, his main works on applied 
dialectical method, particularly ‘Educational Psychology’ and ‘Studies on the history of behavior: Ape, 
primitive, and child’, have not yet received much attention, which is unfortunate. Vygotsky’s 
approach to psychology, which is grounded in a dialectical historical materialist philosophy, is 
underutilized. The dialectical method is a potential methodological instrument of investigation 
of human higher mental functions, and became a fundamental rule in Vygotsky’s psychological 
studies. Dialectical method led Vygotsky to adopt an approach to ‘truth’ and knowledge, refus-
ing to accept any psychological fact without experimental validation. As a consequence of his 
constant critical questioning of the values and foundations of the contemporary trends of Soviet 
psychology, Vygotsky made a number of enemies during his lifetime (incarnated in the rise of 
Stalinism, the mechanistic dialectic, positivist Marxism, ‘diamat’, Stalin’s version of Marxist the-
ory, and so on). The dialectical method views human concrete social reality as a set of complex, 
changing, contradictory processes. These complex processes are embedded in human practical 
activity of the totality of social life. The totality of social life is a moving entity in struggle to 
realize its own nature.
Psychology, viewed in the light of historical materialism, serves the double purpose of 
demonstrating the nature of the social relations of production of a given society, and promoting 
solutions that have relevance to the actual living concrete conditions. Therefore, the dialectic 
is the concrete analysis of concrete conditions. In this sense, the purpose of psychology is not 
only to adapt the individual to a given society, culture, and mode of thinking, or to clarify the 

Marxist psychology and dialectical method
273
mechanisms by which such adaptation is made possible, but also to stress consciousness as a 
part of human activity (instead of behaviour), and to promote awareness, individual potential 
development, and social change. Vygotsky stated that a social change in the mode of produc-
tion, the elimination of private property, a change in social relations, class structure, institutions,  
and the division of labour can enhance human higher mental functions and reduce tensions 
between social classes. Such transformations pave the way for the development of human cognitive  
potentials.
Vygotsky’s ideas in context
Under the directorship of Lev Vygotsky, a new paradigm in psychology began at the Moscow 
Institute of Psychology in the newly created social experiment known as the USSR. While 
Vygotsky and his colleagues were decidedly Marxist, they sought to draw from the philosophic 
works of such notable figures as Kant, Hegel, Spinoza, Feuerbach, Marx, Engels, Lenin, Wallon, 
and Politzer, to name but a few. Three common pursuits can be found pervading the works of 
Soviet psychologists: 1) a rediscovery and understanding of Marx’s works; 2) a reconstructed 
understanding of Marx’s research paradigm; and 3) an exploration of the mediations that make 
possible the developmental changes of society, economy, culture, higher mental functions, per-
sonality, and consciousness.
While Marx’s research program proved to be the kernel of Soviet psychology, Soviet psy-
chologists incorporated strengths of German, French, American, and other world psychol-
ogy. It is in this context that I propose the incorporation of the advanced achievement of the 
cultural-historical activity research paradigm. The unification of these achievements will deliver 
a greater explanatory power to the unfinished project of Marxist psychology (scientific psychol-
ogy) and a better formula for practical action in education, learning, upbringing, social progress, 
and human development.
Marx’s proposal, that the human individual creates his/her nature through social practice 
became for Vygotsky and Marxist psychologists (Wallon, Politzer, Sève, among others) a series of 
guiding theoretical principles. Vygotsky, like Marx, moved away from the conception of the indi-
vidual as a self-contained agency and grounded his theory on Marx’s conception of the social 
individual as an ensemble of social relations. Social individuals do not simply produce the means 
and conditions of their own lives and live under these conditions, but produce the conditions 
under which they live. Vygotsky engaged in developing a theoretical framework to the two-sided 
reality of social individuals as not merely subject to their life conditions, but simultaneously 
creating them.
Vygotsky argued for social, historical, and cultural principles based on historical dialectical 
materialism. Unfortunately, for political reasons, the 1920s project of Marxist psychology suf-
fered many delays, was left dormant in the mid-1930s, and brought to slow death in 1936. In 
the 1960s the project of Marxist psychology was revived after the aborted social uprisings in 
May 1968. Also around this time, Lucien Sève published his ideas in the monumental Man in 
Marxist Theory and the Psychology of Personality. The book addresses key new concepts in psychol-
ogy from a historical dialectical materialist perspective. Sève never held a university teaching 
position, despite his Marxist convictions. Yet his situation in the French Communist Party as 
well as in French universities and academia went unnoticed. His views were marginalized. Sève’s 
psychological ideas were shaped by the social struggle of the 1960s; he was a Marxist and his 
theoretical and conceptual ideas were strongly influenced by Marx’s writings. In order to under-
stand the unfinished project of Marxist psychology, it is useful to examine different versions of 
interpretation of Marxism from Marx’s death to the present day Chinese Marxism.

Mohamed Elhammoumi
274
Dialectical method and psychology
Vygotsky viewed dialectics as a framework for studying the development of higher mental func-
tions. For Vygotsky, ‘Development does not proceed toward socialization, but toward the con-
version of social relations into mental functions’ (1981: 165). Development is not transformation 
but change. His readings of Hegel, Marx, Engels, and Lenin, among others, entrusted him with 
the necessary intellectual tools to see the shortcomings of positivism and the need of investigat-
ing human activity within social, historical, and cultural settings. It was Vygotsky’s combination 
of these various mediations – social, historical, and cultural – into a complex whole that made 
his theoretical framework worthy and promising. Dialectics is the engine of psychology, and its 
driving force. In this connection, Wallon argued that
It is dialectics that has given psychology its stability and its meaning. . . . Through dialectics 
psychology is able to be at once a natural science and a human science. . . . Marxist dialec-
tics has enabled psychology to comprehend the organism and its environment, in constant 
interaction, as a single, unified whole. And finally, in Marxist dialectics, psychology has a 
tool for explaining the conflicts out of which the individual must evolve his behavior and 
develop his personality.
(1951/1963: 34)
At the heart of Marxist dialectics is the idea of contradiction. Contradiction is the key to all other 
concepts and categories of dialectical development. Contradiction is to dialectics as matter is to 
materialism. Vygotsky, like Wallon, organized his psychological observations and experimental 
investigations by presenting the development of the child’s cognitive development as a succes-
sion of stages (concerning language development, speech development, concept development, 
intellectual development, and so forth). Some of these stages are marked by the predominance 
of, for example, social cognition over hypothetico-deductive reasoning, whereas others appear 
characterized instead by the primacy of practical skills over abstract skills. The individual’s per-
sonality is developed in this discontinuous and competitive succession between the prevalence 
of cognitive development and personality development. Vygotsky thus articulated concepts such 
as speech, language, concept formation, and emotion from a dialectical historical materialist per-
spective. His conception of the stages implied the idea of Aufheben, as well as that of regression, 
contrary to other models of developmental psychology (such as from Piaget, versions of activity 
theory, and versions of cultural-historical theory).
While insisting on the discontinuity, change, conflict, contradiction, and crisis which under-
lie the development of higher mental functions, Vygotsky demonstrated his fidelity to the 
Hegelian, Marxian theses of the dialectic. In this regard, Vygotsky, like Wallon, valorized Marx-
ian dialectical concepts of material reality, consciousness, practice, conflict, contradiction, crisis, 
Aufheben, negation, negation of the negation, quantity, quality, discontinuity, and change over 
transformation, interaction, continuity, adaptation, equilibrium, equilibration, enrichment, and 
replacement of concepts. Each human developmental stage is the product of contradictions 
inherent or implicit in the preceding stage. Scientific advances often involve conceptual changes. 
These conceptual changes correspond to the cumulative nature of the dialectic, in which noth-
ing is lost on the way to a higher level. Growth is spurred by the recognition of contradictions 
between what a theory claims to do and what it actually does. This is what Vygotsky had to say 
about behaviour, for example: it is ‘a dialectical and complex process of struggle between man 
and the world, and within man’ (1997a: 53). Each individual’s life represents the road toward the 

Marxist psychology and dialectical method
275
conversion of social relations into higher mental functions, and ultimately the road toward him/
herself. It is through social relations that we develop into ourselves. Marx viewed dialectics as a 
methodological framework, best exemplified in Die Grundrisse and Das Kapital, which outline 
two of his central theories: that of surplus value, and the materialist conception of history.
It is dialectics that gives psychology its scientific base, epistemological meaning, ontological 
guidance, conceptual tools, theoretical clarity, and logical and methodological rationale. Psy-
chology is the study of the human individual within his/her rich web of social relations. Engels 
argued that ‘dialectics . . . is the science of interconnections’ (1940: 26). Luria put it eloquently 
when he said that:
Vygotsky supposed that higher mental processes are of a social origin, and that the basic 
unit of human conscious behavior is not to be found in unconditional or conditional 
reflexes . . . Instead, a new method was proposed – to step outside the organism itself and 
to try to find the basic units of human conscious behavior in the relation of the subject 
with the social environment, treating these relations as an essential feature of human mental 
processes.
(1987: 87)
In connection, Politzer argued that ‘La psychologie ne détient donc nullement le “secret” des faits 
humains, simplement parce que ce “secret” n’est pas d’ordre psychologique’ [Psychology by no means 
holds the “secret” of human affairs, simply because this “secret” is not of a psychological order] 
(1929/1969: 170). Wallon was making exactly the same point when he argued that:
Psychology is by no means unique in this respect. Dialectical materialism is relevant to the 
entire realm of knowledge, as well as to the realm of action. But psychology, the principal 
source of anthropomorphic and metaphysical illusions, must, more than any other science, 
find in dialectical materialism its normal base and guiding principles.
(1951/1963: 34)
Vygostsky’s arguments for a Marxist psychology are quite consistent with Wallon’s and Politzer’s 
views. Vygotsky believed that dialectical materialism has the necessary conceptual tools to bridge 
the gap between human higher mental processes and consciousness, and their social, historical, 
and cultural grounding.
Vygotsky’s application of dialectical method
The dialectical method applied by Vygotsky in his study of ‘Thinking and Speech’ showed that 
each stage of speech development gives rise to a successive stage which is said to be its negation. 
The dialectical process of speech development moves from social speech (thesis), to private 
speech (antithesis), to inner speech (synthesis). Each new stage of speech development both 
supersedes and incorporates the stage which it negates. This dialectical process is best described 
by Hegel’s concept of Aufheben (which combines preservation and the clearing away of a con-
cept in a dialectical process). By means of the double aspect of dialectical negation (negation of 
negation) and Aufheben, progress is made, leading to a new, higher, advanced, more complex stage. 
Higher mental development should not be viewed as mere process of accumulation (expressed 
as the deduction of reductive psychological theory), but as a dialectical negation, preserving 
accomplishments and superseding them in a conceptually radical manner. For example, theory is 

Mohamed Elhammoumi
276
not expected to explain successfully only what its predecessor intended to explain; it should also 
deal with unexpected phenomena. Scientific advances, as well as social and historical changes, 
often involve dramatic conceptual changes, rather than enrichment and replacement of concepts 
in the Hegelian outlook.
Dialectical method: confronting the challenges
The best way to understand Lev Vygotsky is to go beyond him philosophically, epistemolog-
ically, and ontologically. In Vygotsky’s ontological-epistemological system, psychology is based 
on the assumption that human nature is achieved only when human individuals recognize each 
other mutually and equally. Human individuals are full of potentialities waiting the right condi-
tions to be set out. In this sense, Vygotsky argued that,
Marx frequently dwells on the subject of the corruption of the human personality which 
is brought about by the growth of capitalist industrial society. On one extreme end of soci-
ety, the division between intellectual and physical labor, the separation between town and 
country, the ruthless exploitation of child and female labor, poverty and the impossibility 
of a free and full development of full human potential, and on the other extreme, idleness 
and luxury; not only does all this result in the single human type becoming differentiated 
and fragmented into several separate social class types which stand in sharp contrast to one 
another, but also in the corruption and distortion of the human personality and its subjec-
tion to unsuitable, one-sided development within all these different variants of the human type.
(1994: 176)
As long as the development of human potential is interrupted by social injustice, social oppres-
sion, economic depression, social turmoil, discrimination, unemployment, poverty, famine, 
segregation, racism, the urban ghetto, war, colonization, and the effects of repressive external 
concrete reality, the human intellectual development will be inevitably affected. To begin to deal 
with these pressing problems, Vygotsky suggested two solutions: first, that Marxist psychology 
be treated as a comprehensive worldview in which human activity is viewed as a totality, as an 
interdependent whole; second, that human higher mental functions and rule-governed behav-
iour are derived from the macro-social scale, not from hypothetical agency within the organism 
or hypothetical processes that are internal to the individual. In this sense, Marxist psychology 
concerns itself with not only understanding of human activity (instead of mere ‘behaviour’) but 
also with changing human activity. Here, Marxist psychology differs chiefly from other psycho-
logical trends in terms of the unit of analysis. Its unit of analysis is the ‘social relations of pro-
duction’. The concept of ‘social relations of production’ is the kernel of Marxist psychology, as 
was ‘relations of production’ for Karl Marx, ‘collective consciousness’ for Emile Durkeim, ‘shared 
social a priori’ for Georg Simmel, and ‘value orientations’ for Talcott Parsons.
Focusing on the ‘social relations of production’ as a unit of analysis remains under-appreciated 
and certainly under-utilized theoretically, conceptually, and methodologically, as a framework 
for understanding the complex dynamics, nature, structure, and functioning of human higher 
mental functions. This unit of analysis shifts psychology away from the Cartesian dualism, men-
talistic idealism, mechanistic materialism, and cognitivism individualism which predominate 
in present-day psychology. These later trends place the blame for personal problems inside 
individuals’ heads rather than in their social living concrete reality. They also view individual 
activity as reduced to self-interested, rational action. The dialectical historical materialist philos-
ophy underlying Marxist psychology is a theory of the individual’s history (dialectical historical 

Marxist psychology and dialectical method
277
individual) and of the laws of reproduction and transformation of social relations. Human higher 
mental functions are regulated by social relations of production, which generate standard per-
sonality patterns, structure ways of thinking, and organize ways of acting. Marx’s sixth thesis 
on Feuerbach, which states that human essence is ‘an ensemble of social relations’, means that 
human individuals are the products of their real social relations.
The increasing eclecticism and narrowing of the terrain of exploration and investigation 
of human higher mental functions mean that there is an ‘imminent danger of becoming a 
non-science at best, and non-sense at worst’ (Van der Veer and Valsiner 1994: 35). Various the-
ories within Soviet psychology have been offered (reactology, reflexology, Pavlovism, psycho-
analysis, etc.) as alternatives to classical psychology, its crisis and contentions. In the beginning, 
Soviet psychologists attempted to reconcile Marxism and different trends of bourgeois psy-
chology. This reconciliation led to the unity of opposites, which resulted in an elimination of 
dialectical tension. What is called ‘dialectics’ is there not based on contradiction, the struggle of 
the opposites, or negation, but on the dialectic of putting together, and all forms of life move 
toward equilibrium. These versions of dialectics ‘putting together’ had been preached by Louis 
Althusser (1965/1970), Gerald Allan Cohen (1978), and Leszek Kolakowski (1978). Dialectics 
is reduced to the law of logic, and here only statements contradict each other, not actions. This 
kind of dialectics which eliminates the struggle of opposites also underlies the basis of much 
of postmodernism. It is a dialectics without contradiction. A dialectics based on equilibration 
as a concept views development as a succession of disequilibrium and re-equilibration, and the 
contradiction will gradually be eliminated as equilibrium approaches.
The dialectic is the driving force of history. Dialectical thinking is described as a specific 
activity involving human purposes with definite temporal references to things in movement (Hook 
1929: 85). This means that dialectical thinking is seeking to clarify and not to explain.
Dialectics is:
a theory which maintains that . . . human thought develops in a way characterized by . . . 
dialectic triad: thesis, anti-thesis, synthesis. First, some idea or theory or movement is given, 
which may be called ‘thesis’. Such a thesis will often produce opposition, because probably 
it will be, like most things in this world, of limited value – it will have its weak spots. This 
opposing idea or movement is called ‘anti-thesis’ because it is directed against the first, 
the thesis. The struggle between the thesis and the anti-thesis goes on until some solution 
develops which will, in a certain sense, go beyond both thesis and antithesis by recognizing 
the relative value of both, i.e., by trying to preserve the merits and avoid the limitations of 
both. This solution, which is the third step, is called ‘synthesis’. Once attained, the synthesis 
may in turn become the first step of a new dialectic triad . . . will proceed at a higher level.
(Popper 1940: 404–405)
Conclusions
As a leading Marxist psychologist, Lev Vygotsky played an important role in formulating psy-
chological concepts in the light of dialectical historical materialism and paving the way to the 
foundation of a Marxist psychology. His writings are a germinal work centred on the main 
ideas of: ‘who is a human individual? What is social reality? How this reality is formed? How 
human higher mental functions are constructed? What is consciousness? What is personality?’ 
The answer to these questions cannot be found in a scientifically managed psychology based  
on the idea of the human individual as object of manipulation. The answer can be found in scien-
tific study of the human individual within the rich web of social relations of the concrete totality of 

Mohamed Elhammoumi
278
reality. Dialectical historical materialist theory is suitable to tackle the issues raised above. Though 
Vygotsky touches many topics, subjects, and ideas originating from Hegel, Marx, Engels, and 
Lenin, among others, he failed to systemize them in a unified integrative theoretical framework. 
The main difficulty lies in the hopeless ambiguity of integrating Marxist philosophical concepts 
into psychological concepts (i.e. Marx’s ascendance from the abstract to the concrete and Vygot-
sky’s pseudo-concept and scientific concept, Marx’s potentiality concept and Vygotsky’s zone of 
proximal development). Psychology is in need of its own concepts, categories, methods, units of 
analysis, and unified theory in order to develop as a science. Dialectics place psychology on its 
feet and guide it towards a science that emphasizes human potential, creativity, and development.
The dialectical method penetrates concrete reality, deciphers its structures, and sees it in 
its concreteness (Ollman and Smith 2008; Sève 2008). This is the dialectics, a familiar theory 
in accordance with Hegel’s conceptual elaboration and Marx’s dialectical historical materialist 
interpretation. Dialectics as a method is well elaborated by Marx in his theory of materialist 
conception of history. Psychology by no means holds the secret of human affairs, simply because 
this secret is not of psychological order (Politzer 1929/1969), but of the order of the human 
concrete totality. The dialectical conception of concrete totality puts more weight on social 
relations of production. Dialectics is the only method capable of understanding and reproducing 
reality and captures the true consciousness in its totality within concrete reality. This later regu-
lates the social relations of productions. Social relations of production govern human psycholog-
ical affairs. The social relation is the cell form of human mental life, and the entirety of human 
mental life becomes reproducible through social relations of production. A concrete analysis of 
social relations of production and all other social forces plays a central role in the shifting force 
field that is social cultural history. In other words, it helps to understand interconnections as 
widely and deeply as possible, and conceive of the historical social cultural reality of human 
mental life as a unified whole.
Hegel’s dialectic and Marx’s dialectic can be useful tools, fruitful in our quest for understand-
ing human concrete totality and for Marxist ‘critical psychology’. The present concrete totality 
of social reality is pregnant with future society, and dialectics is its midwife.
Further reading
Hook, D., Mkhize, N., Kiguwa, P., Collins, A., Burman, E., and Parker, I. (eds) (2004) Critical Psychology. 
Lansdowne, South Africa: UCT Press.
Parker, I., and Spears, R. (eds) (1996) Psychology and Society: Radical Theory and Practice. London: Pluto Press.
Sève, L. (1978) Man in Marxist Theory and the Psychology of Personality. Hassocks: Harvester Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1997) ‘The historical meaning of the crisis in psychology: a methodological investigation’, 
in The Collected Works of L. S. Vygotsky, Volume 3. New York: Plenum Press.
Website resources
Lev Vygotsky Archive: http://www.marxists.org/archive/vygotsky/
Psychology and Marxism: http://www.marxists.org/subject/psychology/
References
Althusser, L. (1965/1970) For Marx. New York: Vintage Books.
Blunden, A. (1997) ‘Vygotsky and the dialectical method’, http://webpages.charter.net/schmolze1/ 
vygotsky/dialectical.html
Cohen, G. A. (1978) Karl Marx’s Theory of History: a Defence. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Engels, F. (1940) Dialectic of Nature. New York: International Publishers.
Hegel, G. (1892) ‘The logic of Hegel’, in Encyclopaedia. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Marxist psychology and dialectical method
279
Hook, S. (1929) ‘What is dialectics?’, Journal of Philosophy, 26(4), 85–99.
Kołakowski, L. (1978) Main Currents of Marxism: Its Rise, Growth and Dissolution, Volume 1: The Founders. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kołakowski, L. (1978) Main Currents of Marxism: Its Rise, Growth and Dissolution, Volume 2: the Golden Age. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kołakowski, L. (1978) Main Currents of Marxism: Its Rise, Growth and Dissolution, Volume 3: the Breakdown. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Luria, A. (1987) ‘Luria on reductionism’, in R. L. Gregory (ed.) The Oxford Companion to the Mind. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Ollman, B., and Smith, T. (eds) (2008) Dialectics for the New Century. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Parker, I. (2007) Revolution in Psychology: Alienation to Emancipation. London: Pluto Press.
Politzer, G. (1929/1969) ‘To which direction is concrete psychology oriented?’, in Ecrits II: Les Fondements 
de la Psychologie. Paris: Editions Sociales.
Popper, K. (1940) ‘What is dialectic?’, Mind, 49(196), 403–426.
Sève, L. (1968/1978) Man in Marxist Theory and the Psychology of Personality. Hassocks: Harvester Press.
Sève, L. (1975) Marxism and the Theory of Human Personality. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Sève, L. (1989) ‘Dialectique et psychologie chez Vygotski [Vygotsky, Dialectic and psychology]’, Enfance, 
42(1/2), 11–16.
Sève, L. (2002) ‘Quelles contradictions? A propos de Piaget, Vygotsky et Marx [Contradictions? Piaget, 
Vygotsky and Marx]’, in Y. Clot (ed.) Avec Vygotsky [With Vygotsky]. Paris: La Dispute.
Sève, L. (2008) ‘The dialectics of emergence’, in B. Ollman and T. Smith (eds) (2008) Dialectics for the New 
Century. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Van der Veer, R., and Valsiner, J. (1994) The Vygotsky Reader. Cambridge, UK: Blackwell.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1981) ‘The genesis of higher mental functions’, in J. Wertsch (ed.) The Concept of Activity in 
Soviet Psychology. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1994) ‘The socialist alteration of man’, in R. Van der Veer and J. Valsiner (eds) The Vygotsky 
Reader. Cambridge, UK: Blackwell.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1997) Educational Psychology. Boca Raton, FL: Saint Lucie Press.
Wallon, H. (1951/1963) ‘Psychologie et matérialisme dialectique. Società, 7, 241–246. Reprinted in Enfance, 
1–2, 31–34.

280
German (or German/Scandinavian) Kritische Psychologie emerged in the context of intellec-
tual and political struggles at the Free University in the former West Berlin during the 1960s and 
1970s (see Osterkamp and Schraube 2013 for an overview; Maiers 1999; Mørck and Huniche 
2006; Tolman 1994). While based on a number of topical contributions (including Dreier 1980; 
Haug 1987; Holzkamp 1973; Osterkamp 1976; Tolman and Maiers 1991; Schurig 1975), Klaus 
Holzkamp’s (1927–1995) work played a pivotal role for Kritische Psychologie. Its philosophical 
foundation is informed by historical dialectical materialism, and, specifically, builds on ideas 
developed in Marx’s social theory and theses on Feuerbach concerning human subjectivity and 
practice (coining practice research), as well as the cultural-historical activity theory of Vygotsky, 
and above all, Leontiev (a legacy which has been taken up in various other alternative psychol-
ogies as well, cf. Engeström 1987; Hedegaard and Chaiklin 2005; Wertch 1991). Whilst the term 
‘Kritische Psychologie’ is used widely in this context, it is problematic.
First, it is too generic, creating the impression this was a homogeneous approach (it was a 
heterogeneous and collective endeavour from the start), or indeed the only critical psychology 
in Germany; second, it implies that the approach as such is limited to German language con-
text, which is not true; and third, and most importantly, the prefix ‘Kritische’ might suggest an 
anti-psychological vision which is precisely not what Klaus Holzkamp et al. had in mind. This 
Kritische Psychologie is an attempt to rescue psychology from itself by redefining psychology 
as a historically developed theory about subjects as societal beings (based on the concept of 
the societal nature of human existence), and to reconstitute it as a psychology for and about these 
subjects. In this way it sought to overcome the problems caused by traditional psychology’s map-
ping of the abstract and external scientific ‘third-person’ perspective onto its object of study by 
establishing a ‘Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject’ (PSS). This is why in this chapter 
we will refer to PSS instead of ‘Kritische Psychologie’ (Tolman 1989) or ‘German Critical Psy-
chology’ (Markard and Reimer 2013).
Critical engagements with traditional psychology
PSS emerged in response to the North American functionalist model of psychology domi-
nant in Germany and Europe after World War II (Teo 2013), outlining serious limitations and 
29
Kritische Psychologie
Psychology from the standpoint of the 
subject
Johanna Motzkau and Ernst Schraube

Kritische Psychologie
281
contradictions within traditional psychology (TP) (the term refers to mainstream approaches 
within psychology, such as behaviourism or cognitive psychology in its information-processing 
version [Holzkamp 2013b: 234ff ]). First, critique focused on the societal application of psycho-
logical knowledge for specific ruling interests and investigated traditional psychology’s limits 
in terms of social theory, ideology critique, and discourse analysis. Second, PSS noted that TP 
lacked explicit theoretical and epistemological foundations and highlighted the problematic way 
in which TP had implicitly defined its subject matter. Uniquely, and in contrast to other critical 
psychologies, PSS took this critique as a basis for a comprehensive reconceptualization of psy-
chology’s theoretical and methodological foundations (Holzkamp 1983).
PSS pointed out that the dominant post-World War II psychological approaches, particu-
larly those employing experimental-statistical methods – by emulating what they considered 
a natural sciences-type approach to research – ended up with a theoretical and methodolog-
ical framework that implicitly conceptualized the world as a set of isolated stimuli causing 
effects in individuals which could only be accessed and tested from an external point of view, 
i.e. a third-person standpoint. Human beings in turn ended up conceptualized as if they were 
solely dependent on external factors, merely responding to stimuli and acting as isolated 
units in a vacuum. In this way TP not only established a research position of a distant judg-
ing observer (third-person perspective), but also implied a model of passive research objects, 
which, as PSS highlights, ultimately dissolves human subjectivity and creates a very limited 
idea of agency. PSS shows that by aiming for this (in effect pseudo-) scientific ideal TP lost 
sight of the societal and historical dimension of human subjectivity that, as PSS demonstrates, 
is a vital function of human life. TP conceptually creates what Holzkamp termed a ‘homun-
culus’, a creature with such limited capacities it would not be fit for survival (Holzkamp 
2013a: 20).
Furthermore, TP establishes a ‘worldless’ psychology (Holzkamp 2013b: 233) devoid of con-
text, unable to make sense of the complexity of the sociohistorical world as enacted, experienced, 
debated, and shaped by people. PSS highlights TP’s tendency to value methods over content, i.e. 
to define the object of study according to the preferred methods (here experimental-statistical 
methods, thus dictating an isolated stimulus cause-effect rationale for human agency), rather 
than creating methods adequate to the subject under investigation, as PSS set out to do. At the 
core of the critical stance is the argument that TP’s scientific conception might serve specific 
interests of capitalist society by individualizing and naturalizing human activity and psycholog-
ical problems, thereby making people governable and obscuring the implications of power and 
oppression; by proposing personal work on the self as the solution to psychological problems, 
for example, TP privatizes these problems and obscures their rootedness in societal dilemmas 
and power structures. In this way TP construed personal compliance as ‘normal psychological 
functioning’, helping to obscure perspectives that could allow subjects to realize their potential 
for shaping their shared world, and actively engaging with and changing repressive societal 
conditions.
There are a series of published debates, books, and articles that provide a detailed insight into 
PSS’s critical engagement with TP, and particularly Anglo-American-European approaches. For 
example, Holzkamp (1964) offers an early insight into critique of the experimental research 
set-up; the Zeitschrift fuer Sozialpsychologie ran lengthy published debates between Hubert Feger 
(experimental), Carl F. Graumann (phenomenology), Martin Irle (experimental), and Klaus 
Holzkamp; Holzkamp’s core work, the Grundlegung der Psychologie (1983) details his critique and 
reconstruction of psychology, and in Lernen (1993) he examines and recategorizes the concept 
of learning; in addition, his later work on the conduct of everyday life presents a detailed cri-
tique of traditional as well as alternative psychological approaches (2013b: 233ff ). Furthermore, 

Johanna Motzkau and Ernst Schraube
282
Osterkamp (1976) provides an in-depth critique and reinterpretation of psychoanalysis, with a 
specific focus on the concept of ‘drive’.
Psychology from the standpoint of the subject
To provide a detailed example of the analytic work PSS conducted in its reconstruction of psy-
chology, we would like to outline some aspects of the analysis supporting the central concept of 
the societal nature of human existence in some more detail and explore the crucial transition from 
phylogenesis to sociogenesis.
Based on the conceptual critique, PSS recognized the importance of developing a well-founded 
theoretical and methodological language. For such a foundation to be truly empirical, the anal-
ysis must trace (inspired by Leontiev 1981) the becoming of the psyche in relation to the phy-
logenesis and ontogenesis of life in general while accounting for the specificity of human life 
in particular. A period of particular interest for the human species is what Holzkamp terms the 
‘Tier-Mensch-Uebergangsfeld’ (TMU) (zone of transition between animal and human life). 
Previous to this zone (TMU) psychological functions exist, but they manifest as basic psychic 
formations; functions such as ‘learning’, ‘interest’, or ‘motivation’ can be observed, but they man-
ifest in an immediate fashion (e.g. for microbes interest is defined as the ability to be sensitive to 
certain stimuli, e.g. nourishment, for self-preservation, which constitutes motivation).
During evolution there are shifts in what shapes functions such as interest, motivation, etc. 
(e.g. life forms become able to not just detect food but orient towards characteristics that indi-
cate food, e.g. light) and shifts in the dominance of certain functions. For the transition from 
phylogenesis to sociogenesis, Holzkamp identified a crucial shift in the quality of all these 
functions that took place within human evolution and during the TMU, and that ultimately 
also distinguished humans from other primates: while for other life forms, needs like hunger 
require immediate attention until satisfied, during the TMU those evolving towards becoming 
humans were increasingly able to anticipate and mediate such needs by establishing societal 
structures and practices to systematically cater for them. Herein they did not just gain some 
control over their natural environment and thus their conditions of living and surviving, but 
they also became able to create generalized meaning and thus culture; inscribed into their shape 
tools and artefacts, e.g. a plough, carry and express the generalized meaning of their purpose to 
future generations who use and develop them further. Furthermore, these practices established 
a division of labour (as societal structures, such as organizing the acquisition of food through 
traditions of farming and hunting).
As a result of this qualitative shift during the TMU, human life is constituted and shaped pre-
dominantly by sociogenesis and to a much lesser extent by phylogenesis. It is mediated via these 
sociohistorical and cultural forms of development, and thus human subjectivity and agency is 
determined by people’s ability to participate in practices and access, through labour, the general 
means (tools/traditions) that allow them to further shape, transform, and improve their own 
conditions. This is why Holzkamp speaks of the ‘societal nature of human existence’ and highlights 
the importance of participating in practices.
Crucially, then, each person’s possibilities for action are directly defined by how they themselves 
perceive the meanings and resources available to them at any one moment. Hence we each have 
reasons for our actions (they are not reactions to conditioned stimuli) and these are based in our 
first-person perspective, which is personal and societal at once, because structures of social meaning, 
i.e. the pertinent conditions, flow into the premises for each person’s subjective reasons for action.
Once PSS had elaborated the crucial role of subjective reasons for action in human subjec-
tivity and the conduct of everyday life, it proposed a reason discourse (rather than the conditioning 

Kritische Psychologie
283
discourse of TP) as the discourse most adequate to the task of formulating genuinely psycholog-
ical theories and methods. This necessitated a radical epistemological shift in research practice. 
Since reasons for actions are given in the ‘first-person’ (they are always my reasons), research 
needed to be conducted from the standpoint of the generalized subject. It would be a misun-
derstanding, however, to interpret this first-person perspective as an individualistic, subjectivist 
concept.
On the contrary, it establishes a notion of a complete, yet communicable subjectivity (an 
intersubjectivity) not characterized by the inaccessible interiority the TP subject is trapped in. 
The argument is that, since ‘I’ experience myself and the world from my perspective, and act 
from my perspective and standpoint, it follows logically that the other also experiences her/
himself and the world from her/his perspective and acts from her/his perspective and stand-
point. And we know that they do. This means we do not just plainly react to what others do, 
but we have a meta-level at our disposal: we perceive the other subjects as reflexive subjects that 
perceive us as reflexive subjects; if we have reasons then so must the other (even if their reasons 
might not be very good or indeed transparent to us); and if we negotiate such reasons with our-
selves as we act, and assess our possibilities, those reasons must also be communicable to others.
This intersubjectivity, i.e. the reciprocity of the subjects’ first-person perspectives and the 
premise of the intelligibility of reasons, is a prerequisite for social interaction to work at all. 
Hence, rather than being ‘subjectivistic’, it is precisely the systematic inclusion of the subject, 
and the recognition of the other as coequal centre of intentionality, that offers the foundations for 
a truly empirical and scientific (i.e. adequate to the subject matter) approach to understanding 
of human sociality and psychology (Schraube 2013).
This is why PSS proposes to root psychological research in the standpoint and perspective of the 
‘I’ and ‘we’ and explore through subjective experiences what the world means for human subjects 
and their possibilities and necessities to act: hence, a Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject.
PSS’s analyses demonstrate that the potential of human agency is not the product of isolated 
individuals preserving and developing their own lives. Instead, human agency only develops its 
potential through individuals gaining influence over the particular societal conditions specifi-
cally relevant in their conduct of life. Consequently, the quality of each individual’s lived expe-
rience is inherently connected to the type and degree of agency the individual can exercise and 
perceives to be able to exercise. Human suffering and fear originate not solely from immediate 
constraints, but are the result of an individual at the mercy of the societal relations/conditions 
they depend on due to having lost influence over them. To overcome suffering and develop a 
genuinely human quality of life requires the individual’s ability to access and participate in the 
shaping of the conditions her/his conduct of life depends on.
From the perspective of the standpoint of the subject, the challenge or momentum that drives 
human subjectivity and the conduct of life, is located precisely in the reciprocal relationship 
between individual and society: there is a constant contradiction between on the one hand, indi-
viduals being subject to the conditions under which they live, and, on the other hand, their 
potential to influence and change these conditions to reflect their own needs and interests. To 
express this fundamental contradiction in human agency, PSS developed the analytical concepts 
of restrictive agency versus generalized agency. Depending on the situation, in attempting to overcome 
this contradiction subjects may not only have reasons for trying to change particular conditions 
to improve their own life prospects (generalized agency). Equally, subjects might have reasons to 
arrange themselves with the given restrictive conditions; for example, in cases where they consider 
that the attempt to intervene and change restrictive conditions carries a significant risk of conflict 
which could affect their existing position even more negatively. As a result they might view their 
existing conditions as acceptable despite realizing their restrictiveness (restrictive agency). From 

Johanna Motzkau and Ernst Schraube
284
the subject’s standpoint, this creates the dilemma that the propensity to secure one’s own situation 
(in the short term), ends up undermining one’s own prospect of (and constitutive aim to strive 
towards) generalized agency, and in this sense violating one’s own long-term interests.
The central driver for empirical research within PSS is to engage with people on an inter-
subjective basis and to explore such dilemmatic positions, conditions, and inherent constraints 
in order to open up perspectives towards change and generalized agency. As PSS is taken to 
fields where psychological questions arose in everyday practice, it is often described as practice 
research (Axel 2011; Busch-Jensen 2013; Fahl and Markard 1999; Jefferson and Huniche 2009; 
Nissen 2000). By aiming for an involved intersubjective exchange and getting at first-person 
perspectives, it becomes possible to analyze how individual existence is mediated through the 
overall societal context.
This analysis works from the assumption that objective conditions are meaningful only when 
mediated through both collective objectifications and through each subject’s perspective. This is 
why the ‘subject’ of research is defined as a ‘co-researcher’, as they are the ‘experts’ of the condi-
tions, meanings, and reasons that surround the problem at the heart of research that engages with 
practices they are involved in. In this sense such research is inevitably also ‘owned’ and guided 
by them, and the role of the researcher is defined as participatory and cooperative. The aim is to 
develop a collaborative understanding of the questions and problems at the heart of the research, 
to generalize subjective experience, and to open perspectives towards generalized agency.
Contemporary discussions and fields of study
There is a plethora of recent theoretical and empirical research directly drawing on or rooted 
in PSS, often reshaping and further developing PSS. In the following we would like to provide 
examples of such work.
Dreier’s work on clinical and therapeutic practice provides a detailed critique of mainstream 
research into therapeutic interventions, highlighting, for example, that it only takes the thera-
pist’s or researcher’s perspective (not the client’s) and applies a technological, decontextualized 
rationale (assuming the therapist as the sole agent with therapeutic effects occurring within 
therapy, overlooking clients’ agency and the importance of their everyday life). Dreier’s research 
sets out to capture clients as agents who are trying to make therapy work in their conduct of 
life. One of his central projects (Dreier 2008, 2011a), an intensive case analysis, focused on the 
relation between clients and therapists (himself and one colleague) in a Family Therapy setting, 
exploring the link between sessions and everyday life by interviewing the cooperating family 
at home, asking them to reflect about sessions, and holding reflexive sessions with family and 
therapists to ask for their feedback and to explore how they experienced sessions.
Research on children’s development in everyday life constitutes another major field of current 
PSS research. Here the aim is to transform common practices of classification and individual-
ization by systematically including the perspectives of children and by exploring child devel-
opment via their participation in and across different contexts of everyday life, e.g. family life, 
educational institutions, and recreational settings (Højholt 2006 2012; Kousholt 2011; Røn 
Larsen 2012; Stanek 2013). Further research focuses on childhood sexual abuse and children and 
the law and develops a methodology of ‘researching practice as process’ by expanding PSS via 
process theory (Motzkau 2009a, 2009b, 2011). The study of learning in and outside educational 
institutions represents another major field of study. Here learning is re-imagined as a theoretical 
and empirical project systematically structured from the perspective of the learning subjects 
(Haug 2003, 2009; Holzkamp 1993; Langemeyer 2005; Marvakis 2013). Research on social work 
practice and treatment of addiction advances PSS theoretically and methodologically (Nissen 

Kritische Psychologie
285
2004, 2009, 2012), with most recent research in this field exploring the way standards are devel-
oped (particularly those assessing the efficacy of psychological treatment). Research into the 
technological dimension of human life explores the power and politics of technological artefacts and 
their significance in people’s everyday experience and agency by expanding PSS via Science and 
Technology Studies (Chimirri 2013; Huniche 2009; Papadopoulos 2010; Schraube 2009, 2013; 
Winner 2007). Crucially, recent work in PSS focuses on the conduct of everyday life, looking 
at how human beings as active sensuous subjects live their everyday life, and exploring the 
conduct of everyday life as a basis for understanding the dilemmas and contradictions people 
are confronted with in contemporary society (Dreier 2011b; Holzkamp 2013b; Schraube and 
Højholt 2015).
Internal debates and challenges
PSS’s greatest accomplishment, the concept of subjectivity/agency, also presents its greatest chal-
lenge: PSS’s insight into the first-person givenness of human experience, consciousness, reasons 
for action, and the resulting necessity to conduct research from the standpoint of the generalized 
subject, can clash with an understanding of research that is engaged in broadening both the 
researcher’s and the co-researcher’s perspectives to see beyond what PSS terms restrictive agency 
and enable a path towards generalized agency.
From the beginning, this tension has provided momentum for unique and important research 
for example about parenting (Markard 1985), teaching/learning (Holzkamp 1993; Haug 2009), 
racism and neo-nazism (Holzkamp 2013c, 2013d; Osterkamp 1996), as well as generating fierce 
internal debate (e.g. Fried 2002; Osterkamp et al. 2002). This tension is not unique to PSS, but 
the way it was unearthed and discussed openly was, and is, exemplary and inspiring. This is 
because the uniquely comprehensive theoretical framework PSS provides offers an excellent 
backdrop against which, and analytical tools through which, to examine it.
Clearly, co-researchers are free to disagree with the researcher’s aim or definition of the 
issue at hand; disagreement can be further negotiated or reflected in the research. But where 
such standpoints would in themselves be considered problematic (e.g. in the case of racism, or 
neo-nazism), it is difficult to formulate a genuine PSS manner of approaching such important 
topics while fully taking into account, and potentially having to accept, the perspectives of those 
who hold those views. A similar issue was at the centre of a debate that gripped PSS in the 1990s, 
which emerged in response to a heated debate in Germany about child sexual abuse/rape of 
young women the question being whether there was an epidemic of false allegations of abuse. 
In this context the term ‘abuse of abuse’ was coined by Rutschky (1992) (it was mooted that 
many accusers were deliberately making false allegations to harm someone, and that the feminist 
movement was exaggerating numbers of abuse/rape to serve its agenda).
In this context, Holzkamp (1994) advanced the view that, from a PSS perspective, one could 
only meaningfully engage with those (mostly) girls/young women when starting from a posi-
tion of unconditionally acknowledging their allegations, as this was their first-person perspective. 
Other PPS proponents of the debate argued this idea was naïve, and that, if it meant ‘believing’ 
them in a forensic sense of the word, it ultimately implied generalized guilt, i.e. that all men were, 
by association, abusers/rapists until proven innocent, thus making a balanced discussion impossi-
ble and dismissing the standpoints of those accused. This turned into a very heated, and at times 
hostile, debate (Forum Kritische Psychologie, special issue 33 and 37, see also Osterkamp 1997 on 
the ‘abuse of abuse of abuse’) that we cannot do justice here, and unfortunately, the contribu-
tions to which are published in German only. Nevertheless we thought it important to mention 
because it illustrates PSS’s readiness to explicitly and openly take debate to the very heart of 

Johanna Motzkau and Ernst Schraube
286
PSS’s conceptual-transformative framework, forcing it to confront important and uncomfortable 
issues (such as abuse/rape, racism, neo-nazism) even if they challenge it to the extreme.
Conclusion
PSS helps to overcome mainstream psychology’s one-sidedness. It highlights the fractures and 
self-hindrance inherent in a psychology uncritically adopting what it considers the theoretical 
language and methodology of the natural and technological sciences. In contrast, it has sought to 
develop a set of fundamental concepts and methods that are genuinely empirical and psycholog-
ical, a set of concepts capable of elucidating the complex reality of human subjectivity, including 
the reality of the concrete, societal, and technological world in which human experience and 
agency is located. By taking the standpoint of the subject, which is logically the result of the 
first-person givenness of psychological phenomena, psychology is freed from the impossible idea 
of being a science from an external perspective, and from its common practices of classifying 
and disciplining individuals, and controlling and predicting their behaviour. Instead, by taking 
the standpoint of the subject, psychology becomes a science ‘for’ people, working with concepts 
that are analytical and exploratory, at once helping to clarify everyday experience, action, and 
the conduct of life.
What to us seems particularly unique about PSS is first, the comprehensive, detailed, and 
positive reconstruction of psychology as a whole (a feature that sets PSS apart from more recent 
critical approaches, particularly those who do not see ‘foundations’ as desirable [Brown and 
Stenner 2009]); second, the commitment to co-researchers’ perspectives and the uncompromis-
ing way in which researchers are practitioners, theoreticians, and activists; third, the power of 
the analytical tools provided, paired with an ever-prevailing scepticism towards its own insights 
and agendas which keeps PSS open to being reshaped and taken into different directions, as the 
social, personal, political, and theoretical landscapes it confronts are in constant change.
It is to PSS’s credit that it has stuck with the apparently insurmountable problem of subjectiv-
ity and generalized agency, holding it in suspense, rather than dropping, dismissing, or obscuring 
it. At the same time, it has continued to seek out this very challenge as it emerges, is engendered 
and confronted within everyday life and (institutional) practices (this is evident in recent work 
that emerged from within and associated to PSS). This persistency might in part be to blame for 
some of the harsh internal debates in the past, and for the apparent lack of an intellectual centre 
or coherent network more recently, both of which may have contributed to the impression PSS 
has suffered an untimely decline or even demise (Teo 1998). Yet PSS is alive and well in current 
research. PSS may have drifted apart as it was developed into different directions. And even 
though PSS as such is no longer (or never was) a distinct ‘school’ or ‘paradigm’, the analytical 
depth and thoroughness, and the uncompromising attention to detail that initially drove it (as 
evident in Holzkamp’s and Osterkamp’s work), provides a generalizable mode of critical thought 
that can inspire current critical psychologies; it reminds us to be hesitant, as well as uncompro-
misingly constructive, personal, and political.
Further reading
Painter, D., Marvakis, A., and Mos, L. (2009). Special issue: Critical Psychology: Interventions in Honour of 
Klaus Holzkamp. Theory & Psychology, 2.
Schraube, E. and Osterkamp, U. (eds) (2013) Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject: Selected Writings of 
Klaus Holzkamp. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Kritische Psychologie
287
Website resources
Forum Kritische Psychologie: www.argument.de/wissenschaft/psychologie_fkp.html
Kritische Psychologie: www.kritische-psychologie.de
Outlines: Critical Practice Studies: www.outlines.dk
Substance: http://www.substance.ku.dk/
References
Axel, E. (2011) ‘Conflictual cooperation’, Nordic Psychology, 63(4), 56–78.
Brown, S. D. and Stenner, P. (2009) Psychology without Foundations: History, Philosophy and Psychosocial Theory. 
London: Sage.
Busch-Jensen, P. (2013) ‘Grappling with the structural from a situated perspective’, Psychology in Society, 44.
Chimirri, N. A. (2013) ‘Who do we think we (and they) are? The audience and the researcher as participants 
in sociomaterial practice’, The Communication Review, 16(1–2), 81–91.
Dreier, O. (1980) Familiäres Sein und Familiäres Bewusstsein: Therapeutische Analyse einer Arbeiterfamilie. Frank-
furt/M.: Campus.
Dreier, O. (2008) Psychotherapy in Everyday Life. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Dreier, O. (2011a) ‘Intervention, evidence-based research and everyday life’, in P. Stenner, J. Cromby,  
J. Motzkau, J. Yen, and Y. Haosheng (eds) Theoretical Psychology: Global Transformations and Challenges. 
Toronto: Captus Press.
Dreier, O. (2011b) ‘Personality and the conduct of everyday life’, Nordic Psychology, 63(2), 4–23.
Engeström, Y. (1987) Learning by Expanding: an Activity-theoretical Approach to Developmental Research. Hel-
sinki: Jyväskylä.
Fahl, R. and Markard, M. (1999) ‘The project “analysis of psychological practice” or: an attempt at connect-
ing psychology critique and practice research’, Outlines: Critical Social Studies, 1.
Fried, B. (2002) ‘Zur Relevanz gesellschaftstheoretischer Analysen für die aktualempirische Forschung der 
Kritischen Psychologie – am Beispiel des Rassismus’, Forum Kritische Psychologie, 44, 118–151.
Haug, F. (1987) Female Sexualization: A Collective Work of Memory. London: Verso.
Haug, F. (2003) Lernverhältnisse: Selbstbewegungen und Selbstblockierungen. Hamburg: Argument.
Haug, F. (2009) ‘Teaching how to learn and learning how to teach’, Theory & Psychology, 19, 245–273.
Hedegaard, M. and Chaiklin, S. (2005) Radical-local Teaching and Learning: a Cultural-historical Approach. Aar-
hus: Aarhus University Press.
Højholt, C. (2006) ‘Knowledge and professionalism: from the perspectives of children?’ International Journal 
of Critical Psychology, 19, 81–106.
Højholt, C. (2012) ‘Communities of children and learning in school: children’s perspectives’, in M. Hede-
gaard, K. Aronsson, C. Højholt and O. Skjær Ulvik (eds) Children, Childhood, and Everyday Life: Children’s 
Perspectives. Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Holzkamp, K. (1964) Theorie und Experiment in der Psychologie: Eine grundlagenkritische Untersuchung. Berlin: 
De Gruyter.
Holzkamp, K. (1973) Sinnliche Erkenntnis: Historischer Ursprung und Gesellschaftliche Funktion der Wahrneh-
mung. Frankfurt/M: Athenäum.
Holzkamp, K. (1983) Grundlegung der Psychologie. Frankfurt/M.: Campus.
Holzkamp, K. (1993) Lernen: Subjektwissenschafliche Grundlegung. Frankfurt/M.: Campus.
Holzkamp, K. (1994) ‘Zur Depatte über sexuellen Mißbrauch: Diskurse und Fakten’, Forum Kritische Psy-
chologie, 33, 136–157.
Holzkamp, K. (2013a) ‘Basic concepts of critical psychology’, in E. Schraube and U. Osterkamp (eds) 
Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject: Selected Writings of Klaus Holzkamp. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Holzkamp, K. (2013b) ‘Psychology: social self-understanding on the reasons for action in the conduct of 
everyday life’, in E. Schraube and U. Osterkamp (eds) Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject: Selected 
Writings of Klaus Holzkamp. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Holzkamp, K. (2013c) ‘The concept of anti-racist education: A critical analysis of its function and an outline 
of a subject science alternative’, in E. Schraube and U. Osterkamp (eds) Psychology from the Standpoint of 
the Subject: Selected Writings of Klaus Holzkamp. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Johanna Motzkau and Ernst Schraube
288
Holzkamp, K. (2013d) ‘Racism and the unconscious as understood by psychoanalysis and critical psychol-
ogy’, in E. Schraube and U. Osterkamp (eds) Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject: Selected Writings 
of Klaus Holzkamp. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Huniche, L. (2009) ‘Existential concerns in families with Huntington’s disease: towards an understanding of 
the person in social practice’, Theory & Psychology, 19(1), 93–113.
Jefferson, A. M. and Huniche, L. (2009) ‘(Re)searching for persons in practice: field-based methods for 
critical psychological practice research’, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 6, 12–27.
Kousholt, D. (2011) ‘Researching family through the everyday lives of children across home and day care 
in Denmark’, Ethos, 39(1), 98–114.
Langemeyer, I. (2005) ‘Contradictions in expansive learning: towards a critical analysis of self-dependent 
forms of learning in relation to contemporary socio-technological change’, Forum: Qualitative Social 
Research, 7(1).
Leontiev, A. N. (1981) Problems of the Development of the Mind. Moscow: Progress Publishers.
Maiers, W. (1999) ‘Critical psychology: an unfinished modern project’, in W. Maiers, B. Bayer, B. Esgalhado, 
R. Jorna, and E. Schraube (eds) Challenges to Theoretical Psychology. Toronto: Captus Press.
Markard, M. (1985) ‘Projekt “Subjektentwicklung in der frühen Kindheit”: Begründung eines Antrags 
zur Gewährung einer Sachbeihilfe als Hauptförderung durch die DFG’, Forum Kritische Psychologie, 17, 
72–100.
Markard, M. and Reimer, K. (2013) ‘German critical psychology’, in T. Teo (ed) Encyclopedia of Critical Psy-
chology: SpringerReference. New York: Springer, www.springerreference.com
Marvakis, A. (2013) ‘Learning’, in T. Teo (ed) Encyclopedia of Critical Psychology: SpringerReference. New York: 
Springer, www.springerreference.com
Mørck, L. L. and Huniche, L. (2006) ‘Critical psychology in a Danish context’, Annual Journal of Critical 
Psychology 5.
Motzkau, J. F. (2009a) ‘Exploring the transdisciplinary trajectory of suggestibility’, Subjectivity, 27, 172–194.
Motzkau, J. F. (2009b) ‘The semiotic of accusation: thinking about deconstruction, development, the cri-
tique of practice and the practice of critique’, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 6, 129–152.
Motzkau, J. F. (2011) ‘Around the day in eighty worlds: Deleuze, suggestibility and researching practice as 
process’, in P. Stenner, J. Cromby, J. Motzkau, and J. Yen (eds) Theoretical Psychology: Global Transformations 
and Challenges. Toronto: Captus Press.
Nissen, M. (2000) ‘Practice research: critical psychology in and trough practices’, Annual Review of Critical 
Psychology, 2, 145–179.
Nissen, M. (2004) ‘Wild objectification: social work as object’, Outlines, 6(1), 73–89.
Nissen, M. (2009) ‘Mobilizing street kids: the action contexts of independence’, in U. Jensen and C. Mat-
tingly (eds) Narrative, Self and Social Practice. Aarhus: Philosophia.
Nissen, M. (2012) The Subjectivity of Participation: Articulating Social Work Practice with Youth in Copenhagen. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Osterkamp, U. (1976) Motivationsforschung 2. Die Besonderheit menschlicher Bedürfnisse: Problematik und Erk-
enntnisgehalt der Psychoanalyse. Frankfurt/M.: Campus.
Osterkamp, U. (1996) Rassismus als Selbstentmächtigung. Hamburg: Argument.
Osterkamp, U. (1997) ‘⁜‘‘Mißbrauch” ohne Ende? Oder: Vom Mißbrauch des “Mißbrauchs” des 
“Mißbrauchs”. These zur laufenden Diskussion’, Forum Kritische Psychologie, 37, 157–190.
Osterkamp, U., Lindemann, U. and Wagner, H. (2002) ‘Subjektwissenschaft vom Außenstandpunkt? Ant-
wort auf Barbara Fried’, Forum Kritische Psychologie, 44, 152–176.
Osterkamp, U. and Schraube, E. (2013) ‘Klaus Holzkamp and the development of psychology from the 
standpoint of the subject’, in E. Schraube & U. Osterkamp (eds) Psychology from the Standpoint of the 
Subject. Writings of Klaus Holzkamp. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Papadopoulos, D. (2010) ‘Activist materialism’, Deleuze Studies, 4(3), 64–83.
Rutschky, K. (1992) Erregte Aufklärung. Kindesmißbrauch: Fakten und Fiktionen. Hamburg: Klein.
Røn Larsen, M. (2012) ‘A paradox of inclusion: administrative procedures and children’s perspectives on 
difficulties in school’, in M. Hedegaard, K. Aronsson, C. Højholt and O. Skjær Ulvik (eds) Children, 
Childhood, and Everyday Life: Children’s Perspectives. Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Schraube, E. (2009) ‘Technology as materialized action and its ambivalences’, Theory and Psychology, 19(2), 
296–312.
Schraube, E. (2013) ‘First-person perspective and sociomaterial decentering: studying technology from the 
standpoint of the subject’, Subjectivity, 6(1), 12–32.
Schraube, E. and Højholt, C. (2015). Psychology and the Conduct of Everyday Life. London: Routledge.

Kritische Psychologie
289
Schurig, V. (1975) Naturgeschichte des Psychischen. Frankfurt/M.: Campus.
Stanek, A. H. (2013) ‘Understanding children’s learning as connected to social life’, in A. Marvakis, J. Motz-
kau, D. Painter, R. Ruto-Korir, G. Sullivan, S. Triliva, and M. Wieser (eds) Doing Psychology under New 
Conditions. Toronto: Captus Press.
Teo, T. (1998) ‘Klaus Holzkamp and the rise and decline of German critical psychology’, History of Psychol-
ogy, 1(3), 235–253.
Teo, T. (2013) ‘Backlash against American psychology: an indigenous reconstruction of the history of Ger-
man critical psychology’, History of Psychology, 16(1), 1–18.
Tolman, C. W. (1989) ‘What’s critical about Kritische Psychologie?’ Canadian Psychology, 30, 628–635.
Tolman, C. W. (1994) Psychology, Society, and Subjectivity. An Introduction to German Critical Psychology. London: 
Routledge.
Tolman, C. W. and Maiers, W. (eds) (1991) Critical Psychology: Contributions to an Historical Science of the Subject. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Wertch, J. V. (1991) Voices of the Mind: a Sociocultural Approach to Mediated Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Winner, L. (2007) ‘Is there a right to shape technology?’, Argumentos de Razón Técnica, 10, 199–213.

290
For those with a critical psychological eye, one can make the case that psychoanalysis has been 
as radical in its challenge to the ‘psy-disciplines’ as current critical psychology (Canguilhem 
1968/1995; De Vos 2011; Lacan 2006). Nevertheless, psychoanalysis has been complicit in psy-
chology’s seductive execution (Lacan 2006). Psychoanalysis is worrisome when it draws upon 
its psychiatric and psychological companions in theoretical alliance – psychoanalysis as a mental 
health profession (e.g. Wagner 2005). Usually, in this case, psychoanalysis understands itself as 
based in ‘needs’ that exist in the nether lands between biology and culture; such needs have been 
thwarted in a child’s developmental trajectory, and psychoanalysis possesses particular tools to 
address such deficiencies (see Altman 2013). This is not to say that such psychoanalytic work 
does not offer significantly different angles on community transformation (e.g. Wagner 2013). 
Rather, an examination of psychoanalytic theory, inextricable from the question of praxis, calls 
upon one to consider the layers of criticality that can be mined from psychoanalysis; is it an 
applied knowledge or a different sort of knowledge and, in both cases, what is its status within 
the critical psychological field?
Critical psychoanalysis?
Critical psychoanalysis has multiple expressions, including a notion of what it means to be 
human at a particular place and time (Houis et al. 1999; Parker 2011). Yet, psychoanalytic rad-
icality should not be judged by whether a form of psychoanalysis is dramatically popular (Ego 
Psychology/Freud in the United States in the 1950s; Lacan in France during the 1970s; Rela-
tional Psychoanalysis in the States today; Wilfred Bion in Italy) (Kernberg 2011; Pfister and 
Schnog 1997; Turkle 1981). One may judge the ‘tools’ of theory and praxis that any given 
school may offer to those critically inclined for certain projects (e.g. Ainslie 2013; Cantin 2009). 
But to think of this as simply another practice that may be critically crafted toward a particular 
population or for a given emancipatory goal underestimates psychoanalysis, which, of course, is 
a theory of a subject, defined by the unconscious.
The intellectual soil upon which psychoanalytic thoughts and practices landed after they 
left Vienna had an enormous impact on what subsequently was conceived of as psychoanalysis. 
Again, critical psychologists had best be aware; psychoanalysis through the 1950s was a cultural, 
30
Does psychoanalysis have anything 
to say to critical psychology?
Kareen Ror Malone with Emaline Friedman

Does psychoanalysis have anything to say?
291
cinematic, and clinical ‘hit’ in the United States (Herman 1995; Pfister and Schnog 1997). Its 
ties with commodity capitalism in advancing the art of advertising are partly balanced with an 
indisputable, nuanced impact on film and art through, for example, the work of Alfred Hitch-
cock (Žižek 1992). Its strong relation to art continues to this day, and should not be dismissed 
as academic; the aesthetics within culture, evidenced in a trend in art or in a particular artist are 
not without implications for ideology, community, and the modes of production as structural 
features that organize and anticipate subjective horizons (time, place, the place of the subject, 
the excluded, how one speaks, etc.) (Cancina 2013; Romanyshyn 1989; Vanier 2012). Yet links 
to medicine and to capitalism were deadly poisons, flattening many radical aspects of psychoa-
nalysis ( Jacoby 1983; Lacan 2006).
Karen Horney, more traditionally psychoanalytic in earlier years, was seen as feminist and 
revolutionary in her perspective, at least in her challenge to the primacy of the phallus (Rose 
1986). Her later works, such as Neurosis and Human Growth: the Struggle Toward Self-Realization 
(Horney 1950) demonstrate a deep affiliation with the humanistic interest in self-actualization. 
Many have seen this shift and these values as consonant with contemporary capitalist principles 
in the United States (Buss 1979). Horney was part of a broader movement. The North American 
psychoanalytic theoretical swing to ‘self’ and to culture in part reflects a certain awareness of 
cultures as relative, à la Mead. It also reflects awareness that analytic work is a field, intersub-
jective, a field with dynamic particulars that envelops and accesses dynamics that hover outside 
the space of the clinic (Lacan 2006). It is a way of seeing analysis, as with Harry Stack Sullivan, 
which seems initially packaged to accompany a deeper analysis of cultural context (Kernberg 
2011; Mitchell and Black 1995).
Yet at the same time, many within this school see the analytic field in the terms of an inter-
personal dyad, i.e. in terms of two selves now able to act differently, more emphatic, attuned, 
more primitively, and so forth. In fact, one often returns to a theory of needs and self-reparation, 
alienation, and actualization (e.g. Fromm, Kohut) that, in the upbeat interplay of self and other, 
fails to address the complex interface of culture and subjectivity as may, for example, be read 
in Freud’s work. This ‘culturalist’ move bothered mid-century Marxists ( Jacoby 1983; Jay 1973; 
Marcuse 1955), and still raises suspicions from Lacanians and others interested in the political 
ramifications of psychoanalysis, i.e. its insistence on the specificity of the unconscious spread 
across the dyad or the situation of speaking, or even embedded in any exchange that creates 
surplus value (Rebaté 2000; Malone and Sowecke 1998; Lacan 2006; Vanier 2001).
Probably most importantly for this readership, against the fervent wishes of its founder, 
Anglophone psychoanalysis has been institutionally and conceptually tied to medicine, with 
not-unexpected consequences for its metapsychology and cultural reflections. This issue is more 
than a parochial concern of the United States but inflects through many modalities within anal-
ysis in relation to how it takes up the question of its knowledge. In the United States, psychoa-
nalysis was initially imagined as an application of psychoanalysis to somebody, and neutrality as 
a form of psychologized objectification of a traumatized or otherwise disadvantaged individual. 
The arduous work of analysis on the couch was extracted as concepts or assessment tools to be 
applied to a more general population (Herman 1995, Lacan 2006). Yet its true esoteric knowl-
edge was gained through lengthy work with the young, attractive, verbal, and intelligent sorts 
with an education and pedigree that made learning and understanding this knowledge possible 
(Alpert et al. 2013).
Psychoanalytic ties to psychology and medicine are still strong. with effects on how psycho-
analysis is practiced in many settings or how it is conceived, that is, as a particularly elite path 
to mental health. To this day, true analytic practice is often deemed too expensive or too intel-
lectual for the less wealthy (Gherovici 2003). Internationally, and even within North America, 

Kareen Ror Malone with Emaline Friedman
292
psychoanalytic work suggests strongly otherwise, including psychoanalytic work within com-
munity and hospital settings where class status is not the gateway to its efforts (Ainslie 2009; 
Brabeck and Ainslie 2008; Cantin 2009; Debieux and Mountain; 2013). In South America, psy-
choanalysis informs psychology curriculum; in the United States, psychology has re-formatted 
psychoanalysis, at some cost to its specificity. This has meant that its utility for critical psychology 
is similarly compromised, psychoanalysis now falling more within the orbit of the psy-disciplines 
and their normative definitions of health, even with its esoteric and vacillating lexicon (Westen 
2002). When overly psychologized, pragmatized, and privatized, the robust cultural legacy and 
insight of psychoanalysis is lost ( Jacoby 1983).
Another way in which psychoanalysis has entered into the arena of social justice and critical 
thought is through the lenses of feminism. Although much disliked by many in second wave 
feminism (Tong 1998), some Marxist feminists realized that women in their relation to sexuality 
and family are actually addressed as human subjects in the Freudian paradigm (Foreman 1977; 
Jay 1973). Some feminists take off from there, using notions of sexuality and the notion of the 
object to re-construct psychoanalysis and Marxism (Benjamin 1977, 1988). In later instantiations 
of psychoanalytic influence, the presence of Freud and Lacan are quite evident in feminist and in 
cultural studies, from the mid-1980s forward. This shift is in part attributable to Juliet Mitchell’s 
influential text, Psychoanalysis and Feminism (1974/2000), and to French feminisms (Feldstein and 
Roof 1989). In psychological circles, the work Changing the Subject revealed through a variety 
of post-structuralist and feminist frames that a question of the psychological subject was truly at 
stake in any fully critical enterprise (Henriques et al. 1998). Whether one moved in the direction 
of Irigaray or Cixous, there was the inflection of a style of thinking that was tied to a Lacan-
ian way of re-reading Freud. Freud’s texts, if criticized, were resurrected (e.g. Brennan 1989). 
An important impetus for feminist thinkers is understanding femininity as more than a subset 
of motherhood. Those with a Lacanian bent looked to femininity as a means to approach the 
question of the interrelation of the symbolic, imaginary, and real, as a relationship to negation, 
and as a re-positioning from the phallic subject (Barnard 2002; Brousse 1999; Pickman 2004).
Other feminist re-takes of psychoanalysis have pulled from Judith Butler’s hybrid of Marxist, 
Lacanian, and object relations (e.g. Dimen and Harris 2001). Layton (2004) offers a culturally 
critical way of re-framing gender and cultural notions of identity by questioning the binaries 
that are assumed in the ‘opposite sexes’. Queer theorists have appropriated psychoanalysis in 
different ways; compare Corbett (2002), Dean and Lane (2001), Watson (2009), and Berlant 
and Warner (1994). In all cases, there is the issue of an intimate social construction, one that is 
the body itself, transmitted and recycled through the instantiations of the body and the cul-
tural place of generation, sexuality, and sexual difference (Alsop et al. 2002). Jostling with the 
temporal and political dimensions of this issue will inform sinthomosexuality, a notion which 
will assign sexuality the materiality of the letter to claim access to jouissance over access to 
sense (Edelman 2004). It is because sexuality is not biological in Freud that it is found in so 
many other places, leading to a re-articulation of how man and woman come to be (Mitchell 
1974/2000; Pickman 2004).
In more recent years, works of Freud, Klein, Lacan, and relational psychoanalysis have estab-
lished positions that are aligned explicitly or implicitly with critical psychology. One sees such 
incursions in the work of David Caudill (1997) in law, in bringing cultural reflections on psychi-
atric trends, e.g. self-injury, revisiting trauma more broadly, or looking at the cultural processes 
of Western capitalism (Gulerce 2012; MacGowen 2013). Others enjoin a psychoanalytically 
informed discursive approach (Neill 2013; Parker 2005). Articulating what it is about psychoa-
nalysis today that renders it a theory of culture as well as a clinical practice implicitly invites new 
forms of community interventions. In this role, psychoanalysis has played its hand as a viable 

Does psychoanalysis have anything to say?
293
counterforce to less humane forms of treating humans and of thinking through what the rela-
tion of culture and the human entails. For this latter reflection, one can look to Marxists who 
take up psychoanalysis, e.g. Marcuse or Althusser (those two very differently), or to a number of 
Lacanian-inflected visions wherein the cultural is embedded through the Freudian insight on 
subjective division. Such a reflection would involve an explication of the refraction of the drives 
and the body, and the role of cultural and particular representations in defining the process of 
repressions and the place of transference in mediating repressive effects. Again, this is not to say 
that Bion or Klein could not be similarly mobilized, but rather that the structuration of the sub-
ject within Lacanian thought overturns certain predictable ways of thinking about consciousness 
and the self and thus forces a turn to alternative ways of conceiving the rotation of subjectivity 
in historical time (Parker 2011; Svolos 2011).
Within psychoanalytic theory: shopper’s guide
The majority of critical psychologists will probably not go into analysis or participate in an 
Institute of Psychoanalysis. Critical psychology will know psychoanalysis through research or 
through more general texts, or perhaps feminism or cultural studies. If trained squarely within 
the discipline, they will see psychoanalysis in the terms granted it by psychology. The Freud 
passed down in psychology and thus to these critical psychologists is one whose vision of the 
subject is ‘intrapsychic’, a self-enclosed cauldron of instincts who goes out into the world over-
laid by a psychic reality defined by repressions, introjections, and projections. Freud’s approach 
is individualistic, focused on the insistence on infantile fantasy and personal history that reveals 
a particularly dark side of development. Failures at certain junctures, as empirical study (ide-
ally) confirms, will graph this cusp between the logic of the bios (the child’s being as a form of 
body) and a psycho-logic, a being now attuned to another set of exigencies, e.g. adaptational, 
emotional, cognitive, etc. If, by chance, the psychoanalytic view frames this transition in terms 
of needs, i.e. of the logic of the psychic being analogous to current bio-logic understand-
ings, then we have a very familiar, very psychologized Freud. The list of dependency needs, 
of attachment needs, of a much less sexualized analysis is assumed to be timelier and more 
compassionate.
Although one may be politically astute within such need based approaches, whether inter-
personal or object relations, this would probably not be the psychoanalysis towards which critical 
psychologists would gravitate, since they, as much as Freud, saw through the laundry list of needs 
as a matter of socially reified claims upon the body (Lacan 2006; Rose 1986). Psychoanalysis is 
the articulation of a practice and a discordant subject whose suffering and subsistence is nestled 
between the body and socially reified claims, a subject in exile (Fuks 2008). The unconscious is 
the division of a person from himself, and the encounter with what it tells us as bodies and as 
persons with desires is not necessarily wholly viable, socially. Otherwise, why would we resist 
this knowledge? Certainly, the Marxist reproach of the ‘culturalist’ psychoanalyst was just this. 
You seem to be more culturally attuned than that biological Freud, but your sensate infant, ever 
aware of the Other and culturally enmeshed, is too adaptable. The radicality of psychoanalysis 
lies in its capacity for maladaptation. (Dahmer 1977; Marcuse 1955; van Haute 2001).
Despite a wide margin of error within psychology in presenting the most interesting Freud, 
psychoanalysis starts from Freud as an author, meant in the Foucauldian sense, as one who makes 
an epistemic cut (Foucault 1977). Whether one reads Freud as a biological determinist (Mitchell 
and Black 1995), a religiously informed thinker, as a developmental psychologist with a sour 
outlook on children, structurally, or as the founder of talking together differently, psychoanalysts 
are all, in some sense, accountable to Freud’s texts. When someone like Erich Fromm ceases 

Kareen Ror Malone with Emaline Friedman
294
to call himself a psychoanalyst, there is a reason, a change in reference points ( Jay 1973; Lacan 
2006). Psychoanalysis begins with the subjective and social consequences of an unconscious.
Classical and some fundamental aspects of Lacanian analysis attempt to stay faithful to Freud’s 
discovery as they might refer to it, even if at times, it is obvious that such readings may not be 
what others would see as the purest of fidelities to Freud’s ideas (Verhaeghe 2001). Some may 
argue that Bion or object relations could be implicitly or explicitly integrated into Lacanian 
modalities (Kirshner 2011); others incorporate object relations into a basic classical stance, while 
others have moved that same base in relational directions (Kernberg 2011). Contra wise, a 
host of ‘disputing doctors’ frequently contend the validity of alternative approaches, differences 
codified in Institutes, affiliations and so forth (Friedlander 1993; Lacan 2006;Parker 2011). This 
includes even the importance of being a doctor or mental health professional in the first place 
(Freud 1912/1958; Malone 2006; Safouan 2000). Such differences are important for an outsider 
qua critical psychologist to know.
Psychoanalysis is the praxis and theory of becoming human, the stakes of subjectivity. As 
such, it veers from any socially agreed upon spectrum of behaviours to be made sense of, and 
looks instead at the persistence of human desire and the logic of human passion in relation to 
sociality. It thus would substitute an ethics for an understanding. It attempts rather than defaults 
on being an impossible profession (Freud 1937/1969).
Further reading
Fink, B. (2004) Lacan to the Letter: Reading Écrits Closely. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Houis, J. Mieli, P., and Stafford, M. (1999) Being Human. New York: Agincourt/Marsilio: An Après 
Coup Book.
Lacan, J. (1966/2006) Écrits. New York: Norton.
Mitchell, J. (1974/2000) Psychoanalysis and Feminism: A Radical Reassessment of Freudian Psychoanalysis. New 
York: Basic Books.
Website resources
Academy for the Study of the Psychoanalytic Arts: http://www.academyanalyticarts.org
Lacan Online: http://www.lacanonline.com
World Association of Psychoanalysis: http://wapol.org
References
Ainslie, R. C. (2009) ‘Regression in the construction of the immigrant other’, Psychoanalysis, Culture and 
Society, 14(1), 49-57.
Ainslie, R. C. (2013) ‘Intervention strategies for addressing collective trauma: healing communities ravaged 
by racial strife’, Psychoanalysis Culture and Society, 18, 140–152.
Alpert, J., Goren, E. and Rihn, A. (2013) ‘Introduction to Special issue on psychoanalysis, trauma and 
community: expanding our analytic identity: the inclusion of a larger social perspective’, Psychoanalysis 
Culture and Society, 18, 113–127.
Alsop, R., Fitzsimmons, A. and Lennon, K. (2002) Theorizing Gender. London: Polity Press.
Altman, N. (2013) ‘Psychoanalysis in and out of the office’, Psychoanalysis, Culture and Society, 18, 128–139.
Barnard, S. (2002) ‘Tongues of angels: feminine structure and other jouissance’, in Reading Seminar XX: 
Lacan’s Major Work on Love, Knowledge and Feminine Sexuality. Albany: State University of New York 
Press.
Benjamin, J. (1977) ‘The end of internalization: Adorno’s social psychology’, Telos, 32, 42–64.
Benjamin, J. (1988) The Bonds of Love. New York: Pantheon Press.
Berlant, L. and Warner, M. (1994) ‘Sex in public’, Critical Inquiry, 24, 547–566.
Brabeck, K. and Ainslie, R. (2008) ‘The narration of collective trauma: the “true story” of Jasper, Texas’, 
Psychoanalysis, Culture and Society, 13(2), 123–142.

Does psychoanalysis have anything to say?
295
Brennan, T. (1989) Between Psychoanalysis and Feminism. New York: Routledge.
Brousse, M. H. (1999) ‘Sexual position and the end of analysis’, Psychoanalytic Notebooks, 3, 155–163.
Buss, A. (1979) ‘Humanistic psychology as Liberal ideology: the socio-cultural roots of Maslow’s theory of 
self-actualization’, Humanistic Psychologist, 19, 43–55.
Cancina, P. (2013, September) ‘An Artisan’s Know-how. Workshop for Après coup’, unpublished paper, 
New York.
Canguilhem, G. (1968/1995) ‘What is psychology?’, The School Field, 6, 3–20.
Cantin, L. (2009) ‘An effective treatment of psychosis with psychoanalysis in Québec City, since 1982’, 
Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 7, 286–319.
Caudill, D. (1997) Lacan and the Subject of Law. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press.
Corbett, K. (2002) ‘Nontraditional family romance’, Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 120, 599–624.
Dahmer, H. (1977) ‘Psychoanalysis as social theory’, Telos, 32, 27–47.
De Vos, J. (2011) ‘Psychologization or the discontents of psychoanalysis’, Psychoanalysis, Culture and Society, 
16(4), 352–372.
Dean, T. and Lane, C. (2001) Homosexuality and Psychoanalysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Debieux, M. and Mountain, I. (2013) ‘Psychoanalytical listening of socially excluded young people’, Psy-
choanalysis, Culture and Society, 18, 1–16.
Dimen, M. and Harris, A. (eds) (2001) Storms in Her Head. New York: The Other Press.
Edelman, L. (2004) No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Feldstein, R. and Roof, J. (1989) Feminism and Psychoanalysis. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Foreman, A. (1977) Femininity as Alienation: Women and the Family in Marxism and Psychoanalysis. London: 
Pluto Press.
Foucault, Michel. (1977) ‘What is an author?’, in Michel Foucault: Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected 
Essays and Interviews. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Freud, S. (1912/1958) ‘Recommendations to physicians practicing psychoanalysis’, in J. Stratchey (ed. and 
trans.) The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Volume 12. London: 
Hogarth Press.
Freud, S. (1937/1969) ‘Analysis terminable and interminable’, in J. Strachey and P. Gay (ed. and trans.) The 
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Volume 23. London: Hogarth Press.
Friedlander, S. R. (1993) ‘The mass of disputing doctors: some implications of theoretical diversity for 
psychoanalytic practice’, Psychoanalytic Psychology, 10, 221–236.
Fuks, B. (2008) Freud and the Invention of Jewishness. New York: The Agincourt Press.
Gherovici, P. (2003) The Puerto Rican Syndrome. New York: Other Press.
Gulerce, A. (ed.) (2012) Re-configuring Psychoanalysis. London: Palgrave Press.
Henriques, J., Holloway, W. Urwin, C. Venn, C. and Walkerdine, V. (1998) Changing the Subject: Psychology, 
Social Regulation and Subjectivity. London and New York: Routledge.
Herman, E. (1995) The Romance of American Psychology. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Horney, K. (1950) Neurosis and Human Growth: the Struggle Toward Self-Realization. New York: W.W. Norton 
and Company Inc.
Houis, J. Mieli, P. and Stafford, M. (1999) Being Human. New York: Agincourt/Marsilio: An Après 
Coup Book.
Jacoby, R. (1983) The Repression of Psychoanalysis: Otto Fenichel and the Political Freudians. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
Jay, M. (1973) The Dialectical Imagination: a History of the Frankfurt School. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.
Kernberg, O. (2011) ‘Divergent contemporary trends in psychoanalytic theory’, Psychoanalytic Review, 98, 
633–654.
Kirshner, L. A. (ed.) (2011) Between Winnicott and Lacan: a Clinical Engagement. New York: Routledge.
Lacan, J. (2006) Écrits: The First Complete Edition in English. New York: Norton.
Layton, L. (2004) Who’s That Girl? Who’s That Boy? Clinical Practice Meets Postmodern Gender Theory. Hillsdale, 
NJ: Analytic Press.
MacGowen, T. (2013) Enjoying What We Don’t Have. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Malone, K. (2006) ‘Regulations and standards for psychoanalysis: the place of the other in psychoanalysis 
and its teaching’, European Journal of Psychotherapy and Counseling, 8, 269–284.
Malone, K., and Sowecke, S. (1998) ‘The question of analytic neutrality and the effect of demand: Lacan 
and Kohut’, Clinical Studies: International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 3, 25–38.
Marcuse. H. (1955) Eros and Civilization: A Philosophical Inquiry into Freud. Boston: Beacon Press.
Mitchell, J. (1974/2000) Psychoanalysis and Feminism: a Radical Reassessment of Freudian psychoanalysis. New 
York: Basic Books.

Kareen Ror Malone with Emaline Friedman
296
Mitchell, S. and Black, M. (1995) Freud and Beyond. New York: Basic Books.
Neill, C. (2013) ‘Breaking the text: an introduction to Lacanian discourse analysis’, Theory & Psychology, 
23, 334–350.
Parker, I. (2005) ‘Lacanian discourse analysis in psychology: seven theoretical elements’, Theory & Psychology, 
15, 163–182.
Parker, I. (2011) Lacanian Psychoanalysis: Revolutions in Subjectivity. London: Routledge
Pfister, J. and Schnog, N. (eds) (1997) Inventing the Psychological: Toward a Cultural History of Emotional Life in 
America. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Pickman, C-N., (2004) ‘The clinic of the not-all’, The Letter, 30, 19–30.
Rebaté, J. (ed.) (2000) Lacan in America. New York: The Other Press.
Romanyshyn, R. (1989) Technology as Symptom and Dream. London and New York: Routledge.
Rose, J. (1986) Sexuality in the Field of Vision. London: Verso.
Safouan, M. (2000) Jacques Lacan and the Question of Psychoanalytic Training. London: MacMillan Press.
Svolos, T. (2011) ‘Introducing the New Symptom’, in Y. Baldwin, K. Malone and T. Svolos (eds) Lacan and 
Addiction. London: Karnac.
Tong, R. (1998) Feminist Thought: a More Comprehensive Introduction (2nd Edn). Boulder, CO: Westview.
Turkle, S. (1981) Psychoanalytic Politics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Van Haute, P. (2001) Against Adaptation. New York: The Other Press.
Vanier, A. (2001) ‘Some remarks on the symptom and the social link’, Journal for the Psychoanalysis of Culture 
and Society, 6, 40–45.
Vanier, A. (2012) Act and Image. New York: Workshop for Après Coup.
Verhaeghe, P. (2001) Beyond Gender: from Subject to Drive. New York: The Other Press. 
Wagner, L. (2013) ‘The multiple traumas of Hurricane Katrina as witnessed by a psychoanalytic first 
responder’, Psychoanalysis Culture and Society, 18, 153–166.
Wagner, L. B. (2005) Work of the psychoanalytic consortium: why the profession needs accreditation standards 
and the ACPE. Paper presented at the annual conference of the American Psychological Association, 
Washington, DC.
Watson, E. (2009) ‘Queering psychoanalysis/psychoanalyzing queer’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 
7, 114–139.
Westen, D. (2002) ‘The language of psychoanalytic discourse’, Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 12, 857–898.
Žižek, S. (1992) Enjoy Your Symptom! Jacques Lacan in Hollywood and Out. London and New York: Routledge.

297
For the last few decades, French post-structuralist critical thinking has provided one of the 
most important areas of impetus for the development of new ways of considering psychol-
ogy. The philosophy of figures such as Michel Foucault and Roland Barthes has provided a 
dramatic reconceptualization of the human subject. The deconstructive philosophy of Jacques 
Derrida has been central to this post-structuralist revolution, but it has yet to be comprehen-
sively integrated into the discipline of psychology. We argue that, insofar as it can be under-
stood as a form of philosophical psychology, Derrida’s thought has profound implications for 
the discipline on three interconnected levels: as a way of theoretically conceptualizing the 
subject of psychology, by placing the regional science of psychology under a broader onto-
logical scope; as a way of considering the pivotal role that a theory of language plays in the 
conceptualization of the subject; and as a way of interpreting the texts that form the tradition 
of the discipline itself.
Derrida’s thought is best known for its philosophy of language, where in particular he 
highlights the historical relationship between speech and writing. In Of Grammatology he notes 
that, for the entirety of Western philosophy and culture, from its historical origins up until 
the present time, speech has been thought of as the privileged mode of language – leaving 
writing in a strangely repressed position. Derrida (1974) poses the radical question: what if 
writing is a more adequate theoretical example than speech of the essential structure of lan-
guage? Why would this be the case, and indeed, why does it matter? Well, in the act of spoken 
communication there is no absolute guarantee of the occurrence of mutual understanding or 
mutual agreement. There is no absolute guarantee of the occurrence of rational communi-
cation. There is no absolute guarantee that meaningfulness will prevail over meaninglessness. 
And perhaps most relevantly for our purposes, there is no absolute guarantee that, in the act 
of spoken communication, the intentions of the subject will fully present themselves. Because 
of this psychological illusion of self-presence, it follows that self-absence must itself be taken 
into account as a necessary feature of the very structure of language. It is in this respect that 
all language – whether written or spoken or some other form – corresponds to the generic 
structure of writing as requiring the necessary possibility of self-absence. Hence one way of 
understanding the sweep of Derrida’s work is to think of it as transforming our understanding 
of philosophy. Rather than seeing philosophical texts as partial summaries of underlying ideas 
31
Deconstruction
The foundations of critical psychology
Andrew Clark and Alexa Hepburn

Andrew Clark and Alexa Hepburn
298
and arguments, as representations of the purer workings of logic and inference, Derrida sug-
gests that it the language of philosophical writing itself that is important. Philosophy is working 
through its textuality rather than in spite of it. That is the power of his claim that philosophy 
is a kind of writing.
Building on this notion, Richard Rorty (1980) develops a devastating critique of two 
major areas of philosophy: the traditional concern with the discovery of truth, and the ana-
lytic concern with defining criteria for the truth values of statements. He argues that most 
philosophers still view the mind as a mirror, the ‘glassy essence’ that can reflect objective 
reality. This has led to an equally mistaken notion of knowledge as accuracy of representa-
tion, and philosophers as experts on ‘knowing’. His pragmatic aim is to remove the throne 
from which philosophers dispense decrees about truth, validity, and reality, and to show that 
philosophy, like any other discipline, is a kind of writing. We argue here that psychology, 
too, is a form of writing – its claims to truth, validity, and reality about the mind are equally 
textually produced. It follows that deconstruction can perform a similar function for psy-
chologists, examining the metaphors and tropes through which the discipline of psychology 
is produced.
So at what point can we transfer Derrida’s argument from the philosophy of language to 
philosophical psychology? Here we can note that in accounting for the necessary possibil-
ity of self-absence the purity of subjective self-presence becomes a theoretical impossibility, 
as there is a radical contamination from the necessary possibility of self-absence given by the 
very structure of language-as-writing. To illustrate, we can consider Searle’s argument, that 
‘in serious literal speech the sentences are precisely the realizations of the intentions’ (Searle 
1977: 202). Derrida’s response is that this is an illusion that belongs ‘to the repertoire of a psy-
chology of language (mechanistic, associationist, substantialist, expressionist, representationalist, 
pre-Saussurean, prephenomenological, etc.), more exactly to a pre-critical psychologism’ (Derrida 
1988: 66, our emphasis). By putting into question the purity of subjective self-presence, Derrida 
therefore requires us to rethink the very foundations of the inherited concepts and methods 
that we employ in our constructions of human psychology – for so many of these concepts and 
methods implicitly rely on the idea of this purity. It is for this reason (the complex intertwining 
of the nature of human language with the nature of human subjectivity) that we argue that the 
utilization of Derrida’s thought has become essential for rethinking the foundations of critical 
psychology.
As with philosophy, psychology relies upon the fundamental notion of the mind as a mirror 
that reflects more or less accurate mental representations of ‘reality’. This entails three main 
assumptions: that we are dealing with ‘facts’, which are independent of the researcher; that true 
knowledge can only be acquired through the empirical-analytic method; and that there are a 
number of facts about the mind and humanness that psychology is accumulating knowledge on, 
and so will handle with increased effectiveness over time.
Just as philosophy seeks to become the arbiter of statements about external reality, psychol-
ogy aspires to provide the facts about internal reality. The tools that are used to this end – the 
technical apparatus and metaphors such as ‘behaviour’ and ‘information processing’ – can be 
revealed as nothing more than a form of writing. We therefore argue that psychology’s func-
tion be reconceived; it should be removed from the task of seeking ‘facts’ about ‘the mind’, 
and replaced with a study of writing – writing in the deconstructive sense. This would involve 
the study of the variety of descriptions of subjectivity and humanity, rather than the study of 
subjectivity or humanity ‘itself’. And psychologists, like other analysts, need to recognize that 
speech/writing/conversation is all there is; there is no escape from the discursive net into the 
sea of objective reality.

Deconstruction
299
Deconstruction as critical psychology?
In a certain respect, deconstruction as critical psychology does not yet properly exist. On the 
one hand, research in the field of critical psychology has not unreservedly appropriated the 
complexities of deconstructive thinking. And on the other hand, research in the field of decon-
struction has not effectively directed itself towards psychological concerns. Drawing on and 
developing some of our earlier attempts and arguments (Clark 2011, 2013; Hepburn 1999; 
2000a,b, 2002, 2003, 2006; Hepburn and Jackson 2009) we hope to show how the two strands 
of thought might be fused together.
Our approach also builds on prior attempts to apply deconstructive thought to critical psy-
chology – most notably, Erica Burman (1990, 1994, 1998) and Ian Parker and colleagues (1990, 
1995, 1999) – who institute a mode of deconstruction they term ‘practical deconstruction’ (Parker 
et al. 1995: viii). Here, deconstruction is understood primarily as a form of literary theory which 
emphasizes the critical reading of texts. In this version, the strategy of deconstruction is to unravel 
a text in such a way that considers how the language of the text has been rhetorically produced: 
‘Deconstructive unravelling works through a kind of anti-method which resists a definition or 
prescription, for it is looking for how a “problem” is produced the way it is rather than wanting 
to pin it down and say this is what it really is’ (Parker 1999: 2). Deconstruction is thus drawn on 
as a useful critical tool to address standard practices in the institution of psychotherapy. Hence 
the term ‘practical deconstruction’: rather than simply addressing the language of literary texts, 
deconstruction is drawn on as a critical tool with which to address the language of the psycho-
therapeutic institution itself. In particular, the language that occurs between therapist and client is 
thought of as an important location where the critical tools of deconstruction can become useful 
to unravel the complex techniques with which versions of selfhood – and indeed versions of the 
‘problems’ of selfhood – are presented and represented.
What is it about the traditional institution of psychotherapy that Parker argues to be uncrit-
ical? In order to consider this question there is a fusion of the work of Derrida and Foucault 
in Parker’s position: where Derrida’s thought provides the critical tools, Foucault’s thought 
provides the practical point of application of those tools. Where Derrida’s thought is applied 
to the rhetorical structure of texts (primarily philosophical and literary), Foucault’s thought, in 
contrast, is applied to the formation of institutions (primarily those concerning psychiatry and 
the human sciences). In works such as Madness and Civilization, The Order of Things, and The Birth 
of the Clinic (Foucault 1965, 1970, 1973), Foucault’s thought is concerned with the way in which 
the historical formation of new institutions concerning the study of people and their mental 
health created new objects of psychological knowledge. The problem for this ‘knowledge’ is 
thus that it is capable of transforming over time – a capability which ironically undermines its 
status as ‘knowledge’. The historical exclusion in Western society of the mad from the sane, or of 
abnormal practices from normal practices in part arose from the knowledge drawn upon from 
these institutions. However, as these institutions transform their knowledge claims, as their ideas 
and ethos develop, these changes have an impact on the treatment of those who are excluded. 
This twin problem in the historical formation of psychological institutions – the creation of 
new objects of knowledge and the transformation of the knowledge claims concerning these 
objects – are why Foucault referred to the knowledge developed by these institutions as ‘dis-
courses’. As discourses, the historical formation and transformability of knowledges and identi-
ties is emphasized, as are the power relations between various groups in the constitution of these 
knowledges and identities.
For Parker, Burman, and others (e.g. see Parker and Shotter 1990; Sampson 1990) the fusion 
of Foucault and Derrida becomes a useful strategy in the critique of traditional approaches in 

Andrew Clark and Alexa Hepburn
300
psychology, e.g. psychotherapy. Where Foucault’s historical analyses present a broader critical 
standpoint against the relevant psychological institutions, Derrida’s textual analyses present a 
critical standpoint against more localized rhetorical manoeuvres. The task for the deconstructive 
critical psychologist thus involves taking a more localized discursive context within the psycho-
therapeutic institution itself, for example, of the analytical situation between therapist and client, 
and of analyzing the discourse of these interactions. From a critical standpoint, the purpose of 
such an analysis is to highlight the relations of power at work within the more localized discur-
sive context, and to analyze the rhetorical effects of these relations. The concern is to consider 
the way in which the psychological problems of the client are produced as ways that ‘individ-
ualize’ the client: that is, where the varying categories of madness and abnormality classify the 
individual in a particular way. The critical problem with this uncritical individualization is the 
unreflective way in which the psychological institutions have themselves created the categories 
that they apply to their clients, thus identifying them as having ‘psychological’ problems and 
creating knowledge about these problems. The critical problem is thus that this knowledge is 
not necessarily true, and these identifications are not necessarily accurate, and indeed this can 
manifest itself in various rhetorical discrepancies within the language that is used at various 
stages of the analytical situation itself.
Rethinking psychologism: developing a  
deconstructive critical psychology
Critical psychologists’ usage of deconstruction is not here an entirely illegitimate one. How-
ever, it presents an incomplete version of deconstruction in its transition from the popular field 
of ‘literary deconstruction’ to the notion of a ‘practical deconstruction’ that is applied in the 
context of psychotherapeutic institutions. What has thus been circumvented is an emphasis on 
Derrida’s engagement with Western philosophy, and the deconstructive critique of the version 
of subjectivity (as self-presence) found in the metaphysical tradition itself. In this philosophical 
context there is also the need to reconceptualize the very idea of subjectivity that has been put 
into question by Derrida’s thought. In its critique of the metaphysics of subjectivity, decon-
struction has cleared the foundations for critical psychology by targeting the very version of 
human subjectivity that is most uncritical and most pervasive. However, this still leaves us with 
the important task of rethinking the nature of the very subjectivity that has thus been put into 
question.
As a way into this reconsideration of subjectivity, we therefore argue for a more comprehen-
sive application of deconstruction to psychology, which in turn requires further philosophical 
development of the general theory of selfhood that is already operative in Derrida’s thought. 
We argue that this is more powerful for the discipline of critical psychology because it pro-
vides stronger theoretical foundations. But why bother to rethink the foundations of critical 
psychology? The key to addressing this question is in the word ‘critical’. There appear to be 
three – perhaps interrelated – problems with the academic discipline of psychology such that 
one could determine it as ‘uncritical’: (a) a lack of concern for theoretical rigour, especially 
concerning our general philosophical understanding of the nature of the human mind. Here the 
need to appear ‘scientific’ by gathering empirical data overwhelms this concern. (b) The prob-
lem of empirical method itself, especially insofar as a specific philosophical version of what the 
mind is can already be active and implicit within any specific empirical method. (c) An uncrit-
ical philosophical version of the human mind that dominates the various empirical methods 
used across the various sub-fields of psychology. The move to appear critical is thus bound to a 
certain identification of what counts as uncritical. A vibrant discipline of critical psychological 

Deconstruction
301
research therefore needs to be clear what the ‘uncritical’ in psychological research represents. 
For example, is the object of criticism specific uncritical practices within the psychotherapeutic 
institution, or is it a specific uncritical theoretical version of selfhood or subjectivity that runs 
through these institutions?
Because Derrida’s thought already contains a radical critique of the metaphysics of subjectiv-
ity, it lends itself to critical psychology by considering the philosophical version of subjectivity 
that is most uncritically accepted in psychology. What, then, is this uncritical philosophical 
version? It is the tendency to treat the nature of the human mind (psychology) as if it were a 
separate object of study from the nature of human beings more generally (ontology). The disci-
pline of academic psychology thus typically reduces ontology to psychology. But here, the case 
is in fact the reverse: in its initial inception, critical psychology relies on what Heidegger in Being 
and Time (1927/1962) calls ‘fundamental ontology’: that is, the attempt to consider the nature of 
the individual human being within the generic confines of their historically given world, and 
also within the specific confines of their temporal lifespan (Heidegger 1927/1962). In this view, 
what makes traditional academic psychology uncritical is, therefore, the removal of psychology 
from these environmental confines in an attempt to locate the inner workings of the mind – as 
if these inner workings had a logic that was separate from the life history and world history into 
which human beings are thrown. Undoubtedly, it is with the sub-field of social psychology that 
an effort has been made to be concerned with such environmental factors, which is why critical 
psychology has often been thought of as a ‘critical social psychology’ (e.g. Ibáñez and Íñiguez 
1997; Hepburn 2003).
As many critical psychologists have noted, the irony of traditional academic psychology is 
that in its attempts to understand individuals it removes them from the very conditions which 
are necessary for that understanding. This is why critical psychology has itself become a nec-
essary position within the discipline of psychology. Indeed, as a social science the discipline of 
psychology requires empirical methods with which to gather psychological data. Hence another 
important issue is whether research methods which are consistent with the arguments of critical 
social psychology can be developed.
Internal debates in critical psychology
Writing fifteen years ago, Hepburn (1999) surveyed ‘ab/uses’ of deconstruction in various strands 
of critical psychology, highlighting what appeared to be omissions of some of the more useful 
and ‘subversive’ features of deconstruction. She argued that rather than rejecting the ‘undecida-
ble’ aspects of deconstruction, in favour of more ‘emancipatory’ critical realist elements, a more 
thoroughgoing application of deconstruction ‘offers profound critical and political possibilities’. 
As part of this argument, Hepburn (2000a, 2000b, 2003, 2006; Hepburn and Jackson 2009) has 
argued for the more anti-foundationalist approaches in feminist and discursive psychologies 
to be incorporated into critical approaches. However, there have also been fairly consistent 
criticisms of what has been dubbed the ‘Loughborough School’ of discursive psychology (see 
Hepburn and Jackson 2009 and Stokoe et al. 2012 for more elaborate responses than we offer 
here). These criticisms typically centre around the alleged limitations of discursive psychology’s 
adoption of conversation analysis (e.g. Parker 2005), or the embracing of relativism (e.g. Cromby 
and Nightingale 1999; Parker 1999). Space does not permit an extensive review of these debates 
here; instead, we offer an overview of the relevance of discursive psychology (hereafter DP) to 
deconstructive approaches, in that Hepburn’s argument has been that because the a priori exist-
ence of subjectivity and objectivity in psychological research is not assumed, DP comes closest 
to a deconstructive critical psychology.

Andrew Clark and Alexa Hepburn
302
Discursive psychology can be understood as an attempt to socialize psychology by consider-
ing what were traditionally seen as inner, personal, cognitive notions in terms of their location 
in broader social practices. For example, how can we understand ‘memory’ as part of a legal per-
formance of a defence in court, or how can we understand ‘attitudes’ in terms of their position 
in broad debates about controversial topics? The key problem that Edwards and Potter highlight 
is in the very location of psychological phenomena. Traditional approaches in psychology locate 
psychological phenomena in the internality of the human mind/brain, and take the reproduc-
tion of descriptive mental terms in everyday life as evidence for their obvious existence as causal 
entities. DP challenges this ‘cognitivist’ conception of psychology by emphasizing that what we 
call ‘psychological’ phenomena appear first and foremost in everyday discursive actions, e.g. in 
blaming, justifications, announcements, compliments, complaints, and so on.
Here, discourse is conceived in a more localized setting than the Foucauldian historical defi-
nition. As Potter notes: ‘I am taking a focus on discourse to mean that the concern is with talk 
and texts as part of social practices’ (Potter 1996: 105). Potter couples this definition of discourse 
with a social constructionist theoretical standpoint, which views language as a social (specifically, 
interactional) phenomenon through which what we understand to be the realities of human 
experience are mediated. Language is not thought to mirror reality (as if reality were merely a 
set of pre-given facts), but rather the process of interaction is part of what constructs reality in 
particular (and often peculiar) ways. What we therefore like to refer to as ‘psychological phe-
nomena’ are not assumed to be unproblematically located in the internality of individual minds, 
but rather they are explored for their function as parts of these social practices and interactions. 
Two aspects of critical psychology are operative here: first, distancing ourselves from the very 
idea of the mind as a space of subjective internality; and second, distancing ourselves from the 
very idea of the world as a space of objective factuality (Hepburn 2003). Hence we can operate 
with a definition of discourse that accounts for both an alternate location for psychological 
phenomena and a more dynamic view of reality as presently in the process of being changed 
and constructed.
From a DP perspective, then, subjective and objective reality are linguistically organized; if 
we want to gain insights about them, the problematic move is to reify them – to take them out 
of their primary discursive location. If we want to best understand them, we have to understand 
their role in both the local interactional context, typically overlooked by critical and traditional 
approaches alike, and the broader historical and political context of any given interaction, for it 
is here that they become what we understand them to be.
Conclusion: response to the internal debates
This chapter has attempted to present the case for a deconstructive approach to critical psychol-
ogy. As we have shown, Derrida’s philosophy has currently been drawn on in certain limited 
ways in constructionist and critical work. Critical psychologists have typically fluctuated between 
positions that are deconstructive and anti-deconstructive, or, more broadly, post-structuralist and 
realist/materialist.
However, the sheer difficulty of Derrida’s writing is not to be underestimated. This is not so 
much to do with the technical complexity of Derrida’s ideas (which is a challenge in itself ), but  
in capturing and explaining them in a way that is both clear and accurate. In setting out our 
arguments, we have encountered real problems of institutional boundaries, and of what the very 
term of ‘deconstruction’ is taken to mean across these boundaries.
In its initial Derridean form, deconstruction originated as a form of criticism of the tradition 
of Western philosophy – especially of the cherished metaphysical assumptions concerning the 

Deconstruction
303
nature of the human being that this tradition protects. And yet, Derridean deconstruction has 
never really been popular in philosophy departments, and has instead flourished in literature 
departments where it has become a powerful form of literary theory. As literary theory, decon-
struction does not therefore concern itself so much with the critique of the assumptions of 
Western metaphysics, and instead becomes hailed as a form of experimental and creative writ-
ing. In literary theory, deconstruction has a certain ‘stylistic ambition’ (Bennington 2000: 181), 
which appears to involve creating hyperbolic paradoxical formulations in the process of making 
textual criticisms of another’s work. The problem with literary deconstruction from a more 
philosophical interpretation of Derrida’s work (Clark 2013) is therefore that the whole raison 
d’être of Derrida’s thought has become marginalized.
Then deconstruction transfers into the social sciences: how is this meant to work, when, 
unlike the humanities (especially philosophy and literature), the social sciences have the addi-
tional problem of needing to appear scientific by collecting some form of localized data and 
analyzing it according to some form of empirical method? We have argued that the issue here is 
the creation of methods that are consistent with the theoretical arguments. It is at this level, the 
level of ideas, that deconstruction is a useful player in the field of critical psychology. That said, 
both Parker, Burman et al. and Hepburn, Potter et al. would nonetheless claim deconstruction 
as an ally in their form of critical psychology. As we’ve noted, Parker, Burman, and colleagues 
take deconstruction as merely a critical theoretical tool, hence the need to create a notion of 
‘practical deconstruction’. This loses the more philosophical side to deconstruction, where it 
questions metaphysical assumptions.
The call for a ‘practical deconstruction’ in critical psychology no doubt arises from the 
notions of politics, democracy, and justice in Derrida’s writing, such as his recent consideration 
of Marxism (Derrida 1994). On the one hand, Derrida rejects recent attempts to exorcise the 
spirit of Marx by those espousing the ideals of liberal democracy. On the other hand, Derrida 
also rejects some of the central tenets of Marxism, notably the notion that ideology can be ban-
ished through the science of historical materialism. Marx’s notion that the world must be freed 
from the unreal ideological spectres that produce real effects is shown to be reliant on notions 
of presence and ontology that Derrida’s work subverts. For many this means that Derrida’s work 
does not provide the basis for ideology critique, and yet we have argued that Derrida’s work can 
provide strong foundations for a critical psychology. Our argument has been that it can have 
profound implications for the discipline in the way the ‘person’ or ‘individual’ is conceptualized 
and made into knowable phenomena, as a radical reconceptualization of language and discourse, 
and as a way of understanding the texts of psychology and the construction of psychological 
truths as a form of writing.
In contrast, the discursive psychological view of deconstruction engages with its more philo-
sophical side, and the social constructionist view that would have language as actively construct-
ing reality rather than passively mirroring it would appear to be in line with a certain version of 
Derrida’s thought. However, these links are typically not made and their theoretical implications 
for critical psychology are little more than promissory notes.
In true deconstructive style, however, what remains are a series of inconclusive questions: 
what are the issues that will confront psychologists after they have started to take deconstruction 
seriously? What does a post-deconstructive psychology look like? For example, if psychologists 
finally cease to take the reproduction of mental terms in everyday life as evidence for their exist-
ence as causal entities, will psychology then turn into textual analysis? What methods and topics 
are appropriate for psychology? What forms of rhetoric and figuration does psychology employ? 
Answers to these questions lie in further developments of critical approaches in psychology, and 
of deconstruction itself.

Andrew Clark and Alexa Hepburn
304
Further reading
Hepburn, A. (1999) ‘Derrida and psychology: deconstruction and its ab/uses in critical and discursive psy-
chologies’, Theory & Psychology, 9(5), 641–667.
Hepburn, A. (2003) An Introduction to Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage. Especially chapters 6–9.
Parker, I., and Shotter, J. (eds) (1990) Deconstructing Social Psychology. London: Routledge.
Parker, I., Georgaca, E., Harper, D., McLaughlin, T., and Stowell-Smith, M. (1995) Deconstructing Psychopa-
thology. London: Sage.
Website resources
Bibliography of publications by Jacques Derrida: Contains bibliographies of texts and interviews by Jacques 
Derrida, ordered both chronologically (by publication year) and alphabetically (by title). It also contains 
links to bibliographies listing works about Derrida: http://hydra.humanities.uci.edu/derrida/jdind.
html
References
Bennington, G. (2000) Interrupting Derrida. London: Routledge.
Burman, E. (1990) ‘Differing with deconstruction: a feminist critique’ in I. Parker and J. Shotter (eds) 
Deconstructing Social Psychology. London: Routledge.
Burman, E. (1994) Deconstructing Developmental Psychology. London: Routledge.
Burman, E. (ed.) (1998) Deconstructing Feminist Psychology. London: Sage.
Clark, A. (2011) The Death of the other: paradoxes of subjectivity in Derrida’s autobiographical thought’ Doctoral 
dissertation, University of Portsmouth, UK.
Clark, A. (2013) ‘The death of the other: on Derrida’s conceptualisation of autobiography’, Journal for Cul-
tural Research, 17 (3), 279–294.
Cromby, J. and Nightingale, D. J. (1999) ‘What’s wrong with social constructionism’, Social constructionist 
psychology: A critical analysis of theory and practice, 1–19.
Derrida, J. (1974) Of Grammatology. Baltimore, London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Derrida, J. (1988) Limited Inc. Evanston: Northwestern University.
Derrida, J. (1994) Specters of Marx: the State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning and the New International. Lon-
don and New York: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (1965) Madness and Civilization. New York: Pantheon.
Foucault, M. (1970) The Order of Things. New York: Vintage.
Foucault, M. (1973) The Birth of the Clinic. London: Tavistock.
Heidegger, M. (1927/1962) Being and Time. New York: Harper.
Hepburn, A. (1999) ‘Derrida and psychology: deconstruction and its ab/uses in critical and discursive psy-
chologies’, Theory & Psychology, 9(5), 641–667.
Hepburn, A. (2000a) ‘On the alleged incompatibility between feminism and relativism’, Feminism and Psy-
chology, 10(1), 91–106.
Hepburn, A. (2000b) ‘Power lines: Derrida, discursive psychology and the management of accusations of 
school bullying’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 605–628.
Hepburn, A. (2002) ‘Figuring gender in teachers’ talk about school bullying’, in P. McIlvenny (ed.) Talking 
Gender and Sexuality. Amsterdam: Benjamin.
Hepburn, A. (2003) An Introduction to Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Hepburn, A. (2006) ‘Getting closer at a distance: theory and the contingencies of practice’, Theory & Psy-
chology, (16)3, 325–342.
Hepburn, A. and Jackson, C. (2009) ‘Rethinking subjectivity: a discursive psychological approach to cogni-
tion and emotion’, in D. Fox, I. Prilleltensky, and S. Austin (eds) An Introduction to Critical Psychology(2nd 
Edn). London: Sage.
Ibáñez, T. and Íñiguez, L. (eds) (1997) Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Parker, I. (1999) ‘Against relativism in psychology, on balance’, History of the Human Sciences, 12(4), 61–78.
Parker, I. (2005) Qualitative Psychology: Introducing Radical Research. New York: McGraw-Hill International.
Parker, I., Georgaca, E., Harper, D., McLaughlin, T. and Stowell-Smith, M. (1995) Deconstructing Psychopa-
thology. London: Sage.
Parker, I., and Shotter, J. (eds) (1990) Deconstructing Social Psychology. London: Routledge.

Deconstruction
305
Potter, J. (1996) Representing Reality: Discourse, Rhetoric and Social Construction. London: Sage.
Rorty, R. (1980) Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sampson, E. (1990) ‘Social psychology in social control’, in I. Parker and J. Shotter (eds) Deconstructing Social 
Psychology. London: Routledge.
Searle, J. R. (1977) ‘Reiterating the differences’, Glyph, 2, 199–208.
Stokoe, E., Hepburn, A. and Antaki, C. (2012) ‘Beware the “Loughborough School”? Interaction and the 
politics of intervention’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 51(3), 486–496.

306
To read Deleuze in direct relation to psychology without some degree of theoretical violence 
requires several degrees of mediation. Without this, one can run the risk of reductive and oppor-
tunistic appropriation of bits and fragments of his corpus that violates the integrity of the project 
as a whole. That is to say, it would be to replicate what traditional psychology as a field has done 
to almost all the philosophers it has encountered.
Deleuze is first and foremost a philosopher. His philosophical project had little, if anything 
to do with psychology per se, at least up until 1968. The bulk of his work was to extend and 
clarify philosophies and philosophers of immanence. In his book co-authored with Felix 
Guattari (1994: 32), What is Philosophy?, the work of the philosopher is defined as the crea-
tion of concepts, which they specify as, ‘the contour, the configuration, the constellation of 
an event to come’. The creation of the concept by the philosopher, as an event to come is 
profoundly related ‘to our problems, to our history, and, above all, to our becomings’ (27). This 
has deep implications for the ways in which Deleuze’s philosophical interests will intersect 
with and engage the problems of his historical moment and the possibilities of revolutionary 
becoming.
Psychology, philosophy, and politics
Of course, one could argue that philosophy and psychology are intertwined in many ways, and 
certainly Deleuze’s philosophical work has powerful implications for key questions in psychol-
ogy pertinent to the constructions of subjectivity and consciousness. His works on Spinoza 
(1988b, 1990a), Bergson (1988a), Leibnitz (1993), Nietzsche (2006), Bacon (2003) and in The 
Logic of Sense (Deleuze 1990b) are rich in the development of conceptual frameworks that have 
a direct implications for what might be called the ‘minor’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987) (not part 
of the major or dominant) branches of psychology such as humanistic, critical, or transpersonal 
psychology. His work on transcendental empiricism (Deleuze 1994, Deleuze and Guattari 1994) 
and his challenges to the claims of science as the ultimate arbiter of what is true (Deleuze and 
Guattari 1994), also hold important implications for the development of psychology as a scien-
tific discipline and can provide support for those who would critique, at a minimum, the role of 
science in offering insight into human striving, struggles, and dilemmas.
32
Deleuzian perspectives
Schizoanalysis and the politics of desire
Hans Skott-Myhre

Deleuzian perspectives
307
However, there is a significant deepening of his engagement with psychology after the 
events of May 1968 in Paris. Consistent with his proposal that the development of concepts 
are tied to the historical conditions in which they arise, the worldwide revolt in the late 
1960s against the emerging force of global capitalism marks a shift in both his focus and 
overt level of political analysis and engagement. Indeed, one could argue that these events 
provide precisely the mediation necessary to bring the work of the philosopher Deleuze into 
an engagement with the political that opens on to the common field of interest with critical 
psychology. In this regard, it is in his work with the Lacanian analyst, anti-psychiatrist, and 
political activist Felix Guattari that Deleuze’s work takes on areas of interest that are directly 
pertinent to critical psychology. Most particularly, this is the task, in the work with Guattari, 
in the two volumes on Capitalism and Schizophrenia: Anti-Oedipus and A Thousand Plateaus 
(2004, 1987).
In this dense, complex, and multilayered double text, Deleuze and Guattari engage the ques-
tion of capitalism, subjectivity, and revolutionary politics. They extend, challenge, revise and 
trouble the field of theory that comprises the world of countercultural politics in the late sixties 
and early seventies. Existentialism, phenomenology, systems theory, semiotics, neuro-biology, 
and structuralism are undertaken in turn, among others. The central engagement, however, is 
with psychoanalysis and Marxism. In keeping with Marx, this is an investigation of the ways in 
which capitalism operates as a system of global rule. In keeping with psychoanalysis, the inves-
tigation of capitalism cannot be undertaken without an understanding of both the unconscious 
and the question of desire.
The writings of Deleuze and Guattari are, without a doubt, an incisive critique of capitalism 
that contain radical proposals for resistance and revolt against ruling systems in general and cap-
italism in particular. In addition, they extend and critique key theorists and thinkers in psychoa-
nalysis including Freud, Klein, Reich, and Lacan, among others. The question remains, however, 
as to what degree their work is constituted as a sympathetic outside to critical psychology or 
operates within the same theoretical frameworks and parameters.
Critical psychology can be conceptualized as functioning as a particular instance of the 
broader field of critical theory. In this sense, it brings a critique of social structures and functions, 
such as psychology, drawing on theoretical frameworks concerned with questions of human 
liberation and bondage (Horkheimer 1982). Given this definition, we can easily locate the work 
of Deleuze and Guattari within the general field of critical theory. Indeed, Michel Foucault’s 
introduction to Anti-Oedipus states that ‘Anti-Oedipus is an introduction to the Non-Fascist 
Life’ (xiii). Deleuze and Guattari’s concern in Anti-Oedipus is to rethink psychoanalysis outside 
any possibility of bourgeois appropriation or deployment by the state. As Foucault puts it in the 
introduction to Anti-Oedipus,
Informed by the seemingly abstract notions of multiplicities, flows, arrangements, and con-
nections, the analysis of the relationship of desire to reality and to the capitalist ‘machine’ 
yields answers to concrete questions. Questions that are less concerned with why this or 
that than how to proceed. How does one introduce desire into thought, into discourse, into 
action? How can and must desire deploy its forces within the political domain and grow 
more intense in the process of overturning the established order.
(2004: xii)
Anti-Oedipus is written as a savage critique of what is perceived as the missteps and betrayals 
of the revolutionary possibilities of psychoanalysis and by extension psychology by ‘the poor 
technicians of desire – psychoanalysts and semiologists of every sign and symptom – who would  

Hans Skott-Myhre
308
subjugate the multiplicity of desire to the two fold law of structure and lack’ (Foucault 2004: 
xii–xiii).
As a critique, the work of Deleuze and Guattari would seem to operate well within the 
theoretical parameters of critical theory, and as a specific critique of psychoanalysis and psy-
chology within the corpus of critical psychology. However, there is another dimension to the 
term critical here that must be accounted for if we are to welcome Deleuze and Guattari into 
the theoretical collectivity that constitutes critical psychology. This is the question of critical 
theory as a specifically Marxist enterprise. The question of whether this simultaneous critique 
and revision of Marxist theory and method places them outside any claim to being Marxist, 
is, for our purposes here, perhaps beside the point. Clearly, as far as critical psychology is con-
cerned, Deleuze as well as Deleuze and Guattari are sufficiently, if contrarily, engaged in the 
discourse of critical theory in ways that are hold significant interest for those psychologists 
wishing to critically engage the dominant field of psychology on a political and philosophical 
footing.
Deleuze, Guattari, and critical psychology
Specifically, in what ways do Deleuze/Deleuze and Guattari take up concepts and key issues 
pertinent to the field of psychology? Again, we find ourselves slightly to the side of the dom-
inant trends in contemporary dominant psychology. Deleuze as a philosopher took up certain 
concepts and ideas drawn directly from dominant psychology, such as the individual, conscious-
ness, subjectivity, neurosis, psychosis, masochism, and psychopathology, among others. However, 
the approach to these issues is philosophical, not psychological, which is not to say there are 
not implications for psychology. Psychology is simply not his interlocutor or target. He is com-
menting on these things on his way to somewhere else. As we have noted, this shifts when he 
collaborates on work with Guattari. However, even here, the engagement is not directly with 
the dominant trends in contemporary psychology, but instead with psychoanalysis and psy-
choanalytically derived psychiatric thinking and practice. One might argue that these were the 
dominant trends of his time and geographical location in France, but that would be to imagine a 
very narrow and provincial theoretical field, something belied by the most cursory examination 
of the bibliographic scope of the two volumes of Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Instead, it might 
be more accurate to conceive of Deleuze’s encounter with psychology in the same way he 
approached various philosophers. That is, to seek those with whom he had an affinity and then 
read them into his own project. In this sense, the decision to read psychoanalysis and particularly 
Lacan might be thought of in this way.
The engagement with Lacan takes place through a critique of Freud and, specifically, the ways 
in which the family is centred in the Oedipal complex. Deleuze and Guattari (2004) follow 
Marx (1978) and Engels (1978) in the Marxist assertion that the family is an integral component 
of and model for all forms of domination and control. The title of their text Anti-Oedipus is an 
obvious indicator of the ground upon which they will engage the Freudian project. However, 
while their critique of familialism is both cogent and targeted, it is the engagement with desire 
that sets the tone for their interrogation of psychoanalysis/psychology/psychiatry.
To understand the way in which desire is undertaken by Delezue and Guattari in 
Anti-Oedipus, it is important to fully account for the impact of the philosopher Spinoza in the 
work of Deleuze and Guattari. To state that Spinoza is the nearly absent, but thoroughly imma-
nent, source of production in their work in Anti-Oedipus is somewhat of an understatement. It 
is Spinoza and his production of the concept of immanence that is the ghost in the machine. 
We know from other texts how important Spinoza is for Deleuze (1988b, 1990a) and also for 

Deleuzian perspectives
309
Deleuze and Guattari (1994) writing together. Indeed, in What is Philosophy?, they refer to 
Spinoza as,
The Christ of philosophers and the greatest philosophers are hardly more than apostles 
who distance themselves from or draw near to this mystery. Spinoza the infinite becoming 
philosopher: he showed, drew up and thought the ‘best’ plane of immanence-that is the 
purest, the one that does not hand itself over to transcendence or restore and transcendent, 
the one that inspires the fewest illusions, bad feelings and erroneous perceptions.
(60)
As we can see from this passage, it is Spinoza as the philosopher of immanence, who is of pro-
found interest to Deleuze and Guattari. And it is a philosophical adherence to immanence that 
will saturate, mutate, and confound each psychoanalytic concept, psychiatric category, and psy-
chological proposition they encounter.
Of course, this is not without foundation in Spinoza’s own writings. Book IV of the Eth-
ics (Spinoza 2000) has been noted as containing its own psychological and even neurological 
accounting of human motivations and behaviours (Damasio 2004; Yovel 1999). The Spinozist 
accounting of immanence as life itself producing itself without any form of transcendent out-
side informs both Deleuze and Guattari’s accounting of psychoanalysis and their extension of 
the work of psychoanalysis in relation to Marx and modes of life as production that exceed 
the capacity of capitalism to fully encompass or dominate. Mark Seem, in his introduction to 
Anti-Oedipus, remarks,
Everything in Marx and Freud that has to do with how things and desires actually flow will 
be kept and added to the infernal machine . . . This political analysis of desire, this schizoa- 
nalysis becomes a mighty tool where schizophrenia as a process – the schiz – serves as a point  
of departure as well as a point of destination.
(2004: xix)
Certainly, this is where they begin in the opening passages of Anti-Oedipus with what they 
term ‘desiring machines’. The opening subtitle conflates Marx, Freud, and Lacan in the phrase 
‘Desiring-Production’ (1). We are plunged without warning into an ecology of immanent pro-
duction within the first paragraph of the text. ‘It is at work everywhere. Functioning smoothly 
at times, at other times in fits and starts. It breathes, it heats, it eats. It shits and fucks. What a 
mistake to have ever said the id’ (1).
Deleuze and Guattari start with the force of life per se as immanent production. Raw desire 
is not centred in the individualized psychoanalytic structure of the id. Rather it is impersonal 
and machinic. ‘Everywhere it is machines – real ones, not figurative ones: machines driving 
other machines, with all the necessary couplings and connections’ (1). Life here is pure produc-
tion without the mediation of the symbolic. There is nothing figurative, nothing that stands for 
something else. ‘The breast is a machine that produces milk, and the mouth a machine coupled 
to it. The mouth of the anorexic wavers between several functions: its possessor is uncertain as 
to whether it is an eating machine, an anal machine, a talking machine, or a breathing machine 
(asthma attacks)’ (1). The partial objects of the psychoanalytic tradition and their symbolic asso-
ciations are opened here to a literal ecology of lived capacity. As Deleuze (1988b) has noted, the 
project here is an ethological one, that is to say, a concern with the capacity of an organism in its 
interactions with other organisms. However, one must be cautious that one does not inadvert-
ently nominalize what is essentially a process of becoming rather than an identification of being.

Hans Skott-Myhre
310
The ‘subject’ and language
The role of the subject, as noted in these early pages of text, but consistent throughout the 
Deleuzo-Guattarian corpus, is that, ‘we are all little handymen; each with his little machines’ (1). 
Each of these machines produces real effects, not symbols or metaphors. This is not to say that sym-
bols and metaphors are not productions, but for Deleuze and Guattari they do not have the capac-
ity to directly or indirectly represent the productions of life. Instead, as Deleuze and Guattari (2004: 
76) point out in the second volume of Capitalism and Schizophrenia, A Thousand Plateaus, symbols 
and metaphors, as the stuff of language, are part of what they call the world of the ‘order word’.
Language, they tell us, has no direct involvement with life except in so far as it commands, 
orders, and structures what life has already produced. Each ‘order word’ carries what they call 
a ‘little death sentence’ (76). A death sentence, because language in ordering, structuring, and 
commanding the effects of the machinery of life itself forecloses the dynamic living force of 
desire and appears to produce living force as a transcendent outside to itself. Language does not 
communicate information about the world; it produces a map that claims, but fails, to encompass 
the territory described.
One can imagine the implications for such an assertion in terms of the centrality of language 
to psychoanalysis and the descriptive worlds of psychiatry and psychology. For Deleuze and 
Guattari, linguistic exercises that make claims that language is able to reveal the world or accu-
rately represent it are riddled with prefigured social forms and obligations that pre-order and 
structure the outcomes of such claims in micro- or macro-fascistic forms. The interpretation 
of the world through metaphors and symbols is a specific instance of this process. Life is not 
symbolic, nor can it be represented symbolically or metaphorically. This is why they will claim 
in relation to the famous case of Freud that, ‘Judge Schreber feels something, produces some-
thing, and is capable of explaining the process theoretically. Something is produced: the effects 
of a machine, not mere metaphors’ (2004: 2). It is this focus on production as immanent to itself 
that is one of the features of delirium that they argue is consonant with Marx’s insights into the 
relationship between capital and the division of labour.
What the schizophrenic experiences, both as an individual and as a member of the human 
species, is not at all any one aspect of nature, but nature as a process of production . . . 
within society [a] characteristic man-nature, industry-nature, society-nature relationship is 
responsible for the distinction of relatively autonomous spheres that are called production, 
distribution, consumption. But . . . this entire level of distinctions . . . presupposes (as Marx 
has demonstrated) not only the existence of capital and the division of labour, but also the 
false consciousness that the capitalist being necessarily acquires . . . For the real truth of the 
matter – the glaring sober truth that resides in delirium – is that there is no such thing 
as relatively independent spheres or circuits; production is immediately consumption and 
a recording process without any mediation, and the recording process and consumption 
directly determine production.
(2004: 4)
Deleuze and Guattari’s engagement with schizophrenia and delirium elucidates madness as 
the kind of process that simultaneously demonstrates and operates in contradistinction to the 
dependence of capitalism on binary codes that function to divide the living world of produc-
tion into appropriable units. It should be made clear that they have no romanticized notion of 
what it means to be a schizophrenic. They refer to the schizophrenic as an artificial social effect 
of blocking the process of schizophrenic thought and instead of deploying it as a passageway 

Deleuzian perspectives
311
through or out of modes of dominance or control, mistaking it as a goal in and of itself. Madness, 
like love, they say, referencing D. H. Lawrence, becomes distorted when pushed from a process 
into a goal. ‘Schizophrenia is like love: there is no specifically schizophrenic phenomenon or 
entity; schizophrenia is the universe of productive and reproductive desiring machines, universal 
production as “the essential reality of man and nature” ’ (2004: 5).
The question then becomes: what exactly is desire? Here, again, they follow Spinoza and his 
work on affects. For Spinoza and for Deleuze, affects are ‘forces that things exert on other things.  
These forces, in turn, become actualized so long as they find a purchase on those other  
things’ (Tiessen 2012: 13). Massumi (2002) argues that it is through affects that experience is 
initiated in the individual. It is through our relations with other bodies that we discover our own 
capacities to think and act. In this sense, our ability to express is not rooted in a foundational 
self with an interiority and history that requires expression. Instead, expression is founded in 
the encounter between bodies, each of which has an indeterminate ability to elicit capacities 
for thought or action from the other. The process of expression is simultaneously the product 
of, and is always engaged in, an infinite web of production composed of all bodies from the 
subatomic particle to galaxies. For our purposes here, however, it means that the notion of a psy-
chological, bounded, ego-managed self, no longer constitutes an adequate ground from which 
to draw a reasonable theory of emotion or cognitive function.
This portrayal of affect as a collision between bodies that elicits the capacities of each, as a 
particular instance of a much broader ecology of expression extending infinitely in all direc-
tions simultaneously, offers us an insight into the world of machines and social productions seen 
through the lens of immanence. Affect, described this way, opens the door to an understanding 
of the realm of pre-linguistic machinic production. This, Tiessan (2012: 16) tells us, proposes 
affect as the pre-linguistic ‘enabler of all that follows, of all instances of being affected’. Affect 
comes before language and is the ground out of which the capacity for expression, in both 
act and thought, arise. However, language, then, does not originate from within the individual 
subject, but passes through the subject, simultaneously constituting the parameters of who we 
are and what we imagine is possible. Language is impersonal and we do not choose the words 
we speak. Massumi (2002) states that, ‘The force of expression strikes the body first, directly and 
unmediatedly, [from there it passes], transformatively through the flesh before being instantiated 
in subject-positions subsumed by a system of power’ (xviii).
Key here are two elements: (1) the element of affective force as passage and (2) the element 
of systemic structural power as blockage. This relation of what Deleuze and Guattari call ter-
ritorializing and deterritorializing vectors of force will comprise a central theme throughout 
their work. Desire for them is always connective and transitional. Desiring machines operate 
in couplets, one machine coupled to another. ‘Desire always couples continuous flows and 
partial objects that are by nature fragmentary and fragmented. Desire causes the current to 
flow, itself flows in turn, and breaks flows’ (Deleuze and Guattari 2004: 5). In this reading, 
desire does not arise from within the subject, but passes through the subject both constituting 
it as a mode of expressive capacities and providing the passage between bodies that allows 
for a machinic assemblage of force that leads to what Spinoza (2000) terms greater or lesser 
degrees of power of action or thought. In this radically non-dialectic formulation of desire, 
there is nothing lacking. The effects of desire are continuously and infinitely productive of 
actuality as absolute affirmation of living force. The entire reading of desire as lack or need 
is radically refuted. In its place is the real as the product of desire. ‘The real is not impossible; 
on the contrary, within the real everything becomes possible. Desire does not express a molar 
lack within the subject; rather the molar organization deprives desire of its objective being’ 
(Deleuze and Guattari 2004: 27).

Hans Skott-Myhre
312
Deleuze and Guattari refer to what they call ‘Lacan’s admirable theory of desire’ (2004: 27), 
which they propose as having two poles, one positing desire as the small object a as machinic 
desire without any trace of lack or need and without reference to fantasy. The other pole they 
suggest is comprised of the ‘great Other’ which as signifier ‘reintroduces a certain notion of 
lack’. These two poles oscillate between one another. In Deleuze and Guattari it is just such an 
oscillation that bypasses the dialectic, as the process of oscillation is complete within itself and 
not premised in lack produced by an absent outside.
Capitalism and desire
Desire then, is constitutive of the real and lack ‘is created, planned and organized in and through 
social production . . . The deliberate creation of lack as a function of the market economy is the 
art of dominant class’ (Deleuze and Guattari 2004: 28). The relation of lack and desire as forces 
of territorialization and deterritorialization is central to their analysis of capitalism. Tracing the 
Marx of the German Ideology they trace the production of the socius or social machine from 
the primitive horde with its chieftains to the regimes of the despot and finally onto the social 
terrain of capitalism. They propose that capitalism as a system that was founded on the ‘ruins of 
despotic state . . . find itself in a totally new situation’ (Deleuze and Guattari 2004: 33). Previous 
regimes have relied on the process, noted above, of codifying the flows of desire ‘to inscribe 
them, to record them, to see to it that no flow exists that is not properly damned up, channeled, 
regulated’ (Deleuze and Guattari 2004: 33). Capitalism is premised on decoding the social in 
such a way that it can be recoded on the empty signifier of the money form. This is only a faux 
territorialization as the money sign. Because, as Hardt (1995) points out, capitalism, through the 
deployment of the money sign, eviscerates and empties social forms. Capitalism, unlike previ-
ous social forms, cannot provide a totalizing social code for the socius, as its very function is to 
decode the socius and open fields of desire. However, these flows of desire are opened onto a 
field of absolute abstraction that holds the ultimate capacity for social dissolution. This is what 
they propose creates capitalism as a form of schizophrenia, which they identify as the ‘malady of 
our time’ (Deleuze and Guattari 2004: 34).
This psychotic process of capitalist decoding and deterritorializing of the socius always 
presses against its own productive force as limit. Capitalism as production accumulates what 
Deleuze and Guattari refer to as ‘an awesome schizophrenic accumulation of energy or charge’ 
that it must use all of its force to repress and contain for fear that it will undo itself as a social 
form. Following Marx’s twofold tendency to the failing rate of profit, to increases of quantity of 
surplus value, Deleuze and Guattari posit a twofold movement of decoding and deterritorializ-
ing to ‘violent and artificial reterritorializing’ (2004: 34).
The political proposal that arises from this analysis is to engage desire in a schizophrenic 
process that seeks the limits of capitalism and scrambles the codes into decoded flows of living 
desire as opposed to capitalism’s abstract decoding. The process for this is proposed in their 
concept of schizoanalysis, upon which they propose to recuperate the field of psychoanalysis 
as a revolutionary project. They begin with proposal that madness and delirium originate, not 
in the individual unconscious or historical family traumas of unmet needs or lack, but in an 
‘investment of a field that is social, economic, political, cultural, racial and racist, pedagogical and 
religious’. (2004: 274) The family is only a specific function of the ‘unconscious investments of 
the social field.’ (2004:274–75) This social field they suggest is comprised of various forms of 
mad social investment. Of these two major types are significant: (1) paranoiac fascisizing which 
invests in centralizing forms of sovereignty and paranoiac formations of social exclusion of out-
side others and (2) alternatively, schizorevolutionaries that open lines of escape founded in the 

Deleuzian perspectives
313
force of desire as passage and connectivity, operating under the surface of the dominant system 
of coding and decoding. The schizorevolutionary group operates at the edges or peripheries of 
the dominant social and comprises what Deleuze and Guattari refer to as the minoritarian or 
minor force. The use of minor or minority here is not numeric, but refers to the constitutive 
capacity of the schizorevolutionary to oppose and provide alternative to the majoritarian system 
of rule.
The two poles oscillate (à la the reading noted above of Lacan’s theory of desire) within the 
unconscious, sometimes breaking free through revolutionary force and at other times succumb-
ing to internal fascistic impulses. This oscillation forms the ground of schizoanalysis.
Conclusion: towards schizoanalysis
Deleuze and Guattari state that the negative task of schizoanalysis is to form a critique of psychi-
atry that challenges the social alienation inherent in the deterritorializations of capitalism which 
lead to mental alienation and perversity, madness, and neurosis. In short, they propose extending 
the concerns of anti-psychiatry into a thorough politicization of psychiatry (and psychology). 
Such a politics would comprise disconnecting madness from mental illness and connecting it 
to ‘all of the other flows, including science and art’ (2004: 321). This would breach the limits of 
madness, allowing it to be ‘overcome by the means of the other flows escaping control on all 
sides and carrying us along’ (2004: 321).
To do this, Deleuze and Guattari propose a series of positive tasks for schizoanalysis. First, the 
discovery of one’s own desiring machines ‘independent of any interpretations’ (2004: 322). The 
elements of such machines are to be found in the functionality and productivity of the assem-
bling of partial objects in such a way that they disturb the boundary between conscious social 
arrangements and the unconscious. Second, psychoanalysis, they propose, ‘should be a song of 
life or else worth nothing at all’ (2004: 331). They reference Reich and note that he had it right 
when he claimed that ‘the product of analysis should be a free and joyous person, a carrier of 
life flows, capable of carrying them all the way into the desert and decoding them’ (2004: 332) 
Reich referred to the development of a ‘revolutionary preconscious investment [that] bears 
upon new aims, new social syntheses, a new power’ (2004: 347). It is perhaps in their proposal 
for schizoanalysis that Deleuze and Guattari most directly and powerfully bring Deleuze’s phil-
osophical project into the flow of desire that constitutes critical psychology. In their reconceptu-
alization of the intersections of psychology, capitalism, psychoanalysis, and revolutionary politics, 
they offer a unique and idiosyncratic approach to the set of problems and contestations faced by 
psychologists living within the regimes of capitalist rule.
Further reading
For an introduction to Deleuzian concepts, the Sheilds and Vallee edited book Demystifying 
Deleuze is a good starting point. Also good is: Holland, E. W. (2002) Deleuze and Guattari’s 
Anti-Oedipus: Introduction to Schizoanalysis. Routledge. For a practical example of how these 
perspectives play out: Skott-Myhre, H. (2009) Youth and Subculture as Creative Force: Creating New 
Spaces for Radical Youth Work. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Website resources
http://www.langlab.wayne.edu/cstivale/d-g/
http://www.generation-online.org/p/pdeleuzeguattari.htm

Hans Skott-Myhre
314
References
Damasio, A. R. (2004) Looking for Spinoza: Joy, Sorrow, and the Feeling Brain. New York: Random House.
Deleuze, G. (1988a). Bergsonism, trans. H. Tomlinson and B. Habberjam. New York: Zone.
Deleuze, G. (1988b) Spinoza: Practical Philosophy. San Francisco: City Lights Books.
Deleuze, G. (1990a) Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza. New York: Zone Books.
Deleuze, G. (1990b) The Logic of Sense. New York: Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G. (1993) The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque. Minnepolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, G. (1994) Difference and Repetition. New York: Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G. (2003) Francis Bacon: the Logic of Sensation. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, G. (2006) Nietzsche and Philosophy. New York: Continuum International Publishing Group.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1987) A Thousand Plateus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, Volume 2. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1994) What is Philosophy? New York: Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (2004) Anti-Oedipus. New York: Continuum International Publishing Group.
Engels, F. (1978) The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. Moscow: Foreign Languages Pub-
lishing House.
Foucault, M. (2004) Preface. In G. Deleuze and F. Guattari, Anti-Oedipus. New York: Continuum 
International Publishing Group.
Hardt, M. (1995) ‘The withering of civil society’, Social Text, (45), 27–44.
Horkheimer, M. (1982) Critical Theory. New York: Continuum.
Marx, K. (1978) ‘The German ideology part one.’ The Marx-Engels Reader. New York: Norton.
Massumi, B. (2002) A Shock to Thought: Expression after Deleuze and Guattari. New York: Routledge.
Spinoza, B. (2000) Ethics. Oxford: Oxford Press.
Tiessen, M. (2012) ‘Affects’, in R. Shields and M. Vallee (eds) Demystifying Deleuze: an Introductory Assemblage 
of Crucial Concepts. Ottowa: Red Quill Books.
Yovel, Y. (1999) Desire and Affect: Spinoza as Psychologist; Papers Presented at the Third Jerusalem Conference (Eth-
ica III), Volume 2. New York: Little Room Press.

315
This chapter focuses on discursive research and its links with critical psychology. Discourse 
approaches emerged in social psychology in the UK in the 1980s, along with the first inti-
mations of critical psychology. Indeed, there was a lot of overlap in the early years, especially 
in the key proponents. Both intellectual movements were a response to the sense of crisis and 
dead ends experienced in the 1970s in social psychology (Parker 1989). Key early texts in 
discursive research included Changing the Subject (Henriques et al. 1984/1998), Discourse and 
Social Psychology (Potter and Wetherell 1987), Arguing and Thinking (Billig 1987), and Common 
Knowledge (Edwards and Mercer 1987). The ‘turn to language’ these and subsequent texts ini-
tiated in psychology drew creatively and generatively on larger intellectual developments such 
as post-structuralism and postmodernism, Foucault’s analyses of knowledge/power, theories 
of ideology, Lacan’s thinking, microsociology and social constructionism, conversation analy-
sis and ethnomethodology, ancient studies of rhetoric, the sociology of science, Rom Harre’s 
ethogenics, speech act theory, and Wittgensteinian philosophy. Discursive work was exciting 
and liberating at a point where social psychology was almost entirely dominated by experi-
mental research in laboratories, or quantitative questionnaires and surveys. It offered new ways 
of working with people’s meaning-making and with their talk and texts focused directly on 
everyday life.
It is probably fair to say that, now, critical psychology has a love/hate relationship with 
discourse studies – perhaps still with more love than hate. For many critical psychologists, it 
remains the case that discourse theory and analysis offer the most robust epistemological and 
methodological alternatives to mainstream psychology, the most effective interrogations of the 
individualism and conservatism of conventional psychology, and the best means of revealing the 
startling constitutive power of psy-techniques in capitalist and neoliberal social formations. For 
many, discursive research remains the preeminent route reconnecting the subject of psychology 
with social relations. But, for a number of critical psychologists, discursive research has also ulti-
mately disappointed. It has been accused of re-establishing new orthodoxies (Billig 2012; Parker 
2012), being too relativistic (Parker 1992), presenting smoothed out versions of the conflicted 
and apparently incommunicable aspects of subjectivities (Frosh 1999; Hollway and Jefferson 
2005), and not sufficiently engaging with the material and sensuous aspects of human social 
relations (Brown et al. 2009; Maiers 2001; Willig 2007).
33
Discursive psychology
Key tenets, some splits, and two examples
Margaret Wetherell

Margaret Wetherell
316
In this brief review, I will be defining the field of discourse studies pretty broadly. Discursive 
research in psychology is a rapidly evolving stream, now one with many tributaries. It includes 
the discursive psychology developed by Potter and Edwards (Edwards 1997; Edwards and 
Potter 1992; Potter 1996;), the most sustained research enterprise in the field. There is also the 
tradition of work on rhetoric, argument, and dilemma inspired by Billig and his colleagues (e.g. 
Billig 1991; Billig et al. 1988), and my own and other related research in what is sometimes 
called critical discursive psychology (e.g. Durrheim and Dixon 2004; Edley 2001; Wetherell 
1998, 2007). There are lines of discursive research closely aligned to conversation analysis (e.g. 
Antaki and Widdicombe 1998; Kitzinger 2000; Speer and Stokoe 2011), lines more engaged 
with post-structuralist discourse theories (e.g. Gavey 1989; Parker 1992; Rose 1998; Walker-
dine 1990), work which combines discursive research and social identity theory (e.g. Condor 
2000; Reicher and Hopkins 2001), and which emphasises discursive and narrative threads (e.g. 
Taylor 2010).
Given this extent and richness, my aim is simply to elaborate some shared concerns, some 
lines of fracture, and some of the ways discursive research engages in critical activity. I will first 
describe some key shared features of discursive research which sum up its main challenges to 
mainstream psychology, and then look at some of the splits and differences that emerged as 
discursive research developed. I will go on to describe two studies to illustrate how two very 
different kinds of discursive research have contributed to critical psychology’s concerns with 
social justice, before concluding with an overall assessment.
The discursive challenge to mainstream psychology
Three features typically distinguish discursive research in psychology – an emphasis on discourse 
as social action, a focus on the regularities, patterns, and practices evident in people’s talk and 
texts, and a view of subjectivities and psychological processes as situated, relational, and distrib-
uted phenomena.
Discourse as social action
Discursive research in psychology works with a constructionist theory of meaning, in contrast 
to what Edwards (1997) describes as a view of language as a ‘do-nothing domain’. Mainstream 
psychology typically assumes a simple true/false framework. People might lie, may be deceived, 
or may not know, but assuming good information and good faith (plus good research design), 
their words are generally thought to work as a transparent medium and neutral servant, faith-
fully representing, reflecting, tagging, and conveying mental states, events, attitudes, cognitions, 
behaviours, and environments. In this view, the world, language, and minds are separate entities 
with language as a window or expressive conduit between minds and worlds.
In contrast, for discursive researchers, language is performative and constitutive. Our dis-
course often describes our actions but these descriptions are also a form of social action per 
se. Our accounts are complex products, interwoven with histories of previous talk. They are 
constructions which bring social worlds into being, and which make things happen. Accounts 
circulate, are exchanged, become marginal or dominant, are stifled or celebrated, and turned 
through human work into truths. From this perspective, discourse builds worlds and it builds 
minds (Edwards and Potter 1992; Potter and Wetherell 1987). People’s talk and writing is about 
the world and about themselves, but it also variably constructs events, memories, identities, 
social relations, group life, subjectivities, and other people. Discursive researchers thus acknowl-
edge and pay attention to the indexical nature of discourse ignored in mainstream psychology, 

Discursive psychology
317
appreciating that the meaning of an utterance and its sense and implications depend on its con-
texts of use. Taken seriously, indexicality has some major implications for psychological method, 
for business as usual in experimental psychology, and for assumptions concerning mind and 
behaviour.
Discursive researchers ask the question which is of little interest to traditional positivis-
tic psychology – why this utterance and not some other, why this version or formulation of 
self and not some other? We are interested in what discourse accomplishes. In exploring this 
accomplishment, one might be concerned with how an account is tailored for a particular argu-
mentative and rhetorical context and its functions in that context. What might be of interest is 
what a particular version at a particular moment tells us about the wider discursive economy, 
about what is taken for granted in a social scene, the broader politics of representation, about 
the ways in which cultural worlds have been made, and who is routinely empowered and who 
is disempowered as a consequence.
Discourse patterns
Related to this, discursive researchers assume that while people’s discourse can be chaotic, idi-
osyncratic, and random, it is more usually patterned, regular, and ordered. Discursive research is 
the study of these patterns, and for critical psychologists who do discursive research, the interest 
is often in patterns (such as categorisations, formulations, versions, accounts) that create, perpe-
trate, and reinforce discrimination, marginalisation, and asymmetric power relations.
The patterns discursive researchers in psychology investigate are generally understood as 
practices. In other words, the regularities studied by discursive researchers are not presumed to 
be the strong, determining, acontextual cause-effect relationships between variables that are the 
gold standard for quantitative psychologists. Practices, as Edwards (1997) notes, have a ‘could be 
otherwise’ quality. They are open and flexible, subject to change, deeply connected to situation 
and context, and, often, a form of knowing how, more like a craft skill, a habit or routine, than 
a fixed action programme. This is not to say that people can always articulate the practices that 
guide their discursive conduct, or that these are necessarily intentional, conscious, and trans-
parent. Some practices become automatic, so rapid that there is no room for prior reflection, 
and some are so deeply embedded in the history of our development that, as Butler (2005: 78) 
comments, we can never expect to grasp and describe the entire texture of the relational and 
discursive fields in which ‘a person like us’ took shape.
Different kinds of discursive research focus on different kinds of practices. Those research-
ers who focus on interaction, and who turn to conversation analysis and ethnomethodology, 
are interested, broadly, in people’s methods for producing social life, and more particularly in 
the kinds of patterned sequences around turn-taking that make up everyday activities such 
as when workers in residential homes offer choices to people with intellectual impairments 
(Antaki et al. 2008), or when speakers inoculate against being seen to have a stake in some 
particular outcome (Potter 1997). Discursive psychologists examine, too, how psychologi-
cal processes (attribution, collective memory, categorisation, evaluation) work discursively, 
changing psychologists’ conceptions of their core phenomena (Edwards 1997; Edwards and  
Potter 1992).
For other discursive researchers, it is patterns in discursive content (as well as discur-
sive activities) that are more central, such as the interpretative repertoires, subject positions, 
cultural narratives, and dilemmas making up racist ideologies (Edley 2001; Wetherell and 
Potter 1992). Here the discursive activities of interest are those associated with the politics 
of representation such as justification, defence, subjectification, and the maintenance of local 

Margaret Wetherell
318
and more general hegemonies. Even broader still, researchers (e.g. Rose 1998) might be 
concerned with entire epistemic regimes and patterns of person formulation characteristic 
of particular historical periods, along with the role of academic and applied psychology as 
disciplining institutions.
A relational and distributed psychology
Work on discourse practices across different scales reinforces and is typically commensurate with 
the view of human psychology that emerged from relational, narrative, and social constructionist 
theory in the 1990s (Bruner 1990; Gergen 1985, 1991; Hermans 2001; Shotter 1993; Wertsch 
1990). Michael Billig (1999a) outlined the contrast with conventional psychology particularly 
clearly in his argument that discursive research involves dialogical analysis. He describes how con-
ventional psychology, especially cognitive psychology, assumes an isolated and solipsistic indi-
vidual, removed from the hubbub of everyday interaction. In effect, the individual typically acts 
alone in much traditional psychological research, rather like Rodin’s sculpture of ‘The Thinker’: 
head in hands, on a rock, being psychological, with any relational context or history denied and 
obscured.
Discursive research demonstrates how memories, emotions, and other psychological pro-
cesses are constructed jointly across a relational field (Edwards 1997; Middleton and Brown 
2005). Similarly, it shows how identity depends not just on self-assertion, and claims concerning 
who one is, but on fields of differences, and interactional, categorical, and ideological work 
(e.g. Condor 2000; Edley and Wetherell 1997; Wetherell 1998). In these senses, it demonstrates 
why human psychology is perhaps best described as distributed, and is certainly extended way 
past the boundaries of individual bodies and minds, intersubjective, occasioned, emerging 
‘in-between’. In a real sense, psychology is located in practices, including particularly discursive 
practices (Wetherell 2008).
For many discursive researchers, this raises questions about who speaks when we speak. 
Influenced by the thinking emerging from theorists such as Bakhtin, Vygotsky, and Voloshi-
nov (Maybin 2001), it becomes possible to more thoroughly consider, for instance, Erving 
Goffman’s (1981) early concerns with the ways in which people animate and author voices 
and to demonstrate how these voices are emergent from complex social and cultural histo-
ries. Thus when we speak we combine together in new ways fragments of other conversa-
tions and texts and, crucially, the voices of others are made into our own, contextualising and 
re-contextualising their previous evaluative accents. This perspective gives a much richer and 
more social take on the act of introspective self-report which has been such a staple of tradi-
tional psychological and psychoanalytic research. It suggests also that subjectivity and identity 
will be more conflicted, inconsistent, fragmented, and multiple than traditionally assumed, 
constituting and reconstituting as people move variably across intersectional identity fields and 
psycho-discursive practices.
In this context, the notion of subject positions (Davies and Harré 1990), resonating with 
Foucauldian explorations of what it means to ‘be subjected’, and with Althusser’s work on 
interpellation, has become a familiar analytic concept in much discursive research in psychol-
ogy. The position someone speaks from is in this way interrogated more thoroughly, and not 
seen so innocently as a simple experiential or phenomenological act. To speak one discourse 
or interpretative repertoire rather than another, and thus inhabit one speaking position rather 
than another, is an act which constitutes identity and subjectivity in particular ways, where all 
the personal, ideological, and social implications of that act, along with the discursive and social 
history of the positions, are not likely to be clear.

Discursive psychology
319
Some splits and differences
In these ways, then, discursive research in psychology challenges conventional psychology, and 
more crucially, has gone on to develop knowledge apparatuses and research methods that can 
foreground power relations and the social processes and practices involved in the formation of 
psychological subjects and psychological events. Researchers typically work with transcripts of 
interviews or focus group discussions, with texts such as media outputs, with archive material, 
or with taped and sometimes filmed examples of naturally occurring interaction. Although most 
discursive researchers would continue to adhere broadly to the three general principles or key 
features I have just outlined, some major differences in emphasis have emerged over time in 
scale, approach, and mode of analysis. In simple terms, these differences fall into what we (Edley 
and Wetherell 1997) presented at one point as a contrast between ‘top down’ versus ‘bottom up’ 
approaches.
Differences reflect contrasts in the wider discourse traditions, extending beyond discursive 
work in psychology. Conversation analysts and ethnomethodologists, for instance, advocate a 
‘bottom up’ approach, meaning that their preference is to work in a fine-grain way with the 
patterns found in naturally occurring data rather than, say, interview data (see Schegloff 1997). 
They tend to be much more concerned with the generative, active, and lively nature of social 
interaction and work with short episodic encounters, usually with small numbers of partici-
pants. In contrast, at the other extreme, post-structuralist influenced discourse research has been 
more interested in discourse on a large scale. The focus has been on the discursive formations 
(and texts) that organize social life from above, as it were (see Laclau and Mouffe 1987), or the 
ways in which social ‘playing fields’, with their ensembles of subject positions and interpretative 
resources, are set out in advance, if not determining then certainly strongly constraining creative 
human activity.
In psychology, discursive psychologists and conversation analysts have followed the more 
fine-grain approach, while those of us who have been more interested in broader questions of 
rhetoric, discourse, identity, narrative, and ideology have tried to work in a more eclectic fashion. 
We have not been persuaded by the procedural taboo on critical reflection and interpretation 
of participants’ activities, or by the prohibition on ‘going beyond the data’ to attempt to make 
sense of the ideological import, for instance, of a particular pattern. We have tried to combine 
aspects of the more fine-grain focus on activities and local practices, and the emphases of early 
work on discourse in social psychology, while also paying attention to broader social relations 
and social contexts and to structuring powers (see Wetherell 1998, 2007 for a justification of 
such an approach).
Inevitably, these contrasting choices have come to define and legislate what counts as good 
and proper analysis in peer reviews, for instance, and in definitions of academic communi-
ties. Discursive psychologists and conversation analysts have argued strongly, for instance, that 
discursive research should always be founded on participants’ orientations, should adopt the 
‘documentary method’ of ethnomethodology, and should work with ‘naturally occurring’ data 
in preference to interviews or focus groups. The documentary method is the requirement that 
analysts base their claims on the demonstrable actions of participants, in particular on their 
interpretations of the situation and context as evidenced by their next turns in a conversation 
(see Wooffitt 2005 for a strong defence of this approach).
For more eclectic discursive researchers, however, an analysis tends not to be complete with-
out some larger interpretation of the social and ideological implications of the patterns pre-
sented. Analysis in this case does not stop at participants’ concerns, and participants’ actions 
might often be set in a broader political context that they might find unfamiliar or disavow. 

Margaret Wetherell
320
This work, too, is sceptical of the constraints imposed by ‘naturally occurring data’ and by 
the small scale of conversation analytic work in particular (see for more extended discussion, 
the 1998/1999/2000 debate in Discourse & Society between Schegloff 1998, 1999a and 1999b; 
Wetherell 1998; Billig 1999b and 1999c and Weatherall 2000 and the Culture & Psychology 1999 
Special Issue on emotion and discourse, in particular the articles by Edwards and Campos et al.)
What difference might this make for critical psychology? The concerns and objectives of 
critical psychology are in many ways much more obviously aligned with eclectic discursive 
research in psychology and with ‘top down’ ‘big discourse’ approaches such as post-structuralist 
research. But, work in conversation analysis in psychology and in discursive psychology is also 
sometimes relevant to critical psychology, and some important findings have emerged from 
fine-grain work on natural interaction, particularly when researchers have gone somewhat off 
script and been eager to locate and understand the interactions they are studying in terms of 
broader social contexts.
Two illustrative studies
Examples of discursive studies in psychology that mesh with the aims and objectives of critical 
psychology abound. The two illustrative studies I have chosen elegantly illuminate issues central 
to the concerns of critical psychology and exemplify some principal contrasting ways of work-
ing now found in discursive research in psychology.
A fine-grain example from feminist conversation analysis
The first example is a study conducted by Celia Kitzinger examining heteronormativity or 
‘the mundane production of heterosexuality as the normal, natural, taken-for-granted sexual-
ity’ (2005: 477). Kitzinger’s material was a dataset of 59 after-hours calls to a medical practice 
in a large town in the English Midlands. Kitzinger focuses on those calls (50 of the 59) where 
the caller is someone other than the patient and is ringing on their behalf a locum doctor not 
already familiar with the patient. The majority of such calls were from family members (spouses, 
parents, siblings, etc.) and the minority were from non-family members such as friends, neigh-
bours, etc. The calls were recorded by the doctor, who deleted any identifying information 
about the patient.
Kitzinger is working, in other words, with a classic conversation analysis dataset. The data are 
a sample of naturally occurring conversations collected by one of the participants rather than 
being researcher-generated. These are typically short moments of episodic interaction between 
two people operating in an institutional context. The material is then transcribed in great detail 
using the notation system developed by Gail Jefferson, which aims to include what Kitzinger 
describes as ‘those small but significant features of talk (cut offs, silences, etc.) that interactants 
use in systematic and orderly ways’ (2005: 481). Analysis involves searching for patterns in this 
talk where these patterns are seen as practices (‘systematic and orderly’). In this case, Kitzinger 
showed the structures of heteronormativity at work in every interaction.
Research of this kind becomes critical when it reveals how power, privilege, exclusion, and 
marginalization work through the minute details of everyday normativity. Analysis can illumi-
nate what we could call aspects of a kind of ‘social unconscious’ – practices which are implicit, 
not articulated, forceful, repetitive, untroubled, repressive of alternatives, and automatic.
The overall effect is to produce what Haraway describes as a technology for producing the 
effect of ‘natural relationships’ (cited in Kitzinger 2005: 494). Among many systematic practices, 
Kitzinger notes for instance that the doctor routinely displays an assumption that any adult 

Discursive psychology
321
calling concerning a child is that child’s parent. Though there are, of course, multiple ways in 
which any one person could be described, the dominance in this context of definitions of self 
and others through the co-resident nuclear family constellation is striking. In particular, it sug-
gests, as a kind of thought experiment, the interactional trouble and extra layers of negotiation 
likely to be involved if the person ringing on someone else’s behalf was their same sex partner, 
and thus, for Kitzinger, the importance of campaigns for same-sex marriage and claims to those 
powerfully normative family relationships.
An example from critical discursive research in psychology
My second example is a study conducted by Martha Augoustinos, Keith Tuffin, and Mark 
Rapley (1999) focused on the discursive themes and rhetorical work evident as a sample of 
non-indigenous Australians discussed contemporary issues concerning race relations in Aus-
tralia. For Kitzinger, the focus was on the activities of categorisation (self and other reference) 
in everyday interaction. In contrast, Augoustinos et al. were more concerned with the content 
of people’s discourse as well as with what was being accomplished. Their focus was on the reg-
ularities in participants’ constructing and meaning-making displayed in their formulations and 
accounts, and on interpreting the ideological implications and thrust of this discourse in the 
context of a white settler society with a particular history and patterning of privilege, power, 
and inequality.
The significance of this kind of research for critical psychology depends, first, on the cen-
trality and pervasiveness of the discursive themes in the broad social contexts being studied. 
Augoustinos et al. note that their data from Australia reproduce patterns found in work in New 
Zealand (e.g. McCreanor 1989; Wetherell and Potter 1992), a similar white settler society. Per-
vasiveness is important because the aim is to highlight the dominant discursive resources used by 
the privileged. Such research also aims to make a contribution through the extended ideolog-
ical analysis it offers of the upshot, consequences, and implications of the prevalent discursive 
themes. To give just one example, Augoustinos et al. argue that a consequence of the discursive 
patterning they identify is that British settlement becomes ‘not an “invasion” during which 
Indigenous people were “massacred”, but rather is constructed as an innocuous “lifestyle incom-
patibility” ’ (1999: 370). This, they suggest, maintains older notions of the ‘white man’s burden’ 
and misrepresents forceful colonisation as ‘caring’. It is not contemporary white Australians’ fault 
if Aboriginal people fail to ‘fit in’ with the good things on offer.
Conclusion
As these two representative examples illustrate, discursive research in psychology is often moti-
vated by shock and anger at inequity, marginalisation, manifestations of privilege, and justifica-
tions of unjust treatment. More than this profoundly important reactivity, however, I hope this 
brief review of the field has also reminded that discursive research provides critical psychology 
with sets of tools, theories, and methods to systematically investigate and describe power rela-
tions and understand better how they operate.
It is certainly the case, as some critics have argued, that discursive research has become a new 
orthodoxy – increasingly formulaic, bedded down, and operating paradigmatically. The days are 
past when it was highly intriguing, novel, and revolutionary to explore constructionist theory 
and consider meaning as something which was actively made (as opposed to authoritatively 
given) and which could be thus contested or re-made. But this anxiety about orthodoxy while 
pointing to serious issues about capture and appropriation seems to me potentially an elitist 

Margaret Wetherell
322
concern. It was not that amusing, fun, or creative in the 1980s for emerging researchers and 
graduate students to have no models to follow, few audiences for their work, and little feel for 
what a discursive study could or should look like. The advantage of established paradigms is that 
they provide the platforms and foils for new conversations and new revolts against orthodoxies. 
New generations can start from here. These conversations, already beginning in critical psychol-
ogy around the psychosocial, for instance, concerning relations between discourse theory and 
psychoanalysis, and through new concerns with affect and the sensuous, can only intensify in 
years to come.
Further reading
For those relatively new to discursive research these two volumes constituted the Open University post-
graduate course on Discourse Analysis. They contain worked examples of different styles of analysis, key 
readings, and reviews of core debates: M. Wetherell, S. Taylor and S. J. Yates (eds) (2001) Discourse Theory 
and Practice (Volume One) and Discourse as Data (Volume Two). London: Sage
The Special Issue of the British Journal of Social Psychology (2012, 51) edited by M. Augoustinos and  
C. Tileaga presents a useful retrospective of 25 years of research since the publication of the early texts 
in the 1980s.
Many critical psychologists are interested in discourse because of its relevance to investigations of identity 
issues. This review provides a comprehensive starting point: B. Benwell and E. Stokoe (2006) Discourse 
and Identity. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Website resources
Two discourse research groups have dominated the UK scene. Their websites are full of interesting links to 
current research and, particularly in the case of the second, links to other critical work:
www.lboro.ac.uk/departments/socialsciences/research/groups/darg
www.discourseunit.com
References
Antaki, C., Finlay, W.M.L., Walton, C. and Pate, L. (2008) ‘Offering choices to people with an intellectual 
impairment: an interactional study’, Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 52, 1165–1175.
Antaki, C. and Widdicombe, S. (eds) (1998) Identities in Talk. London: Sage.
Augoustinos, M., Tuffin, K. and Rapley, M. (1999) ‘Genocide or failure to gel? Racism, history and nation-
alism in Australian talk’, Discourse and Society, 10(3): 351–378.
Billig, M. (1987) Arguing and Thinking: A Rhetorical Approach to Social Psychology. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Billig, M. (1991) Ideology and Opinions. London: Sage.
Billig, M. (1999a) Freudian Repression: Conversation Creating the Unconscious. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Billig, M. (1999b) ‘Whose terms? Whose ordinariness? Rhetoric and ideology in conversation analysis’, 
Discourse and Society, 10, 543–558.
Billig, M. (1999c) ‘Conversation analysis and claims of naivete’, Discourse & Society, 10, 572–577.
Billig, M. (2012) ‘Undisciplined beginnings, academic success and discursive psychology’, British Journal of 
Social Psychology, 51, 413–424.
Billig, M., Condor, S., Edwards, D., Gane, M., Middleton, D. and Radley, A. R. (1988) Ideological Dilemmas: 
A Social Psychology of Everyday Thinking. London: Sage.
Brown, S., Reavey, P., Cromby, J., Harper, D. and Johnson, K. (2009) ‘On psychology and embodiment: 
some methodological experiments’, Sociological Review, 56(S2), 197–215.
Bruner, J. (1990) Acts of Meaning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Butler, J. (2005) Giving an Account of Oneself. New York: Fordham University Press.
Campos, G. P., Ramos, C. S. and Bernal, J.J.Y. (1999) ‘Emotion discourse “speaks” of involvement: commen-
tary on Edwards’, Culture & Psychology, 5(3), 293–304.

Discursive psychology
323
Condor, S. (2000) ‘Pride and prejudice: identity management in English people’s talk about “this country”, 
Discourse and Society, 11(2), 175–205.
Davies, B. and Harré, R. (1990) ‘Positioning: the discursive production of selves’, Journal for the Theory of 
Social Behaviour, 20, 43–65.
Durrheim, K. and Dixon, J. (2004) ‘Attitudes in the fiber of everyday life: the discourse of racial evaluation 
and the lived experience of desegregation’, American Psychologist, 59(7), 626–636.
Edley, N. (2001) ‘Analysing masculinity: interpretative repertoires, ideological dilemmas and subject posi-
tions’, in M. Wetherell, S. Taylor and S. J. Yates (eds) Discourse as Data. London: Sage.
Edley. N. and Wetherell, M. (1997) ‘Jockeying for position: the construction of masculine identities’, Dis-
course & Society, 8, 203–217.
Edwards, D. (1997) Discourse and Cognition. London: Sage.
Edwards, D. (1999) ‘Emotion discourse’, Culture & Psychology, 5, 271–291.
Edwards, D. and Mercer, N. (1987) Common Knowledge. London: Routledge.
Edwards, D. and Potter, J. (1992) Discursive Psychology. London: Sage.
Frosh, S. (1999) ‘What is outside discourse?’, Psychoanalytic Studies, 1(4), 381–390.
Gavey, N. (1989) ‘Feminist post-structuralism and discourse analysis: contributions to feminist psychology’, 
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 13(4), 459–475.
Gergen, K. (1985) ‘The social constructionist movement in modern psychology’, American Psychologist, 40, 
266–275.
Gergen, K. (1991) The Saturated Self. New York: Basic Books.
Goffman, E. (1981) Forms of Talk. Oxford: Blackwell.
Henriques, J., Hollway, W., Urwin, C., Venn. C. and Walkerdine, V. (1984/1998) Changing the Subject. Lon-
don: Routledge.
Hermans, H.J.M. (2001) ‘The dialogical self: toward a theory of personal and cultural positioning’, Cul-
ture & Psychology, 7(3), 243–281.
Hollway, W. and Jefferson, T. (2005) ‘Panic and perjury: a psychoanalytic exploration of agency’, British 
Journal of Social Psychology, 44, 175–180.
Kitzinger, C. (2000) ‘Doing feminist conversation analysis’, Feminism & Psychology, 10, 163–193.
Kitzinger, C. (2005) ‘Heteronormativity in action: reproducing the heterosexual nuclear family in “after 
hours” medical calls’, Social Problems, 52(4), 477–498.
Laclau, E. and Mouffe, C. (1987) ‘Post-Marxism without apologies’, New Left Review, 166, 79–106.
Maiers, W. (2001) ‘German critical psychology at the turn of the millennium’, in V. Walkerdine (ed.) Critical 
Psychology. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Maybin, J. (2001) ‘Language, struggle and voice: the Bakhtin/Voloshinov writings’, in M. Wetherell, S. Tay-
lor, and S. J. Yates (eds) Discourse Theory and Practice: a Reader. London: Sage.
McCreanor, T. (1989) ‘Talking about race’, in H. Yensen, K. Hague, and T. McCreanor (eds) Honouring the 
Treaty. Auckland: Penguin.
Middleton, D. and Brown, S. D. (2005) The Social Psychology of Experience: Studies in Remembering and For-
getting. London: Sage.
Parker, I. (1989) The Crisis in Social Psychology and How to End It. London: Routledge.
Parker, I. (1992) Discourse Dynamics. London: Routledge.
Parker, I. (2012) ‘Discursive social psychology now’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 51, 471–477.
Potter, J. (1996) Representing Reality. London: Sage.
Potter, J. (1997) ‘Discourse analysis as a way of analysing naturally occurring talk’, in D. Silverman (ed.) 
Qualitative Research: Theory, Method and Practice. London: Sage.
Potter, J. and Wetherell, M. (1987) Discourse and Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Reicher, S. and Hopkins, N. (2001) Self and Nation. London: Sage.
Rose, N. (1998) Inventing Ourselves: Psychology, Power and Personhood. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Schegloff, E. A. (1997) ‘Whose text? whose context?’ Discourse & Society, 8, 165–187.
Schegloff, E. (1998) ‘Reply to Wetherell’, Discourse & Society, 9, 413–416.
Schegloff, E. (1999a) ‘Naivete versus sophistication or discipline versus self-indulgence: a rejoinder to Bil-
lig’, Discourse & Society, 10, 577–583.
Schegloff, E. (1999b) ‘Schegloff’s texts as Billig’s data: a critical reply’, Discourse & Society, 10, 558–572.
Shotter, J. (1993) Conversational Realities: Studies in Social Constructionism. London: Sage.
Speer, S. and Stokoe, E. H. (eds) (2011) Conversation and Gender. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.

Margaret Wetherell
324
Taylor, S. (2010) Narratives of Identity and Place. London: Routledge.
Walkerdine, V. (1990) Schoolgirl Fictions. London: Verso.
Wertsch, J. V. (1990) Voices of the Mind: A  Socio-Cultural Approach to Mediated Action. London: Harvester 
Wheatsheaf.
Weatherall, A. (2000) ‘Gender relevance in talk-in-interaction and discourse’, Discourse  & Society, 11, 
286–288.
Wetherell, M. (1998) ‘Positions and interpretative repertoires: conversation analysis and post-structuralism 
in dialogue’, Discourse & Society, 9, 432–456.
Wetherell, M. (2007) ‘A step too far: discursive psychology, linguistic ethnography and questions of iden-
tity’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 11(5), 661–682.
Wetherell, M. (2008) ‘Subjectivity or psycho-discursive practices: investigating complex intersectional 
identities’, Subjectivity, 22(1), 73–81.
Wetherell, M. and Potter, J. (1992) Mapping the Language of Racism. London: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Willig, C. (2007) ‘Reflections on the use of a phenomenological method’, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 
4, 209–225.
Wooffitt, R. (2005) Conversation Analysis and Discourse Analysis: A  Comparative and Critical Introduction. 
London: Sage.

Part III
Standpoints and perspectives 
on psychology and critical 
psychology

This page intentionally left blank

Part IIIa
Perspectives

This page intentionally left blank

329
As with all the human sciences that emerged in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, 
psychology carries in its main propositions and objects of study the marks of the society in which 
it was conceived and developed. As many critical approaches have been pointing out during the 
last decades, hegemonic theories in psychology and its main concepts – such as the individual and 
their abilities, needs, problems – derive from the dominant thought of modern societies. In this 
context, science was created by highly educated white men, which is expressed through the ideas 
and researches conducted by academics and scientists. During the second half of the twentieth 
century and also in the first decades of the twenty-first century, feminist researchers and activists 
have been bringing to the foreground not only the discrimination suffered by women, but also 
a discussion on how the ideas of universality and normality are constructed in a science based 
on a sexist perspective. As Nogueira (2001) stresses, psychology as a scientific discourse is deeply 
committed to controlling women. Its theories, which hierarchically dichotomize genders, are 
frequently mentioned to justify gender oppression against girls and women.
Feminist activists have been fighting for women’s rights in Western societies for a long time, 
and the fight against patriarchy and sexism acquired different forms and targets. This activism 
was responsible for the intermingling of political practices with theoretical issues, revealing that 
scientific objects are defined as important by specific limited perspectives, which cannot simply 
be erased from the theories. So, even in its different approaches (classic – or white – feminism, 
Black feminism, postcolonial feminism, post-structuralist feminism, transfeminism, ecofeminism, 
and so on), feminists are constantly developing a political critique based on the experience of 
different oppressions, a critique which is necessary to rethink society and its practices – science 
included.
The contributions of feminist perspectives to the human sciences are extremely important, 
but constantly underestimated and frequently put aside as a marginal subject (Kitzinger 1990). 
Particularly in psychology, central concepts, such as sexuality, autonomy, and identity, bring in 
their definitions and uses the marks of a sexist knowledge. Psychological practices, which are 
oriented by these concepts and definitions, recurrently perpetuate inequalities, unjust power 
relations, and objectification of groups and subjects considered immature, not capable, or abnor-
mal, such as children, disabled people, indigenous people, white women, men and women of 
colour, gay and trans people, people with mental disorders, poor people, and so on. Affirming 
34
Feminist psychology
Researches, interventions, challenges
Amana Mattos

Amana Mattos
330
the maxim of working for the good of subjects, psychological research and practices (which are 
deeply connected) delimit places of oppression and silence, establishing who is authorized to 
speak for the ‘others’.
Having this panorama in mind, feminist perspectives appear as a crucial approach for a critical 
psychology which aims at raising problems and queries concerning forms of oppression that 
take place in our society. Not only forms of oppression based on gender and sex differences, but 
also on race, class, religious orientation, and so on, since inequalities are always intersectional.
In this chapter, I will start by presenting some different perspectives that compose the broad 
field of feminist theories and practices. Then, I will discuss the following psychological concepts 
that are problematized by feminist theories: autonomy, identity, and sexuality. After that, I will 
consider the contributions of feminist psychology for the area, its challenges and difficulties, 
offering some examples from researches and practices.
Feminisms and psychology: a heterogeneous puzzle
The main contributions of feminist authors in the field of psychology started in the 1970s, 
with the feminist critiques of science in different areas of knowledge. Before this, women were 
effaced, neglected, or undervalued in hegemonic psychological theories (Saavedra and Nogueira 
2006). Since the 1970s, we can observe an increase in the number of studies based on feminist 
perspectives in the discipline of psychology, addressing different aspects of the area: childhood 
and development, gender inequalities, education, research methodologies, and so on. The major-
ity of these researchers locate themselves in gender studies, or women’s studies. Only some 
of them locate themselves in the area of feminist psychology. In other words, we can discuss 
the impact of feminist perspectives in psychology by considering both feminist psychology 
researchers and researchers that do not claim this label for their works, although clearly influ-
enced by feminist approaches.
However, assuming a feminist orientation is important to engage the researcher in a critical 
perspective about reality, institutions, and power relations in the field of research and also in 
academia (Nogueira 2001). Thinking critically about the objectification of certain positions is 
an exercise constantly promoted by feminist perspectives, and it is not restricted to gender issues. 
Feminist contributions to childhood studies, for instance, are well known (Alanen 2001), and 
this influence can also be found in distinct approaches of developmental psychology. From the 
appreciation of feminine psychological aspects of women, who should have more voice and 
participation in their developmental processes (Chodorow 1978; Gilligan 1982), to the critical 
deconstructions of the object of ‘childhood’, considering the colonizing and sexist standpoints 
of traditional developmental psychology (Burman 2008a; Castro 1998; Walkerdine et al. 2001), 
feminist epistemology and reflexions are influential in contemporary childhood studies.
Another field deeply influenced by feminist epistemologies is research methods. The femi-
nist (and also post-structuralist) critique of the objectification and essentializing of groups and 
subjects, as mentioned above, opened a broader discussion on the political engagement of the 
researcher and the fictionality or constant construction of the subject of the investigation in 
different areas of knowledge, contributing to a severe critique of positivist paradigms of sci-
ence (Haraway 1991; Spivak 1988). In feminist psychology, and research in particular, feminist 
epistemologies called into question the gender of the universal subject – or the individual – of 
psychology, exposing the patriarchal assumptions present in its practices. Also, feminist psycholo-
gists put into perspective the context in which knowledge is constructed, considering the role 
of gender and power relations, as well as of language, in the production of knowledge (Harding 
1993; Neves and Nogueira 2004).

Feminist psychology
331
Since the influences and appropriations of feminisms in psychology are not homogeneous, 
there are many contradictions and conflicts in this field. I would like to point out one of these 
conflicts, which is constantly present in feminist discussions: the tension between academic 
feminists and feminist activists. Many of the concepts that are discussed in feminist debates orig-
inated in academic research. Besides, many feminists (psychologists included) are activists, inside 
and outside universities. However, Black feminists and other groups that have not historically 
participated in Western academic spheres (immigrants, LGBT, and indigenous people, for exam-
ple) have been interrogating (white) academic feminists about their privileges in the production 
of knowledge (Anzaldúa 2007; Lorde 2007; Trinh Min-ha 1989). In Lorde’s words,
the master’s tools will never dismantle the master’s house. They may allow us temporarily to beat 
him at his own game, but they will never enable us to bring about genuine change. And 
this fact is only threatening to those women who still define the master’s house as their 
only source of support.
(Lorde 2007: 112, emphasis in original)
Furthermore, many activists consider that the feminism discussed in academia is far from real 
situations women face every day. For them, theoretical knowledge can be extremely classist 
and racist, perpetuating bourgeois privileges and patronizing poor, battered, illegal immigrant, 
drug-using women.
(Re)thinking assumptions: psychology in feminist perspectives
As a discipline oriented by the paradigm of modern science, psychology presents a universalistic 
description of its objects. This tendency can be identified in different areas of psychological 
research, such as development, personality, behaviour, and cognition. Feminists raise different 
critiques of the idea of universality and neutrality, as I  have already noted. However, some 
subjects are particularly problematic for feminist theories – especially for those that share a 
socio-constructivist perspective. In this section, I will discuss three of these concepts: (a) the 
concept of autonomous and developed subject; (b) the concept of identity grounded in universal 
and essentialist models; and (c) the idea of sexuality and sexual difference.
Autonomy
The main contributions of developmental psychology are oriented towards the achievement of 
the adult as a normal and mature subject, a position that is reached after a developmental process 
conceived according to universal bases (Burman 2008a; Castro 1998). This developmentalism, 
a heritage of the scientific thought of the nineteenth century, is intimately connected to evo-
lutionary theories. The commitment to so-called societal progress can be found in each theory 
that discusses childhood based on ideas of normality and enhancement of learning, abilities, and 
skills. By the hierarchization of individual differences, psychology reduces personal idiosyncrasies 
to features that should be shared by every normal child in a specific age group (Burman 2008b). 
Conceived in the core of modern society, psychology reproduces in its hegemonic theories the 
relation between personal success and individual adaptation to the environment. Thus, being 
outside the norm is a perfect nightmare – particularly if a child is regarded as being ‘abnormal’. 
Guided by an extended bibliography composed of works on developmental psychology, educa-
tion, and paediatrics, parents constantly search for help and counselling from specialists on child-
hood, capable of identifying any ‘irregularity’ in their children’s development (Mattos 2011).

Amana Mattos
332
The objectification of the developmental process has an impact not only on the way psy-
chology – and, also, modernity – conceives childhood, but also on gender relations. As Bur-
man observes (2008b, 2011), hegemonic and patriarchal discourses presented in developmental 
psychology have material consequences in women’s lives. Knowledge and power positions are 
mainly occupied by men – doctors, intellectuals, politicians – that guide parents (as mothers) so 
they can bring up their children correctly. As the child-bearer, women are addressed as passive 
subjects who need specialists (usually white educated men) to explain what they need to do with 
their bodies, feelings, fears, and children. Even when we think about schools and their majority 
of female teachers, it is possible to identify gender oppressions in the relations among teachers 
and principals of schools, doctors, and politicians (Louro 1997; Mattos et al. 2013).
Another gender issue present in developmental theories is the alleged desexualization and 
gender neutrality of the process. In the process of becoming a normal adult, autonomy is a 
central concept. It is conceived as self-government and self-determination, and it is something 
that is developed during childhood and youth, aiming for a self-control of behaviour, cognition, 
emotions, moral judgment, and body. Feminists have questioned if autonomy is a gender-neutral 
feature, since it points to qualities that are the privilege of a determined class, gender, and race. 
As Friedman and Bolte (2001: 89) observe, ‘autonomy had been historically inaccessible to sub-
ordinated and oppressed social groups, such as women, whose labors were often precisely what 
freed middle- and upper-class white males to live autonomous lives’.
Socialization of children and teenagers is the process that leads the not-yet adults to auton-
omy, and it has been described by important (male) authors (Berger and Luckmann 1991; 
Piaget 2001). Feminists have problematized this concept in the last decades, calling attention to 
the valorization of individualism to the detriment of more collective and mutually dependent 
experiences. In fact, different feminists highlight that autonomy, as a feature acquired during 
the developmental process, is a fiction, and it operates within intricate networks of dependency 
among subjects (Benhabib 1987; Hirschmann 2003; Sevenhuijsen 1998).
Assuming that the developed subject has attributes and qualities that are socially related to 
men, feminists raise important critiques of the available models in psychology for testing, eval-
uating, and measuring boys and girls in their developments. If the model is gender-biased, the 
results of evaluations will perpetuate inequalities. As Coole (1993: 86) affirms, regarding nega-
tive freedom (the liberal concept of freedom, related to individual independence): ‘if negative 
freedom does not specify men as its beneficiaries, its logic strongly implies that the later are 
not-women’. Therefore, feminist critiques in developmental psychology address both its main 
concepts and its alleged neutrality, putting into perspective the universality and neutrality taken 
for granted by its authors.
Identity
If the concept of autonomy is central for development theories, identity is the heart of theories 
of personhood in psychology. The notions of self, identity, and subjectivity (even if they are not 
synonyms) refer to theoretical models related to the totality of the person. In these theories, 
the privileged moment for the development of identity is adolescence. Described as a moment 
in which biological, psychosocial, and cultural factors must be coordinated, adolescence is the 
period of the assumption of identity, frequently assumed as universal – at least in its generic 
traces (Erikson 1987; Valsiner 1989).
For Erikson (1987), for example, the psychic integration of experiences makes possible the 
feeling of uniqueness of the person in a given society and social group. The unity of the per-
sonhood depends on a solid sense of identity. This sense is possible once the individual feels 

Feminist psychology
333
connected, in solidarity, with the ideals of the group. From learning to walk to getting married, 
once an individual develops abilities and skills that are valued in society, ‘he’ (and usually it is ‘he’) 
is gaining self-esteem, which is the basis for a solid identity.
The psychological concept of identity has its roots in fundamental philosophical debates on 
sameness and otherness. Philosophical theories of the subject based on ‘his’ sameness (or iden-
tity) derive from a representationalist conception of knowledge, which presumes a ‘real world’ 
that is represented by mental facts or by language. Feminist critiques point out that, in psychol-
ogy, categories of identity, which mark what is immutable in a subject, can be (and frequently 
are) used to ‘compartmentalize and obscure aspects of women’s identities’ (Burman 1998: 15).
That is the case in Erikson’s theory. For him, the construction of feminine and masculine 
identities is based on a binary and anatomical model which outlines gendered needs, abili-
ties and possibilities for both sexes. His works, written in the post-Second World War period, 
describe adolescence based on values shared at the time, considering, for instance, that the devel-
opment of integrated identity in women can only be accomplished by marriage and maternity.
Post-structuralist critiques counter that identity is defined by discursively crossed lines, 
delimiting inside/outside and sameness/otherness, and they delimit the identities of individuals, 
groups, and nations. For Butler (1990), identity should be understood as a normative ideal rather 
than a description of one’s experience. The ‘coherence’ and ‘continuity’ that compose person-
hood must be understood as products of the norms of ruling intelligibilities in that context. 
This perspective brings an important consequence: some identities simply cannot exist, because 
they put at risk the cultural and discursive lines that establish what is normal or acceptable in 
that society. Butler describes these identities as ‘abject’, a concept that is especially important for 
gender identities.
For Fulani (1998: 156), identities in hegemonic psychology discourses turn into a ‘market-
able commodity’, regardless of whether they are considered as inferior or superior positions, 
since they reinforce ‘the discourse and experience of possessive individualism, as yet another 
patriarchal psychological product’. This position is shared by Trinh Min-ha (1989), who warns 
of the hazard of approximating women’s identity to ‘mentally ill’ or ‘mentally underdeveloped’ 
categories. This risk exists once the dominant and colonialist thought of identity is present in 
these discussions – even within women’s movements.
Another problematic aspect we can see in gender studies regarding the concept of identity is 
the separation of gender discussions from feminist perspectives (Saffioti 2001). This is happening 
in some areas, such as women’s studies, that naturalize gender inequalities by not contributing 
to deconstruct them. As Nogueira (2001) points out, many researchers that locate themselves in 
women’s studies develop very traditional works about women’s subjectivity and role in society, 
without critically discussing institutions, power relations, or even the hegemonic concepts of 
woman and femininity presented in traditional psychology.
As with other psychological concepts, identity must be considered in a feminist perspective 
so that it can be deconstructed and addressed in a critical way. As Trinh Min-ha (1989) affirms, 
identities must be thought ‘as points of re-departure of the critical processes by which I have 
come to understand how the personal – the ethnic me, the female me – is political’ (Trinh 
Min-ha 1989: 104).
Sexuality
When examining the universal subject studied by many areas of traditional psychology, sex-
uality is usually treated as a secondary aspect to the study of cognition, perception, emotion, 
and other mental processes. However, it became a central subject in psychoanalysis and clinical 

Amana Mattos
334
interventions. From his first works on, Freud addressed sexuality as a constitutive dimension of 
human subjectivity.
Assuming that sexuality is founded on the unconscious, Freud gave a prominent role to this 
aspect of human life, which was constantly considered shameful, embarrassing or, at least, private 
in Victorian society. While listening to his patients in a psychoanalytical setting, Freud developed 
complex theories on modern subjectivity and the role of sexual difference in their constitution. 
Since the subject in psychoanalysis is not unitary, but divided in psychic instances, sexual dif-
ference is not experienced as something univocal, but is permeated by otherness. Based on the 
Freudian theory, different psychoanalysts conducted their practice and developed their theories 
on human sexuality. Many of these works reproduce gender stereotypes, perpetuating sexual 
hierarchies in their explanations of human sexuality (as in the work of Erik Erikson, discussed 
above). Even Freudian psychoanalytic concepts such as the passivity/activity of drive, related to 
femininity/masculinity, or the gender roles presented in the scenario of the Oedipus Complex 
(the dramatic functions of the mother, the father, the son, and the daughter) are constantly 
problematized by feminist authors (e.g. Benjamin 1987; Butler 1990). However, psychoanalysis 
had an important role in complexifying the understanding of sexuality. Especially with Lacanian 
contributions, the importance of language in the construction of the sexed body became central, 
allowing significant dialogues among psychoanalysis and contemporary gender studies.
In psychology theories, sexual difference can be regarded as the biological differences between 
men and women, which correspond to psychological differences in subjectivity and personality 
of both sexes. The latter are understood as gender characters, differentiated in a binary opposi-
tion of male/female. Alternatively, sexual differences can be conceived as socially-constructed 
differences, which produce discursive bodies and meanings for different sexes. This position 
has led critical contributions of post-structuralist feminism to discuss sexuality. Authors of this 
position intend to undo the binary dichotomy of nature versus nurture in the understanding 
of human sexuality, affirming that medicine, as a modern discipline, discursively constructs its 
objects, including sexed bodies (Butler 1990; Foucault 1978).
From a post-structuralist perspective, bodies always become gendered in the context of a 
determined culture, and social practices of this culture delimit the possibilities of sexual expres-
sions. ‘Gender and sexual identities are, therefore, composed and defined by social relations, they 
are shaped by power relations of a society’ (Louro 2010: 11). Inspired by psychoanalytic discus-
sions regarding the processes of subjective identification, Butler (1990) highlights the argument 
that the subject is built as such by going through the process of asserting a sex. This is important 
because of the assertion that belonging to a particular sex does not occur naturally, nor is it 
based on specific features. The constitution of a particular sex is done by positioning the subject 
before social norms. Here, Butler highlights that the discursive hegemony of heterosexuality is 
constitutive of our society, and that its weight needs to be considered and examined when it 
comes to discussing the ‘how’ of subjects asserting their sex.
The heteronormativity of Western societies is an important target for post-structuralist 
feminist critiques. By heteronormativity, I refer to the rules and norms of discursive practices 
that are guided by the gender binary (masculine and feminine) and by the hierarchical supe-
riority of the former to the latter (Butler 1990). In the critique of this hegemonic discursive 
order, feminists constantly affirm that psychology and psychoanalysis have a central role in its 
maintenance. Their theories and concepts are present in educational practices that act on the 
reinforcement of heterosexuality and of distinct places of gender, both in schools and in society 
in general (Louro 1997). Feminist theories and interventions have the challenge of rethink-
ing sexuality in critical ways, contributing to opening possibilities for non-heteronormative 
experiences and expressions.

Feminist psychology
335
Researching in the field of feminist psychology
Feminist psychology can be defined not only as an area of gender studies in psychology but as 
a permanent critique of epistemological postulates that (re)produce hierarchies and sexism in 
psychological knowledge and practices. As Burman (2008a) points out, psychological theories 
are intimately connected to the normalization of human life, and to the institutionalization of its 
different experiences in the modern age. The discussion of how psychology monitors, confines, 
and institutionalizes people considered abnormal is related to feminism in so far as the ‘normal 
position’ is called into question by feminists as a male-dominant and privileged position. This 
critique, however, assumes different perspectives, and can be developed by the use of different 
research methods which cannot be unified in a ‘feminist methodology’ (Phoenix 1990).
The feminist slogan ‘the personal is political’ is essential for feminist researches. Thinking 
of everyday life as a political field (as Barbara Kruger reminds us by saying that ‘your body 
is a battleground’ in one of her art works), feminists are constantly problematizing everyday 
dynamics, relations, and common sense ideas, aiming to denounce and deconstruct naturalized 
power relations. According to Haug, this exercise addresses the ‘everyday’ in two ways. First, as a 
source of knowledge that brings sexist and androcentric cultural components. Second, as ‘a field 
from which reconstructions are to be made, including alternative methods of gaining knowl-
edge’ (Haug 1998: 126). For feminist psychologists, this problematization of the personal brings 
a particularly important contribution, since hegemonic psychology is historically committed 
to explaining and controlling the personal realm based on measurement and normalization –  
strategies that deeply depoliticize the person and the individual.
Researches that share a feminist perspective discuss the research process itself and its meth-
odologies. In psychology, a discipline crossed by positivist and experimental paradigms, feminist 
researchers frequently use in their investigations methodological tools that are considered ‘low 
status’, such as interviews and focus groups (Phoenix 1990: 90). Phoenix calls attention to the 
fact that issues reach greater importance in social research (i.e. they are funded, published, and 
acknowledged in academia) if considered a ‘social problem’, and studies usually intend to deliver 
specialized understanding of them in order to ‘ameliorate or eradicate them’ (Phoenix 1990: 92). 
However, critical feminist perspectives call into question the sheer idea of ‘social problem’, dis-
cussing the production of stigmatized social positions, abjections, and inferiorities by traditional 
social sciences.
Following this line of argumentation I will mention two research projects that are located 
in the field of feminist psychology. Both projects critically discuss themes that are addressed as 
‘social problems’ by traditional psychology. The first one is Mountian’s research on drugs and 
gender; the second, my own research work on adolescents and their meanings of freedom. Both 
drugs and adolescents are objects of normalization and control in psychology theories, but these 
research projects have sought to critically understand the dynamics and processes involved in the 
construction of these issues. Also, their fieldwork was oriented by feminist perspectives, which 
are concerned with listening to voices that are usually unappreciated in academic theories.
In her work, Mountian (2013) brings a critical analysis on discourses on drugs and drug use, 
and their intersections with gender, sexuality, race, class, and age. A critical deconstruction of 
the notions around ‘drugs’ is put forward, unravelling key discursive constructions, particularly 
on how medical, religious, and juridical discourses impact contemporary ideas of drugs, their 
uses, and public policies. Drawing on feminist, postcolonial, and critical theories and discourse 
analysis, the author revisits the history of drugs, emphasizing how specific social imaginary 
formations are enhanced throughout central events in relation to drug use and prohibition in 
Western societies.

Amana Mattos
336
Here, the very understanding of drugs is challenged, since ‘the definition of drugs appears 
fluid, and this gives space for various interpretations, having specific discursive effects’ (Mount-
ian 2013: 29). In the same vein, gender is understood as a performative process, where the focus 
is on discursive categories on gender and, in particular, on how these operate regarding women. 
The intersections with race and class are also considered, likewise seen as fluid and varying 
according to social-political context. However, the historical fixity of some discourses is consid-
ered in their production, being therefore historically constituted and reiterated.
By analyzing discourses on the female drug user, Mountian explains how discourses on victim 
and threat operate regarding women. These consider the social position of women in relation to 
the nation, associate women and drugs with ideas such as uncontrolled, weak, and dependent, 
and attribute the sexed body to a production of specific social imaginaries of women and drugs. 
In the case of women, a sexual gaze is operating, and the dynamics of visibility and invisibility of 
drug use for women are at stake, having important effects on women’s drug use and drug policies.
My own research work discusses the meanings that adolescents give to freedom in their lives 
(Mattos 2012). As not-yet-adult subjects, teenagers in contemporary big cities experience their 
(lack of ) freedom in contexts where they do not fully participate as citizens, having their own 
narratives, expectations, and problems related to invisible or unappreciated freedom. Listening to 
and understanding their speeches were important guidelines for my fieldwork.
There I discuss the problematic dimension of freedom when taken in its liberal sense. In our 
society, liberal authors, mainly white highly educated men, state that the more freedom one has, 
the better. The liberal concept of negative freedom, which affirms that someone is freer if they 
face less obstacles to their action, can be found in widespread ideas related to freedom in Western 
contemporary society. Liberal influences can also be broadly found in the bases of psychology, 
especially in relation to the development of the autonomous and able-for-freedom individual 
(Burman 2011, 2008a; Mattos 2012).
However, even if freedom is understood as something private, individuals need to deal with 
others in order to act freely. Therefore, the experience of freedom is always something tense, 
conflict-inducing, and marked by dissension. Dealing with all resulting conflicts and different 
individual interests brings us to an experience of strong political potentiality. One of the main 
goals during my fieldwork was to discuss these problems with teenage subjects from different 
socioeconomic contexts in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. I conducted focus groups where participants 
raised many interesting points that queried the abstract idea of a free/independent individual. 
Their experiences and observations improved my discussion of freedom, which is a subject 
neglected in psychological approaches – at least in a political and subjective way.
Conclusions
Feminist interventions in psychology thus compose a heterogeneous field of research and 
­intervention. As a critical perspective on science and academic practices, feminist works raise 
questions for traditional theories on the universal subject of psychology, interrogating its con-
struction and highlighting sexist and colonial discourses. These hegemonic discourses invisibilize 
and oppress differences, producing hierarchies and unequal power relations through psycholo-
gists’ knowledge and practices.
Since feminist psychology is a critical perspective, it does not find wide recognition among 
conservative researchers. Raising research funds and having studies published in acknowledged 
scientific journals are problems frequently faced by researchers that locate themselves in this 
area. Notwithstanding this, understanding and deconstructing these everyday oppressions is an 
important task. This critical deconstruction permeates both intellectual and activist work.

Feminist psychology
337
Further reading
Burman, E. (ed) (1998) Feminists and Psychological Practices. London, Sage.
Burman, E. (2008) Deconstructing Developmental Psychology. London: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1990). Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York, London: Routledge.
Website resources
Annual Review of Critical Psychology 2005 special issue on feminisms and activisms: http://www.discourseunit. 
com/annual-review/arcp-4-feminisms-and-activivisms/
Annual Review of Critical Psychology 2014 special issue on gender and sexuality: http://www.discourseunit.
com/arcp-11-gender-and-sexuality/
References
Alanen, L. (2001) ‘Estudos feministas/estudos da infância: paralelos, ligações e perspectivas’, in Castro, Lucia 
Rabello de (org) Crianças e Jovens na Construção da Cultura. Rio de Janeiro: NAU.
Anzaldúa, G. (2007) Borderlands: the New Mestiza – La Frontera. San Francisco, CA: Aunt Lute Books.
Benhabib, S. (1987) ‘The generalized and the concrete Other: the Kohlberg-Gilligan Controversy and 
feminist theory’, in S. Benhabib, and D. Cornell (eds) Feminism as Critique: Essays on the Politics of Gender 
in Late Capitalist Society. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Benjamin, J. (1987) ‘The decline of the Oedipus complex’, in J. Broughton (ed.) Critical Theories of Psycho-
logical Development. New York and London: Plenum.
Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. (1991) The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. 
Middlesex: Penguin Books.
Burman, E. (1998) ‘Deconstructing feminist psychology’, in E. Burman (ed.) Deconstructing Feminist Psy-
chology. London: Sage.
Burman, E. (2008a) Deconstructing Developmental Psychology. London: Routledge.
Burman, E. (2008b) Developments: Child, Image, Nation. London: Routledge.
Burman, E. (2011) ‘Deconstructing neoliberal childhood: towards a feminist antipsychological approach’. 
Childhood, 19(4), 423–438.
Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York, London: Routledge.
Castro, L. (1998) ‘Uma teoria da infância na contemporaneidade’, in L. Castro (org) Infância e Adolescência na 
Cultura do Consumo. Rio de Janeiro: Nau Editora.
Chodorow, N. (1978) The Reproduction of Mothering: Psychoanalysis and the Sociology of Gender. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press.
Coole, D. (1993) ‘Constructing and deconstructing liberty: a feminist and poststructuralist analysis’, Political 
Studies, 41, 83–95.
Erikson, E. (1987) Childhood and Society. London: Paladin Grafton Books.
Friedman, M. and Bolte, A. (2001) ‘Ethics and feminism’, in L. Alcoff and E. Linda (eds) The Blackwell Guide 
to Feminist Philosophy. Malden: Blackwell Publishing.
Foucault, M. (1978) The History of Sexuality – Volume 1: an Introduction. New York: Pantheon Books.
Fulani, L. (1998) ‘Moving beyond morality and identity’, in E. Burman (ed.) Deconstructing Feminist Psy-
chology. London: Sage.
Gilligan, C. (1982) In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.
Haraway, D. (1991) ‘A cyborg manifesto: science, technology, and socialist-feminism in the late twentieth 
century’, in Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New York: Routledge.
Harding, S. (1993) ‘Rethinking standpoint epistemology: what is strong objectivity?’, in L. Alcoff and  
E. Potter (eds) Feminist Epistemologies. London: Routledge.
Haug, F. (1998) ‘Questions concerning methods in feminist resarch’, in E. Burman (ed.) Feminists and Psy-
chological Practices. London: Sage.
Hirschmann, N. J. (2003) The Subject of Liberty: Toward a Feminist Theory of Freedom. Princeton and Oxford: 
Princeton University Press.
Kitzinger, C. (1990) ‘Resisting the discipline’, in E. Burman (ed.) Feminists and Psychological Practices. 
London: Sage.
Lorde, A. (2007) Sister Outsider. Berkeley: Crossing Press.

Amana Mattos
338
Louro, G. (1997) Gênero, Sexualidade e Educação: Uma Perspectiva Pós-estruturalista. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Louro, G. (2010) ‘Pedagogias da sexualidade’, in G. Louro (org) O Corpo Educado. Belo Horizonte: Autêntica.
Mattos, A. (2011) Liberdade, um Problema do Nosso Tempo. Rio de Janeiro: Fundação Getúlio Vargas.
Mattos, A. R. (2012) Liberdade, um problema do nosso tempo: os sentidos de liberdade para os jovens no 
contemporâneo. 1. ed. Rio de Janeiro: Fundação Getúlio Vargas.
Mattos, A., Perez, B., Almada, V. and Castro, L. (2013) ‘O cuidado na relação professor-aluno e sua poten-
cialidade política’, Estudos de Psicologia, 18(2), 369–377.
Mountian, I. (2013) Cultural Ecstasies: Drugs, Gender and the Social Imaginary. London: Routledge.
Neves, S. and Nogueira, C. (2004) ‘Metodologias feministas na psicologia social crítica: a ciência ao serviço 
da mudança social’, Ex aequo: revista da Associação Portuguesa de Estudos sobre as Mulheres, 11, 408–412.
Nogueira, C. (2001) ‘Contribuições do construcionismo social a uma nova psicologia do gênero’, Cadernos 
de Pesquisa, 112, 137–153.
Phoenix, A. (1990) ‘Social research in the context of feminist psychology’, in E. Burman (ed.) Feminist and 
Psychological Practice. London: Sage.
Piaget, J. (2001)The Psychology of Intelligence. London: Routledge.
Saavedra, L. and Nogueira, C. (2006) ‘Memórias sobre o feminismo na psicologia: para a construção de 
memórias futuras’, Memorandum, 11, 113–127.
Saffioti, H. (2001) ‘Contribuições feministas para o estudo da violência de gênero’, Cadernos Pagu, 16, 
115–136.
Sevenhuijsen, S. (1998) Citizenship and the Ethics of Care: Feminist Considerations on Justice, Morality and Poli-
tics. London and New York: Routledge.
Spivak, G. (1988) ‘Can the subaltern speak?’, in C. Nelson and L. Grossberg (eds) Marxism and the Interpre-
tation of Culture, Basingstone: Macmillan Education.
Trinh, M. (1989) Woman, Native, Other. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Valsiner, J. (1989) Human Devlopment and Culture. Lexington: Lexington Books.
Walkerdine, V., Lucey, H. and Melody, J. (2001) Growing Up Girl: Psycho-social Explorations of Gender and 
Class. New York: New York University Press.

339
To explain the complete social and political context in which the term ‘queer’ appeared would 
go beyond the limits of this chapter, and to try to define what the concept means exactly, is an 
idea we discarded. This, not only because the large diversity of understandings and uses of the 
term ‘queer’ which ‘contradict each other irresolvably’ ( Jagose 1996: 99), but also because we 
take note of the warning given by Nikki Sullivan (2003: 43) when she pointed out that trying 
to do this is ‘a decidedly un-queer thing to do’. If we add to this the origin and contradictory 
development of ‘queer’ since it was claimed and appropriated in the US by activists at the end of 
the 1980s and beginning of the 1990s, with ACT UP and The Queer Nation Manifesto (1990) 
as the key actors, and its controversial inclusion in the academic field as a ‘uniqueersity banquet’ 
as Paco Vidarte called it (2005), then our task becomes even more complex.
Here we would like to leave a trail about the difficulties in translating the word ‘queer’ 
(which comes from the Indo-European root ‘twerkw’) into other languages. Despite all attempts 
so far, the general option has been to maintain the English term. There are several reasons for 
this, including maintaining a geopolitically non-located recognition of the term, avoiding gram-
matically gendered words in Romance languages, or even to avoid leaving out any of its multiple 
meanings. In Spain, for example, there is also the issue of a sexist appropriation by a sector of the 
gay ‘community’ when translating it.
Notwithstanding all these problems, we do want to point out, as a quick introduction to 
the term, how it was used by Queer Nation (1990) when they said that ‘It’s a way of telling 
ourselves we don’t have to be witty and charming people who keep our lives discreet and 
marginalized in the straight world’ (‘Why Queer?’: par. 4). Use of the term therefore involved a 
re-appropriation of a term related to rarity and strangeness, as a self-interpellation of a concept 
which at that time ‘was not yet a cable-TV synonym for gay; it carried a high-voltage charge of 
insult and stigma’ (Warner 2012: par. 4), as a subversive resource of displacement or for inverting 
the politics of enunciation. One of its own ‘rarities’ include the fact that Teresa de Lauretis, the 
author who is considered to have imported the term into the academy at a conference in 1990, 
stated: ‘My “queer”. . . had no relation to the Queer Nation group, of whose existence I was 
ignorant at the time’ (de Lauretis 1991: xvii). Some years later, she even classified it as a term that 
‘has quickly become a conceptually vacuous creature of the publishing industry’ (de Lauretis 
1994/2007: 200).
35
Queer theory
Disarticulating critical psychology
Miguel Roselló Peñaloza and Teresa Cabruja Ubach

Miguel Roselló Peñaloza and Teresa Cabruja Ubach
340
Beyond its meaning and implications as a theoretical proposal or ‘paradigm’, as it is called by 
some, we can also find some criticisms regarding its use. For example, Gloria Anzaldúa (1991) 
called for the intersectionalism of the concept, saying that:
Queer is used as a false unifying umbrella which all ‘queers’ of all races, ethnicities and 
classes are shoved under. At the times we need this umbrella to solidify our ranks against 
outsiders [but] we must not forget that it homogenizes, erases our differences. Yes, we may 
all love members of the same sex, but we are not the same.
(164)
In other words, this metaphorical concept of a ‘happy umbrella . . . that would exclude no one’ 
(Warner 2012: par. 5) ‘gives a false impression of inclusiveness [and] promotes the misleading 
notion that queer solidarity has decisively triumphed’ (Halperin 1995: 64). This goes in line 
with the criticism made by de Lauretis (1991) regarding the integration of geopolitical, ethnical 
cultural, and social and political discourses, as well as with what Ruth Goldman (1996: 175) 
called the ‘constructed silences within queer theory’ surrounding bisexuality, for example. To 
these problems we would also add the new fashion of ‘wearing a pair of queer goggles’, just to 
touch on a theme that is under study, since it is totally against the very postulates and positions 
claimed by and for the queer.
Instead of providing a definition, then, we will give some background to the conditions of 
possibility of its emergence, and the way these conditions coincided with debates started in the 
1980s in social movements and in universities about modern rationalism. As summarized by 
Tamsin Spargo (1999: 9): ‘queer theory is not a singular or systematic conceptual or methodo-
logical framework, but a collection of intellectual engagements with the relations between sex, 
gender, and sexual desire’.
Heading towards something called queer theory
Despite the fact that its origin and rapid spread is especially located in the Anglo-Saxon world, 
we would like to stress that most of the key contributions to the development of queer theory, 
ranging from de-naturalizing sexuality to concerning its use as a normative device, come from 
the works of French philosophers like Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida, who destabilize the 
straight/homo binary and analyze biopolitics and the place of logocentrism in Western knowledge. 
In addition, the epistemological and methodological review of studies on sexuality, as well as gay 
and lesbian studies, in queer theory feeds on and is indebted to feminism, not only for the gene-
alogy of patriarchal relations and the notion of gender, but also for the contemporary reviews and 
discussions in third-wave feminism in line with post-structuralist and postmodern interventions.
In this sense, the contributions of Judith Butler to re-formulating the concept of gender, 
understood as an effect of political truth and illusion of expressiveness, are essential. She pointed 
out that the ‘construct called “sex” is as culturally constructed as gender; indeed, perhaps it was 
always already gender, with the consequence that the distinction between sex and gender turns 
out to be no distinction at all’ (Butler 1990/2008: 9–10). Meaning is seen as operating through 
a cultural fiction of a sexual ‘original’ that does not actually exist, where ‘the effect of gender is 
produced through the stylization of the body’ as a materialization process, from a ‘styled repeti-
tion of [theatrical and linguistic] acts’ (Butler 1990/2008: 191) that are culturally determined, ‘a 
practice of improvisation within a scene of constraint’ (Butler 2004: 1).
This ‘de-essentialisation’ of gender as a performing act does not mean denying its effects 
on people’s lives. Neither does it mean rejecting identifications; rather it is an invitation to 

Queer theory
341
re-appropriate and re-signify the categories that converge in ‘identity’, ‘in order to render that 
category, in whatever form, permanently problematic’ (Butler 1990/2008: 174). And, of course, 
her text ‘Critically queer’ (1993) elaborates a ‘performative’ approach based on Austin’s linguistic 
pragmatics and the contributions made by Foucault concerning ‘sex’, both for gender and for 
drag, pulling away from the common misunderstanding of it as some kind of free ‘choice’ taking 
place in the interior of each individual.
Another recognized influence can be located in the work of Eve Sedgwick (1985), who 
extended the de-naturalization of ‘sex’ to the homosexuality/heterosexuality binary and the-
orized about ‘homosocial’ forms of domination constructed through the repudiation of erotic 
ties between men and the stigmatization of the homosexual. She also showed how the politics 
of enunciation, which gives or takes away legitimacy to categories of people who speak about 
or describe reality, operate by constructing silences around homosexuality, in what she called 
the ‘Epistemology of the Closet’ (1990). In turn, these silences turn into confessional imper-
atives, with a double consequence of public scandal when ‘coming out’, or being blamed for 
not revealing something that, nevertheless, homosexuals are constrained to hide: their ‘sexual 
orientation’, a construct that Sedgwick also helped problematize.
In addition, and apart from the understanding of the heterosexual political regime expressed 
by Monique Wittig in her queered version, as the philosopher Beatriz Preciado (2005) suggests, 
regarding the way that both materialist and performative feminisms elude lesbian and transgen-
der sexuality and corporality, there is also an understanding of how ‘sexpolitics’ (Preciado 2004) 
operate as a form of contemporary capitalist biopolitical action, where discourses and modern 
technologies about sex and identities participate in controlling life. In this framework, ‘queer 
movements and theories reply with strategies that are, at the same time, hyper-identitarian and 
post-identitarian. They make a radical use of the political resources for the performative produc-
tion of deviated identities’ (par. 7).
Therefore, we could establish that the disarticulation of ‘heteronormativity’, or the cultural/
political privilege of heterosexuality as the axis of intimacy and the pillar of social participation 
and organization (Berlant and Warner 1998), is another of the pillars of the queer theoretical 
and activist edifice, whether that is seen as built from an understanding of heteronormativity 
as ‘heterosexual contract’ (Monique Wittig), ‘compulsory heterosexuality’ (Adrienne Rich), or 
‘heterosexual matrix’ ( Judith Butler). They together operate as a complex theoretical corpus of 
criticism against current political regimes of sexuality, with the capacity to construct radically 
illegitimate (and even unrecognizable) subjects and bodies.
In a still more radical line lies ‘the antisocial turn in queer theory’, an expression coined 
in 2005 at the panel ‘The Antisocial Thesis in Queer Theory’, among whose participants were  
Lee Edelman and Judith (now Jack) Halberstam (as cited in Downing and Gillet 2011). As sum-
marized by Laura Stamm (2011), this antisocial turn would be marked by the search for a hetero-
clite society, which would include redefining sexual desires in society and developing a policy of 
rejecting social values, (hetero)sexual reproduction, and the rhetorical emphasis of the Child, at the 
heart of which lies the Freudian Oedipus Complex as a civilized ideal of the family constitution.
Turning (to) psychology
It must be pointed out that the notion itself of ‘psychology’, even the ostensibly ‘critical’ psy-
chology, risks becoming disarticulated from a radical approach on queer theories. In the words 
of Downing and Gillet (2011: 5), ‘since “normal behavior” is not just the object of psychology, 
but also its subject, it is possible to argue that rejecting such a notion is tantamount to repudi-
ating psychology as a discipline’. The starting point of this section of our chapter is therefore 

Miguel Roselló Peñaloza and Teresa Cabruja Ubach
342
an invitation to reflect on the possibilities of bringing queer theory into psychology, or queering 
psychological practice. We will being by summarizing the ways in which queer theory has 
critically questioned psychology, since we find different contributions such as: (a) examining 
how this field has called into attention ‘the ways that modern epistemologies flip back and forth 
between conceptualizing sexuality as an act and as an identity in ways that create discriminatory 
effects’ (Hegarty and Barker 2005: 7); (b) showing that, in the search for causes or explanations 
of the borderlines occupied by queer identities and sexualities, the discipline operates by con-
structing ‘abnormalities’ and regulating social aspects of people’s lives; (c) being aware that when 
understanding ‘sexuality as ideology’, it disarticulates, rather than simply displaces, the dividing 
line between what is taken to be normal or healthy and what is supposedly abnormal or patho-
logical; (d) making an ethical criticism of the reduction of the forms of otherness that entail 
understanding others, a reduction to what psychology can recognize as lying in its own domain; 
and (e) questioning the discipline, in general terms, from the position of queer as ‘de-centered 
from the norm’ (Minton 1997: 349).
If we go back to Foucault’s (1978: 101) argument that ‘discourse can be both an instrument 
and an effect of power, but also an hindrance, a stumbling-block, a point of resistance and a start-
ing point for an opposing strategy’, and notice that psychology flows from and takes on a status 
of ‘truth’ as a key cultural element in social regulation – and not because it is the unveiling of 
the universal functioning of human beings – then we can understand the emergence of ‘queer’ 
as a position of resistance that is internal to this dominant cultural and scientific construct of 
identities and subjectivities.
Presenting queer theory in this way allows us to develop our own position at some distance 
both from a simplistic politics of ‘liberation’ and from illusions of modern ‘rationality’ in order 
to understand the concept of queer as an illusion of exteriority and an effect of resistance in its 
networks of power, within the very same discursive space as the discipline of psychology itself, 
all of this without forgetting, as Paco Vidarte (2005: 77) said, that ‘the queer theory was not born 
in universities and will neither enter its classrooms pacifically’. 
An example: psychotherapy?
We will take as an example what often happens in the field of psychotherapy. As has been 
pointed out by several authors, for instance, in a recent compilation made in Argentina and 
Brazil by Fernández and Siqueira (2013), there is a great lack of knowledge about, and great deal 
of prejudice towards, erotic, sexual, and relational diversities in several professional fields. In this 
respect, they consider it urgent to link psychology to queer studies and use this for other local 
cultural struggles.
Psychotherapy, particularly in the versions of it that feed on gay and lesbian studies, studies 
which lie at the root of contemporary queer theory, has focused on disarticulating psycho-
pathologizing models of homosexuality and lesbianism. One of the main contributions to the 
discipline is so-called gay affirmative therapy, a term first used by Alan Malyon in 1982 and 
defined as ‘a special range of psychological knowledge which challenges the traditional view 
that homosexual desire and fixed homosexual orientations are pathological’ (cited in Butler 
2009: 340), which later on, due to the exclusions it repeated in its restriction to ‘gay’ clients, was 
expanded to ‘LGBT affirmative therapy’, ‘sexuality affirmative therapy’, or ‘affirmative therapy’.
However, despite its specific aim to dismantle heterosexism, an aim which is shared by what 
we could call the queer project, several criticisms have emerged against ‘affirmative therapy’, some 
of them mentioned by Smith et al. (2012), and which are related to the reification of gender and 
sexual identities and its operations through an assimilationist logic. We would also add that the 

Queer theory
343
very concept of ‘therapy’ is problematic within the optic of queer theory, and also from within 
the approach of ‘critical psychology’, since that approach has already established a criticism of 
the tendency of the discipline to individualize social, linguistic, and cultural problems and to 
normalize ways of being through its nosological categories and assumptions about identity, not 
to mention oppressive constructions of what is taken to be ‘mental health’.
As to the issue of power in psychotherapeutic relationships, Damien Riggs (2011), who is 
committed to the democratization of power in an ‘evidence-based practice’, offers an explicitly 
conflictual solution, one in which the therapist should recognize the coexistence of a top-down 
power and use his position of knowledge for productive purposes and queer intentions, that is, 
for example, by facilitating a transition beyond heteronormative discourses. However, we won-
der if, in doing so, clinical practice may become a vehicle for a strange kind of queered regulation 
from an illusory position of exteriority that simply displaces, but does not disarticulate, the 
dominant ideological lines of ‘well-being’ and ‘mental health’.
A problematic example of applying queer notions to therapeutic practice comes from what 
Smith et al. (2012) describe as the paradox of the lexical use of identities in clinical practice. 
While referring to categorical language that strengthens binarism as an accomplice of nor-
mative regulation, they point out that ‘without social identity categories, critically conscious 
counselors have no way to speak to the inequitable experiences of millions’ (Smith et al. 2012: 
390). So, in the very practice of collaborating to give visibility to delegitimized (and abused) 
bodies in mainstream discourses, it is worth asking about the conditions of possibility for artic-
ulating a politics of resistance from inside these spaces. The answer provided by the authors of 
a so-called dual practice by the therapist, clinical and activist, does not seem sufficient enough 
given that therapy is still working, in the best of cases, at the level of the effects of politically 
challenged discursive networks, which should be interrogated at their ideological roots.
We cite these few queering examples concerning psychotherapeutic practice (ones which are, 
so far, still problematic) to give visibility to what we consider to be a complex and very often 
contradictory task. Even the main therapeutic objective of these approaches (mitigating the sub-
jective effects of oppression by challenging the constitution of what is ‘marginal’) problematizes 
a queer politics of becoming and taking on, precisely, the margins and their effects of subjecti-
fication, of becoming un-findable. This queer politics would entail institutional disarticulation, 
and not an attempt to protect the practice of psychotherapy against such a disarticulation; those 
dominant practices produce subjects who are not simply victimized by the oppressive opera-
tions of power (Foucault 1978; Jagose 1996). A psychotherapeutic work of this kind can there-
fore only be done through negotiating and virtually fitting together its radical notions, always 
through complex techniques and forced partial sacrifices.
And psychoanalysis, is it still relevant?
In a similar way, the relationship between psychoanalysis and queer theory is, in the best of cases, 
complex. As Javier Sáez (2004: 193) has argued, ‘from the queer perspective non-normative 
sexual practices are ways of symbolical and political resistance; they are never a subjective 
positioning of a psychological or psychoanalytical origin or a structure of desire’. Feminist 
authors such as Gayle Rubin and, later on, Teresa de Lauretis, made outspoken criticisms of, for 
example, the ‘phallocentrism’ of Lacan’s works, and Foucauldian authors such as Didier Eribon 
(1999/2001) have pointed to the ‘heterocentrism’ and even the homophobia in psychoanalysis. 
Peter Hegarty (2009), for instance, noted that psychoanalysis ‘repeatedly promised to address 
fears about the impure development of children who might lapse into homosexuality’ (‘The 
past of Kid Stuff’, par. 5), and David Halperin (2004) criticized the psychoanalytical approach 

Miguel Roselló Peñaloza and Teresa Cabruja Ubach
344
to HIV and unprotected sex practices which constructs a persuasive (and psychopathologizing) 
theory linking homosexuals to the ‘death drive’.
Nevertheless, there are several academics who include psychoanalysis in their reflections 
within the queer theory. Authors such as Tim Dean (2003: 245) have asserted that ‘it is thanks 
to ideas as this one – the instinct’s original independence of its object – that Freud rather than 
Foucault may be credited as the intellectual founder of queer theory’. One of its most radical 
ideas, concerning the dissolution of the feminine essence or the treatment of femininity as a 
masquerade, was put forward by Joan Rivière, for one, at the start of the twentieth century. This 
then connects with Judith Butler’s theorizations of ‘masquerade’, as well as those of Julia Kristeva 
when looking into abjection in greater depth, and this notion has itself then been used in several 
ways by queer theory. But of course, we are considering precisely the most radical and critical 
proposals within psychoanalysis, a practice which is still struggling to abandon a certain theory 
of the subject. We include, for example, a proposal by Ian Hodges (2011) to queerify psychoanal-
ysis with regards to the Oedipus complex, as a comprehensive model of the transgenerational 
transmission of heteronormative ideals. Drawing on the psychoanalytic work of the feminist 
Juliet Mitchell, Hodges re-conceptualizes this model as a heteronormative product and, at the 
same time, as a descriptor and prescriber in the production of heterosexual subjects, rather than 
a universal model for the psychic conformation of the subject.
So, critical psychology, is it critical enough?
Critical psychology can be seen as a heterogeneous landscape of rupture with hegemonic main-
stream psychology, a heterogeneous landscape that includes social constructionist approaches, 
discourse psychology, post-empiricist psychology, and post-structuralist feminist psychology. 
Approaches to the social construction of human phenomena and that of science in general, 
those which call for the dissolution of disciplinary borders and which criticize their normative 
and regulatory effects, constitute a point in common with queer theory. Nevertheless, it is from 
this approach that we also see disagreements arise: ‘critical relativism’ versus ‘critical realism’; 
attempts to develop a ‘politics of recognition’ and ‘un/identification’ of the homo-hetero binary; 
and studies of the materiality of the body or its rejection of that materiality, for instance.
It is true, of course, that there are common themes in the critical psychological debates: a 
critique of Cartesian humanism and individualism; opposition to positivist traditions and the 
knowledge of identities and bodies; criticism of the regulatory and bio-governance effects of 
psychology; suspicion of claims to universality; the use of contributions from deconstruction, 
Foucault’s genealogical method, and other instruments of postmodern thought regarding ‘other-
ness’; and dilemmas and debates concerning the androcentric and (hetero)patriarchal, or ethno-
centric and colonialist character, of psychology (Fox and Prilleltensky 1997; Ibáñez and Íñiguez 
1997; Parker 1989). Yet how can critical psychology be critical without being self-critical, taking 
into account and prioritizing sexualities, not just as part of its own agenda but as something that 
is cross-cutting and disturbing every taken-for-granted field and subject it deals with, including 
its own methodologies? Of course, queer theory, despite appearing and existing at the same time 
as critical psychology, is reminding us of its own incomplete pathway regarding sexualities, and 
its destabilizing potential. It seems as if there is some sort of ‘simultaneous absorption and occlu-
sion of queer in this new introduction to critical psychology’ (Downing and Gillett 2011: 4) 
that does not quite manage to include all the aspects on hetero(sex)normativity and is especially 
confined to certain concrete areas.
We may also ask ourselves, regarding critical psychology and its institutionalization, and 
previous studies concerning sexualities, both gay and lesbian or even feminist studies, where 

Queer theory
345
we stand in relation to this acceptance and assimilation of or rejection of and resistance to 
queer theory itself. In this sense, we should at least consider that, besides the controversy over 
its subversive capacity in the street and the academy, it is also important to value the fact that 
‘despite its implicit (and false) portrayal of lesbian and gay studies as liberal, assimilationist, 
and accommodating of the status quo, queer theory has proven to be much more congenial 
to established institutions of the liberal academy’ (Halperin 2003: 341). However, if we look 
at how the contributions made by one of its exponents, Judith Butler, are being included 
in several fields of critical psychology, into methodologies of research and intervention, we 
could understand it as part of a process of queering psychology. For instance, from the position 
of someone doing research, reflecting on how the ‘identities’ of people who participate in 
a research project are constructed, to looking at how an understanding on the relationships 
of hetero(sex)partriarchal violence can be expanded and, of course, all the depathologizing 
initiatives. We need to find a way of relating these ‘bodies that matter’ to all the subjects and 
themes of the discipline.
In a similar way, Marc Sherry (2004), commenting on studies on functional diversity, points 
in a provocative way to the need to ‘disable queerness’ and to ‘queering disability’: the first with 
regards to the challenges to exclusions from citizenship based on the discourse of ‘­disability’ 
(medicalization, pathologization, and treatments) that are present in cultural constructs of  ‘queer’; 
and the second with regards to disarticulating heteronormativity in the constructs of ‘disabled’ 
people who are subject to different processes of ‘enfreakment, particularly those that produce 
(often contradictory) notions of asexuality, vulnerability, inexhaustible sexual voraciousness, per-
version, and exoticism’ (Sherry 2004: 781). Here queer theory is brought to bear on questions 
of shame and sexual moralizing.
As expressed by Nancy Hirschmann (2013), there is an interconnection between disability 
studies (fear of disability) and queer theory (fear of queerness), founded both in the bodily/
sexual uncertainty and in the forms of artificial stability portrayed through cultural practices 
and discourse. The fear of this instability or uncertainty, which would otherwise push them to 
invisibility, would highlight the differences and would turn them into otherness, a situation that 
is similar for people who are constructed as being physically disabled and for those who are 
constructed as such based on their anti-normative (sexual) practices and identities. In fact, this 
invisibility appears as the recurring reason to express the need to incorporate queer theory into 
critical psychology.
Conclusion without ending
We conclude by returning to the point we made about limitations or controversies, the point 
that David Córdoba (2005: 23) makes concerning ‘making and talking queer theory as a form of 
political act of enunciative intervention by which, in a way, the authority of academic discipline 
is suspended and is decried from one of its margins’. We do not consider the ‘gender trouble’ 
that queer theory causes as a closed issue. It works as a troubling of assumptions within and 
alongside critical psychology, regarding the processes and strategies of legitimizing psychological 
and social knowledge.
In this respect, all practices which disarticulate what is normative are good for critical psy-
chology, particularly the double disarticulation of biological or social determinative factors. 
Queer approaches constitute a testing field for research and intervention for alternatives in 
critical psychology with a radicalized political agenda. But, we must always ask, to what extent? 
Is this queering critical psychology? Is this generating a queer critical psychology? Is it possible? 
It must remain open to further developments and applications.

Miguel Roselló Peñaloza and Teresa Cabruja Ubach
346
Further reading
Browne, K. and Nash, C. (2010) Queer Methods and Methodologies: Intersecting Queer Theories and Social Science 
Research. Surrey: Ashgate.
Hall, D. and Jagose, A. (2012) The Routledge Queer Studies Reader. London: Routledge.
Website resources
Parole de Queer: http://paroledequeer.blogspot.com.es/p/english.html
Stop-Trans-Pathologization: http://www.stp2012.info/old/en
References
Anzaldúa, G. (1991/2009) ‘To(o) queer the writer – Loca, escritora y chicana’, in A. Keating (ed.) The 
Gloria Anzaldúa Reader. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Berlant, L. and Warner, M. (1998) ‘Sex in public’, Critical Inquiry, 24(2), 547–566.
Butler, C. (2009) ‘Sexual and gender minority therapy and systemic practice’, Journal of Family Therapy, 31, 
338–358
Butler, J. (1990/2008) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York and London: 
Routledge.
Butler, J. (1993) ‘Critically queer’, in J. Butler, Bodies that Matter: on the Discursive Limits of ‘Sex’. New York 
and London: Routledge.
Butler, J. (2004) Undoing Gender. New York and London: Routledge.
Córdoba, D. (2005) ‘Teoría queer: reflexiones sobre sexo, sexualidad e identidad: Hacia una politización 
de la sexualidad’, in D. Córdoba, J. Sáez and P. Vidarte (eds) Teoría queer: políticas bolleras, maricas, trans, 
mestizas. Madrid: Egales.
de Lauretis, T. (1991) ‘Queer theory: lesbian and gay sexualities: an introduction’, Differences: A Journal of 
Feminist Cultural Studies, 3(2), iii–xviii.
de Lauretis, T. (1994/2007) ‘Habit changes’, in T. de Lauretis and P. White (eds) Figures of Resistance. Essays 
in Feminist Theory. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Dean, T. (2003) ‘Lacan and queer theory’, in J.-M. Rabaté (ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Lacan. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Downing, L. and Gillet, R. (2011) ‘Viewing critical psychology through the lens of queer’, Psychology and 
Sexuality, 2(1), 4–15.
Eribon, D. (1999/2001) Reflexiones sobre la cuestión gay. Barcelona: Anagrama.
Fernández, A. M. and Siqueira, W. (eds) (2013) La diferencia desquiciada. Géneros y diversidades sexuales. Buenos 
Aires: Biblios.
Foucault, M. (1978) The History of Sexuality. Volume 1: An Introduction. New York: Pantheon Books.
Fox, D. and Prilleltensky, I. (1997) Critical Psychology: An Introduction. London: Sage.
Goldman, R. (1996) ‘What is that queer queer? Exploring norms around sexuality, race, and class in queer 
theory’, in B. Beemyn and M. Eliason (eds) Queer Studies: a Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Anthol-
ogy. New York: New York University Press.
Halperin, D. (1995) Saint Foucault: Towards a Gay Hagiography. New York: Oxford University Press.
Halperin, D. (2003) ‘The normalization of queer theory’, Journal of Homosexuality, 45(2/3/4), 339–343.
Halperin, D. (2004) ‘Monsters from the ID: gay sex, psychoanalysis, and the inner life of male homosexual-
ity’. Paper presented at the Sexuality after Foucault Conference, University of Manchester (trans. Jessica 
Kreimerman), www.letraese.org.mx/Monstruos%20del%20ID.doc
Hegarty, P. (2009) ‘Queerying lesbian and gay psychology’s coming of age: was history just kid stuff?’, in 
M. O’Rourke and N. Giffney (eds) The Ashgate Research Companion to Queer Theory. Aldershot: Ash-
gate.http://www.academia.edu/3039054/Queerying_lesbian_and_gay_psychologys_coming_of_ 
age_Was_history_just_kid_stuff
Hegarty, P. and Barker, M. (2005) ‘Speaking of science and politics: Meg Barker interviews Peter Hegarty’, 
Psychology of Women Section Review, 7(2), 47–57.
Hirschmann, N. (2013) ‘Queer/Fear: disability, sexuality, and the other’, Journal of Medical Humanities, 34(2), 
139–147.
Hodges, I. (2011) ‘Queering psychoanalysis: power, self and identity in psychoanalytic therapy with sexual 
minority clients’, Psychology and Sexuality, 2(1), 29–44.

Queer theory
347
Ibáñez, T. and Íñiguez, L. (eds) (1997) Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Jagose, A. (1996) Queer Theory: an Introduction. New York: New York University Press.
Minton, H. (1997) ‘Queer theory: historical roots and implications for psychology’, Theory & Psychology, 
7, 337–353.
Parker, I. (1989) The Crisis in Modern Social Psychology: and How to End It. London: Routledge.
Preciado, B. (2004) ‘Multitudes queer: Notas para una política de los “anormales” ’, Revista Multitudes, 12, 
http://multitudes.samizdat.net/Multitudes-queer,1465
Preciado, B. (2005) ‘Devenir bollo-lobo o cómo hacerse un cuerpo queer a partir de El pensamiento het-
erosexual’, in D. Córdoba, J. Sáez and P. Vidarte (eds) Teoría queer: políticas bolleras, maricas, trans, mestizas. 
Madrid: Egales.
Queer Nation (1990) The Queer Nation Manifesto, http://www.historyisaweapon.com/defcon1/queernation. 
html
Riggs, D. (2011) ‘Queering evidence-based practice’, Psychology and Sexuality, 2, 87–98.
Sáez, J. (2004) Teoría Queer y Psicoanálisis. Madrid: Síntesis.
Segdwick, E. (1985) Between Men: English Literature and Male Homosocial Desire. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press.
Segdwick, E. (1990) Epistemology of the Closet. Oakland: University of California Press.
Sherry, M. (2004) ‘Overlaps and contradictions between queer theory and disability studies’, Disability and 
Society, 19(7), 769–783.
Smith, L., Shin, R. and Officer, L. (2012) ‘Moving counseling forward on LGB and transgender issues: 
speaking queerly on discourses and microaggresions’, The Counseling Psychologist, 40(3), 385–408.
Spargo, T. (1999) Foucault and Queer Theory. Cambridge and New York: Icon Books UK, Totem Books USA.
Stamm, L. (2011) Exploring the antisocial thesis in queer theory, https://dspace.lasrworks.org/handle/ 
10349/1100
Sullivan, N. (2003) A Critical Introduction to Queer Theory. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Vidarte: (2005) ‘El banquete uniqueersitario: disquisiciones sobre s(ab)er queer’, in D. Córdoba, J. Sáez y  
P.  Vidarte (eds) Teoría queer: políticas bolleras, maricas, trans, mestizas. Madrid: Egales.
Warner, M. (2012) ‘Queer and then?’ Chronicle of Higher Education, http://chronicle.com/article/
QueerThen-/130161/

348
The emergence of liberation psychology in Latin America can best be understood as an attempt 
to reform psychological praxis in relation to the fundamental questions of colonization and 
decolonization (Escobar 2007; Mignolo and Escobar 2010) in Latin America. This is to con-
sider liberation psychology in terms of the dialogue between knowledge and practices in con-
texts marked by inequalities, exclusion, poverty, (neo)colonization, and violence. Despite the 
changes of recent decades (Stolowicz 2007), the history of Latin America, like other ‘peripheral’ 
(Wallerstein 1996) regions of the world, can be seen in terms of ‘open veins’ for extraction and 
exploitation (Galeano 1998) and, taking into account the interdependent dimensions that make 
this region the most unequal in the world (PNUD 2011), where exclusion and poverty embody 
different expressions of violence, particularly in some places, with recent memories of coloniza-
tion and the signs of the coloniality of power, knowledge, and being.
In this context, liberation psychology in Latin America emerged as one instance of a con-
stellation of critical alternative praxis (Flores 2009), each intervention a response to the inade-
quacy of its discipline to confront the problems here described in terms of coloniality, including 
philosophy of liberation, theology of liberation, popular pedagogy, sociology of exploitation, 
dependency theory, and theatre of the oppressed. All of them share as articulating notions praxis, 
problematization, and awareness of or articulation with social movements.
Ignacio Martín-Baró’s intervention
A variety of responses to the crisis of psychology’s social relevance emerged in various parts of the 
world, but what emerged from Latin America was distinctive. There had been earlier uses of the term 
‘liberation psychology’ but it is Martín-Baró’s formulation that was decisive in shaping what we now 
know as liberation psychology. It is not easy to summarize what was an evolving approach to refor-
mulating psychology since, although he summarized it in some programmatic articles (Martín-Baró 
1985a, 1986, 1998), and most of these are available in English, an understanding of his distinctive 
orientation requires a consideration of a larger body of his work, and specifically his two textbooks of 
social psychology (Martín-Baró 1983, 1989b), his work on violence and war (Blanco and de la Corte 
Ibañez 2003; Martín-Baró 1988, 2000), and his public opinion research (Martín-Baró 1985b, 1989a). 
Nevertheless, ‘Towards a liberation psychology’ (Martín-Baró 1986) outlines his overall project.
36
Liberation psychology
Another kind of critical psychology
Mark Burton and Luis H. Gómez Ordóñez 

Liberation psychology
349
Martín-Baró was a practising priest, working at one of the centres of liberation theology at the 
University of Central America in San Salvador, and in the abovementioned article he used libera-
tion theology as an organizing framework, identifying ‘three essential elements for the construction 
of a psychology of the liberation of the Latin American peoples’. They were: (1) a ‘new horizon’, an 
outward turn from preoccupation with the scientific and social status of the discipline, and redefi-
nition of purpose in terms of the needs and interests of the majority of the Latin American people, 
which had been neglected both in the universities and in professional practice; (2) ‘A new episte-
mology’ where the criterion for psychology’s relevance, and indeed truth, is found through its inter-
rogation by those popular Latin American majorities in a lived process of revision. That would not 
involve a rejection of all previously existing psychology, but critically sifting its models and theories, 
discovering their ‘validity or deficiency, their usefulness or uselessness, their universality or provin-
cialism . . . their potential for liberation or subjugation’ (1986: 27); and (3) ‘A new praxis’: rather than 
merely academically adopting an assumed perspective of the oppressed other, ­knowledge will come 
from the attempt to transform that reality. This involves an activity that transforms reality.
Liberation psychology as a critique of psychology
Critique of the uncritical adoption of models from the North
One of the most salient stances of liberation psychology is its rejection of the uncritical adoption 
of knowledge from the ‘North’. The questioning of that imported reason, with its formulaic 
truths, is the posing of the epistemological problem wherein ‘the understanding of our reality 
ends up mediated by what schemata designed in other worlds can capture’ (Martín-Baró 1987a: 
304). ‘The problem with the concepts and models when used is not so much in what they see 
as in how they see, and above all, it is not so much what they make visible as in what they don’t 
capture; that is to say, not in their positivity but in their negativity’ (Martín-Baró 1998: 325).
Moreover, those schemata tend to be mediated by the traps of a theoretical apriorism that 
forces reality into predetermined categories, assuming a unidirectional and mechanical causality 
and a Manichean dualism. All these assumptions were discarded by natural science a long time 
ago. Liberation psychology considers them to be unnecessary baggage: Martín-Baró (1987a: 
315–316n) saw a kind of partial and limited objectivity resulting from an awareness of both the 
conditions under which knowledge is constructed and the values that guide praxis.
In order go beyond that, liberation psychology establishes as criteria the problematization of 
the relationships between the interests of ruling classes and the decontextualized use of theories 
in the name of those interests. As a result it questions the pretension of universality implicit in 
the uncritical adoption of models, without falling into the trap of ‘psychological patriotism’ 
which denies the importance of approaches from other parts of the world for reflection, thereby 
proclaiming itself as the only truth.
The challenges for liberation psychology, then, lie in the formulation of problems, the defi-
nition of theoretical frameworks, and the construction of safeguards for objectivity, all of which 
require decoding of concepts and methodologies originating from diverse experiences in order 
to build categories and instruments according to the commitment to understand complex real-
ities and to transform ourselves in the process.
Critique of complicity with power
Considering that ‘the greater part of social psychological knowledge has its roots in the per-
spective of established power’ (Martín-Baró 1983: viii), one important way for liberation 

Mark Burton and Luis H. Gómez Ordóñez 
350
psychology to disrupt this complicity with power has been to use committed knowledge, 
capable of going beyond the false dichotomy between science and commitment, with objec-
tives such as the rethinking of its theoretical models in several directions, the foremost being 
to transcend its conceptual heritage in order to strengthen support for the interests of the 
oppressed.
This challenging of power using epistemological inquiry, questioning the normalized crite-
ria of truth that are used to validate knowledge and relations of power, consequently demands 
conceptually reviewing the contextual boundaries of concepts. Moreover, the criteria of praxis, 
used with careful consideration of people’s voices, means focusing on the achievements of 
applied scientific knowledge with respect to the most important problems of populations 
worldwide
All this assumes the importance of the tasks of liberation, which in the case of liberation 
psychology had been defined within the study of social movements, their forms of conscience 
and organizational capabilities, as well as the analysis of those movements as instruments and 
collective subjects both in resistance and in the construction of options for well-being.
Critique of individualizing and victim-blaming ideology
A third way in which liberation psychology is a critique of dominant psychology is in its 
non-individualistic and pro-victim stances, which go together. One of Martín-Baró’s key arti-
cles (Martín-Baró 1987b) was a critique of the ideological construction of the ‘lazy Latino’ 
that has characterized both external and internal perceptions of the ‘essential character’ of the 
‘Latin American’. Martín-Baró analyzes this construction in popular imagination, literature, 
and social scientific theory, using a variety of research evidence to demonstrate the lack of 
support for a general characteristic of fatalism, as either essential or as socially constructed but 
then functionally autonomous character. He shows how fatalism is not characteristic of Latin 
Americans in general. It does not characterize the elites, nor those involved in social move-
ments or in the changed social conditions of post-revolutionary Cuba; it is characteristic of 
specific social and historical conditions. Moreover, where attempts to change social conditions 
have been defeated, fatalism reflects that social reality (cf. Mepham 1972), ideologically offer-
ing meaning to the oppressed but cementing domination by the ruling classes. As he points 
out (1987b: 214):
A society’s structural reality is not a fact of nature, but of history. Its construction and 
functioning lie in the intersubjectivity of the groups and persons who make it up. . . . What 
brings about domination is not ideas, but rather power in social relations, acquired through 
the appropriation of resources most necessary for human life. . . . But such domination is not 
firmly established until individuals accept it psychologically, until it becomes a conception 
of life, and indeed common sense.
This rejection of mainstream psychology’s individualism characterizes the ‘really social psy-
chology’ of liberation psychology (Burton and Kagan 2009). Society is conflictual and power 
is omnipresent, rooted in distinct social interests. So power is understood not just on an inter-
personal basis but in terms of its organization in society (Martín-Baró 1989b: 91–188). The 
conception is dialectical, overcoming a dualistic conception of the individual-society relation, 
replacing it with a transformational understanding of the co-construction of society and per-
sons (Bhaskar 1979) wherein the person is both product and active reproducer-transformer of 
social relations.

Liberation psychology
351
Critical assimilation of psychological concepts
A contrast can be made between the rather eclectic approach of Martín-Baró in particular, and 
liberation psychology in general, and the kind of purism that can characterize some other cur-
rents of critical psychology. This applies both to theory and to method. Yet the approach is not an 
uncritical ‘anything goes’ eclecticism. Instead, concepts and methods are used in order to under-
stand the processes of oppression, and to support liberatory action. Martín-Baró, for instance, 
used rather traditional opinion research techniques to challenge the way the Salvadorean mil-
itary government presented the views of the population both internally and internationally –  
this was, as he noted, a means of de-ideologizing social reality. As the various collections of 
liberation psychology papers attest (Dobles and Baltodano 2010; Dobles et al. 2007; Guzzo and 
Lacerda 2011; Montero and Sonn 2009; Vázquez 2000), psychologists working with a liberatory 
approach have utilized methods as diverse as participatory action research, photo-voice, commu-
nity therapy, drama, and ideology-critique, as well as the more orthodox approaches of literature 
review, content analysis, and survey methods.
Conceptually, Martín-Baró almost seamlessly integrated the classic (North American and 
European) literature of general social psychology with theory from sociology, anthropology, 
and political science, combining empiricist, psychodynamic, gestalt, Marxist, and even emerging 
post-structuralist ideas. And workers in fields such as critical community psychology (Burton 
and Kagan 2009; Kagan et al. 2011; Montero and Serrano García 2011; Rocha Brandao and 
Aurea Cruz Bomfin 1999; Seedat et al. 2001; Ximenes et al. 2008), which is strongly influenced 
by liberation psychology, have similarly utilized a rich diversity of conceptual and practical 
resources from within and outside psychology’s supposed disciplinary boundary. Liberation psy-
chology practice then can be understood as a kind of critically constructive bricolage.
A distinctive kind of critical psychology
Martín-Baró’s overall method, then, can be broadly characterized as the critical and committed 
(re)construction of a psychology to address the most important social problems of the oppressed, 
taking the perspective and history of the oppressed and the social contexts into account. On the 
theoretical level, best demonstrated in his two social psychology textbooks (Martín-Baró 1983, 
1989b), this involved a creative but rigorous rewriting of social psychology that involved four 
elements: (1) The selective use of mainstream psychological concepts, which are approached 
critically. This body of literature accounts for the largest part of the citations in the two books. 
(2) Their augmentation and amendment from other intellectual traditions (Latin American as in 
the case of Freire and Fals-Borda, and to some extent from other regions, he cites for example 
Fanon and Alatas, as well as some European psychologists). (3) The addition of societal-level 
concepts (e.g. class), largely from sociology and political theory. (4) The integration of these in a 
cohesive account of social psychology that overcomes the limitations of individualist and reduc-
tionist social psychology without falling into the error of ‘methodological collectivism’ (Bhaskar 
1979), nor of merely stating generalities. This approach at the theoretical level is also followed in 
his work on specific social issues: housing and overcrowding, violence and war, gender relations, 
and the representation of public opinion.
There is something of a risk here in that concepts with different ontological, epistemological, 
and pragmatic assumptions are fused into an uneasy coexistence. Yet the risk is worth running 
so long as it is taken with an understanding, strengthened by the influence of subaltern part-
ners, of those assumptions when re-framing and utilizing the wider theoretical and practical 
repertoire thereby made available. There is no pure theory or method, but rather a potentially 

Mark Burton and Luis H. Gómez Ordóñez 
352
enormous inventory of imperfect and ideologically constructed tools: hence the importance of 
de-ideologization.
A socially engaged critical praxis
In the development of liberation psychology since 1989, these themes can be seen at work, above 
all in the ‘analectic’ (a multiple dialectic that goes beyond the totality of thesis and antithesis, Dus-
sel 2013) praxis hand in hand with the active subjects of social movements and their members.
Commitment to social problems has led liberation psychologists to examine the relationships 
among memory, resistance, community, social movements, policy, and ideology critique as part 
of the action and reflection that characterizes the praxis of liberation psychology.
As with all critical encounters with social realities, understanding is aided by taking a his-
torical perspective on the paths that led to the present context, taking in the frustrated dreams 
and hopes along the way. Given this, the social processes of the construction of memory are of 
particular importance as articulating social relations built up through the medium of the pro-
cesses and practices that define them. In their turn they are bound up with ‘regimes of truth’ in 
which there are determinate elaborations erected over memories: as Dobles (2009: 42) suggests 
in Foucauldian terms, they are intertwined ‘through a series of arrangements, institutions, rituals, 
places, visual and spatial mechanisms . . . that facilitate the elaboration of specific reminiscence 
of the past, in the context of contemporary power relations’.
These current power relations are reproduced but also contested, since where there is power 
there is resistance. Liberation psychology maps the ‘grammar of change’ of this resistance, see-
ing it as the product of existing social tensions, having porous boundaries, and orientated to a 
counter-hegemonic ethical horizon of liberation. So liberation psychology, in aspiring to be 
politically critical, has to assume the political character of power-knowledge relationships and 
know how to map the alternatives of liberation. This requires the adoption of ideology critique 
( Jameson 2009) in relation to proposed options and processes.
The dialogue in recent years of liberation psychologists with social movements and commu-
nity practice has helped to problematize the de-politicization of social conflicts and the need to 
adopt a clear political agenda to constitute more radically the dreams of liberation. The urgency 
of this is imposed by the crisis of the capitalist order as it intensifies its strategies to ensure con-
tinued accumulation in the wake of shocks and disasters (Klein 2008).
Conclusion: possibilities and challenges
The world has changed since the murder of Martín-Baró in 1989. These changes can be 
summarized in terms of the global advance of colonizing capitalism, both as system of 
accumulation-exploitation and as an ideological hegemon, under the cloak of ‘advancing’ lib-
eral democracy. This in itself poses serious challenges for a transformative and liberating social 
psychological praxis while also suggesting some priorities for liberation psychology, both as 
intellectual framework and as social movement.
Yet the neoliberal model has more recently itself approached a crisis state following the crash 
of financial bubbles in 2008–9, the rise of different models of accumulation, and of left and 
decolonizing movements both in Latin America and elsewhere. These developments are them-
selves a result of the contradictions of capitalist expansion and colonization, the most profound 
of which is the climate and ecological emergency that threatens the very foundation of life on 
earth. As we have implied elsewhere (Burton 2013b), this new political situation demands a 
turn to a more action-orientated, less ‘academic’, critical psychology, an opportunity but also a 

Liberation psychology
353
challenge for liberation psychologies. The challenge consists in developing a praxis that, building 
on the legacy of liberation psychology, connects the psychological with the political, economic, 
ecological, and cultural in a way that truly creates new knowledge and strategies for resisting the 
domination of people and nature prefiguratively while creating new possible worlds.
As noted above, violence has been a key topic for liberation psychology throughout its his-
tory and indeed has acted as a litmus for its claims to social relevance. Yet the phenomena of vio-
lence have changed somewhat since 1989. In Mexico and Central America, for example, there 
has been the growth of violence in relation to drugs from both criminal and State agents and the 
growth of street gangs (‘maras’), themselves a consequence of war, exile, and US policy from the 
1980s. Elsewhere there has been both conservative terrorism and State ‘humanitarian violence’, 
and more broadly the increased recognition of domestic and sexual violence (Moane 2011), 
again amplified by social conflicts (Estrada et  al. 2007). Liberation psychology does suggest 
possibilities for theorizing violence in its objective and subjective dimensions in terms of both 
ideological action and psychosocial mediations, from the social structure into the structure of 
people’s personality and action. Violence is analyzed in terms of the formal structure of violent 
acts, the ‘personal equation’, the enabling context, and the framing of all of this by the ideolog-
ical background. The approach goes beyond the analytic limits of instinctivist, behavioural, and 
historical approaches, offering instead a nuanced, integrative approach (Blanco and de la Corte 
2003; Martín-Baró 2000). As we saw above, it has developed a praxis based on making violence 
and its perpetrators visible, on re-signification of violent acts with the victims, and through 
interventions for justice at the national level.
Liberation psychology makes little sense in isolation from liberatory social movements. Recent 
decades have seen both advances and retreats, including, on the one hand, (1) the development and 
consolidation of connections and cooperation between them, both globally and locally, under-
pinned by opposition to neoliberal globalization and the recognition of the interplay among the 
different kinds of oppression, and (2) new and creative formats of protest and resistance. On the 
other hand there have been challenges, including (1) criminalization of social movements, (2) dif-
ficulties translating demands, strategies, and alternatives between different movements and other 
non-organized sectors of society, and (3) problems in dialogue with the State because it tends to 
impose asymmetrical conditions on the process of solving problems. It remains questionable how 
much liberation psychology has adapted to these openings and limitations.
Martín-Baró used an explicit strategy of making connections with like-minded colleagues 
in other locations (Harris 1990). However, that was difficult before the advent of the internet. 
There are now much better connections between psychologists of a liberatory orientation, 
and improved dissemination of the growing body of work. As a result, workers in locations as 
diverse as Turkey, Palestine, the Phillipines, New Zealand, Malaysia, and South Africa have seen 
the relevance of the approach, adapted it to their own social contexts and made contributions to 
it (Burton 2013a; Montero and Sonn 2009; O’Connor, Tilyard, and Milfont 2011; Seedat et al. 
2001). However, language remains an issue, with Spanish not generally understood in Asia and 
Africa, and only by a minority of English-speaking psychologists. Portuguese is used in parts of 
Africa, and in newly independent Timor Leste, but despite many of the background concepts 
having emerged in lusophone Brazil, there has only been limited translation of the Spanish 
literature into Portuguese (two articles, ‘Towards a liberation psychology’ and ‘Challenges and 
perspectives for Latin American psychology’ appear in Guzzo and Lacerda 2011), although the 
barrier between the two linguistic communities is not high. Nevertheless, it is worth the effort 
to construct a variety of networks for sharing theory and practice, as well as to build solidarity 
links given the risks run by some workers in this field (in addition to Martín-Baró, there have 
been murders and disappearances of liberatory psychologists in places such as Haiti, Guatemala, 

Mark Burton and Luis H. Gómez Ordóñez 
354
and Mexico, and serious threats in Colombia and elsewhere), while the work of exposing 
oppression and standing beside the oppressed can and does lead to silencing, of which murder 
is the most extreme form.
As we have argued elsewhere (Burton 2013c), liberation psychology is too valuable a praxis 
to be seen as just something that is done in Latin America: to borrow from the strap line of a 
recent conference in occupied Palestine, we want to construct a psychology that is both ‘globally 
aware and locally appropriate’, that increases understanding of the universal mechanisms and 
dynamics of oppression and how to combat it while being flexible enough to respond to the 
particularities of oppression and liberation in diverse social and political settings.
Further reading
Aron, A. and Corne, S. (eds) (1996) Ignacio Martín-Baró: Writings for a Liberation Psychology. New York: Har-
vard University Press.
Burton, M. and Kagan, C. (2009) ‘Towards a really social psychology: liberation psychology beyond Latin 
America’, in M. Montero and C. Sonn (eds) The Psychology of Liberation. Theory and Application. New 
York: Springer.
Escobar, A. (2007) ‘Worlds and knowledges otherwise: the Latin American modernity/coloniality research 
program’, Cultural Studies, 21(2), 179–210.
Website resources
English Language Liberation Psychology Network: http://libpsy.org
The Ignacio Martín-Baró Fund for Mental Health and Human Rights: http://www.martinbarofund.org/
What Is Liberation Psychology? Pacifica Graduate Institute: http://www.pacifica.edu/innercontent-m.
aspx?id=2114
References
Bhaskar, R. (1979) ‘On the possibility of social scientific knowledge and the limits of naturalism’, in  
J. Mepham and D.-H. Ruben (eds) Issues in Marxist Philosophy, Volume 3: Epistemology, Science, Ideology. 
Brighton: Harvester.
Blanco, A. and de la Corte Ibañez, L. (eds) (2003) Ignacio Martín Baró: Poder, Ideología y Violencia. Madrid: Trotta.
Burton, M. (2013a) ‘¿Existe la psicología de la liberación fuera de América latina?’, Revista Latinoamericana 
de Psicología Social: Ignacio Martín-Baró, 2(1), 158–170.
Burton, M. (2013b) ‘The analectic turn: critical psychology and the new political context’, Les Cahiers de 
Psychologie Polítique, 23, http://lodel.irevues.inist.fr/cahierspsychologiepolitique/index.php?id=2465
Burton, M. (2013c) ‘A second psychology of liberation? Valuing and moving beyond the Latin American’, 
The Journal of Critical Psychology, Counselling and Psychotherapy, 13(2), 96–106.
Burton, M. and Kagan, C. (2009). ‘Towards a really social psychology: liberation psychology beyond Latin 
America’, In M. Montero and C. Sonn (eds) The Psychology of Liberation: Theory and Application. New 
York: Springer.
Dobles, I. (2009) ‘Ignacio Martín Baró y psicología de la liberación: un desafío vigente’, http://www. 
catedralibremartinbaro.org/pdfs/PCL_DoblesI_UnDesafioVigente.pdf
Dobles, I. and Baltodano, S. (eds) (2010) Psicología: Dominación, Compromiso y Transformación Social. Ciudad 
Universitaria Rodrigo Facio, Costa Rica: Editorial Universidad de Costa Rica.
Dobles, I., Baltodano, S. and Leandro, V. (eds) (2007) Psicología de la Liberación en el Contexto de la Glo-
balización Neoliberal: Acciones, Reflexiones y Desafíos. Ciudad Universitaria Rodrigo Facio, Costa Rica: 
Editorial Universidad de Costa Rica.
Dussel, E. (2013) Ethics of Liberation in the Age of Globalization and Exclusion. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press.
Escobar, A. (2007) ‘Worlds and knowledges otherwise: the Latin American modernity/coloniality research 
program’, Cultural Studies, 21(2), 179–210.

Liberation psychology
355
Estrada, A. M., Ibarra, C. and Sarmiento, E. (2007) ‘Regulation and control of subjectivity and private life in 
the context of armed conflict in Colombia’, Community, Work and Family, 10(3), 257–281.
Flores, J. M. (2009) ‘Praxis and liberation in the context of Latin American theory’, in M. Montero and  
C. Sonn (eds) Psychology of Liberation: Theory and Applications. New York: Springer.
Galeano, E. (1998) Open Veins of Latin America: Five Centuries of the Pillage of a Continent. London: Latin 
American Bureau.
Guzzo, R.S.L. and Lacerda, F. (eds) (2011) Psicologia Social Para América Latina: O Resgate da Psicologia e Lib-
ertação. Campinas, Brazil: Editora Alínea.
Harris, A. (1990) ‘A psychologist in El Salvador’, The Psychologist, 264–266.
Jameson, F. (2009) ‘Ideological analysis: a handbook’, in Valences of the Dialectic. London: Verso.
Kagan, C., Burton, M., Duckett, P., Lawthom, R. and Siddiquee, A. (2011) Critical Community Psychology. 
Chichester: Wiley.
Klein, N. (2008) The Shock Doctrine: the Rise of Disaster Capitalism. London: Penguin Books.
Martín-Baró, I. (1983) Acción e Ideología: Psicología social desde Centroamérica I. San Salvador: UCA Editores.
Martín-Baró, I. (1985a) ‘The role of the psychologist’, in A. Aron and S. Corne (1996) Ignacio Martín-Baró: 
Writings for a Liberation Psychology. New York: Harvard University Press.
Martín-Baró, I. (1985b) ‘Public opinion research as a de-ideologizing instrument’, in A. Aron and S. Corne 
(1996) Ignacio Martín-Baró: Writings for a Liberation Psychology. New York: Harvard University Press.
Martín-Baró, I. (1986) ‘Toward a liberation psychology’, in A. Aron and S. Corne (eds) Ignacio Martín-Baró: 
Writings for a Liberation Psychology. New York: Harvard University Press.
Martín-Baró, I. (1987a) ‘El reto popular a la psicología en América latina’, in A. Blanco (ed.) Ignacio 
Martín-Baró: Psicología de la Liberación. Madrid: Trotta.
Martín-Baró, I. (1987b) ‘The Lazy Latino: the ideological nature of Latin American fatalism’, in A. Aron and 
S. Corne (eds) Ignacio Martín-Baró: Writings for a Liberation Psychology. New York: Harvard University Press.
Martín-Baró, I. (1988) ‘From dirty war to psychological war: case of El Salvador’, in A. Aron (ed.) Flight, 
Exile and Return: Mental Health and the Refugee. San Francisco: Committee for Health Rights in Central 
America.
Martín-Baró, I. (1989a) La Opinión Pública Salvadoreña (1987–1988). San Salvador: UCA Editores.
Martín-Baró, I. (1989b) Sistema, Grupo y Poder: Psicología social desde Centroamérica II. San Salvador: UCA 
Editores.
Martín-Baró, I. (1998) ‘Retos y perspectivas de la psicología latinoamericana’, in A. Blanco (ed.) Psicología 
de la Liberación. Madrid: Trotta.
Martín-Baró, I. (ed.) (2000) Psicología Social de la Guerra: Trauma y Terapia. San Salvador: UCA Editores.
Mepham, J. (1972) ‘The theory of ideology in Capital’, Radical Philosophy, (2), 12–19.
Mignolo, W. and Escobar, A. (eds) (2010) Globalization and the Decolonial Option. London: Routledge.
Moane, G. (2011) Gender and Colonialism: a Psychological Analysis of Oppression and Liberation. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Montero, M. and Serrano García, I. (2011) Historias de la Psicología en América Latina: Participación y Transfor-
mación. Buenos Aires: Paidós.
Montero, M. and Sonn, C. (2009) The Psychology of Liberation: Theory and Application. New York: Springer.
O’Connor, S., Tilyard, B. A. and Milfont, T. L. (2011) ‘Liberation psychology: from Latin America to Aoteroa 
/ New Zealand’, Journal of New Zealand Studies, (NS 11), 151–170.
PNUD. (2011) Informe Regional sobre Desarrollo Humano para América Latina y el Caribe 2010: Documento 
Nacional La Desigualdad en Costa Rica. San José, Costa Rica: PNUD (United Nations Development 
Programme).
Rocha Brandao, I. and Aurea Cruz Bomfin, Z. (eds) (1999) Os Jardins da Psicologia Comunitária. Fortaleza, 
Brazil: Pró-reitoria de extensao da UFC / ABRAPSO-Ceará.
Seedat, M., Duncan, N., Lazarus, S., Duncan, N. and Lazarus, S. (2001) Community Psychology: Theory, Method 
and Practice. Cape Town: Oxford University Press.
Stolowicz, B. (ed.) (2007) Gobiernos de Izquierda en América Latina : Un Balance Político. Bogotá: Ediciones 
Aurora.
Vázquez, J. J. (ed.) (2000). Psicología Social y Liberación en América Latina. Mexico City: Universidad Autonoma 
de Mexico, Unidad de Iztapalapa.
Wallerstein, I. (1996) Historical Capitalism, with Capitalist Civilization. London: Verso.
Ximenes, V. M., Amaral, C.E.M. and Rebouças, F. G. (2008) Psicologia Comunitária e Educação Popular: Vivên-
cias de Extensão / Cooperação Universitária no Ceará. Fortaleza: Universidade Federal do Ceará.

356
Indigenous psychologies emerged in the 1970s to the 1990s, and continued to gain a follow-
ing in the last two decades, with the shared goal of engendering psychologies compatible with 
home-grown ways of living, valuing, and knowing. The term ‘indigenous’ indicates that these 
psychologies are founded upon oppositions or resistances to the exotic psychologies colo-
nially implanted and/or outsourced from European or American educational centres. This 
chapter attempts to demonstrate that the different indigenous psychologies have contributed 
much to the critiques of psychology. More particularly denounced is a psychology bogged 
down by ‘endemic amnesia’, having failed to fulfil its professional mandate to the racially 
and culturally different (Naidoo 1996: 7). By insisting that psychology must become relevant 
to a people’s sociocultural milieu, indigenous psychologists are like-minded with critical 
psychologists in transforming psychology from a discipline that has ‘betrayed its promise to 
understand and help people’ to one that will ‘work for social change rather than against it’ 
(Parker 2007:1).
Indigenous psychologies: locations, characterizations, varieties
Starting as pockets of resistance from former colonies of Western empires in the 1960s to the 
1980s, indigenous psychologies have spread worldwide. Per Kim, Yang, and Hwang (2006), 
indigenous psychologies have ‘taken root’ in the continents of Africa (Cameroon, Zambia); 
the Americas (US, Canada, Latin America, Mexico, Venezuela); Asia (Hong Kong, India, China, 
Japan, Korea, the Philippines, Taiwan); Europe (France, Germany, Scandinavia); the Middle East: 
(Iran, Turkey), and Oceana (Fiji, Papua New Guinea). Scholars from former colonies of West-
ern empires, and those from relatively free or economically stable nations, whether Western, 
or non-Western, particularly East Asian, have joined forces in resisting dominant/dominating 
Euro-American psychologies and in the corollary work of recovering a wealth of indigenous 
psychological concepts and practices. There has been, however, a palpable under-representation 
in the literature, of ‘indigenous communities . . . the original inhabitants of the lands in which 
they dwell’ (Nikora et al. in Allwood and Berry 2006: 254). Within the past four decades, psy-
chologists and other scholars have striven to correct this, and to delineate an indigenous peoples’ 
psychology from indigenous and ecological knowledge and practices.
37
Indigenous psychologies and 
critical-emancipatory psychology
Narcisa Paredes-Canilao, Ma. Ana Babaran-Diaz, Ma. Nancy B. 
Florendo, and Tala Salinas-Ramos with S. Lily Mendoza

Indigenous psychologies
357
A three-fold typology then is offered as to where indigenous psychologies have emerged:  
(1) former colonies of Western Empires, (2) the communities of indigenous peoples, and (3) rel-
atively free and economically stable nations. This typology shows a development unprecedented 
so far in the history of psychology, triggered by the metatheoretical observation of indigenous 
psychologists that all psychologies are indigenous (Allwood and Berry 2006; Greenfield 2000). 
Psychologists from different parts of the world, including those from dominant ones, are now 
engaged in ‘indigenous reconstructions’, or the reconstructions of local psychologies vis-à-vis 
‘American psychology’s dominance’ (Teo 2013). Furthermore, for the specific purposes of the 
present chapter, this three-fold typology organizes indigenous psychologies around a number 
of differences, notably, the degree of anger and resentment held against alien psychologies, and 
how far away, or how different from the alien psychologies, the indigenous psychologies wanted 
to be.
What indigenous psychologists found objectionable  
in Western academic-scientific psychology
There is ample evidence in the literature (for instance, the interviews of 15 leading indigenous 
psychologists by Allwood and Berry 2006, and the articles featured in Kim, Yang, and Hwang 
2006), that what occasioned the emergence of indigenous psychologies was the irrelevance of 
colonially implanted psychologies to local needs. There was a lack of sync between foreign con-
cepts and theories, and the social problems confronted by newly independent or modernizing 
nations forging a national identity. The context for the emergence of most indigenous psychol-
ogies was: postcolonial societies decolonizing education in general, and the social sciences, in 
particular. Decolonization-indigenization of thought systems was deemed the necessary sec-
ond phase, and completion, of nationalist struggles for independence (Alatas 2006; Enriquez 
1992/2008; Sinha 1993). For example, sinicization of the social sciences and psychology in 
1960s China was meant to legitimate a Marxist-Maoist Chinese approach to the social sciences 
including psychology, but also a Chinese national identity (Alatas 2006; Pickren and Rutherford 
2010). But in turn, Taiwanese scholars since the 1980s have preferred ‘Taiwanization’, or simply, 
‘indigenization’ to ‘sinicization’ to signal ‘recontextualization of their disciplines vis-à-vis Tai-
wan, and not China’ (Alatas 2006: 111).
In the Philippines, among the philosophical inspirations of Sikolohiyang Pilipino were the 
nationalist ideals that inspired the revolutions against Spanish, then American, colonizers (Enri-
quez 1992/2008). Elsewhere, such as in Canada, Japan, Korea, and Europe, penetrated by the 
global reach of American psychology since WWII, indigenization of psychology became both 
a matter of national pride, and a more efficacious response to social problems unique to the 
nation, such as the challenge of multiculturalism in Canada (Adair 1999). The production of 
indigenous psychology is therefore deemed crucial for national identity with ‘national’ read as 
‘independent of’, or ‘liberated from’, not only an alien psychology, but all other forms of dom-
ination: economic, cultural, and political.
But indigenous psychologies taking up nationalist aspirations has downsides: first, such a 
move can lead to the under/mis/non-representation of some sectors, especially in countries 
characterized by plural regional, ethnic, religious, and ideological groupings. Jordan (2011) notes 
a contradiction in some national indigenous psychologies being at odds with their indigenous 
communities, or imposing a national identity that excludes indigenous peoples’ culture. It is 
thus important for him that indigenous psychology be redefined to include the value systems of 
indigenous peoples. Second, nationalisms can limit indigenous psychologists to research, teach-
ing, and practice aligned with nationalist goals that may have been formulated by dictatorial 

Narcisa Paredes-Canilao et al.
358
regimes, national governments still in the clutches of former colonial regimes, or simply, coun-
tries committed to rapid modernization and development at the expense of their indigenous 
populations’ rights, ancestral domains, and cultural integrity. Mendoza (2002/2006) argues 
that within the anti-colonial/decolonizing phase of indigenization movements, there is often 
the unavoidable imperative of constituting the nation ‘as one’ in order to counter a powerful 
external enemy. She gives, as an illustrative case, the reactive stance of Pangkami or ‘we-united- 
against-a-dominating-other’ as theorized and critiqued by the Filipino historian, Salazar. But 
she notes that it is crucial not to be trapped in this reactive mode and to move on to a more 
autonomous space of collective self-constitution separate from the constant intrusion of the 
colonial ‘Other’, as demonstrated in the reconstructive phase of Pantayong Pananaw or, roughly, 
‘we-speaking-among-ourselves, using our own categories and for our own interest’. It is in this 
latter phase, she argues, that the pluralities (of subjectivities, cultural and ethnic differences, as 
well as political interests) begin to emerge and demand engagement and contestation.
The problem of irrelevance to national problems is just a symptom of graver ills of Western 
psychology as exposed by indigenous psychologies. It can be said that for the first and second 
sites of emergence, Western psychology is an apparatus of neocolonial social science, which 
promotes mental captivity, academic dependency, or blind imitation, three of the conditions 
of Asian social sciences analyzed by S.F. Alatas in Alternative Discourses in Asian Social Science: 
Responses to Eurocentrism (2006). These are often worse forms of disempowerment than were 
experienced under colonization, and that they occur within the context of formal education 
considered the greatest legacy of colonial regimes makes them more insidious. For example, 
Indian psychology’s ‘colonial condition’ was shown in its imitation of research problems, con-
cepts, theories, and methods from Euro-American psychology, leading to the ‘neglect and avoid-
ance’ of Indian intellectual and cultural traditions and practices (Misra, in Gergen et al. 1996). 
First-level indigenization work involved immediate halting of Indian psychology as a ‘pale copy’ 
of Western modern-scientific psychology with all its ‘empirical, mechanistic, and materialistic 
orientations’ (Sinha 1993:31).
These orientations identified by Sinha are the underlying philosophical presuppositions of 
Western psychology, exposed by the astute analyses of other indigenous psychologists as well. 
It can be summed up, at the risk of oversimplification, thus: Western psychology holds questionable 
assumptions or orientations about the nature of the world and human beings (ontology), about what counts 
as true knowledge and how to pursue it (epistemology), and what has value or disvalue (ethics). Western 
psychology is embedded in: (1) an alienating worldview (atomistic-mechanistic), which cuts up 
the world into discrete parts, and views wholes as reducible to the parts (methodological indi-
vidualism) or parts as nothing apart from wholes (methodological holism, functionalism); (2) a 
context-stripping epistemology (objectivist, empiricist-rationalist) that counts only two sources 
of valid knowledge – algorithmic reason and/or sense experience; and (3) a calculative value 
system (materialistic-economistic) which is concealed in claims to value-neutrality. In stark con-
trast are the indigenous dynamic, complex, and relational ways of living, knowing, and valuing 
that were marginalized or erased under colonization, which are the objects for programmatic 
recovery by indigenous psychologies.
Pickren and Rutherford (2010) postulate that the mainstreaming of radical behaviourism, 
and its post-WWII dispersal to the peripheries, could have been due to the practical expedi-
ency of this psychology for the demands of a military, economic, and cultural superpower, while 
managing a multicultural, multi-ethnic society at the home-front. Moreover, the idealization 
of the individual, the homo economicus, as the individual, motivated by self-interest, and the 
concomitant ‘objectification of the human spirit into a calculable matrix’ under a commer-
cializing and industrializing society, found its logics of justification in the radical behaviourism, 

Indigenous psychologies
359
instrumentalism, and individualism of positivist psychology. This led Pickren to conclude in 
his article, ‘Conditions of (im)possibility: indigenization of psychology in India and the Phil- 
ippines’ (www.indigenouspsych.org), that indigenization of psychology is ‘almost impossible 
because the epistemological and ontological [and it can be added, value] presuppositions of 
psychology remain to be those held by the self-interested calculable human being’. Pickren has 
nonetheless noted in the same article that in comparison to Indian psychology, the indigeniza-
tion of psychology in the Philippines has effected more radical breaks with Western psychology 
(see also Pickren and Rutherford, 2010).
More value presuppositions were hidden behind the façade of value-neutrality. For the 
first and second sites of emergence, Western psychology was part of colonialist, racist, and 
cultural-imperialist projects. The indigenous psychology sought in these instances would be 
markedly anti-colonial, anti-racist, and anti-cultural imperialist (Enriquez 1994; Naidoo 1996; 
Nsamenang 2007). At its worst, psychology became the academic-scientific apparatus of empire 
for classifying natives as genetically, mentally, and behaviourally inferior, through practices 
that automatically pathologized non-white peoples, such as counselling (Naidoo 1996), and 
instruments such as I.Q. tests (Durojaiye 1993; Nsamenang 2007). Thus Naidoo describes a 
contextualized and indigenized psychology for South Africa (Afrocentric psychology) as one 
primarily aimed at contesting the white, male, and Eurocentric substrate of psychology under 
its ‘benign pretensions to universality’ (1996: 2), while for Nsamenang, Africentric psychology 
in Sub-Saharan Africa is ‘a proactive post-colonial wish and search for empowerment through 
outgrowing the received psychology’. As empowerment mechanisms, indigenous psychologies 
develop psychologies that ‘make sense in their own cultures and by which they can gain under-
standing of their subjectivity, experiences and socio-emotional functioning’ (2007:19).
At the same time, there has been a strong articulation that psychology is implicated, alongside 
history and social anthropology, in the marginalization and systematic colonization of indige-
nous peoples. Specifically implicated in accounts of indigenous scholars are social psychology in 
the white assimilationist agenda over the Maoris (Stewart-Harawira 2013), clinical psychology 
as a form of social control that led to ‘mass abnormalization’ of the Maori as ‘helpless recipients 
of English-defined labels and treatments’ (Lock in Gergen et al. 1996), and the deficit model in 
psychology as applied to native Hawaiians, projecting them as mentally, behaviourally, and mor-
ally deficient (McCubbin and Marsella 2009). Indigenous psychologists are also trying to rectify 
the homogenization of the rich variety of indigenous peoples in terms such as ‘American Indi-
ans’ or ‘Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Islands’ or even ‘Maoris’. The indigenous psychologies 
of indigenous peoples are proving to be radically different from Western academic-scientific 
psychology. There is currently an ‘insurrection’ of disenfranchised ontologies and epistemolo-
gies (Stewart-Hariwara), aiming to reclaim holistic psychologies closely linked with the land, 
spiritual beliefs, cultural practices, language, and community (McCubbin and Marsella 2009).
Under the third site of emergence, friendlier, or equal relations obtained between the target 
and the source of Western psychology, thus the search for: a European indigenous psychology, 
if there is such a thing (P. B. Smith 2009), a German indigenous critical psychology that is more 
than Wundt’s laboratory psychology (Teo 2013), or, a Canadianized psychology (Adair 1999), 
versus a dominant American psychology. In East Asia, Sinicization, Taiwanization, and Korean 
and Japanese indigenous psychologies were reactions to various spheres of influence, but mostly 
to the post-WWII dominance of American psychology. But East Asian indigenous psychologies, 
together with some of their Western counterparts, have shown great concern that indigenous 
psychologies are not inimical to the growth of a unified and scientific psychology, and are not 
reverse ethnocentrisms. Thus their readiness to forge an Asian, or Global psychology, oftentimes 
read as cross-cultural psychology. The 10 characteristics of indigenous psychology formulated 

Narcisa Paredes-Canilao et al.
360
by Kim, Yang, and Hwang (2006) and Yang’s seven don’ts and ten dos for scholars wishing to 
indigenize their psychological research, Yang (2012), indicate this moderate stance.
Indigenous psychologies and the pursuit  
of liberated-liberating psychology
Based on the literature, indigenous psychologies were driven less by Western critical approaches 
than by the critical-liberatory ethos expressed in their desire for a liberated (emancipated) and 
liberating (emancipating) psychology. Thus Enriquez advocated a liberated psychology (sikolohi-
yang malaya), which resisted a psychology that perpetuated the colonial captivity of the Filipino 
mind, and, a liberating psychology (sikolohiyang mapagpalaya) that would be responsive to social 
problems, most of which were traceable to ‘inequitable distribution of wealth’ and what he 
termed ‘the Great Cultural Divide’ that has separated the Anglicized, colonially minded Filipino 
from the masses (1992/2008: xxi, 33). Incidentally, he would often complain that psychological 
services could only be afforded by the elite.
Arguably, indigenous psychologies resonate well with critical psychology, the core goal 
of which has been ‘to transform psychology into an emancipatory, social justice-seeking, or 
status-quo-resisting approach that understands psychological phenomena as taking place in spe-
cific political-economic or cultural-historical contexts’ (Teo 2013: 11–12). The displacement 
by indigenous psychologies of psychological explanations from the individual, to sociocultural, 
relational, and contextual terms may indicate de-psychologization, an important project of some 
forms of critical psychology (Dafermos and Marvakis 2006; Parker 2007).
But more evidently, indigenous psychologies are forms of critical-emancipatory social 
science advocated by Habermas (1971) and the socialized epistemologies (standpoint epis-
temologies) inspired by Marx and Engels that were developed for differentially located 
social groups by Lukács (1967), and Harding (1993, 2010). First, the scholars of indige-
nization were united by the twin projects of resisting a dominating Western psychology 
(decolonization) and engendering a locally based and relevant psychology (indigenization). 
And this is true for all the three sites of emergence, though in varying degrees of intensity. 
Decolonization-indigenization can very well be the linchpin of indigenous psychologies 
as ‘critiques of psychology’, ‘psychological critiques’, or, ‘critical approaches in psychology’ 
(terms employed by Dafermos and Marvakis 2006, in recognition of the many varieties 
of critical psychology). The exposure of the social and historical determinations of con-
sciousness (ideology-critique) such as class, gender, and other differential axes productive of 
superior-subordinate relations has been the hallmark of critical philosophy, defined by Lukács 
(1967: 47) as a dissolution of ‘the rigid, unhistorical, natural appearance of social institutions’, 
and thus revealing their ‘historical origins’, subjecting them to historical development as well 
as historical decline.
Second, the demystification of knowledge or ideologies masquerading as universal and 
value-neutral, and locating them back to their social determinations is essentially a Marxist idea 
entrenched in critical theories of society. Habermas argued in Knowledge and Human Interests 
(1971: 308), that the ‘logical-methodological rules of any process of inquiry are specifically con-
nected to knowledge-constitutive human interests’. The empirical-analytic, or positivist sciences 
incorporate a technical cognitive interest (prediction and control), the historical-hermeneutic, or 
phenomenological sciences a practical cognitive one (mutual understanding), and the critically 
oriented sciences an emancipatory cognitive interest (ideology-critique). Indigenous psychologies 
can be located under critical-emancipatory social science in their powerful critiques of positiv-
ism as the reproduction of knowledge that constrains emancipation, that is, the emancipation of 

Indigenous psychologies
361
subjects, from knowledge disadvantageous to them because it has been created by those ascend-
ant to them, and whose interests directly clash with theirs.
Third, starting in the 1960s, social scientists and philosophers of science began to lose con-
fidence in the positivist paradigm of the social sciences, leading to the renewed attention to 
phenomenological and critical paradigms that were marginalized with the mainstreaming of 
positivism. This paradigmatic crisis was evident in psychology and had implications for the 
emergence of indigenous psychologies (Hwang 2005; Kim et al. 2006). While most indige-
nous psychologists turned to emic and interpretative approaches, primarily concerned to elicit 
meaning-in-contexts, it is evident that some indigenous psychologists, especially those from 
former colonies and indigenous communities, were not content to understand the world but to 
change it. Their very first move of tracing the ineptness, irrelevance, and abuses of psychology to 
its methodological and sociocultural underpinnings was critical-emancipatory.
Again, for more illustrative examples, Enriquez (1992/2008) would not succumb to the idea 
that fun-loving and festive Filipinos, falling short of the standards of a psychology designed 
for industrialized societies, nor would Naidoo’s Afrocentric psychology (1996) to a counsel-
ling theory, nor would Nsamenang’s Africentric psychology (2007) to intelligence tests, both 
practices of which are founded upon white, middle-class, male, and evolutionist values. Indig-
enous psychologists have boldly talked back at judgmental and self-righteous psychological 
theories, engaging in metatheoretical critique, so to speak, by calling attention to their logics and 
­sociocultural determinations. For indeed, when under an existing theory ‘a group’s knowledge, 
experience, and aspirations are disparaged, marginalized, or excluded, it is not the group, but the 
theory itself’ that must be taken to task (Paredes-Canilao 2006: 9).
Contributions to disciplinary development  
and transformation of psychology
The wide variety of indigenous psychologies has challenged the discipline of psychology in 
many ways, proposing possibilities for its renewal and transformation (Allwood and Berry 2006). 
First, indigenous psychologies brought to the fore that all psychologies are indigenous (Allwood 
and Berry 2006) or have indigenous elements (Teo 2013). Second, the emergence of indige-
nous psychologies in countries that used to be referred to as ‘Third World’ has challenged all 
psychologists to be ‘generative’, rather than ‘modulative’, in order to study and affect the flow of 
macro-processes as social innovators, and to collaborate with other disciplines towards interdis-
ciplinary responses and solutions to local and national problems, leading to an overall expansion 
of the discipline (Moghaddam 1990). Third, psychology’s status as universal knowledge has been 
contested by practicing psychologists of all races, saying that the profession ought to review and 
reassess the theory and practice of psychology and its sub-disciplines (Naidoo 1996). Fourth, 
the vast storehouse of indigenous philosophies and belief systems have become an invaluable 
resource for alternative perspectives on the nature of human beings in their ‘familial, social, cul-
tural, and ecological contexts’ (Kim et al. 2006: 4). By emphasizing ‘intellectual diversity’, and 
alternatives to linear models, the focus shifts more appropriately to what is ‘relative’ but relevant, 
useful, applicable, and adequate in the understanding of behaviour and mental processes of par-
ticular subject populations. Fifth, indigenous psychologies contributed to the dramatic increase 
in psychological problems and topics as a result of culturally appropriate, culturally sensitive, 
bottom-up, and emic approaches. Sixth, while for some indigenous psychologies, decontextual-
ized science was simply bad science, and situating problems in context was perceived to remedy 
the situation, some indigenous psychologists, especially from the first and second sites of emer-
gence, were not content with the recuperation of science-as-usual with its colonialist, racist, 

Narcisa Paredes-Canilao et al.
362
patriarchal, and culturally-blind substrate (Lock and Gulerce, in Gergen et al. 1996; McCubbin 
and Marsella 2009; Naidoo 1996; Nsamenang 2007; Stewart-Harawira 2013). The strategies of 
resistance resorted to by Indian aboriginals and the Maoris have been well theorized by Shiva 
(1988) for the former, and L.T. Smith (1999) for the latter.
Perhaps the most important contribution of indigenous psychologies to psychology’s trans-
formation, is a new paradigm, both in the Kuhnian senses of the term, (related to wide-ranging 
changes brought about by scientific revolutions), and Agamben’s innovation upon ‘paradigm’ 
(referring to the philosophical element in an idea or event that is productive of infinite possi-
bilities). Specifically Asian in origin, this new paradigm is methodological relationalism, which 
takes relations, rather than individuals, as the primary datum (Ho et al. 2001). Methodological 
relationalism is not just a new approach in personality and social psychology; it is challeng-
ing psychology as a whole as having been traditionally buttressed upon methodological and 
ontological individualism. To show how potent methodological relationalism is as a paradigm, 
it makes intelligible a class of East Asian indigenous concepts which emphasize human rela-
tionship, such as the Chinese, Japanese, and Korean word for ‘human being’, which is literally 
translated as ‘human between’ (Kim and Park in Allwood and Berry 2006: 250). It also sheds 
light on other East Asian relational concepts that have been well-researched by indigenous 
psychologists, such as the Japanese amae (indulgent dependence), the Chinese yuan (inter-
personal affinity), guanxi (human relationships), and mianzi (face), and the Korean concept of 
chong (affectionate attachment), (see Hwang 2006; Kim et al. 2006; Yang 2006;Yamaguchi and 
Ariizumi 2006;). Closer to home, kapwa, a Filipino term that simultaneously refers to ‘the-other
-and-speaker-in-relation’, became a core concept around which theories, methodologies, and 
research methods were developed by Filipino indigenous psychologists (Enriquez 1992/2008; 
Pe-Pua 2006).
Conclusions
Indigenous psychologies have contributed to the transformations of psychology at least as prac-
tised in their own countries. But in terms of opening up psychology to the metatheoretical truth 
that all psychologies are indigenous, the growing number of indigenous psychologies worldwide 
should be an indication that the good news has gone beyond the borders of a small number of 
former colonies of Western empires, and has spilled over into the peripheralized indigenous com-
munities within. As to the main objective of this chapter, it appears in the (admittedly very lim-
ited) literature that indigenous psychologies were less motivated by Western critical approaches, 
than by the critical ethos and fervour. One does not see Marx, critical theorists, or critical psy-
chologists among the authors of works cited by indigenous psychologists, with the exception of 
Kwang-Kuo Hwang, who has recently used the late Roy Bhaskar’s critical realist view of science 
to support his defense of culture as a foundational concept in indigenous psychologies (see 
Hwang’s on-going debates with Allwood in Social Epistemology Review and Reply Collective, 
the on-line platform of Social Epistemology journal [published by Taylor & Francis]).
In relation to other features of critical psychologies: (1) indigenous psychologies inter-
sect with some forms of critical psychology in terms of depsychologization by relocating the 
unit of analysis from the individual, and inner processes in the individual, to the relational 
individual-in-context (familial, social, cultural, ecological); (2) indigenous psychologies pay 
attention to discourse, but not in its post-structuralist-Foucauldian sense as imbrications of 
power relations, but more in relation to indigenous discourses as clues to a people’s psyche, life-
ways, and value systems, and thus the utmost importance of recovering indigenous terms, as well 
as speaking and writing in local languages; and (3) the idea of the ‘psy-complex’ may have been 

Indigenous psychologies
363
operative in the wariness of indigenous peoples and the formerly colonized about psychology, 
as it is historically implicated in the policing and surveillance of natives.
Finally, it was shown in the chapter that indigenous psychologies are critical-emancipatory in 
their attempts to decolonize-indigenize psychology. They are engaged in ideology-critique, with 
Western academic-scientific psychology as the ideology, and are able to disclose its questionable 
philosophical and value presuppositions. For as long as psychology is not rid of them, the prac-
tice continues to be perilous. It is worth reiterating that it is not a question of origins (Western) 
per se, as Enriquez (1992/2008, 1994) has time and again clarified.
Further reading
Kim, U. and Berry, J. W. (eds) (1993) Indigenous Psychologies: Experience and Research in Cultural Context. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Parker, I. (2007) Revolution in Psychology: Alienation to Emancipation. London: Pluto Press.
Pickren, W. E. and Rutherford, A. (2010) A History of Modern Psychology in Context. Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Smith, L. T. (1999/2001) Decolonizing Methodologies: Researching Indigenous Peoples. London and New York: 
Zed Books, Ltd.
Website resources
Allwood, C. M. and Berry, J. W. (eds) (2006) ‘Origins and development of indigenous psychologies: an 
international analysis’, International Journal of Psychology, 41(4), 243–268: http://www.psypress.com/ijp
Kim, U., Yang K-S., and Hwang, K-K. (eds) (2006) Indigenous and Cultural Psychology: Understanding People 
in Context. New York: Springer: http://indigenouspsych.org/Resources/Indigenous%20and%20Cul 
tural%20Psychology%20-%20Understanding%20People%20in%20Context.pdf
Teo, T. (2013) ‘Backlash against American psychology: an indigenous reconstruction of the history of German  
critical psychology’, History of Psychology 16(1), 1–18: http://www.academia.edu/2711617/­Backlash_
against_American_psychology_An_indigenous_reconstruction_of_the_history_of_German_critical_
psychology
References
Adair, J. G. (1999) ‘Indigenization of psychology: the concept and its practical implementation’, Applied 
Psychology: An International Review, 48(4), 403–418.
Alatas, S. F. (2006) Alternative Discourses in Asian Social Science: Responses to Eurocentrism. London: SAGE.
Allwood, C. M. and Berry, J. W. (eds) (2006) ‘Origins and development of indigenous psychologies: an 
international analysis’, International Journal of Psychology, 41(4), 243–268, http://www.psypress.com/ijp
Dafermos, M. and Marvakis, A. (2006) ‘Critiques in Psychology – Critical Psychology’, Annual Review of 
Critical Psychology, 5, 1–20, www.discourseunit.com/arcp/5
Durojaiye, M. O. (1993) ‘Indigenous psychology in Africa: the search for meaning’, in U. Kim and J. W. 
Berry (eds) Indigenous Psychologies: Research and Experience in Cultural Context. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Enriquez, V. G. (1992/2008) From Colonial to Liberation Psychology: the Philippine Experience. Quezon City: 
The University of the Philippines Press.
Enriquez, V. G. (1994) Pagbabangong-Dangal: Indigenous Psychology and Cultural Empowerment. Manila: Pugad 
Lawin Press.
Gergen, K., Lock, A., Gulerce, A. and, Misra, G. (1996) ‘Psychological science in cultural context’, American 
Psychologist, 51(5), 496–503.
Greenfield, P. (2000) ‘Three approaches to the psychology of culture: where do they come from? Where 
can they go?’, Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 3, 223–240.
Habermas, J. (1971) Knowledge and Human Interests. Boston: Beacon Press.
Harding, S. (1993) ‘Rethinking standpoint epistemology: what is strong objectivity?’, in L. Alcoff and  
E. Potter (eds) Feminist Epistemologies, London: Routledge.
Harding, S. (2010) ‘Standpoint methodologies and epistemologies: a logic of scientific inquiry for people’, 
in World Social Science Report: Knowledge Divides, International Social Science Council, UNESCO.

Narcisa Paredes-Canilao et al.
364
Ho, D.Y.F., Lai, A. C., Peng, S. Q. and Chan, S. F. (2001) ‘Indigenization and beyond: methodological relation-
alism in the study of personality across cultural traditions’, Journal of Personality, 69, 925–953.
Hwang, K-K. (2005) ‘From anticolonialism to postcolonialism: the emergence of Chinese indigenous psy-
chology in Taiwan’, International Journal of Psychology, 40(4), 228–238.
Hwang, K-K. (2006) ‘Constructive realism and Confucian relationalism’, in U. Kim, K-S. Yang and  
K-K. Hwang (eds) Indigenous and Cultural Psychology: Understanding People in Context. New York: Springer, 
http://www.indigenouspsych.org/Resources/Indigenous%20and%20Cultural%20Psychology% 
20%20Understanding%20People%20in%20Context.pdf
Hwang, K-K. (2013) ‘Science as a culture in culture with deep-structure across empirical studies in psy-
chology’, Social Epistemology Review and Reply Collective 2, 10, 38–51, http://wp.me/p1Bfg0–10O38
Jordan, J. B. (2011) ‘Indigenous psychology in North America: lessons learned from neo-colonialism’, in 
Progress in Asian Indigenous and Cultural Psychology, Volume 1. Yogyakarta, Indonesia: Center for Indige-
nous and Cultural Psychology, University of Gadjah Mada.
Kim, U. and Park, Y-S. (2006) ‘The scientific foundation of indigenous and cultural psychology: the trans-
actional approach’, in U. Kim, K-S. Yang, and K-K. Hwang (eds) Indigenous and Cultural Psychology: 
Understanding People in Context. New York: Springer.
Kim, U., Yang K-S., and Hwang, K-K. (eds) (2006) Indigenous and Cultural Psychology: Understanding People 
in Context. New York: Springer, http://www.indigenouspsych.org/Resources/Indigenous%20and%20
Cultural%20Psychology%20%20Understanding%20People%20in%20Context.pdf
Lukács, G. (1967) History and Class Consciousness. London: Merlin Press.
McCubbin, L. D. and Marsella, A. (2009) ‘Native Hawaiians and psychology: the cultural and historical con-
texts of indigenous ways of knowing’, Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 15(4), 374–387.
Mendoza, S. L. (2002/2006) Between the Homeland and the Diaspora: the Politics of Theorizing Filipino and 
Filipino-American Identities: a Second Look at the Poststructuralism-Indigenization Debates. New York and 
London: Routledge. Reprinted by University of Santo Tomas Press, Manila.
Moghaddam, F. M. (1990) ‘Modulative and generative orientations in pscychology: implications on the 
three worlds’, Journal of Social Issues, 46(3), 21–41.
Naidoo, A. V. (1996) ‘Challenging the hegemony of eurocentric psychology’, Journal of Community and 
Health Sciences, 2(2), 9–16.
Nsamenang, A. B. (2007) ‘Origins and development of scientific psychology in Afrique’, in M. J. Stevens 
and D. Wedding (eds) under the supervision of John G. Adair. Psychology: IUPsyS Global Resource (Edition 
2007). London: Psychology Press, http://www.psypress.com/iupsys/contents.asp
Parker, I. (2007) Revolution in Psychology: Alienation to Emancipation. London: Pluto Press.
Paredes-Canilao, N. (2006) ‘Decolonizing subjects from the discourse of difference’, Journal of Multicultural 
Discourses, 1(1), 6–26.
Pe-Pua, R. (2006) ‘From decolonizing psychology to the development of a cross-Indigenous perspective in 
methodology: the Philippine experience’, in U. Kim, K-S.Yang, and K-K. Hwang, (eds) Indigenous and 
Cultural Psychology: Understanding People in Context. New York: Springer.
Pickren, W. E. (n.d.) ‘Conditions of (im)possibility: indigenization of psychology in India and the Philippines’, 
http://www.indigenouspsych.org/Members/Pickren,%20Wade/Pickren%20Conditions_of %20 
Impossibiity.pdf.
Pickren, W. E. and Rutherford, A. (2010) A History of Modern Psychology in Context. Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Shiva, V. (1988) Staying Alive: Women, Ecology and Development. London: Zed Books.
Sinha, D. (1993) ‘Indigenization of psychology in India and its relevance’, in U. Kim and J. W. Berry (eds) 
Indigenous Psychologies: Experience and Research in Cultural Context. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Smith, L.T. (1999) Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples. London: Zed Books.
Smith, P. B. (2009) ‘Is there a European indigenous psychology?’, International Union of Psychological 
Sciences (IUPsyS) Global Resource, 2009 edition, http://e-book.lib.sjtu.edu.cn/iupsys/Origins/
Adair/adair05.html
Stewart-Harawira, M. (2013) ‘Challenging knowledge capitalism: indigenous research in the 21st century’, 
Socialist Studies, 9(1), 39–51.
Teo, T. (2013) ‘Backlash against American psychology: an indigenous reconstruction of the history of 
German critical psychology’, History of Psychology 16(1), 1–18, http://www.academia.edu/2711617/
Backlash_against_American_psychology_An_indigenous_reconstruction_of_the_history_of_ 
German_critical_psychology

Indigenous psychologies
365
Yamaguchi, S. and Ariizumi, Y. (2006) ‘Close interpersonal relationships among Japanese: Amae as distin-
guished from attachment and dependence’, in U. Kim, K-S. Yang and K-K. Hwang (eds) Indigenous and 
Cultural Psychology: Understanding People in Context. New York: Springer.
Yang, K-S. (2006) ‘Indigenous personality research: the Chinese case’, in U. Kim, K-S. Yang and  
K-K. Hwang (eds) Indigenous and Cultural Psychology: Understanding People in Context. New York: 
Springer, http://www.indigenouspsych.org/Resources/Indigenous%20and%20Cultural%20Psychol 
ogy%20%20Understanding%20People%20in%20Context.pdf
Yang, K-S. (2012) ‘Indigenous psychology, westernized psychology, and indigenized psychology: a 
non-Western psychologist’s view’, Chang Gung Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences, 5(1), 1–32.

366
This chapter considers postcolonial theory as both a vantage point for the critique of psychol-
ogy and a theoretical resource for the development of critical alternatives to and in psychology. 
Mainstream academic psychology and currently existing critical psychologies alike arguably 
remain Western-centric in regard to their problematics and theoretical resources, and the loca-
tions, institutions, and principal agents of their reproduction. Moreover, critical historiography 
in psychology reveals the epistemological assumptions and representational practices by which 
the discipline had historically become entangled with – informed by but also informing – 
Western colonialism and racism (Bhatia 2002; Richards 2012). Taken at face value, then, post-
colonial theory offers first, a critical perspective on the colonial assumptions, representations 
and omissions that continue to haunt psychology, even in its critical appearances; and second, a 
burgeoning, often psychologically disposed vocabulary for interrogating ‘postcoloniality’ as it is 
manifested in the cultural formations and transformations of specific postcolonial societies (i.e. 
former colonies) and a more generally posited postcolonial condition characterized by both 
symptomatic returns of colonial trauma and the appearance of new (frequently ‘hybrid’) forms 
of expression, belonging, and identification within liminal spaces of transnational exchange. 
Postcolonial theory’s strongest claim, directly relevant to critical psychology, is that it has con-
tributed to a situation where, perhaps for the first time in the Western academy, ‘postcolonial 
subjects become subjects rather than objects of knowledge’ (Young 2001: 63).
This chapter is descriptive but also evaluative. Postcolonial theory certainly clears significant 
theoretical terrain for renewed critical engagement with and in psychology, not only in rela-
tion to its historical complicity with colonialism and racism, but also its more recent and still 
insufficiently interrogated ‘internationalisation’ (Brock 2006). More specifically, it supports the 
‘worlding’ of critical psychology, that is, the ongoing process of revealing and reimaging criti-
cal psychology’s established cultural, political, and epistemological horizons; of interrogating its 
terms of engagement with subjects and situations outside its places of origin; of demanding, in 
the face of psychology’s self-serving appeals to both the universal and the indigenous in its quest 
to be ‘international’, a constant demand for theoretical dis-location and ex-centricity (Khanna 
2004; Roy and Ong 2011). However, postcolonial theory and (critical) psychology often enter 
into productive alliance exactly at the point where the former’s politics are vulnerable to cri-
tique. Whilst postcolonial theory often presents itself as the academic inheritor of Third World 
38
Postcolonial theory
Towards a worlding of critical psychology
Desmond Painter

Postcolonial theory
367
decolonization struggles and its principal protagonists and theorists (Young 2001), this relation-
ship is more complicated. According to Lazarus (2011: 21), postcolonial theory sets itself apart 
through its political assumptions, which include ‘a constitutive anti-Marxism’, ‘an undifferenti-
ated disavowal of all forms of nationalism and a corresponding exaltation of migrancy, liminality, 
hybridity, and multiculturality’, ‘an aversion to dialectics’, and ‘a refusal of an antagonistic or 
struggle-based model of politics’. Decolonization remains on the agenda, but its meaning in 
postcolonial theory shifts from concerns with the structural position of the Third World (or 
more recently, the Global South) within the capitalist world system to increasing preoccupation 
with its cultural and psychological prerequisites.
As a consequence, ‘psychology’ (or ‘psychological’ modes of analysis and critique) often 
appears in postcolonial theory as a substitute for the systematic confrontation of capitalism in its 
world historical scope. In other words, psychology finds its critical resonance by becoming an 
integral part of the redefinition of politics within postcolonial theory, a redefinition premised 
not only on a shift from political-economic to cultural and psychological modes of analysis, but 
also on the renunciation of ‘modernist’ diagnostics of colonial oppression and accompanying 
articulations and mobilizations of liberatory possibilities. This raises the question as to whether 
postcolonial theory’s contribution to exposing and defeating psychology’s Western-centrism 
functions as a true critique, or whether it instead further advances the contemporary tendency 
to psychologize politics and to thus redeploy psychology (even if this psychology might look 
radically different from mainstream varieties) within the contemporary cultural logic of capi-
talist imperialism.
Postcolonial theory: locations, definitions, and contradictions
Two decades ago Jacoby (1995: 30) had already claimed that ‘postcolonial’ had become ‘the 
latest catchall term to dazzle the academic mind’, whilst Dirlik (1994) referred to the existence 
of a ‘postcolonial aura’ in the Western academy. What they were referring to at the time was the 
increasing centrality of a term used not in a descriptive historical sense, to designate societies 
existing in a time after colonialism, but in a theoretical sense to interrogate the wider cultural 
effects of colonialism (Ashcroft et al. 2007), where these ‘effects’ comprise both the intransi-
gence and transformation of colonial cultures – including quotidian practices, academic, literary, 
and popular cultural modes of representation, models of personhood and identities, forms of 
oppression and strategies for liberation – in former colonies and colonial metropoles alike. In 
fact, most of what had come to be termed postcolonial theory originates from the writing of 
academics of Third World origin based at (often elite) Western academic institutions, challeng-
ing the ‘intellectual sovereignty and dominance of Europe . . . that is, challenging the limits of 
western ethnocentricity, and the assumption that the white male western point of view is the 
norm and the true’ (Young 2001: 65), whilst at the same time shifting the spatial and political 
coordinates of the critique of colonialism. As Dirlik (1994: 332) insists, since ‘postcoloniality 
has been released from the fixity of Third World locations, the identity of the postcolonial is no 
longer structural but discursive’. This means that postcolonial theory has forged its academic 
identity by focusing primarily on epistemology and the politics of representation, relying largely 
on textual critique and applications of discourse analysis, and privileging (in fact, romanticizing 
at times) the perspective of exilic displacement.
Since then the field has entrenched itself as ‘a major critical discourse in the humanities’ 
(Gandhi 1998: viii) – first in literature and culture studies departments, ‘where it started as a 
movement to transcend the marginalization of non-Western literatures in the canon’ (Chibber 
2013: 1), but increasingly finding application in related areas in the humanities and social sciences 

Desmond Painter
368
as well (Go 2013; Macleod and Bhatia 2008). Today its founding figures and foundational texts 
have been canonized (Said’s Orientalism, Spivak’s essay ‘Can the subaltern speak?’, Bhabha’s The 
Location of Culture, Chakrabarty’s Provincializing Europe); its journals and conferences have been 
institutionalized (the journals Interventions and Postcolonial Studies; the Australian based Institute 
of Postcolonial Studies and the biennial conferences of the Postcolonial Studies Association); 
and its reproduction has been ensured by degree programs, postdoctoral fellowships, and a slew 
of publisher-driven handbooks and course readers. Moreover, postcolonial theory has not only 
managed to align itself and articulate its theoretical and political ambitions – in the words of 
Bhabha (1994: 252), ‘to rename the postmodern from the perspective of the postcolonial’ – with 
the help of in vogue psychoanalytic, postmodernist and poststructuralist writers like Lacan, 
Derrida, and Foucault (Young 2001), it has also appropriated some of the iconic theorists and 
activists of the historical decolonization struggles, most notable of which, from the perspective 
of critical psychology, is Frantz Fanon (Bhabha 1994; Young 2001). This has afforded postco-
lonial theory with an enormous amount of cultural capital and academic marketability, whilst 
nevertheless allowing it to present itself, at least rhetorically, as a radical political discourse and 
set of practices.
However, even though postcolonial theory has managed to extend its influence beyond the 
specialized study of literary production in European languages emanating from the former colo-
nial dominions to become a major transdisciplinary approach within the humanities as a whole, 
it remains a difficult field to define without obscuring its internal differences or exaggerating 
the singularity of its critical orientation. For example, Go (2013: 29) refers to postcolonial the-
ory as a ‘loosely coherent body of writing and thought that critiques and aims to transcend the 
structures supportive of Western colonialism and its legacies’. More significantly, postcolonial 
theory owes whatever theoretical coherence it has to how it defines and approaches these sup-
portive structures. As Go (2013: 29) asserts, ‘one of postcolonial theory’s distinct contributions is 
to emphasize cultural, ideological, epistemic, or even psychological structures’. Another useful 
definition is offered, ironically, perhaps, by one of the field’s harshest recent critics:
[O]ne of the key elements of postcolonial theory is that it critically discloses the cultural 
logics attendant with empire. In fact, it examines all types of discourses, epistemes, cultural 
schemas, representations, and ideologies that were part and parcel of Western imperialism 
– whether embodied in everyday discourses, novels, works of art, scientific tracts, or eth-
nographies. In this sense, postcolonial theory mounts an assault upon the entire culture of 
Western global dominance.
(Chibber 2013: 29–30, emphasis added)
Postcolonial theory can indeed be characterized, despite its internal diversity, by the manner 
in which it simultaneously centralizes and relativizes culture in its accounts not only of effects 
of colonialism, but of the nature of contemporary global transformations more generally. This 
focus on culture is particularly evident in Bhabha’s (1994: 245) characterization of the field as 
bearing ‘witness to the unequal and uneven forces of cultural representation involved in the con-
test for social and political authority within the modern world order’. For Bhabha, significantly, 
postcolonial theory does not simply navigate the appearance and transformation of culture 
within the existing temporal, spatial, and political coordinates of Euro-modernist accounts of an 
international or global world order. Instead, postcolonial theory introduces what is essentially a 
‘postmodernist’ break with: the developmental teleologies of both liberal capitalist and Marxian 
accounts of world history; the equation of political space and identities with the modernist 
political framework of nation-state and national (or nationalized) cultural identities; and the 

Postcolonial theory
369
reduction of social antagonism to ‘a binary structure of opposition’ such as class struggle or Third 
World versus First World. Instead, postcolonial theory ‘forces a recognition of the more complex 
cultural and political boundaries that exist on the cusp of these often opposed political spheres’ 
(Bhabha 1994: 248).
This means that culture, in both its quotidian and formalized appearances, is reconceptual-
ized in terms that now reflect – beyond the stultifying and violent effects of standardized forms 
of knowing and modes of representation – its liminal and hybridized transformations and relo-
cations. Culture, that is, as ‘an uneven, incomplete production of meaning and value, produced 
in the act of social survival’ (Bhabha 1994: 247). From the perspective of postcolonial theory 
culture is therefore not reducible to either canonical forms of specialized aesthetic production 
or romantic narratives of organic popular traditions meant to authenticate ethnic and nationalist 
claims. Instead, Bhabha foregrounds what he considers to be the transnational and translational 
dimensions of culture: transnational, ‘because contemporary postcolonial discourses are rooted 
in specific histories of cultural displacement’ (247); translational, ‘because such spatial histories of 
displacement – now accompanied by the territorial ambitions of “global” media technologies – 
make the question of how culture signifies, or what is signified by culture, a rather complex issue’ 
(247, emphasis in the original).
As the above characterizations and definitions make plain, postcolonial theory attends to 
culture as both source of domination and site and strategy of resistance in the context of West-
ern colonialism and its aftermath. Regarding the former, the focus has fallen mainly on West-
ern forms of knowing and patterns of representation across a large terrain of colonial textual 
production: scientific accounts, philosophical reflection, ethnographies, literary writing, travel 
reports, maps, photographs, cinema, etc. (Ahmad 1992; Ashcroft et al. 1989; Blunt and McEwan 
2002; Chrisman and Williams 1993; Clark 1999; Foster 1999; Huggan 2000; Said 1978, 1993; 
Young 1990). In this respect postcolonial theory may be likened to a form of colonial discourse 
analysis aimed at deconstructing what Said (1978) has termed ‘orientalism’, Young (1990) ‘white 
mythologies’, and Coetzee (1989) ‘white writing’: texts in which the colonized ‘Other’ as dis-
torted (dehumanized or exoticized), deprived of agency, and located outside history. Its textual 
interventions are therefore aimed at ‘disfiguring colonialist configurations and displacing the 
representations colonialism set in place, and [. . .] writing the colonial world back into the annals 
of world history’ (Parry 1997: 21). Or, in Chibber’s (2013: 30–31) apt characterization of this 
aspect of postcolonial theory’s critical vocation:
As the cultures of imperialism persist, new and different sorts of knowledge must be 
produced to help decolonize consciousness. Postcolonial theory grapples with colonial-
ism’s legacies and seeks alternative representations or knowledge that do not fall prey to 
colonialist knowledge’s misrepresentations and epistemic violence. This is why it is called 
post-colonial theory: it seeks theories (knowledges), ways of representing the world, and 
histories that critique rather than authorize or sustain imperialistic ways of knowing.
The articulation of alternative representations, knowledges, and politics – of writing history 
from the vantage point of the ‘subaltern classes’ (Guha 1997), of ‘provincializing’ European social 
thought and renewing it ‘from and for the margins’ (Chakrabarty 2000: 16), of counteracting the 
derivative nature of the political futures offered by Third World nationalisms (Chatterjee 1986, 
1993; Lazarus 1999), etc. – has been a major source of conceptual, empirical, and political inno-
vation in postcolonial theory. By taking critical distance from Marxist analytics and nationalist 
politics, in particular, and by forging alliances with various postmodernist and post-structuralist 
agendas in the humanities (Bhabha 1994; Lazarus 2011), postcolonial theory has become a 

Desmond Painter
370
vibrant site for producing and retooling concepts aimed at capturing culture and agency in 
quotidian and often aestheticized practices of resistance and transformation. The field is awash 
with evocative work on ‘alterity’, ‘ambivalence’, ‘appropriation’, ‘creolization’, ‘diaspora’, ‘exile’, 
‘frontiers’, ‘hybridity’/‘hybridization’, ‘liminality’, ‘mixedness’, and ‘translation’ (Ahmed 2014; 
Ashcroft et al. 2007; Young 1995) – a veritable metaphysics of in-between-ness, mobility, and 
becoming that speaks of a social world dislocated from the assumptions of modern political 
thought and of ex-centric subjectivities that escape the injunctions of both modernist and tra-
ditionalist forms of political belonging.
Whilst its critique of colonial reason, along with its development of a large corpus of con-
cepts aimed at bringing traumatized and resistant modes of subjectivization and cultural becom-
ing into analytic focus, underscores the significance of postcolonial theory as a critical discourse, 
the field has also been the target of vociferous attacks (Dirlik 1994; Lazarus 2011; Parry 2004). 
Eagleton (1998), for example, claims that postcolonial theory not only homogenizes diverse 
geopolitical and cultural conditions but, ironically, globalizes a Eurocentric way of seeing. Post-
colonial theory becomes, he claims, ‘postmodernism’s way of taking care of everything south 
of Palermo’ (Eagleton 1998: 24). Kennedy (2003: 17) in turn decries postcolonial theory’s 
‘mind-numbing jargon, its often crude essentialisations of the West and the Other as binary 
opposites, and, above all, its deeply ingrained suspicion of historical thinking’. Likewise harsh, 
but from within the ambit of postcolonial theory itself, Loomba (1998: xv) characterizes it as 
an increasingly faddish, personality-driven enterprise, ‘essays by a handful of brand-name critics 
[who] have become more important than the field itself’, which functions ‘in increasingly for-
mulaic or reductive terms that are abstracted from concrete situations’. In other words, postco-
lonial theory risks becoming another (Western) intellectual commodity reflecting and serving 
established academic interests – of individuals, institutions, fields of study – in times of neoliberal 
globalization, rather than a theoretical practice which truly disrupts the political economy of 
knowledge production on a world scale.
Equally serious are critiques of postcolonial theory’s politics. As Lazarus (2011: 14) points 
out, in postcolonial theory ‘Marxism has been obliterated as an enabling political horizon’. This 
distancing from Marxism, especially as an analytic of imperialism and colonialism, has exposed 
postcolonial theory to serious challenges regarding its relationship to capitalism (Chibber 2013; 
Lazarus 2011). First, postcolonial theory is criticized for neglecting the role of capitalism in 
impacting and even shaping the very cultures of colonialism it sets out to study. For Dirlik 
(1994), by sidestepping the foundational role that capitalism has played as ‘motive force’ in West-
ern imperialism and colonial cultures, postcolonial theory indeed obscures, in an ideological 
fashion, that which joins the twenty-first century ‘to a long and yet unbroken history, wrongly 
supposed by postcolonial theory to have come to a close circa 1975 . . . the history of capitalist 
imperialism’ (Lazarus 2011: 15). Second, postcolonial theory is also criticized for neglecting 
to take its own conditions of production and reproduction into serious consideration, hence 
obscuring the way even seemingly critical academic discourses become subject to capitalist 
dynamics (Dirlik 1994; Loomba 1998).
In fact, according to critics, postcolonial theory not only neglects the role of capitalism, but 
finds itself drawn into its very logic of global reproduction. To be sure, contemporary capitalism 
invests in exactly those things postcolonial theory tends to celebrate: cultural difference, the 
aesthetics of everyday life, and mobility; capitalism almost demands ‘hybridity’ and ‘liminality’ as 
it seeks ‘the creation of classes amenable to incorporation into or alliance with global capital’ 
(Dirlik 1994: 354). This means that postcolonial theory stands accused not simply of mystifying 
the relationship between culture and power in the contemporary world, but for becoming part 
of the cultural logic of late capitalism. This upends any celebratory account of the contribution 

Postcolonial theory
371
postcolonial theory can make to critical psychology and vice versa from the outset, for as Parker 
(2006: 53) alludes to, an alliance with psychology easily redoubles the ways in which postcolo-
nial theory ‘recruits and then, through a peculiar act of ventriloquism, speaks for the constituen-
cies that global capitalism is now most keen to work with . . .’
Postcolonial theory and critical psychology
Methodical engagements with postcolonial theory in critical psychology are still relatively rare. 
Hook (2005: 475) refers to postcolonial theory as a ‘theoretical resource’ and a ‘mode of cri-
tique’ which, unlike Marxism, feminism, psychoanalysis, and post-structuralism, ‘remains nota-
bly absent’ in the self-understanding and development of critical psychology; ‘a broad sway of 
criticism and theory that has yet to find its way into psychological discourse’ (479). Macleod 
and Bhatia (2008: 576) start their overview of postcolonial theory and psychology with a sim-
ilar disclaimer: ‘Postcolonial psychology is not in its infancy, but rather an embryonic stage . . . 
[T]here are currently few psychology scholars contributing to what is explicitly called postco-
lonial theory and research’. Finally, Frosh (2013: 141) claims that relationships between psychol-
ogy and postcolonial theory ‘are mediated in a variety of ways, most of them uncomfortable’. 
Where this relationship has produced critique, it has primarily been directed at psychology; ‘the 
converse, a psychological engagement with postcolonialism, is relatively rare, given the stance of 
apolitical naivety that academic psychology commonly adopts’ (Frosh 2013: 141).
Despite this, there is an obvious kinship between the objectives that drive the field of post-
colonial studies and those that give shape to the project of critical psychology. First, postcolonial 
theory offers a potential vantage point from where critiques of Western psychology as ‘a cul-
tural construction with specific historical roots’ (Danziger 1997: 181), and more pointedly, of its 
political effects within the context of imperialism and colonialism might be advanced (Bhatia 
2002; Brickman 2003; Burman 2007; Khanna 2004). Second, postcolonial theory presents criti-
cal psychology with a rich set of theoretical resources and political strategies, frequently attuned 
to issues of subjectivity, colonial trauma, and liberation, which might be employed to open up 
new spaces and develop new modes of enquiry in critical psychology (Hook 2005, 2011; Oliver 
2004; Ward 2013). Thirdly, and primarily through engaging with and further elaborating upon 
existing ‘psychological’ styles of critique within postcolonial theory (Fanon 1967; Memmi 1965; 
Nandy 1983), critical psychology might also contribute to the further development of postcolo-
nial theory (Frosh 2013; Hook 2011). According to Frosh (2013: 141–142), then, ‘it can perhaps 
be claimed that psychology and postcolonial theory need each other’.
Postcolonial theory and the critique of psychology
The postcolonial critique of mainstream psychology focuses on how the discipline has ‘fur-
thered the cause of European imperialism in colonial and postcolonial contexts’ (Bhatia 2002: 
377), targeting in particular the discipline’s historical contributions to scientific racism (Richards 
2012; Teo 2005), its ethnocentric and ‘orientalist’ depictions of colonial others (Bhatia 2002; 
Bulhan 1993; Burman 2007; Brickman 2003), its political role in colonial government in coun-
tries like South Africa and India (Butchart 1998; Kumar 2006; Louw 2002; Nandy 1983), the 
Western biases of its epistemologies and methodologies (Ozaki, David, and Abelmann 2008; 
Smith 1999; Teo 2005), and the uneven, still Western-centred nature of its current ‘internation-
alisation’ (Staeuble 2006). Importantly, such critiques extend also to critical psychology, forcing 
it to interrogate the extent to which it likewise remains locked into the ‘eurocentric order of the 
social sciences’ (Staeuble 2006). Macleod and Wilbraham (2006), for example, base their appeal 

Desmond Painter
372
for an engagement with postcolonial theory on the perceived need to problematize the relation-
ship between local and global in critical psychology. In a critique directed specifically at Parker’s 
(e.g. 2002, 2005) programmatic contributions to the field, they argue that his ‘partial mentions 
and elisions around colonialism and post-colonialism, and his lack of sustained engagement with 
postcolonial theorists, mean that considerable amounts of analytical labour is required to ground 
Parker’s work in our local problematics’ (33).
It is certainly crucial to dislocate critical psychology from its Western-centrism – by extend-
ing its gaze to incorporate non-Western or ‘subaltern’ experiences (e.g. Swartz 2005) and by 
forcing it to engage the contemporary world from the vantage point of regions that, instead 
of merely following in the developmental slipstream of the West, have arguably become fore-
runners of global cultural shifts and changing political futures (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012; 
Connell 2007). But whilst postcolonial theory offers tools with which to facilitate the disloca-
tion of the unilateral development of even critical psychology within the political economy of 
global social science production and consumption, it also poses important limits in this regard. 
Postcolonial theory is itself located in (frequently elite) Western universities, from where it 
is often uncritically exported to non-Western contexts to ‘extend the field of academic dis-
course (in seminars, conferences, journals devoted to the elaboration of a particular esoteric 
terminology)’ (Parker 2006: 52). Of course, postcolonial theory can be ‘indigenized’ – but the 
same is true for Marxism, post-structuralism, and feminism. Whilst it may thus indeed stimu-
late the politics of location and representation and the development of critical alternatives to 
mainstream, Western approaches in psychology (Macleod and Bhatia 2008), it is certainly no 
panacea. In the words of Gutiérrez Rodríguez (2010), postcolonial rhetoric itself remains in 
need of decolonization.
Postcolonial theory as resource for critical psychology
For others, the appeal of postcolonial theory lies less in its capacity to add to the critique of psy-
chology, and more in what it offers critical psychologists in terms of resources for critical analysis 
(Hook 2005, 2011; Ward 2013). The canonical texts of this tradition are understood to offer 
theoretical resources for studying identity, subjectivity, oppression and resistance – specifically  
in the context of the complex psychic and cultural landscapes of postcolonial societies – beyond 
the existing categories of both mainstream and critical psychology. Hook (2011), for example, 
relies heavily on the work of Homi Bhabha (1994), Frantz Fanon (1967), Steve Biko (1978), 
and others to develop a psychoanalytic account of racism which positions itself in critical rela-
tion to both experimental and discursive approaches to the phenomenon in social psychology. 
Whilst this amply demonstrates that resources from postcolonial theory can be used to develop 
sophisticated theory in critical psychology, there is also a danger inherent in this kind of work: 
psychology remains in a rather uncritical position vis-à-vis the political and the historical. In 
Hook’s work, for example, racism is clearly rendered a psychological phenomenon; and despite 
the fact that he presents his work programmatically as a ‘critical psychology of the postcolonial’ 
(Hook 2011), both the particular historical dynamics of the postcolonial society he invokes, 
apartheid and post-apartheid South Africa, and specific aims of the activist-authors like Fanon 
and Biko he engages with, often serve as little more than warrants for the development of a 
discourse on racism which becomes universal precisely on account of being translated into 
psychological terms. Rather than contributing to a critique of the psychologization of political 
discourse and the consolidation of speaking rights for psychological experts on matters of poli-
tics, then, ‘postcolonial critical psychology’ risks serving the agenda of an internationalization of 
psychology by other means.

Postcolonial theory
373
Critical psychology as postcolonial critique
Critical psychology might also be mobilized to contribute to the further development of post-
colonial theory and its associated critical agendas (Frosh 2013; Hook 2005, 2011; Ward 2013). 
According to Hook (2005: 475), ‘much postcolonial theory is explicitly psychological in both 
its concerns and its critical resources’; the further contribution of more precisely tailored psy-
chological perspectives to postcolonial theory is therefore warranted. In particular, according to 
Ward (2013: 171), ‘the application of psychology to the study of postcolonialism offers a deeper 
understanding of the effects on the psyche of [. . .] those who experienced colonial traumas 
(including slavery and indenture, forced migration, and colonization)’.
For Frosh (2013: 147) the relevance of psychoanalysis in particular to postcolonial theory 
may be attributed to the insight that colonial power is rooted in the ‘capacity of the colonizer to 
remove the source of subjecthood from the colonizer’ – a theme that can indeed be traced back 
to anticolonial critics and anticolonial and postcolonial theorists like Memmi (1965), Fanon 
(1967), Biko (1978), Nandy (1983), Spivak (1988), and Bhabha (1994). However, even though 
writers like Fanon and Biko employed ‘psychological’ modes of critique to describe the effects 
of colonialism and racism upon the colonized, their attempts to decolonize consciousness were 
forged as strategies of resistance within historically specific political movements, not in the inter-
ests of codifying a psychology of colonialism for its own sake. Appropriating these traditions 
of critique in the interest of fostering developments in academic psychology presents signifi-
cant risks. Whereas it is undoubtedly laudable to think of possibilities of ‘developing modalities 
of psychological praxis directed towards promoting social justice and decolonisation’ (Stevens, 
Duncan, and Sonn 2010: 20), terms like ‘trauma’ and ‘decolonization’ might become so thor-
oughly psychologized they merely operate to further mystify postcolonial theory’s relationship 
to capitalism and to advance psychology’s global academic interests.
Conclusion
Postcolonial theory presents critical psychology with a number of prospects and risks. On the 
prospective side, it challenges Western-centric patterns of production and consumption in crit-
ical psychology. On the risky side, it harbours political contradictions which are often abetted 
by an alliance with psychology, and which therefore makes ‘postcolonial critical psychology’ 
vulnerable to charges of psychologization and even psychological imperialism. Academic psy-
chologists therefore need to engage postcolonial theory reflexively, so that it does not merely 
serve to rebrand as ‘critical’ the continued production of colonizing psychologies, or to advance 
an all-too-easy postcolonialization of psychology and psychologization of postcolonial critique.
Further reading
Ashcroft, B., Griffiths, G. and Tiffin, H. (eds) (1995) The Post-Colonial Studies Reader. London: Routledge.
Bulhan, H. A. (1985) Frantz Fanon and the Psychology of Oppression. New York: Plenum Press.
Huggan, G. (ed.) (2013) The Oxford Handbook of Postcolonial Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mbembe, A. (2001) On the Postcolony. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Website Resources
Interventions: International Journal of Postcolonial Studies: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/riij20
Postcolonial Studies: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cpcs20
Postcolonial Studies Association: http://www.postcolonialstudiesassociation.co.uk/
Southern Psychologies blog: http://southernpsychologies.wordpress.com/

Desmond Painter
374
References
Ahmad, A. (1992) In Theory: Nations, Classes, Literatures. London: Verso.
Ahmed, S. (2014) ‘Mixed orientations’, Subjectivity, 7(1), 92–109.
Ashcroft, B., Griffiths, G. and Tiffin, H. (1989) The Empire Writes Back: Theory and Practice in Postcolonial 
Literatures. London: Routledge.
Ashcroft, B., Griffiths, G. and Tiffin, H. (2007) Postcolonial Studies: The Key Concepts. London: Routledge.
Bhabha, H. (1994) The Location of Culture. London: Routledge.
Bhatia, S. (2002) ‘Orientalism in Euro-American and Indian psychology: historical representation of 
“natives” in colonial and postcolonial contexts’, History of Psychology, 5, 376–398.
Biko, S. (1978) I Write What I Like. London: Bowerdean.
Blunt, A. and McEwan, C. (2002) Postcolonial Geographies. New York: Continuum.
Brickman, C. (2003) Aboriginal Populations in Mind: Race and Primitivity in Psychoanalysis. New York: Colum-
bia University Press.
Brock, A. (2006) Internationalizing the History of Psychology. New York: New York University Press.
Bulhan, H. A. (1993) ‘Imperialism in studies of the psyche: a critique of African psychological research’, 
in L. J. Nicholas (ed.) Psychology and Oppression: Critiques and Proposals. Braamfontein, South Africa: 
Skotaville.
Burman, E. (2007) ‘Between orientalism and normalization: cross-cultural lessons from Japan for a critical 
history of psychology’, History of Psychology, 10, 179–198.
Butchart, A. (1998) The Anatomy of Power: European Constructions of the African Body. London: Zed Books.
Chakrabarty, D. (2000) Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Chatterjee, P. (1986) Nationalist Thought and the Colonial World: A Derivative Discourse. London: Zed Books.
Chatterjee, P. (1993) The Nation and Its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolonial Histories. Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press.
Chibber, V. (2013) Postcolonial Theory and the Specter of Capital. London: Verso.
Chrisman, L. and Williams, P. (1993) Colonial Discourse and Postcolonial Theory: A reader. Hemel Hempstead: 
Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Clark, S. (ed.) (1999) Travel Writing and Empire: Postcolonial Theory in Transit. London: Zed Books.
Coetzee, J. M. (1989) White Writing: The Culture of Letters in South Africa. Yale: Yale University Press.
Comaroff, J. and Comaroff, J. L. (2012) Theory from the South or, How Euro-America is Evolving toward Africa. 
Boulder: Paradigm Publishers.
Connell, R. (2007) Southern Theory: the Global Dynamics of Knowledge in Social Science. Cambridge, UK: 
Polity Press.
Danziger, K. (1997) Naming the Mind: How Psychology Found Its Language. London: Sage.
Dirlik, A. (1994) ‘The postcolonial aura: Third World criticism in the age of global capitalism’, Critical 
Inquiry, 20, 328–356.
Eagleton, T. (1998) ‘Postcolonialism and “postcolonialism” ’, Interventions, 1, 24–26.
Fanon, F. (1967) Black Skin, White Masks. New York: Grove Press.
Foster, G. A. (1999) Captive Bodies: Postcolonial Subjectivity in Cinema. Albany: State University of New York 
Press.
Frosh, S. (2013) ‘Psychoanalysis, colonialism, racism’, Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology, 33, 
141–154.
Gandhi, L. (1998) Postcolonial Theory. New York: Columbia University Press.
Go, J. (2013) ‘For a postcolonial sociology’, Theory & Society, 42, 25–35.
Guha, R. (ed.) (1997) A Subaltern Studies Reader, 1986–1995. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Gutiérrez Rodríguez, E. (2010) ‘Decolonizing postcolonial rhetoric’, in E. Gutiérrez Rodríguez, M. Boatcâ 
and S. Costa (eds) Decolonizing European Sociology: Transdisciplinary Approaches. Burlington: Ashgate.
Hook, D. (2005) ‘A critical psychology of the postcolonial’, Theory & Psychology, 15, 475–503.
Hook, D. (2011) A Critical Psychology of the Postcolonial: the Mind of Apartheid. London: Routledge.
Huggan, G. (2000) ‘Counter-travel writing and postcoloniality’, in L. Glage (ed.) Being/s in Transit: Travelling, 
Migration, Dislocation. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Jacoby, R. (1995) ‘Marginal returns: the trouble with post-colonial theory’, Lingua Franca, September/
October, 30–37.
Khanna, R. (2004) Dark Continents: Psychoanalysis and Colonialism. Durham: Duke University Press.
Kennedy, D. (2003) ‘Imperial history and post-colonial theory’, in J. D. le Sueur (ed.) The Decolonization 
Reader. London: Routledge.

Postcolonial theory
375
Kumar, M. (2006) ‘Rethinking psychology in India: debating pasts and futures’, Annual Review of Critical 
Psychology, 5, 236–256.
Lazarus, N. (1999) Nationalism and Cultural Practice in the Postcolonial World. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Lazarus, N. (2011) The Postcolonial Unconscious. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Loomba, A. (1998) Colonialism/postcolonialism: the New Critical Idiom. London: Routledge.
Louw, J. (2002) ‘Psychology, history, and society’, South African Journal of Psychology, 32, 1–8.
Macleod, C. and Bhatia, S. (2008) ‘Postcolonialism and psychology’, in C. Willig and W. Stainton-Rogers 
(eds) The Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research in Psychology. London: Sage.
Macleod, C. and Wilbraham, L. (2006) ‘Redeploying Parker, post-colonially’, PINS, 34, 31–50.
Memmi, A. (1965) The Colonizer and the Colonized. Boston: Beacon Press.
Nandy, A. (1983) The Intimate Enemy: Loss and Recovery of Self Under Colonialism. Delhi: Oxford University 
Press.
Oliver, K. (2004) The Colonization of Psychic Space. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Ozaki, S., David, E.J.R. and Abelmann, N. (2008) ‘Colonialism and psychology in culture’, Social and Per-
sonality Psychology Compass, 2, 90–106.
Parker, I. (2002) Critical Discursive Psychology. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Parker, I. (2005) Qualitative Psychology: Introducing Radical Research. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Parker, I. (2006) ‘Against post-colonialism in psychology: beware Macleod and Wilbraham’, PINS, 34, 
51–53.
Parry, B. (1997) ‘The postcolonial: conceptual category or chimera?’, The Yearbook of English Studies, 27, 
3–21.
Parry, B. (2004) Postcolonial Studies: a Materialist Critique. London: Routledge.
Richards, G. (2012) ‘Race’, Racism and Psychology: towards a Reflexive History (2nd Edn). London: Routledge.
Roy, A. and Ong, A. (eds) (2011) Worlding Cities: Asian Experiments and the Art of Being Global. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Said, E. (1978) Orientalism. London: Penguin.
Said, E. (1993) Culture and Imperialism. London: Chatto & Windus.
Smith, L. T. (1999) Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples. London: Zed.
Spivak, G. C. (1988) ‘Can the subaltern speak?’, in N. Cary and L. Grossberg (eds) Marxism and the Interpre-
tation of Culture. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Staeuble, I. (2006) ‘Psychology in the Eurocentric order of the social sciences’, in A. Brock (ed.) Internation-
alizing the History of Psychology. New York: New York University Press.
Stevens, G., Duncan, N. and Sonn, C. (2010) ‘The apartheid archive: memory, voice and narrative as liber-
atory praxis’, PINS, 40, 8–28.
Swartz, S. (2005) ‘Can the clinical subject speak? Some thoughts on subaltern psychology’, Theory & Psy-
chology, 15, 505–526.
Teo, T. (2005) The Critique of Psychology: from Kant to Postcolonial Theory. New York: Springer.
Ward, A. (2013) ‘Understanding postcolonial traumas’, Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology, 33, 
170–187.
Young, R.J.C. (1990) White Mythologies: White Histories and the West. London: Routledge.
Young, R.J.C. (1995) Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture and Race. London: Routledge.
Young, R.J.C. (2001) Postcolonialism: An Historical Introduction. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

376
Critical psychologists need to know this: amidst the flurry of (often haphazard) estimates and 
assuming/monolithic discourse, there remains an urgency, to pay attention to the lives of disa-
bled people living in the global South. In its first World Report on Disability published in 2011 
(in conjunction with the World Bank), the WHO suggests that some estimated 15 per cent of 
the global population is disabled people. It also went on to restate that around 80 per cent of 
these disabled people are located in the so-called global South. Attention towards disability in 
the global South, though, is relatively recent in both practice and academia, dating back to the 
1990s, when a few linkages started to be created with the industry of international development. 
Indeed, many have echoed the notion that disability and poverty are caught in a mutually rein-
forcing relationship, whereby poverty exacerbates and/or intensifies disability (or rather impair-
ment), and impairment leads to or strengthens poverty, the net result being that disabled people 
and their families are among the poorest of the poor (see Groce et al. 2012).
These concerns resonated to some extent at the level of rhetoric in a development sector 
(in theory) concerned with poverty and its eradication. This coincided with the ascent of the 
rights-based approach in development. Others started to create linkages between disability and 
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to strengthen lobbying efforts at inclusive devel-
opment (see for example UN 2011). They argued that disability must be included and addressed 
in the global development agenda because it traverses each and every goal (see Mulligan and 
Gooding 2009). These same efforts are being replicated and expanded on as various global 
stakeholders are lobbying hard to get disability onto the post-2015 goals (http://www.un.org/
disabilities/default.asp?id=1611)
In response to these pressures, development agencies and international and national organ-
izations have slowly but surely issued some disability policy or statement claiming to start 
considering and even mainstreaming disability in their practice – to work towards ‘inclusive 
development’. A new field of research and practice, loosely branded ‘disability and development’ 
also appeared in the last decade or so to frame this ‘newfound’ focus on disabled people in the 
global South – supported by powerful organizations such as Handicap International and CBM 
(previously Christian Blind Mission). What followed, though, was the ascent of hegemonic par-
adigms and practices typical of development scenarios when confronted by a ‘new’ or unfamiliar 
‘problem’. In the same way that neoliberalism became the development metanarrative and cure 
39
From critical disability studies to 
critical global disability studies
Shaun Grech

From critical disability studies
377
of the century, Community Based Rehabilitation (CBR), devised and strongly promoted by 
the WHO, became the disability miracle pill packaged and exported with its set of guidelines 
on how to ‘do’ anything with disability in the so-called developing world. Many discourses, 
methods, research, and ‘strategies’ continue to be fabricated in the global North, premised on 
Western values, including the language of rights and ethics. But models (e.g. the social model of 
disability) and methods are consistently shipped off from global North to South – packaged as 
informed/expert knowledge, discourse, and practice for mass consumption.
Despite the changes in rhetoric, the excitement about the World Report on Disability, and 
the almost euphoric welcome of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (UNCRPD), disability in practice remains marginalized, if not excluded, in much of 
the development sector at policy and programme levels (Grech 2009). At other times, disability 
is hardly contemplated and/or considered a charitable concern, a ‘problem’ to be addressed by 
non-governmental and religious organizations. Disability in the global South also remains on 
the margins of development research. Disabled poor people are often not contemplated, not 
heard, and sometimes drowned in statistics or rendered invisible in the faceless category of the 
‘vulnerable’– an ontological all-encompassing space, a kind of limbo for all those who do not 
‘fit’ among the productive poor, but are seen as being in need of some ‘intervention’ or other.
Critical approaches to global disability and ‘psychology’
Many of the epistemological developments that have happened in recent years in the new 
so-called field of disability and development or global disability have indeed not happened 
from within development, but from within fields such as global health. But, and to emphasize, 
engagements have been far from interdisciplinary, with few or no linkages with fields such as 
development, rural development, economics, psychology, and anthropology, to name but a few. 
And this absence of interdisciplinarity has been far from innocent, with global health struggling 
hard to maintain its grip on what has become a lucrative field of research and consultancy for 
some. This dynamic has been permitted by the creation and perpetuation of a discourse and 
metanarrative of ‘global disability’ (as it has come to be known) feeding back into demand for 
more of this same discourse and analysis, and funds to make this possible – sustained by con-
clusions that there is need for more research, and that much of the research needed is yet again 
epidemiological and medical.
Much of this research is scarcely theoretical, unfailingly mono-disciplinary, often positivist, 
devoid of narratives, and the approach much less critical – especially of its own self-righteous 
discourse and methods. Dominant institutions working in global health, notably universities in 
the UK, have not been so forthcoming at engaging with spaces outside the dominant narrative, 
evident in the sparse literature, much of which is limited to organizational (non-peer reviewed) 
documents or reports written by people from these same institutions or their associates – those 
speaking and propagating exactly the same views and perspectives, who do not ‘rock the boat’ 
epistemically or ontologically. And there remains a dearth of empirical material, especially quali-
tative research highlighting the perspectives and voices of disabled people, especially those living 
in contexts of extreme poverty in rural areas (Grech 2009).
Willingness to engage with critical perspectives sensitive to notions and issues of hegemony, 
post/necoloniality, and the suppression of voices from the global South has been even less forth-
coming (see Grech 2011; Meekosha 2011). But global health has hardly any desire to engage, 
including with disability studies, despite the token inclusion of some representative from disability 
studies at a conference. Opening up the palette of literature, theoretical engagement, and ques-
tioning (including oneself ⁜), becomes very dangerous when it shifts and challenges the positions 

Shaun Grech
378
of discursive comfort, security, and authority, including those by which funds for research and 
projects are obtained. However, these approaches are not unfamiliar in academia, a clear example 
being the iron grip until recently held by the materialist social modelists in British universities, 
and the punitive approaches taken towards those dabbling with issues of the body, discourse, and 
those challenging the limitations of the social model of disability, including across cultures.
While many have started to speak about ‘global disability’, to refer to disability in the global 
South, the general lack of interdisciplinary dialogue continues to mean that there is no such 
thing as a nuanced ‘global disability studies’ yet. Contributing to this scenario is perhaps the 
fact that disability studies as a field continues to bypass the global South in much of its content. 
Indeed, as I have highlighted elsewhere (see Grech 2011), not only is the global South often 
ignored, but, importantly, the field remains the arena of global North (read British and US) 
white, urban, middle-class academics.
Critical disability studies
It is important to note, though, that global sensitivities have started to emerge from within a 
strand of disability studies called critical disability studies (CDS) – a space for theorizing critical 
aspects such as the body and ethics of care through disciplines previously banished, includ-
ing psychology; to challenge ‘the dogmatic tendencies of some theories and theorists through 
reference to eclecticism’ to include accounts from ‘feminism, queer and post-colonial studies’ 
(Meekosha and Shuttleworth 2009, cited in Goodley 2013: 632). CDS, importantly, has started 
to provide a space for those theorizing some global aspects, such as geopolitical asymmetries in 
power and coloniality, among others, a task often taken up by those operating at the discipli-
nary peripheries (see for example Soldatic and Grech 2014). But, to be clear, despite the hopes 
instilled by CDS, much of the emerging CDS literature is also produced within global North 
universities and remains focused on the global North. The ‘global’ may run the risk (despite all 
good intentions) of being conveniently adopted simply to globalize CDS tenets, as opposed to 
having a CDS genuinely prioritizing and even emerging from the global South.
This chapter is written from the fringes – epistemological, ontological, and disciplinary – and 
will be looking at some of the critical issues that emerge but which are often left out of the anal-
ysis (or intentionally ignored) as fields such as global health and disability studies are confronted 
with the complex condition of disability in the global South. This, I hope, contributes to a new 
global South-focused, reflexive, and interdisciplinary project, which I have termed Critical Global 
Disability Studies (Grech 2012).
The global North means real ‘knowledge’
Before starting to address some of these critical emerging issues, it is critical to take a step 
back and deal with the issue of what counts as knowledge; how it is produced; from where 
and by who; and how it should be packaged and disseminated. Indeed, if the pattern is one of 
transferring ideas, research, and ‘knowledge’, it is important to first contend with the issue of 
what Foucault (1979) would call ‘disciplinary power’, because the approach of shifting ideas 
and ‘knowledge’ from the West to the rest is not new, and has long colonial lineages. Reading 
disability studies and global health texts, one is immediately struck by two patterns. The first is 
the generation of these texts and research in the global North, framed as ‘knowledge’, worked 
out in ‘enlightened’ global North institutions using refined, rigorous, and reliable methodologies 
developed in global North universities. These writings and outputs are pitched as the informed 
(authoritative and authority) material in the respective fields. They rapidly become a global 

From critical disability studies
379
narrative to be adopted by all, as experts, organizations, and others teach or facilitate dissem-
ination of these tenets and methods to the global South through, for example, international 
organizations.
The second pattern is little or no engagement with Southern epistemologies, in particu-
lar those ‘frustrated by the continued use of imported Euro-American ideas and institutions’ 
(Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2013: vii), and who resist or contradict the dominant perspectives and logo-
centrism. Those written in languages other than English continue to be even more excluded, 
subjected/inferiorized to the dominant lingua franca (of ‘knowledge’, ethics, the academe, and 
of practice). Language itself becomes an additional variant in the epistemological devaluation 
and exclusion, alongside the racialization and geopoliticization of knowledge. Latin American 
writers (see for example Quijano 2000) have, for example, long resisted the persistent refusal to 
engage with Latin American writings by disciplines such as postcolonial theory.
Exclusions in dominant disciplines in the global North are also supported by the idea that 
these writings from the global South employ unfamiliar and dubious literature, discourse, theory, 
and style of writing. The dominant institution is resistant, and resistance takes the shape (among 
other things) of devaluation, recreating the notion that First World knowledge is superior as well 
as universally applicable. In consequence, it maintains the subjugation of Southern knowledge 
and voices, persistently Third Worldized – simply ‘seen as reflections of other, localised worlds’ 
(Cutajar 2008: 32). The result is a disability studies and global health that remains insular, lim-
ited in its scope and breadth, and which fails to account for the politics of location. Approaches 
of ‘essentialism and exclusiveness, or with barriers and sides’ such as these, as Said (1993: 35) 
stressed, ‘give rise to polarizations that absolve and forgive ignorance and demagogy more than 
they enable knowledge’. In a recent posting on the Disability Research mailing list (run by the 
University of Leeds), renowned disabled Indian theorist and activist, Anita Ghai, expressed quite 
some concern on this public forum:
What is sad is that when I go through research in west, I often find that though writings 
by the south Asian scholars is not considered worthy. I do understand the colonial powers. 
However even people who have reviewed my work for instance, do not bother to include 
the work. Is it because the work is bad, then there is all the more reason to criticise the 
writings. Would you really want to create a community of disability scholars, only from 
USA, UK and Australia?
(12 October 2009)
Some Southern institutions and academics, Cutajar argues, as in the case of Malta (my own 
country), have ‘internalised the colonial scope’– ‘we write in English, use First World concepts, 
methodologies and epistemologies and are constantly aware of how our work might be received 
outside Maltese shores’ (35). But this, Cutajar goes on to claim, does not mean that these ‘Oth-
erized’ scholars are not ‘conscious that their dependence on Western enunciative codes and 
epistemologies is a form of neo-colonialism’ (39). It also does not mean that they do not resist. 
But resistance is often diluted or ignored by the ‘knowledge’ empire (in particular the US and 
the UK) – silence becomes violent. And if, as in the case of Malta, knowledge cannot be deval-
ued on the basis of linguistic difference (or rather it being incomprehensible to mono-linguistic 
contexts such as the UK), it can be rapidly offset by the devaluing or nullification of the insti-
tutions, and more broadly the national context (imbued with a historicity of subjugation), from 
which this knowledge is produced. This is then followed by the ‘poverty’ of its academics, and 
the methods used (see below). We have yet to see an Indian or Latin American disability studies 
emerge and be considered of repute in and an influence on the global North.

Shaun Grech
380
It is here that one sees the opportunistic use of the word ‘global’ by disability theorists to 
enhance the attraction of disability studies texts to global North publishers, and to sell the 
idea that the perspectives inside, such as those in an edited book, are relevant to all (global 
reach  =  more sizable market). Furthermore, ‘those’ parts of the world pitched as ‘lacking’, 
including in literature, are also accommodated (via an ‘inclusive’ text), implying that they, too, 
will become potential customers. But in practice, few of these texts include global South writers. 
The ‘global’ sells, but the historical baggage, in particular the colonial that endows the neolib-
eral globalization of knowledge and practices, replete with inequality and epistemic violence, is 
hardly interrogated in disability studies and other fields, re-inscribing the post/recolonizing of 
the Southern space, subject, and knowledge. Burman (2008: 10) probes her own use of ‘richer 
versus poorer’, and sometimes ‘(over)developed versus developing’ to draw attention to their 
relational character (whereby the interiorized or immature status of ‘developing’ countries arises 
from the historical and current power wielded by ‘developed’ or more accurately – in terms of 
wealth and overconsumption – ‘overdeveloped’ countries)’. It is these asymmetries that ulti-
mately permit the globalization of knowledge from North to South but very rarely the other 
way around.
Homogenizing: on difference and erasure
This assumed superiority and universality of global North knowledge is often premised on the 
homogenizing of the Southern space, subject, and ‘knowledge’, and an obsession with difference 
and Othering of these as ignorant, inferior, and uncivilized. These are consequently pitched 
against hegemonic knowledge from the ‘superior’, ‘enlightened’, ‘human’ global North spaces – 
truth. In global North writings one finds a frequent homogenization of the disability experience 
and its treatment in the global South, discourse suggesting that disabled people in these dark, 
distant places are inordinately oppressed, hidden, ill-treated, and even killed. Streamlining the 
disability experience through dominant frames such as the social model of disability or human 
rights discourse (focused increasingly on barriers and oppression), strengthens this disability 
metanarrative that feeds back into the legitimacy and perceived relevance of these Northern 
frames round the four corners of the globe. The following example is illustrative:
Disabled men and women in many countries face stigma, prejudice and social isolation, 
while lacking the education, social support networks, and legal right to appeal injustices at 
the family, community or national level.
(Groce et al. 2012)
Space, temporality, and circumstance are often condensed in the bid to create a ‘consistent’, but 
unfailingly demonizing discourse around a native Fanon insists is not only ‘declared insensible to 
ethics’ but one which ‘represents . . . the absence of values, but also the negation of values’ (1963: 
32). In sum, ‘the misery of the Third World is the result of its own incompetence, its own inanity –  
in short, of its subhumanity’ (Badiou 2002: 13, italics in original).
The dynamics of homogenization and ‘difference’ meet and are sustained by what we may 
call a dynamic of erasure – a colonizing slash and burn – where little or nothing has been done 
or written in the Southern space and voice. But perhaps one needs to take a step back and 
acknowledge that this erasure is supported by an approach where findings are reported and the-
ory generated on occasion, but we learn little about the Southern contexts within which these 
findings arise. Words such as ‘poverty’ are thrown around with incredible ease, without even being 
conceptualized, without understanding and mapping out what they mean to and how they are 

From critical disability studies
381
defined by those living them every single day. For others, it is sometimes assumed to be the same 
everywhere. Critically, this Southern space, in its full fluidity, complexity, and heterogeneity not 
only interacts with, but importantly (re)constructs disability in ways that profoundly challenge 
Western epistemologies and more basically, ‘knowledge’, redefining a Southern space imbued 
with agency and resistance to the ‘Eurocentric paradigm’ of ‘truth’, ‘order’, and ‘reality’ (Pisani 
2013). Returning to the dynamic of erasure, in practice, in rural areas it is often families and com-
munities who through their love and care continue to single-handedly ensure the survival of their 
disabled members – contexts where the idea of community exists within people’s psyche and 
life worlds, real and imagined. These are the distant rural spaces where the language of rights and 
policies are often mere empty rhetoric, if known at all. Miles (2004) documents centuries of local 
and community based forms of rehabilitation emerging on their own accord in African countries.
To be clear, ill-treatment does exist, but it exists everywhere. While oppression and even 
violence against disabled people happen regularly in the global North, no writer would ever 
contemplate a statement such as ‘disabled people in the West are neglected and killed’. When 
transposed to the global South, this discourse of ill-treatment and cruelty is indeed expected.
But what emerges clearly is that flowing through such discourse is the call for outside inter-
vention (knowing/developed/benevolent/civilized) in a global South constructed as a space in 
need of, perhaps even desiring, correction – even from itself – and the imperative of the global 
North – perhaps obligation – to intervene and offer the knowledge for their own good – to use 
Santos’ (2012: 46) words, ‘a benevolent but imperialist universalism’. This approach has in the 
past and continues to sustain a whole development and humanitarian sector premised on inter-
vening in a space that happens to be calling for the same intervention it has to offer.
As global disability research, discourse, and practice meet the complex global South in the 
context of this disciplinary power, many issues arise, but are seldom talked about or included 
in disability studies or global health analyses. I devote the rest of the chapter to engaging with 
some of these.
Disability is historical too: colonizing to recolonizing terrains
As one reads much of the literature on disability in the global South, one immediately encoun-
ters a stark disengagement from the colonial encounter and its impacts – a disengagement that 
is hard to understand when the colonial experience is perhaps the only common experience 
in the hugely complex and heterogeneous space neatly packed as ‘the global South’. Disability 
studies, focused on the North and dominated by global North theorists as it is, has expressed 
hardly any interest in the colonial. Indeed, much of the history it documents, whether of disa-
bility and its ‘treatment’, or resistance, is limited to that of the global North. References to the 
colonial in disability studies have been exclusively as metaphors for the colonization of bodies, 
through medicalization and institutionalization, but there is no sign of the historical baggage 
of these terms. This is not different from the adoption of ‘disability’ and ‘disabling’ to stand in 
as metaphors for oppression in postcolonial writings – reflected in and sustained by the serious 
disengagement from disability per se in the field. Insights from postcolonial theory in disability 
studies have also been ‘borrowed’ by global North theorists, but again largely in and focused on 
the global North (see Sherry 2007). Issues of geopolitical asymmetries, power, and coloniality 
are instead confined to silence. Much of the research in global health simply reports on find-
ings, but these findings, as well as the global South, the Southern subject, and our practice, are 
stripped of any historical baggage.
In particular, huge gaps persist with respect to the impacts and implications of the colonial 
experience and how it provides the ideological, cultural, and ontological foundations for the 

Shaun Grech
382
continuing domination of the global South. The poverty that remains and has come to charac-
terize much of the global South is also dehistoricized, diluting any understanding and analysis of 
the factors, processes, and parties that continue to create and perpetuate it.
The colonial encounter, though, is far from abstraction and not simply a metaphor, initiating 
mechanisms of pillaging, violence, and oppression, and epistemic, gender, spiritual, bodily, and 
other hierarchies. Importantly, as Quijano (2000) stresses, it introduced racial ‘Otherness’ as the 
ideological key to domination. Disabled people, like others, do not exist outside history, were 
subjugated and confined in the normalizing process, as missionaries and Western medical profes-
sionals imported charity and European specialized institutions-dynamics, destroying local forms 
of care and communities. This is the way disabled people have come to know ‘intervention’. 
These were indeed the informal origins of international development, and how the native has 
come to see and know ‘development’ and the regimenting tools of empire.
Few of the current social, political, economic, cultural, religious, and other aspects of the 
global South can be understood without recourse to history, e.g. wealth and land concentrations, 
inequitable access to health care, and racism in Latin America. The harsh conditions confronting 
some disabled people today, such as the liminal position of disabled refugees, owes its roots to 
notions of nation-states, citizenship, and democracy instituted in colonial domination (Gros-
foguel 2007: 12). These are all constitutive of disability experiences.
As researchers and practitioners, this history frames and positions, but importantly, legitimizes 
us, our epistemologies, our methods, and the universalizing knowledge we produce. It also sus-
tains the structures (e.g. universities and organizations) to maintain this epistemic and material 
‘superiority’ vis-à-vis an underdeveloped Southern space historically (re)constructed ontologi-
cally as perpetually deficient.
Neocolonizing disability
Research, discourse, and knowledge production on global disability need to perhaps be framed 
not only within a colonial, but also a neocolonial context because decolonization for many 
Southern countries did not mean the end of empires: ‘a convoluted situation within which the 
“postcolonial” became paradoxically entangled with the “neocolonial”, to the extent that the 
two cannot be intellectually approached as mutually exclusive states of being’ (Ndlovu-Gatsheni 
2013: xi). Disabled people exist, live, operate in, are constructed in, and are impacted by the neo-
colonial in its multiple forms – which has serious implications for how epistemologies, research, 
and practice are framed. Manifestations and dynamics of the neocolonial are various.
Neoliberal global economic policies, ideologies, and unequal trade relationships: Neoliberalism has not 
only become a hegemonic notion of ‘development’– it is ‘development’, strategically imposed 
through Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAPs) rehashed as Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Papers (PRSPs). But in practice, not only is the process rarely participatory, but the measures 
put in place remain militantly the same: privatization (including of sectors such as education 
and health); rolling back the state; cuts in public sector expenditure and size; exchange rate 
devaluation; liberalization. These measures continue to increase poverty and suffering, inequality, 
disablement, and conflict, while strengthening the power of those imposing them. I am struck 
and have articulated elsewhere (Grech 2009) by how quickly many (including in the disability 
movement), are to lobby to include disability in development. But there is rarely any questioning 
as to the implications of neoliberal globalization and development for disabled people – includ-
ing the power and other relationships triggering their exclusion and disablement in the first 
place. The more basic questions are hardly tackled: is ‘development’ necessarily good for disabled 
people? Can/does it harm disabled people and those around them? Does inclusive development 

From critical disability studies
383
mean leaving the existing system unchanged? But this is hardly surprising when, despite all good 
intentions, alliances between global health and development mean projects and money, and it is 
neither shrewd nor convenient to question the practices of one’s paymaster in this Faustian pact.
In practice, disabled people are harshly impacted by these and other measures constructed 
as ‘developing’, whether through the destruction of rural livelihoods from industrial environ-
mental degradation; the fragmentation of much needed communities of support in rural areas 
through forced migration and displacement (it is often the strongest who migrate); or the pri-
vatization of public health care and water, opening a wider space for impairments. Neoliberal 
globalization, importantly, remains dependent on economic growth as the main development 
strategy – a development built around, and predicated on normalized able-bodiedness – the 
functioning, productive, independent and autonomous, homo oeconomicus. Disabled people are 
instead perpetually constructed as those who are not integrated into the market economy – part 
of the problem who need to be normalized to function and produce in order to reduce the 
costliness or the burden of their existence on governments. These are the bodies, to use Fanon’s 
(1967: 83) words, that are ‘surrounded by an atmosphere of certain uncertainty’. This is indeed 
a clear paradox in the rhetoric of inclusive development.
And even more questions arise: how can disabled people be genuinely included in devel-
opment, and how can the UNCRPD be implemented in the midst of growing cost-cutting, 
economic crises, and rampant inequality? Furthermore, do notions of ‘community’ and ‘social 
capital’ so keenly adopted by the World Bank over the past decade take on a different mean-
ing and simply become opportunistic and cost-effective ‘rediscoveries’ in a development sector 
where the idea of community means autonomous people taking care of themselves, unburden-
ing governments?
Research, media, and other representations: movies, images, and discourse in mainstream and 
social media do much to create and sustain the neocolonial. This includes the way we write 
out reports. Edward Said (1967) emphasized how the critical variable in the process of domina-
tion is not only material violence, but representations and institutionalization of these images. 
Feminists such as Mohanty have vehemently resisted the production of ‘Third World Woman’ 
by global North feminists depicting the ‘singular monolithic subject . . . that stable ahistorical 
something that apparently oppresses most if not all women in these countries’ (Mohanty 2002: 
333, 335). In the disability sector, too, discourse such as that highlighted above, and disseminated 
by organizations to generate funds, does much to dehumanize these spaces. These blatant or 
subliminal messages, though, serve to open the space – ethical justification even – for a civilizing 
intervention, where ‘developing’ and rendering the Other more human again becomes a moral 
obligation. The lexicon of buzzwords in development are in fact illustrative: Poverty Eradica-
tion; Progress; Building Social Capital; Peace-building; Democratization; Good Governance; 
Knowledge-management. Despite all good intentions, it is not hard to see that power in practice 
is often skewed towards one side – one legitimized to determine and do the ‘development – and 
that not all ‘development’ can be considered ‘developed’, in particular the local development.
Conclusions: towards a critical global disability studies
In this chapter I have sought to briefly but critically engage with some of the emerging issues 
as disability studies and global health are confronted with disability in the global South. These 
are my own observations, not intended as comprehensive, and simply meant to instigate further 
debate. While inspired by the critical and questioning stance of critical disability studies, it strives 
to move on towards an approach that not only includes a global element in the existing CDS, 
but that indeed emerges from concerns and voices specifically within a global South context. 

Shaun Grech
384
I have called this project Critical Global Disability Studies (CGDS) – a project that does not 
aim for a different discipline or split from disability studies, but simply an approach with which 
to think, question, critique, challenge, and offer alternatives in the disability and global South 
debate, one that remains haunted by metarratives, epistemic and professional imperialism, and 
coloniality.
Thinking through a CGDS frame to me is simple; it means an approach that encourages 
listening and questioning rather than simply transferring discourse, epistemologies, and meth-
ods – an approach that emphasizes uncertainty and contingency, that is culturally and contex-
tually sensitive and responsive. It does not simplify and generalize, sustained by the continued 
recognition that epistemologies and practices are premised on and developed in specific spaces 
imbued with a historical baggage of geopolitical asymmetries – where colonialism and colo-
niality never slip out of focus. It is about learning about the contexts, cultures, ideologies, and 
the knowledge, experiences, and lives of those we talk about – the way they interpret and know 
their own world. It is (self )reflexive and open to alternative epistemologies, realities, and ways of 
knowing, learning, and talking about worlds already out there. Indeed, as Santos (2012: 52) puts 
it: ‘We do not need alternatives’ we need rather ‘an alternative thinking of alternatives’. CGDS 
is about decolonizing research and practice through an approach that is transdisciplinary and 
trans-sectoral – willing to follow ideas and arguments, which creates linkages, and, importantly 
learns, debates, and collaborates.
CGDS, to emphasize, is not a project of theoretical abstraction, but one of reflexive practice 
that seeks to make a difference to people’s lives on their own terms, moving ‘from the sphere 
of academic argument into the methodological process and into the realm of praxis’ (Goodley 
and Parker 2000: 4). Importantly, it helps support spaces for resistance while becoming an alter-
native site of resistance to all forms of colonization. But to do this, power relationships need to 
be shifted to prioritize global South voices, epistemologies, and knowledge – in particular the 
way disabled people want to know, learn, and teach about their own lives – and to learn from 
those voices challenging the fixities of our own positions and practices in ‘critical psychology’ 
and beyond.
Further reading
Connell, R. (2011) ‘Southern bodies and disability: re-thinking concepts’, Third World Quarterly, 32(8), 
1369–1381.
Soldatic, K. (2013), ‘The transnational sphere of justice: disability praxis and the politics of impairment’, 
Disability & Society, 28(6), 744–755.
Website resources
Critical Disability Studies @ MMU: www.cdsmmu.wordpress.com
Disability and the Global South (DGS): The International Journal: www.dgsjournal.org
References
Badiou, A. (2002) Ethics: an Essay on the Understanding of Evil. London: Verso.
Burman, E. (2008) Developments: Child, Image, Nation. London: Routledge.
Cutajar, J. (2008) ‘Knowledge and post-colonial pedagogy’, Mediterranean Journal of Educational Studies, 13(2), 
27–47.
Fanon, F. (1963) The Wretched of the Earth. New York: Grove Press.
Fanon, F. (1967) Black Skin, White Masks. London: Pluto.
Foucault, M. (1979) Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison. London: Penguin.
Goodley, D. (2013) ‘Dis/entangling critical disability studies’, Disability & Society, 28(5), 631–644.

From critical disability studies
385
Goodley, D. and Parker, I. (2000) ‘Critical psychology and action research’, Annual Review of Critical Psy-
chology, 2, 3–16.
Grech, S. (2009) ‘Disability, poverty and development: critical reflections on the majority world debate’, 
Disability & Society, 24(6), 771–784.
Grech, S. (2011) ‘Recolonising debates or perpetuated coloniality? Decentring the spaces of disability, 
development and community in the global South’, International Journal of Inclusive Education, 15(1), 
87–100.
Grech, S. (2012) ‘Disability and the majority world: a neo-colonial approach’, in D. Goodley, B. Hughes, and 
L. Davis (eds) Disability and Social Theory. Houndmills, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Groce, N., London, J., and Stein, M. (2012) ‘Intergenerational poverty and disability: implications of inher-
itance policy and practice on persons with disabilities in the developing world’. London: UCL.
Grosfoguel, R. (2007) ‘Decolonizing post-colonial studies and paradigms of political economy: transmo-
dernity, decolonial thinking, and global coloniality’, Transmodernity, 1(1), 1–25.
Meekosha, H. (2011) ‘Decolonizing disability: thinking and acting globally’, Disability & Society, 26(6), 
667–682.
Meekosha, H. and Shuttleworth, R. (2009) ‘What’s so critical about critical disability?’, Australian Journal of 
Human Rights, 15(1), 47–76
Miles, M. (2004) ‘Locating deaf people, gesture and sign in African histories, 1450s-1950s’, Disability & 
Society, 19(5), 531–545.
Mohanty, C. (2002) ‘ “Under western eyes” revisited: feminist solidarity through anticapitalist struggles’, 
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28(1), 499–535.
Mulligan, D. and Gooding, K. (2009) The Millennium Development Goals and People with Disabilities. UK: 
Sightsavers International.
Ndlovu-Gatsheni, S. J. (2013) Coloniality of Power in Postcolonial Africa: Myths of Decolonization. Dakar: 
CODESRIA Books.
Pisani, M. (2013) ‘⁜“We are going to fix your vagina, just the way we like it”: some reflections on the con-
struction of [sub-Saharan] African female asylum seekers in Malta and their efforts to speak back’, Post 
Colonial Directions in Education, 2(1), 68–99.
Quijano, A. (2000) ‘Coloniality of power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America’, Nepantla: Views from South, 
1(3), 533–580.
Said, E. (1967) Orientalism. New York: Vintage.
Said, E. (1993) Culture and Imperialism. New York: Vintage.
Santos, B. D. (2012) ‘Public spheres and epistemologies of the south’, Africa Development, 37, 43–67.
Sherry, M. (2007) ‘(Post)colonising disability’, Wagadu: A Journal of Transnational Women’s and Gender Studies, 
4, 10–22.
Soldatic, K. and Grech, S. (2014) ‘Transnationalising disability studies: rights, justice and impairment’, Dis-
ability Studies Quarterly.
UN (2011) Disability and the Millennium Development Goals: A Review of the MDG Process and Strategies for 
Inclusion of Disability Issues in Millennium Development Goal Efforts. New York: UN.
WHO and World Bank (2011) World Report on Disability. Geneva: WHO.

386
Psychology is a discipline that has a contested history as it emerges out of the twentieth cen-
tury and moves into the twenty-first. The discipline has spent nearly a century emphasizing its 
credentials as a science. In this aspect, it has made considerable progress in developing taxono-
mies of classification, sophisticated studies of neurobiology, impressive studies of the teleological 
progression of human development, and nuanced readings of psychopathology both individual 
and social. In this drive to affiliate itself with the scientific disciplines it has, however, left some 
valuable aspects of its foundational knowledge behind. In particular, it has left its philosophical, 
political, and spiritual interests on the margins of its study of the human psyche.
Psychology and spirituality: capitalism and Marx
Whereas the inclusion of various modes of philosophy and political theory into critical psychol-
ogy have produced a complex and rich, albeit contested, field of study and analysis, spirituality 
and the transpersonal have remained on the margins of the critical psychological discourse. 
Certainly, one might suggest a deeply rooted suspicion of the spiritual, premised in Marx’s 
(1978a) denunciations of religion and appeals to the realm of higher spirit as either hopelessly 
romantic delusional attempts at reform or directly complicit in oppression and the ideological 
obfuscation of actual economic and material relations. Therefore, if there is to be an inclusion 
of spirituality and the transpersonal in the critical psychological discourse, a new reading of the 
thought and practice of the spiritual and transpersonal must be taken up. Such a reading must 
account for spirituality and the transpersonal as a direct political and cultural challenge to capi-
talism mounted within the material and historical actualities of the present.
This requires a very specific and careful parsing of the thought and practice of what has 
been termed spiritual. In a sense, it is necessary to reproduce the work done by Marx (1978b) 
in philosophy when he turned the dialectic on its feet. Just as Marx took the realm of ideal 
form and subordinated it to the world of lived struggle and creative production, so the realm of 
transcendent spirituality must be set on its feet within the realm of living, creative, productive 
force. To use the religious expression, the spirit must be made flesh. To do this from a Marxist 
or post-Marxist perspective, there needs to be an accounting of the way that previous modes 
of the social production of the spiritual have shifted with the emerging world of the current 
40
A politically informed immanent 
spirituality for critical psychology
Kathleen S. G. Skott-Myhre

A politically informed immanent spirituality
387
mode of production. In relation to their argument for a reorientation of Marxist theory, Hardt 
and Negri (2005: 140) point out ‘The key to Marx’s theory of historical materialism is that 
social theory must be molded to the contours of contemporary social reality’. They propose 
four basic elements of Marx’s methodology to assist in coming to contemporary terms with 
shifts in the mode of production and resultant reconfiguration of the social: historical tendency, 
real abstraction, antagonism, and the constitution of subjectivity. To apply this to spirituality as a 
proposed mode of critical psychology, it is useful to begin with the ways that globalization and 
postcolonial relations have opened new vistas for spirituality within the historical tendency of 
late stage capitalism.
Spirituality as subjugated knowledge
Stengers and Pignarre (2011) have delineated capitalism itself as a kind of sorcery, referencing 
one of the most contested arenas of spirituality in the development of modernity and capitalism: 
the brutal suppression of women who were accused of being witches. Silvia Federici (2004) had 
argued that the persecution and violent subjugation of witchcraft is fundamentally tied to the 
way that primitive accumulation is related to capitalist development. Undeniably, the develop-
ment of the capitalist mode of production was intimately tied to the suppression of all forms of 
non-Christian spiritual practices and beliefs. Furthermore, Schulte-Sasse (1986) points out that 
the rise of scientism was dependent, to a large degree, on the marginalization of magic and the 
imagination. Throughout the colonial period, the appropriation of indigenous spiritual practices 
into the dominant structures of the Holy Roman Empire and later into the fully commodified 
forms of late stage capitalism, once again, demonstrates the necessity to assimilate and obscure 
the force of indigenous and feminine spirituality as an alternate form of value and mode of life. 
In this regard, it would be remiss to neglect the cultural appropriations of non-European spirit-
uality by transpersonal, humanist, and Jungian psychology.
The historical tendency of the modern and colonial periods to appropriate, assimilate, and 
reconfigure non-monotheistic spiritual beliefs and practices, and viciously suppress those that 
could not be assimilated, cannot be separated from the rise of capitalism and the development 
of the lines of thought and practice that have been complicit within the discipline of psychol-
ogy. The role of real abstraction lies in removing whatever use value there was in indigenous 
practices and replacing them with exchange values that allow them to be marketed as cultural 
metaphor, academic theoretical apparatuses, psychological metaphors, narcissistic individualistic 
exercises in consciousness expansion, bodily awareness/health or, in the case of the dominant 
Western religious orthodoxy, to assimilate the symbology, reconstituted to the particular regimes 
of fear and intimidation necessary to maintain control.
It is with the shift of the mode of production into what might be termed globalized or post-
modern capitalism that what Foucault (1980) would call the ‘subjugated knowledges’ of mar-
ginalized or appropriated ways of knowing emerge into open antagonism with both capitalism’s 
subsumption of the social into the money sign and the cultural appropriation of spirituality into 
the domains of metaphor or myth. This emerging form of spirituality as social antagonism might 
well begin to inform what Stengers and Pignarre (2011) call upon as alternative magic to the 
sorcery of capitalism’s trance. Such an alternative magic or materialist spirituality may begin to 
provide an alternative to the money sign as God; to what Marx (1993: 221), when referring to 
the role of money qua money in latter stage capitalist development, called ‘the lord and god of 
commodities. It represents the divine existence of commodities, while they represent its earthly 
form’. In truth, we may have an opening for such an alternative reading of God in the imma-
nent philosophy of Spinoza. Casarino (2011) notes in his work on Marx and Spinoza that the 

Kathleen S. G. Skott-Myhre
388
emergence of Spinoza’s God, premised in ‘ontological connectivity’ and deploying reason as a 
passage to intuitive knowledge:
was born in relation and as an answer to capital and to its globalizing tendency and total-
izing imperative. In fact, it was born, as it were, in competition with and as an alternative 
to capital, in the sense that both the logic of capital and the logic of intuitive knowledge 
deal in potentiality.
(198)
The opening of ways of knowing that draw on older traditions that precede capitalism as an 
alternative set of ontological practices premised in immanence or living force offers the possi-
bility of spirituality as a counter-capitalist set of radical practice and thought. This field of what 
was previously considered, under colonial relations, the irrational and primitive, opens itself as an 
alternate field of global interconnectivity founded on alternative logic to that of profit and the 
money form. This alternative set of knowledges and practices resides specifically within forms of 
knowledge left behind, abandoned, or savagely repressed by capitalism’s ontological imperative.
It is in this regard that Foucault’s reading of subjugated knowledges as arising among the 
marginalized and disenfranchised classes – those whose knowledge has been bypassed or sup-
pressed in favour of the existing dominant ideology or discourse – becomes an imperative for a 
revitalized immanent spirituality. In Deleuze and Guattari (1987), the groups that comprise the 
connective web of alternative knowledge constitute what they call minoritarian ways of being 
and knowing. By minority, they refer to those subjects whose capacity for becoming is opposed 
constitutively to the dominant modes of society. In this case, this would be spiritual practices 
and ways of knowing that operate antagonistically to the logic of late stage capitalism, a capitalist 
logic we have already referred to as a kind of trance that calls for an alternative invocation.
Becoming sorceress
This form of an alternative trance invokes the magical, but in a very specific way. It suggests an 
older order of the psychological guild, that of the sorcerer. In A Thousand Plateaus, Deleuze and 
Guattari (1987) describe a process they call becoming animal. Becoming animal is premised on 
an encounter with a radically disparate other. For example, a human may become animal in an 
encounter with an animal if their own definition of themselves as human has reached an impasse. 
In the encounter with the other/animal new capacities inherent in the subject but blocked by 
their definition of themselves as human are elicited and become available. The subject does not 
literally become an animal, but the encounter with the animal sets loose a nonhuman becoming 
of unanticipated potentialities. Becoming animal is a particular example of the phenomenon 
which might actually be comprised of any radical otherness such as becoming woman, becom-
ing child, becoming autistic, and so on. The criterion is that the other be a minority. As noted 
above, this is not describing the minority in the numeric sense, but in the sense of not belonging 
to the dominant majoritarian logic of a given society.
Deleuze and Guattari describe the figure of the sorceress in these terms. The sorceress is 
one who has an affinity for the borders of society and who can negotiate the various forms of 
becoming as a way of living. They conceptualize the sorceress as one who is involved with multi-
plicities, specifically the packs or bands that operate on the edges of society. These groups are rad-
ically ‘other’ in the sense that they have an intensity of life force that exceeds the capacity of the 
dominant social to contain or order them. The sorceress does not belong to the group or pack 
whose becoming she facilitates or negotiates. She is affiliated with them in the space between.

A politically informed immanent spirituality
389
The sorceress is an anomaly. Deleuze and Guattari describe the anomaly as the whole minus 
one. They theorize life as collective co-poeisis with each singular subject idiosyncratically con-
tributing to the constitution of the whole. In this sense, we are all anomalies. However, the 
sorceress is one who operates as an anomaly in the borderspace between the pack and the dom-
inant social, a space which exists at the edge of the unknown and unpredictable. The sorceress 
is one who has ‘had the ordeal of access to the plane of composition that diagrams the forces 
crossing our nature with that of others’ (Kuykendall 1988: 29). This is a knowledge specifically 
recognized by Lacan and Freud and which is attributed to the woman as the space prior to 
language and binary configurations. The sorceress opens herself to the experience of the bor-
derspace or the anomalous. Kuykendall states that: ‘The political question is not how to limit, 
contain, or govern sorcerers, but how to activate the power of sorcery that crosses each of us. 
We do not yet know, as Spinoza taught, what such an anomaly – at once multiple and singular, 
individual and universal – might yet be able to do’ (29).
Spiritual borderlands
Certainly, it is within the opening of globalization that all types of liminal border spaces emerge. 
These would include: literal borderlands formed through the geographical constructions of the 
colonial project, the liminal spaces of subjectivity produced between colliding social categories 
of race, sexuality, gender, and so on, and the emergent and shifting political alliances and collec-
tivities inadvertently produced by flows of communications and bodies across the global empire 
of capital.
In the realm of spirituality as antagonism, the work of Gloria Anzaldúa (1987) on the ques-
tion of border spaces, engages all of the elements delineated by Hardt and Negri (2005) above: 
historical tendency, real abstraction, antagonism, and the development of subjectivity. Ironically, 
and tellingly, Anthony Lioi (2008: 73) notes that Anzaldúa’s ‘spirit work has been effaced because 
the spiritual is associated, in academia, with the irrational or illogical and because spirit is under-
stood as ahistorical, apolitical, and non-material’. These are specifically the modes by which 
subjugated knowledge is produced and, ironically, the source of its living force. Lioi (2008: 75), 
in his reading of Anzaldúa’s work, points out the ways that she connects the spiritual and the 
political. He cites her work as founded in the concept of ‘mestizaje or hybridity’. As Anzaldúa 
(1987) states,
As a Mestiza I have no country, my homeland cast me out; yet all countries are mine 
because I am every woman’s sister or potential lover. (As a lesbian I have no race, my own 
people disclaim me; but I am all races because there is the queer of me in all races.) I am 
cultureless because, as a feminist, I challenge the collective cultural/religious male-derived 
beliefs of Indo Hispanics and Anglos; yet I am cultured because I am participating in the 
creation of yet another culture, a new story to explain the world and our participation in 
it, a new value system with images and symbols that connect us to each other and to the 
planet. Soy un amasamiento, I am an act of kneading, of uniting, and joining that not only 
has produced both a creature of darkness and a creature of light, but also a creature that 
questions the definitions of light and dark and gives them new meanings.
(182)
Anzaldúa’s statement here refuses both the logic of colonial/industrial capitalism and the force 
of global capitalist development by offering an alternative value system rooted in a blend of 
indigenous and contemporary subjugated knowledges. Her positioning as a Mestiza opens a 

Kathleen S. G. Skott-Myhre
390
field of connectivity between subject positions that takes advantage of the virtual connectiv-
ity of global capital and turning against itself. This process of subjectivication as a blending of 
idiosyncratic historically produced binaries of identity is reminiscent of what Hardt and Negri 
(2005) refer to as the constitutive force of the multitude as a political force premised on the 
assemblage of divergent subjectivities, or, what they call, singularities, working in common pur-
pose for the common good.
AnaLouise Keating (2008:53-54) describes Anzaldúa’s work as ‘a radically inclusionary poli-
tics or what she (Anzaldúa) calls “spiritual activism” ’. Keating notes that the two terms spiritual 
and activist might, at first, appear to be in contradiction. She explains that the term spiritual 
‘implies an other-worldly, inward-looking perspective that invites escape from and at even denial 
of social injustices’. On the other hand, she notes that activism ‘implies outward directed inter-
action with the material world’. Anzaldúa resolves this apparent contradiction by expanding the 
field to say that these apparent binaries ‘are parts of a larger whole, joined in a complex, interwo-
ven pattern’. This assertion of a non-dualistic reading of the production of social subjectivity that 
refuses, at minimum, a clean division between inner and outer worlds opens a strong challenge 
to dominant productions of the self in psychology. In doing so, it offers a richer vision of the 
complex interplay between the older traditions of indigenous spirituality and social production 
than the structural mappings of dominant social psychology.
At another level, however, Anzaldúa proposes a new deployment of spiritual symbology and a 
reversal of the ways in which the Catholic Church took the symbols of indigenous peoples and 
transmuted them into forces of dominance and control. Lioi (2008: 75) argues that Anzaldúa’s 
concept of Mestiza is a theological position, that ‘the combination of Aztec, Nahua, Catholic 
and Neo-pagan spiritualities in her work’ reflects her status as a ‘transfronterista, a woman with 
many countries and no countries’. Anzaldúa performs the act of ‘stealing the language’ which 
produces what Lioi refers to as, ‘a pneumatological frontier, a reconstruction of an indigenous 
otherworld through the process of fracturing itself’. Deleuze and Guattari (1986) would refer 
to this as the production of a minor literature wherein the symbols of the dominant discourse 
are rewritten within a minor vernacular that re-inscribes them with subversive possibility. Lioi 
(2008: 84) delineates how Anzaldúa’s rewriting of the vision of Guadalupe as Coatalopeuh 
changes Guadalupe from ‘the gentle mother as tool for the pacification of women’ into ‘an 
incarnation of forceful autonomy’. The full impact of this act of spiritual activism within the 
realm of the symbolic can’t be fully appreciated without understanding the subtle impact on 
postcolonial subjectivication. As Lioi points out:
The power of Guadalupe as a mestizo Madonna is revolutionary in a political and cultural 
sense, insofar as she allows chicanas to defend their ethnic, racial and national identity. ‘For 
Mexican-Americans, Our Lady of Guadalupe is a symbol of both cultural and religious 
identity. For a people who were stripped of everything, she restores to them their dignity, 
their humanity, and their place in history.’
(2008: 84)
It is important to note that Anzaldúa is doing far more than resurrecting ‘authentic’ indigenous 
spiritual traditions. Instead, as Keating (2008) points out, Anzaldúa opens these traditions in 
order to deploy them within the contemporary politics of our current historical moment. Her 
work is to remember those knowledges that have been subjugated into the social and cultural 
unconscious of capitalism and to reconnect with them in their full alterity. To do this, she pro-
poses a reworking of subjectivity through reflection. However, this is not the reflective practice 
of New Age self-valorization or actualization. This inner work is always designed to reconnect 

A politically informed immanent spirituality
391
with living force as a revolutionary tool to challenge what Chomsky and Foucault (2006) called 
the ‘beliefs and habits of one’s own age’.
The struggle is inner: Chicano, indio, American Indian, mojado, mexicano, immigrant 
Latino, Anglo in power, working class Anglo, Black, Asian – our psyches resemble the bor-
dertowns and are populated by the same people. The struggle has always been inner, and is 
played out in outer terrains. Awareness of our situation must come before inner changes, 
which in turn come before changes in society. Nothing happens in the ‘real’ world unless it 
first happens in the images in our heads.
(Anzaldúa 1987: 87)
This movement between the inner and outer as a productive oscillation leading to social 
activism challenges dominant paradigms of both the unconscious and the individual self. Implicit 
in the work proposed above are commonalities of inner production and outer action that we 
hold in common and that have some possibility to challenge the alienation of the radically indi-
vidualized commodified self of late stage capitalism.
Creative collectivities
In Anzaldúa’s work, the thematics of what Keating (2007) refers to as a non-oppositional ped-
agogy, which refuses the binary structures of dominant rule in favour of creative collectivities, 
are echoed in the work of Alice Walker (2012, 2004). Walker calls on a radical communitarian 
production of self, premised in the exploration of common liberatory interests. She uses the 
metaphor of a garden to reference the fecundity of human relations freed from domination. The 
inherent creativity of life as a dynamic force in producing history, as Marx suggested, is reflected 
in Walker’s reading of womanism. In this, she offers us a way of accounting for the rich dyna-
mism of life often flattened or obscured by the discourses of power and control.
Womanism, as conceived by Walker, opens the door to a different analysis of relations 
between both men and women but also between women and their own sense of identity. For 
Walker, a womanist is someone who is seen as rooted in her community and committed to the 
development of herself and the entire community. This non-oppositional opening to the inter-
secting struggles of race and gender allows for the possibility of a non-dualistic spiritual political 
engagement within the traditions of marginalized communities, such as those recovering from 
the trauma of slavery and its aftermath in the US. As Renee Martin (2010) commented in her 
blog on Walker’s work:
Just as feminism speaks to your experiences, Africana Womanism speaks to mine. It allows 
me to articulate my spirituality, my connection and love of Black men, a genuine sisterhood 
with other Black women, a connection to family with a special emphasis on motherhood, a 
self-defined identity, unconventional gender roles, collective outcomes, group achievement, 
self love, nurturing, and a recognition that all isms effect women.
The profound sense of historical community values and practices that have survived in the 
alternate sorcery of the margins of the dominant social is also found in the work of Luisah 
Teish (1988). Teish is an acclaimed Voudou priestess who argues that Voudou cannot be read 
separately from its production and continuance in the face of racism and sexism. Teish repu-
diates the way in which the ‘pseudo-science’ (x) of anthropology subjugated non-Western 
modes of knowledge to the realm of superstition. She reclaims Voudou within the definitions  

Kathleen S. G. Skott-Myhre
392
and vocabulary of West Africa as ‘Life Principle’ (x). Voudou, she tells us, is founded within a 
matristic tradition and as such has a strong political implication for women as a source of spiritual 
power. It is also a set of practices and beliefs rooted in a powerful relation to the earth in an eco-
systemic sense of what nomadic feminists might refer to as productive entanglement (Haraway 
2008). Voudou is a practice of what Teisch calls feminist spiritualists and holds a deep relation to 
cycles of menstruation and the power of menstrual blood. The power of Voudou operates at the 
level of what she refers to as the collective unconscious, but in a way that ‘erases the exorcist tapes’ 
(x) as well as Jungian archetypes and allows spirit back into actual relation as family and friends.
Teish tells us that the goal of Voudou is to counteract ‘the savagery of slavery’ (x). With its 
resonances to the production of the collective good, its deep affiliations with an ecological 
apprehension of being, its overtly political accountability to the legacy of slavery and racism, and 
its ties to feminism, Voudou, as practiced and theorized by Teisch, holds many of the elements 
necessary to a political accounting of spirituality that could challenge dominant constructions 
of rationality and superstition/psychosis within psychology.
Deep relationship
The importance of challenging the abstract global connective force of capitalism as an ecology 
of dominance that holds a parasitic relation to living things is central to any political project 
that hopes to establish a new system of values within a field such as psychology. Or, in a broader 
sense, how psychology can become a vehicle for subjective transformation and political action. 
In this respect, another source of indigenous spirituality that holds the elements of historical 
tendency, real abstraction, antagonism, and the development of subjectivity is what has been 
called deep relationship (Kovach 2009; Wilson 2003). North American Indigenous scholars such 
as Shawn Wilson (2003) and Margaret Kovach (2009) argue for what might be called in the 
Western idiom eco-spirituality. Such a mode of spiritual practice and knowledge is premised 
in what we have encountered in all the examples so far as a profound encounter with life as an 
interconnected web of relations. In the spirit of non-oppositionality and non-binary terms of 
relation there can be no separation from living relations. As a result, there are no acts that can be 
delineated teleologically or delegated to the accountability of the individual subject. All actions 
impact all relations. Current psychological frameworks of individual accountability and the val-
orization of humans as separate from and superior to other forms of life are seen as ecologically 
suicidal and dangerous to all life (Goldtooth 2012).
Of particular interest is the ways that this line of thinking has developed in the emerg-
ing field of ecopsychology. The indigenous spiritual understanding of deep interconnectivity is 
reproduced (generally without attribution) in proposing ideas such as, ‘individualized and skin 
encapsulated notions of the self are replaced with notions of an ecological self, where nature 
is viewed as an extension of oneself and the cultivation of one’s ecological identity becomes a 
central feature’ (Segal 2011: 1).
The field of psychology is far more comfortable attributing this line of thought to sci-
ence and particularly the tentative theorizing entailed in systems theory (Segal 2011), rather 
than acknowledging the long-term subjugated knowledge of native peoples in deep ecological 
understandings and social practices. Examples used in eco-psychology such as the example 
of a bear being conceptualized as ‘only 5% fur, teeth, and claws, and 95% salmon streams, old 
growth forests, and alpine meadows,’ are shockingly derivative of indigenous spiritual iconog-
raphy (Segal 2011: 1). If the Catholic Church appropriated indigenous symbols to its own use, 
then current ecopsychological theory is running the same game. As Wilson (2001) points out, 
indigenous constructions of knowledge are rooted in:

A politically informed immanent spirituality
393
the fundamental belief that knowledge is relational. Knowledge is shared with all creation. 
It is not just interpersonal relationships . . . it is a relationship with all of creation. It is 
with the cosmos; it is with the animals, with the plants, with the earth that we share this 
knowledge. It goes beyond the idea of individual knowledge to the concept of relational 
knowledge . . . you are answerable to all your relations.
(92)
Immanent spiritualty
In her introduction to Luisah Teish’s (1988: xvi) book on Voudou, Starhawk reiterates a proposal 
she has made in other places (1997, 1990) for an imminent spirituality. In such practices and 
thought, spirit is seen as imminent both in nature and in human community. She states that 
‘spirit is embodied and embedded in the material world’. In an immanent spirituality, a human 
being’s relation to nature is not that of ‘power over . . . [power] passes through us, is used by us 
and must be replenished by us’. Such force is carried over in the human community as well, 
where ‘there is no concept of individual salvation (there is nothing to be saved from) nor of 
an enlightenment that leaves others behind’. Instead, there is the development of extended 
community of all life including but not limited to humans. The practices and rituals associated 
with an immanent spirituality aim at transformation of subjectivity such that interconnectivity 
is enhanced and the creative development of social forms is prioritized. Starhawk states that, ‘a 
religion of immanence celebrates the erotic, the sensual, the passionate. It is rooted in the con-
cerns of everyday life’. She references a path to ‘psychological transformation rooted in things 
that speak to us deeper than the level of words’. Finally, Starhawk proposes that an immanent 
spirituality challenges the logic of capitalism through refusing the inherent denial of life in the 
valorization of the money sign. Instead, an imminent spirituality would offer ‘a reinspiriting of 
the world, the respect for nature and diversity of human culture as sacred’.
One can only imagine what a similar psychological project towards a psychology premised in 
the values of immanence might look like. Certainly, it would need to be reconfigured radically 
in almost all its key theoretical paradigm and practices. In this regard, spirituality, as delineated 
here, has transformative possibilities for psychology as a critical endeavour with revolutionary 
aspirations.
Further reading
Anzaldúa, G., and Keating, A. (2002) This Bridge We Call Home. New York: Routledge.
Braidotti, R. (2008) ‘In spite of the times: the postsecular turn in feminism’, Theory, Culture & Society, 25(6), 
1–24.
Klassen, C. A. (ed.) (2009) Feminist Spirituality: the Next Generation. New York: Lexington Books.
Web resources
Chief Luisah Teish: http://www.luisahteish.com/
Gloria Anzaldúa Resources: http://www.legacyprojectchicago.org/Gloria_Anzaldua_Resources.html
Starhawk: http://starhawk.org/
References
Anzaldúa, G. (1987) Borderlands/lafrontera. San Francisco, CA: Aunt Lute.
Casarino, C. (2011) Spinoza Now. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Kathleen S. G. Skott-Myhre
394
Chomsky, N. and Foucault, M. (2006) The Chomsky–Foucault Debate: On Human Nature. New York: New 
Press.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1986) Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature, Vol. 30. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1987) A Thousand Plateaus, Vol. 2: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Federici, S. (2004) Caliban and the Witch. New York: Autonomedia.
Foucault, M. (1980) Power/knowledge: Selected Interview and Other Writings, 1972–1977. New York: Random 
House Digital, Inc.
Goldtooth, T. (2012) ‘Occupy talks: indigenous perspectives on the occupy movement’, http://www. 
youtube.com/watch?v=zFWnD5UhbhY
Hardt, M., and Negri, A. (2005) Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Haraway, D. (2008) ‘The age of entanglement’, New Scientist, 198(2661), 50–51.
Keating, A. (2007) Teaching Transformation: Transcultural Classroom Dialogues. Palgrave Macmillan.
Keating, A. (2008) ‘ “I’m a citizen of the universe”: Gloria Anzaldúa’s spiritual activism as catalyst for social 
change’, Feminist Studies, 34(1/2), 53–69.
Kovach, M (2009) Indigenous Methodologies: Characteristics, Conversations, and Contexts. Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press.
Kuykendall, E. H. (1988) ‘Sorcerer love: a reading of Plato’s Symposium, Diotima’s Speech’, Hypatia, 3(3), 
32–44.
Lioi, A. (2008) ‘The best-loved bones: spirit and history in Anzaldúa’s “entering into the serpent” ’, Feminist 
Studies, 34(1/2), 73–98.
Martin, R. (2010) ‘Womanist musings’, http://www.womanist-musings.com.
Marx, K. (1978a) ‘Contribution to the critique of Hegel’s philosophy of right’, in R. C. Tucker (ed.) The 
Marx-Engels Reader. New York: Norton.
Marx, K. (1978b) ‘The German ideology’, in R. C. Tucker (ed.) The Marx-Engels Reader. New York: Norton.
Marx, K. (1993) Grundrisse. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Schulte-Sasse, J. (1986) ‘Imagination and modernity: or attaining of the human mind’, Cultural Critique, 5, 
23–48.
Segal, D. (2011) ‘The promise of ecopsychology: addressing the psychological and spiritual pain associated 
with the industrial growth society’, http://postgrowth.org/the-promise-of-ecopsychology/
Starhawk, M. S. (1997) Dreaming the Dark: Magic, Sex, and Politics. New York: Beacon Press.
Starhawk, M. S. (1990) Truth or Dare: Encounters with, Authority, and Mystery. San Francisco, CA: Harper 
and Row.
Stengers, I., and Pignarre, P. (2011) Capitalist Sorcery: Breaking the Spell. New York: Palgrave.
Teish, L. (1988) Jambalaya: the Natural Woman’s Book of Personal Charms and Practical Rituals. New York: 
HarperCollins.
Walker, A. (2004) In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist Prose. Download iTunes eBook.
Walker, A. (2012) ‘Womanist’, Buddhist-Christian Studies, 32(1), 45–45.
Wilson, S. (2001) ‘Self-as-relationship in Indigenous research,’ Canadian Journal of Native Education, 25, 
91–92.
Wilson, S. (2003) ‘Progressing towards an Indigenous research paradigm in Canada and Australia’, Canadian 
Journal of Native Education, 27(2), 161–178.

Part IIIb
Places

This page intentionally left blank

397
In this chapter, we are tasked with documenting ‘critical psychology’ in Africa. The body of 
literature that could be called ‘critical psychology’ in Africa is varied, focusing on issues such 
as race and racism (see, for example, Duncan 2003; Durrheim and Mokeki 1997; Hook 2012; 
Stevens 2003), mental illness (Akomolafe 2006), violence (Hamber 2010; Harris 2002), HIV 
and AIDS (Campbell and Murray 2004; Long 2009), trauma (Eagle 2004; Edwards 2005; Ste-
vens et al. 2012; Summerfield 2000), female sex offenders (Kramer and Bowman 2011), pae-
dophilia (Bowman 2010), teenage pregnancy and adolescence (Macleod 2003), prison practice  
( Jefferson 2007; Jefferson and Huniche 2009), and anti-privatization movements (Barnes 2009).  
As is the case elsewhere, the literature has drawn on various theoretical and methodologi-
cal genres aligned with ‘critical psychology’ including discursive psychology (Durrheim et al. 
2011), Marxist psychology (Hayes 2001), peace psychology (Hamber 2009; Lykes 2006), psy-
choanalysis (Hook 2004), conversation analysis (Whitehead 2013), critical social psychology 
(de-Graft Aikins 2004), critical community psychology (Lykes et al. 2003), critical health psy-
chology (Barnes 2007; Campbell and Murray 2004), feminism (Pereira 2002), narrative theory 
(Bradbury and Miller 2010), indigenous psychology (Mkize 2004), and political psychology 
(Palmary 2006).
While writings that explicitly draw on or make claims on behalf of ‘critical psychology’ can 
be found in many African countries, the overwhelming majority of the literature has emanated 
from South Africa. We could speculate as to why the discipline of psychology (critical or oth-
erwise) has developed in certain African contexts over others, as has been attempted elsewhere 
(see Cooper and Nicholas 2012; Louw 2002; Nsamenang 1995 and 2000; Painter et al. 2006; 
Painter et al. 2013; Pheko et al. 2013), but we wish instead to draw attention to perhaps the more 
fundamental question of what is ‘African critical psychology’?
The demand for African critical psychology
There are many reasons to think that an ‘African critical psychology’ is impossible given 
complex contestations over what constitutes African, critical, and psychology. We therefore 
consider each of these constructs below, along with some of the possible consequences of 
their usage.
41
Critical psychology in Africa
The impossible task
Ingrid Palmary and Brendon Barnes

Ingrid Palmary and Brendon Barnes
398
Africanizing psychology
There has been a plethora of writing about the relevance of psychology in Africa and this is per-
haps the strongest critique of psychology coming from the African continent. Much of it points 
out that psychology’s claims to universal knowledge and resulting hegemonic perspectives and 
theories is a fabrication that masks its production in and through a particular set of (Western) 
historical and political contexts.
Akomolafe (2006: 727), for example points to the dangers of making one perspective the 
most definitive way to understand a problem. Referring to this as perspectival hegemony he 
argues that this is one way that psychology reproduces a colonial position in its disavowal of sys-
tems of thought from outside of the West. He uses an approach that he explicitly names as criti-
cal psychology to argue that Western psychological concepts and ideas have become naturalized 
‘which allows for the operationalization of Western thought “within a hidden and unmarked 
space, resulting in its re-production and re-affirmation within discourse, social structures and 
institutional practices” ’. He documents how, in his work as a clinical psychologist in Nigeria, 
the DSM was consistently used in such a way that the clinician could devalue the meanings 
given by the client and focus only on those parts of the narrative that were congruent with the 
way mental health was understood in the DSM. In this way, Western psychological knowledge is 
reproduced as the true focus whilst local knowledge is rendered irrelevant or at most a cultural 
variation.
Similarly, for Nsamenang and Dawes’ (1998: 73) work on children, Africa has received a psy-
chology that is ‘alien’ and ‘imposed’. They go on to claim that Africa needs culturally sensitive 
psychological research for and about African children. They acknowledge that African societies 
are hybrid and that there are very different systems of thought in Africa as well as a pressure 
on Africans to adopt systems of thinking and research that reflect Western norms. However, for 
them: ‘psychology came to Africa as a ready-made intellectual package, rather than as a natu-
ral growth from native soil’ (75). Similarly, for Ruto-Korir, (2006: 328) psychology has been 
imported from the West and has been ‘consumed whole and reproduced completely’.
This demand from African writers for a psychology based on African concepts and cosmol-
ogies is clearly the most common call from within psychology (Adams and Salter 2007). Grills 
(2006) argues that psychology’s claim to a universal framework will only be truly universal when 
it also accounts for African indigenous psychologies. The discontent that African psychologists 
feel towards the imposition of Western systems of thought saturates the literature and, in sev-
eral cases, the rage is palpable. For Nsamenang (2005: 276) there is an inherent incompatibility 
between Western educational foci and agrarian African life: ‘the interventionist skin grafts onto 
Africa’s festering sores have failed to take or are shrivelling off rapidly, due to a refusal to attend 
to the above-cited source of incompatibility’.
Whilst there seems to be widespread agreement that Western concepts of psychology are not 
appropriate for African people and that imposing them in contexts outside of their develop-
ment is an act of colonization, the less frequently recognized problem is that across the different 
writings it is not clear exactly what an African cosmology might be. Whilst writers have been 
very quick to claim to know Africa in remarkably confident ways, when we read across different 
texts this certainty of knowledge becomes less certain. Let us look at some examples. Pheko 
et al. (2013) note that:
Indeed Batswana are traditional in their gender role orientation, and are also collectivistic 
in their cultural orientation; making it important to establish how such orientations influ-
ence or relate to a variety of factors. For example, personal, social and cultural factors have 

Critical psychology in Africa
399
been shown to influence the care-seeking process . . . In the Setswana tradition, when mar-
ried people experience marital problems, the most common approach is still to call elders 
from both sides of the families to come and help the couple discuss and find solutions for 
their problems. This therefore calls for researchers and professional to understand how such 
indigenous methods and practices may enhance or comprise the help seeking processes.
(398)
For Nsamenang and Dawes (1998), it equates to using the classification system of modern/mod-
ernizing over European/African which they feel more adequately reflects African life. Similarly 
for Nsamenang (2005), the real problem with European concepts is that they fail to capture 
the agrarian nature of Africans. Afuape (2012) takes a different notion of what is unique about 
Africa. For her, it is people’s connection to nature that makes European concepts inappropriate.
For Grills (2006), African-centred psychology recognizes:
The Spirit that permeates everything that is; the notion that everything in the universe is 
interconnected; the value that the collective is the most salient element of existence; and 
the idea that communal self knowledge is the key to mental health. African psychology is 
ultimately concerned with understanding the systems of meaning of human Beingness, 
the features of human functioning, and the restoration of normal/natural order to human 
development. As such, it is used to resolve personal and social problems and to promote 
optimal functioning.
(np)
She goes on to claim that: ‘African society is other-centered and living is about cooperation not 
competition’ (np).
There are two points that are notable in this literature. The first is how loose the notion of 
Africanness is. None offered a definition of what they mean by African and all slipped between 
African, black, indigenous, and so forth. Secondly, they all make a claim to know what Afri-
canness is using very generalized terms. There are occasional nods to the risks of such universal 
claims, but they are very limited (see for example Dawes 1998). These generalized claims are 
possible because so many of the authors work from the assumption, as indicated in the opening 
paragraphs of this section, that Africanness and Europeanness are discrete and self-contained 
categories. The few moments of recognition in this literature that there may be complexity and 
disagreement as well as fluidity of Western and African ideas are often glossed over and made 
more as a disclaimer which then allows a new generalization about Africans to be made. For 
example, Afuape (2012: 2) says she doesn’t want to overgeneralize – but acknowledges only that 
‘[a]s with all generalisations there are exceptions to the rule. Bearing all this in mind, African 
(and the rest of the Majority world) culture is based on a particular relationship to nature’.
Thus, we can ask, in what ways does this literature operate as a critique of psychology? 
Clearly it critiques psychology’s claims to universality in ways that have been well-documented 
across the world. It also is critical of the imperial role that psychology plays when it assumes a 
universal knowledge of the world. This literature clearly functions as a useful challenge to how 
psychology produces a universal subject. However, in doing so, this literature reproduces the idea 
of universal truth – even if it is now a universal truth about what constitutes Africanness. In so 
doing it does not challenge psychology’s underlying principle that there are generalizable truths 
about the nature of human beings. In documenting an Africanness, it does so on the terms set 
by psychology. It defines African in relation to Europeans, i.e. as what Europeans are not. This 
may have been a necessary project at a moment when psychology was first being introduced 

Ingrid Palmary and Brendon Barnes
400
to the African continent. However, it is one that carries extensive risks for reproducing vio-
lent nationalisms and essentialisms (see the work of Mohanty [1993] for related arguments). In 
its overgeneralized presumptions it too will create all kinds of exclusions which render some 
African people and ideas not really African (such as gender equality in the quotes above). As a 
universal truth on the nature of Africans, it too risks undervaluing and rendering meaningless 
the counter narratives produced by marginal groups of Africans.
A slightly different take on the Africanization of psychology has been found in work that 
claims that psychology has always existed in Africa, just not in a discourse that is identifiable 
as such to a Western audience. For example, for Ruto-Koir (2006), African psychology is older 
than Western psychology. Writing about the Nandi in Kenya she claims that they have a life that 
is full of psychology, even though there is no documented history of psychology in Kenya. For 
her, attention to the proverbs of the Nandi give insight into this neglected Kenyan psychology. 
A similar approach is taken by Nsamenang, who points out how psychology ignores the wisdom 
in African sources of knowledge such as folklore and proverbs.
This is a useful approach in that it allows for an analysis of African psychology that moves 
outside of the definitions of psychology that stem from its Anglo-US history. However, there are 
politics and power dynamics in this literature that are seldom accounted for.
For example, rather than expertise resting with the professional status and institutional 
arrangements of psychology, in this literature a new expert, namely the elders, emerges. Whilst 
this may be a critical move in academia, where elders lack power, it is not in contexts of applied 
psychology where elders are frequently gatekeepers and producers of knowledge. This literature 
also relies on generalizations that are rooted in ethnic and national identities that reproduce 
these as natural categories (and which are the basis of much violence and conflict on the con-
tinent), mapping national and ethnic identities onto psychological traits in much the same way 
as the colonial project mapped psychology and morality onto race. Also, in this literature there 
is a tendency to treat the precolonial era as prehistory. The precolonial African society is seen to 
be timeless, natural, and traditional. This is reflected in how proverbs are seen to be unchanging 
due to sociopolitical context and are assumed to have always remained the same and thus offer-
ing a window into true Africanness. Also, one has to wonder why it is necessary to name this 
knowledge as psychology. What status does it achieve in being recognized as psychology that it 
cannot if it remains in the domain of proverb? Who would give this recognition? In this way, this 
writing still operates, perhaps inevitably, in the shadow of colonial domination.
So whilst there is not much agreement, and some worrying generalizations about what 
might make psychology (a bit more) African, there is at least a minimum acceptance among 
critical psychologists that attention to social context is necessary in order to make psychology 
relevant to Africa (Bandawe 2005; Kakkad 2005; Macleod 2004; Macleod and Howell 2013; de 
la Rey and Ipser 2004). A second key project, then, has been to rewrite psychology with a more 
sociopolitical focus. Some forms of community psychology have attempted this but it is perhaps 
most striking in the literature on health psychology. For example, in a special issue of health psy-
chology in Africa, Campbell and Murray (2004) note that community psychology insists on the 
community being the level of analysis. They recognize that the poorest people have the poorest 
health and emphasize the importance of social change and justice for well-being. This is work 
that has tended to be more applied in focus and mobilizing for change. Thus, for Campbell and 
Murray, any individual change needs to be accompanied by meaningful social change.
However, the issue of what kind of social change is necessary and which aspects of context 
need to be attended to remains a debate. Seedat and Lazarus (2011) remind us that a community 
level analysis is not enough when they show how, in South Africa, community psychology arose 
largely to respond to the problem of poor whites and the perceived problems of racial mixing. 

Critical psychology in Africa
401
There is no doubt that it was a discipline dedicated to attending to sociopolitical context, but in 
ways that reproduced racial hierarchies.
Critical what? Do we need psychology to be critical?
The reflections on the relative absence of psychology and in particular ‘critical psychology’ in 
Africa can lead us to argue that we need more critical psychology. Indeed, this is a position that 
many authors have taken. Few writers question whether we need institutionalized psychology 
in order to be critical at all. For example, in reviewing the development of psychology in Bot-
swana, and in lamenting its slow uptake, Pheko et al. (2013) suggest the need for expanding psy-
chology departments and in particular laboratories, taking on board the belief that experimental 
design represents the gold standard in research. Somewhat differently, Akin-Ogundeji (1987), in 
spite of his critical reflections on the relevance of psychology in Nigeria, also ends with a call 
for more psychological research, and makes some suggestions regarding methods and focus. Yet 
another example is the work of Mpofu (2002) who, in spite of being critical of the practices of 
psychology, recommends greater integration and institutionalization of psychology in Africa in 
a way that assumes that if a professional body was African, it would not function for the same 
imperialist ends as one that is not.
However, too quick a celebration of the need for psychology, even if it is critical, would, 
we argue, be a mistake. Indeed, given the colonial connections outlined above, it is somewhat 
surprising that more people aren’t rather pleased with the absence of psychology on the 
African continent and instead advocating for its dissolution in contexts where it has a strong 
institutional presence, such as South Africa. In particular, we should ask whether we need 
critical psychology or whether we simply need social critique. When we shift the boundaries 
of the question in this way we see a lively, powerful, and vibrant body of critical work hap-
pening on the African continent. This work is relevant to psychology and can be as powerful 
as any critique that names itself a psychological one. The trouble is, psychology is not paying 
attention.
This critique varies from those who have a background in psychology but work in an inter-
disciplinary way and publish in more varied sources to those who have and claim no connection 
to psychology but nevertheless offer critiques that could undermine some of the imperialism 
that is an inevitable part of the production of psychological knowledge.
A useful example of the former is the work of Ratele (2008), who has studied masculinity in 
South Africa. His work is addressed to an interdisciplinary audience and attempts an analysis that 
is at once psychosocial and political, using sources that are international (in that they also include 
extensive African work). Ratele (2008: 518) argues for the importance of a psycho-political 
analysis, by which he means an ‘analysis of individual experience in overtly socio-political terms 
and of sociopolitical developments with the vocabulary of psychology’. Rather than account-
ing for ‘African masculinity’, he shows the contradictory and complex masculinities at work 
among his participants. Whilst ideas from postcolonial theory (there are traces of Fanon in the 
previous quote), discourse analysis, and critical psychology are present throughout the article, 
the article is not ‘about’ psychology at all and is not published in a psychology journal. Whilst 
he also struggles to name his focus (slipping between black males, African males, and males in 
Africa – potentially very different groups) this work has the potential to take psychology further 
by pushing its disciplinary blind spots.
Similarly, the work of Hamber (2009, 2010) has also moved in and out of psychology, address-
ing interdisciplinary audiences and drawing on a wide range of intellectual resources. As such, 
it too tackles a social phenomenon – violence – from a more interdisciplinary approach. This 

Ingrid Palmary and Brendon Barnes
402
allows attention to social context to evolve in ways that psychological theories cannot easily 
offer given their history of individualism and universality.
The authors’ work follows similar patterns. The second author’s work has focused on envi-
ronmental concerns (including water privatization and energy inequality) and shows the possi-
bilities and limitations of psychology in relation to environmental issues, but also highlights the 
dangers of over-psychologizing environmental concerns at the expense of structural interven-
tions. A typical response from students and colleagues is ‘what has psychology got to do with 
water?’ The point being made is that the perceived lack of ‘psychology’ in these examples or the 
fact that work does not necessarily appear in psychology journals (mainstream or critical) does 
not mean that there is no critique.
Indeed, Macleod has shown that in South Africa, where psychology as a formal discipline 
and professional practice is relatively well-entrenched, most psychological knowledge is pro-
duced about wealthy urban South Africans and, in particular, university students. Psychological 
knowledge is often produced in the historically white universities. Given this history, there is 
very valuable work being done by those who have moved out of psychology because it has 
failed to offer the knowledge base that helps in understanding our contexts, those who move in 
and out of psychological knowledge more loosely in order to address the problems of psychol-
ogy’s lack of relevance, and those who have never been in psychology but who write critically 
about it.
One clear example of how a look outside of the discipline might push African critical psy-
chology further is the rather surprising lack of attention given by most critical psychology writ-
ers on the continent to the structural mechanisms and constraints on knowledge production. 
In Africa, much research and intervention is driven not by universities but by the development 
industry. Many academics work predominantly as consultants for donors in order to make a 
living. The lack of attention to this phenomenon and what it means for what psychology may 
reflect the reality that most critical psychology is produced in South Africa, which has the 
highest-paid academics relative to other African countries. However, there are major gaps in the 
focus of psychology which may reflect its dominance in South Africa. Psychology is practiced 
through humanitarian interventions (see I’Anson and Pfeifer 2013; Pupavac 2001;) and a range 
of programmes for the disadvantaged and are largely funded by external agencies and, in the 
context of the global economic recession, increasingly by private foundations rather than bilat-
eral donors. The tools for engaging with the meaning of this phenomenon do not exist within 
psychology and are an aspect of the African context that psychologists have poorly understood.
Looking outside of psychology, Mamdani states:
Today, the market-driven model is dominant in African universities. The consultancy cul-
ture it has nurtured has had negative consequences for postgraduate education and research. 
Consultants presume that research is all about finding answers to problems defined by a cli-
ent. They think of research as finding answers, not as formulating a problem. . . . Today, intel-
lectual life in universities has been reduced to bare-bones classroom activity. Extra-curricular 
seminars and workshops have migrated to hotels. Workshop attendance goes with trans-
port allowances and per diem. All this is part of a larger process, the NGO-ization of the 
university. Academic papers have turned into corporate-style power point presentations. 
Academics read less and less. A chorus of buzz words have taken the place of lively debates.
(2011)
Whilst we can and probably should lament the ways that external funding constrains psycho-
logical knowledge, we should also use it as a point to reflect on what constraints exist within 

Critical psychology in Africa
403
academia which is not consultancy-driven. In other words, rather than imagine there can be 
research and theory that exists without constraint we need to begin a more careful debate about 
the structural constraints on the production of critical psychology in Africa.
The way forward
Whilst recognizing the impossibility of defining an African critical psychology, we have 
attempted to document the critical engagements with the discipline by writers from the African 
continent. Within these there are important themes that need debate and further complication. 
The first is Africanness and how one might identify as an African psychologist or as an African 
subject of psychology. The second is what constitutes critical work. Whilst much work stems 
from a critique of Western psychology, we would argue this need not make it critical, and some 
critical ideas are limited to particular historical moments outside of which they lose their rad-
ical edge. Finally we have questioned, given the relatively weak state of psychology on much 
of the continent, whether we need psychology at all. We would argue that we do. Not as an 
academic and institutional practice, but rather because psychological ideas permeate social life 
from humanitarian interventions, to increasing managerialism in universities, to the popularity 
of self-help television shows and magazines. In these ways psychological ideas are commonplace 
and, dangerously, associated with the urban, the modern, and the developed in ways that, to 
date, critical psychology has been unable to adequately grapple with. Critical psychology should 
move beyond analyses of research and university practice to understanding how psychology 
infuses everyday life in Africa.
Further reading
Holdstock, T. L. (2000) Re-examining Psychology: Critical Perspectives and African Insights. London and Phila-
delphia: Routledge.
Ratele, K., Hook, D., Mkize, D. N., Kiguwa, P. and Collins, A. (2004) Self, Community and Psychology. Cape 
Town: UCT Press.
Website resources
Apartheid Archive: http://www.apartheidarchive.org
Critical Methods: http://www.criticalmethods.org
References
Adams, G. and Salter, P. S. (2007) ‘Health psychology in African settings: a cultural psychological analysis’, 
Journal of Health Psychology, 12, 539–551.
Afuape, T. (2012) ‘African contribution to liberation psychology. African and African heritage precurses and 
contributions to liberation psychology’, as discussed at the Roundtable on Liberation Psychology at the 
4th International Community Psychology Conference, Barcelona, Spain.
Akomolafe, A. (2006) ‘Decolonizing the notion of mental illness and healing in Nigeria, West Africa’, 
Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5, 726–740.
Akin-Ogudeji, O. (1987) ‘Some thoughts on the relevance of applied psychology in Africa’, International 
Journal of Psychology, 22, 483–491.
Bandawe, C. R. (2005) ‘Psychology brewed in an African pot: indigenous philosophies and the quest for 
relevance’, Higher Education Policy, 18, 289–300.
Barnes, B. R. (2007) ‘The politics of behavioural change for environmental health promotion in developing 
countries’, Journal of Health Psychology, 12, 531–538.
Barnes, B. R. (2009) ‘ “Participation”, resistance and the water wars’, Journal of Health Management, 11, 
157–166.

Ingrid Palmary and Brendon Barnes
404
Bowman. B. (2010) ‘Children, pathology and politics: a genealogy of the paedophile in South Africa 
between 1944 and 2004’, South African Journal of Psychology, 40, 443–464.
Bradbury, J. and Miller, R. (2010) ‘Narrative possibilities: theorizing identity in a context of practice’, The-
ory & Psychology, 20, 687–702
Campbell, C. and Murray, M. (2004) ‘Community psychology: promoting analysis and action for social 
change’, Journal of Health Psychology, 9, 187–196.
Cooper, S. and Nicholas, L. (2012) ‘An overview of South African psychology’, International Journal of Psy-
chology, 47, 89–101.
Dawes, A. (1998) ‘Africanising psychology’, Psychology in Society (PINS), 23, 4–16
de-Graft Aikins, A. (2004) ‘Strengthening quality and continuity of diabetes care in rural Ghana: a critical 
social psychological approach’, Journal of Health Psychology, 9, 295–309.
de la Rey, S. and Ipser, J. (2004) ‘The call for relevance: South African psychology ten years into democracy’, 
South African Journal of Psychology, 34, 544–552.
Duncan, N. (2003) ‘ “Race” talk: discourses of “race” and racial differences’, International Journal of Intercul-
tural Relations, 27, 135–156.
Durrheim, K. and Mokeki, S. (1997) ‘Race and relevance: a content analysis of the South African Journal 
of Psychology’, South African Journal of Psychology, 27, 206–213.
Durrheim, K., Mtose, X. and Brown, L. (2011) Race Trouble: Race, Identity and Inequality in Post-apartheid 
South Africa. Durban: Lexington Books.
Eagle, G. (2004) ‘Therapy at the cultural interface: implications of African cosmology for traumatic stress 
intervention’, Psychology in Society (PINS), 30, 1–22.
Edwards, D. (2005) ‘Critical perspectives on research on post-traumatic stress disorder and implications for 
the South African context’, Journal of Psychology in Africa,15, 117–124.
Grills, C. (2006) ‘African Centered Psychology: Strategies for Psychological Survival and Wellness’, http://
baatn.org.uk/resources/Documents/Cheryl+Grills+Powerpoint+2%5B1%5D.pdf
Hamber, B. (2009) Transforming Societies After Political Violence: Truth, Reconciliation and Mental Health. New 
York: Springer.
Hamber. B. (2010) ‘Masculinity and transitional justice’, South Asian Journal of Peacebuilding, 3, 1–22.
Harris, B (2002) ‘Xenophobia: a new pathology for a new South Africa?’ In D. Hook and G. Eagle (eds) 
Psychopathology and Social Prejudice. Cape Town: University of Cape Town Press.
Hayes, G. (2001) ‘Marxism and psychology’, Psychology in Society (PINS), 27, 46–52.
Hook, D. (2004) ‘Frantz Fanon, Steve Biko, “psychopolitics” and critical psychology’ [online]. London: LSE 
Research Online.
Hook, D. (2012) A Critical Psychology of the Postcolonial: The Mind of Apartheid. London: Routledge.
I’Anson, C. and Pfeifer, G. (2013) ‘A critique of humanitarian reason: agency, power and ethics’, Journal of 
Global Ethics, 9, 49–63.
Jefferson, A. (2007) ‘Prison officer training and practice in Nigeria: contention, contradiction and 
re-imagining reform strategies’, Punishment Society, 9, 253–269.
Jefferson, A. and Huniche, L. (2009) ‘(Re)Searching for persons in practice: field-based methods for critical 
psychological practice research’, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 6, 12–27.
Kakkad, D. (2005) ‘A new ethical praxis: psychologists emerging responsibilities in issues of social justice’, 
Ethics and Behavior, 1, 293–408.
Kramer, S. and Bowman, B. (2011) ‘Accounting for the “invisibility” of the female paedophile: an 
expert-based perspective from South Africa’, Psychology and Sexuality, 2, 244–258.
Long, C. (2009) Contradicting Maternity: HIV Positive Motherhood in South Africa. Johannesburg: WITS Uni-
versity Press.
Louw, J. (2002) ‘Psychology, history and society’, South African Journal of Psychology, 32, 1–8.
Lykes B. (2006) ‘Creative arts and photography in participatory action research in Guatemala’, in P. Reason, 
and H. Bradbury (eds) Handbook of Action Research. London: Sage.
Lykes, B., Terre Blanche, M. and Hamber, B. (2003) ‘Narrating survival and change in Guatemala and South 
Africa: the politics of representation and a liberatory community psychology’, American Journal of Com-
munity Psychology, 31, 79–90.
Macleod, C. (2003) ‘Teenage pregnancy and the construction of adolescence: scientific literature in South 
Africa’, Childhood, 10, 419–437.
Macleod, C. (2004) ‘South African psychology and “relevance”: Continuing challenges’, South African Jour-
nal of Psychology, 34, 614–629.

Critical psychology in Africa
405
Macleod, C. and Howell, S. (2013) ‘Reflecting on South African psychology: published research, “rele-
vance”, and social issues’, South African Journal of Psychology, 43, 222–237.
Mamdani, M. (2011) ‘The importance of research in a university’, Pambazuka News, 526.
Mkize, N. (2004) ‘Psychology: an African perspective’ in D. Hook, P. Kiguwa, and N. Mkize (eds) Critical 
Psychology. Cape Town: UCT Press.
Mohanty, C. (1993) ‘Under western eyes: feminist scholarship and colonial discourses’, in P. Williams and  
L. Chrisman (eds) Colonial Discourse and Postcolonial Theory. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Mpofu, E. (2002) ‘Psychology in sub-Saharan Africa: challenges, prospects and promises’, International Jour-
nal of Psychology, 37, 179–186.
Nsamenang, A. B. (1995) ‘Factors influencing the development of psychology in Sub-Saharan Africa’, Inter-
national Journal of Psychology, 30, 729–739.
Nsamenang, A. B. (2000) ‘Critical psychology: a Sub-Saharan voice from Cameroon’, in T. Sloan (ed.) Voices 
for Critical Psychology. London : Macmillan.
Nsamenang, A. B. (2005) ‘Educational development and knowledge flow: local and global forces in human 
development in Africa’, Higher Education Policy, 18, 275–288.
Nsamenang, A. B. and Dawes, A. (1998) ‘Developmental psychology as political psychology in Sub-Saharan 
Africa: the challenge of Africanisation’, Applied Psychology: An International Review, 47, 73–87.
Painter, D., Kiguwa, P. and Bohmke (2013) ‘Contexts and continuities of critique: reflections on the current 
state of critical psychology in South Africa’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 10, 849–869.
Painter, D., Terre Blanche, M. and Henderson, J. (2006) ‘Critical psychology in South Africa: histories, 
themes and prospects’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5, 212–235.
Palmary, I. (2006) ‘Gender identity, race and ethnic difference: feminist politics and political psychology in 
South Africa’, Feminism & Psychology, 16, 44–51.
Pereira, C. (2002) ‘Between knowing and imagining: what space for feminism in scholarship on Africa’, 
Feminist Africa, 1, 1–16.
Pheko, M., Monteiro, N., Kote, M. and Balogun, S. (2013) ‘The development of the psychology discipline 
in Botswana: research so far’, Asian Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 2, 395–412.
Pupavac, V. (2001) ‘Therapeutic governance: psychosocial intervention and trauma risk management’, Dis-
asters, 25(4), 358–372.
Ratele, K. (2008) ‘Analysing males in Africa: certain useful elements in considering ruling masculinities’, 
African and Asian Studies, 7, 515–536.
Ruto-Korir, R. (2006) ‘The faint voice in academia. Including the excluded: an analysis of the psychology 
of Nandi Proverbs and its place in critical psychology’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5, 328–341.
Seedat, M. and Lazarus, S. (2011) ‘Community psychology in South Africa: origins, developments and 
manifestations’, Journal of Community Psychology, 39, 241–257.
Stevens, G. (2003) ‘Academic representations of “race” and racism in psychology: knowledge production, 
historical context and dialectics in transitional South Africa’, International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 
27, 108–207.
Stevens, G., Eagle, G., Kaminer, D. and Higson-Smith, C. (2012) ‘Continuous traumatic stress: conceptual 
conversations in contexts of global conflict, violence and trauma’, Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace 
Psychology, 19, 75–84.
Summerfield, D. (2000) ‘Childhood, war, refugeedom and “trauma”: three core questions for mental health 
professionals’, Transcultural Psychiatry, 37, 417–433.
Whitehead, K. A. (2013) ‘Managing self-other relations in complaint sequences: the use of self-deprecating 
and affiliative racial categorizations’, Research on Language and Social Interaction, 46, 186–203.

406
A reflection on Psychology on the American continent brings out important elements through 
which we can uncover the conditions for critical psychology in this part of the world. At the 
same time, it points to the future that this profession may have in its engagement with everyday 
life and social issues historically constituted and difficult to solve. The history of the American 
continent, including the different economic and political positions from north to south, and the 
tensions, conflicts, and consequences that exist to the present day, forged psychology and left 
its marks, especially in professional practice. The aim of this chapter, to reflect on the critical 
psychology in the ‘American’ countries, will not be complete. The choice made here represents 
a particular position from which we can understand what the Americas are and how psychology 
developed in this part of the world.
The purpose of the chapter follows a five-part structure in which I target the development 
of psychology and the contradictions arising within it, which then point to important elements 
in critical psychology. It sets the basis for a more detailed study which would take into account 
some of the key elements that have contributed to the liberation movement, which is becoming 
a stronger force for organizing critical psychology and social movements here.
The first part provides a brief characterization of the Americas, particularly in relation to 
economic and social indicators. The second highlights the diversity and contradictions respon-
sible for the tensions present in everyday life in this geographical area. The third focuses on 
aspects of the development of psychology and their different directions and commitments. The 
fourth considers the early development of critical psychology generated on the mainland of the 
Americas, and different possibilities in the critical movement in psychology. Finally, in the fifth 
part, are conclusions to be drawn from the development of critical psychology in the Americas 
and directions for future work.
The American continent: many stories, few revelations
It is impossible to make reference to the American continent without mentioning the book 
written by Eduardo Galeano, Open Veins of Latin America, published in 1976 during a period of 
political turmoil and imperialist domination. The purpose of that book was to disclose certain 
facts that the official stories, the ones told by the powerful which conceal or distort with lies in 
42
Critical psychology and the 
American continent
From colonization and domination to 
liberation and emancipation
Raquel S. L. Guzzo

Critical psychology and the American continent
407
attempts to deceive or seduce, to dominate and exploit, that is, stories with no real revelation, 
omitted. The book, which was banned by the military dictatorships imposed on the dominated 
countries, draws attention to the deliberately engineered communication difficulties in media 
that should disseminate information about reality, and it considers both the knowledge relayed 
by the privileged elites and the ‘militant’ literature which consists of revolutionary rhetoric 
which parrots a language which is always for the same ears, prefabricated phrases which are 
distant from any conviction necessary to effective social change.
For much of the world, and for the ‘North American’ people, of course, ‘America’ is only 
the United States. This can already be interpreted as the exercise of political and economic 
power by ‘North America’ on Central and South America, exercise of the power of empire 
(Harnecker and Uribe 1980; Hobsbawm 1987; Lenin 1917; Luxemburg 1985; Sader 2000). The 
other American countries are, according to Galeano, treated as a second class of America with 
an obscure identification and the identity of a people divided.
The Americas are the second largest continent in the world occupying a large part of the 
Western world and concentrating approximately 12 per cent of the world’s human population 
with distinct and ancient cultures and divided into three geographic blocs : North America (five 
countries), Central America (20 countries) and South America (12 countries). Culturally and 
politically, however, the region is considered as two blocks, Anglo-Saxon America and Latin 
America, that have different histories of colonization and therefore development.
It is worth drawing attention to inequality in countries in every part of the continent, in 
which the structure of domination runs from the north, with a smaller number of countries, to 
the south which houses the majority. The American continent is a place of many contradictions, 
one of which is expressed in the ratio between the number of countries in each block and the 
value of their Gross Domestic Product (32.1 per cent of world GDP, according to data from 
SEPLAN 2011), and from which we see the huge social inequalities among the 37 American 
countries. The block with the largest number of countries, South America, has the lowest GDP. 
If the indicator of a country’s development in the current capitalist system is measured by Gross 
Domestic Product, it is clear that what matters in this system is to produce wealth and goods to 
be consumed, not to consider social development and quality of life. The collective production 
of wealth has not consistently changed the lives of most people on this continent. The history 
of the American continent has been a continuous experience of mutilation and disintegration 
disguised by this kind of ‘development’ (Galeano 2000).
Despite this challenge, the Human Development Report presented by the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) defines the goal of the development process as being to 
extend human freedoms and to expand the choices people have to live full and creative lives 
(Malik 2013); this is assumed to be a process that should benefit all individuals in an equitable 
manner based on the participation of each of them. But this is a very distant discourse that does 
not correspond to the everyday life of the majority of people who live on this continent.
Some indicators are evidence of the distance between the real world and a discourse con-
cerned with ‘expanding human freedoms’ for making possible the full and creative development 
of people. We need to examine what is meant by human progress in such documents. According 
to this document (Malik 2013), economic growth by itself does not reflect progress in human 
development. If we assume that an increase in the Human Development Index (HDI) reveals a 
positive movement in relation to social equity and quality of life, we can see that in 2013 several 
countries changed their level of quality of life, particularly those in the more unequal southern 
hemisphere. However, we need to bear in mind that this indicator is a composite measure of 
data from three dimensions (life expectancy, educational attainment, and control over resources 
needed for a decent life, such as housing and sanitation). Small changes in the HDI do not 

Raquel S. L. Guzzo
408
concretely represent a change in the objective conditions of life. The American continent still 
remains unequal, with immense and intense contradictions perceived only by those who, some-
how, are willing to engage in a critical analysis of reality.
Diversity and inequality: tension and  
conflict in search of utopian horizons
The most important characteristics of the continent that impact on people in their daily life are 
those arising from social inequity and the objective and subjective consequences of the process 
of colonization. While necessary conditions for developing the best quality of life are celebrated 
in official discourse, what really occurs is the reproduction of a power relationship between 
those who are completely economically unequal. Although all segments of the Americas have 
been colonized by European countries (especially by England, Portugal, and Spain), the different 
trends of that uneven and combined development are evident today in countries with differ-
ent positions in the globalized world, polarized by exploitation and domination. With a native 
population characterized mainly by indigenous people, large tracts of land and aquatic areas, 
minerals and other natural resources, the three blocks of the American continent were easy prey 
for a devastating domination that eventually established another kind of colonization, a form of 
economic domination and slavery which are themselves the conditions of contemporary ‘social 
development’.
Boron (2010) discusses the vicissitudes of capitalism in Latin America, demonstrating that, 
even after having been open to the dominant mode of production in the major economies of 
Americas for almost a century and a half, and even with some periods of high economic growth 
rates, the Latin American countries did not really escape from a state of underdevelopment. 
These countries are still mired in serious social problems marked by poverty, social exclusion, 
low education, an extreme concentration of wealth and income, violence and social inequality, 
and a more fictitious than real ‘democracy’ with serious violations of the most basic rights of 
the citizen.
What Marxists (Marx and Engels 2004; Marx, Engels, and Lenin 1977) refer to as the sub-
human condition of development is nothing more than a way of life forged in capitalism in this 
part of the world. For Marx, the conditions of human development are not determined by the 
subjective aspirations or desires of this or that person, but by the real social relations that are 
determined by the mode of production and reproduction of capital, and finally by the social 
class conditions. Marx proposes a humanitarian liberation theory and indicates the route to its 
concrete realization; for him, human development is the creation of the material prerequisites of 
a new society full of spirit and practical meaning for everyone. A society guided by possession of 
resources, alienated labour, and the transformation of basic rights in goods, is not compatible with 
an autonomous and emancipated human development condition. Colonialism was the anteroom 
of capitalism in the Americas, denying human rights to those subjugated, dominating them by 
violence, keeping them, even by force, in a state of misery and ignorance (Memmi 2013).
Capitalism shows, in this case, that it is not the path to the development of countries in 
the economic periphery. Rather, it is a sure road towards the perpetuation of the condition of 
dependency, exploitation, repression, violence, and bloodshed, even when some indicators show 
an improvement in the quality of life of its population expressed in the so-called significant gains 
marked by the Human Development Index in the southern hemisphere. In 1990, 33 countries 
had an HDI below the 25th percentile, while in 2012, 15 countries were in this position. Like-
wise, the number of countries with an HDI above the 75th percentile increased from 33 to 59 
between 1990/2000 and 2000/2012 (Malik 2013). This indicated a change, if considered in 

Critical psychology and the American continent
409
isolation from other indicators. For Boron (2010) the advance of globalization makes the cap-
italist world deepen dependency and perpetuate underdevelopment in most of the continent, 
despite changes indicated by the HDI.
Between the suffering body and stricken  
soul: psychology as science and profession
In capitalism of the late nineteenth and twentieth century, psychology appears and develops 
differently in the Americas. According to Parker (2007), a critical reading of the emergence and 
development of the science and profession of psychology demonstrates the deep connection 
between this discipline and the development of capitalist society. Thus, North America, where 
capitalism was configured with extensive and deep roots, sees the most intense and consist-
ent development of psychology associated with the expansion of training programs, scientific 
associations, and regulatory professional practice, impacting the culture of the other American 
countries and development of the profession.
In addition to that development, and due to the period of the ‘Iron Curtain’ which sealed 
off a significant part of the world and the decades of dictatorships supported by the United 
States, nothing produced in the former Soviet Union came to Central and South America 
that was not understood through US American lenses. One exception was the work of Cuban 
psychologists, and their work during the periods of dictatorship in the rest of the south of the 
continent was forbidden. There was thus a dominance of knowledge and training of profession-
als for maintaining the status quo. The psychology that was permitted was one that served as a 
tool for the maintenance of an extractive colonization, as cradle of domination and capitalist 
exploitation which fuelled an ideology of personal success, images of mental illness among 
those who failed, and a focus on the possibilities and impossibilities or individual limits and 
achievements.
In this scenario, psychology developed, particularly in Latin America, the ideas brought by 
trained researchers in the developed world in the early nineteenth century and, only later, as a 
regulated activity in different fields of the profession. Once regulated, numerous undergraduate 
and postgraduate courses were created to sustain the growing demand for psychology among 
the liberal professions, those ‘spaces of reason’ inhabited by physicians and psychiatrists who 
aimed to treat ‘mental illness’ in segments of the population (Antunes 2004; Guedes 1987; 
Jacó-Vilela et al. 2005; Massimi 2004; Massimi and Guedes 2004).
In the last decade of the twentieth century and the early twenty-first century, international 
organizations defined the paths to development of Latin American countries with a neoliberal 
agenda that maintained different levels of education in Central and South American countries, 
encouraging the presence of private initiatives and objectives in higher education qualifications. 
The focus on technical education has set in place a number of different careers designed to meet 
market demand. Educational reforms interfered directly and actively in youth education pro-
jects, particularly in psychology, guiding its professional profile towards individual psychological 
assessment and therapeutic treatment (Martín-Baró 1996, 1998).
Psychology, in this scenario, turned its interests to the ‘stricken soul’ without regard to the 
‘suffering body’; the objective questions posed by the everyday life of most people were not the 
object of attention. The primacy of private practice and the formation of liberal professional 
psychology sustained the discipline as a powerful ideological tool to maintain the structure of 
the prevailing economic system.
Fanon (1965, 1971, 2004, 2008) draws attention to how the experience of colonization 
leaves deep marks on the lives of people. It is through oppression and exploitation, and then 

Raquel S. L. Guzzo
410
through the revolutionary processes, that the colonized subjects are organized to reflect upon 
and reject this condition and transform, radically, their way of life. Independence, for Fanon, 
produces objective and subjective conditions for human liberation, renewal of the family and 
social structures, which impose, with the rigor of the law, the emergence and growth of its 
sovereignty. Drawing on the experience of French domination in Algeria and the revolutionary 
process of liberation, Fanon reflects how a new form of humanity follows this process and makes 
clear the direction psychology and psychiatry may take when they are committed to liberation 
and against oppression. The same condition is expressed in the Latin American countries with 
dictatorships funded to protect and project North American domination.
In tension with this role of the profession, from the 1960s on human life was sketched in 
other ways, in which psychology was not involved. Social exclusion by ethnicity, gender, and dis-
ability, as well as oppression and exploitation in everyday and institutional spaces such as schools 
and places of work, and at the same time poverty and economic accumulation in the world 
system, were causing concerns among professionals who recognized the power of ideology in 
determining the conditions of life.
A specific theory and practice of liberation begin to influence psychology and its possibilities 
for the transformation of society by creating a broad movement, from which other disciplines 
have also benefited. From the social movements to the organization of professional scientific 
societies and different university programs of basic training, the hegemony of psychology in 
the northern hemisphere began to be confronted. For example, Angelini (2012) looks at the 
role the Interamerican Society of Psychology, founded in 1951 in Mexico, had in the develop-
ment of psychology in the ‘Americas’, especially in Latin America, with the aim of promoting 
communication between psychologists in the Americas and advancing research in the area. The 
first congress took place in December 1953 in the Dominican Republic, at Santo Domingo 
University, the oldest in the Americas, with the theme of ‘Culture and Values ​in Psychology’ 
(Angelini 2012). It was a small conference, with the fifty psychologists in attendance. However, 
during a time of dictatorships in Latin American countries in the 1960s and 1970s, the space of 
the congress saw massive participation by students of psychology, as well as by professionals, even 
without clear and straightforward discussion of the relation of psychology to the social events 
of the time. In these events, Ignacio Martín-Baró offered the perspective of the ‘Psychology of 
Liberation’, an ethical-political project for Latin America and, even if it was in no way represent-
ative of the majority of psychologists, a critique of the hegemonic forces began to appear in the 
discipline. Since then, this event is held every two years in different countries of the American 
continent, always containing space for debate on the relationship between the North American 
and South American psychology, as well as self-organization of Latinos compared to Americans.
In a classic article on psychology in Latin America, Ardila (1982) discusses the cultural tradi-
tions and the origin of psychology in Central and South America, and the place of its pioneers 
in the formation and organization of psychological professionals in these countries through 
scientific associations, journals and conferences, and research projects. Ardila shows how the 
growth of the area has had an impact on the development of the discipline internationally. He 
also points to problems for the profession posed by the uneven and divergent development in 
different countries, the stage of ideological conflicts and philosophies that influence the area. 
Without going into the political positions that are sources of tension in the production of 
knowledge, vocational training, for example, indicates the difficulties arising from the struggle 
for hegemony in the field and from North American and European domination of Latin Amer-
ican knowledge production, especially regarding the production and dissemination of scientific 
research. Latin American research has difficulties obtaining financing and being evaluated as 
relevant internationally.

Critical psychology and the American continent
411
After November 1989, in response to the assassination of the Salvadoran Jesuits (including 
Martín-Baró), Latin American psychology began to strengthen a movement of psychologists 
committed to building a more egalitarian and fair society and including the excluded (the poor, 
homosexuals, women, children). Thus began a movement celebrated on the days of the 13, 14, 
and 15 of November, the dates of the massacre at the Central American University José Simeon 
Cañas in El Salvador, which brings together psychologists, social scientists, and activists as an 
event concerned with the psychology of liberation. This movement aims to continue the path of 
Ignacio Martín-Baró, to build a psychology for Latin America through awareness of the process 
of liberation of the oppressed; this has been the theme of the congresses held so far in Central 
America and South America, in Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, Brazil, Costa Rica, Venezuela, 
and Colombia (Osorio 2009).
Perspectives for the organization and liberation of the oppressed
The relationship between critical psychology and liberation movements in Latin America has 
built an important process of becoming aware of the current reality of our part of the world, 
as activists and advocates of social issues and different movements struggling for fundamental 
rights and a complete break with the capitalist system. The process of questioning reality, of the 
‘conscientization’ proposed by Paulo Freire, has been constituted as an important psychosocial 
goal to be achieved by the professionals who are critically positioned and who nurture hope 
for a less unjust and unequal world (Guzzo 2014; Montero 2013). These processes require the 
participation of psychologists from other theoretical traditions and practices who are not a part 
of mainstream psychology; who provide a way of understanding psychological phenomena such 
as the aspirations and expectations of people individually and in groups and their way of life, 
with class analysis; and who make the labels given to problems and disorders function differently. 
From psychological distress and illness to development and strengthening processes, the coping 
tasks of critical psychologists in Latin America require special training with other ethical and 
political commitments. We therefore prepare the professional for community practice and other 
critical intervention, which requires a curriculum that immerses students in the culture and 
history of Latin American peoples.
There is no denying the role of universities in developing a professional identity, but they 
should also be viewed with a critical eye. Gonzalez Rey (2009) notes that one of the worst 
effects of the dependence of psychology on US American models and on the local regimes 
complicit with imperialism, was the institutionalization of education and the hegemony of the 
dominant thinking in the area, as well as the perpetuation of conservative positions in profes-
sional practice. This situation led to the difficulty of access for and retention of those university 
teachers with different ways of understanding the world.
Apart from the conservative training of professional psychologists by Latin American univer-
sities, the competition within institutional spaces and the growth of regulation and monitoring 
of professional work also reveals the tension between the dominant psychology and alternatives 
for the construction of a critical psychology.
In Brazil, for example, psychologists are in public service in the sectors of health care and edu-
cation. This professional entry of psychologists into the system has called into question the basic 
training received in the five years of graduate psychology, setting a new agenda that necessarily 
problematizes a hegemonic view of reality and builds upon the aspirations of the working class, in 
favour of the construction of a theoretical framework that responds to social and political eman-
cipation (Guzzo et al. 2013). In its own cautious and limited way, then, critical psychology con-
fronts what is established and becomes an ethical and political position within the Latin world.

Raquel S. L. Guzzo
412
The critical movement in Latin American psychology has had a major presence in the 
‘counter-knowledge’ and ‘counter-practices’ which contest the historical spread of psychology 
as a science and profession and, in a dialectical perspective, establish other relationships between 
social and individual situations. It thus gives new insight into psychosocial processes, revealing 
qualitative methodologies that denote another path and new knowledge that is now possible in 
this reality. We must remember that in the 1960s and 1970s, struggles on the American continent 
shook the structures of psychology and, as a result, educational institutions have responded by 
becoming spaces of greater conservatism in the training of future professionals. We must there-
fore remember our history and rebuild a movement that is able to provide a political alternative 
as part of the project of making psychology a powerful tool for social change inside and outside 
of the specific work of our discipline.
Brown (1973, 1974) shows clearly and unquestionably how psychology and psychiatry are on 
the side of the capitalists, arguing that there are no significant differences between these differ-
ent sectors. Capitalists and mental health professionals, even though by different methods, serve 
the same purpose of modern capitalism. Brown also demonstrates how the capitalist system 
is organized around a limited form of human existence, incorporating economic oppression, 
social organization, culture, ethics, and interpersonal relationships. It is a system that alienates 
men and women from their humanity. Therefore, he points out, human liberation presupposes 
a revolution, a process that must include the theoretical and practical construction of a quite 
different Marxist psychology as one aspect of a new worldview derived from a Marxist analysis 
of reality. This worldview requires theory and practice to support it, and revolutionary change 
which seeks another form of sociability in the world, and must rebuild traditional practices and 
theories covering all dimensions of human life, the education and development of children, 
youth and preparation for work, housing, food, art, and sexuality, to name but a few of the things 
that are important to us.
The prospects for the development and maturation of critical psychology necessarily involve 
the engagement and involvement of professionals in different sectors of human life, from profes-
sional training to the organization of mass participation in social movements and human rights 
struggles. Critical psychology can offer a distinctive view of the integral relationship between 
subjective and objective reality and the material world, and in this respect, it can demonstrate 
how one side of the equation – subjective or objective – is a constituent of the other.
The ‘psychosocial’ field was constituted as a critical current on the American continent in 
the 1970s and 1980s, and had the main task of elaborating psychology’s own proposals concern-
ing the production of knowledge, but in such a way as to transform the reality of professional 
practice beyond dominant culture. The social context, with its own distinct characteristics and 
ways of life in different cultures, becomes the object of study and demonstrates the relationship 
between social life, social problems, and psychological theories. In Latin America, the movement 
for the liberation of the oppressed is organized from the social sciences, philosophy, and theology 
(Dussel 1984), in a dialogue between the different parties that constitutes those forms of knowl-
edge. Subjective, reciprocal, and plural dimensions attend to ‘singularity’ while, at the same time, 
providing a collective reading of reality.
These ontological foundations define another perspective for psychology. Freitas (2007) 
points to some elements that were formed from this new critical perspective for psychology: 
the incorporation of themes and social issues within programmes and academic courses in psy-
chology and related fields; an emphasis on institutional participation in public policies and in 
community projects; and the entrance of professionals into the field of social practices in public 
office. These perspectives are still being formulated as the utopian horizon of those that really 
want to change reality.

Critical psychology and the American continent
413
Conclusions
Critical psychology in the American continent, albeit in a tortuous and challenging way, has thus 
been constituted as a movement for social change which aims to end the oppression which has 
an impact on the poorest, most excluded, and most exploited people, and aims at the empow-
erment of individuals and groups, and increased social and political participation in community 
spaces. In this way, critical psychosocial practices have approached the kinds of psychology used 
in neighbouring professions concerned with the dynamics of communities and other social 
situations.
However, major difficulties are still faced by those who wish to construct another project 
for psychology that accounts for the resistance to hegemonic ‘science’ and professional practice, 
especially among those involved in training new professionals and ensuring that workspaces 
reproduce the conservative mode of mainstream colonial psychology.
Further reading
Dussel, E. (2000) Ética da libertação: na idade da globalização e da exclusão. Petrópolis, Rio de Janeiro: Editora 
Vozes.
Martí, J. (2001) Nuestra América. Brasília: Unb.
Rosado, R. Q. (2007) Consciousness-in-Action: Toward an Integral Psychology of Liberation  & Transformation. 
Puerto Rico: ilé.
Website resources
El Imperio del Consumo – Agenda Latinoamerica: http://latinoamericana.org/2005/textos/castellano/
PFM.htm
Estado Novo & Oppressão /25 de Abril & Liberdade: http://estadonovo-psicologiapaz.blogspot.com.br
Psicologia Social da Libertação: http://www.controversia.com.br/blog/psicologia-social-da-libertao/
References
Angelini, A. L. (2012) ‘O papel da Sociedade Interamericana de Psicologia no desenvolvimento da psicolo-
gia na América Latina’, Revista Interamericana de Psicologia, 46(1), 9–20
Ardila, R. (1982) ‘Psychology in Latin America today’, Annual Review of Psychology, 33, 103–122.
Antunes, M.A.M. (ed.) (2004) História da Psicologia no Brasil: Primeiros Ensaios. Rio de Janeiro: EDUERJ.
Boron, A. A. (2010) O Socialismo no Século 21 – Há Vida Após o Neoliberalismo? São Paulo: Expressão Popular.
Brown, P. (ed.) (1973) Radical Psychology. New York: Harper and Row.
Brown, P. (1974) Toward a Marxist Psychology. New York: Harper and Row.
Dussel, E. D. (1984) Caminhos de Libertação Latino-Americana II: História, Colonialismo e Libertação. São Paulo: 
Paulinas.
Fanon, F. (1965) A Dying Colonialism. New York: Grove Press.
Fanon, F. (1971) Dialectica de la Liberacion. Uruguay: Cienfuegos.
Fanon, F. (2004) The Wretched of the Earth. New York: Grove Press.
Fanon, F. (2008) Black Skin, White Masks: New York : Grove Press.
Freitas, M. (2007) ‘Desafios ao cotidiano das práticas de intervenção psicossocial: reflexões a partir da Psic-
ologia Social Comunitária’, in J.M.F. Osorio (ed.) Psicología, Globalización y Desarrollo en América Latina. 
Mexico: Editorial Latinoamericana.
Galeano, E. (2000) As Veias Abertas da América Latina (39th Edn.). Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra.
Gonzalez Rey, F. (2009) ‘La Psicología en la America Latina: algunos momentos criticos de su desarollo. 
Psicología para América Latina’, Revista de la Unión Latinoamericana de Entidades de Psicología, 17/
agosto,1–22, http://www.psicolatina.org/17/america-latina.html
Guedes, M. (1987) História da psicologia. São Paulo: EDUC – Ed. da PUC-SP.
Guzzo, R.S.L. (2014) ‘Conscientization and political changes’, in T. Teo (ed.) Encyclopedia of Critical Psychol-
ogy. New York: Springer.

Raquel S. L. Guzzo
414
Guzzo, R.S.L., Marçal, C. and Rybka, L. (2013) ‘Different facets, problems and potentialities for critical 
psychology in dealing with the everyday life of the Brazilian working class’, Annual Review of Critical 
Psychology, 11, 150–162.
Harnecker, M. and Uribe, G. (1980) Imperialismo e Dependência. São Paulo: Global Editora.
Hobsbawm, E. J. (ed.) (1987) História do Marxismo, volume 8: O Marxismo na Época da Terceira Internacional: O 
Novo Capitalismo, o Imperialismo, o Terceiro Mundo (Edn). São Paulo: Paz e Terra.
Jacó-Vilela, A. M., Ferreira, A.A.L. and Portugal, F. T. (eds) (2005) História da Psicologia: Rumos e Percursos. 
Rio de Janeiro: Nau Editora.
Lenin, V. I. (1917) El imperialismo, fase superior del capitalismo. Moscow: Progresso.
Luxemburg, R. (1985) A acumulação do capital: contribuição ao estudo econômico do imperialismo (2nd Edn). São 
Paulo: Nova Cultural.
Malik, K. (2013) A Acensão do Sul: Progresso Humano num Mundo Diversificado. New York: PNUD.
Martín-Baró, I. (1996) Writings for a Liberation Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Martín-Baró, I. (1998) Psicología de la Liberación. Madrid: Editorial Trotta.
Marx, K. and Engels, F. (2004) Textos sobre Educação e Ensino. São Paulo: Centauro.
Marx, K., Engels, F. and Lenin, V. I. (1977) Sobre o Humanismo na Sociedade Comunista. Lisboa: Estampa.
Massimi, M. (ed.) (2004) História da Psicologia no Brasil do Século XX. São Paulo: EPU.
Massimi, M. and Guedes, M. (eds) (2004) História da psicologia no Brasil: Novos estudos. São Paulo: Educ.
Memmi, A. (2013) The Colonizer and the Colonized. London: Plunkett Lake Press.
Montero, M. (2013) De la Otredad a la Praxis Liberadora:La Construcción de Métodos Para la Conciencia. Con-
ferencia apresentada no IV Congreso de Intervención y Praxis Comunitaria Universidad de Chile.
Osorio, J.M.F. (2009) Psicología y Praxis Comunitaria una Visión Latinoamercicana. México: Ed. Latino-  
americana.
Parker, I. (2007) Revolution in Psychology: Alienation to Emancipation. London: Pluto Press.
Sader, E. (2000) Século XX: Uma Biografia Não-autorizada: O Século do Imperialismo. São Paulo: Editora 
Fundação Perseu Abramo.
Secretaria de Planejamento (SEPLAN) (2011) ‘Produto Interno Bruto do Continente Americano e relação 
PIB Americano/PIB Mundial por Países’, http://www.seplan.go.gov.br/sepin/pub/pib/05_pib_conti 
nente_americano.htm

415
The main argument of this chapter is informed by the realization that, despite its significance 
as a critical alternative to colonial psychology, out of all branches of academic Western main-
stream psychology taught in Arab and Palestinian universities, community psychology as a 
sub-discipline is noticeably marginalized and under-recognized. Community psychology has a 
formative quality and the potential to make contributions to the emancipation and liberation of 
marginalized communities, as opposed to many problematic forms of historical and contempo-
rary enactments of mainstream colonial psychology in the Arab World (Makkawi 2009; Soueif 
and Ahmed 2001). Following a historical trend in postcolonial situations, universities in the Arab 
World continue to import and uncritically apply Western constructions of knowledge, including 
psychology, and the intellectual legacy of European colonialism continues to dominate these 
academic institutions (Abouchedid 2006). This intellectual hegemony of colonial knowledge 
in Arab universities renders the enactment of critical psychology in general and community 
psychology in particular – both in academe and in community settings – a challenging under-
taking. In this chapter, I draw upon an emerging program of critical community psychology at 
Birzeit University in Palestine, arguing that envisioning critical psychology in the Arab World in 
general is better conceived through critical community psychology as an emerging alternative 
to colonial psychology.
There is no formally recorded history of the inception of community psychology in Pales-
tine. However, early manifestations of community psychology in the Palestinian colonial context 
can be traced back to various phases of community grassroots organizing and action during 
the anti-colonial struggle for self-determination. The vision and praxis of the newly estab-
lished master’s program in community psychology at Birzeit University evolved from and were 
inspired by earlier forms of community grassroots action during the first Palestinian Intifada in 
the occupied West Bank and Gaza (WBG) in 1987. While this chapter highlights the recently 
developed master’s program in community psychology as an exemplar of critical psychology in 
the Arab World, I focus on the roots of community psychology in the Palestinian community 
long before its formal academic inception.
I start by describing the colonial condition in Palestine with particular attention to the occu-
pied WBG, where this specific case of community psychology enactment is being implemented. 
The focus is placed on academic psychology and the legacy of colonial knowledge inherited 
43
Critical psychology 
in the Arab world
Insights from critical community psychology 
in the Palestinian colonial context
Ibrahim Makkawi

Ibrahim Makkawi
416
and applied by Arab and Palestinian universities and the formal educational system as a whole. 
The following section describes the earlier roots of community psychology enactments which 
were manifested in community organizing and grassroots activism before and during the first 
Palestinian Intifada. Subsequently, the chapter addresses the problematic shift in this ‘bottom-up’ 
form of community grassroots action and the setback it sustained following the signing of the 
Oslo agreement in 1993. This setback is manifested in the work of an expanding network of 
Western-funded Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and the parallel trend of reduc-
tionist research on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) among Palestinian victims of military 
violence. Both the work of the NGOs and the PTSD research accumulation are problematic 
and pose serious challenges to community psychology enactment that is committed to people’s 
liberation and social justice. The concluding section of the paper describes the emerging master’s 
program in community psychology at Birzeit University, highlighting its roots in earlier phases 
of community psychology enactments during the first Intifada, and raising the possibility for 
critical psychology in the Arab World in general.
The colonial condition and colonial knowledge
Following a systematic settler-colonial process by the Zionist Movement, the state of Israel was 
formally established in 1948, and soon began an ethnic cleansing campaign leading to the mass 
expulsion of more than two thirds of the indigenous Palestinian people, leaving a fragile minor-
ity behind (Morris 1989). Furthermore, in 1967 the remaining territories of historical Palestine, 
namely the WBG, were occupied by the invading Israeli army in another wave of colonialist 
expansion. Two fragmented Palestinian communities remained in historic Palestine, but have 
been divided by the virtual ‘green line’ and live under two contradictory sociopolitical condi-
tions, and more than half of the Palestinian people were dispersed as refugees in exile.
Highlighting the persistence of the colonial condition in historic Palestine is pertinent to 
our discussion of the challenges facing the enactment of critical and decolonizing community 
psychology in such a context. The colonial condition in historic Palestine is illustrated in Rou-
hana’s (2011: 1) statement that, political justifications aside, describing ‘Zionism [as] a settler 
colonial movement therefore is, at the very minimum, a description of the process in which 
Palestine was taken over’. This colonial condition continues to characterize the life and struggle 
of the various Palestinian communities, which were fragmented and divided as a result of the 
prolonged colonial practices enacted by the Israeli regime after 1948. Colonialism as a process 
and materialistic manifestation has always been described as a violent action perpetuated by the 
colonizers against the native people (see Bulhan 1985; Fanon 1963; Freire 1970). Reasserting 
Fanon’s (1963) description of the colonial condition as violent contact between the colonizer 
and colonized, Jinadu (1976: 604) writes:
The contact occurs in such a way that the numerically inferior alien race is actually the 
sociologically (i.e. politically and economically) superior race. This is so because of its access 
to, and monopolistic control of, socio-economic and political sources of power. This con-
trol is made possible and facilitated by the sheer weight of military superiority and material 
wealth of the alien race.
For decades, Israeli colonial practices in the occupied WBG included labour exploitation, 
fragmentation of Palestinian lands, settlement activities, control of the Palestinians’ education, 
restricting people’s movement, consistent political harassment, and military intervention, all ren-
dering life conditions for the native population unbearable. The colonizer-colonized power 

Critical psychology in the Arab world 
417
relation penetrated all spheres of life for the native Palestinians. It is within this context of settler 
colonialism that critical community psychology is called upon to address community mental 
health problems stemming directly from repressive colonial hegemony (Makkawi 2009). Since 
universities as centres for the production of knowledge expected to lead the development and 
enactment of community psychology in such context, it is imperative to examine the historical 
development of academic psychology in Arab and Palestinian universities in general.
Modern universities in the Arab World were established during the era of European coloni-
alism, or shortly after some of the Arab states gained their artificial independence (Abouchedid 
2006). Colonial education and Western epistemologies have dominated the earlier stages of 
Arab academic institutions despite Arab nationalists’ efforts to create ‘counter-colonial model 
of education capable of healing the masses from their woes resulting from colonial subjugation’ 
(Abouchedid 2006: 5). Psychology was introduced to the Arab World through Egypt by colonial 
powers of the time and since then Arab universities have been uncritically importing, reproduc-
ing, and teaching Western mainstream psychology.
More than half a century ago, Western scholars based in the American University of Beirut 
plainly stated that ‘Psychology in the Arab Near East sprang from and is nourished by Western 
Psychology. British, French and American influences can be seen – and distinguished – in 
the work of psychologist through the area’ (Prothro and Melikian 1955: 304). While this 
statement came just as a number of Arab countries were gaining their independence, ‘colonial 
psychology’ continues to be persistently hegemonic as the intellectual inherited legacy of 
colonialism in academe throughout the Arab World (Abouchedid 2006; Nasser and Abouche-
did 2007). Melikian (1984: 65) identifies the challenges facing the ‘transmission of psycholog-
ical knowledge in five oil-producing Arab States’ as hinging on ‘Arab concept of mind and 
behavior and Arab perception of psychology’. To locate the obstacles facing the transmission 
of psychological knowledge in the culture and collective mentality of the native commu-
nity, rather than the discipline of psychology itself, illustrates the prominence of intellectual 
colonial hegemony years after the termination of formal colonialism. Palestinian universities 
under Israeli colonial rule in the WBG, modelled after Arab universities, are no exception to 
this colonial legacy.
Arab scholars infatuated with Western epistemology of mainstream psychology which they 
teach and research often state uncritically that ‘Egypt was the main gateway through which 
modern psychology was introduced and practiced in the Arab countries’ (Soueif and Ahmed 
2001: 216). But this ‘modern’ mainstream psychology, when found in other similar colonial 
circumstances, was contested as colonial psychology (Bulhan 1985; Fanon 1963; Martín-Baró 
1994). Continuing uncritically to import, practice, teach, and research Western psychology 
throughout academic institutions in the Arab World is problematic and hinders attempts to 
develop alternative, critical, and decolonizing forms of psychology. Based on his concise review 
of Ahmed and Gielen’s (1998) edited volume Psychology in the Arab Countries, Farraj (2001: 281) 
writes that ‘Arab psychologists rarely conduct studies on topics they have identified as being of 
special importance to people living in the Arab world. Instead of that, they are more likely to 
design studies around already existing instruments for examining certain constructs’.
Social psychology is the most researched area in the Arab psychological scholarship (Soueif 
and Ahmed 2001). The issues and problems investigated in social psychology lend themselves 
quite easily to critical examination and application to real-life problems of the oppressed major-
ities (Martín-Baró 1994). This intellectual space opens the possibility of developing native and 
relevant contributions to psychology (Hwang 2005). For comparison, Latin American social 
psychologists’ discontent with the US model of social psychology evolved into what is widely 
known as the paradigm of liberation psychology (Martín-Baró 1994). Nonetheless, Arab social 

Ibrahim Makkawi
418
psychologists continue to apply Western mainstream theories and concepts to their areas of 
research with little critical theorizing based on local real-world social problems.
Arab psychologists tend to claim that the theoretical roots of contemporary psychology in 
the Arab World reach back to pre-disciplinary intellectual legacies of great Arab-Islamic phi-
losophers (Soueif and Ahmed 2001). However, there is no evidence of current developments 
or transformations of these classic ideas, especially in the discipline of psychology. Recogniz-
ing that ‘it is in the nature of human nature to change’ (Parker 2007: 1), mainstream psychol-
ogy is constantly challenged to re-examine its basic premises in light of the changing human 
condition. There is a sense of absurdity in attributing contemporary psychology in the Arab 
World to classical writings of Arab-Islamic philosophers such as Al-Farabi, Ibn-Sina, Ibn-Roshd, 
Ibn-Al-Heitham, and Ibn-Kaldoun, to mention but a few of the often-cited ‘pre-disciplinary’ 
great Arab-Islamic thinkers, as the founding fathers of Arab psychology (Soueif and Ahmed 
2001), especially when their ideas are seldom developed further by contemporary Arab 
psychologists.
The dichotomy between mere yearning to the ancient roots of Arab-Islamic philosophy with 
lack of contemporary development in psychology on one hand, and simply importing Western 
mainstream psychology with no contribution to knowledge construction on the other, obscures 
the development of critical psychology in the Arab World. Psychology that does not evolve 
from examining real life issues under colonial repression is part of the problem rather than part 
of the solution. The tendency to overlook intellectual contributions of anti-colonial psycholo-
gists working within similar contexts, such as colonial Algiers (Fanon 1963) and Latin America 
(Martín-Baró 1994; Freire 1970), or that draw upon contemporary paradigms of liberation and 
decolonizing psychology (Montero 2008; Seedat and Lazarus 2011) is peculiar to contemporary 
Arab psychological research and teaching. It is within this conflicting intellectual milieu that 
the enactment of critical community psychology, especially in the Palestinian colonial context, 
becomes appealing and challenging at the same time.
Palestinian universities in the WBG are not only considered centres for learning but also 
symbols of survival and resistance to the Israeli occupation. Despite their anti-colonial inception 
and constant targeting by the Israeli military occupation (Bruhn 2006), Palestinian universi-
ties resemble many of their sister institutions throughout the Arab World in their ‘failure to 
emancipate education from its colonial past’ (Abouchedid 2006: 1). In most social sciences, but 
especially in psychology, Palestinian universities continue to teach mainstream, Western indi-
vidualistic knowledge. They have been criticized for lacking the academic culture of scientific 
inquiry, suffering from the absence of epistemological consciousness, implementing traditional 
ways of assessment and examinations, encouraging the brain-drain of qualified faculty members, 
relying on traditional teaching methods mostly using ‘banking education’ (Freire 1970), lack-
ing theoretical vision for Palestinian higher education, and failing to place the development of 
higher education within its historical context (Shaheen 2004).
Early manifestations of community psychology in Palestine
During the first two decades of resisting Israeli occupation (1967–1987), Palestinian people 
in the WBG established an extraordinary network of grassroots organizations, including stu-
dent unions, women’s and workers’ groups, and a wide variety of professional and community 
organizations. These community organizations obtained significant momentum through the 
public spirit of collective responsibility and volunteerism for the public good. This ‘bottom-up’ 
community organizing was initiated and maintained by community members who had no assis-
tance from academic psychologists. During the first Intifada in 1987, the network of grassroots 

Critical psychology in the Arab world 
419
organizations and community groups provided needed social and psychological support to vic-
tims of political and military violence (Hiltermann 1991).
The role of grassroots organizations in popular education during the first Palestinian Intifada 
embodied a particular enactment of community psychology in the context of prolonged periods 
of closure of schools and universities by the Israeli military authorities. Palestinian teachers and 
students in the WBG ‘constituted an assisting force in the organization of un-institutionalized 
(and militarily declared illegal) educational activities, in conditions of widespread popular 
resistance’ (Mazawi 1994: 507). Although declared illegal by the Israeli army, neighbourhood 
committees of Intifada activists organized and conducted popular education activities in ad hoc 
classrooms. In these educational activities, both community teachers and students were involved 
in an authentic and interactive teaching and learning process that integrated local community 
needs with the national struggle for self-determination (Hussein 2005). Palestinian universities, 
which were also closed by military order, struggled to meet the needs of their students, but 
noticeably failed to understand and transform grassroots manifestations of community psychol-
ogy at that time (Makkawi 2009).
The signing of the Oslo agreement between the leadership of the Palestine Liberation 
Organization (PLO) and the government of Israel in 1993 embodied a constraining turning 
point in the development of Palestinian national movement and grassroots organizing. Sub-
sequently, overseas development aid from Western capitalist countries introduced funding and 
development requirements that supported the emergence and proliferation of a wide network 
of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). Grassroots voluntary organizations simply dis-
appeared from the landscape in that the space to develop their own social and economic infra-
structures was diminished due to the new funded NGOs which mushroomed throughout the 
community (Bakeer 2012). Many of the leaders of the old grassroots voluntary organizations 
became paid administrators in the new NGOs network.
When the second Intifada erupted in 2000, the Palestinian community in the WBG was less 
prepared to sustain the collective struggle and provide the social and psychological support it 
had done before. Compared with mass demonstrations, community building, alternative eco-
nomics, popular education, and strong psychological sense of community, which were prev-
alent during the first Intifada (1987), the second Intifada (2000) was less grassroots based and 
highly militarized, with many casualties and victims of military violence. It is within this social 
milieu of a demoralized, depoliticized, and pacified community that mental health NGOs were 
wrongly expected to provide mental health services and to attend to problems stemming from 
the brutal repression and military violence perpetrated by the Israeli occupation.
Problematic manifestations
In contrast to indigenous grassroots community organizations, NGOs constitute a network of 
Western funded projects misleadingly referred to as civil society. In the Arab World, the number 
of such Western funded NGOs increased from 20,000 in the mid-1960s to 70,000 in the late 
1980s. In the WBG alone the number jumped from 272 on the eve of first Intifada in 1987 to 
about 444 after the Oslo agreement of 1993 (Qassoum 2002). In 2004, a total of 57 NGOs were 
providing psychosocial and mental health care services to a variety of groups in the WBG includ-
ing women, children, people with disabilities, and victims of military violence (Giacaman 2004).
Many of these organizations provide overlapping services, sometimes to the same population, 
all depending on the availability of external funding, which is typically conditional upon the 
political situation in the occupied territories. The staff and administrators of these mental health 
NGOs are acting in a vicious circle that goes like this: writing proposals for project funding, 

Ibrahim Makkawi
420
receiving the funds, implementing a funded project, writing a report to the funder, and moving 
on to writing the next proposal. These projects are sporadic, overlapping, poorly defined, never 
properly evaluated, and are anything but strategic movement to enhance community mental 
health among the oppressed Palestinian communities. Despite the fact that many of these men-
tal health NGOs operate centres within the community, their frameworks for intervention are 
awkward and mostly apply individualistic approaches to counselling and psychotherapy.
While grassroots organizations were established from the bottom up with a broad base of 
supporters, typically linked to political parties and inspired by self-sufficiency logic, NGOs 
are established by a few individuals with links to Western funding organizations and with no 
popular base (Samara 2001). Western-funded NGOs are conceived within the wider strategy 
of co-option and entrapment of the Arab and Palestinian intelligentsia, seeking to depoliticize, 
distract, and distance radical and organic intellectuals from involvement with the struggle for 
justice and self-determination (Qassoum 2002).
Parallel to the expanding network of mental health NGOs, there has been a growing body 
of reductionist research on the exposure of Palestinian children and young people to political 
violence and trauma due to Israeli military violence. Both types of activities are individualistic, 
non-participatory, and acritical, and represent power knowledge embedded in the current phase 
of global capitalism. War-related mental health problems and psychological distress among the 
Palestinian people have been prevalent in their collective experience since their first uprooting 
by Israeli colonization in 1948. This collective trauma has been passed down from one genera-
tion of Palestinians to another. However, it is only recently, namely since the first Intifada in 1987, 
but with new momentum during the second Intifada in 2000, that research on mental health 
and war-related psychological distress among the Palestinian people has proliferated. Due to its 
obsessive focus on the consequences for the individual of exposure to military violence and 
trauma, this research has little relevance to the community-level work conducted by indigenous 
mental health practitioners providing services to Palestinian victims of military violence.
According to Haj-Yahia (2007), this accumulating empirical research suffers from a number of 
methodological flaws. First, these studies use traditional quantitative research methods. Second, the 
majority of the research has been conducted in the Gaza Strip, where political violence and life 
hardship is greater than in the West Bank. Third, there is a lack of comparison groups with young 
people who have not been exposed to the same level of military violence. Fourth, military violence 
and traumatic events are measured on dichotomous scales of measurement using yes/no response 
categories. Finally, the scales used in these studies were initially developed in English, mainly in 
the USA and Western Europe and were merely translated into Arabic with no cultural relevance.
This research focuses on the measurement of psychological constructs and coping mecha-
nisms at the individual level of abstraction, whereas trauma caused by the Israeli military violence 
is conceived at the collective level of abstraction. Previous research with Palestinian students 
attending Israeli universities has indicated that collective-national identity enhances their psy-
chological adjustment within a hostile and discriminating political environment (Makkawi 
2004). The literature indicates a positive correlation between higher stages of ethnic identity 
development and personal self-esteem (Phinney 1995). Ethnic identity serves as a protecting 
factor for mental health in the context of ethnic-racial discrimination and prevents negative 
stereotypes from affecting self-concept (Mossakowski 2003). Current research on the Palestin-
ian people in the WBG must examine the relationship between collective-national identity and 
coping with the psychological consequences of military violence.
Research conducted with colonized communities such as the Palestinian people ought to 
be decolonizing praxis, indigenously informed, and transformative, and utilize methodologi-
cal flexibility including qualitative methods (Smith 1999). The disentanglement between the 

Critical psychology in the Arab world 
421
accumulation of reductionist quantitative research and the mere implementation of funded train-
ing projects is best illustrated in a series of empirical quantitative research studies published by 
researchers affiliated with Gaza Community Mental Health Program (GCMHP). In describing 
community mental health as practiced by the GCMHP, Qouta and El-Sarraj (2002: 333) assert 
with reference to their research program that ‘research activities improve knowledge of health 
and human rights issues facing the Gaza community; the publication of research documents is a 
valuable tool in raising the profile both of GCMHP’s work, and of the current situation in Gaza’. 
However vague this statement might be in its depiction of the role of research in the work of 
one of the largest community mental health NGOs in Palestine, the dialectical interconnection 
between scholarships and practice as the simplest form of praxis, is strangely missing. What is 
really in question is the disconnection between the various interventions and ‘human rights activ-
ities’ (however individualistically the concept of human rights is defined) and research produced 
by the staff and visiting researchers in the GCMHP. Empirical research and community mental 
health interventions, in this case, are glaringly disconnected and hardly inform one another.
Critical community psychology at Birzeit University
The community mental health system in the WBG emerged recently as a section within the 
emerging general health system run by the Palestinian National Authority (PNA). The PNA 
assumed responsibility for education and general health within which the mental health system 
had emerged as an ‘embryonic system’ attending to a vast number of risk factors impacting the 
community mental health at large (Giacaman 2004). The stagnation within this emerging sys-
tem, when added to the expansion of the funded NGO network, especially in mental health, 
constitutes a challenge facing the team working on the development of critical community 
psychology at Birzeit University envisioned to be consistent with the grassroots community 
action from the first Intifada.
The few available documentations of the emerging mental health system focus on existing 
structures: two psychiatric hospitals, a total of 15 outpatient governmental community centres/
clinics, and more than 20 clinics managed by NGOs and the private sector (WHO 2006). Due 
to prolonged Israeli occupation, along with the limited resources of the PNA to monitor the 
various psychological and mental health services provided by the network of NGOs in the 
occupied WBG, there has been an entrenched phenomenon of overlapping and border-crossing 
practices among the various mental health professions.
Realizing that community psychology is context dependent (Fryer and Laing 2008) requires 
indigenous contributions to knowledge construction (Smith 1999) and examination of relevant 
community problems within their local contexts. With this recognition, the community psychol-
ogy program at Birzeit University was established under the assumption that opting for a paradigm 
of critical community psychology with an interdisciplinary outlook and contextualized decolo-
nizing praxis should improve this acute situation of community mental health. But the interdisci-
plinary nature of community psychology the program espoused, especially when, internationally, 
the whole field of community psychology is still evolving, has repeatedly exposed it to issues of 
boundary definition with neighbouring disciplines such as sociology, anthropology, and education. 
Similar claims for doing community psychology are also made by many NGOs by merely affixing 
the word ‘community’ to the title of whatever training project they are conducting.
As an emerging sub-field within psychology, it is quite a challenge to have a fixed definition 
of what community psychology is and many would argue that we have several ‘community 
psychologies’ (Fryer and Laing 2008). As it is context dependent, community psychology that 
works well in one context may not be suitable for another context and indigenous scholarship is 

Ibrahim Makkawi
422
expected to facilitate the development of what community psychology works for what context. 
Proposing the development of a context specific sub-discipline that requires local production 
of knowledge, in an academic environment that is ‘alienated from indigenous epistemology’ 
(Abouchedid 2006: 1) and continues to import and uncritically apply ‘colonial knowledge’, is 
not only challenging but also risks the possibility of strengthening the already existing confusion 
in mental health practices mentioned above.
The program is inspired by the assumption that the individual’s psychological well-being 
in this colonial context is to a large extent an outcome of the ongoing Zionist colonization, 
oppression, repression, and exploitation. It is essential to examine how the ongoing occupa-
tion, military violence, the creation of the colonialist separation wall, checkpoints, economic 
embargo, the rise of poverty, imprisonment and torture, assassination and killing, school closures, 
and the systematic destruction of the Palestinian community’s infrastructure all play a significant 
role in the severity of people’s mental ill-health and the increase in risk factors. Consequences 
of these factors include but are not limited to disempowerment, poor community prevention, 
delinquency, child labour, high-risk behaviours, aggression, domestic violence, school violence, 
substance abuse, and many other harmful mental health problems. The key premise is that while 
working with groups and communities within this oppressive context, we emphasize that ulti-
mately the process of community critical conscientization (Freire 1970) is by and in itself a process 
of psychological liberation and mental health promotion.
Community psychology enactment at Birzeit University is envisioned as praxis focusing on 
community participatory action research about context-specific issues within the Palestinian colo-
nial context. Realizing that empirical research about colonial policies, military violence, oppres-
sion, and community mental health in the WBG has been dominated by positivistic, reductionist, 
mainstream quantitative research methodologies with pre-determined categories and hypothesis 
testing (Haj-Yahia 2007), earlier research projects in the Birzeit program opted for a critical shift in 
their methodology and research questions. We took the challenge of shifting our general approach 
to research and knowledge construction to be more consistent with indigenous methodologies 
(Smith 1999) conducted by our students as indigenous researchers with already ‘built-in’ sensi-
tivity to the local community’s culture and aspirations. We framed our emerging research efforts 
in the broader theoretical, epistemological, and methodological tools of the Grounded Theory 
tradition (Glaser and Strauss 1967) due to its flexibility and relevance to inductive exploration of 
newly researched areas. Furthermore, the question of collective-national identity, which has been 
traditionally neglected in the trauma research in Palestine, was placed in the foreground of a num-
ber of student research projects. This allowed for the emergence of context-specific knowledge 
that may illuminate our understanding of the local social problems, rather than mere implemen-
tations of mainstream models which were developed in foreign contexts.
Conclusion
In illuminating the existence of Marxian currents in Latin American community psychology 
in comparison to US community psychology, Gokani (2011: 113) emphasizes that in Latin 
America ‘community psychology emerged from the efforts of community organizers, activists, 
and community members pushing to be heard . . . and the need for academics to respond to 
social justice issues affecting the community’. By analogy, the Palestinian grassroots movement in 
the WBG, prior to and during the first Intifada in 1987 remarkably resembles community level 
action and organizing in Latin America that led to the academic development of community 
psychology during the 1970s and 1980s (Martín-Baró 1994 ; Montero 2008). Regrettably, Pal-
estinian academic psychology at that time failed to respond to community grassroots action and 

Critical psychology in the Arab world 
423
enactment of community psychology. Instead, the Oslo agreement and the subsequent expan-
sion of the NGOs network in the WBG thwarted the development of academic community 
psychology in Palestine. Despite this historical shift, which renders the phenomenon of grass-
roots community action something from the past, the vision and roots of the emerging program 
of community psychology at Birzeit University can be located in community level organizing 
and collective action from the era of the first Intifada
Responding to the social and psychological ramifications of an entrenched settler-colonial 
condition, Palestinian universities in the WBG have been consistently called upon to develop 
and implement academic programs that would not only train younger generation of Palestinian 
students for future job opportunities, but also and more importantly develop programs that 
would contribute to community survival and resilience, and play leading roles in the process 
of nation building and self-determination. It is our realization that colonialism and colonial 
practices constitute the most oppressive and direct cause of community mental health problems 
that led to the establishment of the community psychology program at Birzeit University. An 
expanded account of the argument presented in this chapter, together with examples of critical 
community interventions in Palestine, can be found in Makkawi (2015).
Far from being conceived as distinct and set apart from the rest of the Arab World, the emerg-
ing paradigm of critical community psychology within the Palestinian colonial context will 
hopefully challenge academic psychologists throughout the Arab World to begin problematizing 
taken-for-granted mainstream colonial epistemologies of psychology we import and acritically 
implement in our research, teaching, and practice.
Further reading
Ahmed, R. and Gielen, U. (1998) Psychology in the Arab Countries. Menoufia, Egypt: Menoufia University Press.
Mazawi, A. and Sultana, R. (eds) (2010) Education in the Arab World: Political projects, Struggles and Geometries 
of Power. New York: Routledge.
Website resources
Arab Psychological Network: http://www.arabpsynet.com
Birzeit University for link to Community Psychology: http://www.birzeit.edu
References
Abouchedid, K. (2006) ‘The state of academic apartheid in Arab universities: a radical pedagogical analysis’, 
The Near and Middle Eastern Journal of Research in Education, 1(1), 1–10.
Ahmed, R. and Gielin, U. (1998) Psychology in the Arab Countries. Menoufia: Menoufia University Press.
Bakeer, R. (2012) Changes in social cohesion and psychological sense of community in the Palestinian context between 
the first Intifada and the current era. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Birzeit University, Palestine.
Bruhn, C. (2006) ‘Higher education as empowerment: the case of Palestinian universities’, American Behav-
ioral Scientist, 49(8), 1125–1142.
Bulhan, H. (1985) Frantz Fanon and the Psychology of Oppression. New York: Plenum Press.
Fanon, F. (1963) The Wretched of the Earth. New York: Grove Press.
Farraj, K. (2001) ‘Review: psychology in the Arab countries’, International Journal of Group Tensions, 30(3), 
281–282.
Freire, P. (1970) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Continuum.
Fryer, D. and Laing, A. (2008) ‘Community psychologies: What are they? What could they be? Why does it 
matter: a critical community psychology approach’, The Australian Psychologist, 20(2), 7–15.
Giacaman, R. (2004) Psycho-social/mental health care in occupied Palestinian Territories: the embryonic system. 
Ramallah: The Institute of Community and Public Health.

Ibrahim Makkawi
424
Glaser, B. and Strauss, A. (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. New 
Brunswick: Aldine Transaction.
Gokani, R. (2011) ‘Marxian currents in Latin and North American community psychology’, Annual Review 
of Critical Psychology, 9, 110–117.
Haj-Yahia, M. (2007) ‘Challenges in studying the psychological effects of Palestinian children’s exposure to 
political violence and their coping with this traumatic experience’, Child Abuse and Neglect, 31, 691–697.
Hiltermann, J (1991) Behind the Intifada: Labor and Women’s Movements in the Occupied Territories. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hussein, Y. (2005) ‘The stone or the pen: Palestinian education during the intifada’, Radical Teacher, 74, 
17–22.
Hwang, K. (2005) ‘A philosophical reflection on the epistemology and methodology of indigenous psy-
chologies’, Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 8, 5–17.
Jinadu, A. (1976) ‘Language and politics: on the cultural basis of colonialism’, Cahiers d’Études Africaines, 
16(3–4), 603–614.
Makkawi, I. (2004) ‘National identity development among Palestinian student activists in the Israeli univer-
sities’, International Journal of Educational Policy, Research and Practice, 5(2), 19–59
Makkawi, I. (2009) ‘Towards an emerging paradigm of critical community psychology in Palestine’, Journal 
of Critical Psychology, Counselling and Psychotherapy, 9(2), 75–86.
Makkawi, I. (2015) ‘Community psychology enactments in Palestine: roots and current manifestations’, 
Journal of Community Psychology, 43(1), 63–75.
Martín-Baró, I. (1994) Writing for Liberation Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mazawi, A. (1994) ‘Teachers’ role patterns and the mediation of sociopolitical change: the case of Palestinian 
Arab school teachers’, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 15(4), 497–514.
Melikian, L. (1984) ‘The transfer of psychological knowledge to third world countries and its impact on 
development: the case of five Arab Gulf oil producing states’, International Journal of Psychology, 19, 65–77.
Montero, M. (2008) ‘An insider look at the development and current state of community psychology in 
Latin America’, Journal of Community Psychology, 36(5), 661–674.
Morris, B. (1989) The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem, 1947–1949. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Mossakowski, K. (2003) ‘Coping with perceived discrimination: does ethnic identity protect mental 
health?’,  Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 44(9), 318–331.
Nasser, R. and Abouchedid, K. (2007) ‘The academic “Patras” of the Arab world: creating a climate of aca-
demic apartheid’, PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies, 4(1), 1–18.
Parker, I. (2007) ‘Critical psychology: what it is and what it is not’, Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 
1(1), 1–15.
Phinney, J. (1995) ‘Ethnic identity and self-esteem: a review and integration’, in A. Padilla (ed.) Hispanic 
Psychology: Critical Issues in Theory in Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Prothro, T. and Melikian, L. (1955) ‘Psychology in the Arab Near East’, Psychological Bulletin, 52(4), 303–310.
Qassoum, M. (2002, December) ‘Aborting the revolution: imperial agendas, “civil society” and global 
manipulation’, Between the Lines, http://www.ism-italia.org/wp-content/uploads/Aborting-the- 
Revolution-Imperial-Agendas-Civil-Society-and-Global-Manipulation-Mufid-Qassoum-De 
cember-2002-Between-the-Lines.pdf
Qouta, S. and El-Sarraj, E. (2002) ‘Community mental health as practiced by the Gaza Community Mental 
Health Program’, in J. Joong (ed.) Trauma, War, and Violence: Public Mental Health in Socio-cultural Context. 
New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Rouhana, N. (2011) ‘The colonial condition: is partition possible in Palestine?’, Jadal Mada al-Carmel, 10, 1–5.
Samara, A. (2001) Epidemics of Globalization: Ventures in World Order, Arab Nation and Zionism. Glendale, CA: 
Palestine Research and Publishing Foundation.
Seedat, M. and Lazarus, S. (2011) ‘Community psychology in South Africa: origins, developments, and 
manifestations’, Journal of Community Psychology, 39(3), 241–257.
Shaheen, N. (2004) Palestinian Higher Education: a Critical Look. [in Arabic]. Ramallah: Muwatin.
Smith, L. T. (1999) Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous People. London: Zed Books Ltd.
Soueif, M. and Ahmed, R. (2001) ‘Psychology in the Arab World: past, present, and future’, International 
Journal of Group Tensions, 30(3), 211–240.
World Health Organization (2006) WHO-aims report on mental health system in the WBG. WHO and Min-
istry of Health Palestinian National Authority.

425
Marx writes in the section on ‘The Method of Political Economy’ in the Grundrisse: ‘even the 
most abstract categories, despite their validity – precisely because of their abstractness – for all 
epochs, are nevertheless, in the specific character of this abstraction, themselves likewise a product 
of historic relations, and possess their full validity only for and within these relations’ (1993: 105). 
Marx had in mind the category of labour. Mind, psyche, reason, madness, health, and also Asia are, 
however, no exceptions. They are the product of historical relations and possess their full validity 
only for and within these relations. Medicine, psychiatry, psychology, and the clinic also need to 
be seen within the ‘historical constitution of [their] own practices’ and the ‘political-economic 
conditions in which [they] became possible’ (Parker 2011:1), and also the discourse within which 
they grew roots (Foucault 2006). The ‘invention of the mind’ by Descartes as ‘mirror of nature’ 
(Rorty 1979: 357) and the ‘Cartesian progression of doubt’ as the condition of the ‘great exor-
cism of madness’ (Foucault 2006: 244) would therefore serve as philosophical signposts and 
historical roadmaps in our foray into critical psychology in Asia.
Critical psychology in the rest of the world
This chapter is faced with a dual problem – the problem of ‘critical psychology’ and the prob-
lem of ‘Asia’. One may ask: why are these two seen as a problem? Primarily because I do not 
wish to take them as a priori or as given; and I believe the dialectical relation between the two 
shall give me a sense of what I could call critical psychology in Asia. I wish to ask: what is critical 
psychology, ask it yet again in the context of Asia and again in light of the ‘Four theses and seven 
misconceptions’ (Parker and Burman 2008). I also wish to ask, what is Asia, again, in a somewhat 
interminable manner. Where is the idea of Asia coming from? What are its antecedents? What 
is the genealogy of Asia (see ‘Imagining Asia: A Genealogical Analysis’ by Wang Hui)? What 
happens to critical psychology when it comes to Asia? What is the kind of critical psychology 
that is born in Asia? How many face(t)s of critical psychology are there then in Asia? Between 
absorbed versions and in-born versions? Between Japan on the one hand, and Turkey on the 
other, where Turkey could be seen as a promontory of Asia only? Between Buddhist Sri Lanka 
and communist China? Between a violent Sri Lanka and an equally violent China? Between a 
westward-facing Japan and Turkey – the first turned towards the USA and the second towards 
44
‘Critical psychology in Asia’
Four fundamental concepts
Anup Dhar

Anup Dhar
426
Europe? Where is India in all this, given two hundred years of British colonialism? And where 
are the Philippines, New Zealand, Sri Lanka, and Iran? Further, what are the ‘(four) fundamental 
concepts’ (see Lacan 1977/1998) of critical psychology – between New Zealand, on the one 
hand and Turkey, on the other?
Critical psychology of the world of the rest
This section of the chapter sets up the ‘camera angle’ from which I shall explore and perhaps 
interrogate the question of critical psychology in and of Asia. I would like to make a distinction 
between ‘in’ and ‘of’ Asia: ‘in’ is indicative of location – hence the question, is there critical psy-
chology in Asia?; ‘of’ is indicative of character – does critical psychology in Asia have a character 
distinctive of Asia? What would it mean to have a character distinctive of Asia or to have an Asian 
character; given that Asia is not One?
To make sense of these two questions, I take off from Derrida’s assertion in Geopsychoanal-
ysis: ‘. . . and the rest of the world’: ‘there is practically no psychoanalysis in Asia, or in the South 
Seas’ (could Derrida have made a similar assertion with respect to critical psychology in Asia?). 
One would like to ask: why would he say this? Is it because he is unaware of the presence of 
psychoanalysis in Asia? Or is it because he actually thinks ‘psychoanalysis has never set foot’ on 
Asian soil (this being the question of location)? Or is it because here psychoanalysis ‘has never 
taken off its European shoes’ (this being the question of character)? Is it because as Derrida says 
‘De facto and de jure African [or Asian] psychoanalysis was European, structurally defined in 
the profoundest way by the colonial state apparatus’? Is it because much of Asian or African 
psychoanalysis were ‘merely emanations of what we used (how accurately!) to call ‘metropolitan 
organizations’? (1998: 69).
Derrida also raises the question of naming in institutionalized psychoanalysis (naming a part, a 
fragment, of the global work of critical psychology as Asian is a crucial aspect of this chapter). He 
marks the relative absence of the ‘rest of the world’ in psychoanalysis’s global cartography (this 
chapter, however, is an attempt to make space for not just the ‘rest of the world’ but the ‘world 
of the rest’, and the worldview(s) of the rest in the larger map of critical psychology). Derrida 
begins the piece with the International Psychoanalytic Association’s proposed Constitution of 
1977 (ratified by the Thirtieth Congress in Jerusalem), which contains a ‘parenthetical sentence’ 
which attempts to ‘map the divisions of the psychoanalytic world’. The map is as follows: ‘The 
Association’s main geographical areas are defined at this time as America north of the United 
States-Mexican border; all America south of that border; and the rest of the world’ (italics mine).
It is the ‘rest of the world’ that animates Derrida; it is the ‘world of the rest’ that animates 
me. He asks: why does the rest of the world remain unnamed in the Constitution? Or more 
particularly, why does ‘Latin America’ remain unnamed? This, according to Derrida, is a ‘psy-
choanalytic colonization of a non-American rest-of-the-world, the conquest of a virgin-
ity parenthetically married to Europe’. This leads to first what Derrida calls in Negotiations a 
‘homo-hegemonization’ of the rest of the world (to me it is the hegemonization of the world 
of the rest). It also means attention to (cultural) particularity is seriously compromised; even in 
his naming of ‘Latin America’ Derrida falters; it appears there is no psychoanalysis in the rest of 
the world; the world of the rest remain barren in terms of the production of ‘theories of mental 
life’. It appears all of psychoanalysis, even if present, is European, or a derivative of the European, 
which is why perhaps naming is never enough; one has to work through given names, inherited 
names, look for unknown names, and at times re-name. Otherwise the work and world of the 
rest would look like a slightly modified or displaced version of the European/American Origi-
nal. One needs to ask: how have the ‘rest’ received psychoanalysis (or critical psychology) in the 

‘Critical psychology in Asia’
427
rest of the world? What has it done to the world of the rest? What has the world of the rest done 
to psychoanalysis (or critical psychology)?
How do I make sense of the above discussion – a discussion premised on (the absence and 
presence of ) psychoanalysis in Asia (and Africa)? How do I bring to bear the above discussion 
on the question of critical psychology in Asia? How do I map the difficult work of critical psy-
chology in Asia? Taking off from the above, two sets of questions take shape: first, is there critical 
psychology in Asia? Has critical psychology ‘set foot’ on Asian soil? This is, of course, not to see 
the question of critical psychology in Asia from an expansionist standpoint. Second, has it ‘taken 
off its European shoes’, leading in turn to two further questions: (a) has it taken off mainstream 
psychology’s European shoes? It appears it has. (b) Has it also taken off critical psychology’s 
European shoes? Has it become critical psychology of Asia? Has it produced something differ-
ent from what Derrida calls ‘metropolitan organizations’? Perhaps it would be meaningful to 
look at critical psychology in Asia from the standpoint of marking difference with respect to the 
usual preoccupations of both mainstream psychology and critical psychology in the metropolis, 
deferring not just what was psychology, but perhaps what one meant by critical psychology as 
well. In that sense, would ‘critical psychology in Asia’ be critical of western European critical 
psychology as well?
One needs to ask in this context, what makes the knowledge and practice of psychology 
‘critical’? Does the qualitative turn make it critical? Does the political turn make it critical? Which 
kind of political philosophy makes it critical? Post-Marxism? Post-structuralist feminism? How 
should the imagination of psychology ‘beyond the limits of bourgeois society be achieved’ 
(Dafermos and Marvakis 2006)? Does the cultural turn make it critical? Does a turn to the local 
or the indigenous make it critical? Or does a reflection on the history, philosophy, and sociology 
of psychology make it critical?
Teo (1999: 121) delineates four forms of critical psychology: ‘(a) critical theoretical psy-
chology, (b) critical theoretical psychology with a practical emancipatory intention, (c) critical 
empirical psychology, and (d) critical applied psychology’. Which form did Asian critical psy-
chology take? Which form designates critical psychology in Asia?
One therefore needs to ask, what gives character to what I have designated critical psychol-
ogy of Asia or Asian critical psychology? Location? Or character? Critique of (feudal) traditions? 
Turn to the indigenous, and ‘indigenous renaissance’; a revitalizing of critical biculturalism? Or 
a dual critique – critique of both the Occident and the Orientalist reconstruction of the Ori-
ent – critique of both the hegemonic Occident and the Occident’s hegemonic description of 
the Orient – critique of both the West’s hegemonic principles and principles (emanating from 
either the West or from the East) that hegemonize the East? The somewhat aggressive turn to 
the indigenous has its own problems, as demonstrated by Wai (2013) in the Chinese and Hong 
Kong context (‘Indian psychology’ shall have much to learn from this kind of critical relation 
with the turn to indigenous culture):
psychologists in academia were aware of the hegemony of American Psychology and 
started the indigenous psychology movement in 1970s. This Nationalism-fueled movement 
was critical at first, yet it was later found that the simulacrum of ‘Chinese-ness’ (signified by 
the Confucianism-Taoism-Buddhism triad) led ‘indigenous psychology’ to fall into the trap 
of positivism and essentialism. ‘Indigenous Psychology’ became everything that involved 
non-‘Western’ participants, any research topics that involved ‘non-Western’ themes, and 
at times referred to any research articles that included vast citations of ancient texts (e.g. 
Confucian Dialect). This illustrates the worst possibility of what ‘critical psychology’ could 
be, confining itself to the reformist ‘neopsychology’ dogma. Here the author calls for an 

Anup Dhar
428
anti-psychology underground. With a slightly disturbing anti-APA formatting writing style, 
the author refuses any essentializing attempt. The deliberate choice of a forgotten ‘Chinese’ 
philosophical root (Gongsun Longzi) represent a humble salute to Gilles Deleuze and Félix 
Guattari’s schizoanalysis.
(Wai 2013: 279)
Wai calls for an anti-psychology Grundrisse: ‘critical psychology is not psychology – and the 
proposition is not proposed negatively’ (2013: 278). This attitude – and Wai calls it the ‘critical’ 
attitude – could also form the perspective from which one examines tradition, indigenism, 
nativism, and Asian religions like Buddhism. Which is why it is not enough to envisage critical 
psychology from a Buddhist perspective (Vithanapathirana 2013: 870–885) in the Asian context, 
but to reimagine Buddhism from a critical perspective, reconceptualize why Buddhism ‘focused 
on the problem of dukkha and its cessation (nirodha)’ and the theory of ‘dependent origination’ 
comes to stand for peace in Tibet and statism-violence-repression in Sri Lanka and Burma. 
Which is why it is never enough to say that ‘in Sri Lanka there is no academic discipline called 
critical psychology; . . . Buddhism offers a complete psychological package’ (Vithanapathirana 
2013: 873). One perhaps needs to judge the limits of knowledge which are produced by various 
psychologies, including Buddhist psychology, Chinese psychology, and Indian psychology in 
the Asian context. The task of critical psychology is to work on what Marx or Freud would 
call ‘the secret thereof’ and disclose ‘the blanks, silences and absences’ in knowledge by reading 
its symptoms (Wang 2013: 265). Asian critical psychology thus bears the double burden-bind of 
recovering, recuperating, and foregrounding the ‘Asian’ while at the same time putting under 
erasure ‘Asia’ or rendering deconstructive ‘Asian’ metaphysics.
Further, to ‘what extent are [Asian] psychological knowledge and practice culturally and his-
torically constructed, and how may alternative [Asian] approaches confirm or resist the ideolog-
ical assumptions in mainstream [western] models’ (Parker 2007)? It is here that the problematic 
of imported psychology can be invoked; for example, modern psychology in China, or for that 
matter, India ‘did not grow out of an indigenous socio-cultural root, but was instead imported 
from Western countries approximately during 1876 to 1922, when China was being colonized 
and reformed’. Critical psychology in Asia hence bears the added burden of  ‘decolonising research’  
(Smith 1999) and making space for indigenous ways of knowing, though a critique of Eurocen-
trism: for example, in New Zealand, the critique of the dominance of Pa¯keha¯ epistemological 
assumptions and cultural practices (Robertson 2004). The need for negotiated spaces that enable 
diverse and collaborative relationships between indigenous Ma¯ori and colonial Pa¯keha¯ ways of 
knowing is the agenda for decolonizing knowledge practices, and the possibility of negotiating 
spaces for Pacific peoples (Mila-Schaaf and Hudson 2009). Discourse analysis, on the one hand, 
of the ‘contemporary language of racism’ (Tuffin 2013: 57), characterized not by ‘blunt negativ-
ity’, but by sinuous speech, ambivalence and contradiction (this is important because ‘race talk’, 
as Tuffin (2013: 57) shows, now resides ‘in the language of apparent racelessness’) and work on 
‘locality of psychological epistemologies’ (Huygens 2009; Larner 2003) emerges as a critical psy-
chology agenda (in New Zealand and why not in Asia as well) as against the ‘politically neutral, 
asocial version of psychology’ (Tuffin 2005).
Wai (2013: 278), on the other hand, sees critical psychology as an ‘anti-positivist stand’ and 
an ‘anti-hegemonic attitude’; it is not an essentialized outfit; furthermore, for Wai (2013: 278), if 
critical psychology is a ‘movement instead of [being] an establishment, then public involvement 
is surely sine qua non’. Critical psychology in Asia is thus, at a more abstract level, an impossible 
dialogue between post-positivist epistemologies, turn to discourse subjectivity-phenomenology, 
politicization, praxis, and the question of (white and brown) Orientalism (Chaudhury 1994), 

‘Critical psychology in Asia’
429
the historical contours of which can be teased out with some difficulty as Bo Wang (2013: 257) 
suggests. Wang is of the opinion that there is ‘no such thing as critical psychology (even if in 
its plural form) in China which aims to react against mainstream psy-sciences’. Now why does 
Wang say this? Is it because there is no complete, closed, or coherent corpus, a corpus that could 
be easily delineated, and that could be designated ‘critical psychology in/of Asia’? Is it because, 
as Wang feels, ‘the development of Chinese psychology shares overlapping issues with critical psy-
chology’? Fozooni (2006) shares with Wang a similar concern:
Oh, boy! This is gonna be a tough one! All things considered I would rather be writing the 
fifth volume of Marx’s Das Kapital or the genealogy of lesbianism in the Khomeini clan 
than a critique of the Iranian psy-complex. And since the nemesis of this psy-complex (i.e., 
Iranian Critical Psychology) does not yet exist as a coherent body of thought and action, 
I have no choice but to conjure it up as we go along.
This is also the method – the method of conjuring – Dhar and Siddiqui (2013: 506–547) have 
followed so as to work at the uncertain edge(s) of mainstream psychology to see where psychol-
ogy turns critical; one could also call it, as Wang suggests, ‘working at the borders’. Working at the 
borders could be a way of going about understanding critical psychology (or critical psycholo-
gies) in Asia. Critical psychology could be motivated by a philosophical ethos of ‘limit attitude’, 
which also means being at the borders. It brings to mind what Michel Foucault (1997) suggests 
in ‘What is Enlightenment?’: ‘Criticism indeed consists of analyzing and reflecting upon limits’. 
In this chapter, as we ask, ‘What is critical psychology in/of Asia?’ limit-thinking – thinking the limits 
of the mainstream determinants of psychology, including perhaps those of critical psychology –  
has been a methodology without guarantee.
Also, in modern capitalist Western societies, critical psychology is often understood as related 
to questions of social justice (Fox and Prilleltensky 1997; Hook, Kiguwa, and Mkhize 2004; 
Prilleltensky 2001). Critical psychology is to transform psychology into an emancipatory, radi-
cal, social-justice-seeking, or status-quo-resisting approach that understands psychological issues 
as taking place in specific political-economic or cultural-historical contexts. However, in the 
Asian context, critical psychology is often marked by a tripartite critique: (1) critique of the 
capital-modernism axis, (2) ‘refuting the feudal ideology’ and coordinates of tradition, and (3) 
critique of the ‘neglect of indigenization’ in psychology and an examination of the encounter 
and exchange of Western psychological episteme in Asian cultural ecology, and as perhaps a 
doubled up fourth, critique of, on the one hand, neoliberalism and on the other, pop versions 
of religion and spirituality. I, however, remain torn, as I try to set up a map, a contour of critical 
psychology in Asia, between what Painter (2013) has succinctly designated as impulses of pro-
vincializing and worlding, as globalizing impulses and indigenist impulses, and what Nandy (2004: 
324–338) calls ‘uncritical cultural relativism’ and universalism.
Critical psychology (in Asia) is not psychology!
APA formatting is not only an editorial style. It’s a limit, it’s a curse, it’s a way of thinking, 
and it’s a worldview. The linear flow of introduction → literature review → methodology 
→ major arguments → evidence → discussions → conclusions allure critical psychologists 
to fall into the trap of hypothetical-deductive positivistic hegemonic psychology.
(Wai, 2013)

Anup Dhar
430
Let us recapitulate and make one last move to a post-methodological impulse-impasse. The 
possible positions with respect to critical psychology in Asia that emerge from the above are: 
(1) There is critical psychology in Asia, (2) There is not just critical psychology in Asia; there is 
critical psychology of Asia; there is an Asian version of critical psychology, (3) There is no such 
thing as critical psychology in Asia because (a) Critical psychology in Asia has not yet taken off 
its European shoes; hence there is no critical psychology of Asia, (b) There is no separate corpus 
called critical psychology; critical psychology is glimpsed at only the borders, the margins and 
edges of mainstream psychology, and (c) There is critical psychology in Asia; but much of it is 
about anti-capitalism, anti-colonialism, feminism, homosexual rights, minority rights, etc.
Critical psychology in Asia ‘often fails to inspire faith in a post-methodology spirit’ (Wai 2013: 
280). It adopts history, discourse analysis, and qualitative research methods as ‘neo-methodologies’. 
But does it fail to move beyond what could be called ‘methodological thinking’? Does it fail to 
become post-methodological? This is important because critical psychology is also a call for 
‘heterogeneous psychologies’; critical psychology is an antithesis to ‘hegemonic psychology’. 
Wai asks: does the retention of methodology – even in its newer forms – retain the hegemony 
of hegemonic psychology – i.e. retain the hegemony of One even in the many? To what extent 
should critical psychology tolerate the One in the many? To what extend should critical psy-
chologies tolerate psychology itself? Further, if critical psychology cannot reconceptualize the 
priest-like status of a sexologist, or the doctor-like status of the healer, or the clinical nature of 
care it may fail to make a difference. Therefore ‘critical psychologists’ can’t be ‘psychologists’, by 
definition or by general practices. Psychology refers to the scope of an academic discipline, and 
‘critical’ is an attitude (Wai 2013: 280). The search for critical psychology (in Asia or elsewhere) 
is thus a paradoxical search, a search that is bound to frustrate the researcher.
Critical psychology in Asia in neoliberal times
Marvakis (2012) points out that neoliberalization is not (only) about ‘cutting off’ some social 
welfare and/or getting less money for one’s work. Neoliberalization constitutes a completely 
different conceptualization of (organized) society and, along with that, new forms of subjectivity, 
grounded on what he calls a ‘new – a neo-liberal – anthropology’. He asks: ‘we are witnessing 
a Great Experiment in the making of a new neoliberal humanity through the crisis. Will the 
neoliberal model of what it is to be a human being become definitive for the next fifty years?’ If 
so, how would critical psychology in Asia respond to this change, this transition to the neoliberal 
anthropology? This is a question for the future to come.
The new mantra in neoliberal times is: psychologize. Psychologize all kinds of behaviour and 
mental states that are not in tune with the requirements of a corporate culture; psychologize all 
kinds of non-standard deviations; psychologize anything out of sync with the neoliberal ethos; 
psychologize all kinds of existences that lack ‘killer instinct’; psychologize lack of competitive-
ness, or efficiency; psychologize any kind of attention-deficit in the child; and when the child or 
the adult wilts under an incessant pressure to perform, when one fails to deliver or live up to the 
efficiency index, and to expectations, psychologize even the breakdown; call it ‘stress’ and thera-
peutize in turn the breakdown, the vulnerability. The trope of one’s own ‘patienthood’ deployed 
by post-Freudians acquires new meaning and power under ‘banalised versions of programmes of 
mental and moral improvement designed to get people back to work and ensure that they are 
docile’ (Parker 2011: 7).
In other words, the history of unreason is no more the mere history of either absence-ing, or 
stigmatization-pathologization. It is no more a simple history of the ghettoization of unreason. 
It is no more a history of the ‘putting outside’ or the putting aside of unreason. It is no more 

‘Critical psychology in Asia’
431
the history of putting into the asylum or prison or reformatory any trace of unreason in the 
social order. Modern European man had reduced unreason to first the ‘lacking other of reason’ 
and then to florid madness; the history of unreason was thus largely the history of madness. 
The late modern man, the globalized man, treats unreason at home, at school, at the workplace, 
and only at times in the clinic; he treats unreason even over the telephone. He treats unreason 
not as madness. He does not relegate unreason to the asylum or the ghetto. He does not forget 
unreason. He remembers unreason every moment, at every site: home, family, school, college, and 
workplace. He, in actuality, never lets the leash off unreason.
Counsel: counsel the single for their singlehood, counsel the couple for their coupledom, 
counsel the married, counsel the unmarried, counsel the sexual for being sexual, counsel the 
asexual for being asexual, counsel the rearing mother, counsel the rear-unhappy mother, counsel 
the child reared in school, counsel the teenager for being erratic, counsel the student for absen-
teeism and low grades, counsel the worker for being discontent, counsel the old for being old. 
Enter the bedroom, the inner world of every expression or irruption of unreason. Enter its bed-
rock; its bed. Don’t drag it out. Don’t throw it out of the social. Enter instead its private world. 
Do not exclude it. Include it instead. Exclusion is a thing of the past. Inclusion is the new avatar 
of hegemony. Not inclusion per se, but exclusion by inclusion. It is through incessant remem-
bering, and an incitement to discourse around unreason, that neoliberal psychology forgets the 
experience of unreason. How will critical psychology in Asia respond to this new challenge: the 
neoliberal discourse of psychology?
Conclusion: the four, five, or six fundamental concepts
What are then the fundamentals, in the broad sense of the term, of critical psychology in Asia? 
‘Which amounts to saying – what grounds it as praxis’ (Lacan 1998: 6)? Lacan asks in Seminar 
XI: ‘what conceptual status must we give to four of the terms introduced by Freud as funda-
mental concepts, namely, the unconscious, repetition, the transference and the drive’ (1998: 12). 
What could then be the four fundamental concepts of critical psychology in Asia? Based on 
the above discussion the possible four could be: (1) decolonizing, indigenizing, and defamiliar-
izing (Kumar and Mills 2013: 549–576) psychology in Asia, which also entails a provincializing 
of Anglo-American psychology; where ‘decolonization is to be sought side-by-side with the 
constructive work of proposing indigenous psychology as alternative to Western Psychology’ 
(Paredes-Canilao and Babaran-Diaz 2013: 774); (2) Limit thinking, where limit thinking is both 
about the thinking of limits and the limits of thinking, somewhat like the limits of love (or trans-
ference) and the limits of knowledge (or Consciousness) in Seminar XX (Lacan 1998); (3) Dual 
Critique (critique of both modernism and tradition); and (4) Post-methodological perspectives.
I would however like to add a fifth: abOriginalization. The abOriginalizing impulse has in 
it two related moves – one is to ab-Originalize, i.e. put ‘under erasure’ the origin, or render 
‘genealogical’/’archaeological’ that which presences itself as the origin(al); in other words, it is a 
post-structuralizing impulse; and the other is to aboriginal-ize. One can ask, isn’t ab-Originalizing 
a kind of aboriginalizing too?: yes and no. Isn’t aboriginalizing a kind of ab-Originalizing?: yes 
and no. Yes and no, because one is the necessary condition of the other, but not the sufficient 
condition. Post-structuralizing is a kind of possible culturalizing, and culturalizing could be a 
kind of post-structuralizing. However, there is no guarantee that one would lead to the other. 
One hence needs to keep the work of culturalizing alive in post-structuralism and the work of 
post-structuralizing alive in the cultural turn. The somewhat limited review of the rather complex 
field and work of critical psychology in Asia – albeit never One kind of work – albeit intensely 
disaggregated and decentred in their work-character – albeit immensely variegated – seems to 

Anup Dhar
432
be torn, productively torn, nevertheless, between a culturalizing of the post-structuralist turn in 
psychology, inclusive of a turn to ‘political psychology’ (including critical-emancipatory social 
science) and a post-structuralizing of the cultural turn in Asian psychology.
The above problematic of ab-Originalization and aboriginalization can perhaps be better 
represented in the language of  ‘liberated and liberating psychology’, expressed in the Filipino terms 
malaya (liberated) and mapagpalaya (liberating), in Paredes-Canilao and Babaran-Diaz (2013: 
765–783), that according to them would not just resist the hegemony of western paradigms 
(or Freudian psychoanalysis) but also desist the ‘homogenization of critical psychology’. Using 
the broad outlines of critical-emancipatory social science, Paredes-Canilao and Babaran-Diaz 
(2013) argue that Sikolohiyang Pilipino ‘was meant and has proven to be a liberated and liberating 
psychology (literally malaya at mapagpalayang sikolohiya), and may therefore be a unique type of 
critical psychology in the Philippine setting’.
With respect to method, Paredes-Canilao and Babaran-Diaz first examine the academic and 
cultural circumstances that led to the movement of Sikolohiyang Pilipino, then describe its aims, 
methodologies, advocacies, and theoretical contributions and how these resulted in the establish-
ment of professional organizations, research programs, and curricular offerings. They show how
the movement from the traditional academic psychology as taught in the universities was 
brought about by dissatisfaction with too much emphasis on Western theories particu-
larly on the tendency to emulate the scientific method to examine human phenomena. 
The end of the colonization period in the Philippines brought with it the beginning of a 
post-colonial psychology that focused on indigenous knowledge, practices, and methods.
(765)
Liberated psychology is made possible by its decolonization component, while its being liberating 
is made possible through its indigenization component. Does the dialectic, or perhaps the Moe-
bius, of the liberated and the liberating represent much of the nature and character, and also the 
predicament of critical psychology in/of Asia?
Further reading
Dafermos, M., Marvakis, A., Mentinis, M., Painter, D. and Triliva, S. (2013) ‘Critical Psychology in a Chang-
ing World: building bridges and expanding the dialogue’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 10.
Dafermos, M., Marvakis, A. and Triliva, S. (2006). ‘Critical Psychology in a Changing World (Contributions 
from different geo-political regions)’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5.
Website resources
Critical Psychology (online version): http://www.academia.edu/1984125/Critical_psychology_online_ 
version_
CUSP: Critical Cultures and Cultural Critiques in Psychology: http://www.cuspthejournal.com/
References
Chaudhury, A. (1994) ‘On Colonial Hegemony: toward a critique of brown orientalism’, Rethinking Marx-
ism: A Journal of Economics, Culture and Society, 7(4), 44–58.
Dafermos, M. and Marvakis, A. (2006) ‘Critiques in psychology – critical psychology’, Annual Review of 
Critical Psychology, 5, 1–20.
Derrida, J. (1998) ‘Geopsychoanalysis: and “the rest of the world” ’, in C. Lane (ed.) The Psychoanalysis of 
Race. New York: Columbia University Press.

‘Critical psychology in Asia’
433
Dhar, A. and Siddiqui, S. (2013) ‘At the edge of crucial psychology’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 
10, 506–548.
Foucault, M. (1997) ‘What is englightenment?’, in P. Rabinow (ed.) Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth. New York: 
New Press.
Foucault, M. (2006) History of Madness. London and New York: Routledge.
Fox, D. and Prilleltensky, I. (eds) (1997) Critical Psychology: An Introduction. London: Sage.
Fozooni, B. (2006) ‘Towards a critique of the Iranian psy-complex’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5, 
69–88.
Hook, D., Kiguwa, P. and Mkhize, N. (2004) Critical Psychology. Cape Town: University of Cape Town Press.
Huygens, I. (2009) ‘From colonization to globalization: continuities in colonial “common sense” ’, in  
D. Fox, I. Prilleltensky and S. Austin (eds) Critical Psychology (2nd Edn). London: Sage.
Kumar, M. and Mills, C. (2013) ‘Resounding echoes from afar: defamiliarizing psychology in India’, Annual 
Review of Critical Psychology, 10, 549–576.
Lacan, J. (1977/1998) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.
Lacan, J. (1998) The Seminar of Jacques Lacan. J-A. Miller (ed.) Book XX. On Feminine Sexuality: The Limits of 
Love and Knowledge . . . Encore (1972–1973). (trans. B. Fink). New York: W. W. Norton and Co.
Larner, G. (2003) ‘Towards a critical therapy’, International Journal of Critical Psychology, 7, 9–29.
Marvakis, A. (2012) ‘Psychology, Marxism, and economic crisis. Which crisis? Whose crisis?’, Paper pre-
sented at the 2nd Marxism and Psychology Conference, Morelia, Mexico: State University of Micho-
acán (Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo).
Mila-Schaaf, K. and Hudson, M. (2009) Negotiating Space for Indigenous Theorising in Pacific Mental Health and 
Addictions. Auckland: Le Va, Pasifika within Te Pou.
Nandy, A. (2004). Bonfire of Creeds: The Essential Ashis Nandy. Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
Paredes-Canilao and Babaran-Diaz, M. A. (2013) ‘Sikolohiyang Pilipino: 50 years of critical-emancipatory 
social science in the Philippines’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 10, 765–783.
Parker, I. (2007) ‘Critical psychology: What it is and what it is not’, Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 
1, 1–14.
Parker, I. (2011) Lacanian Psychoanalysis: Revolutions in Subjectivity. London and New York: Routledge.
Parker, I. and Burman, E. (2008) ‘Clinical psychology: four theses and seven misconceptions’, Hellenic Jour-
nal of Psychology, 5, 99–115.
Prilleltensky, I. (2001) ‘Value-based praxis in community psychology: moving toward social justice and 
social action’, American Journal of Community Psychology, 29(5), 747–778.
Robertson, N. R. (2004) ‘On equality and colorblindess’, Bulletin of the New Zealand Psychological Society, 
102, 26–27.
Rorty, R. (1979) Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Smith, L. T. (1999) Decolonising Methodologies: Researching and Indigenous Peoples. Dunedin: University of 
Otago Press.
Teo, T. (1999) ‘Methodologies of critical psychology: illustrations from the field of racism’, Annual Review 
of Critical Psychology, 1, 119–134.
Tuffin, K. (2005) Understanding Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Tuffin, K. (2013) ‘Studying racism in Aotearoa/New Zealand’ in Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 10, 
50–61.
Vithanapathirana, M. (2013) ‘Critical psychology in Sri Lanka: the Buddhist perspective’, Annual Review of 
Critical Psychology, 10, 870–885.
Wai, F. (2013) ‘Critical psychology is not psychology: an essay from the perspective of an ancient Chinese 
philosopher Gongsun Longzi written by a so-called Hong Kong psychologist’, Annual Review of Critical 
Psychology, 10, 277–292.
Wang, B. (2013) ‘Working at the borders: reconstructing the history of Chinese psychology from the per-
spective of critical psychology’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 10, 257–276.

434
In a recent study on traffic policies we learned about Ichihara Prison for Traffic Offenders, a 
groundbreaking initiative established in Japan in 1969 as a governmental response to a significant 
growth in traffic accidents ( Johnson 1991). Under the supervision of Haruo Sato, the first traffic 
warden who was also a psychologist, the authorities sought to make the prison’s environment 
as similar as possible to life in the free community. As stated in The White Paper on Transportation 
Safety in Japan ’85, traffic offenders are ‘allowed to enjoy a freedom of atmosphere’ and ‘they are 
given special corrective education for the purpose of cultivating the spirit of law observation, 
sense of responsibility, respect for human life, and other moral considerations through daily 
activities’ (cited in Johnson 1991: 65). The main orientation of the moral re-education programs 
adopted in Ichihara is to be found in Nakian therapy (‘inner self observation’), and was to move 
inmates toward more positive social behaviours. This therapeutic approach is applied as follows:
For two weeks some half-dozen residents, who have volunteered for the therapy, go to a 
solitary cell in the receiving cell block on weekdays from 5:30 to 9:30 p.m., on Saturdays 
afternoons, and all day on Sundays. Staff members go from cell to cell, asking what the 
individuals are thinking and advising them on how to think about themselves, but offering 
no specific advice. It is expected that the traffic incident will dominate the inmate’s inner 
observation.
( Johnson 1997: 147)
In this way responsibility was shifted from the structural level of our culture of mobility (of 
transport communication based on cars), and the way it reflects and reproduces social differ-
ences, to the traffic authorities and juridical-political system and finally to focus on drivers’ 
attitudes and self-observation through therapeutic practices.
Psychological intervention in this open prison, it could be argued, is limited to monitor-
ing and challenging inmates’ attitudes in the context of apparently free but self-normalizing 
observations/confessions. However, it could also be argued that another main contribution of 
psychology relies on the prefigurative power of this open prison. Taking the former account, 
psychology would be depicted as a body of expert knowledge and work (as ‘psychological dis-
cipline’) implemented across ruling institutions and professional practices (the ‘psy-complex’), 
45
European critical 
psychological trends
An open road to psychological recidivism
Ángel J. Gordo López and Roberto Rodríguez López

European critical psychological trends 
435
while the latter would focus on the way psychology actively engages in the making of and reg-
ulation of everyday social practices and relations (‘material psychological culture’). In the case of 
Ichihara this perspective would also entail consideration of the arrangements and influence of, 
for instance, the prison surroundings, the reception centre, the dormitory building, and the dis-
tribution of the individual sleeping units, and the apparently free practices and relations that they 
incite or afford. The major question that we would like to raise here would be to what extent 
European critical psychological issues and trends have been actively implicated in eclipsing and 
displacing their own material conditions of possibility and everyday mediations.
Taking Ichihara Open Prison as a starting point for what follows, we offer a review of the 
way critical psychology has taken root and evolved in different European countries from the 
early 1970s to the present, with particular emphasis on its material and historical conditions of 
possibility. In the first part of the text we review the current standing of the main European crit-
ical traditions. We specifically discuss the centrality of post-revolutionary Soviet psychology to 
German critical psychology (as an example of formerly critical epicentres in an ongoing process 
of revival of work important to us) and the multidimensional dynamics of critical psychology 
in Britain (as the epicentre of critical psychology in Europe during the last four decades). In the 
second part of the text we argue that these hegemonies have informed and shaped the evolution 
and positions of the rest of European critical psychology. We end the text with some remarks 
about the importance of recovering more materialist approaches in critical thinking in the age 
of the ongoing great financial crisis.
Resourceful geopolitical epicentres
Developments in Russian psychology, such as activity theory and cultural-historical theory, were 
the main resources for early European critical psychology. Despite the lack of consensus on 
appropriate subject matter for psychological research and appropriate methodologies for study- 
ing psychology as a science, the first Soviet psychologists departed from the commonly held 
and important consideration that the analysis of human action as a unit of psychological analysis  
(Rubinstein) takes place within social, cultural, and material contexts (Vygotsky, Leontiev, Eng-
eström) (Yasnitsky 2011). These psychological concerns based on Marxist philosophy, whose 
roots can be traced back to soon after the Russian Revolution of 1917, inspired the formation 
of early critical psychological theory in different countries and regions in Europe (Tolman and 
Maiers 1991).
German critical psychology developed on the basis of Marxism and activity theory but, as 
in the psychology of the former Soviet Union, there was no common agreement about which 
aspects should be incorporated into the theories (Teo 1998). Critical thinking in German psy-
chology appeared in the context of post-Second World War West Germany and was connected 
to the critique of fascism, authoritarianism, and capitalism developed by the student movements 
in the late 1960s and the early 1970s (Maiers 2001; Mattes 1985; Tolman 1989).
Held (2006) characterizes contemporary critical psychologies in Germany and Austria in 
terms of their opposition to quantitative-experimental psychology and their affinity with quali-
tative and subject-oriented methods. According to Held (2006), these opposing trends to main-
stream positivist psychology include the Critical Psychology of Berlin’s Freie Universität by 
Holzkamp (1992, 1972) and others (e.g. Maiers 1991) (in German ‘Kritische Psychologie’ with 
capital K), and also in various branches of critical thinking in psychology influenced by the 
Frankfurt School of Critical Theory, Freudo-Marxism, social constructionism, postmodernism, 
feminist and postcolonial theory, post-structuralist thinking, and similar approaches (in Ger-
man ‘kritische Psychologie’ with a small k). For his part, Teo (1998: 239) notes that the former 

Ángel J. Gordo López and Roberto Rodríguez López
436
current runs close to a constructivist perspective in the ‘socialist’ countries which pursue an 
improvement of psychology and scientific epistemology as well as a science of the subject. 
Paradoxically, the later approach, less identified with the former Eastern European regimes, was 
more oriented towards challenging mainstream psychology or abolishing psychology in that 
form. According to Brunner et al. (2013: 419), some of these other forms of critical psychology 
in Germany, known as psychoanalytic social psychology, also called ‘analytic social psychology’ 
(Fromm), ‘political psychology’ (Brückner, Horn), or ‘critical theory of the subject’ (Lorenzer), 
shared an interest in integrating psychoanalysis into critical social theory, and were established ‘at 
several German speaking universities during the 1960s in the wake of a socio-critical upheaval’. 
Their major topics of research included authoritarianism, processes of inclusion and exclusion, 
National Socialism and its consequences, and, more recently, questions regarding the constitu-
tion of gendered subjects.
In the 1970s, German Kritische Psychologie reached its peak. In the 1980s, with the final col-
lapse of Soviet bloc regimes, mainstream psychology flourished and with it came ongoing insti-
tutional attacks on Kritische Psychologie. Foremost in this period of institutional change was the 
way that critical discourse in psychology, from the 1980s, shifted away from Marxism towards 
diverse variants of postmodernism, picking up from debates in France and finding its way into 
the arguments of feminism and multiculturalism in North America. As Teo (1998: 245) puts it 
‘[F]or many critical communities postmodern relativism seemed more attractive than the search 
for a unified, reality-representing system of categories’.
Way beyond the image of a ‘Golden Era’ for critical work and narratives of decline (Maiers 
1991; Mattes 1985; Teo 1998), methodologically oriented typologies (Held 2006) or ‘renewed 
politicization and a rekindling of psychoanalytically oriented critical thought’ (Brunner et al. 
2013: 420), Lux (2013) identifies a new push for academic critical psychology in Germany. This 
was a revival mainly due to the students’ reactions against the so called ‘Bologna process’ which 
was initiated by the European Union to make academic standards and degrees more compati-
ble throughout Europe while promoting free mobility of students and professionals combined 
with accelerated institutionalization and spread of experimental neuroscience into psychology 
departments (contemporary ‘neurohype’).
The progressive neoliberalization of the European High Education Space since the late 1990s 
and ever more competition for scarce public resources reinforced the affiliation of German psy-
chology with the natural sciences and, as Lux (2013) states, neuro-cognitive psychology become 
a new sub-discipline of psychology in Germany. This new biological and behaviouristic turn 
which German psychology has experienced under the aegis of the Bologna reforms has brought 
other unintended outcomes. In Lux’s (2013: 472) own words, such a reinforcement of positiv-
ist logics ‘has become an important unifying factor which makes new collaborations between 
different approaches of critical psychology possible. Even those who were hopelessly divided in 
the past started to communicate again’. In addition, a new generation of critical psychologists 
has emerged, despite having to find academic jobs in other disciplines such as sociology, public 
health, educational sciences, political sciences, or cultural studies with only very loose connec-
tions to psychology and carrying the risk of a fragmentation of critical psychology as such.
With Mattes’s (1985) assessment of past events and the context for the first wave of German 
Critical Psychology, Lux also considers that the current revival of critical thinking and alliances 
generally follows the trend of continuously growing social protests and the sharpening of social 
conflicts in Europe, related to the widening of social gaps. All this constitutes the broader pic-
ture or constellation of factors which underlines the atmosphere of change in German critical 
psychology, triggered by neoliberal politics in higher education. To quote directly from Lux 
(2013: 478):

European critical psychological trends 
437
While discussing alternatives to the neoliberal program, a significant fraction of the current 
generation of students turned to Marxism, Critical Theory (Frankfurt School), postcolonial 
theory, queer and feminist theory, and other versions of critical social theory. The growing 
interest in critical approaches in psychology which combine social critical theory and the 
critique of the societal role of psychology results, in part, from this constellation. The devel-
opment is explicitly strengthening feminist, postcolonial and Marxist psychologies, but also –  
in the tradition of the Frankfurt School of Critical Theory – psychoanalysis as well as the 
works, for example, of Michel Foucault and Jacques Lacan.
The lesson we learn from the history of German critical psychology is that its early evolution, 
self-effacement, and recent revival did not rely on epistemological or methodological con-
cerns, nor even on theoretical resources, but on wider geopolitical transformations and the 
way they punctuate institutional policies. We also learn about the impossibility of abstracting 
critical psychology from social upheaval and protests. As noted earlier, when the students’ move-
ment declined in the late 1970s, critical psychology in Germany immediately faced a series of 
attempts to shut down and undermine its institutional basis.
While German critical psychology has been profoundly punctuated by major sociopolitical 
turmoil and social mobilizations, the sociopolitical conditions of possibility of critical psychol-
ogy in Britain are often ignored or approached in a rather elusive way. Such a present absence 
becomes more shocking when considering that during the last four decades, under the banner 
of neoliberalism, British critical psychology has become the theoretical epicentre in Europe (and 
beyond). Recent reviews of critical psychology in Britain timidly reflect upon some of these 
issues and national tensions (Cromby and Willis 2013). For his part Parker (in press) states that 
despite the fact that Britain is a ‘disunited kingdom’, it has not given rise to different distinctive 
forms of critical psychology.
Such a narrative of a unified critical psychology and its inner and outer effects can be better 
understood by identifying some of its main structural dimensions. In our view a comprehen-
sive picture of the history, dynamics, and current state of contemporary critical psychology in 
Britain can be painted through the following five dimensions: (1) a concern with ‘real qualita-
tive methodology’ which includes various degrees of methodological solipsism, characterized 
by pride and critical sensibility, as well as a false political consciousness wrapped up in its own 
methodological rigors; (2) ‘subjectivity deflated’ characterized by overdoses of codified and tran-
scribed micro-realism, ethnomethodological hallucinations or discourses and epistemologies 
influenced by technoscience. Lately some work in this area has nevertheless been engaged in 
reflexive ethnographies developed in organizational settings; (3) ‘subjectivity in excess’ grounded 
in psychoanalytic and humanistic theory, which lead the process of psychologizing various 
aspects of critical psychology under the pretext of finding the ‘true subject’, self-understanding, 
self-criticism, and political decadence, all packaged in a false and harmful reconceptualization 
of its own ‘subject matter’; (4) ‘feminist psychology and gender relations’ often characterized 
by contradictory disciplinary tendencies, being either overly preoccupied by the acceptance of 
its own particular disciplinary territories or impelled to search out new disciplinary basis for 
analyzing gender relations and ‘developments’ beyond psychology; and (5) ‘action oriented and 
participatory research’ initiated as a transformative approach with many good intentions in the 
late 1990s, but which has turned out to absorb and neutralize radical mental health policies, 
whether from the established field of community psychology or the more recently accommo-
dated critical disability studies.
Under the banner of incipient neoliberal logics developed since the mid-1980s, the cur-
rent hegemony of British critical psychology relies at least partly on the level of flexibility 

Ángel J. Gordo López and Roberto Rodríguez López
438
and interchanging nature of these five dimensions. In much the same way as the labels which 
inspired them, ‘subjectivity in excess’ or ‘subjectivity deflated’, these dimensions ought to be 
considered as interwoven ‘ideal types’ whose nature as signifiers and self-perpetuating power also 
relies upon their mutual antagonism. The terms ‘subjectivity deflated’ and ‘subjectivity in excess’ 
are inspired by Robert Castel’s (1995, 2009) works on the end of the salaried condition in 
Europe since the 1970s, which coincides with the first major crisis of welfare states, and with it, 
the suppression of major forms of social protection. Paraphrasing Mary Douglas’ (1996) theory 
of styles of thought, we argue that these central dimensions of British critical psychology rest 
upon incompatible organizational principles. Peaceful coexistence is difficult and the different 
strands of British critical psychology cannot exist beyond their mutual antagonism. This hostility 
between competing dimensions is precisely, in part, what keeps British critical psychology going.
It would not be politically correct or fair to allocate specific colleagues and research groups 
to any single dimensions insofar as none exist as individuals exclusively in one or the other, but 
rather in mutual, though antagonistic, dependence. However, under the influence of a current 
concern with ‘reflexivity’ in critical psychology, understood here as an exercise in self-disciplinary 
deconstruction and objectification, we shall comment on those dimensions which we feel most 
closely associated and identified with.
The primary resources which inspired British ‘discursive psychology’ (Burman 1991; Bur-
man and Parker 1993; Parker 1999) were cultural-historical psychology and activity theory, 
which emerged in the context of Soviet psychology, and French post-structuralism, especially 
Foucault’s work on knowledge and power relations along with feminist developments and psy-
choanalytic theory shaped later on by political, action, and discursive psychology. Discursive 
work in psychology bought into the sort of methodological trap which can occur when equat-
ing qualitative work with critical work and erroneously considering that in doing so the politi-
cal dimension of discursive psychology was warranted. In this light, it is not surprising therefore 
that in recent years discourse analysis has been rehabilitated as part of psychology (Parker 2012).
Discursive psychology in Britain has fallen into a debate on methodology which shares 
some obscured dynamics with mainstream psychological concerns. In this way ‘real qualitative 
methodology’, and discursive psychology as part of it, rendered itself open to dangerous liaisons 
with liberal versions of social constructionist agendas, and with it, a stronger concern with lib-
eral methodological realism. The political liberalism which haunted such a realist approach runs 
parallel to the psychologization of studies of subjectivity (‘subjectivity in excess’) (Gordo López 
2000), and with it, a new conceptual space for mystical ‘new age’ concerns. Former concerns 
with ‘subjectification processes’, and their institutional and historical material bases, were to be 
displaced by a renewed interest in ‘subjectivity resources’ and soon after experienced a strong 
influence from US liberal oriented communication and cultural studies. This as opposed to, for 
example, the first generations of the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies in Birmingham 
and its influential updating of Marxist theory and Soviet material concerns for the study of 
popular culture and consumption as the main resource for resistance to hegemonic socioeco-
nomic trends. Considering this, it is telling that the International Journal of Critical Psychology was 
re-launched in 2008 under the name of Subjectivities.
A reinforcement of methodological concerns can also be detected among critical psycholo-
gists whose approaches were mainly constituted betwixt and between the ‘real qualitative meth-
odology’ and ‘subjectivity deflated’. What prevails now in British critical psychology, mainly 
with regard to the work formerly identified with the ‘real qualitative methodology’, ‘subjec-
tive deflated’, and even ‘feminist psychological and gender relations’ is a progressive fragmenta-
tion and with it a dissolving of processes into neighbouring disciplines and concerns, shifting 
from critical margins to central disciplinary productions (media studies, sociology, management 

European critical psychological trends 
439
studies, and the like). The various dimensions which inform critical psychology in Britain and 
the antagonistic drive inherent to their own logics of critical thinking styles combine to have 
a rejuvenating effect while regulating the combinatory logics of its own nature as a signifier. 
Taking these multidimensional dynamics into consideration, liminal positions are also evident.
Alongside Deleuzian agendas, as well as studies of techno-scientific epistemology and reflex-
ivity, there is an increasing interest in taking on the study of the material and social nature of 
affects, emotions, and even neurobiological bases in critical psychological agendas. On the con-
trary to the integral socio-biological approaches of the former Soviet Union, current critical 
research into ostensibly materialist neurobiological approaches is conducted under the hegem-
ony of a new evolutionary theory which can hardly be abstracted from the thriving refloating 
of capitalism and the geopolitical surveillance and ‘transparency’ which new social media (Face-
book, Twitter, Whatsapp, and so forth) bring about in the current era of ‘Big Data’.
Other European critical psychologies
So far we have outlined Soviet and German critical psychology as representatives of former 
Marxist and materialist traditions (from the time of the post-Soviet States to the 1970s) and 
British critical psychology, as the most influential current from the 1980s until the present day. 
We have sought evidence regarding not only the way these trends have evolved but also their 
connections with wider socioeconomic contexts and transformations. However, other satellite 
positions have also spread out all over Europe. While not easily categorized, there are common 
connections to German and, mainly, British critical psychology. Contrary to the German and 
British epicentres, they have never institutionalized their works as a reachable frontier, regardless 
of their various positions and socioeconomic contexts. For the sake of clarity, while being aware 
of the danger of oversimplification, we present the following as a guide to some of the major 
European critical psychology trends, outside of Germany and Britain: (1) resonances of Marxist 
and activity theory (in Austria, Denmark, Finland, Poland, and Slovenia); (2) independent and 
self-organized strands highly fragmented and often absorbed by other disciplines (in the Czech 
Republic, Cyprus, France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain); (3) remote satellites where 
critical psychology has been, till recently, mainly absent or meaningless (in Belgium, Iceland, 
Holland, Norway, Sweden, and Turkey)
Like the two epicentres, these other strands reinforce the idea that the discipline of psychol-
ogy has been unable to respond to important social needs and problems. They also show the 
way that the critical margins, which they represent to various degrees, are equally caught up 
in an irreversible political unresponsiveness or in a relationship of compliance with hegemonic 
structures (Nissinen 2006; Blakar and Nafstad 2006). Such a lack of responsiveness is more 
symptomatic in the case of South European countries such as Spain, Italy, and Portugal which, 
paradoxically, with the arrival of the recent and now ongoing financial crisis and the entrench-
ment of Neo-Con agendas and policies, seem to have experienced a further fragmentation and 
dissolution into neighbouring disciplines. In forms of resistance to the refloating of capitalism 
and the intensive attack on the social (welfare) state, some Marxist and materialist approaches 
remain in Central Europe (mainly Denmark) and have sprung up more recently in Greece, 
mainly from colleagues educated in the tradition of German critical psychology. To a lesser 
degree this incipient process is also reaching remote satellites (Norway and Sweden, for instance) 
where before the onset of the financial crisis, and the then inexorable crisis of the welfare states, 
critical psychological methodological concerns were incorporated into their psychology sylla-
bus in the mid-1990s or were just considered to be just one more English eccentricity (as they 
are viewed in Belgium and Holland).

Ángel J. Gordo López and Roberto Rodríguez López
440
It is not be possible here to go into a detailed and updated review of critical psychology in 
each of these countries, but according to the latest accounts (Dafermos 2013; Dafermos and 
Marvakis 2006; Dafermos et al. 2006; Walkerdine 2002, 2001) the most promising outpost of 
‘real politik’ in critical psychology might be found amongst the latest unintended revival of 
German critical psychology and its influence in satellite countries (of Greece, Denmark, Finland, 
and Poland). It is worth noting the work developed during the last decade by Greek colleagues 
and more recently in British critical psychology research groups. The syncretism developed 
out of the materialist German concerns is conscious of the reluctance of critical psychology in 
Britain to materialize its works on wider socioeconomic developments, but also aware of the 
multidimensional pragmatism which informs British critical psychology. Taken together, this 
leads us to propose that Greek critical psychology, along with the recent German critical psy-
chology revival, are the main critical enclaves. Indeed, even more so if the current disciplinary 
contexts keep them away from the temptation of institutionalization. It is not a coincidence that 
Germany was effectively a first laboratory for the implementation of extreme neoliberal reforms 
at the dawn of the present Western financial collapse, nor is it a coincidence that Greece has 
been economically ‘rescued’ and punished twice already and is continuously under the threat of 
being kicked out of the European Union.
Final remarks
We began this chapter with the Ichihara open prison for repeat traffic offenders to illustrate the 
way that the discipline of psychology has acted as a highly successful apparatus that confines 
and dissolves structural antagonism into the realm of individual normalization. Such a process of 
‘psychologization’ has been assisted by institutional settings and networks of regulations in the 
‘psy-complex’ (Ingleby 1985; Rose 1985, 1996). These regulative networks, as with the Ichihara 
open prison, purport to transcend traditional psychological confinement by means of only 
apparently free everyday practices (in a ‘psychological culture’, Parker 2007). As Papadopoulos 
(2004: 7) warns us, even if the prison does not look like a traditional prison, it nevertheless 
‘transforms, mutates, and creeps into the every-day life’ of inmates.
Disciplinary psychological practices and knowledge hinges upon an ongoing re-colonization 
of everyday psychology (McLaughlin 2011). In this respect, the colonization of everyday life by 
means of an ever-expanding psychological culture ‘operates as twins, two sides of an ideological 
and material effective process’ (Parker in press). However, the current epicentre of critical psy-
chology in Europe seems to have taken the opposite course. It has moved on from analyzing the 
material and political conditions to enjoying self-reflexivity as the main path to psychological 
recidivism and imprisonment, primarily by focusing on methodological issues and subjective 
resources. In this sense, British critical psychology has not paid attention to the way that psychol-
ogy prefigures and masters everyday material practices and mediations. As we argued previously, 
without a commitment to everyday materiality it will be difficult to counter the highly efficient 
neoliberal discourses that strategically address everyday material issues (such as personal security 
and personal finances) and, at the same time, link them with wider structural phenomena (immi-
gration, delinquency, terrorism, or family values) (Gordo López and Pujol Tarrés 2004: 156).
In contrast to its German counterpart, British critical psychology has never responded 
explicitly to any particular social movement, nor has it been ascribed or thought of itself as 
part of wider geopolitical transformations. If we keep in mind that developments in psychology 
mainly respond to economic and international political investments (Burman 2008), such a 
lack of social and economic responsiveness turns out to be highly suspicious, given the current 
hegemony of British critical psychology.

European critical psychological trends 
441
More worrying is the way British critical psychology has promoted, during the last decade, 
inventories of other critical psychologies in Europe and throughout the world. Besides the need 
to attend to both the local and social circumstances which have shaped the different trends 
and issues pursued by critical margins (Dafermos 2013; Dafermos et al. 2006), early historical 
materialist resources have also taught us that the role of critical psychology is the result of dif-
ferent processes of institutionalization which assist production and government. Despite their 
sociocultural specificity, psychology and its critical margins are major resources for practices and 
discourses within a worldwide space which ‘goes beyond national borders and has a high degree 
of transnational intelligibility’ (Papadopoulous 2002), even more so now under the banner of 
global neoliberalization processes and the re-energizing of capitalism in response to the financial 
crisis.
Psychology has become an intrinsically productive force. It could be considered, alongside 
scientific knowledge, as a form of successful ‘globalised localism’ (Santos 2003: 348–249) or even 
as the vernacular language of capitalism (Parker 2007). From this angle, psychological disciplines 
and sub-disciplines, including critical psychology, constitute extensions of global spaces and 
socioeconomic dynamics, as well as of functioning subjective spaces (Gordo López and Pujol 
Tarrés 2004). We should seriously consider global tendencies of resistance as much as socio-
cultural specificities (Marvakis 2013). The relations between ‘epicentres’ and ‘satellites’, their 
relations and shifts of emphasis, turn out to be highly revealing if we take them to be indicating 
comparative geopolitical operations while bearing in mind that critical specificities are also con-
gruous with robust and material normalizing outcomes. If we do not engage in such an analysis, 
we merely satisfy the illusion of countering the geopolitical and postcolonial responsibility of 
psychological epicentres and their wider conditions of possibility.
Note
We are grateful to Paul Cassidy for his supervision of our English grammar and his critical 
comments.
Further reading
Ibáñez, T. and Íñiguez, L. (eds) (1997) Critical Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Parker, I. (2007) La psicología como ideología: Contra la disciplina. Madrid: Catarata [Spanish edition of Revolu-
tion in Psychology: Alienation to Emancipation. London: Pluto Press, 2007].
Parker, I. and Pavón-Cuéllar (eds) (2014) Lacan, Discourse, Event: New Psychoanalytic Approaches to Textual 
Indeterminacy. New York: Routledge.
Sloan, T. (ed.) (2000) Critical Psychology: Voices for Change. London: Macmillan.
Website resources
Annual Review of Critical Psychology: http://www.discourseunit.com/annual-review/
Athenea Digital. Revista de Pensamiento e Investigación Social: http://atheneadigital.net/
Revista Teoría y Crítica de la Psicología: http://www.teocripsi.com/principal.php
Teknokultura. Revista de Cultura Digital y Movimientos Sociales: http://www.teknokultura.net/
References
Blakar, R. M. and Nafstad, H. E. (2006) ‘Critical Psychology in Norway: a brief review commenting on 
why critical psychology is currently virtually absent’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5, 167–173.
Brunner, M., Burgermeister, M., Lohl, J., Schwietring, M. and Winter, S. (2013) ‘Critical psychoanalytic 
social psychology in the German speaking countries’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 10, 419–468.

Ángel J. Gordo López and Roberto Rodríguez López
442
Burman, E. (1991) ‘What discourse is not’, Philosophical Psychology, 4(3), 325–242.
Burman, E. (2008) Deconstructing Developmental Psychology (2nd Edn). Hove: Routledge.
Burman, E. and Parker, I. (eds) (1993) Discursive Analytic Research: Repertories and Readings of Texts in Action. 
London: Routledge.
Castel, R. (1995) Les Métamorphoses de la Question Sociale. Paris: Fayard.
Castel, R. (2009) La Montée des Incertitudes: Travail, Protections, Statut de L’individu. Paris: Seuil.
Cromby, J. and Willis, M. (2013) ‘England’s dreaming? UK critical psychology, 2011’, Annual Review of 
Critical Psychology, 10, 932–951.
Dafermos, M. (2013) ‘Editorial, Vignette 1: How has critical psychology changed in a changed world?’, 
Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 10, 4–9.
Dafermos, M. and Marvakis, A. (2006) ‘Critiques in psychology – critical psychology’, Annual Review of 
Critical Psychology, 5, 1–20.
Dafermos, M., Marvakis, A. and Triliva, S. (eds) (2006) ‘Critical psychology in a changing world: contribu-
tions from different geo-political regions [Special Issue]’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5.
Douglas, M. (1996) Thought Styles: Critical Essays on Good Taste. London: Sage.
Gordo López, Á. J. (2000) ‘On the psychologization of critical psychology’, Annual Review of Critical Psy-
chology, 2, 55–71.
Gordo López, Á. J. and Pujol Tarrés, J. (2004) ‘Intensifying psychological work: from geopolitical unrespon-
siveness to cultural rage/rave’, The International Journal of Critical Psychology, 12, 145–161.
Held, J. (2006) ‘Beyond the mainstream: approaches to critical psychology in the German-speaking com-
munity and their international significance’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 5, 101–113.
Holzkamp, K. (1972) Kritische Psychologie. Vorbereitende Arbeiten. Frankfurt am Main: Fisher Taschenbuch Verlag.
Holzkamp, K. (1992) ‘On doing psychology critically’, Theory & Psychology, 2, 193–204.
Ingleby, D. (1985) ‘Professionals as socializers: the ‘psy complex’’, in I. Parker (ed.) (2011) Critical Psychology: 
Critical Concepts in Psychology, Volume 1: Dominant Models of Psychology and Their Limits. London and New 
York: Routledge.
Johnson, E. H. (1991) ‘Ichihara Prison for Traffic Offenders: an innovative model in Japan’, International 
Criminal Justice Review, 53(1), 53–68.
Johnson, E. H. (1997) Criminalization and Prisoners in Japan: Six Contrary Cohorts. Carbondale: Southern 
Illinois University Press.
Lux, V. (2013) ‘Bologna process and neurohype: current challenges to critical psychology in Germany’, 
Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 10, 469–483.
Maiers, W. (1991) ‘Critical psychology: historical background and task’, in C. W. Tolman and W. Maiers 
(eds) Critical Psychology: Contributions to an Historical Science of the Subject. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Maiers, W. (2001) ‘German critical psychology at the turn of the millennium (Same procedure as last year, 
Miss Sophie? The same procedure as every year, James!)’, International Journal of Critical Psychology, 1, 
84–89.
Marvakis, A. (2013) ‘Vignette 2: Historicity of societal organization – historicity of critical psychology’, 
Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 10, 10–12.
Mattes, P. (1985) ‘Die Psychologiekritik der Studentenbewegung’, in M. G. Ash and U. Geuter (eds) 
Geschichte der Deutschen Psychologie im 20. Jahrhundert. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.
McLaughlin, K. (2011) Surviving Identity: Vulnerability and the Psychology of Recognition. London and New 
York: Routledge.
Nissinen, T. (2006) ‘What does an elephant think of Finnish psychology?’, Annual Review of Critical Psy-
chology, 5, 313–327.
Papadopoulos, D. (2002) ‘Dialectics of subjectivity: North-Atlantic certainties, neo-liberal rationality, and 
liberation promises’, International Journal of Critical Psychology, 6, 99–122.
Papadopoulos, D. (2004) ‘Editorial: psychology and the political’, International Journal of Critical Psychology, 
12, 5–13.
Parker, I. (1999) ‘Critical psychology: critical links’, Radical Psychology: A Journal of Psychology, Politics and 
Radicalism, 1(1), http://radicalpsychology.org/vol1–1/Parker.html
Parker, I. (2007) Revolution in Psychology: Alienation to Emancipation. London: Pluto Press.
Parker, I. (2012) ‘Discursive social psychology now’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 51(3), 471–477.
Parker, I. (in press) ‘Critical psychology in Britain’, in D. Heseler, R. Iltzsche, O. Rojon, J. Rüppel, T. Uhlig 
(eds) Die Unberechenbarkeit des Subjekts – Beiträge zum Verhältnis von kritischer Psychologie und qualitativer 
Forschung. Berlin: Argument.

European critical psychological trends 
443
Rose, N. (1985) The Psychological Complex: Psychology, Politics and Society in England, 1869–1939. London: 
Routledge and Paul.
Rose, N. (1996) Inventing Ourselves: Psychology, Power and Personhood. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Santos, B. de S. (2003) Crítica de la Razón Indolente: Contra el Desperdicio de la Experiencia. Bilbao: Desclée.
Teo, T. (1998) ‘Klaus Holzkamp and the rise and decline of German critical psychology’, History of Psychol-
ogy, 1(3), 235–253.
Tolman, C. (1989) ‘What’s critical about “Kritische Psychologie”?’, Canadian Psychology, 30, 628–635.
Tolman, C. W. and Maiers, W. (eds) (1991) Critical Psychology: Contributions to an Historical Science of the Sub-
ject. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Yasnitsky, A. (2011) ‘Vygotsky circle as a personal network of scholars: restoring connections between peo-
ple and ideas’, Integrative Psychology and Behavioral Science, 45(4), 422–457.
Walkerdine, V. (ed.) (2001) International Journal of Critical Psychology, 1 (launch issue on Critical Psychology).
Walkerdine, V. (ed.) (2002) Challenging Subjects: Critical Psychology for a New Millennium. New York: Palgrave.

444
This chapter partially addresses the emergence of critical psychology in Aotearoa/Australia, and 
interrogates the risky possibilities of critical psy-discourse in the South Pacific. It is partial since 
it is a specific account that constitutes critical psychology within the tension between globali-
zation and locality that specifies ‘our’ place for critical psychology in a global context. Before 
moving to specific tensions, there are questions about the conceptual apparatus of  ‘place’, ‘space’, 
‘locality’, and ‘region’ that trouble borders marking the South Pacific as a site from which to 
view the emergence of critical psychology and reflect on the tensions of globalization and local 
perspectives.
One reading of ‘place’ considers it as a geopolitical region that functions as a locality with 
specific histories of nationhood, cultural hegemony, and social power relations. There is also 
an emerging conceptualization of ‘space’ as a term marking the relationships between people 
and institutions within which the movement of or access to language enacts social power 
relations that hierarchically/structurally organize subjects. Space is where social relations are 
produced and reproduced as texts, where the signs and symbols, stories, and meanings of 
connectedness and exclusion become sites of contestation (Dudgeon and Fielder 2006; Fred-
ericks 2013). Place and space crucially signify social power relations that interconnect issues 
of territorialization, dominance, and oppression (Moreton-Robinson 2007).
Another reading of ‘place’ considers an ontological relationship to land that cannot be 
reduced to land ownership or national boundaries. In this sense, place signifies specific histories 
of territorialization and relationships to home and land that exceed geographic designations of 
north and south, east and west, since they are also implicated in the cultural hegemony that char-
acterizes contemporary globalization. In Australia and Aotearoa/New Zealand, the ontological 
relationship between land as place and indigenous understandings of land as home includes ‘our 
ancestral spirits [as] the place of our belonging’ (Morgan 2008: 263), where home as a place of 
spiritual belonging and continuity is dependent on genealogical connections to ancestral and 
living communities (Nikora et al. 2013). As a location from which to address the emergence of 
critical psychology, one of the central concerns of this chapter is the Eurocentrism that identi-
fies our geopolitical region through Westernized understandings of land, and the relationships 
between people and institutions.
46
South Pacific
Tensions of space in our place
Leigh Coombes and Mandy Morgan

South Pacific
445
Globalization
For the purposes of this chapter, globalization is considered as a process and movement of 
transformation characterized by new hegemonies, governmentality, and resistance. Globalization 
foregrounds questions that have been crucial to the emergence of critical psychology: how do 
social power relations, ideologies, and discourses produce technologies of knowledge produc-
tion, and conceptualizations of the subject within historical, cultural, and social relationships, and 
how are psychology and critical psychology implicated in these productions? We are particularly 
concerned with some of the intimate relations of globalization: neoliberalism, postcolonialism, 
Western hegemony, and everyday practices of normalization.
Neoliberalism can be regarded as a contemporary capitalist ideology widely practiced by many 
Western governments through policies that construe citizens as participants in a marketplace  
where they’re free to choose, consume, and innovate while taking personal responsibility for their 
self-care, self-determination, and efficiency and remaining autonomous, adaptive, and flexible. 
It is characterized by a kind of embeddedness that is specific to spaces (social relations between 
people and institutions) and places (specific histories of territorialization and relationships to 
home and land). Emerging anew from modernity through novel technologies of governmental-
ity, neoliberalism extends individualism and intensifies liberalism. From our location, we notice 
a particular repetition in this expansionist mode of global capital, not quite uniform but domi-
nant and hegemonic, in that the neoliberal citizen is an individualized subject characteristic of a 
Eurocentric gaze on a particular social body. Thus neoliberalism and globalization, multiple and 
fragmented in their processes, reproduce a hegemonic Western mode of subjectification to the 
social power relations of individualist culture. In our geopolitical location, the significance of 
Eurocentrism in techniques of subjectification to dominant Western ideologies of individualism, 
repeated through neoliberal forms of governmentality, is intimately connected to our specific 
places in postcolonialism.
The postcolonial has been variously engaged to articulate the concerns of a so-called Third 
World in the political imagination of the West. Like neoliberalism and globalization, the term is 
multiple, and has been used to engage in conversations on the ongoing legacy of colonialism’s 
subjugations of indigenous peoples, as well as critical reflection on whiteness (e.g. Huygens 
2006; Nairn and McCreanor 1990; Riggs and Augoustinous 2004). In our geopolitical region, 
indigenous writers recognize a difference from ‘other postcolonial contexts where independ-
ence has been gained’ (Dudgeon and Fielder 2006: 403). Moreton-Robinson (2003) argues that 
nations where white settlers are not dominant in government, such as Malaysia, are differently 
postcolonial from Australia, where colonial settlement is firmly established, and entrenched, 
in government. Aotearoa/New Zealand, likewise, is governed and dominated by white settler 
peoples, despite Te Tiriti o Waitangi/Treaty of Waitangi, which established a historical agree-
ment that promised partnership in the development of our nation (McCreanor 1993; Morgan, 
Coombes, and Campbell 2006). In this sense, colonization continues, and the postcolonial marks 
a relationship that is governed by, and normalizes, whiteness.
Here, the specific histories of territorialization are bounded by ongoing colonization and 
marked by differences in relationships to land among indigenous and settler peoples. Indige-
nous writers (e.g. Smith 1999; Tamanui 2012; Teddy et al. 2008) characterizes the relationship 
of settlers and land through dispossession and migration, while indigenous peoples’ relationship 
to land is ontological: land is a life-force, a condition of being, the simultaneousness of past and 
present. Land as an inalienable constitutive of indigeneity, ‘marks a radical, indeed incommensu-
rable, difference’ (Moreton-Robinson 2003: 31) between indigenous and settler peoples.

Leigh Coombes and Mandy Morgan
446
In highlighting this incommensurable difference, we also need to trouble a binary categori-
zation that reproduces a simple boundary between indigenous/white, indigenous/settler. In our 
region, colonization has also dispossessed and dislocated settler peoples, including peoples of the 
Pacific Islands who constitute marginalized diaspora within the national boundaries of Australia 
and New Zealand (e.g. Alefaio 2009; Seiuli 2012). There are complex histories in relation to 
Pacific Island settlers in both nations. For instance, the Torres Strait Islands are not independent 
nations, as are some other Pacific Islands. Torres Strait Island people are positioned as indigenous 
Australians, although many live away from their islands, on the mainland (Dudgeon et al. 2010). 
Among the settler peoples there are plentiful examples of non-indigenous peoples who are 
marginalized by the dominance of white colonial governance and Eurocentric normalization.
The legacy of multiple dispossessions and differences across the South Pacific constitutes our 
place as both a condition and a critique of postcolonial discourse, fracturing any assumption that 
there could be a unified relationship between histories of territorialization and the postcolonial. 
Within these fractured conditions there are specificities marking the relationship between peo-
ples and institutions of our geopolitical region. The spaces produced and reproduced through 
the dominance of Eurocentric representation function as sites of exclusion, contestation, and 
epistemological violences, including the denigration of the social texts marked as ‘indigenous 
knowledges’ within the University.
Critical attention to whiteness and its normalization opens space for counter-hegemonic 
resistances to Eurocentric domination, including the authorization of non-dominant episte-
mologies and marginalized social texts. However, this opening is tenuous, dependent on cul-
tural practices of knowledge production that are materially conditioned through social power 
relations of dominance. For example, although academic institutions are arguably characterized 
by commitments to freedom of thought, indigenous academics struggle against distinctively 
European discourse that produces ‘intellectual fringe dwellers’ (Dudgeon and Fielder 2006: 397), 
more likely seen as political activists than legitimate contributors to authorized knowledge pro-
duction. These experiences testify to the ongoing privilege of Western ways of knowing, and 
the iteration of Eurocentric representations that risk perpetually reproducing the subjugations 
of colonialism.
Normalization of Western discourse, as a technique of subjectification, intersects with the 
neoliberalism and globalization that hold us to our place in postcolonialism. Our specific 
risks for critical psychology are concerned with ongoing colonization through re-inscribing 
white authority over the non-West. Postcolonial theory opens the space to reflexively critique 
psy-discourse in relation to the social power relations through which normalization constitutes 
‘others’ and iterates Eurocentric dominance. The risk of not engaging with postcolonial theory 
is the risk of constituting differences among peoples through knowledge production processes 
that have dehumanized indigenous peoples (Dudgeon and Fielder 2006; Smith 1999). The risk 
of engaging postcolonial theory is a risk of writing back to colonial centres and reproducing 
relations of centre and margin that function to normalize Eurocentric discourse. The critical, 
too, risks overwriting our differences with sameness derived from reifying a partial position 
within the discursive, material, and cultural constituents for articulating interrelationships of 
mutuality.
The emergence of critical psychology into the discipline in the late 1980s drew attention 
to the relevance of psychology in its sociopolitical context. The turn to language – discourse/
knowledge/power – began to recognize sexism, racism, and oppression and their effects for 
those who were constituted as ‘other’ in our research and practice. It manifested as a movement 
of resistance within the discipline that intersected with global social movements for human, 
women’s, and indigenous rights.

South Pacific
447
Writing back
Resistance to the centrality of Eurocentric masculinity emerged with critical psychology in the 
work of feminist psychologists addressing the gendered social power relations of Western norma-
tive heterosexism from the late 1980s on. Early feminist engagement with post-structuralist the-
ory also generated critical discursive research agendas that resist the dominance of post-positivist 
knowledge production. Nicola Gavey’s (1989, 1992, 2005, 2012) arguments for post-structuralist 
feminism and discourse analysis not only questioned the narrow focus of feminist empiricism 
on issues of prevalence and sex differences in perpetuating interpersonal violence, but also 
turned attention towards the gendered power relations that supported violence against women. 
Problematizing normative heterosexism, Gavey and her colleagues have challenged cultural nar-
ratives of sexuality and sexual violence (e.g. Gavey and Senn 2014), egalitarian governance of 
gendered power relations (e.g. Tolmie et al. 2010), and the workings of neoliberalism and post-
feminism in supporting pornography (http://www.sexualpoliticsnow.org.nz/).
Alongside critical engagements with heteronormativity, Gavey interrogates the theoretical 
terms that enable critical feminist engagements to write back to the masculine privileges of 
European cultural values. Sex and the body are particular concerns that shape arguments resist-
ing the naturalistic assumptions of research that conflates biology and embodiment while nor-
malizing heterosex. Gavey (2005) engages Foucauldian theory to theorize sex and the body as 
socially and discursively constituted while simultaneously materially effective; constitutive of 
bodies, sexualities, and subjectivities. Writing back to Eurocentric masculinism, Morgan (2005) 
interrogates critical psychological engagements with theorizing bodies to question how the 
discourse of embodying domination informs transformations of gendered social power relations. 
Challenging the sadomasochistic positioning of women in intimate violent relationships, she 
draws on psychoanalysis to resist Anglo-American traditions of analyzing masculinist privilege in 
the representation of women (Morgan 2011). Morgan’s interests intersect with concerns about 
gendered violence that she and her colleagues have questioned in relation to the morality of 
dominant narratives authorizing gendered subject positions (Coombes and Morgan 2004), and 
the governance of justice interventions into intimate partner violence (Pond and Morgan 2008).
While feminism has never settled into a mainstream position within the discipline of psy-
chology, feminist critical work heightens tensions with the discipline’s dominant post-positivist 
commitments. Accommodating feminism within mainstream methodologies poses little chal-
lenge to psy-discourse in an era of neoliberal postfeminism, yet critical feminism interrogates 
complicity with neoliberalism, particularly notions of empowerment, agency, and choice. Ngaire 
Donaghue has critiqued an ‘agency fetish’ (Gill and Donaghue 2013) in postfeminist discourse 
that evades the complexities of desire, intimacy, and sexuality, and raises issues with re-embracing 
femininity as an agentic choice (e.g. Stuart and Donaghue 2010). Gavey (2012) also troubles 
postfeminist emphasis on women’s empowerment and choice, drawing attention to the punish-
ing effects of sanctions for breaching hetero-norms. This work intersects with critical feminist 
concerns with norms of gendered health and sexuality that also characterize writing back to 
Eurocentrism in our geopolitical place (e.g. Braun 2010; Jackson and Westrupp 2010; Jackson 
and Weatherall 2010; Lyons 2009; Ussher 2011).
The disciplinary space in which gendered social power relations accommodate feminist 
research that does not challenge postpositivist commitments also normalizes racial, ethnic, 
and class differences through notions of deficit. Although feminist critical writing frequently 
acknowledges the material effects of Eurocentric domination in the constitution of racial, 
ethnic, and class differences, there remains a gap that marks a significant disjuncture between 
predominantly white, Western, middle-class critiques of heteronormativity and indigenous 

Leigh Coombes and Mandy Morgan
448
women’s concerns. Critical feminist work writing back to Eurocentric discourses of sexual 
difference is not exempt from reproducing the ‘underlying code of imperialism and colonialism’ 
(Smith 1999: 7). As Moeke-Maxwell (2005) argues, in Aotearoa/New Zealand, feminism has 
not engaged critical discursive approaches to theorize the complex positioning and subjectivities 
of Ma¯ori women. Dominant narratives of colonized identities continue to perpetuate forms of 
racial discrimination that represent indigenous women through the imposition of a racialized 
hierarchy of difference. Racism and racist discourse saturate Eurocentric representations of dif-
ference through constituting disease, mental disorder, violence, and poverty, and positioning 
indigenous peoples as lacking (Groot et al. 2011). The risks of these representations are realized 
in institutional practices. Critical psychology takes up the project of resisting institutionalized 
biomedical models of addressing health risks, and interrogating their practices, while simultane-
ously advocating for the inclusion of social context in considering ‘health and well-being’ (e.g. 
Hodgetts et al. 2014; Hodgetts et al. 2011; Moran and Lee 2011, 2013; Stephens 2014; Stephen-
son 2011). In discursive projects focused on the material and social practices of everyday life 
and the meanings of medication and food, Chamberlain and colleagues (e.g. Dew et al. 2014; 
Hodgetts and Chamberlain 2006) site methodically innovative studies in homes, communities, 
and public media to consider the material and bodily effects of the intersection of institutional-
ized knowledge with social context. Insistence on the social enables attention to specific effects 
of dominant Eurocentric biomedicine on Ma¯ori wha¯nau (Hodgetts et al. 2011) and the inclu-
sion of healers’ resistances to, and collaborations with, dominant practices of healing (Mark and 
Chamberlain 2012).
In our geopolitical region, critical health psychologists problematize the racism of discursive 
practices that are linked to colonial practices of governance, such as the Tohunga Suppression 
Act (1907) that restricted the use of indigenous healing systems (Mark and Chamberlain 2012). 
Control over cultural knowledge and indigenous languages was central to colonial governments’ 
targeting and managing indigenous subjects. Groot et al. (2012) argue that language dominance 
was complicit with the productive differentiation of indigenous subject populations and the 
internalization of white imagination to ensure the effective functioning of colonial systems of 
rule. In the wake of these explicitly colonial strategies, the turn to language in critical social psy-
chology has focused on writing back to discursive practices of everyday racism (e.g. Augustinos 
and Every 2007; Riggs 2013; Tuffin 2013). This work traces a shift from blatant white supremacy 
to neoliberal egalitarianism and individualism that operates as more subtle racism. Acceptable 
forms of defining, stereotyping, and criticizing non-white others are analyzed as practices of 
ongoing colonization (e.g. Liu and Mills 2006; Loto et al. 2006; Nairn et al. 2006).
The success of critical social psychology is evident in the diversity of approaches to discourse 
analysis that have propagated since critical psychology emerged (Augustinos 2013). In our geo-
political region, discourse analysis is debated, defined, and characterized within the context of 
methodological resistances to dominant post-positivism, as it is elsewhere. Yet, methodological 
debates risk establishing hierarchies of criticality even on the margins of psychology. In this 
context, critiques of hegemonic whiteness, racialized embodiment, and symbolic racism that 
centre on writing back to racist discourse simultaneously challenge research that has constructed 
indigenous others as inferior while participating in research that marginalizes indigenous ways 
of knowing.
In the wake of globalization, the construction of deficits is contextualized by spaces where 
risks are characterized as dangerous, and proliferating. Within Eurocentrism, the discourses that 
constitute racial and cultural others as lacking in health, morality, or self-discipline are also 
complicit with promoting modes of surveillance for the sake of safety. Wraith and Stephenson 
(2009: 227) connect heightened risk with forms of state governmentality that engage expert 

South Pacific
449
knowledge production to enact a neoliberal commitment to individualizing responsibility for 
anticipating risks (to health, property, financial security) while proliferating state interventions 
into ‘the finest fissures of society’.
Opening spaces
Critical psychology in our region does not only engage in writing back to Eurocentrism. There 
is also work that focuses on opening up spaces for new forms of transformation. For instance, 
in an ethnographic study, Nathan et al. (2014: 26) analyzed the practices and actions of com-
munity representatives governed by health services and their own communities. They identified 
innovative and subversive responses to diverse forms of domination and created productive 
‘trajectories of action’ to transform everyday lives. The intersections of contemporary postcolo-
nial and neoliberal governmentality are concerns of emerging critical community psychology. 
Focusing on social transformation of injustices where gender, race, or class are produced multi-
ply and structurally, this work is committed to disrupting racialized dominance and developing 
processes for decolonization (e.g. Cruz and Sonn 2011). Early contributions to the work of 
transforming racialized social power relations in Aotearoa/New Zealand focused on critical 
analyses of whiteness and re-constituting Eurocentric subjectivities through advocating for a 
cultural identity as Pa¯keha¯. Becoming Pa¯keha¯ enables European settler peoples to recognize the 
dominant assumptions of white privilege usually constituting their taken-for-granted normality 
in relation to Ma¯ori (e.g. McCreanor 1993). In Australia, too, the work of recognizing whiteness 
(e.g. Gridley and Dudgeon 2009; Sonn and Green 2006) has opened up space for decolonizing 
processes and disrupting the modes through which everyday lives are diversely textured by local, 
social, cultural, and political conditions.
Ethnographic research strategies engaged in critical community psychology have been suc-
cessful in enabling relationships between researchers and communities in resistance to dominant 
methodological approaches that remain institutionally moulded by post-positivism. In ethno-
graphic style, critical community psychology brings academic expertise and theory together 
with community expertise and research participants’ embodied knowing in conversations aim-
ing to address structural violence and exclusion (see http://www.waikato.ac.nz/research/units/
mpru.shtml). For instance, in the Family 100 Project, an alliance between researchers and the 
Auckland City Mission enables places of praxis where ‘documenting actual experiences of lives 
in poverty while working to theorise these situations’ (Hodgetts et al. 2014: 100) has involved 
researchers in reciprocal support of direct action, service development, and advocacy. Hodgetts, 
Chamberlain, Groot, and Tankel (2014) analyze how the poverty of significantly increasing 
social stratification affects family relations with statutory welfare agencies. Using multiple data 
collection techniques, the research actively engages in texturing participants’ accounts with 
their everyday expertise on the spaces they inhabit in local social power relations. Analysis of 
structural violence produced new insights into the abusive relations that were institutionalized 
through welfare practices. Conversations with government bodies and journalists also enabled 
the researchers to broaden public discussions about poverty.
The Family 100 project emerged from an earlier, ethnographic study of homelessness in 
Aotearoa/New Zealand, also in partnership with the Auckland City Mission (http://www.
aucklandcitymission.org.nz/information.php?info_id=115andmID=109). Homelessness became 
understood as a movement that disrupted and destabilized various discursive centres organizing 
the normalization of identities, communities, and homes. Research processes that privileged the 
voices, significant meanings, and everyday movements of homeless people produced accounts 
of the ways that places textured homeless lives, and enabled place-based identities that question 

Leigh Coombes and Mandy Morgan
450
assumptions about the meanings of home and place. Among the studies from the homelessness 
project, Groot et al. (2011) present a case study of Aria¯ that exemplifies the ways critical commu-
nity psychology has opened up space for decolonizing processes in our region. Situating Aria¯’s 
textured accounts of her everyday street life within the context of Ma¯ori overrepresentation 
among the homeless, the study connected poverty, structural, and interpersonal violence with  
the specific histories of colonial territorialization. While acknowledging and honouring the  
pain of these abuses, the case study challenges deficit constitutions of cultural or racial difference 
by attending to Aria¯’s engagement with cultural practices that sustain and connect her to the 
community of street people as well as her wha¯nau. Questions of the differences in Eurocentric 
and indigenous relationships to home and land, tribal homelands, and tu¯rangawaewae (places 
of strength and identity) are foregrounded, so that the histories of territorialization before and 
since colonial rule are intimately connected with diverse contemporary experiences of place  
and space.
In critical community psychology, authoethnography has proved useful to indigenous schol-
ars as a set of research strategies and values that legitimates indigenous inquiry. Indigenous 
autoethnography centralizes indigenous ways of knowing to enable diverse resistances to Euro-
centric colonial dominance and new modes of re-collecting textured, culturally specific lives 
and relationships (e.g. Dudgeon 2008; Moeke-Maxwell et al. 2010; Tamanui 2012).
Indigenous scholars engaged in decolonizing research methodologies have written from 
strategically essentialized positions constituted through colonial discourse, to fracture essences 
as normalizing homogeneities and reterritorialize knowledge production as indigenous (e.g. 
Dudgeon and Fielder 2006; Tamanui 2012). From localized spaces where the specificities of 
tribe, iwi, wha¯nau, aiga are central, white imagination of indigenous identities has been ques-
tioned, destabilized, and re-constituted (Dudgeon and Fielder 2006). In the process, the binary 
coordinates of Eurocentric identities (urban/rural; authentic/fake; self/other) are reconfigured 
in a reflexive dialogue on ‘between spaces’ and culturally specific ‘third spaces’ that connect land, 
spiritual belonging, and home (e.g. Fredericks 2013; Tamanui 2012).
In our geopolitical region, the work of critical psychology that textures experiences of struc-
tural violence and opens spaces for decolonizing research is distinctive, and exceeds resistance 
to the centrality and privilege of Eurocentric normalization. Critical psychological research that 
writes back to the privileged intersections of gender, race, and class through engaging transdis-
ciplinary theories of subjectivity and discourse remains crucial to critiques of postcolonial and 
neoliberal discourse in the South Pacific. Yet the conditions of postcolonialism that centre on 
white imagination are often reproduced, even in resistance. Engagements with communities that 
involve partnerships and dialogues interrogating the textures of everyday lives within specific 
postcolonial locations both write back and diversify difference through multiple relationships of 
land, spirit, and subjectivities.
Contradictions and diversity
In our geopolitical location, as elsewhere, the turn to language has enabled diverse disruptions 
to the dominance of post-positivism. These disruptions produce multiple approaches to research 
praxis, as well as debates and characterizations that border on reproducing hierarchies of legiti-
mation and exclusion. Where indigenous scholars are already resisting colonial positioning that 
delegitimates their contributions to the discipline, the construction of borders that exclude or 
marginalize indigenous modes of critique and knowledge production normalizes Eurocentric 
authority even within critical psychology. Where indigenous scholars have questioned, desta-
bilized, and re-constituted the territory of critical knowledge production in psychology, the 

South Pacific
451
turn to language has both enabled decolonizing research and problematized the dominance of 
monolingualism in the conditions and critiques of Eurocentric postcolonialism. Where postco-
lonialism privileges Eurocentric theories of discourse, the suppression of indigenous languages 
is reproduced in critical psychological texts.
The contradictions between opening possibilities for diverse methodologies and critiques of 
Eurocentric dominance, and reproducing hierarchies of dominance, marginalization, and exclu-
sion in the process, take specific forms in our region and simultaneously position our resistances 
and challenges to Eurocentrism within the context of broader movements in globalization. The 
textures and matters of concern to those who have been constituted as ‘others’ through the ter-
ritorializations of white, masculinist imperialism are increasing the sites of discursive challenges 
and interruptions to social power relations and knowledge production. How we reflexively 
attend to the ways in which difference is always already textured through embodied (gendered/
racialized) processes of subjectification remains vital to our critical reflexive engagement with 
social transformations.
Further reading
Li, W. Hodgetts, D. and Ho, E. (2010) ‘Gardens, transitions and identity reconstruction among older Chinese 
immigrants to New Zealand’, Journal of Health Psychology, 15, 786–796.
Lyons, A., Madden, H., Chamberlain, K., and Carr, S. (2011) ‘ “It’s not really us discriminating against 
immigrants, it’s more telling people how to fit in”: constructing the nation in immigration talk in New 
Zealand’, Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 21, 14–27.
Sonn, C. (2010) ‘Engaging with the apartheid archive project: voices from the South African diaspora in 
Australia’, South African Journal of Psychology, 40, 432–442.
Website resources
National Indigenous Research and Knowledges Network (NIRAKN): http://www.nirakn.edu.au/
Tangihanga: The ultimate form of Ma¯ori cultural expression – overview of a research programme: http://
researchcommons.waikato.ac.nz/handle/10289/7968
References
Alefaio, S. (2009) ‘Reflections of a practicioner: purely a journey of the heart’, Pacific Health Dialog, 15, 
171–176.
Augoustinos, M. (2013) ‘Discourse analysis in psychology: what’s in a name?’, Qualitative Research in Psy-
chology, 10, 244–248.
Augoustinos, M. and Every, D. (2007) ‘The language of “race” and prejudice. A discourse of denial, reason, 
and liberal-practical politics’, Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 26, 123–141.
Braun, V. (2010) ‘Female genital cosmetic surgery: a critical review of current knowledge and contemporary 
debates’, Journal of Women’s Health, 19, 1393–1407.
Coombes, L. and Morgan, M. (2004) ‘Narrative form and the morality of psychology’s gendering stories’, 
Narrative Inquiry, 14, 303–322.
Cruz, M. and Sonn, C. (2011) ‘(De) colonizing culture in community psychology: reflections from critical 
social science’, American Journal of Community Psychology, 47, 203–214.
Dew, K., Chamberlain, K., Hodgetts, D., Norris, P., Radley, A., and Gabe, J. (2014) ‘Home as a hybrid centre 
of medication practice’, Sociology of Health and Illness, 36, 28–43.
Dudgeon, P. (2008) ‘Empowering research with Indigenous communities’, Ngoonjook: A Journal of Australian 
Indigenous Issues, 32, 8–26.
Dudgeon, P. and Fielder, J. (2006) ‘Third spaces within tertiary places: Indigenous Australian studies’, Journal 
of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 16, 396–409.
Dudgeon, P., Wright, M., Paradies, Y., Garvey, D. and Walker, I. (2010) ‘The social, cultural and historical 
context of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians’, in N. Purdie, P. Dudgeon and R. Walker 

Leigh Coombes and Mandy Morgan
452
(eds) Working Together: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Mental Health and Wellbeing Principles and Practice. 
Canberra: Office of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health, Department of Ageing.
Fredericks, B. (2013) ‘“We don’t leave our identities at the city limits”: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
people living in urban localities’, Australian Aboriginal Studies, 1, 4–16.
Gavey, N. (1989) ‘Feminist poststructuralism and discourse analysis: contributions to feminist psychology’, 
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 13, 459–475.
Gavey, N. (1992) ‘Technologies and effects of heterosexual coercion’, Feminism and Psychology, 2, 325–351.
Gavey, N. (2005) Just Sex? The Cultural Scaffolding of Rape. New York: Routledge.
Gavey, N. (2012) ‘ “Beyond ‘empowerment”? Sexuality in a sexist world’, Sex Roles, 66, 718–724.
Gavey, N. and Senn, C. (2014) ‘Sexual violence and sexuality’, in D. Tolman, L. Diamond, J. Bauermeister, W. 
George, J. Pfaus, L. Ward (eds) APA Handbook on Sexuality and Psychology. Washington, DC: APA Press.
Gill, R. and Donaghue, N. (2013) ‘As if postfeminism had come true: the turn to agency in cultural studies 
of “sexualisation” ’, in S. Madhok, A. Phillips and K. Wilson (eds) Gender, Agency, and Coercion. Basing-
stoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gridley, H. and Dudgeon, P. (2009) ‘National roundtable on research on racism towards Indigenous Aus-
tralians’, InPsych: The Bulletin of the Australian Psychological Society, 31, 34–35.
Groot, S., Hodgetts, D., Nikora, L., and Leggat-Cook, C. (2011) ‘A Ma¯ori homeless woman’, Ethnography, 
12, 375–397.
Groot, S., Rua, M., Dudgeon, P. and Garvey, D. (2012) ‘Editorial: Special Issue: Ignored no longer: emerging 
Indigenous researchers on Indigenous psychologies’, Australian Community Psychologist, 24, 5–10.
Hodgetts, D. and Chamberlain, K. (2006) ‘Developing a critical media research agenda for health psychol-
ogy’, Journal of Health Psychology, 11, 317–327.
Hodgetts, D., Chamberlain, K., Gabe, J., Dew, K., Radley, A., Madden, H., Norris, P. and Nikora, L. (2011) 
‘Emplacement and everyday use of medications in domestic dwellings’, Health Place, 17, 353–360.
Hodgetts, D., Chamberlain, K., Groot, S. and Tankel, Y. (2014) ‘Urban poverty, structural violence and wel-
fare provision for 100 families in Auckland’, Urban Studies, 51(10), 2036-2051.
Hodgetts, D., Chamberlain, K., Tankel, Y. and Groot, S. (2014) ‘Looking within and beyond the community: 
lessons learned by researching, theorising and acting to address urban poverty and health’, Journal of 
Health Psychology, 19, 97–102.
Hodgetts, D., Nikora, L. and Rua, M. (2011) ‘Maori men and the indirect procurement and sharing of 
prescription medications’, AlterNative, 7, 152–162.
Huygens, I. (2006) ‘Discourses for decolonization: affirming Maori authority in New Zealand workplaces’, 
Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 16, 363–378.
Jackson, S. and Weatherall, A. (2010) ‘(Im)possibilities of feminist sexuality education’, Feminism and Psy-
chology, 20, 1–20.
Jackson, S. and Westrupp, E. (2010) ‘Sex, popular culture and the pre-teen girl’, Sexualities, 13, 357–376.
Liu, J. and Mills, D. (2006) ‘Modern racism and neo-liberal globalization: the discourses of plausible denia-
bility and their multiple functions’, Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 16, 83–99.
Loto, R., Hodgetts, D., Chamberlain, K., Nikora, L., Karapu, R., and Barnett, A. (2006) ‘Pasifika in the 
news: the portrayal of Pacific peoples in the New Zealand press’, Journal of Community and Applied Social 
Psychology, 16, 100–118.
Lyons, A. (2009) ‘Masculinities, femininities, behaviour and health’, Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 
3, 394–412
Mark, G. and Chamberlain, K. (2012) ‘Ma¯ori healers’ perspectives on cooperation with biomedicine’, Aus-
tralian Community Psychologist, 24, 97–105.
McCreanor, T. (1993) ‘Pakeha psychology and its resistance to the Maori challenge’, New Zealand Psycho-
logical Bulletin, March, 23–27.
Moeke-Maxwell, T. (2005) ‘Bi/Multiracial Maori women’s hybridity in Aotearoa/New Zealand’, Discourse, 
26, 497–510.
Moeke-Maxwell, T., Nikora, L. and Te Awekotuku, N. (2010) ‘Dying to research: an autoethnographic 
exploration of researching Ma¯ori and wha¯nau experiences of end-of-life care’, in J. Te Rito and S. Healy 
(eds) Proceedings of the 4th International Traditional Knowledge Conference. Auckland: Nga Pae o Te 
Maramatanga New Zealand’s Ma¯ori Centre of Research Excellence.
Moran, C. and Lee, C. (2011) ‘On his terms: representations of sexuality in women’s magazines and the 
implications for negotiating safe sex’, Psychology and Sexuality, 2, 159–180.
Moran, C. and Lee, C. (2013) ‘Selling genital cosmetic surgery to healthy women: a multimodal discourse 
analysis of Australian surgical websites’, Critical Discourse Studies, 10, 373–391.

South Pacific
453
Moreton-Robinson, A. (2003) ‘I still call Australia home: indigenous belonging and place in a white post-
colonizing society’, in S. Ahmed, C. Castandeda, A. Fortier and M. Sheller (eds) Uprootings/ regroupings: 
Questions of Home and Migration. New York: Berg.
Moreton-Robinson, A. (2007) ‘Writing off indigenous sovereignty: the discourse of security and patriar-
chal white sovereignty’, in A. Moreton-Robinson (ed.) Sovereign Subjects: Indigenous Sovereignty Matters. 
Sydney: Allen and Unwin
Morgan, M. (2005) ‘Remembering embodied domination. Questions of critical/feminist psy-discourse on 
the body’, Theory & Psychology, 15, 357–372.
Morgan, M. (2011) ‘Sado-masochism and feminist desire: the other measure of true love bleeds’, Theory & 
Psychology, 21, 517–531.
Morgan, M., Coombes, L., and Campbell, B. (2006) ‘Biculturalism, gender and critical social movements in 
Aotearoa/New Zealand: still speaking from psychologies’ margins’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 
5, 52–68.
Morgan, S. (2008) ‘The balance for the world’ in S. Morgan, T. Mia and B. Kwaymullina (eds) Heartsick for 
Country: Stories of Love, Spirit and Creation. WA: Freemantle Press.
Nairn, R. and McCreanor, T. (1990) ‘Insensitivity and hypersensitivity: an imbalance in Pakeha accounts of 
racial conflict’, Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 9, 293–308.
Nairn, R., Pega, F., McCreanor, T., Rankine, J. and Barnes, A. (2006) ‘Media, racism and public health psy-
chology’, Journal of Health Psychology, 11, 183–196.
Nathan, S., Stephenson, N. and Braithwaite, J. (2014) ‘Sidestepping questions of legitimacy: how commu-
nity representatives manoeuvre to effect change in a health service’, Health, 18, 23–40.
Nikora, L., Te Awekotuku, N. and Tamanui, V. (2013) ‘Home and the spirit in the Ma¯ori World’, Paper 
presented at the He Manawa Whenua Conference, University of Waikato, Hamilton, http://hdl.handle.
net/10289/7972
Pond, R. and Morgan, M. (2008) ‘Protection, manipulation or interference with relationships? Discourse 
analysis of New Zealand lawyers’ talk about supervised access and partner violence’, Journal of Commu-
nity and Applied Social Psychology, 18, 458–473.
Riggs, D. (2013) ‘Critical psychology in a context of ongoing acts of colonisation’, Annual Review of Critical 
Psychology, 10, http://www.discourseunit.com/arcp10/Australia%2079-88.pdf
Riggs, D. and Augoustinos, M. (2004) ‘Projecting threat: managing subjective investments in whiteness’, 
Psychoanalysis, Culture and Society, 9, 219–236.
Seiuli, B. (2012) ‘Uputaua: a therapeutic approach to researching Samoan Communities’, Australian Com-
munity Psychologist, 24, 24–37.
Smith, L. (1999) Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples. London and New York: Zed 
Books.
Sonn, C. and Green, M. (2006) ‘Problematising the discourses of the dominant: whiteness and reconcilia-
tion’, Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 16, 379–395.
Stephens, C. (2014) ‘Paying the piper: additional considerations of the theoretical, ethical and moral basis of 
financial incentives for health behaviour change’, International Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 21, 202–205.
Stephenson, N. (2011) ‘Emerging infectious disease/emerging forms of biological sovereignty’, Science, 
Technology and Human Values, 36, 616–637.
Stuart, A. and Donaghue, N. (2012) ‘Choosing to conform: the discursive complexities of choice in relation 
to feminine beauty practices’, Feminism & Psychology, 22, 98–121.
Tamanui, V. (2012) Our unutterable breath: a Ma¯ori indigene’s autoethnography of whanaungatanga Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, Massey University, New Zealand.
Teddy, L., Nikora, L. and Guerin, B. (2008) ‘Place attachment of Nga¯i Te Ahi to Hairini Marae’, MAI 
Review, 1, Article 3, http://www.review.mai.ac.nz
Tolmie, J., Elizabeth, V. and Gavey, N. (2010) ‘Imposing gender neutral standards on a gendered world: par-
enting arrangements in family law post separation’, Canterbury Law Review, 16, 302–330.
Tuffin, K. (2013) ‘Studying racism in Aotearoa/New Zealand’, Annual Review of Critical Psychology, 10, 
http://www.discourseunit.com/arcp10/Aotearoa-New%20Zealand%20II%2050-61.pdf
Ussher, J. (2011) The Madness of Women: Myth and Experience. London: Routledge.
Wraith, C. and Stephenson, N. (2009) ‘Risk, insurance, preparedness and the disappearance of the popula-
tion: the case of pandemic influenza’, Health Sociology Review, 18, 220–233.

This page intentionally left blank

455
Index
abnormal psychology: the ethical-political 
dimension in psychology 93⁜–⁜4; on normal vs. 
abnormal 88⁜–⁜9; resistance of the abnormal 
92⁜–⁜3; on social construction of the diagnostic 
criteria 89⁜–⁜2
abuse: of abuse 285; childhood 66, 102, 204, 
284⁜–⁜5; of human rights 242; in the lives of 
prisoners 98, 100⁜–⁜2; physical 39, 56; of power 
172, 236; of psychology 174, 361; sexual 56, 66, 
98, 102, 204, 218, 284⁜–⁜5; spouse 39; substance 
98, 184, 255, 422
academic communities 120⁜–⁜1, 151, 319, 423
academic psychology 168, 196, 252⁜–⁜3, 301, 366, 
371, 373, 415, 417, 422, 432
accountability 150, 245, 392
ACT UP 339
action psychology 438
action research 5⁜–⁜6, 111⁜–⁜12, 151, 177, 214,  
351
activism and activists: community 108, 151, 235, 
422; decolonization 368; emancipatory disability 
151; feminist 329, 331; grassroots 416; Intifada 
419; liberation 411; mental health 219; political 
160, 206, 446; psychologists as 156; queer 339; 
researchers as 286; social 169, 391; spiritual 390; 
transdisciplinary 152
activities and activity: cultural, social, and historical 
dimensions of 263; mental vs. social 28; situated 
267; social 155; three-level structure of 264
activity theory: conclusions 267⁜–⁜8; from a critical 
psychology perspective 266⁜–⁜7; cultural-
historical 265⁜–⁜6, 271, 272; definitions and 
sources 261⁜–⁜3; in European psychology 439; 
in Russian psychology 435, 438; socio-cultural 
234, 280; versions of 263⁜–⁜5, 274
actualization 128, 206, 291, 390; see also 
 self-actualization
Addelston, Judi 196
addiction treatment 255, 284
ADHD 228
Adler, Alfred 131
adolescence: Erikson’s description of 333; in 
human development 88; myth of 252
adolescents: and freedom 335⁜–⁜6; identity in 332; 
intersex and transgender 196; pregnancy and 397
Adorno, Theodor W. 64, 123, 146, 235, 256
advertising 48, 61, 64, 118, 291
affect theory 46, 49, 205, 311
affection(s) 43⁜–⁜5
affective turn 48, 73
affectivity 47, 49
affects 46, 49, 205, 207, 311, 439
affirmative therapy 201, 342
affordance 30
Africa: context of personality in 63; cosmology in 
186, 398; function of elders in 400; humanism 
in 130; psychoanalysis in 426; see also African 
psychology; critical psychology in Africa
Africana Womanism 391
African psychology: alternative worldview of 
186, 187; connection with Black psychology 
183; difficulty defining 398⁜–⁜9; history of 400; 
indigenous 356; other Black psychologies 187; 
see also Africa; Afrocentric psychology; critical 
psychology in Africa
Afrocentric psychology 59, 183, 359, 361
Afrocentricity 186
agency: of the ‘other’ 369; and PSS 283, 285; 
restrictive vs. generalized 283⁜–⁜5, 286; and 
sexuality 206
agency fetish 447
aggression 127, 195, 422
Alatas, S. F. 358
alcohol use 215; in Black communities 184
alienation 5⁜–⁜6, 30, 119, 214
alienists 214; see also psychiatry
Allport, Gordon 62, 80, 107, 128, 132
alterity 370, 390
Alternative Discourses in Asian Social Science: 
Responses to Eurocentrism (Alatas) 358
alternative therapeutic communities 219; see also 
therapeutic communities
Althusser, Louis 253, 277, 293, 318
Alvarado Chavarría, Jimena 219⁜–⁜20
American continent: characterization of 406⁜–⁜8; 
colonization of 408; conclusion 413; diversity 

Index
456
and inequality 408⁜–⁜9; inequality in 407⁜–⁜8; 
organization and liberation of the oppressed 
411⁜–⁜12; psychology as science and profession 
409⁜–⁜11; see also Canada; Central America; Latin 
America; North America; South America; 
United States
American Journal of Community Psychology 148
American Psychological Association (APA) 122, 
129, 148, 179, 191, 222
American Psychologist 179
American University (Beirut) 417
analytic social psychology 436
anarchism individualism 130
andragogy 132, 194
Angyal, Andras 131
animal, becoming 388
antagonism 369, 387, 389, 392, 438
anthropocentrism 134, 204, 207
anthropology 46, 74, 351, 391, 421
anti-capitalism 430
anti-colonialism 358, 359, 430
anti-cultural imperialism 359
anti-democratic asymmetries 140
anti-essentialism 46
antifeminism 34
anti-foundationalist approach 301
anti-humanism 205⁜–⁜7
anti-positivism 145
anti-privatization movements 397
antipsychiatry movement 93, 108, 147, 214, 
216⁜–⁜20
anti-racist movement 74, 108, 359
anxiety 44, 89, 215, 245, 321
Anzaldúa, Gloria 340, 389⁜–⁜91
Aotearoa see New Zealand
apartheid 65, 372
applied behaviour analysis 33
appropriation 111, 123, 185⁜–⁜6, 265, 267, 306, 307, 
321, 331, 339, 350, 370, 387
Arab World: colonialism in 416⁜–⁜18; see also critical 
psychology in Palestine
archaeology 118
Argentine Psychoanalytical Association 93
Arguing and Thinking (Billig) 315
Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) 54, 55
Arnold, Magda B. 45
art, as means of addressing social problems 123
artefacts 193, 227, 244, 252, 266, 282, 284
Artificial Intelligence (AI) 27
Ash, Solomon 80
Asia: indigenous psychology in 356; location vs. 
character of 426⁜–⁜9; see also critical psychology 
in Asia
assessment(s): dynamic 234; instruments for 
20, 167; psychological 15, 231⁜–⁜2; see also 
intelligence tests; testing
Association for Moral and Social Hygiene 201
Association for Women in Psychology 193
Association of Black Psychologists 183
Association of Humanistic Psychology (AHP) 129
asylum seekers 109
asylums 213⁜–⁜14, 217; see also psychiatric hospitals
atomism 118
attachment theory and disorders 75
Auckland City Mission 449
Aufheben 271, 272, 274, 275
Augoustinos, Martha 321
Australia: community psychology in 150; feminist 
agendas in 75; race-relations in 321; see also 
critical psychology in South Pacific
Australian Psychology Society 148
Austria, critical psychologies in 435, 439
Authoritarian Personality, The (Adorno et al.) 138
authoritarianism 435, 436
autonomic nervous system (ANS) 45
autonomy: Angyal’s theory of 131; of clients 167; 
in feminist psychology 331⁜–⁜2; rational 73
Averill, J. R. 47
Ayurveda 63
Bandura, Albert 33, 234
Barnardos 101
Barthes, Roland 297
Barzun, Jacques 128
Bateson, Gregory 226
Battered Woman Syndrome (BWS) 38⁜–⁜9
Bayesian methods 21
Beck, Aaron 34
Beck, Ulrich 224⁜–⁜5
Becker, Dana 227
Behavioral Research and Instruction Unit (BRIU) 
96
behaviour: analysis of 34; classification of 89⁜–⁜92; 
criminal 96; health 176⁜–⁜7; influences on 175; 
intergroup 81; interpretation and understanding 
of 4⁜–⁜5; as metaphor 298; prosocial 195; S-O-
R-C formulation of 33⁜–⁜4; theories of 240, 242; 
see also group behaviours
Behaviour Analyst Certification Board (BACB) 34
behavioural sequences 4
behavioural units 35⁜–⁜6
behaviourism(s) 107, 127⁜–⁜9, 133, 234, 262, 281; 
classical 33, 34, 35⁜–⁜40; cognitive 33⁜–⁜4; radical 
34⁜–⁜40, 358; radical vs. classical 34; three 
branches of 33⁜–⁜4
behaviourist psychology see classical behaviourism
Being and Time (Heidegger) 301
Belgium, critical psychology in 439
Bell Curve, The (Murray & Herrnstein), 54⁜–⁜5
Bern, Sandra, 194
Bhabha, Homi 372, 373
Bhaskar, Roy 362
bibliotherapy 252
biculturalism, critical 427

Index
457
Biehl, Joao 146
Biko, Steve 372, 373
Billig, Michael 315, 316, 318
Binswanger, Ludwig 131
biodynamic modality 129
biographical methods 139
biological determinism 54, 293
biological psychology 52⁜–⁜3; conclusions 59; 
critical responses 57⁜–⁜9; critiques of 54⁜–⁜7
biological reductionism 54
biologicizing 90
biology 3; cell 57; developmental 57
Bion, Wilfred 290
biopolitics 340
biopsychosocial model 53
biotech companies 59
biotechnosciences 59
Birth of the Clinic, The (Foucault) 299
Birzeit University (Palestine) 148, 415, 416; critical 
community psychology at 421⁜–⁜3
bisexuality 204
‘black box’ psychology 34
Black Consciousness 183, 185
Black feminism 329, 331
Black feminist theory 240, 242, 246⁜–⁜7
Black Nationalism 183
black power movement 71
Black psychology: as alternative to mainstream 
psychology 183⁜–⁜7; historical emergence of 
182⁜–⁜3; other types of 187; reflective critique 
187⁜–⁜8; schools of thought in 183, 184
Black Radicalism 183
Black Rage (Grier & Cobbs) 185
Blacks: family structure of 185; lived experience 
of 184⁜–⁜5
Board Certified Assistant Behaviour Analysts 
(BCaBA) 34
Board Certified Behaviour Analysis (BCBA) 34
Bologna process 436
Borda Hospital (Buenos Aires) 91
borderlands, spiritual 389⁜–⁜91
Borderline Personality Disorder 66
Boulder model 17
boundaries, in social work 243
Bourdieu, Pierre 142
bourgeois psychology 277
Bracken, Pat 214, 217, 219
Bradley, Ben 235
Brah, Avtar 196
brain: and emotions 48⁜–⁜9; internality of 302; 
nature of 255; rewiring 255; vs. self 256; see also 
neurobiology; neurophysiology; neuroscience
brain imaging technologies 48, 53, 55, 59, 62, 75
Britain: childhood studies in 74; psychological 
testing in 232
British critical psychology 437⁜–⁜41
British Psychological Association 195
British Psychological Society (BPS) 147, 196
British Society for the Study of Sex Psychology 
200⁜–⁜1
Bronfenbrenner, Urie 234
Brown v. Board of Education 184
Brown, Thomas 45
Bruner, Jerome 234
Buber, Martin 131
Buddhism 428
Bugental, James 128
Bühler, Charlotte 128
Bulhan, H. A. 183
Burnam, Erica 194, 195, 196, 234, 299
Burt, Cyril 70, 233
Butler, Judith 146, 292, 340, 344, 345
Butterfield, Victor 128
Calkins, Mary Whiton 192
Canada: community psychology in 150; 
indigenous psychology in 356, 359; see also 
American continent; North America
Cannon, Walter B. 45, 46, 47
capitalism: alienation under 119; capitalist 
imperialism 367; capitalist industrial society 
276; challenges to 386, 392, 393; cognitive 
psychology and 29; and colonialism 408; 
colonizing 352; commodity 291; contemporary 
291, 370, 445; critique of 146, 435; and desire 
312⁜–⁜13; deterritorialization of 313; divided 
psyches produced by 218; European 47; global 
307, 371; impact of 370; investigation of 307; 
late 166, 222, 226, 257, 370, 387, 391; in Latin 
America 408; liberal 368; and organizational life 
85; and popular psychology 256; post-modern 
387; and psychology 409; and psychotherapy 
226; re-energizing of 440; resistance to 214, 219; 
and the social machine 312; and violence 408; 
Western 292
Capitalism and Schizophrenia: Anti-Oedipus (Guattari 
and Deleuze) 307, 308⁜–⁜9, 310
Castel, Francoise 219
Castel, Robert 219, 438
Cattell, James McKean 33, 232
Caudill, David 292
cell biology 57
Center for Activity Theory and Developmental 
Work Research 266
Central America 407; psychology in 410; violence 
in 353; see also American continent; Latin 
America; Mexico
Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies 
(Birmingham) 438
centre of intentionality 283
Changing the Subject (Henriques et al.) 72, 292, 315
Charcot, Jean-Martin 216, 218
charitable institutions 241
Charity Organisation Society 241

Index
458
Chernobyl disaster 224
Cherry, Scott 253, 254
child fundamentalisms 75
childhood and development, in feminist 
psychology 330, 331⁜–⁜2
childhood studies 71, 74
children: in Africa 398; assessment of 72; African-
American 184⁜–⁜5; development of 73⁜–⁜5, 
284; exposure to violence 420; intersex and 
transgender 196; and the law 284; political 
socialization of 139; psychologization of 430; 
rights of 74; sexual abuse of 218, 284, 285; and 
sexuality 202, 203; socialization of 332
China, critical psychology in 425, 427, 428; see also 
critical psychology in Asia
Christian theories 119
Citizenship 143
Civil Rights Movement 183
class, and race 336
class struggle 30⁜–⁜1, 369
classical behaviourism 33, 34, 35⁜–⁜40; see also 
behaviourism(s)
clinical psychology 17, 165, 167, 168, 176, 196, 
223, 224, 227, 359
clinical social workers 223
Cloaca (Delvoye) 123
Coatalopeuh 390
cognition: classical models of 25⁜–⁜6; embodied 
25⁜–⁜6; grounded 25, 31; psychologists’ view 
of 44⁜–⁜5; relocation of 109; see also cognitive 
function; cognitive processes
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) 34, 164, 225; 
models for 167, 168
cognitive behaviourism 33⁜–⁜4, 174⁜–⁜5
cognitive function 58, 311; see also cognition
cognitive processes 4, 26, 28, 33, 48, 81
cognitive psychology 24, 174, 175, 281; criticism 
of 26⁜–⁜9; from culture to political economy 
29⁜–⁜30; evolution of 24⁜–⁜6
cognitivism 24, 25, 29, 49, 82, 107, 174, 176, 177, 
234, 276, 302
Cohen, David 216
Cohen, Gerald Allan 277
collaboration 20, 29, 74, 111, 122, 147, 436, 448
collective action 83, 423
collective consciousness 83, 276
collective mind 79⁜–⁜80
collective phenomena 80
collective unconscious 392
collectivism, methodological 351
collectivities, creative 391⁜–⁜2
Colombia: liberation psychology in 354; violence 
in 354
colonial psychology 148, 413, 415, 417; see also 
postcolonial psychology
colonialism: in Africa 400; and antipsychiatry 214; 
British 426; and capitalism 408; in the CGDS 
frame 384; critique of 367; in disability studies 
381⁜–⁜2; effects of 367, 368, 373; European 
47, 415, 417; history of 5; in India 426; and 
indigenous peoples 445; in Israel 149, 416, 417, 
423; in the Philippines 360; and psychological 
knowledge 121⁜–⁜2; psychology of 373; settler 
416⁜–⁜17, 422, 445; in South Pacific 445, 446, 
448, 450; and spiritual beliefs 387; Western 
366, 368, 369; in the work of Parker 372; see 
also anti-colonialism; colonial psychology; 
neocolonialism; postcolonialism
colonization: in African psychology 398; of the 
American continent 408; of bodies 381; as 
colonial trauma 373; of everyday life 28, 166, 
276, 440; of indigenous peoples 359; intellectual 
147, 150; Israeli 420, 422; in Latin America 
407⁜–⁜10, 426; in the Philippines 432; psychology 
and 409; resistance to 384; and social work 241; 
in South Pacific 445, 446, 448; Zionist 416⁜–⁜17, 
422; see also decolonization
commodity culture 219
Common Knowledge (Edwards and Mercer) 315
communication 82, 297⁜–⁜8
communities: academic 120⁜–⁜1, 151, 319, 423; 
influence of 175⁜–⁜6; of knowledge 99; of 
practice 71; therapeutic 92⁜–⁜3, 219
community activism 108, 151, 235, 422
community based organizations 156
community development 146⁜–⁜7
community health psychology 174
Community Psychologist, The 149
community psychology and psychologists: 
conclusion 151⁜–⁜2; critical 397; critical frames 
of reference 145⁜–⁜6; defined 146⁜–⁜7; mentioned 
151, 187, 226, 400; opportunities for critique 
147⁜–⁜8; in the Palestinian context 415⁜–⁜23; some 
problems 148⁜–⁜51; in South Africa 146; subjects 
addressed by 147; textbooks for 147
Community Psychology in Israel (Raviv et al.) 149
community therapy 351
compliance 36, 146, 151⁜–⁜2, 281, 439
conation 44⁜–⁜5
Condition of Postmodernity, The (Harvey) 30
conditioning 33, 282
conflict: and narrative analysis 110; in relationships 
140; social 353; and social identity theory 81, 83, 
84; theories of 45
connectionism 25⁜–⁜6, 31
conscientization 122, 411, 422
consciousness 141, 143, 263; and activity 264; 
‘naturalizing’ 17; and PSS 285
conservatism 139
conservative individualistic theories 119
constructionism 46, 111, 112, 167; see also social 
constructionism
constructivist models 167
consumerism 48, 146

Index
459
context: in Asia 425; in disability studies 384; of 
discourse 317; in indigenous psychology 362; in 
organizational social psychology 83; social 1, 67, 
128⁜–⁜9, 146, 148, 204⁜–⁜5, 234
contextualization 71; see also decontextualization
conversations analysis (CA) 28, 301, 315, 316, 317, 
319, 397; feminist 320⁜–⁜1
Cooper, David 93
Córdoba, David 345
Corston Report 99
cosmology, African 186, 398
cosmopolitanism 188
counselling 129, 164, 223, 431; vs. counselling 
psychology 166⁜–⁜8; humanistic 164⁜–⁜6
counselling psychology: conclusion 169⁜–⁜70; 
differences of 164⁜–⁜6; limitations of 168⁜–⁜9; 
usefulness of 166⁜–⁜8
counterculture 133, 134, 219, 307
‘Cracker’ (television show) 96
creolization 188, 370
criminality 54, 96; construction of 97⁜–⁜8
criminalization of mental illness 98
Critical Community Psychology (Kagan et al.) 146
critical community psychology 397, 449; at Birzeit 
University 421⁜–⁜3
critical disability studies (CDS) 378; and 
colonization 381⁜–⁜3; critical approaches to 
global disability 377⁜–⁜8; critical global disability 
studies 383⁜–⁜4; elements of 378; homogenizing 
380⁜–⁜1; influence of the Global North 378⁜–⁜81
critical discursive psychology 316
critical educational discourse 235
critical feminism 151, 335, 447⁜–⁜8; see also 
feminism
Critical Global Disability Studies (CGDS) 384
critical health psychology 174⁜–⁜9, 397, 448; 
methodologies in 177
critical inquiry 38⁜–⁜9
critical narrative analysis 110
critical neuroscience 58
critical pedagogy 132, 235
Critical Psychiatry Network 214
critical psychoanalysis 290⁜–⁜3
critical psychologists: on academic psychology 301; 
in Africa 400; in Asia 429, 430; and behaviour 
35; and biological psychology 58; and class 
struggle 31; vs. community psychologists 
151; contributions of 16⁜–⁜21; on counselling 
psychologists 165, 169; and critical disability 
studies 376; deconstructive 300, 302; on 
discourse studies 315, 317; in Europe 436, 438; 
and indigenous psychologists 356, 362; in Latin 
America 411; and postcolonial theory 372; and 
psychoanalysis 293; and qualitative research 
114; on reflexivity 38, 179; relationship with 
psychology 2⁜–⁜7; on sexual liberation 206; on 
Spinoza 49; stances toward psychology 174, 290, 
294; as teachers 148; and theoretical psychology 
117⁜–⁜23
critical psychology: and the American continent 
406⁜–⁜13; in the Arab World 415⁜–⁜23; and 
biological psychology 58; and Black psychology 
183, 184; and counselling 168; critiques and 
standpoints 6⁜–⁜7; and deconstruction 299⁜–⁜399, 
302⁜–⁜3; Deleuze on 306; and discursive 
psychology 315⁜–⁜16; division into sub-specialties 
7; and education 234; function of 175; German 
267; and health issues 174; internal debates 
in 301⁜–⁜2; in Latin America 411⁜–⁜12; and 
liberation 145; liberation psychology as 351⁜–⁜2; 
Marxist 287; as postcolonial critique 373; and 
postcolonial theory 371⁜–⁜3; and psychoanalysis 
290⁜–⁜4; and queer theory 343⁜–⁜5; and radical 
social work 243; revolutionary nature of 169; 
and the role of quantification in psychology 16; 
spirituality as 387; standpoints and perspectives 
7; see also critical psychology in Africa; critical 
psychology in Asia; critical psychology in 
Europe; critical psychology in Palestine; critical 
psychology in South Pacific
critical psychology in Africa: Africanizing 
psychology 398⁜–⁜401; demand for 397⁜–⁜40; 
future directions 403; need for 401⁜–⁜3; see also 
Africa; African psychology
critical psychology in Asia: character vs. location 
of Asia 426⁜–⁜7; four forms of 427; fundamental 
concepts 431⁜–⁜2; indigenous culture and 427⁜–⁜9; 
liberated/liberating 432; many faces of Asia 
425⁜–⁜6; in neoliberal times 430⁜–⁜1; possible 
position regarding 430; see also Asia; China; Japan
critical psychology in Europe: conclusion 440; 
Ichihara Open Prison 434⁜–⁜5; other European 
critical psychologies 439⁜–⁜40; resourceful 
geopolitical epicentres 435⁜–⁜9; see also Europe
critical psychology in Palestine 415⁜–⁜16; colonial 
condition and knowledge 416⁜–⁜18; conclusion 
422⁜–⁜3; critical community psychology at 
Birzeit University 421⁜–⁜2; early manifestations 
of community psychology 418⁜–⁜19; problematic 
manifestations 419⁜–⁜21
critical psychology in South Pacific: 
autoethnography 450; and the concept of 
‘place’ 444; contradictions and diversity 450⁜–⁜1; 
and critical community psychology 449; and 
critical health psychology 448; and critical 
social psychology 448; ethnographic research 
strategies 449⁜–⁜50; and Eurocentrism 448⁜–⁜9; 
and globalization 445⁜–⁜6; in New Zealand 426, 
428; post-structuralist feminism and discourse 
analysis 447⁜–⁜9; see also Australia; New Zealand
critical psychotherapy 228
critical realism 81, 301, 344, 362
critical relativism 344
critical social psychology 397, 448

Index
460
critical social theory 436, 437
critical theory 130, 437; as Marxist enterprise 308; 
of the subject 436
critical-emancipatory psychology 360⁜–⁜1
cross-cultural psychology 359
Cuba, psychologists in 409
cultural dynamism 188
cultural imperialism 29, 359
cultural issues 70⁜–⁜1
cultural pluralism 147
cultural relativism 429
cultural studies 292⁜–⁜3, 436, 438
cultural theory 74
cultural turn 427, 431, 432
cultural-historical activity theory (CHAT) 265⁜–⁜6, 
271, 280
cultural-historical psychology 264, 266, 438
cultural-historical theory 435
culture(s): aesthetics within 291; African 398; 
awareness of 291; emphasis on 81; Latin 
American 411; non-Western 177; organizational 
82⁜–⁜3; and personality 63; in postcolonial theory 
369; as principle of critical psychology 5⁜–⁜6; 
psychoanalysis and 293; significance of 121; 
therapeutic 227, 229; translational dimensions 
of 369
Culture & Psychology 320
cybernetics 24
Cyprus, critical psychology in 439
Czech Republic, critical psychology in 439
Darwin, Charles 37, 39⁜–⁜40, 45, 53, 56, 73
Darwinism 57; social 182
Das Kapital (Marx) 264, 275
Davis, Kathy 227
Davydov, V. V. 265
De Certeau, Michel 157
de Lauretis, Teresa 339, 340, 343
Dean, Tim 344
death, and poverty 176
decolonization 147, 348, 357, 358, 360, 362, 367, 
373, 431, 449, 450, 451; see also colonization
decolonizing psychology 187
deconstruction 70⁜–⁜1, 72, 74, 166, 234, 344; 
background 297⁜–⁜8; of childhood 330, 331⁜–⁜2; as 
critical psychology 299⁜–⁜300; and feminism 73; 
internal debates in critical psychology 301⁜–⁜2; 
literary 300; as literary theory 303; practical 299, 
303; response to the internal debates 302⁜–⁜3; 
rethinking psychologism 300⁜–⁜1; in the social 
sciences 303; see also post-structuralism
deconstructionism 75
decontextualization 71, 81, 147
deep relationship 392⁜–⁜3
deinstitutionalization movement 216
Deleuze, Gilles 205, 388⁜–⁜9; perspectives on 306; 
writings with Guattari 306⁜–⁜13
Delvoye, Wim 123
Denmark, critical psychology in 439
depression 89, 228, 253; economic 276
depsychologization 362
deracialization, discursive 109
Derrida, Jacques 72, 246, 297, 300⁜–⁜1, 340, 426; on 
deconstruction 302⁜–⁜3; influence on Parker 299; 
on postcolonial theory 368
Descartes, René 34
Descriptive Phenomenological Method 108
desexualization 332
determinism 57, 58; biological 54, 293; social 360
deterritorialization 311, 312, 313
devaluation of exchange rate 382
developmental biology 57
developmental psychology 71, 73, 74, 75, 293, 330, 
331; critical 74
developmental stages 274⁜–⁜5
developmentalism 331
Dewey, John 37, 38, 45, 107, 232, 235, 236
diagnosis, politics of 216
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM) 65, 90, 122, 200, 398
diagnostic criteria 89⁜–⁜92
dialectical method: challenges of 276⁜–⁜7; and 
psychology 274⁜–⁜5; value of 278; Vygotsky’s 
application of 275⁜–⁜6
dialectics 268, 275; defined 277; Hegelian Marxist 
271⁜–⁜2, 274; and Marx 278; materialist 271, 275; 
mechanistic 272; of  Vygotsky 272⁜–⁜3
‘diamat’ 272
diaspora 370, 446
dictatorial asymmetries 140
Die Grundrisse (Marx) 275
digital computer 24⁜–⁜25
Dilthey, Wilhelm 107
disability: discourse of 345; medical model of 147
disability activism 151
disability movement 382; see also critical disability 
studies
disability research 147
disability studies 74, 345; in the Global North 381; 
in the Global South 376⁜–⁜84
disabling practices 150
discourse: contexts of 317; patterns of 317⁜–⁜18; as 
social action 316⁜–⁜17
Discourse & Society 320
discourse analysis 109⁜–⁜10, 177, 281, 428, 438, 448; 
post-structuralist 447
discourse analytic research 108
Discourse and Social Psychology (Potter and 
Wetherell) 315
discourse psychology 344
discourse theory 82
discrimination 184, 187, 276, 317; in education 
236; gender 176; in the justice system 98; sexual 
206

Index
461
discursive psychology (DP) 175, 301⁜–⁜2, 397, 
438; British 438; conclusions 321; and critical 
psychology 315⁜–⁜16; discursive patterns 317⁜–⁜18; 
illustrative examples 320⁜–⁜21; orthodoxy in 
321⁜–⁜2; relational and distributed psychology 
318; as social action 316⁜–⁜17; splits and 
differences 319⁜–⁜20
discursive research 109, 315, 321
Discursive Social Psychology (DSP) 28, 82
disease: behavioural causes of 173; and poverty 176
dispositioning schemes 36
dispossession 445
diversity 147, 160, 165; cultural 146; functional 
345
domestic violence 98, 99, 353, 422, 447
domestic violence psychology 38⁜–⁜9
dominant psychology 308
Donaghue, Ngaire 447
Douglas, Mary 438
Dreier, Ole 284
drive reduction theory 33⁜–⁜4
drugs: abuse of 184; in Central America 353; 
and gender 335⁜–⁜6; ‘good’ vs. ‘bad’ 215; in the 
military 215; psychoactive 215, 216; recreational 
215, 218
DSM see Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM)
dualisms: animal-environment 26; Cartesian 47, 
276; implicit 58; individual-society 19⁜–⁜20, 242; 
intersecting 242; Manichean 349; mind-body 
34, 38; person-environment 157; in social work 
242; subject-object 30
Dubos, René 128
Durkeim, Émile 276
Eagly, Alice 191
East Asia, indigenous psychology in 356, 359
eclectic models 167
eclecticism 277
ecofeminism 329
ecological emphasis 133
ecological knowledge 356
ecological niches 66
ecological psychology 26⁜–⁜7, 29⁜–⁜30, 71; see also 
ecopsychology
ecological systems theory 175, 234
Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts (Marx) 264
economics 118; global 176; market 65, 312
ecopsychology 134, 392; see also ecological 
psychology
ecotherapy 134
Edelman, Lee 341
education 7, 71, 74, 82, 118, 421; codifying 
psychology in 231⁜–⁜3; colonial 417, 418; 
democratic 132; emotionalism in 235; and 
feminist psychology 330; in humanistic 
psychology 131⁜–⁜2; institutionalization of 411; 
neoliberal politics in 436⁜–⁜7; normative order 
in 91; person-centered approach to 131; special 
232; un-institutionalized 419
educational psychology 74, 231⁜–⁜3
Educational Psychology (Vygotsky) 272
egalitarianism, neoliberal 448
ego psychology 290
egocentrism 177, 179
Egypt, psychology in 417
Ehrenberg, Alain 253
Ekman, Paul 48
electroshock treatments 215
Elkonin, Daniel 265
Ellis, Albert 34
Ellis, Havelock 192
emancipation 227, 243, 267, 360⁜–⁜1, 411, 415; 
emotional and psychological 183; sexual 200, 
206; see also liberation
emotion(s): agency and 253; and art 43⁜–⁜4; 
biological construction of 48⁜–⁜9; and brain 
function 47⁜–⁜9; construction of 318; critiques 
of mainstream traditions 46⁜–⁜7; evaluation of 
critiques of 48⁜–⁜9; liminality of 49; mainstream 
traditions 45⁜–⁜6; and the motivational theory of 
affect 46; nature of 49; vs. reason 47; scientific 
examination of 44⁜–⁜6; social construction of 46; 
study of 439; subjective nature of 44; ‘two factor’ 
theory of 46; Western concept of, 46⁜–⁜8
emotion talk 48
empirical psychology 17
empiricism 75, 351; English 71; feminist 18⁜–⁜19, 
447; transcendental 306
empowerment 220, 227; in social work 242; of 
women 447
energy inequality 402
Engels, Friedrich 143, 275, 308, 360; influence on 
Vygotsky 273⁜–⁜4
Engeström, Yrjö 261, 262, 265, 266, 267
environment: degradation of 176; effect of 35, 39, 
59; relationship of organisms to 26; significance 
of 100
environmental issues: psychology and 402; 
variables 56
environmental psychology 157
epigenetics 59
epistemology(ies) 16, 19, 21, 29, 37⁜–⁜8, 70; anti-
positivistic 132; feminist 37, 330; indigenous 
422; positivist 35; postmodern 21; scientific 436; 
social 121; socialized 360; techno-scientific 439
Epstein, William 168
equilibration 274, 277
erasure 65, 80, 380, 381, 428, 431
Erikson, Erik 332⁜–⁜3, 334
essentialism 243; strategic 187, 206
essentialist reflexes 35⁜–⁜6
ethical-practical work 120⁜–⁜3
ethics 49, 130; social 146

Index
462
Ethics (Spinoza) 309
ethnic cleansing 416
ethnocentrism/ethnocentricity 177, 179, 367, 371
ethnogenics 315
ethnography 449
ethnomethodology 28, 315, 317, 319
eugenics movement 70, 182, 233
Eupsychian Network 128
Eurocentricity/Eurocentrism 169, 358, 359, 367, 
370, 371, 428, 446, 447, 448, 450⁜–⁜1
Europe: critical psychology in 434⁜–⁜40; health 
psychology in 173, 179; indigenous psychology 
in 356; psychology and education in 232; social 
psychology in 81, 82
European Community Psychology Association 148
European Federation of Psychologists’ Associations 
148
European High Education Space 436
European Social Theory 157
European Union 440; academic standards in 436
evaluation see assessment
evidence-based practice (EBP) movement 16, 18, 
164
evolution 56, 282
evolutionary psychology 52, 75, 119; conclusions, 
59; critical responses 57⁜–⁜9; critiques of 54⁜–⁜7
evolutionary theory 37, 192, 439
exchange rate devaluation 382
exclusion 449, 450; in discourse 320; in education 
236; social 188, 410
exile 370
existentialism 108, 167, 307; French 130
experience: analysis of 20; biological aspects of 
58; false ontology of 20; nature of 20; political 
philosophy of 49; socio-political grounding of 
17, 19; subjective 44
experientialism 112, 127
experimental psychology 88
exploitation 184, 287, 422; in Latin America 408
exteriority 342, 343
externalization 261
Eysenck, Hans 167
Facebook 439
family: influence of 175⁜–⁜6; normative relationships 
in 321
Family 100 Project 449⁜–⁜50
family therapy 226, 284
famine 276
Fanon, Frantz 183, 372, 372; on colonialism 416
fascism 64, 123, 213, 310, 312, 313, 435
fatalism 350
Fechner, Gustav 15
Feger, Hubert 281
Feminine Mystique, The (Friedan) 192
femininity 292, 344, 447; vs. masculinity 193⁜–⁜4, 195
feminism(s)/feminists: academic 331; in Africa 397; 
agenda of 235; in Aotearoa/New Zealand 448; 
in Asia 430; communities of knowledge and 99; 
and the counterculture 134; critical 151, 335, 
447⁜–⁜8; critique of psychology by 108, 206; and 
critical disability studies 378; and critical health 
psychology 177; and counselling psychology 
166; and deconstruction 73; different approaches 
of 329; and evolutionary psychology 57; 
French 292; indigenization of 372; Marxist 292; 
materialist 341; in North America 436; and 
the ‘normal’ position 335; performative 341; 
postcolonial 329; post-structuralist 334, 427, 
447; and psychoanalysis 292⁜–⁜3; and psychology 
330⁜–⁜1; and queer theory 340; second wave 71, 
192⁜–⁜4, 292; in Sweden 228; third-wave 340; 
and the ‘third world woman’ 383; and Voudou 
392; and Womanism 391; see also antifeminism; 
feminist theory; transfeminism
feminist empiricists/empiricism 18⁜–⁜19, 447
feminist epistemologies 37
feminist methodology 335
feminist psychology 16, 18⁜–⁜19, 34, 329⁜–⁜31, 437, 
438, 447; autonomy and 331⁜–⁜2; conclusions 
336; identity and 332⁜–⁜3; post-structuralist 344; 
research in 335⁜–⁜6; sexuality and 333⁜–⁜4
feminist psychotherapy 227
feminist spiritualists 392
feminist studies 344
feminist theory 99, 147, 200, 205, 435, 437; Black 
240, 242, 246⁜–⁜7
feminist therapy 167, 226⁜–⁜7, 228
Feuerbach, Ludwig 272, 273, 277, 280
Feuerstein, Reuven 234
Fichte, Johann 130
50 Great Myths of Popular Psychology (Lilienfeld 
et al.) 251, 252
Filipinos see Philippines
Fine, Michelle 196
Finland, critical psychology in 439
Fit In Your Head (website) 251
FMRI technology 48; see also brain imaging 
technologies
focus groups 177, 319
folk neurology 255
folk psychology/psychologists 79, 250, 252
Fordism 30
forensic psychology 96⁜–⁜102; critical 96⁜–⁜7
Forum em Defesa da Vida 160
Foucault, Michel: on art 123; on community 
psychology 146, 151; on conceptual splits 
242; on criticism 214, 307, 429; couplets of 
110; deconstructionism and 72, 297, 299⁜–⁜300; 
on discourse 10⁜–⁜11, 110⁜–⁜11, 152, 202, 207, 
242, 342; on domination 122; in German 
critical psychology 437; on heredity 202, 

Index
463
344; influence on Parker 299; on knowledge 
and power relations 205, 315, 438; on mental 
illness 90, 215⁜–⁜19; on narrative research 110; 
on postcolonial theory 368; on power 97, 141, 
202, 378; on the psy complex 243, 251; on 
sexuality 202, 206, 340, 341; on subjugated 
knowledges 387⁜–⁜8, 438; on technologies of 
self 64
framing 27⁜–⁜8, 71, 150, 216, 219, 225, 353
France: critical psychology in 439; indigenous 
psychology in 356; post-structuralism in 438; 
post-structuralist critical thinking in 297; 
psychoanalysis in 290
Frankfurt School of Critical Theory 130, 138, 143, 
145, 146, 435, 437
Federici, Silvia 387
Free University (West Berlin) 145, 280, 435
free will 142, 206
Freedom to Learn (Rogers) 131
Freie Universität (Berlin) 145, 280, 435
Freire, Paulo 111, 122, 235, 411
Freud, Sigmund: on borderspace 389; challenges to 
192, 308; on critical psychology 428; different 
facets of 293⁜–⁜4; personality psychology and 
62; on pre-cognitive response 46; and the 
psychologization of society 119, 223, 309⁜–⁜10; 
and psychoanalysis 307; and psychosocial 
research 107; on sexuality 45, 202, 292, 334, 344; 
terms introduced by 431; view of human nature 
128, 291, 293; on women 192, 292
Freudo-Marxism 435
Friedan, Betty 192
Friedberg, E. 141
friends, influence of 175⁜–⁜6
Frijda, Nico 44
Fromm, Erich 64, 146, 293
Fukushima nuclear power plant 177⁜–⁜8
functionalist movement 33, 191, 358
‘g’ factor 54, 232
Gage, Phineas 62
Galeano, Eduardo 406
Galperin, Piotr 265
Galton, Francis 233
Gardner, Howard 234
Garfinkel, Harold 157
Gasson, John A. 45
gay affirmation therapy 167, 342
gay and lesbian studies 340, 342, 344⁜–⁜5; see also 
lesbian and gay psychology; LGBT affirmative 
therapy; LGBT movement
gay identity politics 202
gay liberation movement 71, 203
Gaza Community Mental Health Program 
(GCMHP) 421
gaze 3⁜–⁜4
gender: de-essentialism of 340; drugs and 335; 
re-framing of 292; and social relations 334; and 
violence 123; vocabulary of 196
gender differences see sexual difference
gender discrimination 176
gender equality and inequality 99, 227, 330
gender neutrality 332
gender politics 197
gender relations 82, 332, 437, 438
gender stereotypes 108
gene expression, changes in 59
gene flow 56
genetic recombination 56
genetics, Mendelian 182
genome scanning 53
geography 158
Geopsychoanalysis (Derrida) 426
Gergen, Ken 236
German classical philosophy 262, 263
German Critical Psychology 280, 435⁜–⁜7, 439⁜–⁜40; 
see also Psychology from the Standpoint of the 
Subject (PSS)
German Ideology (Marx) 312
Germany: activity theory in 267; critical 
psychologies in 435⁜–⁜6; indigenous psychology 
in 356, 359
gestalt prayer 134
Gestalt psychology 80, 129, 130, 132, 351
Gilligan, Carol 194
global disability, critical approaches to 377⁜–⁜8
global health 383
globalised localism 440
globalism 182
globalization 2, 67, 75, 133, 176, 182, 188, 353, 
370, 380, 382, 383, 387, 389, 409, 444⁜–⁜5, 448, 
451
Global North, knowledge in 378⁜–⁜80
Global psychology 359
Global South: concept of self in 63; disability 
studies in 376⁜–⁜84; learning institutions in 379
global world order 368
Goldman, Ruth 340
grammar(s): issues in 28⁜–⁜9; ontological 48, 49; of 
psychology 58
Gramsci, Antonio 130, 143
grassroots organizations 418⁜–⁜22
Graumann, Carl F. 281
Greece, critical psychology in 439, 440
Greek philosophy 119
Grounded Theory tradition 109, 422
group behaviours: group mind 80; group processes 
82⁜–⁜3; group think 83
Group Mind, The (McDougall) 80
Guadalupe, vision of 390
Guatemala: liberation psychology in 353; violence 
in 353

Index
464
Guattari, Félix 205, 306, 307, 388⁜–⁜9; writings with 
Deleuze 307⁜–⁜13
guild interests 17⁜–⁜18
Guilty Except for Insanity (documentary) 213, 219
Habermas, Jürgen 146, 157, 360
Hadow, Henry 233
Hadow Report 232
Haiti: liberation psychology in 353; violence in 
353
Halberstam, Jack 341
Hall, G. Stanley 33
hallucinations, auditory 220
hallucinogenics 218
Halperin, David 343
Handbook of Community Psychology 149
Harding, Sandra 360
harm minimization 100⁜–⁜2
Harré, Rom 315
Harvey, David 30, 31, 34
Haslam, S. A. 83⁜–⁜4
Hawaiians, abnormalization of 359
healing systems, indigenous 448
health: acknowledgement of 133; behaviours 
related to 176⁜–⁜7; factors affecting 174⁜–⁜7; 
gendered 447
Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) 169
health care costs 173
health psychology: beyond cognitivism and 
positivism 176⁜–⁜7; beyond individualism 175⁜–⁜6; 
challenges for 177⁜–⁜8; clinical 174; contributions 
of 174⁜–⁜5; critical 174, 176⁜–⁜9, 397; defined 173; 
development of 173⁜–⁜4; new methodologies 
and philosophy 177; and poverty 176; beyond 
psychology of male, white, middle class and 
heterosexual 177; and reflexivity 179
health services 161
Hearing Voices movement 220
Hegarty, Peter 343
Hegel, Georg 130, 138, 262, 271⁜–⁜2, 275; influence 
on Vygotsky 273, 274
Heidegger, Martin 138, 301
Henley, Nancy 195
hereditability 70, 233
heredity 34
hermeneutics 30, 31, 119
heroin 215
Herrnstein, Richard J. 54
heterocentrism 343
heteronormativity 206, 320, 334, 341, 343, 344, 
447
heterosexism, normative 447
heterosexual contract 341
heterosexual matrix 341
heterosexuality, compulsory 341
heurism 132
higher mental functions 271, 272, 274, 277
Hippocratic Oath 226
Hirschmann, Nancy 345
historical dialectical materialism 273, 280
historical materialism 303
historical realism 387
history 74, 81; of psychology 178
Hitler, Adolf 64
HIV and AIDS: in Africa 397; epidemic 173; 
psychoanalytical approach to 344
Hodges, Ian 344
holism 128, 133; methodological 358
Holland, critical psychology in 439
Hollingsworth, Leta Stretter 192
Holocaust 138
Holzkamp, Klaus 138, 145, 267, 280, 281, 282
homogenizing 380⁜–⁜1
homonormativity 202
homophobia 200⁜–⁜2, 204, 206, 343
homosexual rights 430
homosexuality 54, 200⁜–⁜1, 342⁜–⁜4; see also gay and 
lesbian studies; LGBT movement; psychology 
and sexuality; queer theory; sexuality
homosexuality/heterosexuality binary 341, 344
homunculus 281
Horkheimer, Max 123, 138, 145, 146
Horney, Karen 192, 291
Hornstein, Gail A. 15
Hull, Clark L. 33, 34
human behaviour see behaviour
human development 88
Human Development Index (HDI) 407, 408⁜–⁜9
Human Development Report (UN) 407
Human Genome Project 59
human kinship 131
human life: cultural organization of 266; societal 
nature of 282, 344; technological dimension of 
284
human nature: theories of 128; understanding 
118⁜–⁜19; voluntaristic views of 132
human potential 108
human rights 92, 242, 446; denial of 408
human society 146
humanism 108, 158, 164, 165, 167, 201⁜–⁜2, 291; 
Cartesian 344; in education 131; liberal 200⁜–⁜3; 
radical 130; religious 130; secular 130; socialist 
130
Humanistic and Integrative Psychotherapy College 
130
humanistic psychology 20 107⁜–⁜8, 110, 119, 168, 
306; acknowledgement of health 133; concern 
with the ecological 133; contributions of 
133⁜–⁜4; and education 131⁜–⁜2; emphasis on 
holism and wholeness 133; future of 134⁜–⁜5; 
history of 128⁜–⁜9; limits and limitations 134; 
modalities of 129; origins of 127; and positive 
psychology 129; present state of 129⁜–⁜30; and 
radical humanism 130; research in, 132⁜–⁜3; and 

Index
465
the therapeutic relationship 130⁜–⁜1; usefulness 
of 133
humanitarian liberation theory 408
Husserl, Edmond 16⁜–⁜17, 20, 130
hybridity/hybridization 188, 367, 369, 370, 389
Hyde, J. S. 18⁜–⁜19
hyper-individuality 251
Iceland, critical psychology in 439
Ichihara Prison for Traffic Offenders 434⁜–⁜5, 440
idealism 271; German 130; mentalistic 276; 
objective 130
identification 72, 83⁜–⁜4
identity/ies: collective 420, 422; and control of 
employees 84; cultural 368; cultural notions 
of 292; ethnic 420; in feminist psychology 
332⁜–⁜3; gay 202; gender 340⁜–⁜1; indigenous 450; 
individual 318; multifaceted 188; national 139, 
357, 420, 422; sexual 202⁜–⁜6; social 90
ideology/ies: critiques 71, 281, 351; practical 109; 
racist 317; sexuality as 342; theories of 315
Ideology & Consciousness 72
illness: biomedical model of 173; factors affecting 
174⁜–⁜7; phenomenal nature of 90; and poverty 
176; see also health psychology; mental illness; 
pharmaceutical industry
Illouz, Eva 252, 253
immigrants and immigration 82, 123, 331
imperialism 121, 214, 369, 370, 371, 411, 448;  
anti-cultural 359; capitalist 367; cultural 29, 359; 
in Latin America 406; linguistic 48; Western 29
Improving Access to Psychological Therapies 
(IAPT) 164, 168
indenture 373
India: context of personality in 63; critical 
psychology in 426, 428; indigenous psychology 
in 358, 359, 362
indigenization 360, 362, 431; see also indigenous 
psychology/ies
indigenous peoples 111, 331; indigenous 
psychologies of 359; subjugation of 445
indigenous psychology/ies 121, 130, 178, 187, 356, 
397, 431; African 398; as alternative perspectives 
361; characterizations 356; conclusions 362⁜–⁜3; 
contributions to disciplinary development and 
transformation of psychology 361⁜–⁜2; locations 
of 356; and the pursuit of liberated-liberating 
psychology 360⁜–⁜1; varieties 357; what was 
found objectionable in Western psychology 
357⁜–⁜60
indigenous rights 446
indigenous wisdom 133
individual psychology 81
individualism 58, 63, 71, 82, 174⁜–⁜7, 202, 243, 276, 
293, 344, 350, 445, 448; in Africa 402; anarchism 
130; methodological 358; and sexuality 206
individuality 80; hyper-individuality 251
individualization 222, 224⁜–⁜8, 284, 300
individuals: development of 71; dialectical 
historical 276⁜–⁜7; health behaviours of 176⁜–⁜7; 
manipulation of 175
industrialism 276
industrialization 15, 64
inequality/ies 57, 122, 176; in the American 
continent 407⁜–⁜8; in discourse 321; energy 402; 
and feminist psychology 330; gender 330, 333; 
health 176; in Latin America 348; social 99; 
socially structured 97
infancy, models of 71
information processing 298
Ingleby, David 73, 219
injustice: and poverty 98; social 276; social 
transformations of 449; see also social justice
inquiry, interpretive vs. objectivist view of 17
instinct theory 182
Institute for Social Research see Frankfurt School 
of Critical Theory
Institute of Postcolonial Studies 368
Institute of Psychoanalysis 293
institutionalization 436, 440
integrative models 167
intellectual development, human 276
intelligence(s) 54⁜–⁜5; conceptualizations of 235; 
fixed 233; multiple 234; study of 191
intelligence tests 15, 232, 361
Interamerican Society for Psychology 150, 410
interconnectivity 392, 393; in Africa 398
interdependence 133, 186
internalization 261, 265
International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) 
39, 65, 90, 200
International Federation of Social Workers 240, 
244
International Journal of Critical Psychology 438
International Psychoanalytic Association 426
international psychology 187
internationalization 372
interpellation 318
Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis 108
interpretive turn 4, 71
interrelationship 128
interrogation techniques 122; enhanced 179
intersectionalism 340
intersectionality/ies 188, 196
intersubjectivity 283⁜–⁜4
interventionism 251
Interventions 368
interviews 138, 177, 319; in social work 242⁜–⁜2
IQ 232; heritability of 70; measures of 54⁜–⁜5
IQ tests 54, 252; and cultural imperialism 359
Iran: critical psychology in 426, 429; indigenous 
psychology in 356
Ireland, critical psychology in 439
Irle, Martin 281

Index
466
Isaacs, Susan 232
Israel 416
Italy: critical psychology in 439; psychoanalysis in 
290
James, William 33, 37, 45, 46, 107, 132, 232, 234
Japan: critical psychology in 425; health 
psychology in 173, 179; indigenous psychology 
in 356, 359; prison for traffic offenders in  
434⁜–⁜5
Japanese Association of Health Psychology 179
Jardim Ângela 156, 158⁜–⁜60
Jastrow, Joseph 192
Jefferson, Gail 320
Jim Crow laws 183
Journal of Applied Behaviour Analysis 34
Journal of Black Psychology 183
Journal of Black Studies 183
Journal of Community Psychology 148
Journal of Critical Psychology Counselling and 
Psychotherapy 149
Journal of Health Psychology 174
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 128
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour 
 34
justice system 98
Kahn, Arnold 197
Kant, Immanuel 130, 138, 273
Keating, AnaLouise 390
Kelly, George 128
Key Performance Indicators 148
Kharkov school 263⁜–⁜4, 266
Killing Rage (hooks) 184⁜–⁜5
King of Hearts (film) 219
Kitzinger, Celia 320
Klein, Melanie 292, 307
Knapp, Robert 128
knowledge: alternative 387⁜–⁜8; background 28; 
colonial 415⁜–⁜18; committed 350; construction 
and production of 121, 138, 330⁜–⁜31; cultural 
448; demystification of 360; distortion of 
407; ecological 356; Foucault’s work on 438; 
generation of 19; indigenous constructions of 
392⁜–⁜3; institutionalized 448; intuitive 388; local 
398; non-Western 391; and power 19, 315; 
production of 121, 402, 450; psychological 121, 
299; sociology of 46; subjugated 387⁜–⁜8; Western 
415, 418; Western psychological 398
Knowledge and Human Interests (Habermas) 360
Koffka, Kurt 132
Kohlberg, Lawrence 194
Köhler, Wolfgang 132
Kolakowski, Leszek 277
Korea, indigenous psychology in 356, 359
Krishnamurti, Jiddu 168
Kristeva, Julia 344
Kritische Psychologie 280, 435⁜–⁜7, 439⁜–⁜40; see also 
Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject 
(PSS)
Kruger, Barbara 335
Lacan, Jacques 267, 290, 292⁜–⁜4, 307⁜–⁜9, 312, 313, 
315, 334, 343, 389, 437, 431; on postcolonial 
theory 368
Laing, R. D. 217
language(s): in discursive research 316⁜–⁜17; 
emphasis on 81; indigenous 448, 451; 
involvement with life 310; performative nature 
of 46; philosophy of 29, 274, 297; as primary 
medium of meaning 48; and sexuality 334; 
significance of 82; and social productions 311; 
turn to 315, 450⁜–⁜1
Lasko, Alvin 128
Lasswell, Harold 138
late capitalism 166, 222, 226, 257, 370; see also 
capitalism
Latin America: capitalism in 408; colonialism in 
150, 407, 409⁜–⁜10; community psychology in 
422; critical psychology in 411⁜–⁜12; exploitation 
in 408; imperialism in 406; indigenous 
psychology in 356; liberation psychology 
in 348⁜–⁜54, 410⁜–⁜11, 417; neoliberalism in 
409; oppression in 409; political turmoil in 
406; psychology in 409; racism in 382; social 
exclusion in 410; see also Central America; 
Mexico; South America
Lazarus, Moritz 79
Le Bon, Gustave 80, 137, 138
learned helplessness 179
learning: in and outside of educational institutions 
284; latent 33; research on 285; social 33, 167
Lenin, Vladimir 272; influence on Vygotsky 273⁜–⁜4
Leontiev, A. N. 263⁜–⁜7, 280
lesbian and gay psychology 200
lesbianism 201, 203, 342; see also queer theory
Levant, Ronald 253
Lewin, Kurt 80, 111, 157
LGBT affirmative therapy 167, 342
LGBT health psychology 201
LGBT movement 108, 331; see also gay and lesbian 
studies; gay liberation movement
liberal humanism 200⁜–⁜3
liberal humanist psychology 204, 206
liberal theories 119
liberalism 139, 201⁜–⁜2
liberalization 382
liberation 122, 145; of marginalized communities 
415; see also emancipation
liberation movements in Latin America 410⁜–⁜12
liberation/liberated psychology 141, 166, 183, 410, 
411; as critique of adoption of models from 
the North 349; as critique of complicity with 
power 349⁜–⁜50; as critique of individualizing 

Index
467
and victim-blaming ideology 350; conclusion 
352⁜–⁜4; critical assimilation of psychological 
concepts 351; as a distinctive kind of critical 
psychology 351⁜–⁜2; language difficulties in 
353; in Latin America 417; Martín-Baró’s 
intervention 348⁜–⁜9; as a socially engaged critical 
praxis 352
liberation theology 159, 219
libido 45
life sciences 59
lifeline 57
lifeworld 17
limbic system 45
liminal spaces 366, 382, 389, 439
liminality 367, 369, 370; of disabled refugees 382; 
of emotion 49
linguistic turn 108
Lioi, Anthony 389, 390
literary theory, deconstruction as 299
lobotomies 213, 215
Logic of Sense, The (Deleuze) 306
logocentrism 72, 340
looping effect 119
López-Sánchez, Gerardo 142
Loughborough School 301
Lovell, Anne 219
Lukács, Georg 130, 138, 143, 360
Lukes, Steven 142
Luria, Alexander 266
Lynch, K. 157, 158
Lyth, Isabel Menzies 245
Mad Pride movement 215
Mad Zone: Therapists Behind the Front Lines 
(documentary) 215
Madness and Civilization (Foucault) 299
Malaysia: liberation psychology in 353; 
postcolonialism in 445
male superiority 192
Malyon, Alan 342
Man in Marxist Theory and the Psychology of 
Personality (Sève) 273
management studies 438
managerial doctrine 83⁜–⁜4
Ma¯ori people 428, 449⁜–⁜50; indigenous psychology 
of 362; mass abnormalization of 359
maps 157, 158; in São Paulo 159⁜–⁜60
Marcuse, Herbert 146, 293
marginalization 91, 187, 188, 215, 220, 317, 361, 
388, 415, 446; of Black communities 184; in 
discourse 320; economic 183; of indigenous 
peoples 359; of non-Western literatures 367
marijuana 215
market economy 65, 312
marriage, same-sex 321
Martín-Baró, Ignacio 139, 183, 391, 410, 411; and 
liberation psychology 389⁜–⁜9
Marx, Karl: on alienation 30, 119; on capitalism 
145, 312, 386⁜–⁜7, 408; on corruption of the 
human personality 276; critical psychology and 
428; and Derrida 303; and desire 309; dialectics 
of 271, 275, 278; Economic and Philosophic 
Manuscripts 264; Eleventh Thesis on Feuerbach 268; 
on the family 308; First Thesis on Feuerbach 262; 
Grundrisse 425, 428; in indigenous psychologies 
360, 362; influence on Vygotsky 268, 273⁜–⁜4, 
278; on labour 267, 310, 425; on life and 
history 391; on materialism 262; on objective 
idealism 130; on political psychology 138, 143; 
rediscovery of his works 273; on scientific 
investigation 264; Sixth Thesis on Feuerbach 277
Marxism (Marxist theory): on capitalism 31, 
386⁜–⁜7, 408; Chinese 273; community 
psychology and 145⁜–⁜7, 151; and critical health 
psychology 177; and cultural psychology 293; 
deconstruction and 72⁜–⁜3; Deleuze and Guattari 
on 307⁜–⁜10; Derrida on 303; on the family 308; 
and feminism 292; in Germany 436; on human 
activity 263; indigenization of 372; interest in 
437; in Latin America 351, 412; on place 158; 
positivist 272; and postcolonialism 368, 369, 
370; on power relations 140; and psychoanalysis 
219; on psychology 46, 108; and self-help 257; 
and Soviet psychology 435; updating 438; 
Vygotsky on 273, 277
Marxist psychology 271⁜–⁜2, 277, 397, 437; 
conclusions 277⁜–⁜8; confronting the challenges 
of dialectical method 276⁜–⁜7; and the dialectical 
method 274⁜–⁜5; and human activity 276; and 
Vygotsky 272⁜–⁜3; Vygotsky’s application of 
dialectical method 275⁜–⁜6; Vygotsky’s ideas in 
context 273
masculinism, Eurocentric 447
masculinity/ies: vs. femininity 193⁜–⁜4, 195; research 
on 111; in South Africa 401
Maslow, Abraham 128, 129, 131, 132, 135
materialism 205, 206, 262, 271, 302, 439; dialectical 
275; historical 272, 303; historical dialectical 
273, 280; mechanistic 276; see also realism
mathematics 15
Matson, Floyd 128
May, Rollo 128
May (1968) 93
McDougall, William 80
Mead, George 130
Mead, Margaret 291
measurement 18, 20, 21
mechanism 118
media: depiction of marginalized groups by 111, 
112, 121, 203, 383; depiction of psychologists 
by 224; discourse analysis and 108, 109; global 
369; influence of 175; in Latin America 407; and 
self-help 255; social context and 448
media studies 438

Index
468
mediation 33, 261, 266, 271, 273, 274, 276, 307, 
309, 310, 353, 435, 440, 448
medical marijuana 215
medicalization 89, 94, 345, 381
medication: preference of counselling over 
168; psychotropic 64⁜–⁜5; relationship of 
psychoanalysis to 291
meditation 132
Mednick, Martha 195
Memmi, Albert 373
memory: collective 317, 318; construction of 352; 
discursive work on 111, 302; and personality 67
Mendelian genetics 182
mental age 232
mental deficiency 233
mental functioning 25
mental health 82; community 422; in the prison 
population 98; see also mental illness
mental health activists 219
Mental Health Foundation (MHF) 98
mental health movements 219⁜–⁜20
mental health professionals 223; and capitalism 412
mental health system 91, 101
mental illness 66, 217; in Africa 397; treatment of 
89⁜–⁜90
mental rules 24, 28
mental suffering 217; theory of 214
mentalism 36
Mestiza 389⁜–⁜90
metapsychology 291
metatheory 117
methodolatry 20, 21, 177
methodological behaviourism 35; see also classical 
behaviourism
methodological collectivism 351
methodologism 19⁜–⁜20, 120
methodology 19, 21; qualitative 437, 438
Mexico: indigenous psychology in 356; liberation 
psychology in 354; psychology in 410; violence 
in 353, 354; see also Central America; Latin 
America
micro-politics 84
micro-realism 437
microsociology 315
Middle East: colonialism in 416⁜–⁜18; indigenous 
psychology in 356; see also critical psychology 
in Palestine
migrancy and migration 367, 445; forced 373
Milgram, Stanley 80
Miller, George 253
Miller, Jean Baker 193
mind-body dualism 34, 38
MindFreedom Oregon 215
minimal group paradigm 81
minorities: in the prison population 215; rights 
of 430; and violence 123; see also Blacks; 
indigenous peoples
misogyny 108
Mitchell, Juliet 292
Mitwelt 131
mixedness 370
modernism 146, 429, 431; see also postmodernism
modernist therapy 166
modernity 166, 387, 445; reflexive 224
modes of ordering 160⁜–⁜1
Moncrieff, Joanna 216
money, influence of 122
moral development, theory of 194
moral reasoning, and sex differences 195
moral re-education 434
Moscovici, Serge 81
Moscow Institute of Psychology 273
motivation 53, 82, 83, 282
Motivation and Personality (Maslow) 129
Moustakas, Carl 128
Moustakas, Clark 132
multiculturalism 29⁜–⁜30, 165, 357, 367, 436
multicultural therapy 167
multiple personality disorder (MPD) 66, 218
multivocality 160
Murphy, Gardner 128, 132
Murray, Charles A. 54
Murray, Henry A. 128, 132
mutation 56
myth and mythologies: spirituality as 387; white 
369
naïve scientists 62
Nakian therapy 434
naming 66, 426
Nandy, Ashis 373
narcissism 134
narrative research 109⁜–⁜10
narrative theory 318, 397
narrative therapy 225
narratives, cultural 317
Narvola, Julia 228
National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence (NICE) 164
National Institutes of Health (NIH) 18
nationalism 139, 357⁜–⁜8, 367; in Philippines 357
natural selection 56
naturalism, philosophical 130
Nazism 138
Neff, Kristin 253, 254
negation 274, 275; dialectical 275
negotiations 28, 140, 141, 321
neo-behaviourism 174; see also behaviourism(s)
neocolonialism 382⁜–⁜3; see also colonialism
Neo-Con agendas 439
neoliberal egalitarianism 448
neoliberalism 29, 65, 73, 110, 352, 353, 430⁜–⁜1, 436, 
445, 448⁜–⁜9; global 382, 440; in Latin America 
409

Index
469
neoliberal postfeminism 447
neo-nazism 285
networks, heterogeneous 160⁜–⁜1
neural processes see cognitive processes
neuroanatomy 191
neurobiology 307, 439
neuro-imaging see brain imaging technologies
neurology, popular 255
neurological turn, and self-help 255⁜–⁜7
neurophysiology 25
neuropsychology 113
neuroscience 3, 113, 119, 225, 436; affective 48; 
and biological psychology 52; cognitive 112; 
critical 58; and education 235⁜–⁜6; and emotion 
48⁜–⁜9
neuro-self-help 255
Neurosis and Human Growth: the Struggle Toward Self-
Realization (Horney) 291
neutrality, fake 4; see also value-neutrality
New Left 219
New Zealand (Aotearoa): community psychology 
in 150; critical psychology in 426, 428; 
discursive research in 321; indigenous 
psychology in 359, 362; liberation psychology in 
353; see also critical psychology in South Pacific
Nicholson, Paula 195
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) 416, 
419⁜–⁜21, 423
Nordic countries, gender equality in 227; see also 
Finland; Norway; Scandinavia; Sweden
normality: vs. abnormality 88⁜–⁜93; in children 331; 
gender and sexuality 200, 329; in mental illness 
300; and psychology 4; in race relations 449
normalization 93⁜–⁜4, 243, 335, 445
North America 407; feminism in 436; justice 
system in 98⁜–⁜9; multiculturalism in 436; 
psychoanalytic swing to ‘self’ in 291
Norway: critical psychology in 439; diagnosis in 
228
objectivism/objectivist 16, 17, 73, 127, 165, 358
objectivity 16, 120, 301; vs. subjectivity 301; value-
neutral 18
Occupy Movement 220
Oceana, indigenous psychology in 356; see also 
critical psychology in South Pacific
Oedipus Complex 308, 334, 341, 344
Of Grammatology (Derrida) 297
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest (Kesey) 213
Opal 217
Open University 99
Open Veins of Latin America (Galeano) 406
operant learning theory 34
operant psychology 33
operants 37; transformative 35⁜–⁜6
oppression 81, 122, 184, 187, 353, 446; and 
colonialism 382; and feminist psychology 
329⁜–⁜30; gender 332; in Latin America 409; 
and liberation psychology 354; psychological 
147; psychology of 183; sexual 206; social 276; 
Zionist 422
Order of Things, The (Foucault) 299
Oregon Mental Health Consumer and Psychiatric 
Survivor Coalition (OCSC) 219
organizations: change in 92; charitable 241; 
community 418, 419; culture in 82⁜–⁜3; life of 
92; grassroots 416, 418⁜–⁜22; metropolitan 426⁜–⁜7; 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) 416, 
419, 420; peer-run 219; performance of 82⁜–⁜4; 
professional 32, 122, 129⁜–⁜30, 148, 183, 214, 
418, 432; public sector 156; social 140, 141, 158, 
203, 412; study of 79⁜–⁜85, 155⁜–⁜6; World Health 
Organization (WHO) 39, 176
organizational psychology: complexity in 160⁜–⁜1; 
possibilities for dialogue in 158⁜–⁜60; and a sense 
of place 147⁜–⁜8; shift in 155⁜–⁜7
organizational social psychology 82⁜–⁜5
organizational studies 155
‘otherness’ and ‘other’: acceptance of 94; in African 
society 399; in community psychology 152; 
conception of 93; in critical disability studies 
383; in critical psychology 3, 344; in the Global 
South 379, 380; in indigenous psychology 358, 
362, 450⁜–⁜1; oppressed 349; and power 141; in 
postcolonial theory 369, 370⁜–⁜2, 446, 448; in 
queer theory 345; racial 202, 382; sexual 206; in 
social work 246; spiritual 388
Our Lady of Guadalupe 390
paedophilia 397
Palestine: colonialism in 150; liberation psychology 
in 353, 354; community psychology in 415⁜–⁜23
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) 419
Palestinian National Authority (PNA) 421
parenting 285; lesbian and gay 203; research on 
285;
parents: and child development 74⁜–⁜5, 331⁜–⁜2; 
education of 332; influence of 139, 236, 242; 
relationship with children 185, 203; single 179
Parker, Ian 256, 299
Parlee, Mary 195
Parsons, Talcott 276
participant validation 112
Participatory Action Research (PAR) 111, 177
paternalism 243
pathologization: of blacks and other non-whites 
184⁜–⁜5, 339; of drugs 215; of persons and 
behaviours 234, 430; psycho- 54, 166, 167, 236, 
342; by psychology 6, 88⁜–⁜9, 165; of sexuality 
345; of women 39, 67, 193
patients: choices of 167; rights of 228
patriarchy 214, 329, 362
patterns, discursive 317⁜–⁜20
Paulhan, Frédric 45

Index
470
Pavlov, Ivan 33, 62, 262, 263
peace psychology 187, 397
peer reviews 319
peers, influence of 139
Peirce, Karl 37
performativity 124, 244
Perls, Fritz 134
personality and personalities: ‘Big Five’ trait 
structure 62; across borders 63; history of 62⁜–⁜3; 
nature of 61⁜–⁜2; pathological 65⁜–⁜7; personalities 
for sale 64; pharmaceutical 64⁜–⁜5; psychopathic 
65; re-imagining 67; 16 Principle Factors 62; 
South African context 63; and the status quo 63; 
studies of 138; and technologies of the self 63⁜–⁜4
personality social psychology 132
person-centred approach (PCA) 129, 164
personhood 63, 65, 156, 232, 332⁜–⁜3, 367
personology 132
perspectives, multiplicity of 265
PET technology 48; see also brain imaging 
technologies
phallocentrism 343
pharmaceutical industry 59, 122, 214
pharmaceuticals 64⁜–⁜5
pharmacology 89
phenomenological psychology 16, 17
phenomenology 16, 27, 29, 36, 46, 108, 109, 132, 
281, 307; hermeneutic 30
Philippines: critical psychology in 426; indigenous 
psychology in 359; liberated/liberating 
psychology in 353, 360, 361; nationalism in 357, 
358; post-colonial psychology in 432
philosophical psychology 20, 298
philosophy 16, 17, 88, 167, 297; Arab-Islamic 418; 
critiques of 298; Deleuze on 306; German 
classical 262, 263; historical materialist 272; 
of language 297⁜–⁜9, 302; and psychology 306; 
of psychology 178; of science 147, 361; and 
textuality 297⁜–⁜8; Wittgensteinian 315
Phoenix, Ann 196
phrenology 62, 191
phylogenesis 282
physiology of activity (Bernstein) 262⁜–⁜3
Piaget, Jean 70, 234, 274
Pilgrim, David 168
Pinel, Philippe 216
place: conceptualization of 444; in critical 
psychology 157⁜–⁜8; personhood and 156; as 
social construct 158; see also space
pluralism: in counselling 165; methodological 19; 
models of 167; pluralist compromise 19
Poland, critical psychology in 439
political economy 29⁜–⁜30
political institutions, influence of 175⁜–⁜6
political psychology 397, 436, 438; asymmetry 
in power 139⁜–⁜41; conclusions 143⁜–⁜4; critical 
study of 143⁜–⁜4; further development of 138⁜–⁜9; 
methods of study 138⁜–⁜9; origins of 137⁜–⁜8; 
politics and power 139⁜–⁜40; power in action 
142⁜–⁜3; symmetry in power 141⁜–⁜2
political science 118, 137, 138, 167, 351
political turn 427
politicians, political behaviour of 139
politics: debates and critical analysis 143; 
elections 139; gay identity 202; micro- 84; 
political activity 1; political biography 130; 
politicization of discourse 372; and power 
139⁜–⁜40; revolutionary 307; and social identity 
theory 84; turmoil in Latin America 406; and 
violence 123
Politzer, Georges 275; influence on Vygotsky 
 273
polyamory 203
Poor Law 241
popular psychology, and self-help 252⁜–⁜3
pornography 447
Portugal, critical psychology in 439
positive psychology 110, 179, 234
positivism 4, 17⁜–⁜18, 35, 80⁜–⁜1, 120⁜–⁜1, 147, 165, 
174, 176, 177, 196, 204, 335, 344, 361;  
logical 35⁜–⁜8; questioning of 235
positivist psychology 271, 359
postcolonial critical psychology 372
postcolonial feminism 329
postcolonial psychology 187, 437
Postcolonial Studies 368
Postcolonial Studies Association 368
postcolonial theory 74, 366⁜–⁜7, 379, 381, 401, 435, 
437, 446; contradictions 370⁜–⁜1; and critical 
psychology 371; definitions 367⁜–⁜70; locations 
367; see also postcolonialism
postcolonialism 74, 177, 183, 335, 357, 370⁜–⁜2, 
382, 415, 432, 445, 446, 449, 450, 451; see also 
postcolonial theory
post-empiricist psychology 344
postfeminism, neoliberal 447
post-Fordism 256
post-humanism 130
postindustrialism 30
postmodern relativism 267
postmodernism 31, 108, 146, 158, 167, 315, 344, 
368, 370, 435, 436
postpartum depression 193
post-positivism 113, 447⁜–⁜50
postpsychiatry 214
post-state experience 91
post-structuralism 46, 72, 147, 177, 200, 203, 292, 
302, 315, 316, 319, 320, 351, 362, 372, 447; and 
discourse analysis 447; French 297, 438; and 
identity 333; and research methods 330; and 
sexuality 334; see also deconstruction
post-structuralist feminism 329, 334, 447
post-structuralist feminist psychology 344
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) 416

Index
471
poverty 139, 176, 178, 276; disadvantages of 98; 
in New Zealand 449; see also critical disability 
studies
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) 382
power: and abnormal psychology 90⁜–⁜1; asymmetry 
in 139⁜–⁜41; complicity with 349⁜–⁜50; in 
critical analysis 131; democratization of 
343; disciplinary 97; in discourse 320, 321; 
influence of 122; oppressive systems of 151; 
and powerlessness 119; in psychotherapeutic 
relationships 343; and mental illness 216⁜–⁜17; 
oppressive 146; and politics 139⁜–⁜40; of sorcery 
389; symmetry in 141⁜–⁜2; tri-dimensional view 
of 142
power dynamics 19; and knowledge 19, 315; and 
social work 241
power relations 38, 57, 187⁜–⁜8, 267, 300, 319, 
330, 333, 352, 438; asymmetric 139⁜–⁜41, 317; 
colonizer-colonized 416⁜–⁜17; in disability studies 
384; gendered 447; in indigenous psychology 
362; social 444, 445, 447, 449; strategic 140
power structures 89; and gender and sexuality 
201⁜–⁜2
practice(s): clinical and therapeutic 1, 284; 
discursive 317, 318, 320; situated 71; social 28, 
31, 156, 319; social work 284
practice research 267, 280
pragmatism 37⁜–⁜8, 440
pre-critical psychologism 298
prejudice(s) 81, 82, 109, 138, 187
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder (PMDD/PMS) 
21, 193
presentism 265⁜–⁜6
presidents, character of 139
Prilleltensky, Isaac 235
prison practice 397
prisoners: Black and minority ethnic (BME) 98; 
with mental health issues 98⁜–⁜100
private events 37, 39⁜–⁜40
privatization 141, 382⁜–⁜3, 397, 402
problematization 123
process theory 284
productive theory 132
Proust, Marcel 43⁜–⁜4, 49
Psychcentral 251
psychiatric hospitals 91⁜–⁜3; see also asylums
psychiatry and psychiatrists 7, 88, 129, 167, 214, 
223; and capitalism 412; radical 217; role of 
money in 122
psychoanalysis 49, 73, 75, 107, 127, 128, 133, 
145, 177, 223, 282; in Africa 397; and critical 
psychology 290⁜–⁜4; culturalist 293; Deleuze 
on 307; institutional 426; as mental health 
profession 290; and postcolonial theory 373; and 
queer theory 343⁜–⁜4; relational 290, 292; role of 
money in 122; in South America 74
Psychoanalysis and Feminism (Mitchell) 292
psychoanalytic social psychology 436
psychoanalytic theory 111, 293⁜–⁜4, 438
psycho-biology, research in 140
psychodrama 129
psychodynamic therapy 48, 133, 167, 351
psychological ecology 157
psychological phenomena 302; biological 
explanations for 89
psychologism, rethinking 300⁜–⁜1
psychologists: clinical 223; community 148; 
guild interests of 17; in Latin America 411; vs. 
psychotherapists 222⁜–⁜3; see also psychotherapists; 
therapists
psychologization 94, 112, 118, 440
psychology: as academic discipline 6; and 
capitalism 412; concepts of 119⁜–⁜20; vs. 
counselling psychology 164; critique of 3, 
371⁜–⁜2; defined 222; developmental 71, 73⁜–⁜5, 
229, 330, 331; and the dialectical method 
274⁜–⁜5; as disciplining institutional force 108; 
diverse 177; education and 231⁜–⁜6; ethical-
political dimension in 93⁜–⁜4; feminization of 
191; four antinomies of 92; globalization of 
2; guild interests of 17⁜–⁜18; history of 412; 
humanization of 165; as human science 16⁜–⁜17; 
nature of 117⁜–⁜18; philosophically grounded 
17; and philosophy 306; postcolonial critique 
of 371⁜–⁜2; as professional practice 6, 118; 
professionalization of 16, 134, 165, 167, 227; and 
psychotherapy 222⁜–⁜3, 291; and the psy-complex 
214; as psy-profession 129; public perception 
of 223⁜–⁜4; and queer theory 341⁜–⁜2; research 
in 140; role of money in 122; scientificity of 
20; and self-help 250⁜–⁜2, 254⁜–⁜5; sex differences 
in 191⁜–⁜2; and spirituality 386⁜–⁜93; of women 
191⁜–⁜7; standpoints and perspectives 7; see also 
critical psychology
psychology by type: abnormal 88; action 438; 
African 183, 186, 187; Africanizing 398⁜–⁜401; 
Afrocentric 59, 183, 359, 361; analytic social 
436; biological 52⁜–⁜9; Black 182⁜–⁜8; bourgeois 
277; British 70⁜–⁜1; Buddhist 428; Chinese 
428; clinical 17, 165, 167, 168, 176, 196, 223, 
224, 227, 359; clinical health 174; cognitive 
24⁜–⁜31, 174, 175, 281; colonial 148, 413, 415, 
417; community health 174; counselling, 
164⁜–⁜70; critical 1⁜–⁜5, 168, 175, 306; critical 
community 397, 449; critical discursive 316; 
critical-emancipatory 360⁜–⁜1; critical health 
174⁜–⁜9, 397, 448; critical social 397; cross-
cultural 359; cultural-historical 264, 266, 438; 
decolonizing 187; discursive 175, 301⁜–⁜2, 
315⁜–⁜21, 344, 397, 438; domestic violence 38⁜–⁜9; 
dominant 308; ecological 26⁜–⁜7, 29⁜–⁜30, 71; 
educational 74, 231⁜–⁜3; ego 290; empirical 17; 
environmental 157; Euro-American 185⁜–⁜8; 
organizational 155⁜–⁜61; evolutionary 52⁜–⁜9, 

Index
472
75, 119; experimental 88; folk 79, 250, 252; 
forensic 96⁜–⁜102; German critical 435; Global 
359; health 173⁜–⁜9, 397; humanistic 20, 107⁜–⁜8, 
110, 119, 127⁜–⁜35, 168, 306, 387; individual 
81; international 187; Jungian 387; LGBT 
and LGBTQ 200⁜–⁜7; LGBT affirmative 204, 
205⁜–⁜6; LGBT health 201; liberal humanist 204, 
206; liberated/liberating 432; liberation 141, 
166, 183, 348⁜–⁜54, 410, 411, 417; of liberation 
183; mainstream 6; Marxist 271⁜–⁜8, 397, 437; 
operant 33; of oppression 184; peace 187, 
397; personality 61⁜–⁜7; personality social 132; 
phenomenological 16, 17; philosophical 20, 298; 
political 137⁜–⁜44, 397, 436, 438; popular 252⁜–⁜3; 
positive 110, 179, 234; positivist 271, 359; 
postcolonial 187, 437; post-deconstructive 303; 
post-empiricist 344; post-structuralist feminist 
344, 372; professional 118; psychoanalytic 
social 436; public health 174; quantitative 70; 
quantitative-experimental 435; relational and 
distributed 318; scientific 46, 273; Soviet 262⁜–⁜3, 
272, 277, 435, 438; stimulus-response 33⁜–⁜5; 
sub-disciplines of, 52⁜–⁜3, 118; theoretical 20, 
17⁜–⁜24, 178; third force 127; traditional 281, 
301; transpersonal 306, 38; US 71; Western 
135, 357⁜–⁜8; ‘womanless’ 193; ‘wordless’ 281; 
work 155; varieties and critique of 6⁜–⁜7; see also 
academic psychology; classical behaviourism; 
community psychology and psychologists; 
critical psychology; developmental psychology; 
feminist psychology; indigenous psychology; 
psychology of women; social psychology
psychology and sexuality: critical perspective 
201⁜–⁜3; and the politics of sexuality 205⁜–⁜7; the 
subject, anti-humanism, and resistance 203⁜–⁜5
Psychology Board of Australia 148
Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject 
(PSS): central concepts of 282⁜–⁜4; conclusion 
286; contemporary discussions and fields 
of study 284⁜–⁜5; critical engagements with 
traditional psychology 280⁜–⁜2; internal debates 
and challenges 285
Psychology in Organizations (Haslam) 83⁜–⁜4
Psychology in the Arab Countries (Ahmed and 
Gielen, eds) 417
psychology of liberation 183; see also liberation 
psychology
psychology of oppression 184
psychology of women: background 191⁜–⁜3; 
critiques of, 196⁜–⁜7; and feminist psychology 
194⁜–⁜5; reconceptualizing ‘women’ 195⁜–⁜6; and 
second wave feminism 193⁜–⁜4; ‘womanless’ 
psychology 193
Psychology of Women Quarterly 192
Psychology Today 250, 251
psychopathology and psychopathologization 54, 
138, 166, 167, 236, 342; of mental illness 93
Psychopathology and Politics (Lasswell) 138
psychopharmacology 167, 216
psychophysics 15
psychophysiological reflex theory (Sechenov) 
262⁜–⁜3
psychoporn 255
psychosexual stages 62
psychosis, politicization of 217
psychosocial field 110⁜–⁜11, 412
psychosocial research/studies 82, 107, 109
psychosynthesis 129
psychotherapists: alternative approaches to 
psychotherapy 226⁜–⁜7; as counsellors 167; and 
individualization 224⁜–⁜6; and the psychology-
psychotherapy alliance 222⁜–⁜3; public image of 
223⁜–⁜4; see also therapists
psychotherapy 7, 34, 129, 167⁜–⁜8; counseling 
instead of 167; critical 228; defined 222; in 
everyday life 226; feminist 227; newer 130; 
professionalism of 227; psychodynamic 133; and 
psychology 222⁜–⁜3; and queer theory 342⁜–⁜3; 
role of money in 122
psychotropic medication 64⁜–⁜5
‘psy-complex’ 6⁜–⁜7, 10, 73, 82, 214, 229, 243, 252, 
362⁜–⁜3; and social work 241
psy construction 147
psy-disciplines 61, 122, 202, 252, 290, 292
psy-entertainment 255
psy-factor 253
psy-neurosciences, critique of 256
public agencies 156
public health psychology 174
public sector organizations 156
Puerto Rico, political psychology in 142
Q-sort factors 203; quantitative 132
Qualitative Inquiry 114
qualitative research 82, 107⁜–⁜14; critical 111⁜–⁜13; 
experiential vs. constructionist 108⁜–⁜9; 
methodology 437⁜–⁜8; quality criteria checklists 
for 112; reflexive 113
qualitative research movement 177
Qualitative Research 114
qualitative turn 427
quantification 15⁜–⁜18
quantitative data analysis 20
quantitative imperative 16⁜–⁜17
quantitative methodology 17, 20⁜–⁜1, 177
quantitative psychology 70
quantitative/qualitative divide 16⁜–⁜20
Queer Nation 339
Queer Nation Manifesto 339
queer practice 74
queer project 342
queer theory 200, 205, 207, 292, 339⁜–⁜40, 437; 
antisocial turn in 341; conclusion 345; and 
critical psychology 344⁜–⁜5; development 

Index
473
of 340⁜–⁜1; and psychoanalysis 343⁜–⁜4; and 
psychology 341⁜–⁜2; and psychotherapy  
342⁜–⁜3
questioning 5, 6, 166
questionnaires 88, 138, 177, 315
race and racism 64, 123, 166, 183⁜–⁜5, 187, 219, 276, 
285, 361, 366, 372, 446, 448; in Africa 397, 401; 
and class 336; institutional 176; language of 428; 
and Voudou 391; white privilege 184; white 
supremacy 448
racial explanations 233
racialized thinking 182
racist discourse 448
radiation, psychological effects of 178
radical behaviourism 34⁜–⁜40, 358; 
misrepresentations of 34⁜–⁜5
radical humanism 130
radical psychiatry 217
Rank, Otto 130
rape hypothesis 57, 58
Rapley, Mark 321
Rational Emotive Therapy 34
realism 302; critical 301, 344, 362; historical 387; 
micro- 437; naïve 19⁜–⁜20; see also materialism
reason discourse 282
recidivism 100
reconstruction 74, 118, 264, 267, 281⁜–⁜2, 286, 335, 
357, 390, 427
reductionism 3⁜–⁜4, 56, 57, 58, 118, 174, 177, 422; 
biological 54
reflections, ontological 117⁜–⁜20
reflexes, essentialist 35⁜–⁜6
reflexive modernity 224
reflexivity 38, 113, 121, 179, 439
reflex theory 262⁜–⁜3
re-framing 231, 292, 351
rehabilitation 73, 91, 96, 100, 377, 381
Reich, Wilhelm 307, 313
relational psychoanalysis 290, 292
relational theory 318
relational turn 130
relationship therapy 130
relationship(s): conflict in 140; deep 392⁜–⁜3; force 
140; negantropic 141; problem solving in 240; 
social 139⁜–⁜40; social context of 143; symmetry 
in 141⁜–⁜2; therapeutic 130⁜–⁜1
relativism, postmodern 267; critical 344
religion 205, 251, 386, 393, 429; Asian 428; see also 
spirituality
religious humanism 130
Renaissance humanism 130
representation: alternative 369; cultural 6, 74, 
368⁜–⁜9; of disability 383; discussion of 19, 108; 
Eurocentric 446, 448; of the individual 243; of 
madness 219; politics of 317, 367; of power 202; 
of psychology 224; of public opinion 351; of 
reality 24, 26, 28, 298; triangular 266; of women 
191, 192, 195, 447
reproductive fitness 52, 56
research: action 5⁜–⁜6, 111⁜–⁜12, 151, 177, 214, 
351; in Africa 401; alternative routes to 7; on 
artificial intelligence 27; critical psychological 
216; discursive 109, 315, 321; epigenetic 59; 
ethnographic 449; on expertise 27; feminist 108, 
29, 330, 335⁜–⁜6; in health psychology 179; in 
humanistic psychology 132⁜–⁜3; indigenizing 360; 
integrity of 18; in Latin America 410; on neo-
nazism 285; neuroscientific 48⁜–⁜9; on parenting 
285; participatory 437 participatory action 177, 
351; post-structuralist 320; practice 267, 280; 
psycho-biological 140; in psychology 4, 7, 15, 
140; psychosocial 107; qualitative 82, 107⁜–⁜14; 
on racism 285; on sex differences 195; in social 
action 151; subjectivity in 108; on teaching/
learning 285
research methods: heuristic 132; classical 138
Rewire Your Brain 256
Rey, Gonzalez 411
Ribot, Théodule-Armand 47
Riegel, Klaus 71, 74
Riggs, Damien 343
Rimke, Heidi M. 252
risk: assessment of 100; in civilization 224⁜–⁜5; 
language of 156; in social work 246
Risk Society (Beck) 224
Rivière, Enrique Pinchon 93
Rivière, Joan 344
Rogers, Carl R. 127, 128, 130⁜–⁜2, 164, 253
Rorty, Richard 298
Rose, Nikolas 73, 146, 252
Rose, Steven 57
Rosenhan, David 216
Rosenhan experiment 93
Rosenquist, Norma 128
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 48, 119
Rubenstein, S. 264⁜–⁜5
Rubin, Gayle 343
Russian psychology 435; see also Soviet  
psychology
S.A.N.E. 215
S-O-R-C formulation 34
Sáez, Javier 343
Salcedo, Doris 123
Salzen, E. 45
sanitation 176, 407
São Paulo, research in 156, 158⁜–⁜60
Sartre, Jean-Paul 130, 168
Sato, Haruo 434
Sawaia, Bader 49
scaffolding 234
scales 138, 318, 420
Scandinavia, indigenous psychology in 356

Index
474
Scandinavian Kritische Psychologie 280; see also 
Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject 
(PSS)
Schachter, Stanley 46
Scherer, Klauss R. 45, 46
schizoanalysis 312⁜–⁜13
schizophrenia 54⁜–⁜6, 66, 93, 216⁜–⁜18, 307, 310⁜–⁜11
schizorevolutionaries 312–13
science(s): decontextualized 361; emphasis on 80; 
human 17; phenomenological 360; and politics 
122; positivist 17, 360; positivist empiricist; 
value-free 122, 147, 196, 201, 206; see also value-
free science
Science and Technology Studies 285
scientific management 30⁜–⁜1
scientific psychology 273; see also Marxist 
psychology
scientism 387
Scientology 215
second wave feminism 71, 192⁜–⁜4, 292
secular humanism 130
secularism 130
Sedgwick, Eve 341
Sedgwick, Peter 217
Seem, Mark 309
segregation 184, 187, 276
self: vs. brain 256; concept of 131, 254; ecological 
392; entrepreneurial 256; and identity 332; 
nature of 128; North American psychoanalytic 
swing to 291; radical communitarian production 
of 391; technologies of 63⁜–⁜4
self-actualization 62, 135, 206, 227, 291; see also 
actualization
self-awareness 128
self-categorization theory 81
self-censorship 139
Self-Compassion: Stop Beating Yourself Up and Leave 
Insecurity Behind (Neff ) 253, 254
self-defence 39
self-determination 167; in Palestine 415, 419, 420
self-harm 101⁜–⁜2
self-help: and popular psychology 252⁜–⁜3; and 
psychology 7, 250⁜–⁜2, 254⁜–⁜5; neuro- 255; and 
the neurological turn 255⁜–⁜7
selfhood, ‘problems’ of 299
self-injury 292
self-knowledge 37, 73
self-medication 215
Seligman, Martin 234
Selznick, P. 155
semiotics 307
Serrano-García, Irma 142
settler colonialism 416⁜–⁜17, 422, 445; see also 
colonialism
settler society 321
Sève, Lucien, influence on Vygotsky 273
sexism 197, 329, 330, 335, 446; and Voudou 391
sexual abuse see abuse
sexual difference 18, 55, 166, 191⁜–⁜2, 194, 195⁜–⁜7, 
292, 334, 447, 448
sexual liberation 205
sexual orientation 202⁜–⁜3
sexual selection 52, 56, 57
sexuality affirmative therapy 201, 342
sexuality: cultural narratives of 447; de-
naturalizing 340; in feminist psychology 333⁜–⁜4; 
gendered 447; history of 202; as ideology 
342; pathologization of 345; rethinking 334; 
studies on 340; theorizing on 200, 292; see also 
psychology and sexuality
Sherif, Carolyn 193, 196
Sherif, Muzafer 80
Sherry, Marc 345
Shibboleth (Salcedo) 123
Shoben, Edward 128
sign meaning 266
Simmel, Georg 276
Singer, J. E. 46
singularities 368, 390, 412
sinicization 357, 359
sinthomosexuality 292
Skarin, Fanny 228
Skinner, B. F. 33⁜–⁜8, 119, 233
slavery 373, 392
Slovenia, critical psychology in 439
Smail, David 168
social action: discourse as 316⁜–⁜17; research on  
151
social change 5, 81, 110, 240, 242⁜–⁜3, 246, 273, 276; 
in Africa 400; in the American continent 413; 
and indigenous psychology 356; positive 111
social constructionism 49, 71, 82, 108, 118, 177, 
203, 315, 318, 344, 435; see also constructionism
social determinism 360; see also determinism
social group 131
social identity 82, 90
social identity theory 81, 83, 84, 316
social justice 17, 18, 38, 67, 122, 130, 147, 166, 429; 
and education on sexual orientation 204; and 
psychoanalysis 292; and social work 246
social learning models 167
social learning theory 33
social life 138; and the dialectical method 272
social media 439
social movements 352; criminalization of 353; 
liberatory 353
social organizations 82, 140, 141, 158, 203, 412
social phenomena, biological explanations for 89
social psychology 79⁜–⁜85, 138, 192, 196, 301, 
315, 351; analytic 436; in the Arab World 417; 
critical 81, 397, 448; discursive 82; experimental 
80; genesis of 79⁜–⁜80; organizational 79, 82⁜–⁜5; 
psychological 81; sociological 81
Social Psychology (Allport) 80

Index
475
social relations: and gender 334; and power 142⁜–⁜3; 
of production 276
social science(s) and scientists 138, 236, 361, 367; 
critical-emancipatory 360; decolonization of 
357; deconstruction in 303; Eurocentrism of 
371; and feminism 192; in Latin America 411; 
Marxist-Maoist approach to 357
social services 161
social systems 245
social theory: contemporary 31; critical 436, 437; 
critiques of 72; of Marx 280⁜–⁜1; practice turn 
in 28
social unconscious 320
social work 7, 240⁜–⁜1, 246; critical analysis of 
246⁜–⁜7; dividing practices 241⁜–⁜4; implicated 
technologies of 244⁜–⁜5, 247
social work practice 284
socialism 219
socialist humanism 130
socialization 92; of children and teenagers 332
society: causation in 53; cohesion in 83; 
complexity of 224; control in 110, 175; 
development of 71; human 146; influence in 
82; interpretations of 3⁜–⁜5; issues in 161; order 
in 241; solidarity in 83; stratification in 449; 
transformations in 451; variables in 56
Society for Community Research and Action—
Community Psychology (SCRA) 146⁜–⁜7, 148
socio-cultural activity theory 234
socioeconomic status 176
sociogenesis 282
sociology 74, 118, 157, 167, 351, 421, 438; cultural 
253; of knowledge 46, 147; micro- 315; of 
psychology 178; of science 315
solipsism, methodological 437
S-O-R-C formulation of behaviour 33⁜–⁜4
sorceress, becoming 388⁜–⁜9
South Africa: colonialism in 150; community 
psychology in 146, 400; critical psychology in 
397; indigenous psychology in 359; liberation 
psychology in 353; psychology in 372, 401, 402
South America 407; psychoanalysis in 292; 
psychology in 410
South Pacific, critical psychology in 444⁜–⁜51
Soviet psychology 262⁜–⁜3, 272, 277, 435, 438; see 
also Russian psychology
space: anthropological 158; conceptualization of 
444; see also place
Spain, critical psychology in 439
Spargo, Tamsin 340
speciesism 134
speech act theory 315
Spinoza, Baruch (Bernard) 49⁜–⁜50, 273, 308⁜–⁜9, 
311, 387⁜–⁜8
spiritualists, feminist 392
spirituality: becoming sorceress 388⁜–⁜9; as counter-
capitalist 388; creative collectivities 391⁜–⁜2; deep 
relationships, 392⁜–⁜3; feminine 387; immanent 
388, 393; indigenous 387; and psychology 
386⁜–⁜7; spiritual borderlands 389⁜–⁜91; as 
subjugated knowledge 387⁜–⁜8
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty 373
S-R-C model 35
Sri Lanka, critical psychology in 425
Stalin, Josef 272
Stalinism 272
Stamm, Laura 341
standardization 15⁜–⁜16
standpoint theorists 18⁜–⁜19
Starhawk 393
Steiner, Rudolf 232
Steinthal, Heymann 79
stereotypes 18, 90, 108, 192, 223, 334, 420
stigma 90⁜–⁜3, 216, 335, 339
stimulus-response psychology 33⁜–⁜5
Stirner, Max 130
strategic essentialism 187, 206
stress 54, 83, 169, 215, 225, 227, 430
Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAPs)  
382
structuralism 33, 307
student movements 435
Studies on the history of behavior: Ape, primitive, and 
child (Vygotsky) 272
subjectification 110, 118, 124, 317, 390, 445,  
451
subjection 146
Subjectivities 438
subjectivity/ies 1, 4, 36⁜–⁜7, 58, 72, 82, 84, 91, 93, 
118, 120, 122, 124, 152, 206, 267, 280, 281,  
283, 286, 291, 293, 294, 300, 301, 307, 316, 318, 
332, 393, 430, 447, 450; acknowledgement of 
168; deflated 437, 438; of emotion 44; in excess 
437, 438; and health 174; in Marx’s historical 
realism 387; vs. objectivity 301; and PSS 285; in 
research 108; and sexuality 334; social 390; and 
spirituality 392; technology of 63; of women 
333
subjugation 445⁜–⁜6
Sub-Saharan Africa, Afrocentric psychology in  
359
substance abuse, in Black communities 184;  
see also drugs
suicide 101
Sullivan, Harry Stack 291
Sullivan, Nikki 339
Sumner, Francis 182
surveys 138, 315
survival-crime 98
Sweden, critical psychology in 439
symbolism, psychophysiological 47
symbology, spiritual 390
syncretism 440
systemic models 167

Index
476
systems theory 307, 392; ecological 175, 234
Szasz, Thomas 214, 216, 217
Taft, Jessie 130
Taiwanization 357, 359
Tavris, Carol 193
taxonomic priority principle 58
teaching, research on 285; see also learning
technology/ies: cultural embrace of 15; of 
social work 244⁜–⁜5, 247; of the self 63⁜–⁜4; of 
subjectivity 63
Teish, Luisah 391⁜–⁜3
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) 155
territorialization 311⁜–⁜12, 444, 445, 450
testing: mental 15; projective 132; psychological 
231⁜–⁜2; psychometric 88; see also assessment(s); 
intelligence tests
thalamus 47
theism 130
theoretical psychology 20, 117⁜–⁜24, 178; 
epistemological reflections 120⁜–⁜1; esthetic 
challenge, 123; ethical-practical work 120⁜–⁜3; 
ontological reflections 117⁜–⁜20; substantive 
deliberations 124
theory of desire (Lacan) 312, 313
theory of emotion 311
theory of functional systems (Anokhin) 262
theory of Higher Nervous Activity (Pavlov) 262, 
263
theory of moral development 194
theory of the dominant (Ukhtomsky) 263
therapeutic communities 92⁜–⁜3; alternative 219
therapeutic culture 227, 229, 253
therapists 128⁜–⁜30, 134; education of 131, 133; see 
also psychotherapists
therapy 164; affirmative 342; gay affirmative 342; 
humanistic 164; modernist 166; pluralistic 
approach to 165; post-professional 165
Thinking and Speech (Vygotsky) 275
third force psychology 127; see also humanistic 
psychology
Third World 445
Thomas, Philip 214, 219
Thousand Plateaus, A (Guattari and Deleuze) 307, 
309, 388
Tier-Mensch-Uebergangsfeld (TMU) 282
Timor Leste, liberation psychology in 353
Tohunga Suppression Act 448
Tolman, Edward C. 33
Tomkins, Silvan 46, 48
tool mediation 261
Torres Strait Islands 446
torture: psychological 179; strategies for 122
Toward a New Psychology of Women (Miller) 193
Toward a Psychology of Being (Maslow) 135
traditional psychology (TP) 281, 301
Train Your Brain 256
transactional analysis 129, 130
transcendental empiricism 306
transfeminism 329
transformative operants 35⁜–⁜6
transhumanism 130
transinstitutionalization 98
transnationalism 182, 188
transpersonal psychology 306
transpersonal therapy 167
trauma 292; in Africa 397; colonial 366, 373; 
military 420; unresolved 101⁜–⁜2; see also violence
Treaty of Waitangi/Te Tiriti o Waitangi 445
triangulation 112⁜–⁜13
Trinh, Min-ha 333
truth: pragmatic 38; theory of 37⁜–⁜8
Tuffin, Keith 321
Turkey: critical psychology in 425, 439; indigenous 
psychology in 356; liberation psychology in 353
Turkle, Sherry 214
turn to language 315, 450⁜–⁜1
Twitter 439
unconscious, collective 392
unemployment 150, 276
United Kingdom: critical psychology in 437⁜–⁜41; 
discursive psychology in 315; feminist agendas 
in 75; health psychology in 173; justice system 
in 97⁜–⁜9; person-centred approach in 164; 
psychology and education in 232⁜–⁜3
United Kingdom Council for Psychotherapy 
(UKCP) 129, 130
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the 
Child 74
United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) 407
United States: Black psychology in 182; cognitive 
psychology in 175; counselling psychology 
in 165; dominance in field of community 
psychology 150, 152; feminist agendas in 75; 
health psychology in 173, 179; human potential 
pioneers in 108; prison population in 100⁜–⁜1; 
psychoanalysis in 290⁜–⁜2; psychology in 178; 
psychology and education in 232; social 
psychology in 81
universalism 81⁜–⁜2, 147, 249
universality, in Africa 402
universities: in the Arab World 417; Palestinian 418
University José Simeon Cañas 411
urban ghetto 276
user/survivor movement 214
Utica State Lunatic Asylum 217
vaccinations 176
value-free science 122, 147, 196, 201, 206
value-neutrality 16, 18, 120, 122, 358, 359, 360
value system, materialistic-economic 358
variability hypothesis 192

Index
477
Veresov, N. 263
Vich, Miles 128
victim blaming 147
Vidarte, Paco 339
violence: in Africa 397, 401⁜–⁜2; in Black 
communities 184; and capitalism 408; 
cycles of 39; domestic 98, 99, 353, 422, 447; 
epistemological 120⁜–⁜1, 123; female victims 
of 228; humanitarian 353; interpersonal 447; 
intimate partner 447; in liberation psychology 
352⁜–⁜3; in the lives of prisoners 101; military 
420, 422; and minorities 123; patterns of 150; 
sexual 99, 353, 447; structural 449; theorization 
of 353; see also trauma
voice, development of 37
Volkerpsychologie (Wundt) 107
voluntary diasporic communities 188
Voudou 391⁜–⁜2
Vygotsky, Lev 71, 234, 261, 263, 265⁜–⁜6, 268, 
280; application of dialectical method by 
275⁜–⁜6; dialectical method of 272⁜–⁜3; ideas in 
context 273; importance of 277; role of 277⁜–⁜8; 
understanding 276⁜–⁜7; writings of 277⁜–⁜8
Walker, Alice 391
Walker, Leonore 39
Wallon, Henri 275; influence on Vygotsky 273, 
274
Wang, Bo 429
war 62, 67, 70, 139, 215, 223, 276, 353, 420
war on drugs 216
War on Terror (US) 122, 179
water privatization 402
waterboarding 122
Watson, John B. 33⁜–⁜7, 39, 233
Watzlawick, Paul 226
Weber, Max 139
Weisstein, Naomi 191, 192
Werp, Gjyri Helen 253
Wertheimer, Max 132
West Bank and Gaza (WBG) 415⁜–⁜22
Western colonialism 366, 368, 369; see also 
colonialism; postcolonialism
Western psychology: alienating worldview of 
(atomistic-mechanistic) 358; calculative value 
system (materialistic-economistic) of 358; 
context-stripping epistemology of 358; what 
indigenous psychology objected to 357⁜–⁜60
Western-centrism 372
What is Philosophy (Guattari and Deleuze)  
306, 309
Whatsapp 439
White, Robert 128
White Paper on Traffic Safety in Japan 434
whiteness, normalization of 445⁜–⁜6; see also race 
and racism
Wilkinson, Sue 194, 195
Wish 99
witchcraft, persecution of 387
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 46, 58, 120, 315
Wittig, Monique 341
womanism 391; see also feminism
women: accused as witches 387; drug use by 336; 
empowerment of 447; and human nature 119; 
indigenous 447⁜–⁜8; innate spirituality of 389; and 
mental illness 218; pathologizing of 67; in the 
prison system 97⁜–⁜9, 102, 111; reconceptualizing 
195⁜–⁜6; representation of 191, 192, 195, 447; 
rights of 446; as sex offenders 397; and Voudou 
392; women-centered approaches 75, 108, 194; 
see also psychology of women
Women’s Aid 98, 99
women’s studies 330, 333; see also feminist 
psychology
Woolley, Helen Thompson 192
work psychology 155
workplace: dangerous conditions in 176; 
psychological testing in 231
World Bank 383
World Health Organization (WHO) 39, 176, 200, 
376
Wundt, Wilhelm 33, 231, 232, 359
Yoder, Jan 197
Zeitschrift fuer Sozialpsychologie 281
Zimbardo, Philip 80
Zionist Movement (Zionism) 416, 422
zones of proximal development (ZPD) 234, 271
Zucker, Kenneth 196


