www.ebook3000.com

 Handbook of Research in Second Language 
Teaching and Learning 
 Volume III 
 Volume III of the  Handbook of Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning , like Volumes I 
and II, is a comprehensive, state-of-the-art overview of current research into social contexts of sec-
ond language (L2)/foreign language (FL) teaching and learning; language policy; curriculum; types 
of instruction; incremental language skills such as listening, speaking, reading, writing, vocabulary, 
and grammar; international communication; pragmatics; and assessment and testing. It differs from 
earlier volumes in its main purpose—to provide a more in-depth discussion and detailed focus on 
the development of the essential language skills required for any type of communication: speaking, 
listening, reading, vocabulary, grammar, and writing. 
 Volume III preserves continuity with previous volumes in its coverage of all the classical areas of 
research in L2/FL teaching and learning and applied linguistics, but rather than offering a historical 
review of disciplinary traditions, it explores innovations and new directions of research, acknowl-
edges the enormous complexity of teaching and learning the essential language abilities, and offers a 
diversity of perspectives. Chapter authors are all leading authorities in their disciplinary areas. 
 What’s new in Volume III? 
 • Updates the prominent areas of research, including the sub-disciplines addressed in Volumes 
I and II, and represents the disciplinary mainstays 
 • Considers and discusses perspectives held by different schools of thought on the what, the how, 
and the why of teaching foundational language skills, including theories, pedagogical principles, 
and their implementation in practice 
 • Captures new and ongoing developments in the key areas of L2/FL teaching and learning, and 
innovative research topics that have gained substantial recognition in current publications, 
including the role of corpora, technology, and digital literacy in L2/FL teaching and learning 
 • Examines new trends in language pedagogy and research, such as an increased societal emphasis 
on teaching academic language for schooling, somewhat contradictory definitions of literacy, 
and the growing needs for instruction in intercultural communication. 
 Eli Hinkel is Professor, Linguistics and MA-TESL Programs, Seattle Pacific University, USA. 

 ESL and Applied Linguistics Professional Series 
 Eli Hinkel, Series Editor 
 Wong/Waring •  Conversation Analysis and Second Language Pedagogy: A Guide for ESL/EFL Teachers  
 Nunan/Choi, Eds. •  Language and Culture: Reﬂ ective Narratives and the Emergence of Identity 
 Braine •  Nonnative Speaker English Teachers: Research, Pedagogy, and Professional Growth 
 Burns •  Doing Action Research in English Language Teaching: A Guide for Practitioners  
 Nation/Macalister •   Language Curriculum Design  
 Birch •  The English Language Teacher and Global Civil Society 
 Johnson •  Second Language Teacher Education: A Sociocultural Perspective 
 Nation •  Teaching ESL/EFL Reading and Writing  
 Nation/Newton •  Teaching ESL/EFL Listening and Speaking 
 Kachru/Smith •  Cultures, Contexts, and World Englishes 
 McKay/Bokhosrt-Heng •  International English in its Sociolinguistic Contexts: Towards a Socially 
Sensitive EIL Pedagogy 
 Christison/Murray, Eds. •   Leadership in English Language Education: Theoretical Foundations and 
Practical Skills for Changing Times 
 McCafferty/Stam, Eds. •   Gesture: Second Language Acquisition and Classroom Research 
 Liu •  Idioms: Description, Comprehension, Acquisition, and Pedagogy 
 Chapelle/Enright/Jamieson, Eds. •  Building a Validity Argument for the Test of English as a Foreign 
Language ™ 
 Kondo-Brown/Brown, Eds. •  Teaching Chinese, Japanese, and Korean Heritage Language Students 
Curriculum Needs, Materials, and Assessments  
 Youmans •  Chicano-Anglo Conversations: Truth, Honesty, and Politeness 
 Birch •  English L2 Reading: Getting to the Bottom, Second Edition 
 Luk/Lin •  Classroom Interactions as Cross-cultural Encounters: Native Speakers in EFL Lessons 
 Levy/Stockwell •  CALL Dimensions: Issues and Options in Computer Assisted Language Learning 
 Nero ,  Ed. •  Dialects, Englishes, Creoles, and Education 
 Basturkmen •  Ideas and Options in English for Speciﬁ c Purposes 
 Kumaravadivelu •  Understanding Language Teaching: From Method to Postmethod 
 McKay •  Researching Second Language Classrooms  
 Egbert/Petrie, Eds. •  CALL Research Perspectives 
 Canagarajah, Ed. •   Reclaiming the Local in Language Policy and Practice 
 Adamson •  Language Minority Students in American Schools: An Education in English 
 Fotos/Browne, Eds. •  New Perspectives on CALL for Second Language Classrooms 
 Hinkel •  Teaching Academic ESL Writing: Practical Techniques in Vocabulary and Grammar 
 Hinkel/Fotos, Eds. •   New Perspectives on Grammar Teaching in Second Language Classrooms  
 Hinkel  •  Second Language Writers’ Text: Linguistic and Rhetorical Features 
 Visit www.routledge.com /education  for additional information on titles in the ESL and Applied 
Linguistics Professional Series. 
www.ebook3000.com

 Handbook of Research in Second 
Language Teaching and Learning 
 Volume III 
 Edited by 
Eli Hinkel 

 First published 2017 
 by Routledge 
 711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 
 and by Routledge 
 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
 © 2017 Taylor & Francis 
 The right of Eli Hinkel to be identified as the author of the editorial material, and of the authors for their individual 
chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any 
electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, 
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 
 Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 A catalog record for this book has been requested 
 ISBN: 978-1-138-85981-4 (hbk) 
 ISBN: 978-1-138-85982-1 (pbk) 
 ISBN: 978-1-315-71689-3 (ebk) 
 Typeset in Minion
by Apex CoVantage, LLC 
www.ebook3000.com

 Preface 
viii
 Part I 
Social Contexts, Language Policy, and Language Learners 
1
 Chapter 1 
The Sociology of Language Teaching and Learning 
3
 JOHN EDWARDS 
 Chapter 2 
Language Policy/Planning and Language Learning  
15
 ROBERT B. KAPLAN 
 Chapter 3 
English as a Global Language 
29
 SANDRA LEE McKAY 
 Chapter 4 
English for Academic Purposes 
42
 CARMEN PÉREZ-LLANTADA AND JOHN M. SWALES 
 Chapter 5 
English for Specific Purposes 
56
 BRIAN PALTRIDGE AND SUE STARFIELD 
 Chapter 6 
Teaching English to Young Learners  
68
 DAVID NUNAN 
 Chapter 7 
Academic Language in K–12 Contexts  
82
 MARIA ESTELA BRISK AND QIANQIAN ZHANG-WU 
 Part II 
Curriculum and Instruction 
101
 Chapter 8 
SLA Research and Foreign-Language Teaching  
103
 PATSY M. LIGHTBOWN 
 Chapter 9 
Curriculum Approaches in Language Teaching  
117
 JACK C. RICHARDS 
 Contents 

vi • Contents
 Chapter 10 
Application of Research to Materials Design  
132
 PENNY UR 
 Chapter 11 
Teaching Language Skills from a Discourse Perspective  
144
 ELITE OLSHTAIN AND MARIANNE CELCE-MURCIA 
 Chapter 12 
Content-Based Language Teaching and Academic Language Development 
159
 MARGUERITE ANN SNOW 
 Chapter 13 
Research in Corpora in Language Teaching and Learning  
173
 ELAINE VAUGHAN AND MICHAEL McCARTHY 
 Chapter 14 
Technology in Language Teaching and Learning 
186
 GREG KESSLER 
 Part III 
Listening and Speaking 
199
 Chapter 15 
L2 Listening 
201
 STEVEN BROWN 
 Chapter 16 
Cognition, Metacognition, and L2 Listening  
214
 CHRISTINE C. M. GOH 
 Chapter 17 
Learning-to-Speak and Speaking-to-Learn: Five Categories 
of Learning Opportunity 
229
 JONATHAN NEWTON 
 Chapter 18 
Research and the Teaching of Speaking in the Second 
Language Classroom 
242
 ANNE BURNS 
 Chapter 19 
Pronunciation 
257
 DONNA M. BRINTON 
 Part IV 
Literacies, Reading, and Writing 
271
 Chapter 20 
Second Language Literacy: Kindergarten to Grade 12  
273
 LEE GUNDERSON AND REGINALD ARTHUR D’SILVA 
 Chapter 21 
Digital Literacies 
286
 RODNEY H. JONES 
 Chapter 22 
L2 Reading Comprehension and Development 
299
 WILLIAM GRABE 
 Chapter 23 
Reading and Technology: What’s New and What’s Old about Reading 
in Hyperlinked Multimedia Environments?  
312
 THOMAS COBB 
www.ebook3000.com

Contents • vii
 Chapter 24 
Research on L2 Writing: Contexts, Writers, and Pedagogy  
328
 DANA R. FERRIS 
 Part V 
Vocabulary and Grammar 
341
 Chapter 25 
The Three “I”s of Second Language Vocabulary Learning: Input, 
Instruction, Involvement 
343
 BATIA LAUFER 
 Chapter 26 
Measuring Vocabulary Size 
355
 PAUL NATION AND LAURENCE ANTHONY 
 Chapter 27 
Prioritizing Grammar to Teach or Not to Teach: A Research Perspective  
369
 ELI HINKEL 
 Chapter 28 
Systemic Functional Grammar in the K–12 Classroom  
384
 MARY J. SCHLEPPEGRELL 
 Part VI 
International Communication and Pragmatics 
397
 Chapter 29 
Teaching and Learning Intercultural Communication: Research in 
Six Approaches  
399
 LIXIAN JIN AND MARTIN CORTAZZI 
 Chapter 30 
Research in World Englishes and International Communication 
416
 ANDY KIRKPATRICK 
 Chapter 31 
Teaching and Learning Second Language Pragmatics 
428
 ANDREW D. COHEN 
 Part VII 
Assessment and Testing 
453
 Chapter 32 
Social Dimensions of Assessment and Testing  
455
 BERNARD SPOLSKY 
 Chapter 33 
The Practice of Language Assessment 
463
 GLENN FULCHER 
 Chapter 34 
Large-Scale Language Assessment: Empirical Studies  
476
 ANTONY JOHN KUNNAN 
 Chapter 35 
Fifteen Ways to Improve Classroom Assessment 
490
 JAMES DEAN BROWN AND JONATHAN TRACE 
 List of Contributors  
506
Index 
509

viii
 A Broad-stroke Overview: Political Impacts on Language Teaching and Learning 
 In 1657, when John Amos Comenius completed his work on  Opera Didactica Omnia , Latin was 
being slowly displaced by English, French, and Italian in school studies and curricula. In that work, 
Comenius outlined his theory of language acquisition that maintained that the teaching of all for-
eign languages had to be oral due to the preeminence of the spoken language above written for the 
purposes of communication. It seems that little has changed since then in the principles of language 
teaching and learning. 
 The appearance of Volume III of the Handbook is direct and clear evidence of the continuing 
importance of teaching and learning languages for practical rather than purely educational purposes. 
The book addresses changes in educational, social, legal, and immigration frameworks that have 
occurred in the past several years in many regions around the world. These new and not-so-new 
developments include, for example, the changing attitudes toward language proficiencies of count-
less demographic types of language learners who can be, for instance: 
 • immigrants and their families, who need to settle in their new locations and find employment 
in, e.g. the UK, the US, Australia, Germany, Canada, France, Italy, and New Zealand 1 (United 
Nations, 2013) 
 • temporary employees, guest workers, migrant workers in farming and factory jobs, and their 
family members 
 • international students and scholars in many countries around the world 
 • political, social, and environmental refugees, asylum seekers, and displaced persons 
 • voluntarily or forcibly resettled populations, e.g. whole groups of religious, ethnic, or cultural 
minorities (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 2015) 
 According to reports issued by the United Nations in the past few years, globally, the number of refu-
gees and displaced persons has never been higher than it is today, and approximate numbers exceed 
250 million. For the majority of these people, learning a new language is likely to be crucial. 
 Not entirely unexpected, and likely in conjunction with the increased scale and pace of such migra-
tions, immigration and language requirements laws have been substantially revised in the countries 
that are considered to be desirable destinations. The International Organization for Migration has 
referred to Europe, as well as some regions in the US, as the most populous destinations, as well as 
the most dangerous in terms of the human toll at border crossings (European Parliament, 2015). 
 Preface 
www.ebook3000.com

Preface • ix
 In recent years, a broad array of political, legislative, regulatory, and educational initiatives have 
been proposed and adopted into law to formalize language requirements of immigrants, students, 
and other types of new arrivals. They include the following: 
 • new educational and language-oriented legislation in the US and the UK 
 • 2014–2015 language requirements of the Canadian citizenship laws 
 • modifications in the Australian Immigration Act in 2015 
 • new language requirements of workers and students entering New Zealand (2014) 
 • new immigration laws (2013–2015) in a number of European Union (EU) countries, such as 
the UK, Italy, Ireland, Hungary, Germany, and Sweden. 
 According to EU immigration laws that apply to all member countries, a knowledge of English can 
be substituted for that of “the language of the host country” (p. 16) in the Netherlands, Denmark, 
the Czech Republic, and Finland. English proficiency is required of all students, scholars, and profes-
sional trainees who enter any of the 27 EU countries (European Parliament, 2011). 
 In addition, learning and attaining proficiency in English has become progressively more impor-
tant and economically urgent in various countries. Local media have continued to publicize gov-
ernment, political, and educational calls for raising English skill levels in practically every location 
around the world where legislative bodies and ministries mandate how foreign languages are taught 
and learned. A few representative examples include: 
 • the heightened importance of second (L2) and foreign (FL) language learning in such coun-
tries as, for example, China, 2 India, Pakistan, and Vietnam 
 • the “urgent necessity” for learning and using English in Saudi Arabia, other Gulf nations, 3 and 
throughout the “Arab world” (AlHammadi, 2013, p. 46) 
 • calls for “urgent action” and improvements in the English proficiency among school and uni-
versity graduates in Malaysia, 4 Indonesia, Korea (Sung & Spolsky, 2014), and Taiwan 5 
 • a growing preeminence of English in virtually all EU countries, where 77% of all primary 
school students and 100% of these students in Austria, Cyprus, Italy, Malta, and Spain 6 learn 
the language to prepare “for global economy” 
 In short, the push for L2/FL learning, as well as English language learning and skills, has probably 
never been greater than it is today. 
 Overview 
 The main purpose of Volume III is to provide a more in-depth discussion of language teaching and 
learning essentials. This edition is different from the earlier two because of its detailed focus on the 
development of the essential language skills required for any type of communication. In combina-
tion, however, Volumes I, II, and III have a better chance of presenting more thoroughly essential 
study areas in the field of language teaching and learning than any of the three volumes singly. 
 The contents of this book reflect the renewed importance of learning and teaching L2/FL, and it 
looks at the discipline from an entirely different vantage point. The content of Volume III contin-
ues to strive to remain thorough, as much as possible within the scope of one book. A collection of 
state-of-the-art overviews of what is known, important, advantageous, relevant, influential, fruitful, 
theoretical, practical, or controversial and contradictory in L2/FL teaching and learning may have 
little choice but to exclude a number of research areas. This obvious constraint applies equally to the 

x • Preface
three volumes of the handbook that complement one another and present a relatively comprehensive 
picture. 
 Broad-scope books that, in one form or another, present an overview of the discipline need to 
maintain and continue its traditions and topic coverage. This volume includes all the classical areas 
of research in L2/FL teaching and learning, and applied linguistics, and the book design preserves 
the continuity with the previous editions. The key topics have remained enduring areas of coverage 
in all three volumes. In addition, chapter guidelines for each contribution have sought to account for 
a brief synopsis of the legacies within each topic area. 
 On the whole, however, Volume III of the Handbook is not a historical review of disciplinary 
traditions. The book explores the innovations and new directions of research in L2/FL teaching 
and learning. In light of the increasing importance of L2/FL usage around the world, the chapters 
examine in greater depth the core areas without which no communication can take place: speaking, 
listening, reading, vocabulary, grammar, and writing. 
 Methodology for Content Design 
 As with earlier editions, to identify areas and topics that are of relevance, importance, and usefulness, 
it was necessary to look at the topics of research and interest among the professional associations and 
research organizations around the world. The following approach was adopted: 
 (1) To focus on currency and relevance, the themes and shifts highlighted at research and profes-
sional conferences, meetings, gatherings, academies, presentations, and in-progress workshops 
were collected. 
 (2) The divisions, affiliates, special interest groups, as well as content and topic areas in various 
professional associations and organizations in dozens of countries and across continents were 
compiled to ensure the currency and breadth of research topics, content areas, and values. 
 (3) A thorough and extensive review of the L2/FL research published since the release of Volume 
II played a central role. 
 (4) The new and additional disciplinary areas that complement established research territories 
are driven by the indelible effects of technology and politics in how languages are taught and 
learned at the present time. 
 (5) Current social, political, legal, educational, and migration sources were surveyed. These con-
sisted of legal and government briefs available in many countries and at numerous institutions 
(e.g. Migration Policy Institute or Migration Policy Center), news agencies, and an enormous 
number of research reports, initiative briefs, and publications produced and disseminated by 
an extensive array of international organizations. 
 As a result of this substantial examination, possible topic areas in the teaching and learning of 
the foundational L2/FL skills began to emerge and were subsequently narrowed down to seven main 
research areas reflected in the book. 
 The book chapters set out to highlight the major findings and the advancements of knowledge 
that have taken place since the publication of the earlier two volumes in 2005 and 2011. This tome 
includes seven parts, each divided into three to seven chapters, depending on its topics and contents. 
As mentioned earlier, it seems necessary to take stock of the classic applied linguistics L2/FL research 
areas, such as the sociology of language teaching and learning, language policy in education, and 
teaching and learning English as a global language. Similarly, an overview of other L2/FL facets 
accounts for more narrowly focused domains of research, and these address much of what currently 
takes place in the L2/FL universe. 
www.ebook3000.com

Preface • xi
 In general terms, an inclusion or exclusion of a particular theme or topic in this already huge 
compendium of overviews reflects its prominence in L2/FL research literature and professional 
gatherings. It is important to note, however, that the research areas of interest and value may vary 
greatly across geographic locations and the human contexts in which L2/FL is taught, learned, and 
researched. 
 As with any collection of state-of-the-art overviews, this compendium may have little choice but 
to exclude a number of research areas. This obvious constraint applies equally to all three volumes of 
the handbook. Like Volumes I and II, Volume III brings together a comprehensive, state-of-the-art 
overview of current research into social contexts of L2/FL teaching and learning, language policy, 
curriculum, types of instruction, and incremental language skills, such as listening, speaking, read-
ing, writing, vocabulary, and grammar, as well as international communication, pragmatics, assess-
ment, and testing. 
 In a departure from the design of the two earlier editions, the structure of Volume III seeks to 
acknowledge the enormous complexity of teaching and learning the essential language abilities. Most 
researchers, methodologists, curriculum designers, and practitioners typically accept it as given that 
language teaching and learning is such a vast and complex area of study that it might be simply 
impossible to grasp it in its entirety. 
 One outcome of the complexity of language and language teaching is that multiple perspectives, 
research methods, learning priorities, and instructional approaches can be found in practically every 
aspect of linguistic analysis and pedagogy. To account for the fact that divergent perspectives and 
schools of thought exist on the teaching and learning of all essential language skills, the content of 
Volume III expands its overviews of research findings in L2/FL listening, speaking, literacy, reading, 
writing, vocabulary, and grammar. 
 To some extent, the diversity of perspectives in research on L2/FL teaching and learning reflects 
the rising professionalization of the field and the increasing depth of knowledge in scholarship and 
pedagogy. L2/FL research and its findings fundamentally hinge on indirect and interpreted evidence, 
and in almost all cases, more than one perspective and interpretation are possible. For this reason, it 
may come as little surprise that theoretical and scholarly views on key variables in L2/FL teaching and 
learning can differ to a great extent. Multiple and different perspectives on practically every aspect of 
L2/FL teaching and learning are probably inevitable. 
 Diverse viewpoints and mindsets are coin of the realm in every discipline, and L2/FL research 
is no exception. To this end, Volume III seeks to account for disparate frames of reference, research 
findings, and their interpretations in the key areas of language teaching and learning. 
 The new features of the book are highlighted at the outset, followed by those that have endured 
the test of time and are therefore retained in Volume III. 
 New Directions, Contents, Chapters, and Authors in Volume III 
 The content changes in Volume III accomplish four goals: 
 (1) survey and update the prominent areas of research, including the sub-disciplines that have 
been already addressed in Volumes I and II, and that represent the disciplinary mainstays 
 (2) consider and discuss perspectives held by different schools of thought on the what, the how, 
and the why of teaching foundational language skills, including theories, pedagogical prin-
ciples, and their implementation in practice 
 (3) capture new and ongoing developments in the key areas of L2/FL teaching and learning, and 
innovative research topics that have gained substantial recognition in current publications, 
e.g. the role of corpora, technology, and digital literacy in L2/FL teaching and learning 

xii • Preface
 (4) examine new trends in language pedagogy and research, e.g. an increased societal emphasis 
on teaching academic language for schooling, somewhat contradictory definitions of literacy, 
and the growing needs for instruction in intercultural communication 
 The selection of chapter authors also adheres to the original strategy of inviting leading authori-
ties in their disciplinary areas. As in Volumes I and II, all authors in Volume III are outstanding 
authorities in their areas of expertise. Volume III includes 35 chapters with 14 returning and 21 new 
authors. 
 • An inclusion of new authors from Asia, Australia, Europe, and North America maintains the 
book’s international scope. 
 • Some authors whose names are synonymous with their areas of expertise and who are the pre-
eminent figures in their sub-disciplines have been invited back to contribute to Volume III. 
Nonetheless, all chapters are completely new and will not significantly overlap content in those 
domains published in previous volumes. 
 • Some authors with world-class reputations and diverse research interests have chosen to work 
on chapters on topic areas different from those in their earlier chapters. 
 • The addition of new material primarily covers the impact of technology on L2/FL pedagogy, 
the influence of corpus studies on instruction, and innovative developments in cross-cultural 
interactions. 
 • The assessment and testing chapters bear little resemblance to the corresponding sections in 
Volumes I and II. The chapters on social outcomes of language assessment, practical factors in 
language testing, and large-scale and classroom assessment complement the thematic threads 
addressed in the earlier volumes. 
 The audience for Volume III is envisioned to be the same as for Volumes I and II. Earlier and cur-
rent volumes of the handbook are geared to all types of L2/FL and FL professionals: researchers and 
researchers-in-training; advanced and not-so-advanced graduate students; faculty in teacher train-
ing, teacher education, and applied linguistics programs; practicing, novice, and pre-service teach-
ers; teacher trainers; curriculum designers; and material developers; or others who are still merely 
considering joining the profession. 
 The Organization of the Book 
 The principles for selecting themes, topics, research areas, and chapters in Volume III have remained 
somewhat similar to those in Volumes I and II. The contents of the book are organized into seven 
thematic parts. (One widely acclaimed linguist commented that now that the book is not as lengthy 
as the previous two volumes, it might actually be possible to read most of it.) 
 The social contexts of L2/FL learning and users, who undertake to learn a language (most com-
monly, English), are the top priority in the research on L2/FL teaching and learning. Much L2/FL 
research that is into the social, political, and educational systems undertakes to find out as much as 
possible about the contexts in which second and foreign languages are taught and learned. 
 Part I ,  Social Contexts, Language Policy, and Language Learners  consists of seven chapters. 
At the beginning of the book, the chapters in this section focus on the people who set out to learn 
a second and foreign language in various contexts, political and educational systems. As is typical 
of many populations, language learners everywhere have broad-ranging objectives for achieving 
different L2/FL proficiencies in order to accomplish their educational, vocational, personal, aca-
demic, professional, career, and communicative goals. The contents of  Part I  address the sociology 
www.ebook3000.com

Preface • xiii
of language teaching and learning, the status of language policy in education, views on English 
as a Global Language, learning English for Academic Purposes and English for Specific Purposes, 
the research on teaching English to very young learners, and teaching and learning the language 
of schooling. 
 The current research in language curricula and pedagogy represents the second theme. These 
are discussed in  Part II ,  Curriculum and Instruction . The seven chapters discuss applications 
of research to curriculum and material design, as well as deal with a few prominent exemplars of 
instructional approaches in L2/FL. These approaches were selected for a closer look because they are 
widely adopted in various geographic locations and social contexts around the world. For example, 
research in spoken and written discourse and the applications of its findings to teaching L2/FL recep-
tive and productive skills is probably one of the more robust areas in language pedagogy, and no 
handbook on second language anything can proceed without an overview of the current state of 
affairs in this discipline. Since at least the early 1980s, content-based language teaching—and more 
recently its European counterpart Content Integrated Language Learning—has become central in 
a range of teaching contexts and at various levels of schooling, such as elementary and secondary, 
including both majority- and minority-language learners. The same can be said about the growing 
prominence of corpus analyses and their findings in all manner of language pedagogy. The prolifera-
tion of technology in language learning and instruction in and out of school (not to mention the 
ubiquity of technology anywhere and everywhere world-wide) has dramatically changed how learn-
ers go about their daily language-related activities. 
 The focus on specific language skills begins in  Part III ,  Listening and Speaking . As has been men-
tioned, a number of standpoints, interpretive paradigms, and perspectives typically co-exist side-by-
side in what is known and valued in research on practically all facets of L2/FL teaching and learning. 
This indelible quality of L2/FL anything—and particularly so in research on language pedagogy—
seems clear in the two chapters on L2/FL listening and the other two on L2/FL speaking. Two chap-
ters address the current and divergent perspectives on listening pedagogy and learning to develop 
L2/FL listening abilities. Similarly, two additional chapters are devoted to the classroom teaching of 
L2/FL speaking skills and the five categories of opportunity in the acquisition of speaking abilities: 
rehearsal, interaction, output, feedback, and language understanding. The role of pronunciation in 
developing L2/FL speaking and listening skills similarly intertwined with the development of L2/FL 
listening and speaking skills. 
 The five chapters in  Part IV ,  Literacies, Reading, and Writing , treat a number of broad domains 
of research, such as pen-and-paper literacy, using digital technology for language learning, L2/
FL reading as an essential language skill, the increasing prominence of computers in learning to 
become a proficient L2/FL reader, and ongoing debates and controversies in the complex political 
world of L2/FL writing. The classical definition of literacy refers to the ability to read and write. 
However, how teachers and learners go about it in various regions around the world probably has 
little in common. In addition, the application of the term “literacy” to adopting and practicing with 
digital technology to improve learning is likely to be a bit of a misnomer when compared to literacy 
in its classical sense. Nonetheless, socially accepted and widely employed definitions of complex 
constructs do not necessarily have to be consistent or logical. Hence, pen-and-paper literacy thus 
finds itself in the company of digital literacy that, by definition, requires advanced reading and 
writing abilities. 
 The four chapters in   Part V , Vocabulary and Grammar , focus on various aspects of learning L2/
FL lexicon and its nearest relative, grammar. In recent decades, dramatic shifts in theoretical foun-
dations, teacher beliefs, and the practice of teaching have had enormous influence on the place of 
vocabulary, grammar, and their contributions to language pedagogy and uses. Although typically 
whole books are written on L2/FL vocabulary, grammar, or vocabulary combined with grammar, 

xiv • Preface
the chapters in this book section only touch the tip of the iceberg. How, when, and in what contexts 
vocabulary is learned, as well as how to measure its size and growth, are the topics without which 
no vocabulary overview can take place. On the other hand, the two schools of thought on grammar 
research and pedagogy approach analyses, instruction, and practice from vantage points that may not 
be easily reconciled. Taken together, however, the viewpoints presented in this book section dominate 
in various geographic locations and educational contexts around the world. 
 The topics of  International Communication and Pragmatics  are considered in  Part VI . Research 
into the connections between language learning and communication across cultural, social, and 
national divides has long remained one of the pivotal areas of study. More recently, intercultural 
and international communication have attracted further attention due to the increasing effects of 
globalization. The term “international communication” first appeared in research and publications 
in the 1950s, while the coined phrase “intercultural communication” and its alternative form “cross-
cultural communication” emerged slightly later in the 1960s. Studies in L2/FL pragmatics are bound 
up with cross-cultural and cross-national language usage in an enormous array of socio-cultural 
frameworks. Social and pragmalinguistic variations in spoken interactions and their norms are taken 
up in research on speech acts and cross-cultural speech act uses. 
 The four chapters in   Part VII , Assessment and Testing , are probably insufficient to discuss in any 
depth the many important human and institutional issues entailed in measuring L2/FL proficiency. 
However, the overarching goal of the chapters in  Part VII  is to underscore the vexing complexity 
of language assessment and testing as it is closely tied to L2/FL learning, learning processes, and 
inferential measurements of L2/FL competence, proficiency, and skill. Thus, the chapters present 
brief overviews of the socio-political contexts of language assessment, practicalities, benefits, and 
constraints entailed in virtually all language assessments, as well as large-scale assessments that serve 
multiple purposes in multiple contexts. The final chapter in this section draws on many concepts and 
findings in classroom assessment with the goal of helping L2/FL teachers plan, design, and carry out 
reflective or formative measures that can blend assessment and L2/FL instruction. 
 The Structure of the Chapters 
 In this Handbook, as in any other large book that consists of dozens of chapters written by the three 
or four dozen authors and co-authors, the contributions are likely to differ in character. To a large 
extent, the chapters reflect the diversity of the research into L2/FL teaching and learning, the contexts 
in which it is taught and learned, and the individuals who teach and learn. To add to the mix, some 
chapters deal with concrete and well-defined topics or argue for the validity of particular research 
findings, teaching methods, or language learning theories, whereas others cover abstract research 
areas or seek to balance disparate research undertakings. 
 In Volume III, the principles for selecting and structuring chapters have largely remained the 
same as they were in previous editions. Based on the survey of the information sources, the areas 
of relevance and currency were relatively easy to identify. In light of the great diversity of the field, 
research, and disciplinary perspectives, every effort has been made to make the chapters consistent 
in style, tone, and the depth of material coverage. For this purpose, all contributors were requested 
to construct their chapters along a similar outline: 
 • An explanation of how the topic discussed in the chapter fits into a larger picture of the 
domain of L2/FL research 
 • Important developments, trends, and traditions in the discipline, as well as current controver-
sies and the reasons that they have arisen 
 • A detailed examination of the current research findings presented in the chapter 
www.ebook3000.com

Preface • xv
 • A section on conclusions and/or future research directions 
 • A substantial list of references that can assist interested readers in backtracking seminal and 
relevant works 
 Each chapter represents a standalone examination of research in a specific L2/FL subdomain, yet 
the book as a whole seeks to reflect the major trends in the current investigations into the people and 
the contexts where and how second and foreign languages are taught and learned. 
 Acknowledgements 
 I owe a debt of gratitude to my friends and colleagues whose guidance, assistance, and advice were 
vital. I am sincerely and deeply grateful to them for giving generously of their knowledge, experience, 
and time (in alphabetical order): 
 Kathryn Bartholomew, Seattle Paciﬁ c University 
 Marianne Celce-Murcia, University of California, Los Angeles 
 William Grabe, Northern Arizona University 
 Robert B. Kaplan, University of Southern California 
 Sandra Lee McKay, San Francisco State University 
 Penny Ur, Oranim College of Education 
 Cheryl Zimmermann, California State University, Fullerton 
 Naomi Silverman, Publisher at Routledge, has been a wise, supportive, foresightful, and steadfast 
friend and colleague for many years. The Handbook and its editions were Naomi’s idea, and they sim-
ply would not have happened without her support, initiative, and enthusiasm for this ongoing project. 
 More than a dozen reviewers, former and current graduate students, experienced teachers, and 
one textbook writer read various drafts of all chapters and provided thorough, thoughtful, and 
detailed comments. Their work was instrumental in the development of individual chapters and, by 
extension, the volume as a whole. My heartfelt thanks goes out to them: the book could not have 
proceeded without their knowledge, expertise, and devotion to the cause. My appreciation also goes 
to the three external reviewers of the second volume of the handbook, and their suggestions for revi-
sions and changes in Volume III were very helpful. 
 In Memoriam 
 The Handbook of Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning and its two earlier volumes 
have been around since 2003, when Volume I was originally proposed and then developed. In the 
past many years, the editions of the Handbook have greatly benefitted from the expertise and gener-
osity of world-class chapter authors, colleagues, and friends. Their scholarship, work, and contribu-
tion to the field have been invaluable to the study and teaching of language and second language. 
Their contributions to the lives of their colleagues, students, and readers have touched and will 
continue to touch all those who learned and will continue to learn from them. 
 Richard Baldauf (1943–2014) 
 Alan Davies (1931–2015) 
 David Eskey (1933–2002) 
 Elliot Judd (1948–2008) 
 Yamuna Kachru (1933–2013) 

xvi • Preface
 Jiri Nekvapil (1935?–2015) 
 Teresa Pica (1945–2011) 
 Theo van Els (1936–2015) 
 Leo van Lier (1944–2012) 
 Larry Vandergrift (1948–2015) 
 Notes 
 1. Stuff.co.nz, November 17, 2015, “Half the children getting English language support in school Kiwi-born.” Retrieved from 
http://www.stuff.co.nz/national/education/74057812/half-the-children-getting-english-language-support-in-school-
kiwiborn, November 21, 2015. 
 2.  China Daily , May 25, 2015, “Initiative spurs language learning.” Retrieved from http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2015–
05/25/content_20807384.htm, September 2, 2015. 
 3.  Saudi Gazette , June 11, 2014, “More and more women travel abroad to study English.” Retrieved from http://www.saudigazette.
com.sa/index.cfm?method=home.regcon&contentid=20140611208057, August 12, 2015. 
 4.  Channel NewsAsia,  November 20, 2015, “English a failing subject for Malaysia despite the push.” Retrieved from http://
www.channelnewsasia.com/news/asiapacific/english-a-failing-subject/2277498.html, November 27, 2015. 
 5.  Taipei Times , October 6, 2015, “Graduates lacking desired skills.” Retrieved from http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/
archives/2015/10/06/2003629402, October 6, 2015. 
 6. Pew Research Center, October 8, 2015, “More than any other foreign language, European youths learn English.” Retrieved 
from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/10/08/more-than-any-other-foreign-language-european-youths-learn-
english/. 
 References 
 AlHammadi, F. (2013). The urgent necessity for learning and using English as an international dialect of communication in 
the Arab school system and universities: A sociolinguistic study.  International Journal of English Linguistics, 3/2, 46–53. 
 European Parliament. (2011).  Laws for legal immigration in the 27 EU member states . Geneva: International Organization for 
Migration. 
 European Parliament. (2015).  Exploring new avenues for legislation for labour migration to the European Union . Brussels: Euro-
pean Parliament. 
 Sung, K. & Spolsky, B. (Eds). (2014).  Conditions for English language teaching and learning in Asia . Newcastle upon Tyne: 
Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
 United Nations. (2013).  Trends in international migrant stock: The 2013 revision . New York: Author. 
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2015).  Global trends report: World at war . New York: Author. 
www.ebook3000.com

 I 
 Social Contexts, Language 
Policy, and Language Learners 

www.ebook3000.com

3
 1 
 The Sociology of Language Teaching and Learning 1 
 John Edwards 
 Introduction 
 This handbook is concerned with second-language teaching and learning, and this chapter focuses 
upon the social settings in which these activities take place. My title, however, omits the word ‘sec-
ond’ because I intend here to discuss elements of the broader picture of which second-language 
learning and teaching are a part. While the formal context of the classroom is the focal point here, it 
is worth mentioning at the outset that the teaching-learning nexus very often— most  often, perhaps, 
if we were to approach the topic from broad temporal and geographic bases—arises outside the 
school gates. Considering the longstanding and ubiquitous efforts by which people have expanded 
their language repertoires in response to real-life pressures and requirements, one might object that 
extra-educational linguistic settings suggest learning much more than teaching. But this is only to 
restrict the latter to formal and regularized procedures, and neglects the obvious fact that there is 
always a ‘teacher’ of sorts for every language learner. One might then imagine that studying the lan-
guage dynamics of the home, the streets, the market and the workplace could reveal elements profit-
ably transferrable to narrower milieus. 
 One might imagine that . . . and one would be right, because the impulse is exactly what under-
pinned the beginning attempts, a couple of generations ago, to make classrooms more like the 
informal places in which people interact because of immediate necessity or desire. A great range of 
approaches—from ‘language laboratories’ prioritizing conversational skills over grammatical preci-
sion, to field trips, to immersion programs, to study terms abroad—can be seen as emanating from 
this impulse. 2  It seems so obvious now, and yet we recall that for a long time children in language 
classes had little or no exposure to the real social life of language. For most of them language learning 
was just another subject and, in the absence of any extracurricular activities (rare enough, and par-
ticularly so in anglophone settings), the results after years of formal study—after sustained emphasis 
on construal over conversation, on parsing over production—were entirely predictable. 3 
 Language diversity in the classroom falls into several main categories. In many (perhaps most) 
contexts, they are not to be found in ‘pure’ form and do not exist as mutually exclusive types. There 
are classrooms with children who speak either ‘foreign’ languages or non-standard forms of locally 
dominant ones. A third variant introduces speakers of ‘foreign’ languages who learn and use, some-
times before coming to school, one of those local non-standard forms. A fourth classification—
involving another sort of non-standard usage—is one that now emerges increasingly frequently in 

4 • John Edwards
a world where English is becoming more and more globalized, but where its apparently permanent 
incursions are spawning sturdy local ‘Englishes.’ Teachers may expect to encounter more speakers 
of such ‘Englishes’ and, in the opinion of Ferguson (2006: 174), this will necessitate the replace-
ment of ‘absolutist conceptions of what is proper and correct in language with greater flexibility 
and principled pragmatism regarding norms and models.’ To strengthen and broaden the point, one 
might add that any effect on linguistic ‘absolutism’ brought about by the presence of these variant 
‘Englishes’ will also be beneficial where more indigenous non-standard forms are concerned. Two 
final categories reflect consciously specialized intentions: bilingual and immersion classrooms (each 
having variants along substantive, temporal and other dimensions). 4 
 Attitudes, Motivation, Necessity 
 Approaches to teaching and learning that try to bring classroom practices a bit closer to those operat-
ing beyond the school gates are clearly on the right track. Attempting to replace decontextualized and 
often quite artificial environments with ones more related to ‘natural’ pressures and requirements is 
good. These attempts are easier in some settings than in others, and they imply degrees of relevance 
of favorable motivations and attitudes—although not always in immediately obvious ways. 
 Where social necessity is evident—consider, for instance, immigrants and their children in situ-
ations in which they must expand their language repertoire—classroom teaching is reinforced by 
extra-educational forces; in some instances, it may be driven by them. Conversely, where necessity 
is not a feature, schools act more in isolation and, needless to say, their task is much more difficult. 
These simple facts account for many of the disparities observed in the success of language teaching 
and learning. One need not be a Solomon to see that there are more difficulties teaching German in 
Nevada than in Nijmegen. In the Nevadas of the world (and there are many of them), the difficulty of 
creating an instrumental linguistic need means that favorable attitudes may become more important 
than in the Nijmegens; see also below, this section. Here, as already implied, schools have typically 
done a poor job. Traditional classes, with their emphasis upon grammar and writing skills, have often 
made the learning of languages a passive, receptive matter for students. This is hardly likely to induce 
in pupils any sense that learning German is a different sort of exercise than learning trigonometry or 
ancient history. It does nothing to reduce the artificiality of a classroom in which students (and often 
their teachers) routinely use a language which is neither the maternal variety nor one that can be 
put to any immediate use. It is neither an extension of the way first languages are acquired, in which 
communication is stressed and where grammatical refinements come afterwards, nor a representa-
tion of normal, interactive conversation. Language learning at school will always either benefit from 
externally imposed necessity or suffer for the lack of it. 
 The perceived importance of language attitudes and motivation, reinforced by the enduring dif-
ficulties in encouraging and maintaining interest in many classroom settings, have led to a specialist 
literature on language attitudes; Garrett (2010) provides an excellent broad-brush treatment, and 
the collection edited by Dörnyei and Ushioda (2009) focuses more particularly on language-learning 
matters. Throughout this literature, the general point is that favorable attitudes contribute to the ease 
and depth of language acquisition. The specific point is that the more such attitudes can be created 
and/or sustained in the classroom, the better. While a great deal of consideration has been given to the 
varied forms that motivation may take, to the ways in which it can best be encouraged, and to its inter-
twinings with other personal and social factors, acceptance of its centrality has become the received 
wisdom among many scholars. As Gass and Selinker (2008: 426) point out, ‘motivation appears to 
be the second strongest predictor of [language-learning] success, trailing only aptitude.’ This implies 
continuing difficulties for formal teaching and learning contexts. At the very best, after all, schools 
can never be more than restricted microcosms of wider society; classrooms can never become streets. 
www.ebook3000.com

Sociology of Language Teaching and Learning • 5
 It is many years ago now that Macnamara (1973) appeared to take the contrary view, that attitudes 
were of  little  importance in language learning. His argument remains succinct and noteworthy, as 
well as one that is insufficiently borne in mind. It reminds us that language learning frequently occurs 
outside the academic precinct. It is instructive even where it errs. 
 Macnamara first noted that necessity may overpower attitudes: someone who moves from Bir-
mingham to Berlin will probably learn German. Confirmation of this common-sense observation 
was found in the report of a large-scale Irish survey: the use of that language was more associated 
with ability than with attitudes (Committee on Irish Language Attitudes Research, 1975). As I com-
mented shortly afterwards, this suggests that attitudes may often assume significant importance only 
after some minimal competence has been achieved, and not before (Edwards, 1977), and that, in 
‘real-life’ settings, attitudes may indeed be secondary elements in language learning. Macnamara’s 
second point also had to do with language learning in those larger settings. He cited the adoption of 
English by the Irish population, a massive 19th-century language shift not accompanied by favor-
able attitudes. (We might note here that, indeed, most historical changes in language use owe more 
to socioeconomic and political exigencies than they do to attitudes.) However, he acknowledged 
that explanatory room could be made for attitudes of a sort: not intrinsically favorable postures 
but, rather, ones arising from perceptions of practical necessity. For example, while many mid-19th-
century Irish people disliked English and what it represented, they also grudgingly realized its utility. 
No ‘integrative’ motivation, then, to cite a term popularized by Gardner and Lambert (1972), but a 
reluctantly instrumental one. 
 A useful distinction may be made between attitudes that are favorable and those that are unfavor-
able but positive (Edwards, 1983). A positive position is,  stricto sensu , one of certainty or assurance: 
it need not be pleasant or desirable. To stay with the Irish example, while bearing in mind that the 
essential element here is widely applicable, one might say that general opinions of the English lan-
guage, and general attitudes towards learning it, were positive and instrumental but not favorable 
(and certainly not integrative). 
 A final strand in Macnamara’s assessment brings us back to the classroom. He made the famil-
iar point that language learning at school has traditionally been an unreal and artificial affair, an 
undertaking in which communication is subordinate to an appreciation of language as an academic 
subject. It was this lack of communicative purpose, and not children’s attitudes, that he felt accounted 
for their poor language competence. However, while it is clear that a great failing in language class-
rooms has been the absence of any realistic usage, it does not follow that attitudes are necessarily of 
small importance. To repeat: the argument that the classroom is an ‘artificial’ context may reflect a 
condemnation of traditional approaches, but it does not of itself indicate that attitudes are trivial. In 
fact, attitudes may take on quite particular importance precisely because of the disembodied nature 
of the traditional classroom. That is, if a context is not perceived as pertinent to real life, or does not 
arise from necessity, then attitudes may make a real difference. 5 
 With even a minimal sense of the interactions among attitude, motivation and perceived neces-
sity, it becomes easy to understand the major problems associated with teaching and learning foreign 
languages in ‘big-language’ contexts and, conversely, the relative lack of them among speakers of 
‘smaller’ varieties. Both relative ease and difficulty are importantly related to contextual conditions 
having to do with power and dominance. This explains why so many anglophones (for instance) 
are monolingual; it also explains, incidentally, why the vast majority of second-language learn-
ers are learning English. In a world made increasingly safe for anglophones, there is less and less 
reason (or so it seems to many) to learn other languages. Swaffar (1999: 10–11) made some sug-
gestions ‘to help foreign language departments assume command of their destinies,’ and the usual 
suspects were pedantically rounded up: a redefinition of the discipline (‘as a distinct and sequenced 
inquiry into the constituents and applications of meaningful communication’), more emphasis upon 

6 • John Edwards
communication and less upon narrow grammatical accuracy, the establishment of standards, models 
and common curricula (for ‘consistent pedagogical rhetoric’), and so on. These points are all very 
laudable but hardly unfamiliar and—more bluntly—not very useful. It has always been difficult 
to sell languages in Kansas: wherever you go, for many hundreds of miles, English will take you to 
McDonald’s, get you a burger, and bring you safely home again. A thorough reworking of ‘pedagogi-
cal rhetoric’ doesn’t amount to sale prices. 
 What about Spanish, in an America where the number of Hispanics has recently overtaken that 
of black Americans? 6  The teaching and learning of it would seem obviously important. Beyond the 
implications of a very large Spanish-speaking presence (after Mexico, in fact, the United States is 
the largest Spanish-speaking country in the world), the language continues to be a major player on 
the world stage (its speakers constitute the third largest group, behind Chinese and English). Further, 
it has illustrious and ongoing cultural and literary traditions. It is the ideal American second language 
and, indeed, is the linchpin of modern-language teaching in the United States. For example, figures 
quoted in Edwards (2001) suggest that students of Spanish constitute more than half of all tertiary-
level language learners. Everything is relative, however, and here one could cite other figures attesting 
to the very small numbers of language learners overall. Is the teaching and learning of Spanish in a 
healthy state in America, then, or does it only seem so in comparison with weaker sisters? 
 Just as it has often been thought right to work to eradicate ‘incorrect’ dialects and replace them 
with ‘proper’ standard ones (see below, this section and the following one), so schools have often con-
sidered, implicitly or directly, that the sooner foreign-language-speaking pupils engage with language 
shift, the better. At the same time, however, schools have always understood that the expansion of 
linguistic repertoires is an important facet of the educational process. Many obvious tensions arise 
here. For example, the same school that values and teaches French or Spanish may do little or noth-
ing to recognize, adapt to, or build upon the Hausa, Turkish and Laotian that come in the door with 
new immigrant pupils. In scholarly eyes, all languages may be equal but, socially speaking, some are 
more equal than others. 7  Social realities and widely held attitudes, and not any inherent linguistic 
features, dictate an emphasis on some languages and the ignoring of others. This in itself need not 
give rise to difficulties—unless, of course, the idea that those ‘others’ are  intrinsically  less important 
mediums is allowed to take root. 
 I now consider a little more closely the negative, unfavorable or ill-informed views that may be 
held by teachers, views that can hinder successful repertoire expansion or, indeed, efficient and sup-
portive classroom communication generally—whether these desirable features are to occur in a 
language-focused classroom or whether we wish to encourage their emergence in all classrooms and 
with all sorts of instructors. I might also add at this point that  all  languages and dialects reflect and 
convey group identity. They are all markers of solidarity and belonging and, as such, anchor group 
members in the collective. We are not dealing solely with linguistic ease, or progress, or alleged ame-
lioration; we are also dealing with symbols having considerable psychological and social potency. 
 We should also remind ourselves that educational and social disadvantage underpinned by (among 
other things) inaccurate linguistic opinion and prejudice remains a great problem. Popular speech 
and language attitudes continue to hold certain dialects and accents as better or worse than others. 
There is no real difficulty, of course, in the possession of personal preferences, in the fact that I think 
Italian to be the most beautiful and mellifluous of languages, whereas you find the greatest music and 
poetry in Scottish Gaelic. But there are dangers when we imagine that we are arguing about substan-
tive linguistic issues, about the inherent properties of one variety or another, or—worse still—about 
the cognitive attributes thought to accompany certain language forms. In all these ways, the so-called 
deficit theory of non-standard dialects and, indeed, of certain foreign languages continues to hold 
wide sway. The man or woman in the street may not be able to articulate this theory, may indeed 
be quite unaware that he or she  has  a theory, but it is the easiest thing in the world to demonstrate 
www.ebook3000.com

Sociology of Language Teaching and Learning • 7
the continuing influence of a ‘deficit’ point of view: just ask people about ‘correct’ and ‘incorrect’ 
language (see, for instance, Lippi-Green, 1997; Trudgill, 1975). And, more to our purposes here, one 
would be naive to imagine that this influence is absent inside the educational cloisters. Of course, I 
do not mean to single out teachers as the primary villains here, nor do I imagine that their attitudes 
and actions are anything but well-meaning. Beside the obvious fact, however, that they are members 
of society first, they are also on the front lines, so to speak, and their roles and their influences are 
incredibly strong in the lives of young children. This only strengthens the case for providing them 
with the most up-to-date and enlightened information about language and its ramifications. 
 Let me suggest, by the way, that ‘disadvantage’ is an accurate and useful term, provided that it is 
used properly as a reflection of group difference that is, itself, a product of social discontinuity and 
comparison. 8  I have argued elsewhere (Edwards, 1989, 2010, for example) that it is simply incorrect 
to see social and educational disadvantage as having a genetic underpinning. Over the long histori-
cal haul, this has been the most popular view, but it is wrong: it is shot through with prejudice and 
inaccurate knowledge of the causes and ramifications of class and cultural variation. Nonetheless, 
precisely because the genetic ‘case’ has been such a longstanding one and, indeed, such a continuingly 
attractive explanation for group disadvantage, we have to recognize that it is hardly unknown for 
teachers to believe that the language ‘problems’ they encounter are of deep-seated hereditary origin, 
that these problems present obstacles to be overcome, that part of their job is to help their pupils 
replace ‘incorrect’ with ‘correct’ usage, and so on. 
 Inaccurate ideas about disadvantage having an hereditary basis do not exhaust the possibilities 
for disadvantage-equals-deficit positions. Environmental factors have also been cited as another logi-
cally possible source. The ‘deficit theorists’ whose influence peaked in the 1960s and 1970s argued 
that certain social contexts produced real and longstanding deficiencies. ‘Cultural deprivation’ was 
a phrase often used in the literature, even though a moment’s thought reveals that it nonsensically 
implies that a group is being perceived as deprived of  another  group’s culture—after all, it hardly 
makes sense to describe a community as being deprived of itself. The implication, in fact, was that 
poor and lower-class sociocultural settings were deficient precisely because they did not exhibit 
middle-class values and practices. Social difference was translated, in other words, into social deficit. 
This, unsurprisingly, was the heyday of ‘compensatory-education’ initiatives. In most writing under 
this rubric, deficits were seen to be virtually as deeply rooted as if they were genetic in origin. 
 There is of course another environmental stance, one that accepts the existence of important 
class and cultural differences but refuses to see them as substantive deficits. Rather, it attempts to 
understand how environmental variations produce attitudinal and behavioral ones, and resists the 
temptation to make moral judgements solely from middle-class perspectives. I suggest that this envi-
ronmental ‘difference’ position is the only logically tenable one, although the force of social pressure 
and prejudice that can turn difference into deficiency admittedly remains very powerful. If potent 
‘mainstream’ sentiments hold that class and cultural differences are actual defects, then academic 
conceptions of right and wrong may seem rather insignificant. Perception is everything. But per-
ception can be based upon misinformation (or worse), so my argument is that we should make the 
different-but-not-deficient ‘case’ wherever and whenever possible. I need hardly repeat that it is an 
argument to be stressed in all teacher-education milieus. 
 It is, after all, particularly in linguistic contexts where the general deficit-difference debate has 
been played out in more specific terms. Indeed, the historically prejudicial perceptions that saw class 
and cultural variations as based upon real genetic or environmental deficits also saw language and 
dialect variations in the same way. The work of the late Basil Bernstein—whether the ‘real’ Bernstein 
or Bernstein misinterpreted—unfortunately provided a contemporary reinforcement of these inac-
curate perceptions. Working-class language ‘codes’ were seen to exemplify linguistic deficiency or 
deprivation, and their speakers to possess a repertoire distinctly inferior to that of their middle-class 

8 • John Edwards
counterparts. The implications of this theoretical position were particularly important, inasmuch as 
they encouraged teachers and teacher educators to carry on with programs of instruction based upon 
a continued disdain and rejection of dialectal variants. 
 Lippi-Green (1997: 111) writes about teachers whose views seem to have ‘effectively summarized 
all of the conclusions drawn from Bernstein’s theories of restricted and elaborated codes.’ Walsh 
(1991: 107) found teachers of Puerto Rican children who felt that their pupils 
 come to school speaking a hodge podge. They are all mixed up and don’t know any language 
well. As a result, they can’t even think clearly. That’s why they don’t learn. It’s our job to teach 
them language—to make up for their deficiency. And, since their parents don’t really know 
any language either, why should we waste time on Spanish? It is ‘good’ English which has to 
be the focus. 
 Could we ask for a clearer or more succinct statement of the ‘deficit’ position? 
 A final point here: some have argued that the sort of attention to attitudes that I have been report-
ing on here is rather passé. The discourse-analysis emphasis that has gained recent prominence in 
several language fields and sub-fields, for example, has tended to downplay more empirical inves-
tigations. Nonetheless, it often has less to say than some of the ‘classic’ work in language attitudes 
and stereotypes, at least in terms of practical and generalizable information of interest to teachers 
and others. It undoubtedly has contributions to make, particularly in conjunction with more ‘tradi-
tional’ attention to perceptual matters. Rampton’s ethnographic treatment of classroom discourse, 
for instance, points out that—while the attitudinal atmosphere at school with respect to the tolerance 
and treatment of dialect variation is not the same as it was in the 1960s and 1970s—perceptions of 
social class, its linguistic accompaniments, and the attendant psychological stresses, remain impor-
tant. Writing of two pupils, he notes that 
 both Hanif and Ninnette had fairly clear images of the kinds of disadvantaged lives they wanted 
to avoid . . . working-class pupils might not be quite as fragile as sociolinguistics has sometimes 
implied, but everyday experience and a huge non-linguistic literature on class provides [sic] 
ample reason for taking class-related insecurities very seriously. 
 (Rampton, 2006: 320) 
 Generally speaking, it seems obvious that sensitive attention to the details of discourse and conversation 
can reveal many things of interest. Studies of gender differences in the classroom provide another good 
case in point here. Close analyses of verbal exchanges, of variations in the question-and-answer patterns 
of girls and boys, for instance, or of differential attention provided by teachers—these can be very illu-
minating (see Carr and Pauwels, 2006; Julé, 2004; Sommers, 2000). 
 Even some of its most fervent advocates admit, however, that discourse studies do not always 
reveal much that is new (an early critic here is Stubbs, 1984), and the level of detail in which they 
often revel is usually unlikely to lead to helpful educational actions and amendments. 
 As noted, small-scale enquiries can inform broader matters, and, to their credit, discourse analysts 
of most stripes are highly sensitive to cultural and class variations. Indeed, such variations are the 
very substance of their  métier , particularly when we look at discourse-analytic work in its ‘critical’ 
versions. Nonetheless, my general contention is that the micro-level perspective associated with dis-
course analysis is not of the greatest or the most immediate value for the matters under discussion 
here. Further, I find that discourse analysis and its various offspring have become very inward-looking, 
increasingly tricked out in noisome jargon and much given to the highly specialized theorizing and 
fissiparous debate that one associates with weak disciplinary areas. 9 
www.ebook3000.com

Sociology of Language Teaching and Learning • 9
 I am heartened to find, therefore, that the careful study of language beliefs and attitudes has not 
quite disappeared; edited collections by Kristiansen et al. (2005) and Garrett et al. (2003) are exem-
plary here, as is the work of Ladegaard (2000), Ladegaard and Sachdev (2006) and Garrett (2010). 
Many other scholars could have been cited; I mention these in particular because they cross many 
linguistic, geographic and demographic boundaries. There are also new (or revived) approaches that 
complement ongoing work on language attitudes, motivation, and the like. The emphasis upon ‘folk 
linguistics’ and ‘perceptual dialectology,’ which often represents a desire to get to grips with more 
fully fleshed language attitudes, is a vital modern sub-discipline, for example; see the overviews pro-
vided by Preston (1999) and Long and Preston (2002). 
 Classroom Dynamics 
 L’école est un curieux lieu de langage. Il s’y mélange les langues ofﬁ cielle, privée, scolaire, des 
langues maternelles, des langues étrangères, de l’argot de lycéen, de l’argot de la cité. À consi-
dérer toutes ces langues qui cohabitent, je me dis que l’école est peut-être le seul lieu où elles 
peuvent se retrouver dans leur diversité et dans leurs chevauchements. Mais il faut être très 
vigilants et justement tirer partie de cette belle hétérogénéité. 
 This quotation (from Steiner and Ladjali, 2003: 83–84) refers to the interesting and varied mixture 
of languages and language varieties that is found in the classroom. More pointedly, the authors sug-
gest that it may be the only setting in which so many varieties exist and often co-exist, and that we 
should take advantage of this striking diversity. While the sentiment is one that most teachers and 
scholars—most enlightened people, indeed—would immediately endorse, we have already seen that 
the  belle hétérogénéité  of the classroom has not always been viewed in such a favorable light. In this 
section, then, I focus once more upon teachers: how do they interpret the sociological setting in 
which they work, and what do they take their roles to be? We are still, of course, essentially in the 
realms of perception and attitude. I begin, however, with a general and contextualizing observation. 
 Among my other academic activities and duties, I have often given talks to teachers and teachers’ 
organizations. These have typically dealt with the points of intersection among education, social 
class, language and identity. Such topics have always been of great relevance for teachers, however (or, 
indeed, whether or not) they understood them. Putting aside language teaching  per se  for a moment, 
and simply considering classrooms (most classrooms now, I suppose) as those sites of linguistic 
heterogeneity commented upon by Steiner and Ladjali, one might argue the following: whether it is 
a matter of accepting or rejecting non-standard dialects or foreign languages at school, of adapting 
classrooms to language diversity or attempting to maintain a strict monolingual regimen, of seeing 
school as a contributor to social change or as a supporter of some ‘mainstream’  status quo , of arguing 
the merits of ‘transitional’ versus ‘maintenance’ bilingual education, of promoting immersion pro-
grams or endorsing the neglect (often benign in intent, admittedly) that is submersion, of embracing 
multiculturalism or recoiling from it—in all these matters, the knowledge, sensitivities and postures 
of teachers are of no small importance. 
 Over several decades, however, I have been amazed and disappointed at how ill-prepared teachers 
typically are with regard to linguistic and cultural variation in the classroom. (This extends beyond 
‘ordinary’ teachers, as we shall see, and takes in those trained specifically as language teachers; see 
below, this section. 10 ) The education of teachers often involves limited attention to such variation; 
even where it is considered, misconceptions persist. It is important to mention here that broadening 

10 • John Edwards
teachers’ linguistic awareness is not difficult to bring about. The evidence, for example, that Black 
English dialects are just as valid as any other English variants, that they are just as rule-governed, that 
their patterns of pronunciation and emphasis are just as regular, that they serve the cognitive needs 
of their speakers just as well as does any other form of speech—all this and more can be presented to, 
and easily understood by, anyone who has an open mind. So much the worse, then, that so many are 
still left to labor under stereotyped, inaccurate and potentially harmful illusions. 
 Andersson and Trudgill (1990: 179) write that ‘teachers who are prepared to take an open-minded, 
unprejudiced attitude towards the varieties of language spoken by their pupils will be the ones who 
also succeed best in fostering and developing children’s linguistic interests and abilities.’ We should 
expand upon this, and say that such teachers are likely to succeed best in developing  all  of their pupils’ 
potentials, but the observation also prompts us to consider how best we might facilitate the develop-
ment of open-mindedness, linguistic and otherwise, among teachers (and others, too, of course). It is 
obvious that any approach must be based upon the appropriate presentation of up-to-date evidence 
bearing upon linguistic and cultural issues; for some specific perspectives, in a range of locales, see 
Beykont (2002), Gaine (2005) and Pearce (2005). 
 So, contemporary linguistic and cultural insights should be made available to teachers. However, 
while the ruling in the famous Ann Arbor Black English trial that  required  them to take courses in 
sociolinguistics may have had a useful influence on subsequent programs of teacher education, I don’t 
think that that judgement was necessarily the best precedent for all future procedure; see Labov (1982) 
and Lanehart (2001). Rather, I believe that careful and regular attention to basic language matters is the 
soil in which the sensitivities of teachers and teachers-in-training are most likely to grow and thrive. 
 In a lengthy review, Brouwer and Korthagen (2005: 153) point out that ‘occupational socializa-
tion in schools is a known factor counteracting attempts at educating innovative teachers.’ Like the 
rest of us, teachers are very susceptible to the cognitive and emotional tone of their surroundings. 
It is not to be doubted that such susceptibility is correlated with vagueness or ignorance, so that the 
issues on which one is least informed are likely to be those most prone to influence. A corollary is 
that attempts to replace ignorance with awareness are likely to act as inoculations against later sus-
ceptibility. To make this more specific: providing new teachers with accurate linguistic information 
about the competence of their pupils may disrupt a chain of ignorance and misinformation that is 
otherwise likely to continue. 
 A reasonable suggestion, often made, calls for the recruitment of more teachers who are from non-
standard-speaking (or ‘foreign’) communities themselves. Quiocho and Rios (2000), for instance, 
suggest that teachers who are from minority groups will be more likely to demonstrate linguistic 
and cultural sensitivity in the classroom. But it is important to point out that minority-group mem-
bers who become teachers may, by that fact alone, be atypical of the group. Relatedly, the process 
of teacher training may tend to accelerate their middle-class socialization. (Rather more pointedly, 
Grinberg and Saavedra [2000: 436] note that once Latinos and other minority-group members ‘enter 
the system, internal processes of colonization take over.’) It is by no means clear, then, that increasing 
the number of teachers from particular ethnolinguistic or social-class communities will produce a 
commensurate increase in desirable classroom perceptions and reactions. 
 Some of my own research in Nova Scotia made it quite clear that prevailing perspectives made 
little room for non-standard English in the classroom (Edwards and McKinnon, 1987). In some 
schools there were sizeable groups of African-Canadian youngsters, descendants of those who came 
to Canada during the American civil war, along the ‘underground railroad,’ or who had been given 
land grants in return for service in the British army; in others, there were Acadian children of French-
speaking background. An inability or an unwillingness to see such groups as anything other than 
aberrations in an essentially English/Celtic mainstream had the predictable consequences. They con-
tinue today, and not just in rural maritime Canada. 
www.ebook3000.com

Sociology of Language Teaching and Learning • 11
 Flores (2005), for instance, presents a rather chilling chronological table showing that educa-
tional assessments of the 1920s—a time when Spanish speakers in the United States were sometimes 
judged to be mentally retarded—have now become condemnations of bilingual-education programs 
that prevent the most efficient acquisition of English. 11  In another setting, Hélot and Young (2005: 
242–244) show that, since the French educational system is still largely ‘envisaged from a monolin-
gual point of view . . . it is difficult for most teachers to view the different languages and cultural 
backgrounds of their pupils as other than problematic.’ The authors suggest that, where linguistic 
diversity  does  seem to be mildly encouraged by the education ministry, this is ‘mainly as a policy to 
counterbalance the hegemony of English.’ Zientek (2007) has written about the general shortcom-
ings of teacher-preparation programs in America; more specifically, she discusses the inadequate 
information provided about cultural and linguistic diversity in the classroom. Work by Tenenbaum 
and Ruck (2007) has also demonstrated the varied expectations that teachers have of children: Asian 
pupils were expected to do best at school, followed by European American children, then Hispanics 
and, finally, black children. Teachers were also found to be more encouraging in their interactions 
with those of whom they expected the most. The dangers of such stereotypic preconceptions are 
obvious, contributing as they easily can to self-fulfilling prophecies. 
 As parenthetically noted above, there is even evidence that the more specific training of bilingual-
education and other language teachers has been less than adequate. Grinberg and Saavedra (2000) 
cite some representative comments that reveal how university courses leading to teacher certification 
are often of ‘little relevance.’ One trainee wrote that ‘in my preparation as a bilingual educator I was 
not prepared for the reality in the school’ (433). Another relevant observation: ‘living here in the 
heart of New Mexico, we have very fertile grounds to develop strong, effective bilingual programs . . . 
[but] the university does not have a good program to prepare teachers . . . there is no rigor . . . the 
content of the classes is minimal, at a low level’ (434). 
 If we turn to non-standard dialect varieties, we find that increased attention has indeed been 
given to a fuller understanding of their intrinsic validity; much of it, however, has remained within 
academic groves. A discussion by Siegel (2007: 76) shows how little ground has often been gained. 
Describing creoles and non-standard dialects in education, he points out that, despite several decades 
of sociolinguistic insight, accurate depictions of such varieties ‘have not filtered down to many edu-
cators and administrators.’ Zéphir’s work (1997, 1999) is also important here, as she draws explicit 
and telling parallels between the educational reception of creole and that of Black English. In a review 
of a book on Black English, Kautzsch (2006) points to the necessity for more open-minded and 
well-informed teachers, and for educational systems committed to ‘difference’ rather than ‘deficit’ 
stances on cultural and dialect variations. Godley et al. (2007: 124) provide a very recent classroom 
demonstration of the continuing assessments that equate ‘standard’ with ‘correct,’ and Black English 
with ‘incorrect, ungrammatical English.’ 
 I don’t want to multiply examples unnecessarily, but an interesting longitudinal perspective can 
be found in the reports published by the American Dialect Society at 20-year intervals (1943, 1964, 
1984; and Preston, 2003), reports outlining ‘needed research’ in dialect studies. In the latest of these, 
several authors write about the important linguistic demonstrations of the validity of Black English 
and other non-standard dialects, about the useful developments in language-attitude research, as 
well as progress in the ‘perceptual dialectology’ and ‘folk linguistics’ mentioned in the previous sec-
tion. While virtually all scholarly writing about Black English has argued for the greater sensitivity to 
black culture and lifestyles that should logically accompany demonstrations of the validity of black 
dialects (the work of Smitherman [1981, 2006] is noteworthy here), it is sad to find that unenlight-
ened stereotypes continue their baleful course. Relatedly, Wolfram and Christian (1989) note that, 
while researchers and those who teach teachers agree on the importance of information about dialect 
variation in the classroom, they have been hindered by the lack of appropriate texts. It is interesting, 

12 • John Edwards
to say the least, that during the years following Labov’s (1969) classic demonstration of the ‘logic of 
nonstandard English,’ little suitable teacher-training material was apparently developed. 
 Conclusion 
 This chapter has emphasized the importance of attitudes and motivation, and the ways in which they 
interact with perceived necessity. Such an emphasis can apply to virtually all classrooms, of course, 
because in what educational setting are perceptions and their consequences unimportant? Language 
and dialect at school, however, cannot be understood in quite the same way that we think of the useful 
contributions that ability and attitude can make to learning trigonometry, or botany, or even litera-
ture. There are several reasons for this. Children come to school with particular linguistic fluencies 
that are already more than mere instruments of communication: they are also elements of personality 
and social identity. Thus, when teachers wish, quite reasonably, to broaden the repertoires of children 
whose speech is non-standard, they run the risk of creating difficulties at home; where they hope to 
expand, their efforts may be seen as attempts at linguistic replacement. It is, after all, a delicate exercise 
to help children become bi-dialectal, to better face a world in which their maternal forms may be stig-
matized, without implying that there must, after all, be something wrong with those forms. 
 Expanding the picture from dialect to language, it is easy to see that linguistic facility and flex-
ibility buttress all other elements of education; they are, quite simply, more fundamental than any-
thing else. While the learning of  all  subjects at school may provide specific tools for further progress, 
language is the general one that underpins all others. One may consider the existence and enlarge-
ment of maternal varieties, or issues surrounding dialect expansion, or the acquisition of second and 
subsequent mediums of communication—in all, language is the essential key for opening social and 
personal doors, preferred or required. Such observations are nothing more, of course, than the most 
familiar of truisms about human life, and this is hardly the place for trite statements of the obvi-
ous. Nevertheless, all teachers—not just those who are focused upon language learning  per se— are 
necessarily deeply involved in language matters. It follows that the sociology of language teaching 
and learning has primarily and most importantly to do with the atmospheres in which they occur, 
contexts created or restricted by the perceptions of all participants. This is clearly the case in more 
‘artificial’ and self-conscious settings. It is also true, however, in what seem to be the more ‘natural’ 
ones where didactics are (or seem to be) absent—because the behavioral effects of even real and 
pressing necessity rest upon perception. 
 Notes 
  1. Some of this chapter draws more or less directly upon Edwards (2010). 
  2. It is also worth recalling that the initial use of language-laboratory technology was often simply to individualize previ-
ously existing grammar-and-pronunciation exercises. 
  3. The results of my lengthy school language-learning efforts—exhaustive in many areas, exhausting in almost all—were 
surely like those of a great many other students. I became a dab hand at recognizing and reciting the  plus-que-parfait 
du subjonctif  but couldn’t understand bus drivers in either Paris or Montreal, nor (more importantly) order a  croque-
monsieur and a  bière with any unselfconscious ease. 
  4. I am referring to English only here, but the points made can be extrapolated to other linguistic settings. I should reiterate, 
too, that the linguistic (and other) variants that children bring with them to school are things which virtually  all teachers 
encounter. We are not dealing here with matters relevant only to language teachers. 
  5. I prescind here from the obvious point that ‘necessity’ may take many forms, not all of them instrumental in an immedi-
ate, practical or applied sense. What is instrumental is not merely that which emanates from or is necessitated by ordinary 
quotidian requirements. The language-learning efforts of scholars—or, to strengthen the point, of academic eremites—are 
just as instrumental for them as are those of the job-seeking immigrant. I should also add that, in any event, the traditional 
distinction between ‘instrumental’ and ‘integrative’ motivation is neither a firm nor a necessarily permanent one. 
www.ebook3000.com

Sociology of Language Teaching and Learning • 13
  6. As of mid-2014, there were some 54 million Hispanics in the United States; this represents about 17% of the overall 
population (of 319 million). They constitute the largest minority group, with the black population standing at about 45 
million. One estimate suggests that, shortly after mid-century, the Hispanic population will represent almost one-third 
of the country’s total. (These are U.S. Census Bureau figures; see www.quickfacts.census.gov.) The population of Mexico, 
incidentally, is about 122 million, and that of Spain is about 47 million. 
  7. Mackey (1978: 7) observed that ‘only before God and the linguist are all languages equal. Everyone knows that you can go 
further with some languages than you can with others.’ 
  8. I use the term  disadvantage  advisedly. As long as we understand that it need not refer to innate linguistic ‘deficit’—and 
therefore has inaccurate and ill-informed connotations—then we reasonably revive its use. There is no question, after all, 
that individuals can be importantly disadvantaged in certain social contexts. This has nothing to do with inherited and 
unchangeable characteristics and everything to do with the power of social convention. For fuller discussion here, see 
Edwards (1981, 1989). 
  9. I feel quite strongly about this, particularly when discourse-analytic work purports to have applied educational value—so 
much so that, in my 2010 book on languages at school, I devote a chapter to ‘discourse analysis and its discontents.’ 
 10. Even if there were  no  great likelihood of teachers encountering linguistic diversity in their classrooms (increasingly 
implausible as this would seem), I think that a good case could still be made for giving much more attention to it. All 
good education worthy of the name must surely be multicultural, and a logical implication is that any heightening of 
teachers’ linguistic awareness and sensitivities is a good thing. 
 11. It was in the context of large-scale immigration to the United States that Florence Goodenough (1926: 393) pointed out 
that ‘the use of a foreign language in the home is one of the chief factors in producing mental retardation.’ Having been 
a doctoral student under Lewis Terman—who developed the Stanford-Binet IQ test—Goodenough became a respected 
and prolific scholar. 
 References 
 American Dialect Society (1943)  Needed Research in American English . Chicago: A.D.S. 
 American Dialect Society (1964)  Needed Research in American English (1963) . Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press. 
 American Dialect Society (1984)  Needed Research in American English (1983) . Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press. 
 Andersson, Lars and Peter Trudgill (1990)  Bad Language . Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Beykont, Zeynep (ed.) (2002)  The Power of Culture: Teaching Across Language Difference . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Educa-
tional Publishing. 
 Brouwer, Niels and Fred Korthagen (2005) Can teacher education make a difference?  American Educational Research Journal 
42, 153–224. 
 Carr, Jo and Anne Pauwels (2006)  Boys and Foreign Language Learning: Real Boys Don’t Do Languages . Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
 Committee on Irish Language Attitudes Research (1975)  Report . Dublin: Government Stationery Office. 
 Dörnyei, Zoltán and Ema Ushioda (eds.) (2009)  Motivation, Language Identity and the L2 Self . Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Edwards, John (1977) Review of  Report  (Committee on Irish language attitudes research).  Language Problems and Language 
Planning 1, 54–59. 
 Edwards, John (1981) Disadvantage: Guilt by association.  Educational Psychology 1, 101–103. 
 Edwards, John (1983) Language attitudes in multilingual settings: A general assessment.  Journal of Multilingual and Multicul-
tural Development 4, 225–236. 
 Edwards, John (1989)  Language and Disadvantage . London: Cole & Whurr. 
 Edwards, John (2001) Languages and language learning in the face of world English.  Profession , 109–120. [ Profession is the 
Annual of the Modern Language Association]. 
 Edwards, John (2010)  Language Diversity in the Classroom . Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Edwards, John and Margaret McKinnon (1987) The continuing appeal of disadvantage as deficit: A Canadian study in a rural 
context.  Canadian Journal of Education 12, 330–349. 
 Ferguson, Gibson (2006)  Language Planning and Education . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
 Flores, Barbara (2005) The intellectual presence of the deficit view of Spanish-speaking children in the educational literature 
during the 20th century. In Pedro Pedraza and Melissa Rivera (eds.)  Latino Education: An Agenda for Community Action 
Research (pp. 75–98). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Gaine, Chris (2005)  We’re All White, Thanks: The Persisting Myth about ‘White’ Schools . Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham. 
 Gardner, Robert and Wallace Lambert (1972)  Attitudes and Motivation in Second-Language Learning . Rowley, MA: Newbury 
House. 
 Garrett, Peter (2010)  Attitudes to Language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

14 • John Edwards
 Garrett, Peter, Nikolas Coupland and Angie Williams (eds.) (2003)  Investigating Language Attitudes . Cardiff: University of 
Wales Press. 
 Gass, Susan and Larry Selinker (2008)  Second Language Acquisition . London: Routledge. 
 Godley, Amanda, Brian Carpenter and Cynthia Werner (2007) ‘I’ll speak in proper slang’: Language ideologies in a daily edit-
ing activity.  Reading Research Quarterly 42, 100–131. 
 Goodenough, Florence (1926) Racial differences in the intelligence of school children.  Journal of Experimental Psychology 9, 
388–397. 
 Grinberg, Jaime and Elizabeth Saavedra (2000) The constitution of bilingual/ESL education as a disciplinary practice: Genea-
logical explorations.  Review of Educational Research 70, 419–441. 
 Hélot, Christine and Andrea Young (2005) The notion of diversity in language education: Policy and practice at primary level 
in France.  Language, Culture and Curriculum 18, 242–257. 
 Julé, Allyson (2004)  Gender, Participation and Silence in the Classroom . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Kautzsch, Alexander (2006) Review of  African American English (Lisa Green).  Language in Society 35, 149–152. 
 Kristiansen, Tore, Peter Garrett and Nikolas Coupland (eds) (2005)  Subjective Processes in Language Variation and Change. 
[=  Acta Linguistica Hafniensia 37]. 
 Labov, William (1969) The logic of nonstandard English.  Georgetown Monographs on Language and Linguistics 22, 1–31. 
 Labov, William (1982) Objectivity and commitment in linguistic science: The case of the Black English trial in Ann Arbor. 
 Language in Society 11, 165–201. 
 Ladegaard, Hans (2000) Language attitudes and sociolinguistic behaviour.  Journal of Sociolinguistics 4, 214–233. 
 Ladegaard, Hans and Itesh Sachdev (2006) ‘I like the Americans . . . but I certainly don’t aim for an American accent’: Language atti-
tudes, vitality and foreign language learning in Denmark.  Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development  27, 91–108. 
 Lanehart, Sonja (ed.) (2001)  Sociocultural and Historical Contexts of African American English . Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
 Lippi-Green, Rosina (1997)  English with an Accent: Language, Ideology and Discrimination in the United States . London: Rout-
ledge. 
 Long, Daniel and Dennis Preston (eds.) (2002)  Handbook of Perceptual Dialectology: Volume 2 . Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Mackey, William (1978) The importation of bilingual education models. In James Alatis (ed.)  Georgetown University Round 
Table on Languages and Linguistics (pp. 1–18). Washington: Georgetown University Press. 
 Macnamara, John (1973) Attitudes and learning a second language. In Roger Shuy and Ralph Fasold (eds)  Language Attitudes: 
Current Trends and Prospects (pp. 36–40). Washington: Georgetown University Press. 
 Pearce, Sarah (2005)  You Wouldn’t Understand: White Teachers in Multiethnic Classrooms . Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham. 
 Preston, Dennis (ed.) (1999)  Handbook of Perceptual Dialectology: Volume 1 . Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Preston, Dennis (ed.) (2003)  Needed Research in American Dialects . Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
 Quiocho, Alice and Francisco Rios (2000) The power of their presence: Minority group teachers and schooling.  Review of 
Educational Research 70, 485–528. 
 Rampton, Ben (2006)  Language in Late Modernity: Interaction in an Urban School . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Siegel, Jeff (2007) Creoles and minority dialects in education: An update.  Language and Education 21, 66–86. 
 Smitherman, Geneva (ed.) (1981)  Black English and the Education of Black Children and Youth: Proceedings of the National 
Invitational Symposium on the King Decision . Detroit: Center for Black Studies, Wayne State University. 
 Smitherman, Geneva (2006)  Word From the Mother: Language and African Americans . London: Routledge. 
 Sommers, Christina (2000)  The War against Boys: How Misguided Feminism Is Harming Our Young Men . New York: Simon 
& Schuster. 
 Steiner, George and Cécile Ladjali (2003)  Éloge de la transmission: le maître et l’élève . Paris: Albin Michel. 
 Stubbs, Michael (1984) Applied discourse analysis and educational linguistics. In Peter Trudgill (ed)  Applied Sociolinguistics 
(pp. 179–202). London: Academic Press. 
 Swaffar, Janet (1999) The case for foreign languages as a discipline.  ADFL Bulletin 30(3), 6–12. 
 Tenenbaum, Harriet and Martin Ruck (2007) Are teachers’ expectations different for racial minority than for European Amer-
ican students? A meta-analysis.  Journal of Educational Psychology 99, 253–273. 
 Trudgill, Peter (1975)  Accent, Dialect and the School . London: Edward Arnold. 
 Walsh, Catherine (1991)  Pedagogy and the Struggle for Voice . New York: Bergin & Garvey. 
 Wolfram, Walt and Donna Christian (1989)  Dialects and Education: Issues and Answers . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
 Zéphir, Flore (1997) Haitian Creole language and bilingual education in the United States: Problem, right or resource?  Journal 
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 18, 223–237. 
 Zéphir, Flore (1999) Challenges for multicultural education: Sociolinguistic parallels between African American English and 
Haitian Creole.  Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 20, 134–154. 
 Zientek, Linda (2007) Preparing high-quality teachers: Views from the classroom.  American Educational Research Journal 44, 
959–1001. 
www.ebook3000.com

15
 2 
 Language Policy/Planning and Language Learning 
 Robert B. Kaplan 
  The fact that I am writing to you in English already falsiﬁ es what I wanted to tell you. My subject: how to 
explain to you that I don’t belong to English though I belong nowhere else. 
 (Hannah Giorgis, 2015) 
 The Case of Myanmar 
 To illustrate, as Myanmar has recently opened itself to the world, its national language, Burmese, is 
proving unsatisfactory for communication. For 50 years, Myanmar was rigorously cut off from the 
outside world. During that time, 
 • strict censorship of publications, 
 • limited access to global media and 
 • extremely limited access to education. 
 has restricted the development of the Burmese language. As a consequence, the natural development 
of lexicon essential for communication in political and technical fields was severely constrained. 
Necessary lexical items simply did not develop. At present, foreign words are being absorbed into 
Burmese, but the meanings of such terms are not yet available in Burmese. As Fuller (2015) explains, 
the English word  democracy  was incorporated into Burmese decades ago; however, for many Bur-
mese, the word identifies something foreign and somewhat abstract, since there are no Burmese 
words for comparable concepts like those designated by such lexical items as  racism ,  federal or  glo-
balization . Indeed, under British colonial rule, English words like  budget  and  beer  were liberally 
incorporated into Burmese; however, military governments over the past five decades prohibited 
the use of English loan words on the grounds that they were culturally disruptive. Fuller (2015) 
cites U Thant Myint-U 1 , a historian who also serves as an advisor to the president, to the effect that 
“Burmese has a far poorer political vocabulary than English. At a time when everything is about the 
country’s political future, it’s a liability and a constraining factor.” 
 At the present time, foreign advisors often stress the need to develop “strong institutions”; while 
there is a Burmese word for  organization  (i.e., an organized body of people with a particular purpose, 
especially a business), there is no single word that translates the meaning of  institution  (i.e., a society 
or organization founded for a religious, educational, social, or similar purpose). In short, U Thant 

16 • Robert B. Kaplan
Myint-U states, “You assume that another person has the same interpretation as you, but these words 
can mean very different things to different people.” Myanmar today has one foot in its old dictatorial 
and paternalistic past and one foot in a Western-inspired dash for democracy. The language resulting 
from 50 years of governmental restriction is unprepared to participate in global cooperation. As a result 
of the practices and policies of the national government, Burmese is proving unsatisfactory for com-
munication. There is no Burmese word for  computer  or, for that matter, for  phone . The language will 
grow as the nation develops new practices, but growth takes time, and in the interim, the population is 
caught in a past imposed and enforced by its government’s language planning and the resulting policy. 
 The Case of the People’s Republic of China 
 A new language law was written and passed at the 18th session of the standing Committee of the 
Ninth National People’s Congress on 31 October 2000. 2  This law was the first language law in the 
history of China (as explained by the Editors of  Hanzi Wenhua ; it was the outcome of a lengthy series 
of efforts over more than a dozen years (from 1986 to 2000).  Chapter 4 , Article 28 of the law states 
“This law shall come into effect on January 1, 2001.” 
 The languages of China are those spoken by the 56 recognized ethnic groups resident within 
China. The most widely spoken Chinese language is known as  Hanyu  (the Han language), a branch 
of the Sino-Tibetan language family, consisting of hundreds of local language varieties, many of 
which are not mutually intelligible. The Han language has been divided into seven to ten groups, the 
largest being 
 Mandarin (i.e., Beijing dialect), 
 Wu (i.e., Shanghainese), 
 Min (i.e., Taiwanese Hokkien), and 
 Yue  (i.e., Cantonese). 
 The languages most studied and supported by the state include Chinese, Mongolian, Tibetan, 
Uyghur, and Zhuang. According to  Ethnologue , 3  China has 292 living languages. The editors of the 
journal  Hanzi Wenhua  state: “Since China is a country of many nationalities and of many spoken 
and written languages, it would be difficult for people of different nationalities and regions to com-
municate with one another without a common language.” 
 Given that diversity, the new language law (first published in  Hanzi Wenhua ) is intended “to promote 
the standardization and development of Modern Standard Chinese, to enable it to play a role in society in 
promoting economic and cultural exchange throughout China” (Article 1). Further, the law is intended 
“to maintain the sovereignty of the state and to uphold the dignity of the nation and national unity of 
the state” (Article 5). In short, the government has bought into the one-language/one-nation myth 4 that 
having a national language, which all citizens are required to know and use, is necessary to the unity of 
any polity. At the same time, the existence of the national language diminishes all linguistic forms that 
differ from the national language, because the knowledge and use of those varieties creates subdivisions 
of society that are subordinate to the dominant group in political, financial, or social power. 
 Furthermore, Article 10 states: 
 Schools and other educational institutions must use Putonghua and standard Chinese charac-
ters as the basic spoken and written language in education and teaching. . . . Schools and other 
educational organizations must teach Putonghua and standard Chinese characters in Putong-
hua and using standardized Chinese characters. Course books must conform to the norms and 
standards of Modern Standard Chinese. 
www.ebook3000.com

Language Policy/Planning and Language Learning • 17
 The following articles (10–13) specify that all publications “must conform to the norms” and that 
radio and TV broadcasting stations “must use Putonghua as the basic broadcasting language.” In 
addition, public service activities “must use standardized Chinese characters as the basic written 
language.” Article 16 specifies precisely when “dialects” can be used: 
 • when they are genuinely needed by officers of state in the furtherance of their duties, 
 • if the use of dialects “has been approved by” the State Council’s or Provincial radio and TV 
broadcasting departments, or 
 • in the performance of traditional operas, films, TV programs or other art forms, and 
 • “when genuinely needed” in publishing, teaching or research. 
 (In these constraints, one encounters the first serious difficulty—the law does not define how one 
can determine when a genuine need exists.) Finally, the law provides a list of conditions where non-
standard forms may be used (Article 17), and it states: 
 People can report those who violate the regulations so that those who fail to follow the rules 
must be warned and monitored to ensure that corrections are made within a specified time. 
 (Article 26) 
 There is nothing in the Chinese law that could not previously have been found in the Official/
National Language laws in a large variety of other polities. A National or Official Language is given a 
special legal status in a particular polity or other jurisdiction. Typically, a polity’s official/national lan-
guage refers to the language used within government (e.g., in the courts, in legislative bodies, in admin-
istration). Since “the means of expression of a people cannot be changed by any law,” the term Official/
National Language does not typically refer to the language used by a community of people or by a 
political entity, but by its government. Approximately 178 countries have at least one official language, 
and many recognize more than one official language. Some countries use the official language designa-
tion to empower indigenous groups by giving them access to the government in their native languages. 
In countries that choose not to designate an official language, a de facto official/national language com-
monly evolves. English is the most common official language, with recognized status in 67 countries. 
French (29), Arabic (26), Spanish (19), Portuguese (9), and German (6) are also widely recognized. But 
some countries elect to have more than one official language; Bolivia recognizes 37, India 23. 
 Unsurprisingly, the Chinese law empowers one segment of the population while it deprives other 
segments of equal status. Although the law (Articles 10 and 16) does permit the use of the languages 
of national minorities and does permit the use of dialects of Chinese in education if they are genu-
inely needed, it does not explain how genuine need may be determined. In addition, since the matter 
at hand is a function of government, how these added activities are funded and by whom they may be 
funded are also a matter of law. In some cases, in other polities, although use of minority languages 
is permitted, no funding is allocated in the national annual budget to support that use. In several 
instances in other countries, the funding of use of minority languages falls to the minority com-
munities themselves; commonly, minority communities have no source for funding of the special 
circumstances, no matter how those circumstances may be defined. 
 In short, the designation of an official/national language makes the preservation of other lan-
guages virtually impossible either 
 • because the funding needed to preserve them does not exist or 
 • because the status of those languages is so substantially reduced that speakers have no audience or 
 • because the two causes co-exist. 

18 • Robert B. Kaplan
 Thus, all other varieties of the language are so reduced in support that they are not likely to survive. 
And, when languages do not survive, the cultures that gave rise to their existence disappear along 
with the languages (Crystal, 2000). There is always a question whether the price of monolingualism 
is too high; that is, whether the cultures that are lost might have been worth preserving. 
 The Meaning of Language Death as Distinct from Multilingualism 
 Language death occurs when a language loses its last native speaker. The most common process 
leading to language death is one in which a community of speakers of one language becomes bilin-
gual in another language and gradually shifts allegiance to the new language until they cease to use 
the heritage language. Such assimilation may be voluntary, or it may be forced upon a population. 
The rapid death of minority languages across the world is a matter of widespread concern, not only 
among linguists and anthropologists but also among all persons interested in cultural identity. By 
some counts, only about 10% of the circa 6,000 languages in the world are secure from extinction; 
according to some estimates, by the end of the 21st century, the world will be dominated by a small 
number of major languages. 
 Surely, just as the extinction of any animal species diminishes our world, so does the extinction 
of any language. Surely [. . .] any language is a supreme achievement of a uniquely human col-
lective genius, as divine and endless a mystery as a living organism. Should we mourn the loss 
of [a language] any less than the loss of the panda or the California condor? 
 (Krauss, 1992: p. 8) 
 The death of a language is tragic because a language is an overview of the thought of a people 
through their entire history. 
 Not only is much lost as the result of the death of any language, but in a sense the loss of languages 
is precisely the antithesis of multilingualism. Speaking more than one language increases such cogni-
tive skills (unrelated to language) as problem solving, creativity, and memory. According to several 
recent studies, 
 66% of the global population, 
 56% of Europeans, 
 35% of Canadians, and 
 17% of US citizens 
 are, in fact, multilingual. 
 There is little doubt that knowing more than one language carries tremendous advantages. Young 
bilinguals are known to be flexible thinkers and better problem solvers. They have a competitive 
edge in the labor market, with those fluent in English along with another language showing higher 
earnings. What’s more, research shows that knowing more than one language could even delay the 
onset of Alzheimer’s and dementia by two to four years. Most people have come to agree that it is 
necessary to know more than one language. More than 70 percent of respondents in a recent study 
agreed or strongly agreed with the statement that all students should learn an additional language 
of their choice. 
 The European Union (EU) supports multilingualism, and one of the goals of multilingualism in 
the EU is for every European to speak two languages in addition to their mother tongue. The best way 
www.ebook3000.com

Language Policy/Planning and Language Learning • 19
to achieve that would perhaps be to introduce children to two foreign languages from an early age. 
Evidence suggests that doing so may speed up language learning as well as also to improve mother 
tongue skills. The EU supports language learning because: 
 • better language skills enable more people to study and/or work abroad, and thus to improve 
their job prospects, and 
 • speaking other languages helps people from different cultures understand one another—
essential in a multilingual, multicultural Europe, and diametrically opposed to the one-nation/
one-language myth. 
 The Case of the European Union 
 The EU constitutes a unique economic and political partnership between 28 European countries 5 
that together cover much of the continent. The EU was created in the wake of World War II. The 
first steps were to foster economic cooperation; i.e., countries that trade with one another become 
economically interdependent and as a consequence are more likely to avoid conflict. The initial result 
was the formation of the European Economic Community (EEC), created in 1958—initially a group 
of six countries (Belgium, Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands) practicing 
economic cooperation. Since then, a single market has been created, and that market continues to 
develop. 
 What began as merely an economic union has evolved into an organization spanning a wide range 
of policy areas, from development aid to environmental cooperation. A name change from the EEC 
to the EU occurred in 1993. 
 The EU is a gathering of nations based on the rule of law; everything that the EU does is conceived 
as acting on treaties, voluntarily and democratically agreed to by all of the member countries. These 
agreements are binding, and they set out the goals of the EU in its many areas of activity. To illustrate, 
the EU has kept the peace, achieved stability, and attained prosperity for more than 50 years. And it 
has introduced a single currency—the euro—for the entire multinational community. By eliminat-
ing border controls between the member countries, it has allowed people to travel throughout most 
of the European continent, and it has facilitated the ability to live and work abroad throughout the 
EU polities. The EU has achieved a single market, enabling goods and services to move unobstructed. 
The EU has promoted core values of human rights—including human dignity, freedom, democracy, 
equality, the rule of law, and respect for human rights—both internally within Europe and around 
the world. The 2009 Treaty of Lisbon brought all those rights together in a single document—the 
Charter of Fundamental Rights. All the EU institutions are legally bound to uphold those rights, as 
are all EU governments whenever they apply EU law. The EU remains focused on making its govern-
ing institutions more transparent and democratic. Greater authority is being given to the directly 
elected European Parliament, while individual national parliaments have been entitled to have a 
greater role, working alongside the European institutions. As a result, European citizens have been 
encouraged to use an increasing number of channels for taking part in political processes. All of these 
benefits have been achieved without finding it necessary to have one common language; indeed, mul-
tilingualism has not only been successful, but it has also led to greater individual freedom and wider 
participation. How has monolingualism or multilingualism impacted language teaching? 
 Language Teachers 
 If language teaching is to be discussed, it seems necessary to start with the teachers who will do the 
serious work at the chalk-face. Particularly in situations where the language to be taught is a language 

20 • Robert B. Kaplan
not native to the population of the polity in which the teaching and learning will occur, the qualifica-
tions of the teachers are probably particularly significant. 
 • The teachers in the language classrooms may be individuals with extensive teaching experi-
ence in the country where the teaching will occur, but they may have had little or no training 
in teaching language. 
 • The teachers may be professionals in fields other than language (e.g., mathematics, music, or 
medieval studies), who are native speakers of the language to be taught, but they may not be 
trained as teachers. 
 • The teachers may be graduate students who have some knowledge of language, literature, and 
culture, but who have not been trained as teachers of anything, but especially not as teachers of 
language. 
 • The teachers often begin their classroom work with little assistance to help them understand 
which methods work, how they work, or why they work. 
 • The teachers may believe that language learning is a product of transmission—that is, they 
may believe that, in language learning, the teacher is active, transmitting knowledge, while the 
learner is passive, receiving and absorbing the knowledge transmitted by the teacher; this is an 
attractive assumption, since the teachers may themselves be products of this process, having 
observed that the teacher is the focal point in the classroom because the teacher knows the lan-
guage being taught while the students do not. Given these assumptions, the teacher’s primary 
task is perceived as presenting the material in the textbook while the students’ primary task is 
to hear and absorb the information presented. 
 Any or all of these perceptions are inappropriate, because the teachers described here reach only 
some of the students; that is, they transmit information about the language, but they are not con-
cerned with the students’ use of the language—the participatory side of language learning is simply 
neglected or excluded. The students are learning language rules, not language. 
 Language learning is a process of discovery. Linguists are, regrettably, responsible for the unin-
tentional failure to recognize the importance of participation; their commendable desire to build 
models of language has resulted in a tendency to leave out the important consideration that language 
is a human activity, inevitably involving cultural and community awareness as well as linguistic 
information. At the same time, it is important to understand that the rules of correctness are, in 
some sense, the least important aspect of communication, relating mainly to political acceptability, 
social tolerance, and a spirit of cooperation and belonging arising from common interests and goals. 
Among children, it is normal not to show any serious concern about the social rules of language 
until they are at least moving into puberty, when exactitude becomes a somewhat serious concern. 
High school first-language acquisition is the arena in which developing suitability becomes a serious 
consideration, together with the need for acceptability. 
 The teacher does not need to be always the center of attention; the activity under consideration 
is not learning as an act of acquiring new knowledge—not even an act of modifying and reinforcing 
existing knowledge; managing behaviors, skills, values, or preferences constitute more than learning 
in the typical school sense. The teacher should control learning and encourage the other essential 
activities—those that are not always perceived as appropriate school subjects. 
 Language Teaching 
 The question “How should additional languages be taught?” is both contentious and, despite years of 
exploration, still somewhat confusing. This reference list contains a number of examples (Gass & Selinker, 
www.ebook3000.com

Language Policy/Planning and Language Learning • 21
1994; Harley et al., 1990; Kramsch, 1993a, 1993b; Lee & VanPatten, 1995; Lightbown & Spada, 1992; 
Pinker, 1994), though this list does not by any means cover all the available methodological approaches. 
The studies in the list are all dated in the 1990s, a time when the methodology issue was being widely 
discussed. The National Capitol Language Resource Center (NCLRC) “Essentials of Language Teaching” 
(online) contains an extensive listing of references; it is organized into eleven categories: 
 What Language Teaching Is 
Teaching Goals and Methods 
 Planning a Lesson 
Motivating Learners 
 Assessing Learning 
Teaching Grammar 
 Teaching Listening 
Teaching Speaking 
 Teaching Reading 
Teaching Writing 
 
 
Teaching Culture 
 Not surprisingly, the four “skills” (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) initially were intended to 
provide a link between the frameworks and the specific English language proficiency tasks (reading, 
writing, speaking, and listening) judged by students and teachers to be important for competent aca-
demic performance across a range of subject areas. Note 6  this is an illustration of a rather elementary 
discussion of the four skills; it is based on a number of assumptions. Some of those assumptions may 
not be entirely accurate; for example, while infants learning their first language probably acquire lan-
guage skills in the order suggested, a mature literate student learning a second language is not likely 
to follow the sequence in the rigid order presented. Such an interpretation concerning mature adult 
second-language learning ignores important differences, such as: 
 • between youthful first-language learners and mature second-language learners, 
 • between the illiterate learner and the literate learner, 
 • between the socially unschooled learner and the socially sophisticated learner, and 
 • between the monolingual and the bilingual. 
 The four skills are arranged in a sequence intended to suggest that they are mutually dependent, but also 
that they are invariably acquired in sequence. To complicate matters further, teachers are responsible 
for some of the dismal results. For example, students are often placed into low-ability groups based 
on scores on some standardized tests in English and mathematics, but standardized tests only measure 
proficiency in the narrowest sense; they do not measure motivation, nor do they recognize differences 
resulting from rather different stimuli. Despite vast changes in second language acquisition theory and 
pedagogy over the past half century, an English-only classroom fronted by a teacher who is monolingual, 
or who has been encouraged to behave as if he or she were monolingual, is a classroom where failure 
is the predominant expectation. Teachers of English (especially those who are native speakers of Eng-
lish) presume that the classroom is an English-speaking classroom teaching English-speaking learners, 
but most such classrooms are ordinarily filled with students who are in many respects totally different 
from the students English-speaking teachers are in the habit of teaching. Thus, regrettably, teachers are 
themselves responsible for some of the problems. There are at least three issues underlying this problem: 
 • teachers’ beliefs about learning a second language, 
 • the contribution made by teachers’ language learning experience to their reported beliefs and 
practices, and 
 • teachers’ beliefs about the role of the first language in second language learning. 
 (Ellis, 2003) 

22 • Robert B. Kaplan
 Monolinguals, often presented and protected by governments, and especially by governmental 
education departments, present an idealized version of a language as a model for all learners and all 
speakers in any given polity. Sometimes language is defined in official documents (like a Constitu-
tion), but sometimes it is implied, rather than clearly stated. In the United States, for example, the 
federal government does not specify an official language; however, all official documents are written 
in English (though some may also be published in other languages). Given that the laws say nothing 
about language, there has been a constant battle between supporters of 
 •  ENGLISH ONLY , an essentially isolationist concept, and 
 •  ENGLISH PLUS , the multilingual concept consisting of proponents of the cultural and linguis-
tic pluralism of the United States and of the national multiethnic and multilingual communities 
serving as a resource and as a response to the opposing nature of  ENGLISH ONLY . 
 English-only supporting supervisors and managers often interpret the exclusive use of English to 
mean that English is the mandatory language of daily life. However, English-plus supporters believe 
that: 
 declaring an official language would abridge the rights of individuals with limited English 
proficiency, individuals who are paying taxes and who are entitled to the same rights as those 
who speak English. 
 (Schultz, 2007) 
 They believe that cultural and linguistic pluralism is part of the glue that holds the United States 
together. 
 Since English-only proponents believe that English, if it were the national language, would con-
stitute the only language citizens should know, their approach to language teaching is traditional and 
conservative. On the other hand, English-plus proponents believe in multilingualism; that is, ideally, 
in the idea that all citizens would speak at least two languages. The idea of two languages, however, 
presents a complication—which other language would citizens learn? Those who are members of 
an indigenous minority community would speak at least the minority language. A minority lan-
guage may be an indigenous language—in the United States, the tribal languages spoken by Native 
Americans—including such languages as: 
 • Navajo (an Athabaskan language, currently spoken in Arizona, New Mexico, Utah), 
 • Cree (an Algic language, currently spoken in Montana and in Canada), 
 • Ojibwa (an Algic language, currently spoken in Minnesota, Montana, North Dakota, and in 
Canada), 
 • Cherokee (an Iroquoian language, currently spoken in Oklahoma and North Carolina). 
 A minority language may also be any of the immigrant languages, for example: 
 • Russian (a European language currently spoken in Russia [formerly the Soviet Union], the 
world’s largest nation [143.5 million persons], bordering European and Asian countries as 
well as the Paciﬁ c and Arctic Oceans; 
www.ebook3000.com

Language Policy/Planning and Language Learning • 23
 • Chinese (an Asian language, currently spoken worldwide—actually a group of related but 
mutually unintelligible language varieties spoken as their ﬁ rst language by 1.2 billion persons 
[circa 16% of the world’s population] including speakers of the Han majority in China and 
in some form by persons around the world); 
 • Arabic (an Afro-asiatic Central Semitic language spoken in a wide arc stretching across West-
ern Asia, North Africa, and the Horn of Africa). Modern Standard Arabic, the literary form, is 
the only ofﬁ cial variety. Modern Standard Arabic and all of the spoken varieties (some mutu-
ally unintelligible) exist in a state known as  diglossia , used side-by-side for different societal 
functions. If Arabic is considered multiple languages, it is unclear how many languages there 
would be, but if it is considered a single language, it is perhaps spoken by as many as 420 mil-
lion speakers, making it one of the six most-spoken languages in the world. 
 These three languages are cited only as examples; the number of immigrant languages in each 
nation varies widely, but again simply to illustrate, the United States census shows a total population 
over age 5 of 291.5 million. More than 60 million people (21% of the total population) speak a lan-
guage other than English; it is estimated that 381 languages are spoken 7  by people in the United States. 
 The Case of the United States 
 When Europeans first arrived in what is now the United States, people living in North America spoke 
more than 300 different languages. Today, only 175 languages are still in use, but many of them are 
spoken only by small numbers of elderly people; those languages are in danger of disappearing. 
When a language becomes extinct, it can take along with it much of the history and culture of the 
people who spoke it. 
 Over time, the loss of Native languages has been expedited by U.S. government policies focusing 
on assimilating Native Americans and immigrants into western culture. Many Native American chil-
dren were sent to government-run boarding schools where they were prohibited from speaking their 
languages. It wasn’t until the mid-1900s that the preservation of Native culture and language began 
to gain support, and several more decades elapsed before any legislation was passed to accomplish 
that goal. 
 The Hawaiian language ( ‘Ōlelo Hawai‘i ) is a Polynesian language taking its name from Hawai’i, 
the largest island in the tropical North Pacific archipelago, where it was spoken. The first Hawaiian-
language constitution was established by King Kamehameha in 1839. Hawaiian, along with English, 
is an official language of the state of Hawaii. 
 For various reasons, including territorial legislation establishing English as the official language in 
schools, the number of native speakers of Hawaiian gradually decreased between the 1830s and the 
1950s, being completely displaced by English on six of the seven inhabited islands. In 2001, native 
speakers of Hawaiian amounted to less than 1% of the statewide population. 
 The  Native American Languages Act  of 1990 recognized the language rights of American Indians, 
Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders, while the  Esther Martinez Native American 
Languages Preservation Act  of 2006 helps to keep Native American languages alive by providing fed-
eral grants to Native American language immersion programs. 
 The gradual disappearance of those languages was only illustrative of language loss in the United 
States and of the official government policies responsible for that loss. Robert Lambert (Lambert & 
Freed, 1982) raised his concern about the failures of U.S. language education policy and its inertia in 
continuing to stress traditional foreign languages rather than those relevant to the changing world. 

24 • Robert B. Kaplan
 Similar policies were put in place in many other countries. Indeed, language planning in many 
countries fails to accomplish its objectives more often than it succeeds (Kaplan, 2012). The gradual 
disappearance of a language in a community where it was at some time spoken does not mean that 
the given language simply vanishes, leaving a vacuum; it is always replaced by a language with which 
it has been in contact. In such a contact situation, the language in danger of disappearing is always 
the dominant language spoken by a sociological minority group, resulting in both reduction of pro-
ficiency among speakers and general reduction in use. Reduction in use results from encountering 
a population who do not speak the language of the new minority and who speak only the majority 
language, thus creating a problem when speakers of the new language want to communicate with 
the monolingual speakers of the dominant language. The new group can, of course, choose not to 
communicate with the dominant group monolingual speakers. If there is a minority group, and if 
the minority group is not broken up, the minority language will not disappear. But when minority 
speakers cannot do with the minority language what they used to do, the minority language is gradu-
ally replaced (Fase, Jaspaert & Kroon, 1992). 
 Language contact, shift (Fishman, 1991), maintenance, and loss can be accounted for. Clyne 
(1992) examined these concepts as sociolinguistic factors to explore the changes occurring between 
English-speaking Australian populations and immigrant communities speaking Dutch and German. 
Clyne found that linguistic, psycholinguistic, and sociolinguistic factors interact in giving rise to 
grammatical change and to code switching. 
 Language Contact 
 This area of concern has come to be called  Language Contact . Language contact is a multidimen-
sional, multidisciplinary field in which interrelationships hold the key to the understanding of how 
and why people use language(s) the way they do (Clyne, 2003, p. 1). 
 Edwards (1992) was concerned with the development of a typology of minority language 
situations—actually of ethnic minority language contexts, including such dimensions as geographic, 
historical, political, social, psychological, educational, and linguistic aspects. He devised a model 
(Table 2.1): 
 The terminology needs a bit of explanation, and a number of conditions need to be explored. 
Comparing minority languages  unique  to one state versus languages which are  non-unique  but are 
minority languages in all contexts in which they occur; at the same time, the same minority language 
in different states are either  adjoining  or  non-adjoining ; in addition, the relative degree of internal 
spatial cohesion among speakers of minority languages can be said to be either  cohesive or  non-
cohesive  (Edwards, 1992, pp. 38–39). The model gives rise to a 10-cell structure; there are, of course, 
problems with the model, as there are with any model. For example, is Spanish in North America a 
 Table 2.1 A Geographic Typology of Minority Language Situations (Edwards 1992, adapted from White 1987) 
Cohesive
Non-cohesive
Unique minorities
1
2
 Adjoining
3
4
Non-unique minorities
 Non-adjoining
5
6
 Adjoining
7
8
Local
 Non-adjoining
9
10
www.ebook3000.com

Language Policy/Planning and Language Learning • 25
minority language? In 2015, there were 41 million speakers of Spanish in the United States—13% of 
the total US population (291.5 million) over 5 years of age; clearly a minority. However, the State of New 
Mexico has 45–50% Spanish Speakers—no longer a minority language since the number of other lan-
guage speakers does not approach 50% [Asian Pacific = 15%; other Endo-European = 19%; other 
= 4%]. By comparison, the distribution in the State of West Virginia is radically different (Table 2.2). 
 Clearly, Spanish speakers (only 1%) are not a majority. It is apparent that Spanish speakers range 
from a very large percentage in New Mexico to a negligible percentage in West Virginia. In short, it is 
not reasonable to discuss the matter of majority versus minority language status over polities of very 
different size, existing in very different geographic space, and serving very different needs. Given the 
issue of Spanish, the difficulty extends to polities in which Spanish is an official language. 
 There is no official language at the federal level in Mexico. Spanish, however, is used as a de facto 
official language and is spoken by 97% of the population. The  General Law of Linguistic Rights of the 
Indigenous Peoples , however, grants all indigenous minority languages spoken in Mexico, regardless 
of the number of speakers, the same validity as Spanish in all territories in which those languages 
are spoken, and indigenous peoples are entitled to request some public services and documents in 
their languages. Along with Spanish, the law has granted more than 60 other languages the status of 
 national languages , including all Amerindian languages regardless of their origin. 9 
 Mexico has the largest Spanish-speaking population, having almost twice as many speakers as 
Spain, the country second in number of speakers to Mexico. The Mexican government has promoted 
and established bilingual primary and secondary education in some indigenous rural communities; 
for example,  Nahuatl  is spoken by 1.5 million people and  Yucatec Maya  by 800,000. Approximately 
6% of the Mexican population speaks an indigenous language, and 3% do not speak Spanish. Some 
national languages are in danger of extinction. English is widely used in business, in the border cit-
ies, as well as by the 1 million U.S. citizen retirees living in Mexico, mostly in small towns in Baja 
California, Guanajuato, and Chiapas. Other European languages spoken by sizable communities in 
Mexico are Venetian, Plautdietsch, German, French, and Romani. 
 Conclusion 
 In brief, national language policies are generally antagonistic toward supporting multilingualism 
in the population; on the contrary, such policies are significantly responsible for the death of lan-
guages and for the expansion of policies supporting monolingualism and other isolationist practices. 
Regrettably, political officers in Ministries of Education frequently lack the training to understand 
what is necessary in terms of instructional time and methods and materials that can lead to the kind 
of multilingualism that is desirable in the population. 
 Many education agencies are substantially responsible for the lack of success in the teaching 
of alternative languages—languages not normally spoken in the polity. The difficulties built in to 
 Table 2.2 Distribution of Speakers of Spanish in West Virginia 8 
Language
Number
Percent
Population 5 years and over
1,706,931
100.0
Speak only English
1,661,036
97.3
Speak a language other than English
45,895
2.7
Spanish or Spanish Creole
17,652
1.0
French (incl. Patois, Cajun)
5,693
0.3
German
5,040
0.3

26 • Robert B. Kaplan
 For example, the  South China Morning Post ( SCMP ), in an editorial published on 24 August 2015, 
observed that proficiency in English is said to be a prerequisite for a good education as well as for 
career development, but ethnic minorities living in Hong Kong who cannot read and write “good” 
Chinese are by definition disadvantaged. The education system does little to prepare them; ethnic 
minority children attend schools that put little emphasis on teaching Chinese; nonetheless, Chinese 
language proficiency is a compulsory university entry requirement. The  SCMP  has recently published 
a series of reports showing that ethnic minority youngsters are seeking admission in foreign institu-
tions that do not require Chinese proficiency as a condition of admission. In the People’s Republic of 
China (PRC), including Hong Kong, learning Chinese early is essential. The present system 
 results in a loss of talent [. . . when] students leave because of language obstacles in education. 
[. . . In China] learning Chinese at an early age is essential. It is in the interest of ethnic minori-
ties to make better efforts to adapt and integrate into [Chinese] society. This, however, cannot 
be done without the help of a sound education policy. The government should continue to 
promote integration so that there will be genuine equal opportunities for all.   
 Note that the problem results from the “national language” policy as well as from the unsuccessful 
assimilation of ethnic minorities (Paulston, 1992) and the subsequent loss of some language(s). 
Given the reality that much of the world population lives in a global employment environment, 
multilingualism is desirable both for educational and for economic reasons. 
 Furthermore, education officers have not generally been trained to recognize the factors that con-
tribute to multilingualism, to policies that serve to preserve languages having decreasing numbers of 
speakers, and to the kind of instruction and the distribution of instruction through the academic career 
of children, especially in countries lacking the resources to enlighten language teaching and language 
learning. Indeed, in many instances the policies put in place derive from political motivation and are 
not in any sense “educational.” In such countries, educational programs designed in wealthier nations 
are often provided through the efforts of those wealthier states, often without those states having a 
clear understanding of the limited facilities in the recipient states or of the learning styles to which the 
populations in the recipient states are accustomed. As a result, imported programs frequently prove to 
be inappropriate in the polities to which the generosity of those wealthier states is directed. 
 Were one to offer suggestions to states struggling with language education policies, the sugges-
tions could, perhaps, recommend: 
 • Funding studies of language distribution among the school-age population; 
 • Funding research in the school-age population to determine: 
 ° the inclination to learn other languages among school-age youngsters, 
 ° the language(s) of interest to the school-age population, and 
 ° the instructional methodologies likely to succeed in teaching language use (rather than lan-
guage form) in that population. 
alternative language teaching have been identified and discussed in many polities; a somewhat ran-
dom sampling of such studies representative of a number of polities is provided: 
 Battenburg (1999); 
Benrabah (2005); 
 Heath (1972); 
Johnson (1997); 
 Kayambazinthu (1999); 
Kirkwood (1990); 
 Medgyes & Miklósy (2000); 
Sert (2008). 10 
www.ebook3000.com

Language Policy/Planning and Language Learning • 27
 It is perhaps time to curtail the waste of limited education resources on unsuccessful and 
unjustified educational programs and to invest in the rededication of those limited resources 
to more functional—and more likely to succeed—educational programs in the interests of the 
learners and to the social benefit of the polity, rather than to the political image the polity may 
project. 
 Notes 
  1. His grandfather, U Thant, was Third United Nations Secretary-General, serving from 1961 to 1971. 
  2. Literally, the title reads “The National Law Pertaining to China’s Commonly Used Spoken and Written Language.” Kirk-
patrick and Xu modified that to read  Modern Standard Chinese  as representing the spoken form,  Putonghwa , and the 
written form, standardized Chinese characters. All of the quoted passages presented here in English are taken from Kirk-
patrick & Xu (2001). 
  3.  Ethnologue: Languages of the World  is a comprehensive reference work cataloging all of the world’s known living lan-
guages. <http://www.ethnologue.com> 
  4. Deriving from the Biblical story of Babel, suggesting that the proliferation of languages was a penalty imposed on human-
ity; its reversal would restore humanity’s original perfectibility. <http://ethnologue.com> 
  5. The UK voted to withdraw from the European Union in June 2016. 
  6. English Club <https://www.englishclub.com/> (a site where learners come to improve their English (through online les-
sons, quizzes, games, forums, blogs, videos, photos etc.) and teachers come to use it as a resource for lesson plans) is for 
anyone who is learning or teaching English. If one likes to “study,” one can look at the lessons in areas like the four skills. 
When one learns a language, four skills are needed for complete communication. When one learns a native language, one 
usually learns to listen first, then to speak, then to read, and finally to write. These are called the four “language skills.” The 
four language skills are related to each other in two ways: 
 • The direction of communication (in or out), 
 • The method of communication (spoken or written). 
 
  Input  is sometimes called  reception and  output is sometimes called  production. Spoken is also known as  oral . 
  7. See Table 1. Detailed Languages Spoken at Home by English-speaking Ability for the Population 5 Years and over: 2011 
(For information on confidentially protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions, see <www.census.
gov/acs/www/>). 
  8. Brown, A., & Lopez, M. H. (2013).  Mapping the Latino Population, By State, County and City . Pew Research Center, Wash-
ington, DC. 
  9. The law includes Amerindian languages of ethnic groups not native to Mexico—for example, the  National Commission 
for the Development of the Indigenous Peoples  recognizes the language of the Kickapoo, a population that emigrated from 
the United States, as well as those of Amerindian refugees from Guatemala. 
 10. See also the  South China Morning Post  print edition article 12 November, 2012, “Education fails  language test .” See the 
following newspaper articles for examples of the public discussions: 
 • Kamalanathan, P. (August 30, 2015). English is not an impossible dream. Education.  The Star online [Indonesia]. 
 • Thomas, Beatrice. (September 2, 2015). Japan should tap Olympics to bolster flagging English skills, says language 
school boss.  The Japan Times . 
 • Sauvakacolo, Siteri. (August 31, 2015). PM Stresses Need to Master English Language.  The Fiji Times online. 
 • Lau, Stuart. (28 August, 2015). Hongkongers must improve their English to boost city, says Germany’s top diplomat. 
 South China Morning Post. 
 •  Dah, Yacoub. (29 August 2015). English is All the Rage in Mauritania. Al-Fanar Media. 
 References 
 Battenburg, J. (1999). The gradual death of the Berber language in Tunisia.  International Journal of the Sociology of Language 
137, 147–161. 
 Benrabah, M. (2005). The language planning situation in Algeria.  Current Issues in Language Planning 6(4), 379–502. 
 Clyne, M. (1992). Linguistic and Sociolinguistics Aspects of Language Contact, Maintenance and Loss: Towards a Multifaceted 
Theory. In Fase, W., Jaspaert, K. & Kroon, S. (Eds).  Maintenance and Loss of Minority Languages  (pp. 17–36). Amsterdam 
& Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
 Clyne, M. (2003).  Dynamics of Language Contact . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Crystal, D. (2000).  Language Death . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

28 • Robert B. Kaplan
 Edwards, J. (1992). Sociopolitical Aspects of Language Maintenance and Loss: Towards a Typology of Minority Language 
Situations. In Fase, W., Jaspaert, K. & Kroon, S. (Eds).  Maintenance and Loss of Minority Languages  (pp. 37–54). Amster-
dam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
 Ellis, E. M. (2003)  Bilingualism among Teachers of English as a Second Language.  Griffith University (Brisbane, Australia). 
Doctoral Dissertation. 
 Fase, W., Jaspaert, K., & Kroon, S. (Eds). (1992).  Maintenance and Loss of Minority Languages . Amsterdam & Philadelphia: 
John Benjamins. 
 Fishman, J. (1991).  Reversing Language Shift . Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
 Fuller, T. (July 19, 2015). Those who would remake Myanmar find that words fail them. Asia Pacific.  New York Times . 
 Gass, S. M., & Selinker, L. (1994).  Second Language Acquisition: An Introductory Course . Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Harley, B., Allen, P., Cummins, J., & Swain, M. (Eds). (1990).  The Development of Second Language Proficiency . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Heath, S. B. (1972).  Telling Tongues: Language Policy in Mexico: Colony to Nation . New York: Teachers College Press. 
 Johnson, R. K. (1997). The Hong Kong Education System: Late Immersion under Stress. In Johnson, R. K. & Swain, M. (Eds). 
 Immersion Education: International Perspectives (pp. 171–189). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Kaplan, R. B. (2011). Macro Language Planning. In Hinkle, E. (Ed).  Handbook of Research in Second Language Teaching and 
Learning: Volume II (pp. 924–935). New York & London: Routledge. 
 Kaplan, R. B. (2012). Why Educational Language Plans Sometime Fail. In Baldauf, R. B. Jr., Kaplan, R. B., Kamwangamalu, 
N. M. & Bryant, P. (Eds).  Language Planning in Primary Schools in Asia  (pp. 1–20). New York & London: Routledge. 
 Kaplan, R. B., & Baldauf, R. B., Jr. (2005). Language in-Education Policy and Planning. In Hinkel, E. (Ed).  Handbook of 
Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning (pp. 1013–1034). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Kayambazinthu, E. (1999). The Language Planning Situation in Malawi. In Kaplan, R. B. & Baldauf, R. B. Jr. (Eds).  Language 
Planning in Malawi, Mozambique and the Philippines (pp. 15–85). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Kirkpatrick, A., & Xu, Z. (2001). The new language law of the People’s Republic of China.  Australian Language Matters 9(2), 
14–15. 
 Kirkwood, M. (Ed). (1990).  Language Planning in the Soviet Union . New York: St. Martin’s Press. 
 Kramsch, C. (1993a).  Context and Culture in Language Teaching . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Kramsch, C. (1993b). Redrawing the Boundaries of Foreign Language Study. In Krueger, M. & Ryan, F. (Eds).  Language and 
Content: Discipline- and Content-based Approaches to Language Study :  Heath Series on Foreign Language Acquisition 
Research and Instruction (pp. 203–217). Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath. 
 Krauss, M. (1992). The world’s languages in crisis.  Language 68, 4–10. 
 Lambert, R. D., & Freed, B. F. (Eds). (1982).  The Loss of Language Skills . Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Lee, J. F., & VanPatten, B. (1995).  Making Communicative Language Teaching Happen . Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill. 
 Lightbown, P., & Spada, N. (1992).  How Languages Are Learned . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Medgyes, P., & Miklósy, K. (2000). The language situation in Hungary.  Current Issues in Language Planning 1(2), 148–242. 
 Paulston, C. B. (1992). Linguistic Minorities and Language Policies: Four Case Studies. In Fase, W., Jaspaert, K. & Kroon, S. 
(Eds).  Maintenance and Loss of Minority Languages (pp. 55–80). Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
 Pinker, S. (1994).  The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language . New York: William Morrow. 
 Schultz, S. (2007). The Official Language of the United States and Its Impact on the Translation Industry. Strictly Spanish LLC, 
Cincinnati, OH. <info@strictlyspanish.com> 
 Sert, N. (2008). The language of instruction dilemma in the Turkish context.  System 36, 156–171. 
www.ebook3000.com

29
 3 
 English as a Global Language 
 Sandra Lee McKay 
 The purpose of this chapter is to critically examine the construct of English as a global language and 
to suggest approaches to second language teaching that are supportive of an increasingly globalized 
world in which border crossing and cross-cultural exchanges are common. The chapter begins by 
comparing various approaches to the study of English as a global language as a means of delineating 
an alternative approach that is in keeping with the reality of a good deal of cross-border communica-
tion today. It then examines various strands of research that support this view and suggests areas of 
needed research in the field. 
 Defining Paradigms 
 With the increasing spread of English, many terms have arisen to address the complexity and 
variation of English use today, including terms such as World Englishes, English as a lingua franca, 
linguistic imperialism, and language hybridity. Each one has its own agendas and assumptions 
regarding linguistic norms, linguistic variation, and linguistic capital. However, what most of 
these approaches lack is a recognition of the somewhat limited role English serves today in cross-
border, cross-cultural exchanges. The fact is that three-quarters of the population today does not 
speak English (Graddol 2006). Hence, a good deal of cross-border exchanges that occur today 
do not occur in English but rather in the dominant language of the host society. For example, a 
Brazilian immigrant to Japan today will, in the majority of cases, be using Japanese rather than 
English as the language of exchange, in the same way that a Turkish immigrant to Germany will 
use German. Granted there may be instances of the use of English, but this will likely be among 
the elite of the population. In addition, much of the communication may make use of several 
languages that are available. 
 Many of the current approaches to English, while providing valuable insight into the use of Eng-
lish today, do not take into account the fact that English is one of several languages used in today’s 
cross-border exchanges. What follows is a critical examination of major approaches to the spread of 
English with a discussion of the contributions of the approach to an understanding of the complexity 
of English use today, along with its limitations. 

30 • Sandra Lee McKay
 World Englishes 
 The World English paradigm, developed largely by Braj Kachru, seeks to document the variation 
that exists in English today based largely on geographical context. In a seminal work on varieties of 
English, Kachru (1989) argued that the different roles that English serves in countries around the 
world are best conceived of in terms of three concentric circles: (a) the  Inner Circle , where English is 
the primary language of the country, such as in Australia, Canada, the United States, and the United 
Kingdom; (b) the  Outer Circle , where English serves as a second language in a multilingual country, 
such as in Singapore, India, and the Philippines; and (c) the  Expanding Circle , where English is widely 
studied as a foreign language, such as in China, Japan, and Korea. He argues that World Englishes 
develop largely in Outer Circle countries because in such countries two or more languages are in 
constant contact. As such, the use of English in the country begins to vary through linguistic bor-
rowing. The goal of World Englishes research is to document the phonological, semantic, and gram-
matical variation that exists in various Outer Circle Countries. 
 This paradigm was the first to recognize the variation that exists today in English usage around 
the world and, more importantly, to recognize the legitimacy of norms other than those of the Inner 
Circle. This was a major step forward in challenging the Inner Circle focus of much research and 
pedagogy. However, this approach views language use as a factor solely of nation states, whereas, in 
fact, today national borders are becoming much more porous, so, for example, immigrant groups 
may retain their language and culture outside of their nation state. Even more importantly, World 
Englishes research typically fails to recognize the issue of power as it relates to language in examining 
how and why English impacts the uses of other languages due to its economic and political power. 
 English as a Lingua Franca 
 English as a lingua franca (ELF) examines how English is used between speakers of different lan-
guages and cultural backgrounds. Firth’s (1996) seminal definition of ELF is “a ‘contact language’ 
between persons who share neither a common native tongue nor a common (national) culture, and 
for whom English is the chosen  foreign  language of communication” [emphasis in original] (p. 240). 
A major contribution of this approach is that it recognizes the common use of English among L2 
speakers rather than suggesting that the main purpose of English is to use English with native speak-
ers. Even more importantly, it documents that manner in which less proficient speakers of English 
manage to communicate and repair breakdowns in communication. Its limitations, however, are 
that by documenting so-called core features of ELF, some may conclude that such language patterns 
should be the target of English learning, thus promoting a target of a somewhat limited English 
rather than full proficiency in the language. In addition, like the World English model, it does not 
recognize how issues of power affect language use. 
 Linguistic Imperialism 
 Phillipson’s (1992, 2009) contribution to an understanding of the role of English today was his rec-
ognition of the linguistic power of English as described in what he terms  linguistic imperialism . In 
arguing for the linguistic power of English, Phillipson documents how colonial nations frequently 
imposed the use of English on particular nations. In his seminal work,  Linguistic Imperialism , he also 
delineates several major tenets regarding language teaching. Phillipson lists these tenets as follows: 
 English is best taught monolingually, 
 The ideal teacher of English is a native speaker, 
www.ebook3000.com

English as a Global Language • 31
 The earlier English is taught, the better the results, 
 The more English is taught, the better the results, 
 If other languages are used much, standards of English will drop. 
 (p. 185) 
 Phillipson (1992) argues that each tenet is basically false and can be epitomized in the following 
fallacies: 
 The monolingual fallacy 
 The native speaker fallacy 
 The early start fallacy 
 The maximum exposure fallacy 
 The subtractive fallacy. 
 (p. 185) 
 In highlighting these fallacies, Phillipson rightly challenges the Anglophone focus of a good deal 
of English pedagogy and the use of an English-only classroom. However, Phillipson is often criticized 
for not recognizing the agency of language learners. While, as Phillipson rightly points out, through-
out history individuals have been coerced into English learning by colonial powers, at the same time 
many individuals have chosen to learn English because of the power they believe it has. 
 Hybridity 
 Finally, scholars such a Pennycook (2007) have made a valuable contribution in pointing out the 
hybridity of English use today in that English is only one of many languages used in cross-cultural 
exchanges and in pop culture. In this way, the theory of hybridity recognizes the multilingual and 
multicultural element of cross-cultural exchanges today. However, the concept of hybridity raises 
critical questions, such as determining what is meant by the term itself and how issues of power affect 
the way languages are used in these hybrid texts and exchanges. In their book on hybridity, Rubdy and 
Alsagoff (2014), while documenting the value of work in this area, point out several shortcomings of 
the concept, including the following. First, some (e.g., Gómez-Peña 1996) criticize the difficulty of 
defining the term  hybridity  itself in that it is so broadly defined that many types of language use can be 
included, even traditional notions of code-switching. Second, there is also the criticism that the very 
concept of hybridity presupposes that languages are “discrete and identifiable entities” (p. 9). Finally, 
the field has also been accused of not adequately addressing issues of power and inequality. 
 In light of the shortcomings of many of these approaches to address issues of power and to rec-
ognize the multilingual nature of communication today, Kubota (2012) advocates a pedagogy for 
border crossing that includes three key components. First, such a pedagogy would approach language 
learning from the position of power and privilege. Hence, all language learners would be encouraged 
to consider how economic class and racial background affect language learning and teaching. Sec-
ond, in such a pedagogy, an open attitude would be encouraged in all language learning. As Kubota 
points out, “English may not function as a lingua franca in many social contexts. Students need to 
develop open and positive attitudes for interacting across differences” (p. 64). In this way, students 
need to be encouraged to listen carefully and negotiate fully in order to understand and be under-
stood from people of all backgrounds. Finally, Kubota advocates the development of communica-
tion skills. Communication strategies and accommodation skills would be actively taught, including 
“extralinguistic cues such as gestures and drawings, gauging interlocutors’ linguistic repertoires, sup-
portive listening, eye contact and adjusting the speech by simplifying, paraphrasing, and slowing 

32 • Sandra Lee McKay
down” (p. 65). Such a perspective is supportive of a more realistic view of English use and learning 
today. However, it is important to note that underlying such an approach must be a deep respect for 
multilingualism and an encouragement for all speakers to draw on their full linguistic repertoires 
for communication across borders. Several recent trends in the field of sociolinguistics and pedagogy 
fully support such an approach. In the following, I will discuss five of these areas: the sociolinguistics 
of globalization, the unsustainability of native speakerism, the acceptance of a plurality of norms, an 
emphasis on pragmatics, and the localization of pedagogy. 
 The Sociolinguistics of Globalization 
 One factor that warrants a new look at how English is used in an increasingly globalized world is 
mobility. People today are moving across borders at a greater rate than ever before and using their 
linguistic resources to manage daily affairs and to secure employment. They are involved in what 
Blommaert (2010) calls “a messy market place” of language use in which people crossing borders use 
all the linguistic resources they have. In order to adequately describe this social situation, Blommaert 
calls for a new sociolinguistics of globalization, one that reflects real language use in specific contexts. 
He argues that new terms are needed to describe language use in an era of increased mobility. To this 
end, he proposes a sociolinguistics of mobility which 
 focuses not on language-in-place but on language-in-motion, with various spatiotemporal 
frames interacting with one another. Such spatiotemporal frames can be described as ‘scales,’ 
and the assumption is that in an age of globalization, language patterns must be under-
stood as patterns that are organized on different, layered (i.e. vertical rather than horizontal) 
scale-levels. 
 (p. 5) 
 Blommaert (2010) contends that we live in an era of super linguistic diversity, as evidenced in 
immigrant communities where recent immigrants, often poor, manage to get their needs addressed 
by drawing on every linguistic resource they have in which English may play only a small role. While 
specific language varieties often serve special functions in an individual’s life, the fact is that certain 
languages today have more linguistic power than others. They have, in other words, what Blommaert 
calls semiotic value rather than linguistic significance. To make this point, Blommaert points to the 
example of a sign in an upscale shopping center in Tokyo in which a very exclusive chocolate store 
had the name  Nina’s derrière.  The store owners clearly had no idea of the French meaning of  der-
rière  (behind), but they recognized the semiotic power of French to connote high-quality products. 
The same is true of the use of English in many contexts. English is chosen because of its association 
with economic affluence, cosmopolitanism, and power. This semiotic value of English can play an 
important role in the learning and using of English. It is, in addition, what leads one to imagine that 
English fluency will bring with it all of the characteristics listed previously—economic affluence, 
cosmopolitanism, and power. 
 Blommaert’s delineation of a sociolinguistics of globalization is important in understanding the 
role and spread of English today. By highlighting the importance of mobility, he suggests how Eng-
lish often is only one of many languages that can be used for cross-border exchanges. In addition, 
his idea of the semiotic value of English demonstrates one of the factors that can motivate language 
learning. For many, English knowledge is viewed as a sign of education, affluence, cosmopolitanism, 
and power. This belief, whether accurate or not, can motivate individuals to assume the arduous 
task of mastering a second language. As Kachru (1986) points out in a book entitled  The Alchemy of 
English , “knowing English is like possessing the fabled Aladdin’s lamp, which permits one to open, as 
it were, the linguistic gates to international business, technology, science and travel. In short, English 
www.ebook3000.com

English as a Global Language • 33
provides linguistic power” (p. 1). While the semiotic value of English is evident, its actual value in 
terms of access to employment and education is open to question. 
 A second aspect of the sociolinguistics of globalization outlined by Blommaert (2012) is a new 
view of what has traditionally been viewed as code-switching. Whereas traditionally code-switching 
has been viewed as a more or less deliberate switch from one discrete language to another, Blommaert 
contends that in many instances the “mixed language” that is used is the only code spoken and that 
this “language” includes features of speech that differ depending on such things as genre, topic, and 
style. He proposes an alternative model to account for language use today, one that is much more 
complex than the traditional idea that bilinguals use two distinct languages in discrete contexts. 
Instead, he proposes a new theoretical orientation to language use in a highly mobile society that 
includes the following essential assumptions: 
 1. People do not use ‘Languages,’ they use  resources  for communication, driven by concerns of 
 effect , and deployed in practices of  languaging  (‘doing’ language). 
 2. Specific sets of such resources are  language-ideologically  associated with a Language such as 
‘English’ or ‘Russian.’ The Languages we know are therefore not objective units but ideologi-
cal ones: we say that we write in ‘English’ because of the widespread association of specific 
features with ‘English’ (rather than, say, ‘Russian’). 
 3. The effects brought about by deploying specific resources are  indexical : the specific ordering 
of resources into recognizable registers, genres, and styles triggers powerful standard socio-
cultural interpretations. Such forms of order are often labeled ‘norms’ or ‘speech conventions,’ 
and every meaningful form of communication will be grounded in conventionalized (hence 
recognizable as meaningful) ordered patterns of deployed resources. 
 4. The collective resources available to anyone at any point in time are a  repertoire ; repertoires are 
biographically emerging complexes of indexically ordered, and therefore functionally orga-
nized, resources. Repertoires include  every  resource used in communication—linguistic ones, 
semiotic ones, sociocultural ones. 
 (Blommaert 2012, p. 4) 
 What does a view of language as resource based on an individual’s repertoire of indexical resources 
suggest for language learning and teaching? In answering this question, it is important to recognize 
that each language learner has acquired very “ specific bits of language  such as standard orthographic 
literacy, control over advanced professional jargons, specific accents and so forth” (Blommaert 2012, 
p. 4). In this way language proficiency consists of the particular bits of language that individuals 
acquire due to their experience with the language. They draw on these resources in whatever lan-
guage they have available to communicate. This kind of communication is in stark contrast to many 
L2 classrooms where the use of the L1 is strictly forbidden. Fortunately, several educators today are 
advocating that L2 learners and teachers draw on all the linguistic resources they have in a classroom 
to make language learning happen. This view of language use reflects what Garcia and Wei (2014) 
advocate in discussing  translanguaging in language classrooms. 
 The Unsustainability of Native Speakerism 
 The frequent use of the term  native speaker  and the constant comparison of the native and non-
native English-speaking teachers warrants a careful examination of what it means to be a native 
speaker. Several key questions arise in trying to define a native speaker, including the following. 
 Must you speak English in your home from birth to be a native speaker of English? 
 Can you speak two languages in your home and still be a native speaker of English? 

34 • Sandra Lee McKay
 Must you continue to speak English throughout your life to be a native speaker of English? 
 If you start to use English as your sole language as an adult, can you be considered a native speaker 
of English? 
 Traditionally, native speakers are viewed as individuals who acquire English early in their child-
hood because it is spoken in the family and/or it is the language of the country where they live. Davies 
(1991), for example, defines a native language as “the first learned language, in which one achieves 
a high degree of competence and linguistic intuition” (p. ix). He notes that being a native speaker 
 is only partly about native naturalness . . . it is also, and in my view more importantly, about 
groups and identity:  the point is of course that while we don’t choose where we come from we do 
have some measure of choice of where we go to . Difficult as it is, we can change identities, . . . we 
can join new groups. 
 (p. ix) 
 Davies then entertains the possibility that one can achieve a native naturalness in another language 
by joining a new group and identifying with this group. If then being a native speaker is about pos-
sessing native naturalness, one does not need to necessarily achieve this naturalness at birth but could 
do it later in life. 
 Tay (1982), in her definition of a native language, maintains that in addition to the criteria of the 
first learned language, native intuition, and identity as central to a definition of a native language, 
there is the criterion of continued use. She argues that a native speaker who is not from an Inner 
Circle country is one who learns English in childhood and continues to use it as his or her dominant 
language and has reached a certain level of fluency. According to Tay, three conditions are necessary 
to be a native speaker. One must learn a language early in life, attain a high level of native intuition, 
and continue to use the language throughout life. 
 If we return then to our initial questions, we might answer as follows. 
 Must you speak English in your home from birth to be a native speaker of English?  No. One can 
achieve native intuition in a language later in life through continued use and group identity. 
 Can you speak two languages in your home and still be a native speaker of English?  Yes. What is 
essential is that you achieve native intuition in the language. 
 Must you continue to speak English throughout your life to be a native speaker of English? Yes. Con-
tinued use is essential to promoting and maintaining native intuition. 
 If you start to use English as your sole language as an adult, can you be considered a native speaker of 
English? Yes. However, you must achieve native intuition. 
 A central concern in defining a native speaker is what is meant by native intuition. Here, Rampton’s 
(1990) discussion of expertise is helpful. Because of the difficulty of defining a native speaker or native 
intuition, Rampton argues that a better term to use is  expertise.  He argues that the term  expertise is 
preferable since it suggests that one can become more of an expert through learning and use, that one 
individual can have more expertise than another, and that no one ever knows everything about a cer-
tain body of knowledge. More recently, Higgins (2003) argues that the term  ownership  be used in place 
of the term  native speaker . For Higgins, ownership is a factor of the degree to which speakers of English 
“project themselves as legitimate speakers with authority over the language” (p. 615). Such ownership 
is reflected in an individual’s certainty and confidence in his or her own linguistic intuitions. 
 Given the difficulty of defining a native speaker, it is surprising that the term continues to be 
widely used and that so-called native speakers are often considered to be more effective teachers, 
www.ebook3000.com

English as a Global Language • 35
resulting in their being hired over local bilingual teachers and at times paid higher salaries. This situ-
ation may be due to the fact that there are many widely accepted myths regarding native speakers, 
including the following: 
 Myth One: Native speakers are more proﬁ cient than L2 speakers. 
 Such a generalization is undermined by the fact that many native speakers in Inner Circle coun-
tries do not speak or write the language well due to a lack of education and practice with the 
language. 
 Myth Two: Native speakers have native speaker intuition. 
 The problems with this generalization are that (1) native speaker intuition is difﬁ cult to deﬁ ne 
and (2) to the extent that it involves a naturalness in the use of the language, this can be 
developed by anyone through constant use of the language and a sense of ownership of the 
language. 
 Myth Three: Native speakers are better teachers of English. 
 This is clearly not the case if the native speaker is lacking in expertise in the language and has not 
acquired competency in language pedagogy. 
 How then is the unsustainability of native speakerism related to globalization and English? There 
are two significant factors. First, the difficulty of defining the term suggests that a new pedagogy 
and view of English as a global language needs new terminology to discuss language users, one in 
which the term  native speaker  is not present. Second, to the extent that native speakerism has led to 
an emphasis on Anglophone culture in classroom materials, a new perspective on English as a global 
language suggests that classroom materials need to value all cultures equally and include readings 
that discuss cultures around the world, whether English speaking or not. Finally, a de-emphasis of 
native speakerism should lead to the evaluation of teachers on an individual basis. Effective language 
teachers must have a variety of skills—proficiency in the language, a critical understanding of L2 
pedagogy, knowledge of the local culture and how English is used in it, and ideally, a knowledge of 
prevalent local languages. 
 A Plurality of Norms 
 A major concern in pedagogy and research in the area of English as a global language is the question 
of what standards of use and usage should be promoted in classrooms. The spread of English has 
brought with it the development of many new varieties of English, which has led to much discussion 
regarding what standards should be promoted in the teaching of English. Implicit in discussions of 
variation are the notion of standards, a standard language, and issues of power and identity that are 
built into such concepts.  Standard language is the term generally used to refer to that variety of a lan-
guage that is considered the norm. It is the variety regarded as the ideal for educational purposes, and 
it is usually used as a yardstick by which to measure other varieties. It largely reflects formal written 
English. The related notion of  language standards  has to do with the language rules which inform the 
standard and which are then taught in the schools. 
 The challenge that World Englishes presents to the Standard English ideology is one of plurality—
that there should be different standards for different contexts of use; that the definition of each 
Standard English should be endonormative (determined locally) rather than exonormative (deter-
mined outside its context of use). However, if there are different forms of Standard English, the 
concern of mutual intelligibility emerges. The fact that some speakers of English use a variety of 
English that is quite different from a standard variety of English has led some to argue that the use 
of these varieties of English will lead to a lack of intelligibility among speakers of English. This fear 

36 • Sandra Lee McKay
has led to a widespread debate over standards in the use of English. However, it is important to note 
that formal written English varies little from context to context. This fact will help maintain a core of 
English usage. However, there are still legitimate concerns regarding the relationship between local 
and global standards. 
 Within each country where a local variety of English is spoken, some speakers are familiar with 
both the local variety and a more universally accepted variety of English. At the same time, some 
speakers, often the less educated and less affluent, are familiar only with the local variety of English. 
Whereas many would argue that it is the responsibility of English classroom teachers to familiarize 
students with a widely accepted variety of English, in some contexts, the teachers may not be fully 
familiar with such a variety of English. This raises extremely complex questions as to what standards 
are appropriate for some local contexts. To illustrate this situation, let us consider the example of 
Wesbank High described in Blommaert (2010). 
 Wesbank is one of the first post-apartheid housing projects in the Western Cape. Most of the 
inhabitants are what was previously termed “coloreds” and speak Afrikaans, while approximately 
25% are black and speak Xhosa. The poverty and unemployment rate in the settlement is extremely 
high. Wesbank, the only secondary school in the area, is dual-medium, meaning that classes are 
offered in English and Afrikaans. In every grade, a small minority of the classes are English medium, 
and the rest are Afrikaans medium. Very few students in the school have English as their mother 
tongue. Hence, as Blommaert (2010) points out, teachers in Wesbank face a number of challenges: 
“large classes with a very heterogeneous population with respect to backgrounds, capacity and levels 
of achievement; a poor and marginalized community; an under-resourced school in which special 
educational needs cannot be adequately addressed” (p. 83). 
 All of the learners have problems with basic literacy. Data gathered from their writing showed that 
almost all students typically display the following features in their writing: 
 erratic use of capitals (not using them where needed, using them where not needed); 
 difﬁ culties with singular and plural markers; 
 difﬁ culties with verb inﬂ ections, esp. plural marking and tense marking; 
 problems with the use of deﬁ nite and indeﬁ nite articles (not using them where needed); 
 a wide range of spelling problems, mostly a result of phonetic spelling (writing according to 
pronunciation); 
 a tendency to aestheticize writing, even when struggling with basic writing skills—writing as 
drawing. 
 (Blommaert 2010, p. 84) 
 Such features lead to the production of sentences like the following. 
 Because they thought that is a Gun Sound and the boy wasn’t back @ home. 
 If I loved him, He would marry me. . . . 
 BECAUSE You can Communicate with Everyone with it. 
 You can go to the far lands that they speek other language lets say maybe they speek French they 
may understand english. 
 English. Because it’s the oFFicial Language in South Africa. 
 (Blommaert 2010, p. 84) 
 As Blommaert (2010) points out, these features of writing are not unusual; they are termed “grass-
roots literacy” and are widespread in Africa and elsewhere in the world where “people are inserted in 
sub-elite literacy economies and have restricted literacy repertoires, and often assume the shape of 
www.ebook3000.com

English as a Global Language • 37
a skeleton writing competence in which acoustic images of words are noted in an unstable spelling 
system” (p. 85). What is significant for our purposes is that the teachers display some of these same 
features, resulting in their not correcting what many might consider “errors.” The reason is that the 
teachers come from the same community as the learners. 
 The norms that are applied in this context are what might be termed peripheral norms rather 
than a universal or singular norm, a norm which neither the students nor the teachers have access to. 
And as Blommaert (2010) notes, as a consequence, “doing well in school means doing well by local 
standards” (p. 93). He goes on to argue that 
 Even though, from one perspective, it amounts to lifting ‘errors’ to the level of norms (and 
thus ‘normalizing’ errors in writing), another perspective suggests that it offers interesting 
pedagogical opportunities and is thus a productive, positive procedure. It can be seen as the 
 localization  of education standards—something which probably occurs everywhere (we have 
seen that all over the world English is learned  with an accent), but is rarely recognized and 
acknowledged. 
 (p. 95) 
 While the localized standards may provide a productive learning environment for learners in a 
difficult social environment, “the localization of norms also involves a move away from the norms 
of the ‘centre.’ And these norms, as we know, are hegemonic in the end” (Blommaert 2012, p. 96). 
Ultimately, some skills offer a very low degree of mobility while others offer a considerably larger 
degree of mobility and transferability across social and spatial domains. ‘Standard’ literacy usually 
falls in the second category, while ‘non-standard’ literacy falls in the first category, even if from one 
perspective it can be see as ‘full’, developed, complex literacy within a restricted repertoire of literacy 
skills and resources (p. 100). 
 The point is that English today is “a multiplex item composed of at least two different objects: 
 English1  an ideologically conceived homogenous and idealized notion of ‘English-the-language-of-
success, and  English2,  a situationally and locally organized pragmatics of using ‘English’ in ways 
rather distant from English” (p. 100). 
 What does the complexity of linguistic norms suggest for the teaching of English as a global 
language? First and foremost it suggests that a global language will have local norms. However, such 
varieties are not less valuable than so-called standard norms, especially in a local context. On the 
other hand, there is no question that a standard variety of English, based largely on written formal 
English, differs little from context to context and is, by far, the variety with the most linguistics and 
economic capital. 
 Increasing Emphasis on Pragmatics 
 It is difficult to overemphasize the importance of pragmatic competence in cross-border exchanges. 
In the majority of such exchanges, speakers have different levels of competence in the grammar of 
English, as well as differences in their sense of pragmatic appropriateness. As Canagarajah (2007) 
notes, in most EIL exchanges, 
 the form of English is negotiated by each set of speakers for their purposes. The speakers 
are able to monitor each other’s language proficiency to determine mutually the appropriate 
grammar, phonology, lexical range, and pragmatic conventions that would ensure intelligibil-
ity. Therefore, it is difficult to describe this language a priori. 
 (p. 925) 

38 • Sandra Lee McKay
 In order for communication to proceed smoothly, speakers have to work to negotiate understand-
ing and adjust the form of their language so that the listener is able to comprehend the intent of the 
message. Firth (1996) contends that as long as interlocutors in an intercultural exchange achieve a 
certain level of understanding, they seem to adopt a  let-it-pass principle , acting as if they understand 
one another even when they don’t. 
 This seems to be the state of affairs in low-stakes exchanges that occur mainly for camaraderie. 
However, in some exchanges, such as business exchanges in which precision of meaning is critical, 
speakers can work hard to make their meaning clear. This is evident in the following exchange col-
lected by Firth (1996), in which management personnel are using English as a lingua franca. Notice 
how a Dane (H) and a Syrian (B) work to achieve an understanding of what the Syrian speaker means 
by the term  blowing : 
 B: So I told him not to send the cheese after the blowing in the customs. We don’t want the order 
after the cheese is blowing. 
 H: I see, yes. 
 B: So I don’t know what we can do with the order now. What do you think we should do with this 
all blowing, Mr. Hansen? 
 H: I’m not uh (pause).  Blowing? What is this, too big or what? 
 B: No, the cheese is bad, Mr. Hansen. It is like fermenting in the customs’ cool rooms. 
 H: Ah, it’s gone off! 
 B: Yes, it’s gone off. 
 (Firth 1996, p. 244) 
 Notice in this exchange that speaker B assumes H knows the meaning of the term  blowing ; since 
H is not familiar with this term, he directly asks “What is this, too big or what?” Notice also that it 
is not errors in grammatical form (of which there are many) that impede comprehension. Instead, 
it is a lack of semantic understanding. In order to repair this breakdown in communication, H has 
to resort to the pragmatic strategy of clarifying meaning. In more informal, low-stakes exchanges, 
speakers may indeed employ the let-it-pass principle. The point is that speakers typically employ 
the negotiating strategies that suit their purpose for the exchange. Often form is less important than 
making themselves understood. 
 Canagarajah (2007) rightly argues that in many English cross-cultural exchanges, form can in 
some ways be less important than meaning and use, pointing out that in such exchanges, 
 form receives reduced significance, or, rather, form gets shaped according to the contexts 
and participants in an interaction. More important are the range of other skills, abilities, and 
awareness that enable multilingual speakers to negotiate grammar. In addition to grammati-
cal competence, we have to give equal importance to language awareness that enables speak-
ers to make instantaneous inferences about the norms and conventions of their multilingual 
interlocutors; strategic competence to negotiate interpersonal relationships effectively: and 
pragmatic competence to adopt communicative conventions that are appropriate for the 
interlocutor, purpose and situation. 
 (p. 928) 
 Since the present-day community of English speakers is composed of individuals speaking differ-
ent varieties of English, at different levels of proficiencies for different purposes, a truly competent 
speaker must be able to shift among these contexts. Competence in cross-border exchanges then 
includes 
www.ebook3000.com

English as a Global Language • 39
 the ability to shuttle between different varieties of English and different speech communities. 
In this sense, the argument becomes irrelevant whether local standards or inner-circle stan-
dards matter. We need both and more—that is the ability to negotiate the varieties in other 
outer- and expanding-circle communities as well. 
 (Canagarajah 2006, p. 233) 
 Developing such abilities and assessing them is challenging. However, it is important to point out 
that, in order to accomplish this task, learners do not need to be “proficient in every variety under 
the sun” (Canagarajah 2006, p. 233). Rather, as Canagarajah (2006) notes, we need to shift our focus 
both in pedagogy and assessment to developing negotiating skills: 
 Such realizations suggest the need for an important shift in assessment practices. From focus-
ing overly on proficiency in grammar or in abstract linguistic features, we have to focus more 
on proficiency in pragmatics. Sociolinguistic skills of dialect differentiation, code switching, 
style shifting, interpersonal communication, conversation management, and discourse strate-
gies are important for shuttling between English varieties. 
 (McKay 2005, p. 233) 
 Ultimately we need to shift our emphasis “from language as a system to language as social practice, 
from grammar to pragmatics, from competence to performance” (Canagarajah 2006, p. 234). 
 Given the importance of strategic and pragmatic competence in English exchanges, an essential 
aspect of English classes should be to develop these competencies. McKay (2011) argues that all 
English-language curricula should give attention to the following components of language use: 
 • Explicit attention should be given to introducing and practicing repair strategies, such as 
asking for clarification and repetition, rephrasing, and allowing wait time. 
 • A variety of conversational gambits or routines should be introduced and practiced, includ-
ing such items as expressing agreement and disagreement, managing turn-taking, and taking 
leave. 
 • The curricula should seek to promote students’ understanding of how pragmatic norms can 
differ cross-culturally. 
 • Students should be free to express their own pragmatic norms but to recognize that to the 
extent these differ from the norms expected by their listener, there may be cross-cultural mis-
understandings. 
 (p. 133) 
 All of these theories regarding the globalization of sociolinguistics, native speakerism, norms, and 
pragmatics have important ramifications for pedagogy, primary among these being the need to local-
ize pedagogical decisions to suit the particular context. This is the topic we turn to now. 
 The Localization of Pedagogy 
 Kumaravadivelu (2001), in a seminal paper on a postmethod pedagogy, argued persuasively for the 
localization of methods. For Kumaravadivelu,  pedagogy is a broad concept including “not only issues 
pertaining to classroom strategies, instructional materials, curricular objectives, and evaluation 
measures, but also a wide range of historical, political and sociocultural experiences that directly or 
indirectly influence L2 education” (p. 538). He envisions a postmethod pedagogy that includes three 
parameters: particularity, practicality, and possibility.  Particularity  refers to the need for all pedagogy 

40 • Sandra Lee McKay
to be sensitive to “a particular group of teachers teaching a particular group of learners pursuing a 
particular set of goals with a particular institutional context embedded in a particular sociocultural 
milieu” (p. 538). This means that one set of pedagogical objectives and aims will never be appropriate 
for all teaching contexts. 
 The second feature of a postmethod pedagogy is  practicality . In explaining this construct, Kuma-
ravadivelu shuns the notion that theory should come from theorists and teacher educators and 
teachers should merely put such theories into practice. Rather, Kumaravadivelu sees the teacher as 
key to the making of pedagogical decisions and practical theory. For Kumaravadivelu (2001), it is 
the “practicing teacher who, given adequate tools for exploration, is best suited to produce such a 
practical theory” (p. 541). He advocates a pedagogical thoughtfulness in which teachers “understand 
and identify problems, analyze and assess information, consider and evaluate alternatives, and then 
choose the best available alternative, which is then subjected to further critical appraisal” (541). 
 Possibility , the final feature of a postmethod pedagogy, is derived from the assumption that “peda-
gogy, any pedagogy, is implicated in relations of power and dominance, and is implemented to cre-
ate and sustain social inequalities” (p. 542). The example of Wesbank High is a case in point. The 
grassroots literacy that exists there is directly due to relations of power and dominance in the South 
African society. As Kumaravadivelu (2001) rightly points out, “the experiences participants bring to 
the pedagogical setting are shaped not just by the learning/teaching episodes they have encountered 
in the past but also by the broader social, economic, and political environment in which they have 
grown up” (p. 543). Because of this, it is imperative that all pedagogical decisions take into account 
the social, economic, and political context of the local classroom. 
 McKay and Brown (2016) continue Kumaravadivelu’s discussion of a postmethod pedagogy, 
arguing specifically for a locally defined pedagogy in keeping with the view of language discussed in 
this chapter. There are three major benefits to considering local needs and context in defining peda-
gogy. First, as suggested in this chapter, each language learner and teacher brings to the classroom 
particular “bits of English.” If the learning objectives are locally defined, materials and methods of 
that classroom can be suited to that particular group of learners. Second, by recognizing the resources 
that students and teachers bring to a particular classroom, all of their resources can be brought into 
play, including linguistic resources, gestures, visuals, and so on. Third, basing pedagogical decisions 
on a view of language as one of several available resources the student possesses frames the learner 
not as deficient in some particular resource, but rather as possessing several additional valuable 
resources. The goal of the classroom then is to help students acquire other repertoires that they see 
as important to them. 
 Future Directions/Needed Research 
 What kind of investigations will be necessary to enact such a pedagogical approach? First, a good deal 
more research needs to be undertaken in how speakers negotiate meaning in cross-border exchanges 
using all of the repertoires they have available. Whereas lingua franca research does address cross-
border exchanges, by restricting the data to largely English-only interactions, it minimizes the other 
resources that speakers draw on to negotiate meaning. Second, more attention needs to be given 
to needs analysis and how to localize this process so that local educators are fully aware of what 
resources their learners have available to them, how they use these resources in the community to 
serve their needs, and what additional resources they believe they need. Given this assessment, it 
may well be that students do not need or want to acquire the Standard English that is currently pro-
moted in most language classrooms. Third, teachers need greater guidance in acquiring strategies 
for designing materials that meet their students’ needs and enacting learning methods that are best 
suited for the particular group of students in that specific environment. As suggested in this chapter, 
www.ebook3000.com

English as a Global Language • 41
it may well be that for English learning to be most successful, the other resources students have avail-
able to them in terms of other languages and negotiating strategies need to be fully employed in the 
classroom. Finally, assessment measures need to adequately assess the skills that students possess and 
to include in those skills not only grammatical, semantic, and pragmatic knowledge of English, but 
also the strategies they employ to engage in meaningful interactions using what they have. This is an 
ambitious undertaking, involving both sociolinguistic and educational endeavors, but it is the only 
way that a pedagogy designed to meet the communication needs of a global society will be reached. 
 References 
 Blommaert, J. (2010).  The sociolinguistics of globalization . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Blommaert, J. (2012). Language and the study of diversity: Paper 13. Working papers in urban language and literacies. Centre 
for Language Discourse & Communication. King’s College London. 
 Canagarajah, S. (2006). Changing communicative needs, revised assessment objectives: Testing English as an international 
language.  Language Assessment Quarterly, 3 (3), 229–242. 
 Canagarajah, S. (2007). Lingua francs English, multilingual communities, and language acquisition.  The Modern Language 
Journal, 91 , 923–939. 
 Davies, A. (1991).  The native speaker in applied linguistics . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
 Firth, A. (1996). The discursive accomplishment of normality: On ‘lingua franca’ English and conversation analysis.  Journal 
of Pragmatics, 26 , 237–259. 
 Garcia, O., & Wei, L. (2014).  Translanguaging: Language, bilingualism and education . New York: Palgrave/Macmillan. 
 Gómez-Peña, G. (1996).  The new world border: Prophecies, poems, and loqueras for the end of the century . San Francisco: City 
Lights. 
 Graddol, D. (2006).  English next: Why global English may mean the end of ‘English as a foreign language’ . London: British 
Council. 
 Higgins, C. (2003). ‘Ownership’ of English in the outer circle: An alternative to the NS-NNS dichotomy.  TESOL Quarterly, 
34 (1), 615–644. 
 Kachru, B. B. (1986).  The alchemy of English . Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
 Kachru, B. B. (1989). Teaching world Englishes.  Indian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 15 (1), 85–95. 
 Kubota, R. (2012). The politics of EIL: Toward border crossing communication in and beyond English. In A. Matsuda (Ed.), 
 Principles and practices of teaching English as an international language (pp. 55–69). Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Kumaravadivelu, B. (2001). Toward a postmethod pedagogy.  TESOL Quarterly, 35 (4), 537–560. 
 McKay, S. L. (2005). Teaching the pragmatics of English as an international language.  Guidelines, 27 (1), 3–9. 
 McKay, S. L. (2011). English as an international lingua franca pedagogy. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of research in second 
language teaching and learning (Vol. 2, pp. 122–139). New York: Routledge. 
 McKay, S. L. & Brown, H. D. (2016).  Teaching and assessing EIL in local contexts around the world . New York: Routledge. 
 Pennycook, A. (2007).  Global Englishes and transcultural flows . New York: Routledge. 
 Phillipson, R. (1992).  Linguistic imperialism . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Phillipson, R. (2009).  Linguistic imperialism continued . New York: Routledge. 
 Rampton, M. B. H. (1990). Displacing the native speaker: Expertise, affiliation, and inheritance.  ELT Journal, 44 (97), 97–101. 
 Rubdy, R. & Alsagoff, L. (2014).  The global-local interface and hybridity . Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Tay, M. (1982). The uses, users, and features of English in Singapore. In J. B. Pride (Ed.),  New Englishes (pp. 51–72). Rowley, 
MA: Newbury House. 

42
 4 
 English for Academic Purposes 
 Carmen Pérez-Llantada and John M. Swales 
 Introduction 
 For much of the last 30 years, a majority of investigative work in English for Academic Purposes 
(EAP) has been concerned with the specialized discourses that specialized groups of L2 learners need 
to comprehend, acquire, and appropriate. Given the scope of this handbook, we felt that the right 
strategy would be to downplay this side of EAP and focus on other areas where points of contact 
between our field and other branches of L2 teaching and learning would be stronger. Further, the 
genre and discourse analytic literature in EAP has been widely covered in recent collections, includ-
ing  The Handbook for English for Specific Purposes  (Paltridge & Starfield, 2013), the  Encyclopedia of 
Applied Linguistics  (Chapelle, 2013), and the  Routledge Handbook of English for Academic Purposes 
(Hyland & Shaw, 2016). So, instead, this chapter concentrates on such matters as the composition of 
EAP classes, EAP and second language acquisition, EAP methodologies, particularly those that inter-
face with task-based learning and rhetorical consciousness raising, aspects of EAP course objectives 
and materials design, learning styles and student involvement with corpora, and EAP approaches to 
the four language skills. Throughout, the emphasis is on mutually beneficial interfaces between the 
specialized world of EAP and the broader and larger world of second language teaching and learning. 
 Since its rapid development in the 1980s, the field of EAP has become a prominent L2 educational 
area worldwide. EAP education involves the teaching/learning of specialized linguistic knowledge 
and literacy skills and aims at training university students and early-career researchers profession-
ally, and making them successful communicators in English in academic and research settings. Spe-
cialized EAP education is particularly prominent today, as English has become the predominant 
international lingua franca of higher education and research. The number of international students 
in tertiary education institutions is increasing, and the ratio of non-Anglophone and Anglophone 
scholars participating on the world stage is 4:1. The need to learn how to communicate in English in 
global academia is unprecedented. 
 Setting up an EAP course has traditionally been based on a needs analysis. Paltridge and col-
leagues (2009) explain this is a way of finding out both the kinds of texts (genres) students will be 
exposed to in a target (learning) situation and the knowledge and skills they need to acquire in order 
to be able to understand and produce those texts. Several ways of articulating cogent instructional 
intervention have been developed to cater to the specific needs of EAP learners but, to date, there is 
a broad consensus that genre- and task-based instruction is a particularly effective teaching/learning 
www.ebook3000.com

English for Academic Purposes • 43
approach in EAP education. This involves completing contextualized tasks so that the students rec-
ognize what social actions a given genre or a set of genres perform and how the situational context 
influences the perceptions and expectations of genre use (Swales, 1990, 2004). Feak (2010) also pro-
vides convincing reasons in support of this instructional approach. Tasks are tailored to maximize 
the learning process of the group of students enrolled in a course. As Feak further explains, in a task-
based approach the teacher does not predetermine the linguistic knowledge that the students will be 
exposed to through the sample texts (genre types) included in the task. Instead, the task, carefully 
planned by the teacher, supports task completion and elicits the students’ awareness of linguistic 
features, rhetorical goals, communicative purposes, and intended audience of the text exemplars. In 
EAP genre- and task-based instruction, the learning process is conceptualized as the ‘cycle of rhe-
torical consciousness-raising’ (Swales & Feak, 2009). Task completion also involves enquiry-based 
learning of social interaction practices, namely, awareness of the functionality of language (i.e. notic-
ing how language is used for a particular communicative purpose and an intended audience) and 
its linguistic form. An added value of the approach is the fact that, concurrently with language and 
literacy learning, tasks engage students in the learning of basic/advanced socio-cognitive skills such 
as information search and analytical and critical thinking, skills that support the students’ textual 
practices within their discourse community (A. Johns, 1997). 
 The EAP literature sensibly recommends that the development of tasks is grounded on theories 
and principles of second language acquisition, particularly the Noticing Hypothesis (e.g. Schmidt, 
1993), and, on the other hand, pedagogically reasoned and perceptive of the specificities of the local 
context and those of the group of students that takes the EAP course (Feak, 2010; Tomlinson, 2010). 
With a view to following this recommendation, task designers can draw upon a variety of sources, 
ranging from linguistic data from specialized corpora to qualitative data of the course participants’ 
language and literacy needs, their previous educational background and experience and their own 
perceptions of language learning  inter alia . In what follows we briefly describe the educational con-
texts of EAP teaching and learning, review a sample of academic literacy research, and discuss ways 
in which this research improves today’s EAP instructional practice through exploration of aspects 
of L2 learning. 
 EAP Teaching and Learning in a Global Perspective 
 The United States is known for its highly interactive smaller classes, and for decades now, in many 
such courses, part of the final grade is assessed on the basis of classroom participation. As a result, 
EAP units in post-secondary institutions tend to offer programs that cover the four skills, although 
with a typically stronger emphasis on the productive skills of writing and speaking. Activities in the 
speaking area will likely include pronunciation, classroom discussion, class presentation, and, where 
appropriate, special classes for training international teaching assistants. Often, these speech classes 
make some use of the free  Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English  (MICASE). In South Amer-
ica, in contrast, the traditional EAP emphasis has been on assisting students to cope with English-
medium textbooks, technical reports, and journal articles. In other areas where EAP is strong—the 
UK, Spain, Australia, and, more recently, Eastern Europe (Bennett, 2014), China, and Iran—EAP 
units usually adopt curricula that fall somewhere between US approaches and Latin American ones. 
 While academic literacy and oracy is also acquired through exposure to disciplinary lectures and 
assignments, in EAP the acquisition of these elements is foregrounded rather than being “in the back-
ground.” Taking academic writing as an example, instruction at an undergraduate level will often 
serially involve training in producing short and extended essays, lab reports, summaries, critiques, 
reviews, and perhaps ending with term papers. At a graduate level, the students’ target situational 

44 • Carmen Pérez-Llantada and John M. Swales
needs remain the relevant instructional focus and so will likely involve conference abstracts, Master’s 
theses, grant applications, journal articles, and PhD theses. 
 In the US, influences on EAP curricula have in part come from basic Composition, particularly 
with this field’s focus on the somewhat troubled concept of “voice,” or the expression of an autho-
rial persona. Other influences come from Intercultural Rhetoric (Connor, 1996), which explores the 
ways non-Anglophone students’ linguacultural backgrounds influence L2 academic writing. Connor 
(1996) stresses the importance of the theory of literacy (‘literacy’ in its singular form) to document 
the role of L1 transfer in relation to issues of culture, identity, and adaptation in L2 writing. Finally, 
as a result of changing socially situated practices and the fast growth of technologies in today’s higher 
education and research settings, new learning needs demand new learning targets, which are cur-
rently addressed in composition and Writing Across the Curriculum (WAC) courses (Bazerman, 
Little, Chavkin, Fourquette, & Garufis, 2006). Finally, EAP in the US has begun to recognize that 
only about half of today’s graduating doctoral students will follow traditional academic careers and, 
in consequence, international students also need to be prepared for professional communications 
outside of the university (Feak & Swales, 2015). 
 In the UK tradition, higher education institutions have also been leading providers of skill-based 
EAP training at undergraduate and postgraduate levels in order to support the linguistic demands 
of academic study and a research career. The past 20 years have witnessed an upsurge of interest in 
academic literacies research (‘literacies’ in its plural form), mostly motivated by the increasingly 
multilingual and multicultural population of universities in the UK. Broadly, the academic literacies 
movement places the emphasis on practices rather than on texts (Lillis & Scott, 2007). It postulates an 
autonomous and ideological stance to academic writing and communication and advocates a ‘trans-
formative’ agenda for EAP teaching and learning—one based on the understanding that academic 
rules and conventions are negotiable and that students have the right to participate in the academic 
community and therefore to develop a critical stance towards these rules and conventions (Wingate, 
2012). 
 EAP Research on L2 Learning 
 The studies surveyed below have been published in three mainstream EAP journals ( English for Spe-
cific Purposes ,  Journal of English for Academic Purposes , and  Journal of Second Language Writing ). We 
assume that, being highly cited in the past five years, these studies are moving the field forward. They 
all illustrate EAP practitioners’ interest in exploring facets of L2 acquisition and learning processes. 
The use of academic phraseology and style, the use of source text material and strategies for integrat-
ing sources in text-composing processes, knowledge of the rhetorical text organization, and aspects 
of argument construction are the main language and literacy skills investigated.  Table 4.1  provides 
further details of the studies in an accessible format. As readers will see, this journal-level research 
has tended to privilege discoursal studies—overly so according to Lillis and Scott (2007)—while 
influential books, such as Dudley-Evans and St. John (1998) and A. Johns (1997), offer a broader 
perspective. 
 One set of the studies surveyed conducts formal research to investigate the use of high-frequency 
multi-word constructions—also labeled ‘phraseological patterns’ and ‘lexical bundles.’ Draw-
ing on data from large-scale corpora of expert academic writing from various disciplines, these 
studies report on the frequency, grammatical structures, and discourse functions of multi-word 
constructions across language varieties—North-American and British academic English in Liu 
(2012) and academic Spanish in Soler (2011). It is argued that the recurring phraseology of 
academic writing is mainly phrasal, rather than clausal, which eventually characterizes the style 
www.ebook3000.com

 Table 4.1 A Sample of EAP Research 
Author(s)/year
Aspect(s) 
investigated
Research method(s) Main findings
Instructional 
intervention
Biber and Gray 
(2010)
Degree of 
complexity, 
elaboration, 
and 
explicitness 
in academic 
writing
A three-million-
word corpus of 
research articles 
(RAs) in science/
medicine, 
education, 
social science 
(psychology), 
and humanities 
(history)
Compared to academic 
speech, academic prose 
is not so structurally 
elaborated and is less 
explicit in meaning 
Structural compression 
involves use of phrasal 
modifiers embedded in 
noun phrases
Extensive practice in 
decoding texts with 
extensive phrasal 
modification
Instruction on how to 
write clear prose
Soler (2011)
Structural 
construction 
of titles
1,140 titles from 
RAs in English and 
Spanish in the fields 
of biological and 
social sciences
Prevalence of nominal-
group titles
Full-sentence construction 
titles in the biological 
sciences; predominance 
of compound titles in the 
social sciences
Discipline and language 
variation
Explicit instructional 
focus on content/
function words, 
punctuation, 
length, structural 
constructions, 
and semantic and 
pragmatic features
Liu (2012)
Multi-word 
constructions 
(MWCs) 
and its usage 
patterns in 
academic 
writing
Corpus of 
Contemporary 
American English 
and British National 
Corpus
A list of the 228 most 
common MWCs
Noun and prepositional 
constructions are most 
common
Very high frequency of 
the “NP + linguistic action 
verb + that”
The list can raise 
students’ awareness of 
recurring MWCs and 
encourage their use
Cortes (2013)
Grammatical 
and functional 
features of 
lexical bundles
A one-million-
word corpus of RA 
introductions from 
various disciplines
Many expressions are 
extremely frequent
Some lexical bundles are 
linked to one move or step 
in a move; others occur 
across several moves/steps
Some bundles function as 
triggers for moves and steps
Introducing move-/
step-specific lexical 
bundles so that 
students identify 
them in their own 
corpora
Learner noticing 
of the use/lack of 
use of bundles to 
convey particular 
communicative 
functions
Hyland (2010)
Text 
organization, 
argument, 
credibility, 
stance, and 
engagement 
features
120 research articles 
from science and 
engineering fields 
and 120 popular 
science articles
Rhetorical choices (text 
organization, argument, and 
attribution) reflect audience 
sensitivity
Instruction 
on features of 
interpersonality
Learner noticing 
of features of 
popularizations 
and RAs
(Continued)

 Table 4.1 (Continued)
Author(s)/year
Aspect(s) 
investigated
Research method(s) Main findings
Instructional 
intervention
Lim (2010)
Categories 
of comments 
and recurring 
linguistic 
features in 
Results sections 
of RAs
30 RAs from the 
fields of applied 
linguistics and 
education
Main categories: ‘explaining 
the findings’, ‘evaluating the 
findings’, and ‘comparing 
findings with the literature’
Disciplinary differences
In applied linguistics, 
instruction on how to 
explain, evaluate, and 
compare findings
In education, advice 
not to incorporate 
excessive evaluative 
comments but opt to 
do so in Discussion/
Conclusion sections
Molino (2010)
Personal and 
impersonal 
authorial 
references 
across academic 
writing cultures
60 single-authored 
RAs (450,000 
words) in 
Linguistics (30 in 
English and 30 in 
Italian)
Personal pronouns are less 
frequent in Italian RAs
Choice of interpersonal 
strategy correlates with 
frequency of occurrence of 
specific speech acts
Instructional 
focus on linguistic 
strategies of authorial 
visibility in relation 
to speech acts
Wingate (2012)
Students’ 
concepts of 
‘argument’ 
when arriving 
at university
Argumentation 
strategies 
in student 
academic 
writing
117 first-year 
undergraduate 
students
Academic Writing 
Questionnaire in 
Induction Week
A diary when 
writing an essay
The Student 
Handbook and the 
tutor comments on 
the 60 essays
Lack of criticality when 
handling sources, failure to 
use sources for supporting 
evidence; difficulties with 
positioning
Lack of explicit guidance 
by tutors (i.e. absence of 
comments)
Explicit instructional 
focus on 
argumentation
Use of student texts 
as exemplars
Loi (2010)
Rhetorical 
organization 
of English and 
Chinese RA 
introductions 
in the field of 
educational 
psychology
20 English RAs 
written by first-
language English 
speakers and 20 
Chinese RAs written 
by first-language 
Chinese speakers
English and Chinese 
introductions use 3-move 
structure
Rhetorical moves/steps are 
less common in Chinese 
introductions than in 
English introductions
An analytic-synthetic 
approach to academic 
writing instruction, 
encouraging students 
to engage in genre-
analysis tasks before 
doing their own 
writing
del Saz Rubio 
(2011)
Moves/
steps of RA 
introductions 
and 
metadiscourse 
features 
signaling 
moves
28 RA introductions 
from the field 
of Agricultural 
Sciences
Adherence to three-move 
rhetorical organization
Metadiscourse features 
perform pragmatically 
(persuading readers; 
giving evidence; conveying 
attitude; establishing 
proximity or distance 
towards claims)
Use of corpus 
data for designing 
and developing 
pedagogical material
Focus on the 
pragmatic and 
socio-rhetorical 
conventions of the 
sub-disciplinary field
Sheldon (2011)
Rhetorical 
organization of 
Introductions 
in RAs in 
English L1, 
Spanish L1, 
and English L2
RAs in English 
L1 and L2 and 
in Spanish L1 in 
applied linguistics
English L1 introductions 
stick to CARS model. Spanish 
L1 introductions display a 
culture-specific writing style 
English L2 introductions 
appear to be developing 
CARS-like control
Use of CARS 
model to support 
the teaching of RA 
introductions
www.ebook3000.com

 
Author(s)/year
Aspect(s) 
investigated
Research method(s) Main findings
Instructional 
intervention
Lim (2012)
Rhetorical 
steps (and 
sub-steps) 
and linguistic 
choices in RA 
introductions
30 RAs from 
three high impact 
management 
journals published 
from 1994 to 2010
‘Indicating a gap’ and 
‘adding to what is known’ 
display persuasion strategies 
and linguistic features that 
downplay past research 
and foreground the new 
research
Linking linguistic 
features more closely 
with the rhetorical 
functions at the sub-
step level
Cross-disciplinary 
comparisons 
of rhetorical 
conventions
Lin and Evans 
(2012)
Rhetorical 
macrostructure 
of empirical 
RAs
433 empirical RAs 
in 39 disciplines in 
engineering, applied 
sciences, social 
sciences, and the 
humanities
Close ‘manual’ 
analysis
Introduction-Methods-
Results-Discussions 
(IMRD) is a major 
structural pattern
Introduction–Literature 
Review–Method–Results 
and Discussion–Conclusion 
is also a frequent pattern.
Other patterns: IM[RD]C, 
IMRDC, ILMRDC and 
ILMRD
Greater instructional 
focus on L, C, and 
[RD] sections
Pedagogical materials 
need to be informed 
by analyses of 
structures, functions, 
and communicative 
purposes of RA 
sections
Wette (2010)
Use of sources 
in both first- 
and second-
language 
writing
78 undergraduate 
students from 
six strands of L2 
writing courses
A pre-unit quiz and 
guided writing task, 
a post-unit task
Students’ reflective 
comments
Analysis of out-of-
class assignments
Students’ significant 
improvement in the 
rule-governed aspects 
of source use
Students have difficulties 
comprehending 
complexities in texts, 
summarizing propositional 
content accurately, and 
integrating citations with 
their own voices and 
positions
Greater length of 
instruction on 
handling source texts
Extensive practice 
in paraphrasing and 
summarizing source 
texts
Classroom discussion 
and reflection so as 
to raise awareness of 
disciplinary practices
Mansourizadeh 
and Ahmad 
(2011)
Types and 
functions of 
citations in 
expert and 
novice RA 
writing
A case study on 
citation practices in 
14 RAs written by 
non-native expert 
and novice writers
Novice writers use citations 
to attribute. Experts use 
them to support claims.
Novices use citations in 
isolation. Expert writers use 
non-integral citations
Instruction on the 
rhetorical functions 
of citations in 
academic writing
Li and 
Casanave 
(2012)
Students’ 
understanding 
of plagiarism 
and their 
strategies for 
integrating 
source texts
A case study of two 
first-year students 
at a university in 
Hong Kong doing 
the same writing 
assignment that 
required the use of 
sources
The two students’ texts 
included patchwriting and 
inappropriate citation use
Only one student’s 
problems with use of source 
material were spotted by the 
lecturer and checked with 
Turnitin
Instruction should 
be perceptive of the 
place of reading 
in source-based 
assignments, the 
difficulty level 
of sources for an 
assignment, and 
the complexities 
of attribution in 
source-based writing 
assignments
(Continued)

Author(s)/year
Aspect(s) 
investigated
Research method(s) Main findings
Instructional 
intervention
Pecorari and 
Shaw (2012)
Intertextuality 
in student 
academic 
writing
Semi-structured 
text-based 
interviews with 
eight university 
teachers at several 
Swedish universities
Intertextuality is 
conceptualized into four 
different types. Teachers have 
differing views as regards 
factors that determine their 
judgments on source use
Students’ exposure to 
conceptualization of 
source use (the four 
types of intertextuality) 
and discussion of 
differing judgments
Weigle and 
Parker (2012)
Borrowing of 
source text 
language
63 essays 
transcribed 
verbatim and coded 
for source text 
borrowing
Two student groups 
(undergraduate and 
graduate) and four 
levels of proficiency
Only a small percentage 
of students borrowed 
extensively from source 
texts
Minor differences in 
patterns of borrowing 
across topics, student 
groups, and proficiency 
levels
Greater emphasis on 
how to write from 
sources
Instructional 
emphasis on 
appropriate use 
of source texts, 
attribution, and 
citation conventions
Hirvela and Du 
(2013)
Strategies for 
paraphrasing 
of source text 
material
A study of 
two Chinese 
undergraduates at 
a comprehensive 
Midwestern 
university in the US
Think-aloud 
protocols and text-
based interviews
Developmental learning of 
paraphrasing techniques
The students develop 
attitudes towards 
paraphrasing, as 
perceptions of source text 
material are culturally 
mediated
Instructional focus on 
ways of paraphrasing 
literature
Greater attention to 
students’ attitudes 
towards paraphrasing
Lin and 
Morrison 
(2010)
First-year 
students’ 
language 
problems 
in English-
medium higher 
education
A longitudinal study 
of 28 Hong-Kong 
students
Semi-structured 
interviews over their 
three years of study
A questionnaire 
survey completed by 
3,000 students at the 
same university
Main challenges: 
understanding technical 
vocabulary, achieving an 
appropriate academic style, 
and meeting disciplinary 
requirements
Instruction covering 
aspects of the course 
not covered at 
school (e.g. citation 
styles) or immediate 
practical needs (style 
conventions and 
essay-writing skills)
Mungra and 
Webber (2010)
Language 
and content 
problems 
that Italian 
researchers 
encounter 
in writing 
medical RAs
A collection of 
clinical research 
manuscripts 
submitted by Italian 
medical researchers 
to English-medium 
journals
Content problems related to 
use of methodology
Lexical and grammatical 
errors, clarity, and verbosity 
or repetition
Raising awareness 
of the features 
which may affect the 
acceptance/rejection 
of manuscripts in 
English-medium 
publications
Stapleton 
(2012)
Text-
composing 
behavior
A case study of an 
L2 English master’s 
student, while she 
writes a 4,000-word 
essay
Student’s logs, 
an open-ended 
retrospective 
questionnaire, and 
interviews
Composing involves 
formulating thoughts into 
language, research (searching, 
reading, and copying), 
planning (generating ideas, 
deciding how to organize 
them, and anticipating 
audience reaction), revision, 
collaboration with a more 
experienced writer, and self-
evaluation of writing
Greater focus on 
researching skills, use 
of sources, textual 
borrowing, and 
paraphrasing
 Table 4.1 (Continued)
www.ebook3000.com

English for Academic Purposes • 49
of academic prose as less structurally elaborated and explicit in meaning than academic speech 
(Biber & Gray, 2010). Cortes (2013) also observes that some multi-word constructions function 
as triggers of rhetorical moves/steps. These studies recommend that teaching focuses on how to 
write clear prose and provides instruction on content and function words, as well as on the gram-
matical structures and semantic and pragmatic meanings of multi-word constructions. Extensive 
practice in decoding texts with extensive phrasal modification and raising students’ awareness of 
structural forms, discourse function, and correlation of multi-word constructions with particular 
rhetorical moves and steps are also suggested for pedagogical practice. Cortes (2013) also recom-
mends that, as part of their formal instructed learning process, the students compile their own 
discipline-specific corpus so that they notice the use/lack of use of bundles to convey particular 
communicative functions within and across rhetorical moves and steps before they engage in the 
text-composing process. 
 A second set of the studies addresses aspects related to argument construction, authorial cred-
ibility, and the expression of stance and engagement in expert academic writing, the learning tar-
get of advanced EAP writing courses. Hyland (2010) uses a large-scale corpus to analyze variation 
across genres (research articles [RAs] and popularizations) and disciplines (science and engineer-
ing). Small-scale corpora are used by Lim (2010) to observe variation across the disciplines of applied 
linguistics and education and by Molino (2010), who analyzes the different uses of personal and 
impersonal pronouns in academic English and Italian RAs in the field of linguistics. The study by 
Wingate (2012), which illustrates practitioner research, combines a range of empirical methods to 
investigate students’ text-construction processes—an academic writing questionnaire, students’ dia-
ries when writing an essay, the Student Handbook, and the tutor’s comments on the students’ essay 
writing. Wingate (2012) reports that lack of criticality when handling sources, failure to use sources 
for supporting claims, and difficulties with authorial positioning are the main first-year undergradu-
ates’ writing challenges. Pedagogical intervention includes the provision of rich instruction on argu-
mentation and interpersonal metadiscourse strategies, as well as greater focus on linguistic strategies 
of authorial visibility in relation to speech acts. A pedagogy that uses student texts as exemplars and 
tasks involving students’ noticing of interpersonal markers usage across genres and rhetorical sec-
tions is also proposed. 
 Rhetorical organization at the macro-, meso-, and micro-levels and compliance with disciplin-
ary text-organization conventions are aspects of particular concern in the following formal research 
studies. Lin and Evans (2012) investigate the rhetorical macrostructure of a large corpus of empirical 
Author(s)/year
Aspect(s) 
investigated
Research method(s) Main findings
Instructional 
intervention
Pérez-Llantada, 
Plo and 
Ferguson 
(2011)
Language 
problems 
confronted 
by Spanish 
academics when 
disseminating 
research in 
English
Semi-structured 
interviews with 
senior Spanish 
academics
Problems in vocabulary 
range, sentence-level syntax, 
control of modality, and the 
rhetoric of introductions
Greater instructional 
focus on vocabulary 
range, sentence-level 
syntax, and rhetorical 
conventions
Use of translation as 
an L2 writing strategy
Charles (2012)
Vocabulary and 
collocations
50 advanced-level 
students (mostly 
graduates) from 
multidisciplinary 
classes
Initial and final 
questionnaires
Success in constructing a 
corpus of 10–15 research 
articles
Students’ own corpus 
building improves 
discipline-specific writing
Integrating corpus-
building task to 
supplement corpus- 
and task-based 
instruction
 

50 • Carmen Pérez-Llantada and John M. Swales
RAs drawing on a close (‘manual’) macro-level analysis. Meso-level identification of moves/steps 
in RA introductions is conducted across language—English L1-Spanish L1-English L2 in Sheldon’s 
(2011) study of applied linguistics RAs, and English L1-Chinese L1 in the field of educational psy-
chology in Loi (2010). The comparison of language variables prompts empirically grounded discus-
sion of culture-specific writing styles. Small-scale corpora assist the analysis of moves/steps of RA 
introductions in the fields of agricultural sciences (del Saz Rubio, 2010) and management (Lim, 
2012). Overall, it is claimed that expert academic writing conforms to the ‘default’ Introduction-
Methods-Results-Discussions macro-structure and the established moves/steps for writing intro-
ductions, with only minor variations observed across disciplines and languages. Lim (2012) and del 
Saz Rubio (2011) also analyze how micro-level rhetorical features (metadiscourse markers) signal 
moves in RA introductions and perform pragmatically (persuading readers and conveying authorial 
proximity or distance towards propositional meanings). Instruction offering students opportunities 
to reflect on the communicative goals of the different rhetorical sections of the RA macrostructure in 
a given discipline and across disciplines is recommended. Swales’s Create-A-Research-Space (CARS) 
model is also deemed pedagogically germane to teach how to write RA introductions. 
 Patchwriting and inappropriate citation use in text composing are also areas of pedagogical con-
cern. The specific aspects investigated are the use of sources in L1/L2 writing (Wette, 2010), types and 
functions of citations in expert/novice writing (Mansourizadeh & Ahmad, 2011), and students’ views 
and practices in borrowing source texts (Hirvela & Du, 2013; Pecorari & Shaw, 2012; Weigle & Parker, 
2012). Wette (2010) supplements her data from a learner corpus of out-of-class written assignments 
with information from students’ reflective comments on writing tasks. Weigle and Parker (2012) code 
a corpus of students’ essays to identify source-text borrowing. Mansourizadeh and Ahmad (2011) use 
a small-scale corpus to discuss differences between expert and student writing. The remaining stud-
ies draw on qualitative methods such as case studies (Li & Casanave, 2012), think-aloud protocols, 
and semi-structured and text-based interviews (Hirvela & Du, 2013; Pecorari & Shaw, 2012). Lack of 
knowledge of rules of source use and antiplagiarism software, as well as difficulties in source attribu-
tion, summarizing source content accurately, and projecting one’s own voice when borrowing source 
texts are reported. Pecorari and Shaw’s (2012) discussion of teachers’ diverse judgements of inappro-
priate source text borrowing and, from a different standpoint, Hirvela and Du’s (2013) observation 
that source text material is perceived differently across academic writing cultures support the view 
that the activity of writing is embedded in culture. Rich instruction on strategies for handling sources, 
forms and functions of citations, and extensive practice in paraphrasing, summarizing sources, and 
writer’s positioning towards sources are recommended. Classroom reflection and discussion on stu-
dents’ and instructors’ differing judgments of source texts are also suggested. 
 A final set of studies investigates senior and novice writers’ perceptions of their own L2 learning 
processes. The studies document L2 language and literacy problems through the examination of both 
texts and text-composing processes. Using a corpus of medical RAs, Mungra and Webber (2010) dis-
cuss the language problems that Italian researchers face in writing for publication. Stapleton (2012) 
reports on a case study of an L2 English master’s student and conducts close examination of her 
text-composing processes, triangulating data from the student’s logs, interviews, and an open-ended 
retrospective questionnaire. Lin and Morrison’s (2010) longitudinal study draws on semi-structured 
interviews and a large-scale questionnaire survey to identify first-year students’ language challenges 
in English-medium higher education. Semi-structured interviews with Spanish scholars are used in 
Pérez-Llantada et al. (2011) to discern problematic language areas in advanced L2 writing. Charles 
(2012) administers initial and final questionnaires to advanced-level students to assess aspects of 
vocabulary and learning of collocations. Interestingly, the language problems faced by advanced and 
novice writers are surprisingly similar—lexical and grammatical errors, limited vocabulary range, L1 
transfer of sentence-level syntax, modality, and use of rhetorical and style conventions. The studies 
www.ebook3000.com

English for Academic Purposes • 51
recommend instructional focus on aspects not covered in secondary education (e.g. researching and 
essay-writing skills, textual borrowing and paraphrasing, citation and style conventions) and inte-
grating a corpus-building task to improve discipline-specific writing. Rich input and practice on 
academic vocabulary use, sentence-level syntax, modality, and textual rhetoric are also suggested. 
For early-career researchers, a pedagogy raising awareness of the features which may determine the 
acceptance or rejection of manuscripts in English-medium journals is deemed advisable. 
 Albeit the sample of studies surveyed is limited, it nonetheless provides an overview of main-
stream interests of EAP research and poses further questions for future investigations. These are: 
(i) whether formal instruction involving exposure to real language usage and/or based on tasks engag-
ing students in analysis, reflection, discussion, and extensive practice holds facilitative effects in L2 
learning; (ii) whether the constructs of awareness, noticing, and attention in formal instruction 
enhance the learning process; and (iii) to what extent knowledge of an academic L1 writing culture 
influences writers’ views of L2 text-composing and actual text-composing processes. In what follows, 
we delve a bit further into these issues and suggest future research directions. 
 Corpora and Teaching EAP 
 There has been a long tradition in EAP to try and use authentic instances of language and authen-
tic text extracts in classroom teaching and in textbook materials—a tradition that has been greatly 
strengthened by the increasing availability of specialized corpora and of software programs such as 
concordances. This history of corpora and EAP is well described in Tribble (2015). Römer (2011) 
has proposed that work within the purview of this section can be usefully divided into indirect and 
direct applications, with the former being employed by researchers, materials writers, and lexicog-
raphers. The latter, in contrast, provides hands-on corpus experiences for language learners and 
language instructors, so that both groups experience direct interactions with corpora findings. These 
individual and hypotheses-testing procedures are often described as data-driven learning (DDL), 
a concept originally described and activated by Tim Johns 25 years ago when operating with very 
primitive equipment (T. Johns, 1991). 
 The earlier classroom approaches used paper products, such as in Thurston and Candlin (1997); 
later, Lee and Swales (2006) were able to use a specially equipped computer classroom, while today 
corpus-based activities can be carried out simply using the students’ laptops. In addition, conver-
sion of electronic texts, such as research articles from a particular discipline, into corpus files has 
become relatively straightforward. These developments have led to innovative courses that require 
participants from different disciplinary areas to construct their own corpora from papers from their 
own fields, not excluding some of their own (Charles, 2015). These do-it-yourself (DIY) corpora are 
particularly useful for international doctoral students who are planning an academic career; one of 
the English as an Additional Language (EAL) participants in Lee and Swales’ study observed that with 
her new corpus she felt much more confident about correcting the written English of her American 
future students. And, as is well known, the use of appropriate corpora can lessen the need to depend 
on potentially unreliable native-speaker informants. Maggie Charles of the Oxford University Lan-
guage Centre, a leading proponent of DIY corpora, has recently described her multidisciplinary EAP 
classes where she adopts a ‘same task, different corpus’ approach (Charles, 2015). For instance, stu-
dents searched for occurrences of  I ,  we ,  my , and  our  in their own small disciplinary corpora and could 
then discuss the different findings from the various disciplines represented and their possible 
causes, giving rise to increased awareness of the linguistic and rhetorical features of their texts. In 
another case, students used the Plot feature in  Antconc  (Anthony, 2011) to explore the distribu-
tion across research article sections of the modals  may ,  could , and  might , followed by similar oral 
discussion. 

52 • Carmen Pérez-Llantada and John M. Swales
 One advantage for the EAP instructor is that, with the availability of corpora like COCA Academic 
or a web-crawler like Google Scholar, finding suitable examples is made much easier and much 
quicker. For example, take the case of the  to  + verb- ing  structure, a feature of English syntax that learn-
ers often acquire very late. Instructors can easily come up with this usage: “I am looking forward  to 
meeting  you next week.” But others? Searches using the string  to (x)ing  (where (x) is a wild card stand-
ing for any string) will produce some unwanted examples such as “to sing” or “to bring,” but also a 
host of instances of the targeted structure. It turns out that it follows certain complex prepositions 
(“In addition to working . . .”), certain adjectives (“She is close to completing . . .”), certain nouns 
(“There is no alternative to repeating . . .”), as well as certain other verbs (“she is used to running . . .”) 
(Swales & Feak, 2000). Another interesting feature of language that corpus investigations reveal is 
that of semantic prosody, i.e. that certain words and phrases tend to be associated with positive or 
negative outcomes. One much-illustrated case is that of the verb  cause , which is strongly associated 
with negative complements. Another is the phrase  not without : A Google Scholar search shows that 
in academic prose this is typically followed by such nouns as  complications  (particularly common in 
medical research),  problems ,  shortcomings ,  difficulties , and so on. 
 Some of the studies reviewed earlier in this chapter emphasized the benefits of corpus-informed 
pedagogical materials to raise students’ awareness of the rhetorical organization of RA sections (del 
Saz Rubio, 2011; Lim, 2010; Lin & Evans, 2012) and the forms and functions of highly frequent 
multi-word constructions across rhetorical moves/steps (Cortes, 2013; Liu, 2012). Charles (2012) 
also recommended that learning disciplinary writing conventions is enhanced by engaging students 
in corpus-building tasks. There is to date, however, relatively little evidence of the benefits of direct 
use of technology and DDL for engaging students, first, in noticing recurring phraseological fea-
tures, their surrounding co-text and their semantic and pragmatic meanings at the micro-, meso-, 
and macro-rhetorical level and, second, in using them in writing tasks. These are aspects to consider 
in order to gain deeper insights into L2 learning. Yoon’s (2011) overview of research assessing the 
benefits of corpora (concordancing) use in L2 writing pedagogy is a useful starting point. Yoon 
further notes that corpora are suitable reference tools that increase learner autonomy in the class-
room context (p. 130). Whether handling discipline-specific corpora outside of the classroom has 
the potential to develop students’ independent learning and lifelong learning skills—e.g. researching 
skills, preparation of essays manuscripts, revision, and self-assessment of one’s own writing—also 
surfaces as a pending investigative area for joint EAP and second language acquisition (SLA)/second 
language learning (SLL) research. 
 EAP and Student Diversity 
 Today’s increasing transnational mobility and knowledge exchange on a global scale in academia and 
higher education are shaping new scenarios for EAP teaching. These socio-interactional dynamics 
provide a rationale for extending EAP scholarly dialogue along the following lines. 
 On the one hand, we see how recent conceptualizations of EAP students as ‘intercultural learners’ 
and EAP instructors as ‘intercultural brokers’ (Bocanegra-Valle, 2015) in many ways problematize 
the view of the so-far-uncontested English native-speaker model as the target model in L2 learn-
ing. Instead, the ‘competent intercultural communicator model’—a model that fits into the broad 
theoretical framework of intercultural communication (Scollon, Scollon, & Jones, 2012)—is viewed 
as a more suitable target model for L2 assessment. Future areas for EAP formal and practitioner 
research include investigation of language competence and intercultural competence and the links 
between them, and validation of the construct of intercultural competence for EAP assessment of the 
language production skills. Also, aspects related to the concept of ‘intercultural awareness’, defined 
as “knowledge, awareness and understanding of the relation (similarities and distinctive differences) 
www.ebook3000.com

English for Academic Purposes • 53
between the ‘world of origin’ and the ‘world of the target community’” (Council of Europe, 2001, 
p. 103) need further theorization. It is important to gain deeper insights into the ways students are 
acculturated into the L2 academic literacies so as to better ascertain how the processes of acquisition 
and appropriation of the cultural aspects of the second language actually take place. 
 On the other hand, EAP research should continue the interdisciplinary dialogue with the field 
of intercultural rhetoric—in the tradition initiated by Kaplan (1966) and later developed by Con-
nor (1996)—to deepen our understanding of culture-specific writing styles and the implications 
that ensue for L2 learning. The literature reviewed earlier included empirical accounts of linguistic 
universals and cultural particulars across academic languages such as L1 English, L1 Spanish, and 
L1 Chinese (Loi, 2010; Sheldon, 2011). One of the questions posed was whether the academic L1 
writing culture influences a writer’s views of L2 text-composing strategies. Hirvela and Du’s (2013) 
study demonstrated that students’ perceptions of the rhetorical functions of source text material 
vary across students’ cultural groups—a tacit assumption that distinct academic literacy traditions 
exist. The diversity of multicultural and multilingual literacy traditions thus invites further analysis 
of acquisition and learning processes of first and subsequent academic languages, as well as discus-
sion of the students’ views and perceptions of literacy learning, their individual learning strategies 
and styles, and the challenges that L2 writing poses to them. The perspectives of genre and composi-
tion studies can shed light into the use of interdiscursivity as a text-composing strategy in which L1 
genre knowledge acts as a scaffold for L2 genre writing (Salö & Hanell, 2014). Research on aspects 
of interlanguage and interculture development may help further explain in what L2 developmental 
stages L1 academic literacy is most influential or, on a related manner, understand the reasons why 
L1 lexico-grammar and pragmatic features are transferred to L2 academic texts. Pérez-Llantada et al. 
(2011) reported that advanced academic writers used translation as an L2 writing strategy, a strategy 
which might account for L1 transfer. 
 It is also of interest to the EAP practitioner, both in his/her roles of instructor and advisor, to keep 
a detailed account of the students’ L2 literacy journeys in order to better understand how they write. 
Swales (1998) and Paltridge (2008) propose ‘textography’ as an approach to examine the contextu-
alization and the situatedness of L2 writing and investigate the links between language and culture. 
Textographies involve the use of multiple methods, from textual analysis of drafts and final texts to 
qualitative data-gathering procedures such as those used in the literature reviewed earlier—inter-
views, questionnaires, written assignments, and institutional documents. These methods assist the 
interpretation of “the worlds in which the texts are written, why the texts are written as they are, what 
guides the writing, and the values that underlie the texts that have been written” (Paltridge, 2008, 
p. 10). By this means, the practitioner can be in a position to assess the strengths, weaknesses, oppor-
tunities, and threats that L2 academic literacy poses to learners from linguacultural backgrounds 
other than English and make research-informed pedagogical decisions accordingly. 
 References 
 Anthony, L. (2011).  Antconc 3.2.4 . Tokyo: Waseda University. 
 Bazerman, C., Little, J., Chavkin, T., Fourquette, D., & Garufis, J. (2006).  Reference guide to writing across the curriculum: Refer-
ence guides to rhetoric and composition . West Lafayette, IN: Parlor Press and The WAC Clearinghouse. Available at wac.
colostate.edu/books/bazerman_wac/ (accessed 29 August 2015). 
 Bennett, K. (ed.) (2014).  The semiperiphery of academic writing: Discourse, communities and practices . Basingstoke, UK: Pal-
grave MacMillan. 
 Biber, D. & Gray, B. (2010). Challenging stereotypes about academic writing: Complexity, elaboration, explicitness?  Journal of 
English for Academic Purposes, 9 (1), 2–20. 
 Bocanegra-Valle, A. (2015). Intercultural learners, intercultural brokers and ESP classrooms: The case of a shipping business 
course.  Procedia—Social and Behavioral Sciences, 173 , 106–112. 
 Chapelle, C. (2013).  Encyclopedia of applied linguistics . Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

54 • Carmen Pérez-Llantada and John M. Swales
 Charles, M. (2012). ‘Proper vocabulary and juicy collocations’: EAP students evaluate do-it-yourself corpus-building.  English 
for Specific Purposes, 31 (2), 93–102. 
 Charles, M. (2015). Same task, different corpus: The role of personal corpora in EAP classes. In A. Leńko-Szymańka & A. Boul-
ton (Eds.),  Multiple affordances of language corpora for data-driven learning  (pp. 131–154). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Connor, U. (1996).  Contrastive rhetoric: Cross-cultural aspects of second-language writing . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Cortes, V. (2013). ‘The purpose of this study is to’: Connecting lexical bundles and moves in research article introductions. 
 Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 12 (1), 33–43. 
 Council of Europe. (2001).  The Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teaching and Assessment . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 del Saz Rubio, M. (2011). A pragmatic approach to the macro-structure and metadiscoursal features of research article intro-
ductions in the field of agricultural sciences.  English for Specific Purposes, 30 (4), 258–271. 
 Dudley-Evans, T. & St. John, M.-J. (1998).  Developments in English for Specific Purposes: A Multidisciplinary Approach . Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Feak, C. B. (2010). Putting strategy into ESP materials development. In C. Pérez-Llantada & M. Watson (Eds.),  Specialized 
languages in the global village: A multi-perspective approach (pp. 239–260). Newcastle: Cambridge Scholar Publishing. 
 Feak, C. B. & Swales, J. M. (2015).  Rethinking our EAP teaching: Some emerging challenges . Plenary talk at the Consortium on 
Graduate Communication Colloquium. Toronto, March 2015. 
 Hirvela, A. & Du, Q. (2013). ‘Why am I paraphrasing?’: Undergraduate ESL writers’ engagement with source-based academic 
writing and reading.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 12 (2), 87–98. 
 Hyland, K. (2010). Constructing proximity: Relating to readers in popular and professional science.  Journal of English for 
Academic Purposes, 9 (2), 116–127. 
 Hyland, K. & Shaw, P. (2016).  Routledge Handbook for English for Academic Purposes . London: Routledge. 
 Johns, A. M. (1997).  Text, role and context: Developing academic literacies . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Johns, T. (1991). ‘Should you be persuaded’: Two samples of data-driven learning.  English Language Research Journal, 4 , 1–16. 
 Kaplan, R. B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education.  Language Learning, 16 , 1–20. 
 Lee, D. & Swales, J. M. (2006). A corpus-based EAP course for NNS doctoral students: Moving from available specialized 
corpora to self-compiled corpora.  English for Specific Purposes, 25 , 56–75. 
 Li, Y. & Casanave, C. P. (2012). Two first-year students’ strategies for writing from sources: Patchwriting or plagiarism?  Journal 
of Second Language Writing, 21 (2), 165–180. 
 Lillis, T. & Scott, M. (2007). Defining academic literacies research: Issues of epistemology, ideology and strategy.  Journal of 
Applied Linguistics, 4 (1), 5–32. 
 Lim, J. M.-H. (2010). Commenting on research results in applied linguistics and education: A comparative genre-based inves-
tigation.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9 (4), 280–294. 
 Lim, J. M.-H. (2012). How do writers establish research niches? A genre-based investigation into management researchers’ 
rhetorical steps and linguistic mechanisms.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 11 (3), 229–245. 
 Lin, L. & Evans, S. (2012). Structural patterns in empirical research articles: A cross-disciplinary study.  English for Specific 
Purposes, 31 (3), 150–160. 
 Lin, L. H.-F. & Morrison, B. (2010). The impact of the medium of instruction in Hong Kong secondary schools on tertiary 
students’ vocabulary.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9 (4), 255–266. 
 Liu, D. (2012). The most frequently-used multi-word constructions in academic written English: A multi-corpus study.  Eng-
lish for Specific Purposes, 31 (1), 25–35. 
 Loi, C. K. (2010). Research article introductions in Chinese and English: A comparative genre-based study.  Journal of English 
for Academic Purposes, 9 (4), 267–279. 
 Mansourizadeh, K. & Ahmad, U. K. (2011). Citation practices among non-native expert and novice scientific writers.  Journal 
of English for Academic Purposes, 10 (3), 152–161. 
 Molino, A. (2010). Personal and impersonal authorial references: A contrastive study of English and Italian linguistics research 
articles.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9 (2), 86–101. 
 Mungra, P. & Webber, P. (2010). Peer review process in medical research publications: Language and content comments. 
 English for Specific Purposes, 29 (1), 43–53. 
 Paltridge, B. (2008). Textographies and the researching and teaching of writing.  Ibérica: Journal of the European Association of 
Languages for Specific Purposes, 15 , 9–24. 
 Paltridge, B., Harbon, L., Hirsch, D., Shen, H., Stevenson, M., Phakiti, A., & Woodrow, L. (2009).  Teaching academic writing: 
An introduction for teachers of second language writers . Ann Arbor: The University Press. 
 Paltridge, B. & Starfield, S. (2013).  The Handbook for English for Specific Purposes . Malden, MA: John Wiley & Sons. 
 Pecorari, D. & Shaw, P. (2012). Types of student intertextuality and faculty attitudes.  Journal of Second Language Writing, 
21 (2), 149–164. 
www.ebook3000.com

English for Academic Purposes • 55
 Pérez-Llantada, C., Plo, R., & Ferguson, G. R. (2011). ‘You don’t say what you know, only what you can’: The perceptions and 
practices of senior Spanish academics regarding research dissemination in English.  English for Specific Purposes, 30 (1), 
18–30. 
 Römer, U. (2011). Corpus research applications in second language teaching.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 31 , 205–225. 
 Salö, L. & Hanell, L. (2014). Performance of unprecedented genres. Interdiscursivity in the writing practices of a Swedish 
researcher.  Language and Communication ,  37 (2), 12–28. 
 Schmidt, R. (1993). Awareness and second language acquisition.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 13 , 206–226. 
 Scollon, R., Scollon S. W., & Jones, R. H. (2012).  Intercultural communication: A discourse approach . Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell. 
 Sheldon, E. (2011). Rhetorical differences in RA introductions written by English L1 and L2 and Castilian Spanish L1 writers. 
 Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 10 (4), 238–251. 
 Soler, V. (2011). Comparative and contrastive observations on scientific titles written in English and Spanish.  English for 
Specific Purposes, 30 (2), 124–137. 
 Stapleton, P. (2012). Gauging the effectiveness of anti-plagiarism software: An empirical study of second language graduate 
writers.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 11 (2), 125–133. 
 Swales, J. M. (1990).  Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Swales, J. M. (1998).  Other floors, other voices: A textography of a small university building . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Swales, J. M. (2004).  Research genres. Explorations and applications . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Swales, J. M. & Feak, C. B. (2000).  English in today’s research world . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Swales, J. M. & Feak, C. B. (2009).  Abstracts and the writing of abstracts . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Thurston, J. & Candlin, C. N. (1997).  Exploring academic English: A workbook for student essay writing . Sydney: CELTR. 
 Tomlinson, B. (2010). Principles of effective materials development. In N. Harwood (Ed.),  English language teaching materials: 
Theory and practice (pp. 81–108). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Tribble, C. (2015). Teaching and language corpora: Perspectives from a personal journey. In A. Leńko-Szymańka & A. Boulton 
(Eds.),  Multiple affordances of language corpora for data-driven learning (pp. 37–62). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Weigle, S. C. & Parker, K. (2012). Source text borrowing in an integrated reading/writing assessment.  Journal of Second Lan-
guage Writing, 21 (2), 118–133. 
 Wette, R. (2010). Evaluating student learning in a university-level EAP unit on writing using sources.  Journal of Second Lan-
guage Writing, 19 (3), 158–177. 
 Wingate, U. (2012). ‘Argument!’ Helping students understand what essay writing is about.  Journal of English for Academic 
Purposes, 11 (2), 145–154. 
 Yoon, C. (2011). Concordancing in L2 writing class: An overview of research and issues.  Journal of English for Academic Pur-
poses, 10 (3), 130–139. 

56
 5 
 English for Specific Purposes 
 Brian Paltridge and Sue Starfield 
 Introduction 
 A number of recent publications have looked at current and future directions in English for spe-
cific purposes (ESP) research. This includes Starfield and Paltridge’s (2014) paper in the  Revue 
Française de Linguistique Appliqué, Starfield’s (2016) chapter in the  Routledge Handbook of English 
Language Teaching , and book chapters in Belcher’s (2009)  English for Specific Purposes in Theory 
and Practice , Belcher, Johns and Paltridge’s (2011)  New Directions in English for Specific Purposes 
Research , and Paltridge and Starfield’s (2013)  Handbook of English for Specific Purposes.  Trends that 
have been identified in these publications include a continued focus on genre, the use of corpora 
to carry out studies of ESP language use, the use and place of English as a lingua franca in ESP 
settings, the development of academic literacies, ESP and identity, and ethnographic approaches 
to researching specific purpose language use. Other topics that have been discussed include dis-
ciplinary language and ESP, context and ESP, ESP classroom-based research, needs analysis and 
ESP, and critical discourse analysis and ESP (see Belcher, Johns and Paltridge 2011 for chapters on 
these topics). 
 Gollin-Kies’ (2014) review of research trends in the journals  English for Specific Purposes  and the 
 Journal of English for Academic Purposes  is an important contribution to this discussion, as it focuses 
on the research methods most typically used in the area as well as the research paradigms that have 
been underrepresented. To explore these issues, Gollin-Kies examined research articles that had been 
published in the two journals over a period of 10 years, from 2003 to 2012. She found that a pre-
dominance of qualitative research had been published with a strong focus on the analysis of written 
discourse, often from a corpus perspective. This, she found, was in contrast with earlier studies in 
the area of TESOL (Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages) and applied linguistics (e.g. 
Lazarton 2000), which had found a preference for quantitative studies. Very little research in the 
two journals (apart from corpus studies), in fact, could be described as solely quantitative, although 
there was a growing interest in quantitative/qualitative and mixed methods studies (see also Hashemi 
2012; Hashemi and Babaii 2013). This is similar to other journals (although not all—see Benson, 
Chik, Gao, Huang and Wang 2009) in the area of TESOL where in the journal  TESOL Quarterly , for 
example, a similar trend can be seen in recent years (Gao, Li and Lu 2001; Paltridge and Mahboob 
2014; Mahboob and Paltridge 2015). 
www.ebook3000.com

English for Specific Purposes • 57
 Genre and ESP 
 Research into the language and discourse of specific purpose genres has been important in the field 
since the early days of ESP research. The article by Tarone and her colleagues (Tarone, Dwyer, Gillette 
and Ickes 1981) that appeared in the first volume of  English for Specific Purposes  is an example of just 
this. In this article, Tarone and her colleagues use the word  genre  for the first time in ESP published 
research, at the very same time that Swales (1981) published his seminal research into the discourse 
structure of research article introductions in the  Aston ESP Research Reports . Genre has since become 
a significant notion in ESP research, both with the publication of Swales’ (1990) book  Genre Analysis 
and with the very many genre-oriented publications that have followed on from this. 
 Paltridge (2013a) reviews the development of genre in the field of ESP, discussing its early origins, 
its relation with discourse analysis, and what came to be known as the CARS (Create a Research 
Space) model in ESP genre studies. He also discusses the relation between genre and language in ESP 
research, multimodality and ESP genre studies, genre as social action (Miller 1984) in ESP research, 
the teaching and learning of specific purpose genres, and future directions for ESP genre studies. 
Paltridge (2014) traces the history of genre and genre-based teaching in the area of second language 
writing in English in university settings through key work that has been influential in its develop-
ment from Swales’ (1981) paper on research article introductions, Miller’s (1984) paper ‘Genre as 
social action’, and the work of the ‘Sydney school’ starting with Martin’s (1984) paper ‘Genre register 
and language’ through to the present day. 
 ESP genre studies, in more recent years, have aimed to go beyond descriptions of texts, however, 
to explore the social action of genres, their socially situated nature, and the role the genre is playing 
in the particular setting. Genre studies have also increasingly looked at the multimodal nature of 
texts, especially with the increase in digital genres which students and practitioners need to be able 
to engage in, in contemporary academic and workplace settings (see Prior 2013). 
 Corpus Studies and ESP 
 A further development in ESP research is the use of computers to assist in research into specific 
purpose language use (see Nesi 2013 for a review of corpus-based studies in the area of ESP). These 
corpus-based studies have helped us to better understand the nature of specific purpose language 
use by virtue of the sheer sweep and scale with which this kind of research can now be carried out. A 
number of corpora that have been developed in recent years have greatly facilitated this research, some 
of which are open access. These include the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (http://
quod.lib.umich.edu/m/micase/), the British Academic Spoken English corpus (www2.warwick.ac.uk/
fac/soc/al/research/collect/base/), and the British Academic Written English corpus (www2.warwick.
ac.uk/fac/soc/al/research/collect/bawe). The Michigan corpus contains data from a wide range of spo-
ken academic genres as well as information on speaker attributes and characteristics of the speech 
events that are contained in the data. The British Academic Spoken English corpus includes record-
ings of conference presentations, lectures and seminars, interviews with academic staff, as well as 
tagged transcripts of some of the data. The British Academic Written English corpus includes contex-
tual information on the data, such as the gender and year of study of the student who wrote the text, 
details of the course the assignment was set for, and the grade that was awarded to the text. This kind 
of information is extremely useful to ESP researchers as it enables them to go beyond word counts 
and frequencies to providing a more contextualised understanding of the findings of their research. 
 Nesi and Gardner (2012) draw on the British Academic Written English corpus for their study 
of written genres across more than 30 academic disciplines, from the undergraduate through to the 

58 • Brian Paltridge and Sue Starfield
postgraduate level. Their study revealed 13 different genre families in the writing samples they looked 
at and particular language frequencies across the texts. They came to their conclusions on the basis 
of their corpus analysis together with interviews with academic staff who were involved in the teach-
ing and assessment of the students’ assignments. They also drew on students’ perceptions of the type 
of assignment they were submitting, gained through interviews with students. This kind of analysis 
parallels Lillis’s (2008) proposal for ‘talk around text’ as a strategy for closing the gap between text 
and context in the examination of academic writing in a way that contextualises the research as well 
as adds value to that research (see Paltridge, Starfield and Tardy 2016 for an extended discussion of 
Lillis’s proposal in relation to academic writing research). 
 Ethnographically Oriented Research 
 Ethnographically oriented research (Ramanathan and Atkinson 1999; Hyland 2006) is becoming 
increasingly common in ESP studies as an approach alone, as well as in combination with other 
research approaches in order to gain a better and more contextualised understanding of ESP lan-
guage use. This research complements textually oriented ESP research in that it provides a contextual 
orientation to this research that moves beyond the text (Freedman 1999) in order to explore the 
socially situated nature of the use of language in specific purpose settings. Handford and Matous 
(2011), for example, describe a corpus-based study of on-site interactions in the international con-
struction industry where they used corpus techniques to analyse audio and video data and combined 
this with interviews, field notes, and expert informant insights to examine how the language used 
by Japanese- and Cantonese-speaking workers on a construction site in Hong Kong compared with 
everyday English and Business English. They did this by shadowing two Japanese engineers and 
recording their interactions and then interviewing them and a number of other people on the con-
struction site. In their later paper which examines on-site problem-solving activities, Handford and 
Matous (2015) analyse transcripts of audio- and video-recorded spoken interactions and combine 
this with the interviews and field notes that were taken on the research site. The interviews were with 
four Japanese employees, two Hong Kong foremen, a local Hong Kong engineer, and a British project 
manager who was employed by the Japanese company, all of whom used English as the common 
language. Both of their publications include screenshots from the video recordings, which provide 
further contextualisation to their study. 
 Chun’s (2015) classroom ethnography of an English for academic purposes program, which had 
the goal of preparing students for university studies, is a further example of how ethnographically 
oriented research can help us understand what is going on in ESP classrooms and how we might 
wish to change them. Chun observed an EAP class over a period of nine months, as well as examined 
the textbook and other curriculum materials used by the teacher. He also took field notes of his 
classroom observations and the meetings he had with the instructor, carried out semi-structured 
interviews with the teacher and her students, collected students’ written assignments and photos the 
students had taken of their literacy practices outside of the classroom, as well as took his own photos 
of the classroom interiors. Chun considers the findings of his study in relation to theoretical discus-
sions of critical literacy and how these are taken up in actual practice, including what counts as ‘criti-
cal’ (and ‘uncritical’) in EAP classrooms and why this matters. He then proposes what an alternative 
EAP curriculum might look like based on the findings of his study. 
 Paltridge and Starfield (2016) provide an overview of EAP research that has taken an ethnographic 
perspective. They discuss the basic characteristics of ethnographically oriented research and research 
techniques that are typically drawn on in these kinds of studies. They then review examples of eth-
nographically oriented research that have been conducted in the area of EAP with a particular focus 
on the areas of academic writing, speaking, reading, and listening, and the teaching and learning of 
www.ebook3000.com

English for Specific Purposes • 59
English for academic purposes. Their final chapter makes suggestions for future ethnographically 
oriented research in the area of EAP. 
 Paltridge, Starfield and Tardy’s (2016) book examines ethnographic research in academic writing, 
more specifically. Their book focuses on a range of contexts including undergraduate education, 
postgraduate education, and scholarly publication as well as the teaching and learning of academic 
writing. At the more particular level, they also have chapters on context and academic writing and an 
overview of methodological issues to consider in carrying out ethnographically oriented academic 
writing research. This work parallels what Berkenkotter (2009, p. 18) calls a context-based, rhetori-
cally oriented, ‘wide-angle’ approach to genre analysis that moves beyond solely text-based analysis 
to explore factors that influence the creation and reception of genres in particular social, cultural, 
and political settings. Indeed, as Devitt (2009) argues, the forms of genres are only meaningful within 
their social, cultural (and individual) contexts. That is, forms in genres ‘take their meaning from who 
uses them, in what ways, with what motives and expectations’ (p. 35). This view of writing, further, 
aims to understand texts not just from an outsider perspective but, equally and importantly, from 
insiders’ perspectives as well (Donahue and Lillis 2014) in terms of ‘what writers do, why and in 
which contexts’ (Lillis 2013, p. 159) (see Dressen Hammouda 2013 for a discussion of ethnography 
in ESP research more broadly). 
 ESP and English as a Lingua Franca 
 The research that is currently being published in  English for Specific Purposes  is especially international 
in character. In volumes 36–38 of that journal, for example, authors who published in the journal are 
from Canada, China, France, Hong Kong, Iran, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Poland, Roma-
nia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan, Thailand, the UK, and the US, with native-speaker authors 
in the minority. These three volumes of the journal, along with many that have preceded it, show 
that there is no ‘inner circle’ (Kachru 2005) of ESP research and that ESP research is clearly not the 
property of the English-speaking world. Certainly, in ESP, English is the property of the users, native 
and non-native speaker alike, something that was called for many years ago by Larry Smith (1987) in 
his discussions of the use of English as an international language. So, when Johns and Dudley-Evans 
(1991) said that English for specific purposes is both international in scope as well as being specific 
in purpose, they were as much talking about its future as they were about the status of ESP at that 
particular time. This is especially the case with the increase in the use of English as the lingua franca 
of international research. Often, in these settings English is the native language of neither group of 
users, but it is the language they will most likely use to communicate with each other. This is most 
certainly the case with the journal  English for Specific Purposes , where the majority of its current 
authors and a very large number of its readers are no longer from the English-speaking ‘centre’. 
 In her book  English as a Lingua Franca in the International University , Jenkins (2014) discusses 
English as a lingua franca in academic settings and, in particular, the politics of academic English lan-
guage policies. A further important area of the lingua franca use of English is in the area of Business 
English, where there has been a wide range of research conducted on this topic. The 2005 special issue 
of  English for Specific Purposes , edited by Catherine Nickerson, provides examples of this research (see 
Mauranen 2011, 2012; Seidlhofer 2011; Nickerson 2013 for further reviews of research in the area of 
English as the lingua franca). 
 Hincks’ (2010) study examines speaking rate and content information in English as a lingua 
franca oral presentations in academic settings. For her study, Hincks analysed the rate of speech and 
amount of content covered by 14 fluent non-native speakers of English who gave the same presen-
tation twice, once in English and once in Swedish. She found the speakers’ speech rate was slower 
when they delivered the presentations in English, and they covered less content in their English 

60 • Brian Paltridge and Sue Starfield
presentations than they had in Swedish. This research has important implications for the movement 
in countries such as Sweden (and other countries) to teach academic courses in English. This move 
to English-medium instruction has important implications for academic staff who may feel com-
fortable in their general English ability but less confident when using English in academic lectures, 
discussions and student consultations (see Westbrook and Henriksen 2011; Jensen, Denver, Mees and 
Werther 2013; Thøgersen 2013 for further discussion of this). 
 Spoken Discourse and ESP 
 There has, in recent years, been more of a focus on spoken discourse in ESP settings than there has 
been in the past (see Feak 2013 for a review of this research). The work referred to previously by 
Handford and Matous (2011, 2015) is an example of this. Lin’s (2015) examination of the use of 
modifiers in academic seminars and lectures using the BASE and MICASE corpora (see corpus stud-
ies and ESP above) and Lee and Subtirelu’s (2015) research into metadiscourse in EAP classes and 
university lectures are further examples of recent ESP research into spoken discourse, as are Rowley-
Jolivet’s (2015) and Morell’s (2015)research into conference presentations and Bosher and Stocker’s 
(2015) and Staples’ (2015) research into spoken discourse in nursing settings. 
 Morton (2009) examined in-class presentations by undergraduate Architecture students in an 
Australian university. In her study, Morton employs observations and semi-structured interviews 
with students and their instructor to understand what is important in these presentations. Morton 
concludes that it is not enough for students to explain their design to their audience and to walk their 
audience through their building or site. They also need to have something in their presentations, such 
as particular types of images and the use of a narrative style in the presentation, that creates rapport 
with the audience and that will convey the richness and complexity of their design as well as help 
the audience visualise the design. Her research shows the importance of investigating the nature of 
seemingly everyday genres, such as academic presentations in the particular settings in which they 
occur, to see what is valued in those settings and what the features of effective presentations are from 
the perspective of different disciplines. 
 Chang and Kanno (2010) carried out research into the value placed on linguistic proficiency (in 
particular, speaking) for doctoral students in different academic disciplines in the US. They carried 
out interviews, shadowing observations, collected information from departmental websites and stu-
dent handbooks, and obtained samples of students’ writing. Their conclusion is that the importance 
of language competence varies across disciplinary communities, community practices, and different 
community members. The students’ advisors, further, did not think that the students suffered major 
disadvantages due to their non-native speaker status, and the students saw themselves as no less 
legitimate as beginning researchers than their native-speaker peers. Research of this kind shows the 
value of going beyond common assumptions about issues that face non-native-speaker students and 
aiming for insiders’ perspectives on issues that relate to them in order to gain deeper understandings 
of these issues as well as provide a firmer base for responding to them. 
 ESP and Undergraduate Academic Literacies 
 Leki (2007) examined the literacy experiences of four undergraduate students in a US university 
based on a five-year longitudinal study. She aimed, in her study, to uncover how these students 
experienced and responded to the literacy demands of their studies, how their English language and 
writing classes helped them meet the literacy demands of their disciplines, and how they became 
initiated into the discourses of their disciplines. The data she drew on were interviews and emails 
with the students, interviews with the students’ instructors, documentation related to the students’ 
www.ebook3000.com

English for Specific Purposes • 61
course work (such as course syllabuses, class texts, writing assignments, drafts of papers, and copies 
of exams), observations of classes, recordings of writing center sessions, and journals in which the 
students commented on the work they did during the semester and their responses to it. The main 
themes that emerged from her data were the academic, social, and ideological issues that the students 
faced in relation to their writing experiences. Through her detailed discussion of each of her cases, 
we see examples of the worlds these students live in and, importantly, how these students ‘negotiate 
the complexities of the social, cultural, and academic and sociopolitical environments that surround 
them’ (Leki 2007, p. 285). 
 Curry and Hanauer’s (2014)  Language, Literacy, and Learning in STEM Education  also contain 
chapters which examine undergraduate academic literacy development, while Wingate (2015) exam-
ines academic literacy and student diversity focusing on undergraduate students, in her case in the 
UK (see Paltridge, Starfield and Tardy 2016,  Chapter 4 , for further discussion of undergraduate aca-
demic literacy development). 
 ESP and Advanced Academic Literacies 
 There has also been, in recent years, an increased attention given in ESP research to advanced aca-
demic literacies and students’ multiple literacy needs in their present and future lives. This has 
included research into writing for publication and thesis and dissertation writing in a second lan-
guage. These two areas have become especially important with the ever-increasing globalisation of 
higher education, the continued dominance of English as the language of scientific communication, 
and the growing pressure on academics for whom English is not their native language to publish 
in English-language journals. This research draws our attention to the challenges that many ‘off-
network’ writers face in doing this. These challenges, further, are not only linguistic as second lan-
guage writers attempt to balance the desire to gain international recognition through publication in 
English with choices that reflect their own value systems and ideologies that may reflect their desire 
to resist the global dominance of English (see Flowerdew 2013 for a review of research in the area of 
writing for publication; Thompson 2013 for research into thesis and dissertation writing; Paltridge, 
Starfield and Tardy 2016 for research into postgraduate writing and writing for publication). 
 Paltridge, Starfield and Ravelli (Paltridge, Starfield, Ravelli and Tuckwell 2012, Paltridge, Starfield, 
Ravelli, Nicholson and Tuckwell 2012; Starfield, Paltridge and Ravelli 2012; Ravelli, Paltridge and 
Starfield 2014) have examined doctoral writing in the visual and performing arts. Their study included 
a nationwide survey of universities (in Australia) which offered these degrees, the collection of doc-
toral texts, supervisor questionnaires, as well as interviews with students and supervisors. In addition, 
they examined university prospectuses, information given to students in relation to their candidature, 
the published research into visual arts PhD examination, in-house art school publications, and discus-
sion papers on the topic of our study. They also attended roundtable discussions on doctoral research 
in the visual and performing arts as well as students’ exhibition openings. The aim of their study was 
to gain an understanding, not only of the kinds of texts these students needed to write, but why they 
write them as they do so that they could better advise students of the choices available to them in their 
area of study, as well as the constraints they still need to take account of in their writing. 
 Lillis and Curry (2010) and Li (2006a, 2006b, 2007) are examples of studies which examine the 
experiences of multilingual scholars seeking to publish their work in English. Hanauer and Eng-
lander’s (2013)  Scientific Writing in a Second Language  and Hyland’s (2015)  Academic Publishing: 
Issues and Challenges in the Construction of Knowledge are further examples of recent research which 
focuses on academic publishing from a second language perspective. 
 In their book  Academic Writing in a Global Context , Lillis and Curry (2010) employ text analysis, 
interviews, observations, document analysis, analysis of written correspondence, and reviewers’ and 

62 • Brian Paltridge and Sue Starfield
editors’ comments to examine these experiences. Their later book (Curry and Lillis 2013) draws on 
this research to propose strategies that multilingual writers can adopt to enhance their chances of 
getting published as well as how other people can support these writers in this endeavor. Li (2006a) 
examines a Computer Science student’s research writing in Chinese and English, while Li (2006b) 
examines issues faced by a Physics student wanting to publish in English. In her (2007) paper, 
Li examined a Chemistry student’s process logs, drafts of his writing, email exchanges she had with 
the student, and interview data to examine how he went about writing for publication and the 
engagement he had with others as he did this (see Paltridge, Starfield and Tardy 2016,  Chapter 6 , for 
a broader discussion of work in this area). 
 Occluded Genres and ESP 
 There is a growing interest in what Swales (1996) has termed ‘occluded’ genres; that is, genres which 
are ‘closed’, not public, and often difficult to obtain examples of. These genres are often high stakes 
in nature and important to have an understanding of. Examples of these are PhD examiners’ reports, 
reviewers’ reports on submissions to peer-reviewed journals, and reviews of promotion and tenure-
track applications. Starfield et al. (2016) examine the evaluative language used by PhD examiners in 
the reports that they write. Using Martin and White’s (2005) appraisal framework, they found both 
positive and negative judgments of students’ work, expressions of satisfaction and dissatisfaction 
with their work, along with explicit and implicit judgment of the students in the reports. They also 
found that examiners described how they were affected by the students’ work. There was the use of 
imperatives when examiners were telling a student to do something and interrogatives where they 
are asking for further clarification, intending these ‘questions’ to be read as directives in a similar 
manner to when reviewers of journal articles ask for changes to be made to submissions to peer-
reviewed articles (see Paltridge 2015, discussed following). 
 Paltridge (2013b, 2015) examined reviewers’ reports on submissions to the peer-reviewed journal 
 English for Specific Purposes  with the aim of exploring textual issues as well as the experiential and co-
textual context of the reports. His study draws on a collection of 95 reviewers’ reports, questionnaire 
data from 41 of the reviewers, and follow-up emails to reviewers to further elaborate on answers that 
had been provided in the questionnaires. The textual component examined how reviewers asked for 
changes to be made to submissions. The study found that requests for changes were largely made as 
directions, suggestions, clarification requests, and recommendations. While a good number of these 
changes were requested directly, a large number of them were not and would be difficult, especially 
for beginning authors, to decode. The study also found that many of the reviewers had learnt to do 
reviews by reading reviews of their own submissions to peer-reviewed journals. Others had learnt to 
write reviews by just doing them; that is, by practice. The most challenging aspect for the reviewers 
was writing reviewers’ reports that were critical but still constructive. There was no consensus on the 
most straightforward aspects of writing peer reviews. 
 Hyon (2008) and Chen and Hyon (2005) provide analyses of promotion and tenure-track applica-
tion reviews in the English Department at California State University, San Bernardino, while Hyon 
(2011) looks at the same sort of data across a number of different universities in the US. Chen and 
Hyon (2005) and Hyon (2008) describe intertexual relations between the texts that assessors write 
in the retention, promotion, and tenure process and discourse conventions in the reports they write. 
In particular, they discuss the  genre chain  (Swales 2004) that exists between the various evaluative 
reports that are written in this process, showing how these reports are located within the larger sys-
tem of faculty review wherein certain texts necessarily precede the creation of others (Hyon 2008). 
Hyon (2008) discusses inventiveness in these reports and ways in which writers play with the genre 
conventions of the texts they write. She found examples of bending genre expectations by the use, 
www.ebook3000.com

English for Specific Purposes • 63
for example, of humour and irony to show solidarity with the applicant, even though these are con-
ventionally extremely serious reports. 
 Identity, Learner Needs, and ESP 
 Hyland (2012) has examined disciplinary identity in a range of academic areas, while Norton and 
Toohey (2011) focus on matters of identity from learners’ perspectives. This, and related work on 
imagined communities (Anderson 1991; Kanno and Norton 2003), are important research develop-
ments in the area of ESP. Belcher and Lukkarila (2011), for example, argue that teachers need to learn 
more about their learners’ imagined communities and ‘who they want to become’—that is, their 
imagined identities—if they really want to help them achieve their long-term, rather than just their 
short-term, language learning goals. A focus on identity in ESP teaching and learning, thus, has an 
important role to play in bringing about social change, which is, for many, a goal of language learn-
ing. In the view of Belcher and Lukkarila (2011, p. 73), we need to “learn more about how learners 
see themselves” in order to better meet their learning needs. That is, we need to put our learners, as 
they say, ‘front and centre’ in our needs analyses so that we can help them become who they want 
to become through language. Without this, they ask “How can our teaching ever really be called 
learner-centred?” and “Can we claim to be responsive to the learners’ own purposes for language 
learning if we are not aware of their sense of their own needs and goals?” 
 Gathering this kind of data on every student, as Belcher and Lukkarila point out, may not be 
practical, but there are things that teachers can do to tap into learners’ perceptions of their own 
(evolving) identities that may not require a lot of time and effort—such as language and literacy 
autobiographies, reflective journals about language use, reports on interviews with classmates about 
their learning goals, and collaborative survey projects. This learner identity data collection, they 
argue, “encourages us to rethink not only what we offer learners in terms of content . . . but also how 
we offer that content—the degree to which we support learners’ construction of a vision they have of 
themselves” (p. 90). It is not, of course, the case that the courses we teach can address the future needs 
of all our students (Brown 2016), but the feedback we give students on their work and the discussions 
we have with them in class can be better focussed if we know where our students are wanting to go, 
what they want to do, and who they want to become through English. 
 One way on which this matter can be explored is through the idea of imagined and possible 
selves (Ryan and Irie 2014); that is, who it is that our learners want or imagine they can be through 
English. Dörnyei (2009) suggests we do this by examining learners’ views of their ideal L2 self, their 
ought-to L2 self, and how their L2 learning experiences relate to this (Dörnyei 2009, 2010). He 
outlines these as: 
 • The  Ideal L2 Self ; that is, who students would like ‘to be’ in their second language 
 • The  Ought-to L2 Self ; that is, the attributes they believe they ought to possess in order to meet 
these expectations and to avoid possible negative outcomes 
 • The  L2 Learning Experience ; that is, how students’ language learning experiences relate to their 
ideal L2 self and their ought-to L2 self 
 What we find from these investigations can then be drawn on to help learners build a vision (Dörnyei 
and Kubanyiova 2014) for who they want to be through English and how they might go about 
achieving this goal. While studies of this kind have been carried out in the area of English-language 
teaching, in general (see e.g. Dörnyei, Csizer and Nemeth 2006; Ryan 2009; Taguchi, Magid and Papi 
2009), there has been less attention given to this in the area of ESP. Research of this kind can give 
us an inside view of the worlds in which our learners are both participating and in which they wish 

64 • Brian Paltridge and Sue Starfield
to participate. It can also show us ways in which we can help learners become central, rather than 
peripheral, members of their desired academic, professional, or other communities in a way that can 
make their imagined communities more of a reality for them. 
 Future Directions 
 As Belcher (2013) argues, despite all of the text-linguistic research that has been carried out in 
the area of ESP, many written, spoken, and digital genres still need to be examined. There is also a 
need for more research into the needs of undergraduate students and the issues they face in their 
study. At the other end of the academic scale, by contrast, we are seeing an increased focus on 
what Hyland (2009) refers to as English for professional academic purposes (EPAP). We are also 
starting to see work in the area of English for community membership purposes, which focusses 
on the needs of language learners outside their academic or employment contexts, focussing on 
their everyday communication needs, especially in the area of adult migrant education (see, e.g. 
De Silva Joyce and Hood 2009). An additional area Belcher (2013) points to that needs further 
research is the nature of ESP expertise in the sense of how people become ESP teachers and how 
they develop their expertise as teachers in the area. And there is also the matter of moving beyond 
a native speaker model when establishing goals for learners and to what extent they need to be 
‘native like’ rather than resourceful users of English (Pennycook 2012) who can use the language 
to meet their own particular needs. 
 References 
 Anderson, B. (1991).  Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism . Revised edition. London: Verso. 
 Belcher, D. (Ed.) (2009).  English for specific purposes in theory and practice . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
 Belcher, D. (2013). The future of ESP Research: Resources for access and choice. In B. Paltridge & S. Starfield (Eds.),  Handbook 
of English for specific purposes (pp. 535–552). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Belcher, D., Johns, A. M. & Paltridge, B. (Eds.) (2011).  New directions in English for specific purposes research . Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press. 
 Belcher, D. & Lukkarila, L. (2011). Identity in the ESP context: Putting the learner front and center in needs analysis. In 
D. Belcher, A. M. Johns & B. Paltridge (Eds.),  New directions in English for specific purposes research  (pp. 73–93). Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
 Benson, P., Chik, A., Gao, X., Huang, J. & Wang, W. (2009). Qualitative research in language teaching and learning journals, 
1997–2006.  The Modern Language Journal 93 (1), 79–90. doi:10.1111/j.1540–4781.2009.00829.x 
 Berkenkotter, C. (2009). A case for historical ‘wide-angle’ genre analysis: A personal retrospective.  Ibérica: Journal of the Euro-
pean Association of Language for Specific Purposes 18 , 9–21. 
 Bosher, S. & Stocker, J. (2015). Nurses’ narratives on workplace English in Taiwan: Improving patient care and enhancing 
professionalism.  English for Specific Purposes 38 , 109–120. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2015.02.001s 
 Brown, H. D. (2016).  Introducing needs analysis and English for specific purposes . Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
 Chang, Y.-J. & Kanno, Y. (2010). NNES doctoral students in English-speaking academe: The nexus between language and 
discipline.  Applied Linguistics 31 (5), 671–692. doi:10.1093/applin/amq026 
 Chen, R. & Hyon, S. (2005). Faculty evaluation as a genre system: Negotiating intertextuality and interpersonality.  Journal of 
Applied Linguistics 6 (1), 153–184. 
 Chun, C. W. (2015).  Engaging with the everyday: Power and meaning making in an EAP classroom . Bristol, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
 Curry, M. J. & Hanauer, D. I. (Eds.) (2014).  Language, literacy, and learning in STEM education . Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Curry, M. J. & Lillis, T. (2013)  A scholar’s guide to getting published in English . Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 De Silva Joyce, H. & Hood, S. (2009). English for community membership: Planning for actual and potential needs. In D. Belcher 
(Ed.),  English for specific purposes in theory and practice  (pp. 244–263). Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press. 
 Devitt, A. (2009). Re-fusing form in genre study. In J. Giltrow & D. Stein (Eds.),  Genres in the internet: Issues in the theory of 
genre  (pp. 27–48). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Donahue, C. & Lillis, T. (2014). Introduction and research roadmap: Writing and text production. In E.-M. Jakobs & D. Perrin 
(Eds.),  Handbook of writing and text production (pp. 55–78). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. 
www.ebook3000.com

English for Specific Purposes • 65
 Dörnyei, Z. (2009). The L2 motivational self system. In Z. Dörnyei & E. Ushioda (Eds.),  Motivation, language identity, and the 
L2 self  (pp. 9–42). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Dörnyei, Z. (2010). Researching motivation: From integrativeness to the ideal L2 self. In S. Hunston & D. Oakey (Eds.),  Intro-
ducing applied linguistics (pp. 74–83). Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
 Dörnyei, Z., Csizer, K. & Nemeth, N. (2006).  Motivation, language attitudes and globalization: A Hungarian perspective . Cleve-
don, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Dörnyei, Z. & Kubanyiova, M. (2014).  Motivating learners, motivating teachers: Building vision in the language classroom . Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Dressen Hammouda, D. (2013). Ethnographic approaches to ESP research. In B. Paltridge & S. Starfield (Eds.),  The handbook 
of English for specific purposes (pp. 501–518). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Feak, C. B. (2013). ESP and speaking. In B. Paltridge & S. Starfield (Eds.),  The handbook of English for specific purposes 
(pp. 35–54). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Flowerdew, J. (2013). English for research publication purposes. In B. Paltridge & S. Starfield (Eds.),  The handbook of English 
for specific purposes (pp. 301–321). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Freedman, A. (1999). Beyond the text: Towards understanding the teaching and learning of genres.  TESOL Quarterly 33 (4), 
764–767. doi:10.2307/3587890 
 Gao, Y., Li, L. & Lu, L. (2001). Trends in research methods in applied linguistics: China and the West.  English for Specific Pur-
poses 20 (1), 701–708. doi:10.1016/S0889–4906(99)00015–0 
 Gollin-Kies, S. (2014). Methods reported in ESP research articles: A comparative survey of two leading journals.  English for 
Specific Purposes 36 , 27–34. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2014.04.001 
 Hanauer, D. I. & Englander, K. (2013)  Scientific writing in a second language . Anderson, SC: Parlor Press. 
 Handford, M. & Matous, P. (2011). Lexicogrammar in the international construction industry: A corpus-based study of 
Japanese–Hong-Kongese on-site interactions.  English for Specific Purposes 30 (2), 87–100. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2010.12.002 
 Handford, M. & Matous, P. (2015). Problem-solving discourse on an international construction site: Patterns and practices. 
 English for Specific Purposes 38 , 85–98. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2014.12.002 
 Hashemi, M. R. (2012). Reflections on mixing methods in applied linguistics research.  Applied Linguistics 33 (2), 206–212. 
doi:10.1093/applin/ams008 
 Hashemi, M. R. & Babaii, E. (2013). Mixed methods research: Toward new research designs in applied linguistics.  The Modern 
Language Journal 97 (4), 828–852. doi:10.1111/j.1540–4781.2013.12049.x 
 Hincks, R. (2010). Speaking rate and content information in English as a lingua franca oral presentations.  English for Specific 
Purposes 29 (1), 4–18. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2009.05.004 
 Hyland, K. (2006).  English for academic purposes: An advanced resource book . London: Routledge. 
 Hyland, K. (2009). English for professional academic purposes. In D. Belcher (Ed.),  English for specific purposes in theory and 
practice  (pp. 83–105). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
 Hyland, K. (2012)  Disciplinary identities: Individuality and community of academic discourse . Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. 
 Hyland, K. (2015).  Academic publishing: Issues and challenges in the construction of knowledge . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Hyon, S. (2008). Convention and inventiveness in an occluded academic genre: A case study of retention-promotion-tenure 
reports.  English for Specific Purposes 27 (2), 175–192. 
 Hyon, S. (2011). Evaluation in tenure and promotion letters: Constructing faculty as communicators, stars and workers. 
 Applied Linguistics 32 (4), 389–407. 
 Jenkins, J. (2014).  English as a lingua franca in the international university: The politics of academic English language policy . 
Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
 Jensen, C., Denver, L., Mees, I. & Werther, C. (2013): Students’ attitudes to lecturers’ English in English-medium higher educa-
tion in Denmark.  Nordic Journal of English Studies 12 (1), 87–112. 
 Johns, A. M. & Dudley-Evans, T. (1991). English for specific purposes: International in scope, specific in purpose.  TESOL 
Quarterly 25 (2), 297–314. doi:10.2307/3587465 
 Kachru, Y. (2005). Teaching and learning of world Englishes. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of research in second language teach-
ing and learning  (pp. 155–173). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Kanno, Y. & Norton, B. (2003). Imagined communities and educational possibilities: Introduction.  Journal of Language, Iden-
tity, and Education 2 (4), 241–249. doi:10.1207/S15327701JLIE0204_1 
 Lazarton, A. (2000). Current trends in research methodology and statistics in applied linguistics.  TESOL Quarterly 34 (1), 
175–181. doi:10.2307/3588103 
 Lee, J. J. & Subtirelu, N. (2015). Metadiscourse in the classroom: A comparative analysis of EAP lessons and university lectures. 
 English for Specific Purposes 37 , 52–62. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2014.06.005 
 Leki, I. (2007).  Undergraduates in a second language: Challenges and complexities of academic literacy development . Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

66 • Brian Paltridge and Sue Starfield
 Li, Y. (2006a). Negotiating knowledge contribution to multiple discourse communities: A doctoral student of computer sci-
ence writing for publication.  Journal of Second Language Writing 15 (3), 159–178. doi:10.1016/j.jslw.2006.07.001 
 Li, Y. (2006b). A doctoral student of physics writing for publication: A sociopolitically-oriented case study.  English for Specific 
Purposes 25 (4), 456–478. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2005.12.002 
 Li, Y. (2007). Apprentice scholarly writing in a community of practice: An intraview of an NNES graduate student writing a 
research article.  TESOL Quarterly 41 (1), 55–79. doi:10.1002/j.1545–7249.2007.tb00040.x 
 Lillis, T. M. (2008). Ethnography as method, methodology, and “deep theorizing”.  Written Communication 25 (3), 353–388. 
doi:10.1177/0741088308319229 
 Lillis, T. M. (2013).  The sociolinguistics of writing . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
 Lillis, T. M. & Curry, M. J. (2010).  Academic writing in a global context: The politics and practices of publishing in English . 
Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
 Lin, C.-Y. (2015). Seminars and interactive lectures as a community of knowledge co-construction: The use of modifiers. 
 English for Specific Purposes 38 , 99–108. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2015.02.002 
 Mahboob, A. & Paltridge, B. (2015). In this issue.  TESOL Quarterly 49 (2), 221–225. doi:10.1002/tesq.231 
 Martin, J. R. (1984). Language, register and genre. In F. Christie (Ed.),  Language studies: Children’s writing: Reader  (pp. 21–30). 
Geelong, Victoria: Deakin University Press. Reprinted with revisions in A. Burns & C. Coffin (Eds.) (2001).  Analyzing 
English in a global context (pp. 49–66). London: Routledge. 
Martin, J. R. & White, P. R. R. (2005). The language of evaluation: Appraisal in English. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
 Mauranen, A. (2011). English as the lingua franca of the academic world. In D. Belcher, A. M. Johns & B. Paltridge (Eds.),  New 
directions in English for specific purposes research (pp. 94–117). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
 Mauranen, A. (2012).  Exploring ELF: Academic English shaped by non-native speakers . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Miller, C. R. (1984). Genre as social action.  Quarterly Journal of Speech 70 , 151–167. Reprinted in A. Freedman & P. Medway 
(Eds.) (1994).  Genre and the new rhetoric  (pp. 23–42). London: Taylor & Francis. 
 Morell, T. (2015). International conference paper presentations: A multimodal analysis to determine effectiveness.  English for 
Specific Purposes 37 , 137–150. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2014.10.002 
 Morton, J. (2009). Genre and disciplinary competence: A case study of contextualisation in an academic speech genre.  English 
for Specific Purposes 28 (4), 217–229. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2009.04.005 
 Nesi, H. (2013). ESP and corpus studies. In B. Paltridge & S. Starfield (Eds.),  The handbook of English for specific purposes 
(pp. 407–426). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Nesi, H. & Gardner, S. (2012). Genres across disciplines: Student writing in higher education. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
 Nickerson, C. (2013). English for specific purposes and English as a lingua franca. In B. Paltridge & S. Starfield (Eds.),  The 
handbook of English for specific purposes (pp. 445–460). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Norton, B. & Toohey, K. (2011). Identity, language learning, and social change.  Language Teaching 44 (4), 412–446. 
doi:org/10.1017/S0261444811000309 
 Paltridge, B. (2013a). Genre and English for specific purposes. In B. Paltridge & S. Starfield (Eds.),  The handbook of English for 
specific purposes  (pp. 347–366). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Paltridge, B. (2013b). Learning to review submissions to peer reviewed journals: How do they do it?  International Journal for 
Researcher Development 4 (1), 6–18. doi:org/10.1108/IJRD-07–2013–0011 
 Paltridge, B. (2014). Genre and second language academic writing.  Language Teaching 47 (3), 303–318. doi:org/10.1017/
S0261444814000068 
 Paltridge, B. (2015). Referees’ comments on submissions to peer-reviewed journals: When is a suggestion not a suggestion? 
 Studies in Higher Education 40 (1), 106–122. doi:10.1080/03075079.2013.818641 
 Paltridge, B. & Mahboob, A. (2014). In this issue.  TESOL Quarterly 48 (1), 1–5. doi:10.1002/tesq.160 
 Paltridge, B. & Starfield, S. (Eds.) (2013).  The handbook of English for specific purposes . Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Paltridge, B. & Starfield, S. (2016). Ethnographic perspectives on English for academic purposes research. In K. Hyland & P. 
Shaw (Eds.),  The Routledge handbook of English for academic purposes . London: Routledge, pp. 218–229. 
 Paltridge, B., Starfield, S., Ravelli, L., Nicholson, S. & Tuckwell, K. (2012). Doctoral writing in the visual and performing arts: 
Two ends of a continuum.  Studies in Higher Education 37 (8), 989–1003. doi:10.1080/03075079.2011.562285 
 Paltridge, B., Starfield, S., Ravelli, L. & Tuckwell, K. (2012). Change and stability: Examining the macrostructures of doc-
toral theses in the visual and performing arts.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes 11 (4), 332–334. doi:10.1016/j.
jeap.2012.08.003 
 Paltridge, B., Starfield, S. & Tardy, C. M. (2016).  Ethnographic perspectives on academic writing . Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Pennycook, A. (2012).  Language and mobility :  Unexpected places . Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Prior, P. (2013). Multimodality and ESP research. In B. Paltridge & S. Starfield (Eds.),  The handbook of English for specific 
purposes  (pp. 519–553). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
www.ebook3000.com

English for Specific Purposes • 67
 Ramanathan, V. & Atkinson, D. (1999). Ethnographic approaches and methods in L2 writing research: A critical guide and 
review.  Applied Linguistics 20 (1), 44–70. doi:10.1093/applin/20.1.44 
 Ravelli, L., Paltridge, B. & Starfield, S. (Eds.) (2014).  Doctoral writing in the creative and performing arts . Faringdon, UK: Libri. 
 Rowley-Jolivet, E. (2015). Quantification in conference talks and proceedings articles in engineering.  English for Specific Pur-
poses 38 , 11–22. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2014.10.003 
 Ryan, S. (2009). Self and identity in L2 motivation in Japan. In Z. Dörnyei & E. Ushioda (Eds.),  Motivation, language identity, 
and the L2 self  (pp. 120–143). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Ryan, S. & Irie, K. (2014). Imagined and possible selves: Stories we tell ourselves about ourselves. In S. Mercer & M. Williams 
(Eds.),  Multiple perspectives on the self in SLA (pp. 109–126). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Seidlhofer, B. (2011).  Understanding English as a lingua franca: A complete introduction to the theoretical nature and practical 
implications of English used as a lingua franca . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Smith, L. (1987).  Discourse across cultures . Hertfordshire, UK: Prentice Hall. 
 Staples, S. (2015). Examining the linguistic needs of internationally educated nurses: A corpus-based study of lexico-grammatical 
features in nurse–patient interactions.  English for Specific Purposes 37 , 122–136. doi:10.1016/j.esp.2014.09.002 
 Starfield, S. (2016). English for specific purposes. In G. Hall (Ed.),  Routledge handbook of English language teaching 
(pp. 150–163). Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
 Starfield, S. & Paltridge, B. (2014). Current and future directions in English for specific purposes research.  Revue Française de 
Linguistique Appliquée 29 (1), 9–14. 
 Starfield, S., Paltridge, B., McMurtrie, R., Holbrook, A., Bourke, S., Lovat, T., Kiley, M. & Fairbairn, H. (2016). Understanding 
the language of evaluation in examiners’ reports on doctoral theses: An APPRAISAL analysis.  Linguistics and Education. 
doi:10.1016/j.linged.2015.06.004 
 Starfield, S., Paltridge, B. & Ravelli, L. (2012). “Why do we have to write?”: Practice-based theses in the visual and performing 
arts and the place of writing. In V. K. Bhatia, C. Berkenkotter & M. Gotti (Eds.),  Insights into academic genres  (pp. 169–190). 
Bern: Peter Lang. 
 Starfield, S., Paltridge, B. & Ravelli, L. (2014). Researching academic writing: What textography affords. In J. Huisman & M. 
Tight (Eds.),  Theory and method in higher education research II  (pp. 103–120). Oxford: Emerald. 
 Swales, J. M. (1981). Aspects of article Introductions.  Aston ESP Research Reports , No 1. Language Studies Unit, The University 
of Aston at Birmingham. Republished University of Michigan Press 2011. 
 Swales, J. M. (1990).  Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Taguchi, T., Magid, M. & Papi, M. (2009). The L2 motivational self system amongst Chinese, Japanese and Iranian learners of 
English: A comparative study. In Z. Dörnyei & E. Ushioda (Eds.),  Motivation, language identity, and the L2 self  (pp. 66–97). 
Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Tarone, E., Dwyer, S., Gillette, S. & Ickes, V. (1981). On the use of the passive in two astrophysics journal papers.  The ESP 
Journal 1 (2), 123–140. doi:10.1016/0272–2380(81)90004–4 
 Thøgersen, J. (2013). Stylistic and pedagogical consequences of university teaching in English in Europe. In H. Haberland, D. 
Lønsmann & B. Preisler (Eds.),  Language alternation, language choice, and language encounter in international education 
(pp. 181–198). Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Thompson, P. (2013). Thesis and dissertation writing. In B. Paltridge & S. Starfield (Eds.),  The handbook of English for specific 
purposes  (pp. 283–300). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Westbrook, P. N. & Henriksen, B. (2011). Bridging the linguistic and affective gaps: The impact of a short, tailor-made lan-
guage course on a Danish university lecturer’s ability to lecture with confidence in English. In R. Cancin, K. Jæger & L. 
Dam (Eds.),  Policies, principles, practices: New directions in foreign language education in the era of educational globaliza-
tion  (pp. 188–212). Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Press. 
 Wingate, U. (2015).  Academic literacy and student diversity: The case for inclusive practice . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 

68
 6 
 Teaching English to Young Learners 
 David Nunan 
 Introduction and Overview 
 The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of current theoretical approaches and empiri-
cal research into the teaching of English as a second or foreign language to young learners. The first 
challenge in addressing this topic is defining young learners. I do this in the first substantive section 
of the chapter following this introduction and overview before turning to an issue that has preoccu-
pied researchers for many years, that of the relationship between chronological age and acquisition 
(Singleton, 1989). This is followed by a discussion of social contexts within which young learners 
acquire and use English as an additional language. Individual learner variables form the substance of 
the next section. In the final section, I review research that addresses issues of pedagogy. 
 Over the last few years, the teaching of English as a second or foreign language to young learners 
has been one of the fastest growing areas of interest within language education. This is reflected in the 
amount of research being conducted into language acquisition, the establishment of private language 
schools for young learners, the books and course materials being published, the certificates, diplomas 
and degrees being offered to teachers of young learners, and a lowering of the age at which English is 
introduced as a compulsory subject by ministries of education around the world. Johnstone (2009: 
33) goes so far as to describe the introduction of foreign languages in general, and English in particu-
lar, as “possibly the world’s biggest policy development in education.” 
 The rapid growth in interest in the Teaching of English to Young Learners (TEYL) has been 
prompted, at least in part, by the emergence of English as the global language of the day. Parents 
believe that fluency in English will bring a comparative advantage to their children. In post-handover 
Hong Kong, there was an outcry from parents when the government proposed switching most schools 
from English-medium instruction to Chinese-medium instruction, and the policy was quietly let to 
atrophy. Governments also believe that their national interests, economic, political and otherwise, 
are served by a citizenry in which a significant proportion is competent in English. (For an historical 
overview and critique of TESOL (Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages) methodolo-
gies in Asia, see Lin (2013). (For reviews of the impact of English as a global language on educational 
policies and practices in a range of international contexts, see Nunan 2003, 2013a; Enever, Moon & 
Raman, 2009; Copland, Garton & Burns, 2014.) 
 In fact, research suggests that the place of English as a medium of communication in the inter-
national workplace is highly context dependent. While Japanese firms functioning in Thailand are 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching English to Young Learners • 69
likely to use English, in Korea it is more likely that Japanese will be the medium of communication 
(Ryuko Kubota, Melbourne, Australia, 3 January 2016). Chinese companies establishing themselves 
in countries such as Australia, where the medium of communication is English, are increasingly 
importing workers from China who have little if any facility in English and little need for such facility 
as communication is exclusively among fellow Chinese speakers. 
 Investigating the first and second language development of young learners, particularly very 
young learners, presents researchers with real challenges. Techniques that are perfectly fine with 
adults, such as interviews, questionnaires, tests and so on, are problematic when it comes to inves-
tigating second language acquisition in children. Developmental psychologists investigating cogni-
tion and first language acquisition in infants have developed some ingenious techniques for finding 
answers to the questions they pose, and some of these techniques have been appropriated by second 
language researchers (Gopnik, Meltzoff & Kuhl, 2001). While talking to children and finding out 
what they know is an important tool in the investigative armory of the developmental psychologist, 
one cannot ‘interview’ children in the same way as one can interrogate an adult. 
 In a recent longitudinal investigation into the attitudes and perceptions of young 7–10-year-old 
learners of foreign language in Europe, the research came up with innovative ways of collecting data 
from the learners. They argue that: 
 Thanks to the innovative research methodology applied in the study through making YLs’ 
(young learners’) voices heard we obtained first hand evidence of how YLs feel about FLL (for-
eign language learning) and themselves as FL learners. Our findings show that YLs themselves 
can be crucial sources of information on learner characteristics. 
 (Mihaljevic Djigunovic & Lopriore, 2011: 58) 
 Defining the Young Learners 
 The young learner in general, and the young language learner in particular, has been variously 
defined, depending on writers’ purposes. Some, whose purpose is to provide insights for teach-
ers, focus on the elementary school years, typically from ages 5–12 (Linse, 2005). If one adopts 
a broader view, the lens must necessarily range from the fetus to the young adult (Gopnik, 
Meltzoff & Kuhl, 2001). 
 The Swiss biologist Jean Piaget and his psychologist wife Valentine first described the major devel-
opmental stages that children pass through from birth to puberty. They did this by making a close 
study of their own children. They demonstrated that even very young children know an extraor-
dinary amount about the world. Although babies’ views of the world were as complex as those of 
adults, they were profoundly different from adults’ views. As they move from birth towards puberty, 
children’s worldview passes through a succession of transformations, each one quite different from 
the one that preceded it (Piaget, 1952, 1954). 
 Piaget identified four broad stages of development as the child progressed from birth to adoles-
cence: the sensori-motor stage, the pre-operational stage, the concrete operational stage and the for-
mal operational stage. At each stage, the child exhibited different social, psychological and cognitive 
characteristics. The earliest stage, the sensori-motor, extends from birth to around the age of two. 
Linguistically, this stage is marked by the rapid growth of vocabulary. At the pre-operational stage, 
which extends to approximately seven years of age, learners consolidate the acquisition of their first 
language. From the age of seven until the onset of puberty, the ability to think logically and to draw 
generalizations from experience begins to develop. During the final stage, that of formal operations, 
the capacity for making abstract generalizations is largely complete. Brain lateralization occurs at this 
stage. This means that the two hemispheres of the brain begin to function independently. It has been 

70 • David Nunan
hypothesized that this stage represents a ‘critical period’ for language acquisition, and that after brain 
lateralization, it is impossible to acquire native-like proficiency in a second or subsequent languages. 
(Brain lateralization and the notion of a critical period are a controversial issue. I shall look at the 
concepts and their implications when considering the issue of age and acquisition.) 
 Another seminal figure in the field of child language development is Lev Vygotsky, whose influence 
on child second language development has been even more profound than that of Piaget. Piaget’s 
foci were epistemological and psychological. Given his early training as a biologist, he sought to link 
philosophical problems of knowledge to the biological development of the brain. Vygotsky’s range 
of interests were even more impressive, and his accomplishments were extraordinary, particularly 
given the fact that he died of consumption at the age of 38. His initial training was as a lawyer. In his 
early years, he also wrote literary criticism. After graduating, he worked at the Psychological Institute 
of Moscow, where he completed his dissertation on the psychology of art. A committed Marxist, he 
devoted the rest of his life to investigating how social life shaped the development of knowledge and 
language, although he never lost his interest in the imagination and the arts (Vygotsky, 1986). 
 Vygotsky’s focus on language development in and through social life accounts, at least in part, for 
the fact that he gets more attention than Piaget these days, although their approaches are by no means 
incompatible (Gopnik, Meltzoff & Kuhl, 2001). If anything, his influence has continued to grow over the 
last 20 years due, in no small measure, to the ‘social turn’ in second language acquisition (Block, 2005). 
In child second language research, his work is reflected in diverse areas of inquiry. Language socializa-
tion in second language contexts (Kulick & Schieffelin, 2004; Bayley & Langman, 2011), sociocultural 
theory (Lantolf, 2000, 2011), systemic-functional linguistics (Halliday, 2004), genre theory (Martin, 
2001), and inter-cultural communication (Holliday, Hyde & Kullman, 2006), to name just a few areas, 
draw, either explicitly or implicitly, on Vygotsky’s articulation of language development and social life. 
Recent research in the role of creativity, imagination and play in second language acquisition and use 
also looks to Vygotsky for its theoretical rationale. Choi (2015, 2016), for example, documents this 
process through her case study of two Japanese learners of English as a second language: 
 My learners were searching for ways of expressing themselves drawing on both linguistic and 
non-linguistic resources. Through use of the imagination, collaborative play, and joint action, 
they developed a creative and critical project that went beyond achieving the initial goal of 
expressing themselves. They created improvisations that involved street mime, movement and 
engaging with the public, and through these improvisations came to understand the possibili-
ties in and of language in their journey of becoming. The case study demonstrates the creative 
and unpredictable outcomes that can emerge when two minds jointly engage in, linguistically 
and socially mediated action. 
 (Julie Choi, Melbourne, Australia, 12 November 2015) 
 Age and Acquisition 
 The age factor in foreign language teaching and learning has probably been written about more exten-
sively than any other (Singleton, 1989; Singleton & Munoz, 2011. The key question that researchers 
have addressed is: what is the optimal age for learning a foreign language? There is a widespread 
assumption that the earlier someone begins to learn a foreign language, the better they will be. The 
assumption has led policy makers in many parts of the world to introduce foreign language learning, 
particularly English, at earlier and earlier ages. 
 An important theory that has influenced the debate over the optimal age to introduce a foreign 
language is the critical theory hypothesis. The hypothesis argues that there is a phase in the develop-
ment of an organism during which particular behaviors and cognitive functions must be acquired, 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching English to Young Learners • 71
and if the period is missed, then acquisition of the behaviors and functions will be severely impaired 
and may, in fact, not be acquired at all. 
 In relation to language acquisition, the hypothesis argues that for high-level mastery of a foreign 
language, study should be embarked upon before the onset of puberty. At around this time, a process 
of brain lateralization occurs in which the language function becomes localized to the left side of the 
brain. After this time, it has been argued, native-like mastery of another language is virtually impos-
sible (Penfield & Roberts, 1958). 
 The notion that there is a critical period for language acquisition that is governed by brain lat-
eralization is controversial. In the first place, while it is uncommon for individuals to develop near 
native-speaking competence in a second language post-puberty, it is by no means unheard of. Neu-
roscience also indicates that the metaphor of brain plasticity may not be appropriate, that, in fact, 
the brain retains its ‘plasticity’ well beyond puberty. On the issue of a critical period, Singleton and 
Munoz (2011: 419) argue that: 
 Postulating a critical period for language acquisition is fraught with problems . . . there is no 
consensus regarding the duration and scope of such a critical period, and the evidence pre-
sented in support of the notion of a critical period is very far from conclusive. . . . Concerning 
L2 acquisition, the propositions that have been put in respect of the absoluteness of late L2 
learners incapacity to attain native-like levels of proficiency, the absolute necessity of greater 
conscious effort on the part of late L2 learners and the absolute difference between mecha-
nisms underlying early and late L2 learning have not been irrefutably demonstrated, and have 
been beset by counter-evidence. 
 If the evidence for the existence of a critical period for language acquisition is fraught with problems, 
so is the research evidence on the assertion that the earlier one begins learning a second language, the 
more proficient one will be. The problems of designing a study to address the question are many and 
varied. Does one investigate L2 acquisition in naturalistic or instructional settings? If one is investi-
gating the question of whether 5-year-olds are better at language learning than 15-year-olds, what 
does one measure, and how does one measure it? Commonly employed measures such as grammati-
cality judgment tests might work with 15-year-olds but not with 5-year-olds. If one is evaluating 
spoken output, does one compare the 5-year-olds against the norm of native-speaking 5-year-olds 
and the 15-year-olds against the norm of native-speaking 15-year-olds? (And if so,  which native 
speakers?) If measuring vocabulary acquisition, does one count the raw number of items acquired 
or, again, adopt some chronological norm? (For an up-to-date and critical review of the research 
evidence for and against the question as to whether an earlier start is better, see Kang Shin, 2014.) 
 Despite these practical design difficulties, which go a considerable way towards explaining the 
inconclusive and contradictory findings in the research literature, Ellis (1994: 491–92), after an 
exhaustive review of the studies available at the time he was writing, felt confident enough to make 
the following generalizations: 
 1. Adult learners have an initial advantage where rate of learning is concerned, but they will 
eventually be overtaken by child learners if they get enough exposure to the L2. 
 2. Only child learners are capable of acquiring a native-like accent. 
 3. Children may be more likely to acquire a native grammatical competence. 
 4. Children are likely to reach higher levels of attainment in pronunciation and grammar than 
adults. 
 5. The process of acquiring an L2 grammar is not substantially affected by age, but this is not the 
case for pronunciation. 

72 • David Nunan
 In an investigation I carried out into the impact of the emergence of English as a global language 
on educational policies and practices in Asia (Nunan, 2003, 2013a), a major finding was that in all 
countries surveyed, there was a downward shift in the age at which English was introduced as a 
compulsory subject based on the belief that younger equals better. However, this shift was not always 
accompanied by adequate or appropriate resourcing, including the education of teachers, nor by 
curriculum models and materials that would increase the chances of effective learning outcomes. 
 From this investigation, there is little doubt that the impact has been considerable. For exam-
ple, despite considerable country-by-country variation, in most countries the age at which 
English is a compulsory subject has shifted down in recent years, a shift that is predicated on 
the importance of English as a global language. Underlying the shift there is an assumption on 
the part of governments and ministries of education that when it comes to learning a foreign 
language, the younger the starting age of instruction the better. This view seems to be firmly 
entrenched, despite its controversial nature. 
 (Nunan, 2013a: 166) 
 As a result of this study, I made a number of policy recommendations, including a review of the 
starting age and intensity of foreign language instruction along with an articulation of the rationale 
for both the starting age and the intensity of instruction. I also recommended an audit of the human 
and material resources allocated to English language instruction and an assessment of the adequacy 
of these in relation to the needs of the learners, along with a cost-benefit analysis of English language 
education within the education system as a whole. These recommendations for adequate and appro-
priate resourcing and monitoring are at least partly in line with those made by Marinova-Todd, 
Bradford Marshall and Snow (2001: 28–29), who argued that: 
 Investment in elementary foreign language education may well be worth it, but only if the 
teachers are native or native-like speakers and well trained in the needs of younger learn-
ers; if the early learning opportunities are built upon with consistent well-planned, ongoing 
instruction in the higher grades; and if the learners are given some opportunities for authentic 
communicative experiences in the target language. Decisions to introduce foreign language 
instruction in the elementary grades should be weighed against the costs to other components 
of the school curriculum: as far as we know, there are no good studies showing that foreign 
language instruction is worth more than additional time invested in math, science, music, art, 
or even basic L1 literacy. 
 (pp. 28–29) 
 The Social Context of Second Language Acquisition 
 In considering the social context of second language acquisition, a distinction is traditionally drawn 
between the classroom and the world beyond the classroom: 
 A general distinction can be made between ‘natural’ and ‘educational’ settings. The former arise 
in the course of the learners’ contact with other speakers of the L2 in a variety of situations—in 
the workplace, at home, through the media, at international conferences, in business meetings 
etc. There will be some learners who experience the L2 entirely in natural settings. However, 
many learners will be exposed to the L2 in both natural and educational settings. 
 (Ellis, 1994: 214) 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching English to Young Learners • 73
 This simplistic classification is elaborated on by Ellis, who presents a comprehensive framework 
within which second language learners can be located. In the first part of this section, I will use Ellis’s 
framework, before looking at more recent work, which moves beyond the bi-, tri- and multi-lingual 
paradigm to the notion of plurilingualism. 
 In discussing natural contexts, Ellis uses Judd’s (1978) tripartite distinction between majority 
language contexts, official language contexts and international contexts. Majority language contexts 
are those in which the learner’s target language is the dominant language in the community in which 
he or she is residing, for example, Asian immigrants to Australia, where English is the dominant 
language, or Eastern European workers in Germany, where German is the dominant language. Offi-
cial language contexts include post-colonial countries in Africa and Asia, where the language of the 
colonizing country continues to enjoy ‘official language’ status, although it is not the native language 
of the majority of the population. The third natural context, the ‘international’ context, refers to situ-
ations in which L1 speakers of different languages adopt a third language as a lingua franca. 
 As far as child second language acquisition is concerned, the majority language and official lan-
guage contexts are the relevant ones. Children may pick up the target language through interaction 
with native-speaking peers and exposure through the media, and this may supplement formal Eng-
lish as a second language (ESL) instruction in school. 
 When considering educational contexts, Ellis draws on the work of Skutnab-Kangas (1988), who 
identifies four different types: segregation, mother tongue maintenance, submersion and immersion. 
In segregated instruction, the L2 learners are separated from other learners in the school. Skutnab-
Kangas is critical of this practice, arguing that the results are poor. However, Ellis believes that the 
case against segregation is not clear-cut: 
 In certain situations, the provision of separate educational facilities may have beneficial effects. 
For example, short-term programmes for refugee populations newly arrived in the United 
States or European countries can help them adjust socially, affectively and linguistically to the 
demands of their new country. 
 (Ellis, 1994: 222) 
 In the mother-tongue maintenance classroom, instruction is provided in the learners’ first language. 
The goal of mother-tongue maintenance is to foster bilingualism. Romaine (1996) points out that 
the concept of bilingualism is more complex than the dichotomous definition that a bilingual is 
someone who has native-like control of two languages. She suggests that the concept is a continuum, 
with native-like control at one end and the ability to produce complex, meaningful utterances in a 
second language at the other. More recent research indicates that child second language acquisition 
and use is far more complex than the mono- versus bi- and multi-lingual dichotomies suggest, and 
that the research agenda also need to include plurilingualism and translanguaging, concepts which 
are discussed in the section on pedagogical applications. 
 Ellis cites research suggesting that segregated instruction has distinct cognitive, linguistic and 
affective advantages, and refutes the notion that children brought up bilingually will suffer cognitive 
and linguistic disadvantage. 
 Submersion is not an approach at all, but refers to the practice of placing minority language learn-
ers in mainstream content classes without any linguistic or other types of support. In effect, the learn-
ers are left to sink or swim. In order for the practice to have a chance of working, several conditions 
must occur. First, it is important that the teachers be bilingual so they can understand the children 
and mediate content for them. Second, input must be modified to make it comprehensible. Third, 
the child should be provided with L1 literacy skills (Cummins, 1984). 

74 • David Nunan
 Immersion describes a range of contexts and a number of different approaches through which 
learners acquire a second language by receiving content instruction in the second language. Immer-
sion programs were first developed in Canada, where children who speak English as their first lan-
guage received content instruction in French, the minority language. Full immersion programs are 
those in which all subjects are taught in the second language. Partial immersion describes the situa-
tion in which only some subjects are taught in the second language. (For early, empirical studies of 
immersion education in a range of countries and contexts, see Johnson & Swain, 1997.) 
 In communities with high populations of immigrants, the provision of ESL instruction varies 
greatly in terms of both quality and quantity. Content-based instruction (CBI) continues to be pop-
ular in these contexts. There are several instructional models of CBI: theme-based, sheltered and 
adjunct (Brinton, Snow & Wesche, 1989; Brinton, 2003). Theme-based language instruction takes 
experiential content. Very often, the content is taken from other subjects in the school curriculum: 
science, mathematics, physical education and so on. Sheltered-content instruction is another term 
for segregated instruction. 
 Dual-language education is another popular model in some contexts. The concept is similar to 
content-based instruction in that the second language is used as a medium of instruction rather than 
as a subject to be studied. Students acquire the language in the process of learning curricular content. 
These programs are implemented at preschool, elementary and secondary levels in the United States. 
Christian (2011: 4) describes four types of dual-language programs: 
 1. developmental bilingual programs, where all students are native speakers of the minority 
languages that is one of the languages of instruction; 
 2. foreign language immersion programs, or “one-way” immersion, where all of the students are 
native speakers of the majority language and are learning another language; 
 3. heritage language immersion programs, where all of the students are from the language 
minority community, though they may have little or no actual proficiency in the heritage 
language; and 
 4. two-way immersion programs, where approximately half of the students are native speakers 
of the minority language and half are native speakers of the majority language and all receive 
instruction through, and learn, both languages. 
 With globalization, there is a trend to think beyond bilingualism, trilingualism and even multilin-
gualism to plurilingualism. Piccardo (2013) captures this shift as follows: 
 Contemporary globalized society is characterized by mobility and change, two phenomena 
that have a direct impact on the broad linguistic landscape. Language proficiency is no longer 
seen as a monolithic phenomenon that occurs independently of the linguistic repertoires and 
trajectories of learners and teachers, but rather shaped by uneven and ever-changing compe-
tences, both linguistic and cultural. 
 (Piccardo, 2013: 600) 
 Bi-, tri- and multi-lingualism imply a facility with two or more languages. Each language, however, is 
quarantined one from the other. Plurilingualism is different. It describes the process of shifting back 
and forth between languages to achieve shared communicative goals in a more fluid and dynamic 
way than bi-, tri- and multi-lingualism (Canagarajah & Liynage, 2012: 50). Plurilingualism chal-
lenges the territorial separation inherent in the concept of multilingualism. 
 With this trend has come a shift away from a deficit view of language learning, in which the learner 
is viewed as an empty vessel to be filled (or a  tabula rasa  [blank slate] to be inscribed upon) towards 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching English to Young Learners • 75
the notion of the resourceful learner. Such a learner uses all of his or her linguistic and cultural 
resources to fill linguistically mediated needs (Pennycook, 2012). 
 Learner Variables 
 In this section, I look at some of the key variables and individual differences at play in the teaching 
of English to young learners. In a recent book-length treatment of individual differences in second 
language acquisition, Dörnyei (2010) reviews research into the following factors: personality, apti-
tude, motivation, learning styles, learning strategies, anxiety, creativity, willingness to communicate, 
self-esteem and learner beliefs. (See also Dörnyei, 2001.) 
 A major challenge for researchers wanting to investigate these factors is that they are all psycho-
logical constructs. They, along with other constructs such as intelligence and language proficiency, 
cannot be directly seen. They, therefore, have to be operationalized in some way. In the psychometric 
tradition, this is usually through some sort of instrument, such as a questionnaire or observation 
schedule. (For a critique of the psychometric approach and construct operationalization in research 
on individual differences, see Williams & Burden, 1997.) 
 In a recently published longitudinal investigation into foreign language learning by young learn-
ers, individual learner differences emerged as a major factor in learning outcomes. “The four year . . . 
investigations focusing on language learner characteristics offer important insights into individ-
ual learner differences and their role in ELL (early language learning)” (Mihaljevic Djigunovic & 
Lopriore, 2011: 58). Data from the study showed that individual learner variables resulted in learning 
experiences and perceptions that were unique to each individual. 
 Affect 
 Most of the individual learner differences dealt with in the literature fall under the rubric of ‘affect’ or 
emotional, in contrast with cognitive, variables in language learning. Variables include motivation, 
anxiety and attitude towards language learning. 
 A great deal has been written about motivation. Like the other affective variables, it is difficult 
to define as it is a psychological construct, and, as I have pointed out in the second paragraph of 
this section, this presents challenges for researchers. In his guide to motivational strategies in young 
people, Covington (1998: 1) states that like gravity, it is easier to describe than define. I would say 
that this holds for all psychological constructs. We can only get at them by observing what people do 
or through some form of elicitation or self-report (Nunan & Bailey, 2009). In the positivist tradition, 
the most common way of operationalizing the construct was through some form of interview sched-
ule or questionnaire, although, as Williams and Burden (1997) point out, this can lead to definitional 
circularity. (Motivation is that characteristic which is measured by motivational questionnaires.) 
Gardner and Lambert (1972), who pioneered research in language learning motivation, drew a dis-
tinction between instrumental and integrative motivation. Instrumental motivation referred to the 
drive to master a language for external purposes, such as obtaining a better job. Integrative motiva-
tion is motivation driven, not by the desire for some sort of material gain, but by an intrinsic inter-
est in foreign languages and a positive attitude towards, as well as a desire to interact socially with, 
members of the target language community. (For a discussion and critique of Gardner & Lambert’s 
and Gardner’s (1985) social-psychological model, see Dörnyei [1994, 2010].) 
 If investigating motivation in adults presents significant challenges, then investigating the con-
struct in children is even more so. The instrumental/integrative distinction would seem to be irrel-
evant. It is highly unlikely that children would have either utilitarian or target-language affiliate 
motives. Standard motivational measuring instruments such as questionnaires are also impractical. 

76 • David Nunan
 Although it is theoretically possible to distinguish between motivation and attitude towards the 
target language, in operational terms it does not make much sense to separate them, and, in fact, in 
the Gardner and Lambert model, attitude is a part of motivation. In a recent longitudinal investiga-
tion into foreign language learning (FLL) by young learners in Europe, Mihaljevic Djigunovic and 
Lopriore (2011) also melded motivation and attitude, looking at how young learners felt about for-
eign language learning at the beginning of their experience and how their attitudes and motivation 
changed over a three-year period. They used a ‘smiley face’ questionnaire and an oral interview to 
collect their data, which were triangulated through classroom observation. They report that encour-
aging young learners to articulate their feelings, as well as explaining why they felt the way they did, 
not only provided data for the research but also led to increased self-awareness on the part of the 
learners. 
 As a result of their investigation, they came up with the following conclusions: 
 Most young learners start FLL with a very positive outlook. 
 Differences in attitudes to FLL, motivation for learning and language self-concept can be observed 
from the start. 
 (Individual) learner characteristics have an impact on language achievement. 
 The impact of young learner characteristics is stronger by the age of 10–11 years than at the ﬁ rst 
phase of learning. 
 FL researchers tend to be aware of changes in young learners’ attitudes, motivation and self-
concept. This can be done through providing opportunities for YLs to comment on the FLL 
process. 
 (Mihaljevic Djigunovic & Lopriore, 2011: 59) 
 Aptitude 
 Language learning aptitude has long been of interest to both theoretical and applied linguists (Diller, 
1981). In his review of research into language aptitude, Carroll (1981) cites studies, including his 
own, reaching back into the 1950s. He argues that aptitude as a construct can be clearly distinguished 
from achievement on theoretical and logical grounds. Aptitude is a learning potential, while achieve-
ment is a learning outcome. Children differ in many ways, not only in terms of their physical charac-
teristics and abilities (some are tall while others are short; some are good at ball games while others 
excel at swimming) but also in terms of their cognitive skills and abilities. Some excel at mathemat-
ics, others at languages; some are gifted artists, others are musical. 
 Language learning aptitude is not a unitary construct. This means that learners will vary in terms 
of their aptitude for different aspects of language learning. Some learners will have well-developed 
phonological acuity and will be good mimics. Others will be good at writing or grammar. 
 Learning Styles and Strategies 
 Like affect and aptitude, learning style and learning strategy are both complex concepts. Learning 
styles refer to learners’ natural and preferred ways of going about learning (Oxford, 1990; Christison, 
2003). Learning strategies are more concrete. They are the mental and communicative processes 
deployed by learners to learn a language. (For reviews of early research into learning styles and strat-
egies, see Wenden & Rubin, 1987. For a contemporary overview, see Purpura, 2014.) 
 In relation to learning styles in elementary ESL classrooms, Peck (1995) argues that when teach-
ing children, the physical elements of learning style need to be taken into consideration. She sug-
gests that 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching English to Young Learners • 77
 It is possible that most elementary school children are global / intuitive / field-dependent 
learners and therefore learn successfully through holistic approaches such as thematic units 
and whole language. 
 (Peck, 1995: 129) 
 Compared with adult learners, where investigations into the relationship between strategy training 
and acquisition is burgeoning, research into the effect of strategy training with children is relatively 
sparse. Most of what has been written argues for the feasibility of adding a learning-how-to-learn 
dimension to elementary and junior high school foreign language programs, along with practical 
techniques for how this can be done. (See, for example, Pinter, 2006; Rixon, 2013.) 
 In 2012, I worked with a group of 10- and 11-year-old Korean elementary learners of English as a 
foreign language. My interest at that time was to investigate whether young foreign language learners 
can engage in cognitive and metacognitive processes of reflection. In particular, I was interested in 
finding out how they make sense of the experience of language learning, and to what extent they were 
able to reflect on and make sense of their learning experiences. The ultimate aim of this work was to 
establish whether it is feasible to incorporate learner sensitization and strategy training in the young 
learner classroom. Results indicated that learners were able to reflect on and report their learning 
processes. They performed best on metacognitive and social/affective tasks, and they were weakest 
on the direct/cognitive activities (Pinter, 2006). The most interesting insight to emerge was the fact 
that all learners found opportunities to use their English out of class. In terms of English learning 
and use, there was no ‘hard and fast’ distinction between the classroom world and the social world. 
Based on their stories of language use outside the classroom, it would seem that the children saw 
language as a tool for communication as much as an object of study (Nunan, 2013b). Working with 
immigrant children as young as 9 years old, Maguire and Graves (2001) also found that the learners 
were able to reflect on and report their learning experiences and were able to conceptualize their 
learning processes. In a major investigation into early language learning in Europe, it was found that 
learners were able to reflect on and articulate their feelings and attitudes towards foreign language 
learning (Enever, 2011). 
 Pedagogical Applications 
 At the beginning of this chapter, I referred to the rapid growth, one could almost say ‘explosion’, 
in TEYL that resulted largely from the role of English in globalization. In a large-scale investiga-
tion involving more than 4,000 teachers, Copland, Garton and Burns (2014) sought to identify the 
problems and challenges faced by teachers of English to young learners. The researchers adopted a 
mixed-method approach, using surveys, case studies, interviews and observations. The survey was 
a global one. The case studies involved teachers in five different elementary schools in five coun-
tries. Widespread problems included teaching the productive skills (speaking and writing), teaching 
grammar, motivating learners, managing large classes, providing discipline and differentiating learn-
ing. Other challenges, such as developing teachers’ English competence, were “more localized”. The 
main recommendation flowing from the study is that teacher education should focus specifically on 
helping teachers deal with the specific problems identified in the research rather than on “general” 
approaches to the teaching of English. 
 One of the complications in finding pedagogically appropriate solutions to problems such as 
those identified in the Copland, Garton and Burns research is that, as I pointed out earlier in the 
chapter, young learners progress through a series of developmental stages, and at each stage, their 
cognitive processing, ‘world view’, socialization and attitude to others, attention span and myriad 
other factors will change. What might work for learners at one stage will not necessarily work with 

78 • David Nunan
learners at another stage. It is not possible to adopt a blanket approach to the teaching of grammar, 
for example, for learners at different ages and stages. Unless instruction is developmentally appro-
priate, it is unlikely to be successful. The issue is further complicated by the fact that chronological 
age is only a rough guide to a child’s social, emotional, physical, cognitive and moral development 
(Brazelton & Greenspan, 2000). Individual differences also come into play. 
 The question arises as to when strategy training might be introduced into the language curricu-
lum. Pinter argues that learning to learn should be a part of the curriculum from the beginning of 
formal schooling: 
 ‘Learning to learn’ is one of the most important objectives for all learning / teaching contexts 
for all ages. In our fast moving world, it is simply impossible for learners to acquire all the 
knowledge and skills they need while they are in school. It is the school’s responsibility to teach 
learners how to learn, i.e. to equip them with strategies they can use outside school. This pro-
cess needs to start as early as possible, preferably at the beginning of schooling. Various aspects 
of ‘learning to learn’ can be introduced into the day-to-day practice of and language classroom 
without changing many of the usual classroom practice. 
 (Pinter, 2006: 99) 
 Technology is ubiquitous, and in education it has had an impact on all aspects of the curriculum. 
In language education it has been particularly significant, filling four important roles: as a carrier of 
content, as a practice tool, as a learning management device and as a communication tool (Nunan, 
2012, 2013c). Chik (2014), in a evaluation of language learning apps for young learners, suggests 
that, given the dramatic rise in the number of English language learners worldwide, these could well 
outnumber native speakers as users of tablet apps. Nunan (2013c) presents two case studies into the 
innovative use of technology in the young language learner classroom, one which was successful and 
one which was unsuccessful. Four factors emerged as critical in determining the success or otherwise 
of the innovation: enthusiastic support from the school leadership, buy-in by parents, active engage-
ment by children, and ongoing professional development for the teachers. 
 White, Hailemariam and Ogbay (2013) describe a pedagogical innovation in an immigrant 
community in England that is based on a peer teaching model. In this model, a more-able stu-
dent is paired with a less-able student in out-of-class ‘homework clubs’ designed to complement 
formal classroom instruction and established by parents and others in immigrant communities. 
They situate their work within the ‘paradigm shift’ argued for by Piccardo (2013), in which 
learners’ plurilinguistic and pluricultural competencies are drawn on and encouraged rather 
than being denied in the classroom. In the case of White et al., the competencies are utilized in 
informal learning groups beyond the classroom. Peer teaching has a number of benefits and, 
they argue, 
 is one way in which students could have the opportunity to make full use of their linguistic 
capital, and be helped to find ways of bridging the gap between that capital and the language 
priorities of instruction in mainstream school and indeed of society as a whole, in which both 
require a high level of competence in English. 
 (White, Hailemariam & Ogbay, 2013: 642) 
 Munoz and Lindgren (2011) also looked at the out-of-class experiences of young learners. They 
found that two factors in particular had a significant impact on learners’ foreign language profi-
ciency. The first was the amount of meaningful out-of-class exposure they received through, for 
example, watching subtitled television programs and films. The second was the parents’ knowledge 
and use of the foreign language professionally. 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching English to Young Learners • 79
 Calls for plurilingualism as pedagogy are gaining momentum and are increasingly supported by 
research. The practice, used by plurilinguals as they move between languages, is referred to as trans-
languaging (Garcia, 2009). Encouraging the use of more than one language in the classroom is a 
departure from the traditional practice of discouraging or even proscribing the use of code-switching 
or code-mixing. The resourceful use of a range of languages in and beyond the classroom is a practice 
that learners deploy quite naturally (Choi, 2013, 2015, 2016). 
 Conclusion 
 The teaching of English to young speakers of other languages has become a major focus of research 
over the last 10 to 15 years, with some large-scale studies being conducted in Europe and elsewhere. 
This growth has been fueled by the consolidation of English as the pre-eminent global language of 
the day in business, media, sports and other areas. Its use as a lingua franca has also been stimulated 
by the increasing mobility and global flow of large populations of guest workers, immigrants and 
refugees. These trends are changing the nature of the English language as it is adapted to a diverse 
range of communicative contexts and situations and used in conjunction with local languages (Vit-
tachi, 2010). As a result, the social contexts of language learning and use have become increasingly 
complex and diverse, and have led to the development of new pedagogical practices and applications, 
along with the development of new conceptualizations of language and learning as reflected in terms 
such as plurilingual pedagogies and translanguaging. 
 Learner factors that have been the subject of empirical investigation include age, individual learner 
differences such as motivation, attitude towards foreign language learning, out-of-class exposure and 
parental influence. Investigating these factors presents challenges in terms of research design and the 
selection of appropriate methodological tools. 
 In many parts of the world, the response of governments and ministries of education has been 
to lower the age at which English language is introduced as a compulsory subject, even though the 
research evidence is by no means clear-cut on the question of whether younger equals better. Car-
rying out comparative studies of learners at different chronological ages is fraught with difficulty 
because learners are at different stages of development, cognitively, affectively and socially, and a 
range of other variables need to be taken into consideration. These include the intensity of instruc-
tion, the curriculum models and type of instruction, the training of the teachers and so on. 
 References 
 Bayley, R. & J. Langman (2011) Language socialization in multilingual and second language contexts. In E. Hinkel (Ed.)  Hand-
book of research in second language teaching and learning . Volume II (pp. 291–302). New York: Routledge. 
 Block, D. (2005)  The social turn in second language acquisition . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
 Brazelton, B. & S. Greenspan (2000)  The irreducible needs of children: What every child must have to grow, learn and flourish . 
Cambridge: Perseus Press. 
 Brinton, D. (2003) Content-based instruction. In D. Nunan (Ed.)  Practical English language teaching  (pp. 199–224). New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
 Brinton, D. M., M. A. Snow & M. B. Wesche (1989)  Content-based second language instruction . Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
 Cameron, D. (2001)  Teaching language to young learners . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Canagarajah, S. & I. Liynage (2012) Lessons from pre-colonial multilingualism. In M. Martin-Jones, A. Blackledge & A. Creese 
(Eds.)  The Routledge handbook of multilingualism (pp. 49–65). London: Routledge. 
 Carroll, J. B. (1981) Twenty-five years of research on foreign language aptitude. In K. Diller (Ed.)  Individual differences and 
universals in language learning aptitude  (pp. 83–118). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Chik, A. (2014) English language teaching apps.: Positioning parents and young learners.  Changing English , 21(3), 252–260. 
 Choi, J. (2013) Constructing a multivocal self: A critical autoethnography. Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Technol-
ogy, Sydney, Sydney. 
 Choi, J. (2015) Escaping into the landscape: Color, performance and exhibition. Paper presented at the Sociolinguistics of 
Globalization Conference, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, June 2015. 

80 • David Nunan
 Choi, J. (2016). Creative criticality in multilingual texts. In R. Jones & J. C. Richards (Eds.)  Creativity in language teaching 
(pp. 146–161). New York: Routledge. 
 Christian, D. (2011) Dual language education. In E. Hinkel (Ed.)  Handbook of research in second language teaching and learn-
ing . Volume II (pp. 3–20). New York: Routledge. 
 Christison, M. (2003) Learning styles and strategies. In D. Nunan (Ed.)  Practical English language teaching  (pp. 267–288). New 
York: McGraw-Hill. 
 Copland, F., S. Garton & A. Burns (2014) Challenges in teaching English to young learners: Global perspectives and local 
realities.  TESOL Quarterly , 48(4), 738–762. 
 Covington, M. (1998)  The will to learn: A guide for motivating young people . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Cummins, J. (1984) Bilingualism and special education issues in assessment and pedagogy. Clevedon Avon: Multilingual Matters. 
 Diller, K. (Ed.) (1981)  Individual differences and universals in language learning aptitude . Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Dörnyei, Z. (1994) Understanding second language motivation: On with the challenge!  Modern Language Journal , 78, 515–523. 
 Dörnyei, Z. (2001)  Motivational strategies in the language classroom . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Dörnyei, Z. (2010)  The psychology of the language learner: Individual differences in second language acquisition . New York: 
Routledge. 
 Ellis, R. (1994)  The study of second language acquisition . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Enever, J. (Ed.) (2011)  Early language learning in Europe . London: British Council. 
 Enever, J., J. Moon & U. Raman (Eds.) (2009)  Young learner English language policy and implementation: International perspec-
tives . Reading, UK: Garnet Education. 
 Garcia, O. (2009)  Bilingual education in the 21st century: A global perspective . Chichester: Wiley Blackwell. 
 Gardner, R. (1985)  Social psychology and second language learning: The role of attitudes and motivation . London: Arnold. 
 Gardner, R. & W. Lambert (1972)  Attitudes and motivation in second language learning . Rowledy, MA: Newbury House. 
 Gopnik, A., A. N. Meltzoff & P. K. Kuhl (2001)  The scientist in the crib: What early learning tells us about the mind . New York: 
Harper. 
 Halliday, M. A. K. (2004)  An introduction to functional grammar . 3rd Edition. London: Arnold. 
 Holliday, A., M. Hyde & J. Kullman (2006)  Intercultural communication . London: Routledge. 
 Johnson, R. K. & M. Swain (Eds.) (1997)  Immersion education: International perspectives . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Johnstone, R. (2009) An early start: What are the key conditions for generalized success? In J. Enever, J. Moon & U. Raman 
(Eds.)  Young learner English language policy and implementation: International perspectives  (pp. 31–41). Reading, 
England: Garnet Education. 
 Judd, E. (1978) Language policy and TESOL sociopolitical factors and their influence on the professions. In C. Blatchford & 
J. Schachter (Eds.)  On TESOL ’78: EFL policies, programs, practices (pp. 265–273). Washington, DC: TESOL. 
 Kang Shin, A. (2014) Teaching young learners in English as a second/foreign language. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton & 
M. A. Snow (Eds.)  Teaching English as a second or foreign language (pp. 550–567) . 4th Edition. Boston, MA: National 
Geographic Learning/Heinle Cengage. 
 Kulick, D. & B. B. Schieffelin (2004) Language socialization. In A. Duranti (Ed.)  The handbook of linguistic anthropology 
(pp. 349–368). Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Lantolf, J. (2000)  Sociocultural theory and second language learning . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Lantolf, J. (2011) Integrating sociocultural theory and cognitive linguistics in the second language classroom. In E. Hinkel 
(Ed.)  Handbook of research in second language teaching and learning . Volume II (pp. 303–318). New York: Routledge. 
 Lin, A. (2013) Toward paradigmatic change in TESOL methodologies: Building plurilingual pedagogies from the ground up. 
 TESOL Quarterly , 47, 521–545. 
 Linse, C. (2005)  Practical English language teaching: Young learners . New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
 Maguire, M. & B. Graves (2001). Speaking personalities in primary school children’s L2 writing.  TESOL Quarterly , 35(4), 
561–593. 
 Marinova-Todd, S., D. Bradford Marshall & C. Snow (2001) Missing the point: A response to Hyltenstam & Abrahamsson. 
 TESOL Quarterly , 35(1), 171–181. 
 Martin, J. R. (2001) Language, register and genre. In A. Burns & C. Coffin (Eds.)  Analysing English in a global context 
(pp. 149–166). London: Routledge. 
 Mastruserio Reynolds, K. (2015)  Approaches to inclusive English classrooms . Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Mihaljevic Djigunovic, J. & L. Lopriore (2011) The learner: Do individual differences matter? In J. Enever (Ed.)  Early language 
learning in Europe (pp. 43–59). London: British Council. 
 Munoz, C. & E. Lindgren (2011) Out-of-school factors—the home. In J. Enever (Ed.)  Early language learning in Europe 
(pp. 103–123). London: British Council. 
 Nunan, D. (2003) The impact of English as a global language on educational policies and practices in the Asia-Pacific region. 
 TESOL Quarterly , 37(4), 589–613. 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching English to Young Learners • 81
 Nunan, D. (2011)  Teaching English to young learners . Anaheim, CA: Anaheim University Press. 
 Nunan, D. (2012) Foreword. In L. England (Ed.)  Online language teacher education (pp. vii–xiv). New York: Routledge. 
 Nunan, D. (2013a)  Learner-centered English language education: The selected works of David Nunan. World Library of Educa-
tionalists . New York: Routledge. 
 Nunan, D. (2013b) Out of the mouths of babes: Applying a learner-centered approach to young learners. Featured Presenta-
tion, TESOL International Convention, Dallas, Texas, March 2013. 
 Nunan, D. (2013c) Innovation in the young learner classroom. In K. Hyland & L. C. Wong (Eds.)  Innovation and change in 
English language education (pp. 233–247). London, UK: Routledge. 
 Nunan, D. & K. M. Bailey (2009)  Exploring second language classroom research : Boston, MA: Heinle/Cengage Learning. 
 Oxford, R. (1990)  Language learning strategies: What every teacher should know . New York: Newbury House. 
 Peck, S. (1995) Learning styles and elementary school ESL. In J. Reid (Ed.)  Learning styles in the ESL/EFL classroom (pp. 128–133). 
Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
 Penfield, W. & L. Roberts (1958)  Speech and brain mechanisms . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Pennycook, A. (2012)  Language and mobility: Unexpected places . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Piaget, J. (1952)  The origins of intelligence in children . New York: International Universities Press. 
 Piaget, J. (1954)  The construction of reality in the child . New York: Basic Books. 
 Piccardo, E. (2013) Plurilingualism and curriculum design: Toward a synergic vision.  TESOL Quarterly , 47, 600–614. 
 Pinter, A. (2006)  Teaching young learners . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 Purpura, J. (2014) Language learning strategies and styles. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton & M. A. Snow (Eds.)  Teaching 
English as a second or foreign language (pp. 532–549).  4th Edition. Boston, MA: National Geographic Learning/Heinle 
Cengage. 
 Rixon, S. (2013)  How young learners learn language and how to test them . Association of Language Testers in Europe. 
 Romaine, S. (1996) Bilingualism. In W. Ritchie & T. Bhatia (Eds.)  Handbook of second language acquisition  (pp. 571–604). San 
Diego: Academic Press. 
 Singleton, D. (1989)  Language acquisition: The age factor . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Singleton, D. & C. Munoz (2011) Around and beyond the critical period hypothesis. In E. Hinkel (Ed.)  Handbook of research 
in second language teaching and learning . Volume II (pp. 407–425). New York: Routledge. 
 Skutnab-Kangas, T. (1988) Multilingualism and the education of minority children. In T. Skutnab-Kangas & J. Cummins 
(Eds.)  Minority education (pp. 9–44). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Song, J. (2011) Globalization, children’s study abroad, and transnationalism as an emerging context for language learning: A 
new task for language teacher education.  TESOL Quarterly , 45(4), 749–758. 
 Vittachi, N. (2010) A short course in globalese. In D. Nunan & J. Choi (Eds.)  Language and culture: Reflective narratives and 
the emergence of identity (pp. 215–222). New York: Routledge. 
 Vygotsky, L. (1986)  Thought and language . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Wenden, A. & J. Rubin (1987)  Learner strategies in language learning . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall International. 
 White, G., C. Hailemariam & S. Ogbay (2013) Towards the development of plurilingual pedagogy: Making use of children’s 
informal learning practices.  TESOL Quarterly , 47(3), 638–643. 
 Williams, M. & R. Burden (1997)  Psychology for language teachers . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Wu, X. (2003) Intrinsic motivation and young language learners: The impact of the classroom environment.  System , 31(4), 
501–517. 

82
 7 
 Academic Language in K–12 Contexts 
 Maria Estela Brisk and Qianqian Zhang-Wu 
 Throughout the world many students are educated in a language other than their home language. 
English-speaking countries such as Australia, Great Britain, Canada and the United States have a 
tradition of receiving immigrants in their schools. Educators working with second language (L2) 
learners have been concerned for some time with the need to develop language that goes beyond 
everyday use. Cummins (1984) proposed a distinction between basic interpersonal communica-
tive skills (BICS) and cognitive/academic language proficiency (CALP). Other researchers explored 
connecting content area with language instruction using either language-based content learning or 
content-based language learning (Crandall, 1987; Mohan, 1986). Further exploration into the vari-
ous content areas revealed differences among them, leading to analyzing the specifics of the language 
of math (Dale & Cuevas, 1992), social studies (Short, 1994), and science (Kessler & Quinn, 1987). 
Since the turn of the 21st century there has been an explosion of studies investigating what is referred 
to as the language of schooling (Schleppegrell, 2004), academic English (Bailey, 2007), academic 
language (Gibbons, 2009; Zwiers, 2008), and disciplinary linguistic knowledge (Turkan, De Oliveira, 
Lee, & Phelps, 2014). The need to understand the linguistic demands of schooling has been exac-
erbated by education reforms that promote high levels of literacy in connection to subject matter 
content—for example, the Common Core State Standards Initiative (2010) and the Next Generation 
Science Standards (2013) in the United States and The Australian Curriculum: ACARA (2012) in 
Australia. Britain launched a series of educational reforms in 1988 with wide implications on lan-
guage and literacy (Chen, 2007). In addition, language-specific standards such as the WIDA English 
Language Development Standards (2012) and the TESOL Pre-K–12 English Language Proficiency 
Standards (2006) have added to the focus on academic language (AL) instruction and proficiency. 
 Simultaneous to the awareness of the language demands of schooling emerged the need to find ways 
to make this language accessible to L2 learners. Approaches such as the Cognitive Academic Language 
Learning Approach (CALLA; Chamot & O’Malley, 1986) and the Sheltered Instruction Observation 
Protocol (SIOP; Echevarría, Vogt, & Short, 2000) proposed specific strategies to support the acqui-
sition of this language of schooling. More recently, Zwiers (2008) described AL with respect to the 
four language skills and features of different content areas, as well as gave multiple suggestions of how 
teachers can teach this material. Others approaches proposed by Gibbons (2009) and Rothery (1996) 
suggest more explicit ways to teach AL and literacy, informed by sociocultural and systemic functional 
linguistics theories. In 2012 Stanford University launched a website “Understanding Language” (http://
ell.stanford.edu) with theoretical and practical resources related to AL in a variety of subject matters. 
www.ebook3000.com

Academic Language in K–12 Contexts • 83
 DiCerbo, Anstrom, Baker, and Rivera (2014) reviewed extensively the literature on academic Eng-
lish in the context of K–12 schools, including conceptualization, approaches to teaching, and implica-
tions on teacher education. This emerged from an earlier report by Anstrom, DiCerbo, Butler, Katz, 
Millet, and Rivera (2010). Bailey (2007), Heritage, Silva, and Pierce (2007), Janzen (2008), Liu (2014), 
and Turkan, De Oliveira, Lee, and Phelps (2014) among others include extended literature reviews 
on AL for K–12 within their papers. In combination, these reviews provide information on what AL 
is, its various aspects, approaches to teaching, implication for teacher education, and suggestions for 
further research. In addition, the presence of international students and language minority popula-
tions in US colleges has produced considerable research in relation to college students (Coffin, Curry, 
Goodman, Hewings, Lillis, & Swann, 2003; Matsuda, 2006; Silva, 1992; Silva & Matsuda, 2012). Inter-
est in learning English to function within professions led to research and pedagogy on English for 
special purposes (Adamson, 1990; Dudley-Evans & St. John, 1998). 
 The purpose of this chapter is to present the various topics raised in the research with respect 
to how AL is defined, the rationale for need to teach, controversies, how it develops, what and 
how to teach, who should teach, and how to assess. Examples of AL, presented by the research at 
the various language levels and in relation to various disciplines, illustrate what authors mean 
by this concept. The chapter concludes by proposing a theoretical lens that helps address both 
the needs raised by educators and the questions posed by critics. The focus of this chapter will 
be limited to K–12 education. Although the chapter focuses on students learning English as a 
second language, the findings apply in general to the language K–12 students encounter in their 
educational experiences. 
 Definitions 
 Most researchers recognize that AL is a fluid concept. They define it with respect to context of use, 
i.e., the language needed to function in school to acquire and demonstrate knowledge (Anstrom 
et al., 2010; Cummins, 1984; Schleppegrell, 2012). AL is a cluster of linguistic resources found in 
texts used in schools and needed for communicative purposes in such settings (Snow & Uccelli, 
2009; Uccelli & Meneses, 2015). Gottlieb and Ernst-Slavit (2014) propose a model where “concepts 
are reinforced through language, and language is the medium for accessing content, while the socio-
cultural context frames each learning situation” (p. 62). 
 Bailey and Heritage (2008) further distinguish between language needed in school for interaction 
as opposed to language needed to cope with content material. Others claim there is no such thing as 
an AL but a variety of registers depending on whether the subject is math, science, history, and so on 
(Schleppegrell, 2004; Turkan et al., 2014). Scarcella (2003) argues that academic English goes beyond 
the linguistic dimension to also include sociolinguistic and cognitive dimensions. Blair (2016) ques-
tions the association of AL with school context, showing that there are features of the out-of-school 
language of adolescents that are similar to what is considered AL. 
 When discussing AL, some researchers focus on written language (Bailey, 2007; Schleppegrell, 
2004), others focus on oral discourse (Liu, 2014; Saunders & O’Brien, 2006), while Gibbons (2009) 
presents the notion of a mode continuum, where language changes from oral to written and within 
each. Thus language differs depending on whether students are discussing among themselves, pre-
senting ideas publicly, writing their own pieces, or reading material authored by adults. As the mode 
changes, so does the language, as texts become more explicit, the language grows denser and becomes 
more field specific and impersonal. In addition, researchers have shown that academic texts are mul-
timodal (Martin & Rose, 2008; Schleppegrell, 2007; Unsworth, 2001). Thus, learning academic dis-
course also includes understanding diagrams, timelines, maps, graphs, formulas, and others. Gottlieb 
and Ernst-Slavit (2014) propose that students encounter in and out of school four types of literacies, 

84 • Maria Estela Brisk and Qianqian Zhang-Wu
including print-based (e.g., books, magazines), digital (e.g., blogs, computer games), visual (e.g., 
PowerPoints, videos), and oral (e.g., songs, story-telling). 
 Christie (2012) takes a developmental perspective suggesting that AL is part of children’s linguistic 
development resulting from experiences in school contexts. Liu’s (2014) thorough review of defini-
tions concludes that the above definitions set forth by researchers differ from how school districts 
perceive AL. Educational institutions define AL in terms of students’ ability to meet standards and 
performance on high-stakes tests. 
 Rationale for the Need to Teach AL 
 Given that students do not often encounter the type of language demanded in school in their every-
day life, researchers argue for the need to teach it at school, particularly the language of the various 
disciplines (DiCerbo et al., 2014; Schleppegrell, 2004; Turkan et al., 2014). Moreover, ability to use 
the language of the discipline is connected with understanding concepts. When students express, 
for example, mathematical concepts with everyday language, they may not relate it well with math-
ematical concepts and operations (Schleppegrell, 2007). Depending on their home experiences, chil-
dren may or may not be familiar with the academic discourse (Schleppegrell, 2012; Valdés, Bunch, 
Snow, Lee, & Matos, 2005). Consequently, although all students need the language of schooling, their 
need will vary given the students’ sociocultural backgrounds. This need for instruction continues 
throughout students’ schooling rather than just in the early years (Christie, 2012). 
 Development of AL covers both oral and written language. Researchers have often focused on 
written language because reading and writing are major tasks in schooling, they help advanced AL 
(Scarcella, 2003), and they are the main source of evaluating students’ disciplinary knowledge (Bai-
ley, 2007). However, oral AL is essential for developing academic literacy and fostering thinking 
and understanding (Fisher, Rothenberg, & Frey, 2008; González-Howard & McNeill, 2016; Zwiers & 
Crawford, 2011). The CCSS for English Language Arts (ELA) also include standards for speaking and 
listening across all grade levels, in addition to reading and writing standards (CCSS, 2010). 
 From a broader perspective, teaching AL is closely associated with the promotion of social justice 
(Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 2014; Rose & Martin, 2012). Academic discourses have posed great chal-
lenges to bilingual learners in mainstream classrooms (Ernst-Slavit & Mason, 2011). The abstract 
nature of the language, lexical density, and need for precise expression makes it challenging not only 
for bilingual students but for all students (Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 2014). Therefore, effective AL 
instruction enhances students’ chance to succeed in school (Zwiers, 2008). The Sydney School in 
Australia considers providing students with the knowledge of language to access curriculum a cru-
cial aspect of effective teaching (Rose & Martin, 2012). However, Mohan (1986) warns that not only 
language but also access to content is an essential educational right of L2 learners. 
 In all the studies on AL the focus has been English, since that is the main language of schooling in 
English-speaking countries. However, some researchers have pointed out the value of native language 
literacy in acquisition of second language literacy (Cummins, 2000; Gibbons, 2009) and the value of 
bilingualism on academic achievement. (See overview in Brisk & Proctor, 2012.) Therefore, bilingual 
education contexts that aim at bi-literacy can provide ideal circumstances for development of AL 
(Brisk & Proctor, 2012). 
 Controversies 
 There is controversy with respect to the concept of AL as well as with instructional practices used to 
develop AL. Some researchers question the notion of AL as a distinct form of language to be learned 
by students in educational settings. Valdés (2004) argues that, especially in connection to written 
www.ebook3000.com

Academic Language in K–12 Contexts • 85
language at the college level, AL is considered a highly specialized form of discourse with emphasis 
on correctness. Emphasis on this type of discourse parallels the hegemonic attitudes surrounding the 
belief in a standard form of English. Others have pursued this line of critique. Bailey (2007) cautions 
against believing that social language is less sophisticated or cognitively demanding than the one 
used in academic contexts; rather, she suggests that there are differences in grammatical structures, 
vocabulary, and language functions. Others claim that the focus on AL in schools leads to segrega-
tion of children, especially bilingual children or those who do not speak standard dialects (Flores & 
Schissel, 2014). Poza (2015) states that this notion of AL is never related to middle- and upper-class 
English speakers, for whom the home to school language use is a continuum and not a dichotomy. 
Thus, the perspective changes from learning something totally new and separate to further develop-
ing skills brought from home. Moreover, the focus on academic English emphasized by the standards 
movement, measuring English proficiency with respect to academic English only, disregards the full 
linguistic resources bilingual learners bring to school (Flores & Schissel, 2014; Rolstad, MacSwan, & 
Guzmán, 2015). Language skills students bring to the school context are the ones used as the basis to 
acquire the language of schooling (Gibbons, 2009; Poza, 2015). Thus, critics feel that this dichoto-
mous treatment of language leads to ignoring linguistic abilities students bring to school, which 
in turn leads to instructional policies that limit emergent bilinguals to AL instruction, rather than 
being immersed in the authentic context where this language is used to learn the disciplines, giving 
students a better chance to learn it (Poza, 2015; Valdés, 2004). 
 Even among researchers that focus on AL there is disagreement with respect to a number of issues, 
including: 
 • When to teach the language: (a) either as needed or as a result of systematic preparation and 
(b) before teaching content or as content is taught 
 • Adaptation of language and content in materials and classroom instruction 
 • Use of students’ native language to support L2 acquisition 
 • Whether instruction should focus on language using topics from grade level content or lan-
guage should be taught within each discipline 
 • Policies for assessing language and content 
 These will be addressed in various sections of the chapter. 
 Academic Language Development 
 Except for Christie’s study (2012), there is limited research with respect to the development of AL. 
Christie considers the development of AL to be the result of maturity and instruction. Christie pro-
poses four fluid phases. In Phase 1 (ages 4/5 to 8) students are exposed mostly to commonsense 
discourses and the beginnings of literate language, where they learn to decode and encode language 
and concepts such as words, letters, and the alphabet. Students are also socialized to the language of 
classroom interactions and begin to develop literacy. In Phase 2, late childhood and early adolescence 
(ages 9 to 13), children encounter subject-specific language and literacy. They handle more abstract 
concepts and they learn to make generalizations, to interpret, and to evaluate. The written language 
moves away from oral language, becoming lexically dense with concepts packed in extended nomi-
nal groups and complex sentences. They also learn how to represent meaning with semiotic systems 
other than language such as graphs, diagrams, and so on. In Phase 3, mid-adolescence, students 
further develop the discourses of the various disciplines and the increasingly complex language. 
By Phase 4, late adolescence into adulthood (ages 16 and up), educational contexts demand high 
levels of abstraction, interpretation, and evaluation. Students need to learn methods of inquiry and 

86 • Maria Estela Brisk and Qianqian Zhang-Wu
creation of knowledge of the various disciplines. Throughout these phases, students expand their 
linguistic resources. 
 Within the development of the language of schooling, some researchers believe that oral lan-
guage, or rather, academic conversations, set the foundation for literacy development (Gottlieb & 
Ernst-Slavit, 2014). Others consider academic oral language to be part of a continuum of language 
development following everyday language use and preceding children’s writing within individual 
units of study (Gibbons, 2009). The belief that oral language comes before reading and writing in 
second language acquisition has been largely based on language development in general. However, 
second language research has also shown that second oral and written language can be developed 
simultaneously, reinforcing each other (Hudelson, 1984). The challenge for some L2 learners is that 
schooling is not only the first encounter with academic English but also with the English language. 
 AL Instruction 
 AL instruction relates to classroom practices, i.e., what to teach and how to teach, and to school-wide 
policies, i.e., how to organize the school curriculum, how to structure instruction within school 
organization, and how to assess. 
 What to Teach 
 Any given topic in a content area will require a variety of language resources. For example, as 
reported by a kindergarten teacher, the language resources at the sentence and word levels that stu-
dents needed to function in a unit on the life cycle of a caterpillar were: 
 Declarative sentences: to report observations and sequence of events 
 Interrogative sentences: to ask questions 
 Complex noun groups and use of adverbials: to express complete information ( The fuzzy black 
caterpillar is crawling over the leaf .) 
 Content-speciﬁ c vocabulary:  caterpillar, chrysalis, larva, grow, transform, etc. 
 Prepositions:  on, over, inside, outside 
 Comparison words:  like, same as, similar, different 
(Adapted from Heritage et al., 2007, p. 193.) 
 In addition, at the discourse level, students need to know the text structure of a cyclical 
explanation. 
 The aspects of language to teach have been reported across disciplines with respect to various levels: 
discourse, sentence, and word (DiCerbo et al., 2014; Zwiers, 2013), or with respect to the disciplines, 
i.e., English, math, science, history, and so on (Liu, 2014; Turkan, et al., 2014). Gottlieb and Ernst-Slavit 
(2014) show features of different disciplines within each of the levels. DiCerbo et al. (2014) conclude 
that although aspects of language are found across content areas, many language demands are discipline 
specific. Scarcella (2003) adds the phonological and sociolinguistic component to the lexical, grammati-
cal, and discourse components. The sociolinguistic component encompasses the language functions and 
genres. Scarcella goes beyond the linguistic component, which is the focus of this chapter, to include also 
a cognitive component that covers background world knowledge, higher-order thinking, knowledge of 
strategies that support communication, and metalinguistic awareness. Finally, she highlights that linguis-
tic and cognitive components are not enough. There is also a sociocultural/psychological dimension that 
students must acquire to understand how to function in the contexts where AL is used. 
www.ebook3000.com

Academic Language in K–12 Contexts • 87
 Discourse Level Features 
 Discourse, an extended text beyond the sentence, has been analyzed with respect to text types, func-
tions, and genres. At the discourse level, texts—oral or written—demand different structural orga-
nization and language. For example, story problems and graphs are text types found in math, diaries 
and speeches in social studies, lab directions and reports in science, and plays and blogs in English 
language arts (Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 2014). AL serves such functions as answering informational 
questions, explaining cause and effect, and persuading (Bailey, 2007). These functions differ among 
disciplines. For example, in ELA language is used to describe characters and settings, in math to com-
pare two-digit numbers, and in science to describe patterns and different kinds of materials (Gottlieb 
& Ernst-Slavit, 2014). Others classify the recurrent forms of text in a particular culture into genres, 
such as procedure, narrative, report, explanation, and argument (Butt, Fahey, Feez, & Spinks, 2012; 
Martin & Rose, 2008). 
 Sentence Level Features 
 Length and complexity of sentences and noun phrases, relationships expressed by conjunctions, use 
of nominalization, and use of passive voice are among sentence level features that make AL difficult 
for L2 learners. AL, especially in its written form, packs information into sentences and noun groups 
(see Table 7.1). 
 Word Level Features 
 Understanding of content is closely connected with comprehension of words. Researchers have cre-
ated AL word lists (Coxhead, 2000) and classified them in different ways (Beck, McKeown, & Kucan, 
2002; Stevens, Butler, & Castellon-Wellington, 2000; TESOL Standards, 2006). They conclude that 
 Table 7.1 Sentence Level Features of Academic Language 
Feature
Example
Complex sentences
Anne Frank had lived in the Netherlands since she 
was four years old, so although she was born German, 
she wrote in Dutch. [4 clauses within a sentence].
Extended noun groups
Pressure and high temperatures beneath the earth’s 
crust causes rocks to melt down. (www.ask.com/
question/how-do-volcanoes-erupt)
The coyote has a habitat range that is more diverse 
than any other animal in the world, except humans. 
[noun group includes an embedded clause]
Use of passive voice
A wide variety of rocks are formed by different 
cooling rates.(www.kidsloverocks.com/html/types_
of_rocks.html)
Relationships expressed by conjunctions
The travelers were relieved that their journey was 
over, but they worried about what awaited them on 
Ellis Island (Maestro, 1996, p. na).
“Since b is positive, m+n is positive.
Paragraph related with text connectives. These text 
connectives express a number of functions, including 
cause/effect, sequence, clarifying, and so on 
(Derewianka, 2011; Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 2014).
In fact, the creation of Kitty took quite a long time. 
[cause/result]
However, during that time, the world was changing 
rapidly. [condition/concession]

88 • Maria Estela Brisk and Qianqian Zhang-Wu
academic texts include everyday vocabulary, general academic vocabulary, and specific words of a 
particular discipline. For emergent bilinguals, all three types can present a challenge depending on 
their general English proficiency, their level of education in L1, and the type of L1. For a student 
new to the language, even the everyday vocabulary may be unknown, while the technical vocabulary 
may include cognates if the students are educated in an L1 that is Latin-based (e.g.,  carnivorous and 
 carnívoro in Spanish) (Short & Echevarría, 2004). 
 Another source of vocabulary difficulty comes from words that have one meaning in everyday 
language and a different one in content area language (Dale & Cuevas, 1992; Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 
2014; Schleppegrell, 2007). For example,  table  (a piece of furniture) vs.  table  in math and science;  note 
(a short text),  note in music; and so on. 
 The Language of Mathematics 
 One of the greatest misconceptions that gets in the way of focusing on the language of math is 
the perception that math is “language free” (Liu, 2014). Indeed, math expresses meaning through a 
multi-semiotic system that includes oral language, symbolic representations, graphs, diagrams, and 
formulas, and written language (Schleppegrell, 2007). As in other disciplines, the language of math 
features technical vocabulary ( triangle ,  octagon ), complex noun groups ( a quadrilateral with two 
pairs of parallel sides ), everyday vocabulary used with a different meaning ( extension ,  property ), logi-
cal connectors ( if . . . then ), passive voice ( x is defined as  . . .), prepositions ( divided into ,  multiply by ), 
and comparatives ( less/greater than ) (Dale & Cuevas, 1992). 
 Students are given little exposure to writing in a variety of genres in math (see Table 7.2). Marks 
and Mousley (1990) argue that students’ learning of math would greatly benefit from writing in dif-
ferent genres rather than just the recount genres. 
 Table 7.2 Genres of Math and Science 
Genre
Purpose
Example for Math
Example for Science
Procedure
To give instructions
How to calculate the 
surface of a geometric 
figure
Procedure to study 
evaporation
Procedural 
Recount
To recount in a sequence 
observed facts and 
processes
Explain the steps the 
author took in solving a 
problem
Recount of what happened 
when carrying out the 
experiment on evaporation
Numerative 
Recount
To tell a story that involves 
math for the purpose of 
testing students’ ability to 
solve a problem
There are 748 students 
eating lunch in the 
cafeteria at school. The 
same number of students 
is sitting at each of the 22 
tables. How many students 
are sitting at each table?
Report
To organize information.
Types of parallelograms
Types of rocks
Explanation
To explain how or why 
things are the way they are 
or to analyze how things 
work
Transitivity property
A = B and B = C, then 
A = C
How volcanoes erupt;
consequences of 
deforestation
Argument
To persuade about 
something or to do 
something
Two dozen eggs at $5 is a 
better buy than one dozen 
at $2.75.
To persuade that human 
activity is causing climate 
change.
www.ebook3000.com

Academic Language in K–12 Contexts • 89
 The Language of Science 
 Studies on the language of science have yielded results with respect to the function of the language 
used for classroom interaction and for writing. Bailey, Butler, Stevens, et al. (2007) show that oral 
interactions in science classrooms include language for communication and language related to the 
science content. This language is used to accomplish such functions as explanation, description, 
comparison, and assessment (DiCerbo et al., 2014). Science focus produces two important genres 
among others: explanations and arguments (see Table 7.2). Scientific texts seek to explain how things 
work or why things are the way they are (Macken-Horarik, 2002). There are many types of explana-
tions, such as sequential, causal, cyclical, factorial, and others (Derewianka & Jones, 2012). Science 
also makes claims about phenomena, setting claims supported by evidence and scientific reasons 
(Quinn, Lee, & Valdés, 2012). The most common type of text encountered by students in schools is 
the lab report, which includes four genres: prediction, procedure, procedural recount, and an expla-
nation or argument. 
 The language of science is technical, abstract, dense, and tightly knit. The vocabulary is either 
technical ( atom, hydrogen ) or everyday words with a different meaning ( body, particle ). The technical 
vocabulary to a great extent is of Latin or Greek origin (e.g.,  androgynous ,  electromagnetic ). The use 
of many abstract words increases the difficulty (e.g., discovery, significance, etc.) (Fang & Schleppe-
grell, 2008, p. 23). As in other disciplines the use of nominalizations ( One of the reasons for the evolu-
tion of reptiles to birds was safety .), dense noun groups ( The first animal that looked like a bird . . .  ), 
and complex sentences ( Other megacities are exposed to seismic (earthquake) and volcanic hazards 
where inappropriate land use and poor construction practices coupled with rapid population growth, 
are increasing vulnerability. ). Concepts are developed in tightly knit paragraphs, placing the science 
concept in the theme position (rather than the person doing the action). For example, in the phrase 
“Repetition of this process,” “repetition” is in the theme position. More typically, students tend to 
write “We repeated the process,” putting themselves in the theme position. 
 The Language of Social Studies 
 The language of social studies shows specific features with respect to function (explain, justify, clas-
sify, describe, sequence, evaluate), text structures (cause and effect), and syntactic features (historical 
present, causative link words) (Schleppegrell, 2005; Short, 1994). Texts are lexically dense ( It aimed 
to guarantee blacks the right to vote and to use public accommodations, and provided for the federal gov-
ernment to prosecute those who did not obey this law. ). As in the other disciplines, nominalizations are 
used to pack information ( Colonization of the Americas resulted  . . .). Meanings of words need to be 
interpreted within the clause rather than the isolated word or phrase (Fang & Schleppegrell, 2008). 
For example, in the clause,  The Boston Massacre, as it was called, took place in 1770 , the verb  call has 
a different meaning than,  he called to announce the event . In addition, nouns often do not refer to a 
person or persons but to categories ( the British ) or institutions that include people ( Congress ). 
 There are a great number of genres in historical texts with different purposes and structures (see 
Table 7.3; Coffin, 2006). Historical accounts, explanations, and arguments are difficult genres appro-
priate for secondary education. 
 The Language of English Language Arts (ELA) 
 The language demands of ELA require students to understand and use language to develop character 
and settings in ways that show rather than tell directly what characters are like. For example,  Stop!, 
yelled the squirrel  as opposed to  Stop!, pleaded the squirrel . The verb creates a different image of the 

90 • Maria Estela Brisk and Qianqian Zhang-Wu
squirrel’s personality. Students also need to learn to control reference, to make clear which is the 
referent when they use pronouns. They need to show passage of time with adverbs ( after ), adverbial 
phrases ( at the end of the war ), or clauses ( when the patriots arrived  . . .). They need to understand 
and use metaphorical language. 
 A variety of genres are encountered in ELA classes (see Table 7.4). A number of them require 
responding in some manner to texts that have been read. The difficulty of these genres is related to 
the particular texts. Character and thematic analysis are appropriate only for middle and high school 
students (Christie & Derewianka, 2008). These genres require the ability not only to analyze text but 
also to argue points about the text. Some items in testing programs that have emerged in response to 
CCSS require these skills of analyzing and arguing about texts for upper elementary students.       
 Table 7.3  Genres of History 
Genre
Purpose
Example
Autobiography
To retell “the events of the author’s life in order to 
both inform and entertain” (Coffin, 2006, p. 49).
My Story by Rosa Parks
Biography
To tell “the life story of a significant historical 
figure” (Coffin, p. 53).
Sonia Sotomayor: La juez que 
creció en el Bronx/A judge 
grows in the Bronx
Empathetic 
Autobiography
To inform and entertain in relation to the events 
in the life of a historical figure as the narrator. 
This person is either defined or general, i.e. Paul 
Revere or a colonial soldier (Brisk, 2015).
Samuel Eaton’s day: A day in 
the life of a pilgrim boy
Historical 
Recount
“[T]o chronicle past events regarded as 
historically significant, and designed to inform 
rather than entertain” (Coffin, 2006 p. 56).
The Boston Tea Party
Historical 
Account
A historical account not only recounts the past 
but also provides the reasons for the outcomes 
(Christie & Derewianka, 2008).
A history of the Korean 
War and the reasons for its 
outcomes
Historical 
Explanation
Factorial: factors explaining a historical event
Consequential: explanation of the consequences 
of a historical event
Factors leading to WWII
Consequences of the 
abolition of slavery
Historical 
Argument
To take a position about some aspect of history.
To argue that US 
colonization was detrimental 
for indigenous populations
Site and Period 
Studies
To investigate aspects of significant sites and periods 
in history. Not written as a chronology as other 
historical genres (Christie & Derewianka, 2008).
Site studies: Colonial villages
Period studies: Roman 
Empire, Medieval times
 Table 7.4 Genres of ELA 
Genre
Purpose
Example
Personal 
Recount
To tell what happened based on a personal 
experience, to document a sequence of 
events and evaluate their significance in 
some way.
The day I visited the aquarium and saw a 
piranha
Fictional 
or Personal 
Narrative
To construct a pattern of events with a 
problematic or unexpected outcome that 
entertains and instructs.
Cinderella
Personal 
Response
To express simply an attitude to the text.
The book is great because it includes my 
favorite animals.
www.ebook3000.com

Academic Language in K–12 Contexts • 91
 The Language of Other Disciplines 
 AL goes beyond the aforementioned traditional standardized-test-related disciplines. For instance, 
the language of music, physical education, and arts demonstrates features particularly regarding 
difficult vocabulary. The word-level challenges in these disciplines are multidimensional: (1) field-
specific acronyms (e.g., DJ, R&B, BMI), (2) everyday words with unfamiliar meaning (e.g., beat, 
note), and (3) technical vocabulary (e.g., cardiovascular, impressionist, tonality) (Gottlieb & Ernst-
Slavit, 2014). 
 How to Teach 
 Aspects other than linguistics are important when instructing emergent bilingual learners, such as 
knowing the students and creating a culture of respect for all students, their families, culture, and 
languages (Heritage et al., 2007). Absence of these features in the context of AL teaching has led to 
critiques of AL. However, it is not AL per se but teachers’ and administrators’ general unfavorable 
attitudes to bilingual learners, their language, and culture (Lee & Oxelson, 2006). When focusing on 
language instruction, teachers need to make decisions with respect to when to teach AL, whether to 
allow students to use everyday language and to simplify resources, and when to allow students to use 
their native language. 
 How to teach academic English needs to be differentiated from how to make content accessible 
to students who are developing English. Strategies using semiotic systems other than language, 
such as images and hands-on activities, help comprehension of content but do not guarantee 
acquisition of the language resources students need to comprehend and make meaning through 
language themselves. For example, a hands-on activity with rocks to teach students the differ-
ent types of rocks (igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic) by bringing real rocks and having 
students observe them helps comprehension, but it may or may not develop language. Instead, 
taking students’ everyday language ( melted rock ,  pieces of rock ) to express a scientific phenomenon 
and converting it to scientific language ( molten rock  or  magma ,  sediment ), while explaining and 
discussing with the students the reason for using the scientific terms, does help the acquisition 
of AL (Brisk, 2015). 
 There is no total agreement as to when to teach AL. AL is often taught as needed rather than as 
a result of lesson planning. Coady, Harper, and De Jong (2015) found that teachers tended to teach 
Genre
Purpose
Example
Review
To retell the events in a text and evaluate 
its qualities.
I read the book The Recess Queen. This book 
is about . . . I liked it because the nicer girl 
taught the mean girl to stop bullying the 
other students.
Character 
Analysis
To evaluate the characters in a text.
“To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee 
contains believable characters . . . Two 
interesting characters are Atticus and Jean 
Louise . . . Atticus is a believable character 
because . . .” (Christie & Derewianka, 2008, 
p. 72).
Thematic 
Analysis
To reflect on text(s) and their values.
Students read The Giver and write about the 
value of utopian and regulated societies.
Commonsense 
or Social Issues 
Argument
To persuade about something or to do 
something.
Fifth-grade students should have cell phones.
 

92 • Maria Estela Brisk and Qianqian Zhang-Wu
the language that was needed in the moment. They recommend planning for language instruction, 
instead. Heritage et al. (2007) suggest something in between. When teachers are teaching a particular 
content, they should do “pop-up” lessons after they assess through initial activities students’ language 
resources needed to function in the lesson. Then they can go on with the planned lesson. 
 Even within units there is not agreement when AL should be taught. Some support pre-teaching 
language features that will be needed to comprehend a lesson (Dutro & Moran, 2003). Other research-
ers believe AL instruction should be embedded into the teaching of content (Heritage et al., 2007). 
The latter provides authentic contexts, which are considered essential for L2 acquisition (Larsen-
Freeman & Anderson, 2011). For example, a kindergarten teacher integrated content and language 
instruction when teaching about caterpillars. She exposed students to both real caterpillars, books, 
and charts about caterpillars. She allowed students to discover while arguing whether a  creature 
was a  caterpillar  or a  worm . She encouraged students to use the technical language and to look for 
evidence and other aspects of the inquiry method. She provided specific language ( It wriggled ) as 
students tried to express their ideas. She asked probing questions about the science topic using the 
language she wanted them to learn ( This creature is going under the ground, this creature is moving 
over the leaf. ). She gave the English terms drawing from students’ discussions in the native language 
( crisalida/chrysalis ) (Heritage et al., 2007, pp. 195–198). 
 Another topic of contention is whether to adapt language, content, and texts to make the content 
accessible. In an effort to affirm students and not put pressure on them, teachers accept students’ 
oral and written language that is not academic in nature. Some researchers claim students should be 
allowed to use everyday language, whereas others claim it is important that students use the technical 
language of the discipline, and yet others advocate for hybrid practices where both are allowed (Jan-
zen, 2008). High school ESL students expressed frustration of being exposed to low-level content, 
which they felt put them at a disadvantage when taking high-stakes tests (Liu, 2014). Zwiers (2007) 
believes that these practices “undermine, rather than cultivate, AL development” (p. 107). 
 Some researchers believe it is better to implement pedagogies that will help students gain access 
to the academic text rather than adapt texts (Bunch, Walqui, & Pearson, 2014; Rose & Martin, 2012). 
Gibbons (2009) proposes to move students through what she calls the “mode continuum.” When 
students are working in groups, they use their everyday context-specific language; when they present 
orally to the class, they are encouraged to start using technical terms, being explicit about what they 
are reporting without assuming contextual knowledge from students outside their group; when they 
write about what they are studying, they further apply their technical language; and when they read, 
they completely encounter the language of the discipline. 
 In addition, instruction needs to be explicit, showing students how the language works by explor-
ing texts to see how authors use language, jointly constructing texts with the teacher to further 
practice how to use language to make meaning (Brisk, 2015; Gibbons, 2009) and making students 
notice how language works (Schmidt, 1992). Providing explicit language instruction to draw stu-
dents’ attention to particular grammatical patterns and vocabulary allows L2 learners to develop a 
metalanguage, which benefits both oral/written AL development in the long run (Gibbons, 2009). 
 A number of specific strategies that help students develop AL within the language habits of spe-
cific content areas have been recommended. What is problematic is to include texts in genres that 
are not typically used in the context of specific disciplines. For example, use a narrative rather than a 
cyclical explanation to present the workings of the circulatory system (Janzen, 2008). 
 Although most studies on AL instruction focus mainly on English, the impact of bilingual stu-
dents’ home languages is also important. A continuum exists between students’ home language and 
English; literacy skills developed in the first language are in turn transferrable to academic English 
(Cummins, 2000; Hornberger, 2003). However, the specific L2 of the discipline still needs to be 
taught. In turn, translations are not helpful if the students are not familiar with the concepts. 
www.ebook3000.com

Academic Language in K–12 Contexts • 93
 Home language provides emergent bilinguals with more linguistic resources to participate in 
classroom interactions and access printed resources (Brisk & Ossa-Parra, 2016; Gibbons, 2009). Thus, 
while enhancing English AL teaching, bilingual students’ home languages should not be excluded 
from classroom practices. 
 Teaching language in context needs to be well scaffolded using such practices as modeling think-
ing and language use of the discipline, opportunities for ample practice in both preplanned activities 
and spontaneous students’ interactions, linking to students’ prior knowledge, and facilitating com-
municative activities with information gap (Gibbons, 2009; Zwiers, 2008). 
 School Policies 
 Schools are faced with programmatic decisions with respect to who teaches AL, when it should be 
taught, and how to assess it. The decision on who teaches is connected to beliefs on how AL is best 
acquired by second language learners and the qualifications of the school personnel. 
 Curricular and Personnel Decisions 
 The publication of Bernard Mohan’s (1986)  Language and Content  started debates in the educa-
tion field concerning whether content-subject teachers should use content as context to teach lan-
guage (language-based content instruction), or ESL teachers should teach language to prepare L2 
learners to function in content area classes using topics from content areas (content-based language 
instruction). 
 Currently there is strong support for teaching language in connection to teaching the disci-
plines, not only because language and content cannot be separated (Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 2014; 
Liu, 2014; Mohan & Slater, 2006) but also because content instruction provides an authentic con-
text for AL development (Horowitz, 2008; Kinsella, 1997; Mohan, 1986; Zwiers, 2007, 2008). Other 
researchers point out that students learn a second language faster when context is offered and 
knowledge is acquired through the new language (e.g., Larsen-Freeman, 2000). When language 
and literacy are considered a social practice, then it is natural to infer that the acquisition of the 
language of the various disciplines needs to take place within the context of the disciplines (Liu, 
2014; Poza, 2015). Moreover, without ample input/practice of AL in content subjects, it is difficult 
to prepare students for future standardized assessment (DiCerbo et al., 2014; Gottlieb & Ernst-
Slavit, 2014). 
 An approach to content-based language instruction is known as Sheltered English immersion 
(SEI), where students are taught the second language in the context of content area instruction (Free-
man, D. & Freeman,Y., 1988). All the students in the class are L2 learners. These classes have been 
taught either by ESL specialists or content area teachers. The depth of the content is usually relative to 
the students’ English language proficiency. Although these classes can benefit L2 learners, Gonzalez-
Howard and McNeill (2016) observed that the quality of AL use lowered as proficient students were 
transferred from the SEI class to the mainstream. 
 There is a range of possibilities of how to organize the curriculum: AL classes, sheltered English 
immersion (SEI), language-based content language instruction, or integrated content and language 
instruction. Met (1999) proposes a continuum of models in which content-driven language learning 
and language-driven content learning are on both ends of the continuum. 
 These policy decisions are largely driven by the personnel schools have, rather than by beliefs 
related to whether support for teaching AL separately or within content instruction are better. In 
most cases, content area teachers have not been prepared to teach language since the notion of pre-
paring all content teachers to be language teachers is only just reaching universities (Brisk, 2008; 

94 • Maria Estela Brisk and Qianqian Zhang-Wu
Levine, Howard, & Moss, 2014). In turn, ESL teachers have not been prepared to teach disciplines. 
An approach to address this problem is to pair content area and ESL teachers. Some scholars do not 
support team teaching (Banegas, 2012; Cammarata, 2009), whereas some believe team teaching, if 
well collaborated, can function as a model for teacher development (Stewart & Perry, 2005). 
 Dual language, two-way bilingual programs, and Canadian immersion bilingual programs (for 
definitions, see Brisk, 2006) integrate language, literacy, and content instruction. Approaches such as 
Content Based Instruction (CBI) and Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) emerged 
from these models of education where students learn language through content (Banegas, 2012). 
 Assessment 
 Assessment of AL faces not only the impact from the general problems of testing but also challenges 
posed by the tricky balance between assessment of content and language. The current accountability 
system along with passing of the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) in 2002 have jointly emphasized 
the importance of large-scale standardized assessments as an approach to evaluate school perfor-
mance and education quality (Abedi, 2004; Heritage et al., 2007). However, the present assessment 
system has many drawbacks. The large-scale standardized tests mostly tap into students’ perfor-
mance on a certain test rather than paying attention to the more detailed information (e.g., how and 
why they performed like this), which could undermine the washback effect of the assessment, leaving 
teachers too little diagnostic information to enlighten instruction strategies (Heritage et al., 2007). 
Furthermore, the pressures of improving standardized test performance from top-down policies 
(e.g., adequate yearly progress required by the NCLB Act) have also caused a series of social justice 
issues, which in particular adds to the burden of financially struggling schools and schools with large 
ELL populations (Abedi, 2004). 
 Alternative assessment (e.g., project-based assessment, performance-based assessment, portfolio 
assessment, students’ self-evaluation, etc.) have emerged in reaction to the problems of standard-
ized tests. These types of assessments evaluate “how and what students know and can do in real-
life performance situations” (Darling-Hammond, 1994, p. 6) and are gaining popularity. However, 
alternative assessment approaches are often teacher-dependent and time-consuming, making them 
difficult to implement. Even assuming teachers are able to devote enough time to conduct these 
assessments, their lack of knowledge about language (Fillmore & Snow, 2005), their unwelcoming 
attitudes toward language minority students (Walker, Shafer, & Iiams, 2004; Youngs & Youngs, 2001), 
and/or inadequate teacher preparation (O’Neal, Ringler, & Rodriguez, 2008) could also invalidate the 
value of such alternative approaches. 
 Many researchers call for the need to design more valid and reliable assessments that can better tap 
into the key features of AL which pose challenges to ELLs (Bachman, 1990; Scarcella, 2003; Stevens, 
Butler, & Castellon-Wellington, 2000). Nevertheless, AL, given its fuzzy definition, is by no means 
easy to gauge. Besides the impacts from problems of testing in general, assessment of AL is also faced 
with the dilemma of the balance between content and language. 
 Content and language are closely interdependent with each other (Mohan, 1986). Thus, isolation 
of language from content is impossible when it comes to instruction and assessment. ALL content 
tests are also language tests, covering not only subject knowledge but also learners’ grammatical, 
sociolinguistic, discourse, and strategic competence (Brisk, 2006). Unable to isolate language from 
content, subject matter assessments are challenging for L2 learners, depending on their AL English 
proficiency (Menken, 2008). Effective language-saturated content instruction is therefore of crucial 
importance to better prepare students for assessments. Moreover, Rolstad, MacSwan, and Guzmán 
(2015) question the fairness of judging L2 learners’ language ability by assessing AL. They argue 
that schools are basing English language proficiency—with implications on policy decisions—just 
www.ebook3000.com

Academic Language in K–12 Contexts • 95
on AL instead of on the range of uses of the language, classifying students unfairly as not proficient 
in English. 
 A Contextual Perspective on Academic Language: 
Using Systemic Functional Linguistics as a Frame 
 Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL) views language as a semiotic resource to make meaning in 
context (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004). Language users make choices given the context of culture, 
which defines the genres of discourse and the context of situation, which defines the register. The 
register encompasses the field, or topic being expressed, tenor or relationship between the language 
user and audience, and mode. The mode can be oral, written, or multimodal, requiring different uses 
of language to create a cohesive text (Thompson, 2004). 
 From the SFL perspective, AL is not a separate entity but rather the result of language choice 
given the context. Thus, if language users are writing a scientific explanation on how recycled paper 
is produced, they will organize the discourse based on the text structure of the sequential explana-
tion genre and use grammatical structures expected in this genre. The text will start by explaining 
the phenomenon followed by the steps involved in the process of making recycled paper. The verbs 
will be in the timeless present, because that is how things are. Passive voice will be used to focus on 
the paper and not on who carries out the process ( The paper is soaked and heated in huge vats .). The 
choice of vocabulary will be guided by the topic, and the audience will guide the level of technicality 
of the vocabulary. It will likely be written in statements and using third person, reflecting an authori-
tative voice. It will use grammatical structures to create a cohesive written text. The language choices 
would be different if children were discussing a visit to a paper recycling plant or if they were writing 
a procedure on how to make recycled paper in the classroom. 
 As children grow, they experience different contexts beyond the familial home and neighborhood. 
The children need to build their language(s) resources to be able to function in these new contexts. 
Since children have different life experiences, their individual language resources will differ. Children 
tune in to pragmatics very early and learn what choices to make given different contexts. Bilingual 
children, in addition, learn which language to use in which context. Adults have an important role 
in building children’s language resources, both families, friends, and neighbors outside schools and 
teachers and peers within schools. The assumption is that children will come to school with language 
resources built through their lived experiences, and teachers will continue to build that language as 
they give children new experiences with different disciplines. Thus, AL acquisition is not a separate 
skill but is part of the development continuum that takes place when encountering new contexts that 
demand new language resources (Christie, 2012). 
 SFL does not assume that students are only exposed to AL in the school context because the home 
context of scientist will include the language of science, that of musicians, the language of music, 
and so on. Language resources are built in context, whatever that context offers. Part of the motiva-
tion of SFL linguists in Australia to apply these theories in school was the fact that they perceived 
the lack of effort on the part of schools of building the language resources of aboriginal children to 
be able to effectively participate in learning the school curriculum (Rose & Martin, 2012). Through 
building the language resources in the context of learning, these students were able to access the 
curriculum. Thus, the goal was learning and being active participants in the process, rather than 
language training. 
 In the context of schooling, students are exposed to a variety of disciplines. Because language is 
one of the semiotic resources used to make meaning in the disciplines, language is considered part of 
the knowledge of the discipline and not as a separate skill. Thus, SFL researchers believe that teach-
ing a discipline must include teaching the language and literacy connected to the discipline at the 

96 • Maria Estela Brisk and Qianqian Zhang-Wu
discourse, sentence, and word levels (Christie, 2012; Schleppegrell, 2009). Content area teachers are 
then also language teachers in charge of building students’ linguistic resources to be able to function 
by expressing and comprehending knowledge in the discipline. 
 SFL research has provided the linguistic features of various content areas in more detail than 
other researchers (Janzen, 2008). The features of genres in the English-speaking culture have been 
illustrated by a number of SFL researchers, including Butt et al. (2012), Derewianka (1990), Derewi-
anka and Jones (2012), Humphrey, Droga, and Feez (2012), Knapp and Watkins (2005), Martin and 
Rose (2008), and Schleppegrell (2004). The genres of specific disciplines have been further analyzed, 
including English language arts (Christie & Derewianka, 2008; Fang & Schleppegrell, 2008), history 
(Coffin, 2006; Schleppegrell & Achugar, 2003), social studies (Bunch, 2006), science (De Oliveira & 
Dodds, 2010; Veel, 2000), and mathematics (De Oliveira & Cheng, 2011; Marks & Mousley, 1990; 
Schleppegrell, 2007). These studies provide specifics with respect to the genres of the disciplines, text 
structure of these genres, and language features typically found in that discipline, giving teachers the 
resources they need to teach language in the context of the disciplines and help students develop the 
language resources they need to function in the various disciplines. 
 This contextual perspective to AL helps address many of the controversies. SFL does not consider 
AL as a distinct form of language with superior connotation but rather language demands of a par-
ticular context of situation, which is neither superior nor inferior to any kind of context, just differ-
ent. For children, it is just part of their continuum of language development occurring because of 
immersion in the school environment (Christie, 2012). Because SFL is a theory of language that can 
be applied to any language, it does not give priority to English over other languages. The language 
resources needed and developed are also a function of the context experienced by students. Specific 
positive or negative attitudes to a particular language are a function of the context and not inherent 
to the language. Because SFL considers language an aspect of content knowledge, separating the two 
is not appropriate. Moreover, since the language of the disciplines is specific to better represent the 
content of the discipline, the role of teachers is to scaffold students’ development of this language 
and not simplify the language. 
 Because SFL is a language theory, it provides systematic tools to help teachers develop language. 
Ideologies that misdirect instruction students need, place value on a language over others, and 
deprive students of the education and development to which they are entitled cannot be attached to 
language. Otherwise, students end up as victims of ideological battles. 
 Transforming the knowledge about language in the disciplines offered by SFL researchers into 
pedagogy and studying the impact on bilingual learners would shed light on the impact of this theory 
on these students’ acquisition of the language of schooling and their academic achievement (Brisk & 
Kaveh, forthcoming; Rose & Martin, 2012). 
 References 
 Abedi, J. (2004). The no child left behind act and English language learners: Assessment and accountability issues.  Educational 
Researcher, 33 (1), 4–14. 
 Adamson, H. D. (1990). ESL students’ use of academic skills in content courses.  English for Specific Purposes, 9 , 67–87. 
 Anstrom, K., DiCerbo, P., Butler, F., Katz, A., Millet, J., & Rivera, C. (2010).  A review of the literature on academic English: 
Implications for K–12 English language learners.  Arlington, VA: The George Washington University Center for Equity 
and Excellence in Education. 
 Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA) (2012). The Australian curriculum. Retrieved from 
www.australiancurriculum.edu.au. 
 Bachman, L. F. (1990).  Fundamental considerations in language testing . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Bailey, A. L. (2007).  The language demands of school: Putting academic English to the test . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Bailey, A. L., Butler, F. A., Stevens, R., & Lord, C. (2007). Further specifying the language demands of school. In A. Bailey (ed.), 
 The language demands of school: Putting academic English to the test  (pp. 103–156). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

Academic Language in K–12 Contexts • 97
 Bailey, A. L. & Heritage, M. (Eds.). (2008).  Formative assessment for literacy, grades K-6: Building reading and academic language 
skills across the curriculum . Newbury Park, CA: Corwin Press. 
 Banegas, D. L. (2012). Integrating content and language in English language teaching in secondary education: Models, ben-
efits, and challenges.  Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching, II (1), 111–136. 
 Beck, I., McKeown, M. G., & Kucan, L. (2002).  Bringing words to life: Robust vocabulary development . New York: Guilford. 
 Blair, A. (2016). Academic uses of language (re)defined: A case of emergent bilinguals engaging in languages and literacies in 
and outside of school.  Linguistics and Education, 35, 109–119 . 
 Brisk, M. E. (2006).  Bilingual education: From compensatory to quality schooling  (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
 Brisk, M. E. (Ed.). (2008).  Language, culture, and community in teacher education . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Brisk, M. E. (2015).  Engaging students in academic literacies: Genre-based pedagogy for K-5 classrooms. New York: Routledge. 
 Brisk, M. E. & Kaveh, M. Y. (forthcoming). Mainstream teachers for successful multilingual classrooms: The case of a school 
that embraced a genre-based pedagogy to teach writing. In S. Hammer & K. M. Viesca (Eds.),  Multilingual learners: What 
teachers should, do and will know − An international comparison . New York: Routledge. 
 Brisk, M. E. & Ossa-Parra, M. (2016). Mainstream classrooms as engaging spaces for emergent bilinguals: SFL theory, catalyst 
for change. In R. Harman (Ed.),  Critical systemic functional linguistics: Promoting language awareness and social action 
among K–12 students and teachers . New York: Springer. 
 Brisk, M. E. & Proctor, C. P. (2012). Challenges and supports for English language learners in bilingual programs. In  Under-
standing Language: Language, Literacy, and Learning in the Content Areas . Stanford University. http://ell.stanford.edu/
papers/policy 
 Bunch, G. C. (2006). Academic English in the 7th grade: Broadening the lens, expanding access.  Journal of English for Academic 
Purposes, 5 , 284–301. 
 Bunch, F. C., Walqui, A., & Pearson, P. D. (2014). Complex text and new common standards in the United States: Pedagogical 
implications for English learners.  TESOL Quarterly, 48 , 533–559. 
 Butt, D., Fahey, R., Feez, S., & Spinks, S. (2012).  Using functional grammar: An explorer’s guide . Hampshire, UK: Palgrave/MacMillan. 
 Cammarata, L. (2009). Negotiating curricular transitions: Foreign language teachers’ learning experience with content-based 
instruction.  Canadian Modern Language Review ,  65 (4), 559–585. 
 Chamot, A. U. & O’Malley, J. M. (1986).  A cognitive academic language learning approach: An ESL content-based curriculum . 
Washington, DC: National Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education. 
 Chen, Y. (2007). Equality and inequality of opportunity in education: Chinese emergent bilingual children in the English 
mainstream classroom.  Language, Culture, and Curriculum, 20 , 36–51. 
 Christie, F. (2012).  Language education throughout the school years: A functional perspective . Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley-
Blackwell. 
 Christie, F. & Derewianka, B. (2008).  School discourse: Learning to write across the years of schooling . London: Continuum. 
 Coady, M. R., Harper, C., & De Jong, E. J. (2015). Aiming for Equity: Preparing mainstream teachers for inclusion or inclusive 
classrooms?  TESOL Quarterly , doi:10.1002/tesq.223. 
 Coffin, C. (2006).  Historical discourse: The language of time, cause and evaluation . New York: Continuum. 
 Coffin, C., Curry, M. J., Goodman, S., Hewings, A., Lillis, T. M., & Swann, J. (2003).  Teaching academic writing: A toolkit for 
higher education . New York: Routledge. 
 Common Core State Standards Initiative (2010). Retrieved on 2/14/13 from http://www.corestandards.org 
 Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list.  TESOL Quarterly, 34 (2), 213–238. 
 Crandall, J. (Ed.). (1987).  ESL through content-area instruction: Mathematics, science, social studies . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall Regents. 
 Cummins, J. (1984).  Bilingualism and special education: Issues in assessment and pedagogy . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Cummins, J. (2000).  Language, power, and pedagogy: Bilingual children in the crossfire  (Vol. 23). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
 Dale, T. C. & Cuevas, G. J. (1992). Integrating mathematics and language learning. In P. A. Richard-Amato & M. A. Snow 
(Eds.),  The multicultural classroom: Readings for content-area teachers (pp. 330–348). New York: Longman. 
 Darling-Hammond, L. (1994). Performance-based assessment and educational equity.  Harvard Educational Review, 64 (1), 5–31. 
 De Oliveira, L. C. & Cheng, D. (2011). Language and the multisemiotic nature of mathematics.  The Reading Matrix, 11 (3), 
255–268. 
 De Oliveira, L. C. & Dodds, K. (2010). Beyond general strategies for English language learners: Language dissection in science. 
 Electronic Journal of Literacy Through Science, 9 . Retrieved from http://ejlts.ucdavis.edu, 1–14. 
 Derewianka, B. (1990).  Exploring how texts work . Rozelle NSW, Australia: Primary English Teaching Association. 
Derewianka, B. (2011). A new grammar companion for teachers. Marickville, NSW, Australia: Primary English Teaching 
Association.
 Derewianka, B. & Jones, P. T. (2012).  Teaching language in context . Melbourne: OUP. 

98 • Maria Estela Brisk and Qianqian Zhang-Wu
 DiCerbo, P. A., Anstrom, K. A., Baker, L. L., & Rivera, C. (2014). A review of the literature on teaching academic English to 
English language learners.  Review of Educational Research, 84 (3), 446–482. 
 Dudley-Evans, T. & St. John, M. J. (1998).  Developments in English for specific purposes: A multi-disciplinary approach . Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Dutro, S. & Moran, C. (2003). Rethinking English language instruction: An architectural approach.  English Learners: Reaching 
the Highest Level of English Literacy, 227 , 258. 
 Echevarría, J., Vogt, M., & Short, D. J. (2000).  Making content comprehensible for English language learners: The SIOP model . 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
 Ernst-Slavit, G. & Mason, M. R. (2011). “Words that hold us up”: Teacher talk and academic language in five upper elementary 
classrooms.  Linguistics and Education, 22 (4), 430–440. 
 Fang, Z. & Schleppegrell, M. J. (2008).  Reading in secondary content areas: A language based pedagogy . Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press. 
 Fillmore, L. W. & Snow, C. E. (2005). What teachers need to know about language. In P. A. Richard-Amato & M. A. Snow (Eds.), 
 Academic success for English language learners (pp. 47–75). White Plains, NY: Longman. 
 Fisher, D., Rothenberg, C., & Frey, N. (2008).  Content-area conversations: How to plan discussion-based lessons for diverse lan-
guage learners . Alexandria, VA: ASCD. 
 Flores, N. & Schissel, J. L. (2014). Dynamic bilingualism as the norm: Envisioning a heteroglossic approach to standards-based 
reform.  TESOL Quarterly, 48 , 454–479. 
 Freeman, D. & Freeman, Y. (1988). Sheltered English instruction.  ERIC digest . ED301070. 
 Gibbons, P. (2009).  English learners academic literacy and thinking . Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
 González-Howard, M. & McNeill, K. L. (2016). Learning in a community of practice: Factors impacting English-learning 
students’ engagement in scientific argumentation.  Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 53 (4), 527–533. 
 Gottlieb, M. & Ernst-Slavit, G. (2014).  Academic language in diverse classrooms: Definitions and contexts . Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Corwin. 
 Halliday, M. & Matthiessen, C. (2004).  An introduction to functional grammar  (3rd ed.). London: Hodder Arnold. 
 Heritage, M., Silva, N., & Pierce, M. (2007). Academic English: A view from the classroom. In A. Bailey (Ed.),  The language 
demands of school: Putting academic language to the test (pp. 171–210). New Haven: Yale University Press. 
 Hornberger, N. H. (Ed.). (2003).  Continua of biliteracy: An ecological framework for educational policy, research, and practice in 
multilingual settings (Vol. 41). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Horowitz, E. K. (2008). What should I know about teaching academic English in content classes?  Becoming a language teacher: 
A practical guide to second language learning and teaching (pp. 157–179). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
 Hudelson, S. (1984). Kan Yu Ret and Rayt en Ingles: Children become literate in English as a second language.  TESOL Quar-
terly, 18 , 221–238. 
 Humphrey, S., Droga, L., & Feez, S. (2012).  Grammar and meaning . Sydney: Primary English Teaching Association Australia. 
 Janzen, J. (2008). Teaching English language learners in the content areas.  Review of Educational Research, 78 , 1010–1038. 
 Kessler, C. & Quinn, M. E. (1987). ESL and science learning. In J. Crandall (Ed.),  ESL through content-area instruction 
(pp. 55–87). Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall Regents. 
 Kibler, A. K. & Roman, D. (2013). Insights into professional development for teachers of english language learners: A focus 
on using students’ native languages in the classroom.  Bilingual Research Journal, 36 (2), 187–207. doi:10.1080/1523588
2.2013.820226 
 Kinsella, K. (1997). Moving from comprehensible input to “learning to learn” in content-based instruction: Perspectives on 
integrating language and content. In M. A. Snow & D. M. Brinton (Eds.),  The content-based classroom  (pp. 46–68). White 
Plains, NY: Longman. 
 Knapp, P. & Watkins, M. (2005).  Genre, text, grammar: Technologies for teaching and assessing writing . Sydney: University of 
South Wales Press. 
 Larsen-Freeman, D. (2000). Second language acquisition and applied linguistics.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 20 , 
165–181. 
 Larsen-Freeman, D. & Anderson, M. (2011).  Techniques and principles in language teaching  (3rd ed.). Oxford; New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Lee, J. S. & Oxelson, E. (2006). “It’s not my job”: K–12 teacher attitudes toward students’ heritage language maintenance. 
 Bilingual Research Journal, 30 (2), 453–477. doi:10.1080/15235882.2006.10162885 
 Levine, T., Howard, E. R., & Moss, D. M. (2014).  Preparing classroom teachers to succeed with second language learners: Lessons 
from a faculty learning community . New York: Routledge. 
 Liu, K. K. (2014).  An activity theory perspective on academic language use by ELLs in a high school math classroom (Doctoral 
dissertation, University of Minnesota). 
 Macken-Horarik, M. (2002). “Something to shoot for”: A systemic functional approach to teaching genre in secondary school 
science.  Genre in the Classroom: Multiple Perspectives , 6(1), 17–42. 
www.ebook3000.com

Academic Language in K–12 Contexts • 99
Maestro, B. (1996). Coming to America: The story of immigration. New York: Scholastic.
 Marks, G. & Mousley, J. (1990). Mathematics education and genre: Dare we make the process writing mistake again?  Language 
and Education, 4 (2), 117–130. 
 Martin, J. R. & Rose, D. (2008).  Genre relations: Mapping culture . Oakville, CT: Equinox. 
 Matsuda, P. K. (2006). The myth of linguistic homogeneity in US college composition.  College English ,  68 (6), 637–651. 
 Meltzer, J. & Hamann, E. T. (2005).  Meeting the literacy development needs of adolescent ELLs through content-area learning. Part 
two: Focus on classroom teaching and learning strategies . Providence, RI: Brown University. 
 Menken, K. (2008).  English learners left behind: Standardized testing as language policy  (Vol. 65). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
 Menyuk, P. & Brisk, M. E. (2005).  Language development and education: Children with varying language experience . Hampshire, 
UK: Palgrave MacMillan. 
 Met, M. (1999).  Content-based instruction: Defining terms, making decisions . National Foreign Language Center. 
 Mohan, B. A. (1986).  Language and content . Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
 Mohan, B. & Slater, T. (2006). Examining the theory/practice relation in a high school science register: A functional linguistic 
perspective.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 5 (4), 302–316. 
 Moschkovich, J. N. & Nelson-Barber, S. (2009). What mathematics teachers need to know about culture and language. In B. Greer, 
S. Mukhopadhyay, S. Nelson-Barber & A. Powell (Eds.),  Culturally responsive mathematics education  (pp. 111–136). New 
York: Routledge. 
 NGSS Lead States (2013).  Next generation science standards: For states, by states . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
 O’Neal, D., Ringler, M., & Rodriguez, D. (2008). Teachers’ perceptions of their preparation for teaching linguistically and 
culturally diverse learners in rural eastern North Carolina.  Rural Educator, 30 (1), 5–13. 
 Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language instruction. In G. Crookes 
& S. Gass (eds.),  Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and practice  (pp. 9–34). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Poza, L. (2015). Mecanismos de exclusión: Ideologías lingüísticas y ambigüedades en la conceptualización de lenguaje aca-
démico.  Miríada Hispánica, 10 , 221–240. 
 Quinn, H., Lee, O., & Valdés, G. (2012).  Language demands and opportunities in relation to next generation science standards 
for English language learners: What teachers need to know  Retrieved on 3/11/15 from Understanding Language https://
ell.stanford.edu/ 
 Rolstad, K., MacSwan, J., & Guzmán, N. (2015). Bilingual learners and the purposes of language assessment.  Miríada His-
pánica, 10 , 207–223. 
 Rose, D. & Martin, J. R. (2012).  Learning to write, reading to learn: Genre, knowledge, and pedagogy in the Sydney school . London: 
Equinox. 
 Rothery, J. (1996). Making changes: Developing an educational linguistics. In R. Hasan & G. Williams (Eds.),  Literacy in society 
(pp. 86–123). New York: Longman. 
 Saunders, W. M. & O’Brien, G. (2006). Oral language. In F. Genesee (Ed.),  Educating English language learners: A synthesis of 
research evidence (pp. 14–63). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Scarcella, R. (2003).  Academic English: A conceptual framework . The University of California Linguistic Minority Research 
Institute. Technical Report 2003–1. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J. (2004).  The language of schooling: A functional perspective . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J. (2005).  Helping content area teachers work with academic language: Promoting English language learners ’ 
 literacy in history . UC Davis, School of Education: University of California Linguistic Minority Research Institute. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J. (2007). The linguistic challenges of mathematics teaching and learning: A research review.  Reading & 
Writing Quarterly, 23 , 139–159. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J. (2009). Grammar for generation 1.5: A focus on meaning. In M. Roberge, M. Siegal & L. Harklau (Eds.), 
 Generation 1.5 in college composition: Teaching academic writing to U.S. educated learners of ESL  (pp. 221–234). New York, 
NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J. (2012). Academic language in teaching and learning.  The Elementary School Journal ,  112 (3), 409–418. 
 Schleppegrell, M. & Achugar, M. (2003). Learning language and learning history: A functional linguistics approach.  TESOL 
Journal, 12 , 21–27. 
 Schmidt, R. (1992). Awareness and second language acquisition.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 13 , 206–226. 
 Short, D. J. (1994). Expanding middle school horizons: Integrating language, culture, and social studies.  TESOL Quarterly, 
28 , 581–608. 
 Short, D. & Echevarria, J. (2004). Teacher skills to support English language learners.  Educational Leadership, 62 (4), 8–13. 
 Silva, T. (1992). L1 vs L2 writing: ESL graduate students’ perceptions.  TESL Canada Journal, 10 (1), 27–47. 
 Silva, T. & Matsuda, P. K. (Eds.). (2012).  On second language writing . New York: Routledge. 
 Snow, C. E. & Uccelli, P. (2009). The challenge of academic language. In D.R. Olson & N. Torrance (eds.),  The Cambridge 
handbook of literacy (pp. 112–133). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

100 • Maria Estela Brisk and Qianqian Zhang-Wu
 Stevens, R. A., Butler, F. A., & Castellon-Wellington, M. (2000).  Academic English and content assessment: Measuring the progress 
of ELLs . CSE Technical Report (552). Berkeley, CA: CRESST University of California. Retrieved on July 26, 2016 from 
http://cresst.org/publications/cresst-publication-2924/?_sf_s=Academic+English+and+content+assessment:+Measuri
ng+the+progress+of+ELLs&_sft_post_tag=english-language-learners&sf_paged=3 
 Stewart, T. & Perry, B. (2005). Interdisciplinary team teaching as a model for teacher development.  TESL-EJ, 9 (2), 1–17. 
 Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) (2006).  PreK–12 English language proficiency standards . Alexandria, 
VA: Author. 
 Thompson, G. (2004).  Introducing functional grammar  (2nd ed.). London: Arnold. 
 Turkan, S., De Oliveira, L. C., Lee, O., & Phelps, G. (2014). Proposing a knowledge base for teaching academic content to 
English language learners: Disciplinary linguistic knowledge.  Teachers College Record, 116 (030308), 1–30. 
 Uccelli, P. & Meneses, A. (2015). Habilidades de lenguaje académico y su asociación con la comprensión de lectura en la escuela 
primaria y media: Un nuevo constructo operacional.  Miríada Hispánica, 10 , 179–205. 
 Unsworth, L. (2001). Teaching multiliteracies across the curriculum: Changing contexts of text and image in classroom prac-
tice. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press. 
 Valdés, G. (2004). Between support and marginalisation: The development of academic language in linguistic minority chil-
dren.  International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 7 (2–3), 102–132. 
 Valdés, G., Bunch, G., Snow, C., Lee, C., & Matos, L. (2005). Enhancing the development of students’ language (s). In L. Dar-
ling-Hammond & J. Bransford (eds.),  Preparing teachers for a changing world: What teachers should learn and be able to 
do (pp. 126–168). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
 Veel, R. (2000). Learning how to mean—Scientifically speaking: Apprenticeship into scientific discourse in the secondary 
school. In F. Christie & J. R. Martin (Eds.),  Genre and institutions: Social processes in the workplace and school (pp. 161–195). 
London: Cassell. 
 Walker, A., Shafer, J., & Iiams, M. (2004). “Not in my classroom”: Teacher attitudes towards english language learners in the 
mainstream classroom.  NABE Journal of Research and Practice, 2 (1), 130–160. 
 WIDA Consortium (2012).  2012 amplification of the English language development standards kindergarten-grade 12 . Madison, 
WI: Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System. 
 Youngs, C. S. & Youngs Jr, G. A. (2001). Predictors of mainstream teachers' attitudes toward ESL students.  Tesol Quarterly , 
35, 97−120. 
 Zwiers, J. (2007). Teacher practices and perspectives for developing academic language.  International Journal of Applied Lin-
guistics, 17 (1), 93−116. 
 Zwiers, J. (2008).  Building academic language: Essential practices for content classrooms, grades 5 – 12 . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
 Zwiers, J. (2013).  Building academic language: Essential practices for content classrooms, grades 5 – 12 . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
 Zwiers, J. & Crawford, M. (2011).  Academic conversations: Classroom talk that fosters critical thinking and content understand-
ings . Portland, ME: Stenhouse Publishers. 
 K–12 Literature and Textbooks 
 Burns, M. & Silveria, G. (1194).  The greedy triangle . New York: Scholastic. 
 Holliday, B., Cuevas, G. J., Moore-Harris, B., Carter, J. A., Marks, D., Casey, R. M., Day, R., & Hayek, L. M. (2003).  Glencoe 
mathematics: Algebra 1 . New York: Glencoe/McGraw Hill. 
 Maestro, B. (1996).  Coming to America: The story of immigration . New York: Scholastic. 
 Malaspina, A. (2013).  The boston tea party . Minneapolis, MN: ABDO Pub. Co. 
 McCarthy, E. (2013).  Common core math 4 today, grade 5: Common core edition . Greensboro, NC: Carson-Dellosa. 
 Parks, R. & Haskins, J. (1992).  Rosa parks: My story . New York: Dial Books. 
 Pratt-Serafini, K. J. (2002).  Saguaro moon: A desert journal . Nevada City, CA: Dawn Publications. 
 Pressler, M. (2001).  Anne Frank: A hidden life . New York: Puffin Books. 
 Tarbuck, E. & Lutgens, F. (2012).  Earth science. 13th edition . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall/Pearson. 
 University of California, Berkeley (2003)  Magnetism and Electricity. Foss Science Stories . Delta Education. 
 Waters, K. (1993).  Samuel Eaton’s day: A day in the life of a pilgrim boy . New York, NY: Scholastic. 
 Winter, J. (2009).  Sonia Sotomayor: La juez que creció en el Bronx/A judge grows in the Bronx. New York, NY: Atheneum Books. 
www.ebook3000.com

 II 
 Curriculum and Instruction 

www.ebook3000.com

103
 8 
 SLA Research and Foreign-Language Teaching 
 Patsy M. Lightbown 
 Becoming/Being a Language Teacher 
 Teachers draw their ideas about their daily practice from different sources. They start from their own 
experience as learners. After all, teachers were students for many years before they became teachers. 
Whether consciously or not, their initial beliefs and expectations about teaching are based to some 
extent on how they were taught.  What did my teachers do? Do I feel that I learned a lot in their classes? 
Can I replicate what I liked about my experience as a learner? Can I avoid doing the things that I felt 
were not helpful to me as a learner? Are there better ways to teach? 
 As they participate in teacher education programs, courses in teaching methods will give them 
new ideas on which to base their practice, and their student teaching internships will provide their 
first experiences in the role of teacher. Once they are in their own classrooms, the local curriculum 
as well as the textbook and its “teacher’s guide” will further shape what they do in the classroom. If 
they are fortunate, they will be mentored by more experienced teachers who share their lesson plans 
and materials and answer questions about a million and one details of school and classroom life. 
 With time, new teachers increasingly base their instructional activities on their own experiences 
of what has and has not worked well. These experiences of success and frustration will result in part 
from the background preparation and skill that they took into the classroom. But their experiences 
are also affected by the local circumstances of their teaching—the school’s resources, the age and 
number of students in their classes and the amount of time teachers spend with each group, the 
goals and motivations of the students and their previous educational background, the relationship 
between the students’ home language(s) and the second or foreign language being taught. As their 
experience grows, teachers form and re-form their views on what and how they should teach in order 
to maximize a sense of accomplishment for their students and for themselves. 
 Another source that teachers may draw on as they develop their own ways of teaching is their 
knowledge of research on second-language learning and teaching. Most teachers who have been 
through a university program will have had at least one course in second-language acquisition (SLA). 
In some cases, such a course is taught early in their program, part of the “theoretical” foundation 
for later “more practical” courses. In my experience, those who take such a course  after  they have 
had some experience as teachers have more easily recognized the practical benefit of knowing about 
research on how language development unfolds. 
 In this chapter, I will review some examples of findings from SLA research that teachers may find 
useful as they guide students in their second-language classes. Knowing more about how languages 

104 • Patsy M. Lightbown
are learned can help teachers set realistic expectations for themselves and for their students. Setting 
expectations that are realistic can sometimes mitigate the sense of frustration that teachers experi-
ence when they face unreasonable demands—from the general public, from their students, from 
their textbooks, even from themselves. 
 The chapter will provide an overview of research that is especially relevant to second-language 
learning by students between the ages of 5 and 18—roughly the period of compulsory schooling in 
many countries. The emphasis will be on classroom-based studies in contexts where students do 
not hear the language much outside the classroom—sometimes referred to as “foreign-language” 
settings—but will also touch on research with students in “second-language” settings, where immi-
grant and minority-language children learn the language of the larger community. The overview will 
necessarily leave out many interesting topics and will mention only a fraction of the studies that have 
been done. The goal is to touch on topics that are related to the expectations of parents, ministries 
of education, the general public—as well as teachers and students themselves. Each topic has been 
the focus of a number of studies whose results point toward a consensus about some factors that are 
associated with successful learning and teaching. 
 SLA Research 
 Language acquisition—both first language (L1) and second language (L2) development—became 
a significant focus of research for linguists and psychologists in the 1960s. Since the 1970s, SLA 
research has expanded greatly, and publications fill the pages of scores of books and dozens of jour-
nals. In early studies, researchers often documented the development of a second language by par-
ticipants whose learning took place with little or no instruction, outside a classroom. The researchers 
were looking for “natural” language acquisition processes (e.g., Dulay & Burt, 1974; Meisel, Clahsen, 
& Pienemann, 1981; Schumann, 1979). This research revealed that learners’ language development 
was systematic and that even learners from different language backgrounds acquired language in 
surprisingly similar ways. The term “interlanguage” is the label given to the version of the L2 that 
learners use at a given point in their development (Selinker, 1972). 
 Other researchers compared the overall outcomes for instructed and uninstructed learners, ask-
ing how—if at all—instruction affected those outcomes (Krashen & Seliger, 1975; Long, 1983). Early 
findings confirmed that learners who received instruction were more likely to advance further than 
those who did not. Researchers began to delve more deeply into the nature of instruction and the 
interlanguage development of “instructed” learners. They found that the language development pat-
terns of these learners were similar to those of learners who received little or no instruction—similar 
developmental stages, similar errors, and, to a certain extent, similar outcomes. This led to questions 
about how and to what extent instruction affected the path, the rate, or the eventual outcomes of 
second-language development (e.g., Ellis, 1989; Lightbown, 1983; Pica, 1987). 
 In the 1980s, more SLA researchers began to explore the nature of instruction. Some described 
the processes of classroom interaction in great detail (e.g., Allen, Fröhlich, & Spada, 1984; Chaudron, 
1988; Seliger & Long, 1983). They subsequently looked for evidence of specific relationships between 
teaching and learning, in “process-product” studies (e.g., Fröhlich, Spada, & Allen, 1985; Lightbown, 
1983; Spada, 1987). Drawing on the findings of observational research and analyses of the language 
of classroom learners, researchers generated hypotheses about the effects of certain teaching prac-
tices or materials. In experimental studies, instructional materials and procedures were used with one 
group and outcomes were compared with those of groups who received different instruction or no 
instruction (e.g., Harley, 1989; Lyster, 1994). 
 Since the late 1980s, more and more classroom-based studies have sought to identify instruc-
tional features that appear to be related to learning processes or outcomes in specific contexts (e.g., 
www.ebook3000.com

SLA Research and Foreign-Language Teaching • 105
Lyster & Ranta, 1997; Spada & Lightbown, 1993). Such studies bring greater face validity to research, 
but researchers face a challenge in determining how—or whether—findings obtained in one con-
text, with a particular set of participants and variables, has relevance for learners and teachers in 
other contexts. 
 Research and Teaching 
 Not surprisingly, the influence that research findings can or should have for the day-to-day decisions 
and activities of the classroom teacher has been much discussed. Some writers observe that teachers 
do not have the time or the inclination to read research and that, in any case, most of what is pub-
lished in academic journals is too far removed from teachers’ interests and experiences (Borg, 2009; 
Macaro, 2003; Nassaji, 2012; Plonsky, 2013). Others have explored ways to make research relevant 
and accessible to them, suggesting a reciprocity in the relationship between the teacher-professional 
and the researcher-academic, and emphasizing how they can learn from each other (Erlam, 2008; 
Lightbown & Spada, 2013; Ortega, 2011; Ur, 2014). 
 In an early review of research on SLA, I asserted that research could by no means tell teachers  what 
to teach or  how  to teach but that it could be of value to teachers by providing insights into what they 
can reasonably expect from themselves and from their students (Lightbown, 1985). In the decades 
since that publication, far more studies have investigated classroom-based language learning, and 
we know more now about language development and about the interactions among teachers and 
learners. Nevertheless, the question of how research and teaching are related remains a matter of 
discussion and disagreement. 
 Some researchers argue that the information gained by studying language learning and teach-
ing in many different contexts allows us to provide some broad generalizations (Lightbown, 1985, 
2000) or state some principles (Ellis, 2005a, b) that can at least raise teachers’ awareness of how 
research findings can help them understand the language learning needs of their students and 
how their teaching practices may be related to those needs. In their introduction to books in 
the series  Oxford Key Concepts for the Language Classroom , Lightbown and Spada (2014) empha-
size the importance of making research findings  accessible  to classroom teachers, recognizing that 
many research reports are “too long, too difficult, or not sufficiently classroom-oriented for the 
needs of teachers and future teachers” (p. xii). Even so, they express the belief that knowing about 
some of the background research on language learning as well as some of the classroom-based 
research “can guide teachers in their instructional planning, pedagogical activities, and assessment 
of learners’ progress” (p. xi). Spada (2015) acknowledges that research findings have sometimes 
been “misapplied” but concludes nonetheless that some findings from SLA research can guide 
classroom practice. Ortega (2009) recommends replacing the notion that research findings should 
be “applied” by teachers with the view that some of what we have learned from research is “rel-
evant” to classroom teaching. 
 In some cases, rather than being characterized as publishing papers that are too difficult for 
teachers to understand, researchers are sometimes described as producing information that is no 
more than confirmation of what “everybody knows” or providing no more guidance than “com-
mon sense” (see Goldenberg, 2008; Lightbown, 2000; Ur, 2014). There are two responses to this 
view. On the one hand, teachers may feel more confidence in their pedagogical choices when they 
see that these are reinforced and explained by research evidence. On the other hand, when there is 
substantial research evidence that goes against the tide of popular opinion, it may prompt teachers 
to examine their beliefs and to try something different in their classrooms. Openness to information 
that challenges “the usual” can help teachers avoid inflexible pedagogical habits and contribute to 
their professional growth. 

106 • Patsy M. Lightbown
 In the remaining pages of this chapter, I will look at findings from SLA research, both some that 
provide empirical support for what “everybody knows” and some that run counter to widely held 
views, challenging teachers to make their own informed decisions. 
 Time and Timing 
 For many years, I taught in a program for teachers and prospective teachers of English in the schools 
of Quebec, where more than 80% of the population uses French as their home language and in public 
life. Most of my students were teaching or preparing to teach in schools where all subjects are taught 
in French, except for courses in English as a second language. I often began the course by asking 
participants what they thought would be the greatest impediment to their primary and secondary 
school students’ achievement of high proficiency in English. There were many responses, including 
students’ lack of motivation or the presence of too many students in a class. My own answer was that 
the amount of time devoted to English instruction was simply too limited. Like students in foreign-
language instruction in much of the world, the total time students spent learning English amounted 
to approximately 700 hours, spread over eight or nine years, an approach that Stern (1985) referred 
to as “drip feed.” I urged teachers to consider class time as time for preparing students to continue 
learning outside the classroom (Lightbown, 1986). 
 Researchers have long emphasized the importance of time as a factor in all learning, and success 
in foreign-language learning has been found to be correlated with the amount of time students spend 
on it (Carroll, 1975; Stern, 1985). The widely held belief that babies learn to speak “quickly” ignores 
the reality that by they time they are 6 years old, most young children have heard and used language 
at home, at play, in day care or kindergarten for more than 20,000 hours, much of it in one-on-one 
communication with a parent, sibling, or playmate. Even at the rate of five hours per week for ten 
school years, learners will have had roughly one-tenth as many hours of language contact, typically 
in a large group with little one-on-one communicative language use, and often with extended holiday 
periods of no contact at all with the language (Eurydice, 2012). 
 One response to the difficulty of learning in the limited hours of drip-feed instruction in some 
school-based foreign-language teaching has been the introduction of intensive courses. In such 
courses, the overall time for learning may be increased slightly, but the more dramatic change is 
in the distribution of the time for learning. For example, rather than having two or three hours of 
instruction per week, students spend four or five hours  per day  in second-language learning. Thus, 
in some intensive or compact courses, students may have a few hundred hours of language exposure 
in a single school year. Research has consistently shown not only that this intensification of time 
improves outcomes in the short term (Collins, et al., 1999; Lightbown & Spada, 1994; Serrano & 
Muñoz, 2007) but that the benefits persist over the following years after students return to drip-feed 
programs (Lightbown & Spada, 1991). 
 Another approach to solving the problem of limited time is content-based language teaching 
(CBLT) (Lightbown, 2014; Lyster, 2007). CBLT can double the amount of time students spend in 
contact with the language because they have not only a foreign-language course but also one or more 
subject-matter courses taught in the foreign language, for example, in the CLIL (content and lan-
guage integrated learning) approach (Coyle & Baetens Beardsmore, 2007) or the European Schools 
(Housen, 2012). Immersion programs can increase the amount of time even more, in some cases 
giving students up to 5,000 hours over several years in classrooms where their L2 is the medium of 
instruction for most subject matter (Genesee, 1987; Lyster, 2007). Even in these cases, however, the 
extent to which each individual student uses the language may vary considerably, depending not only 
on classroom interaction patterns but also on the larger social context in which the school is located 
(Housen, 2012). 
www.ebook3000.com

SLA Research and Foreign-Language Teaching • 107
 In summary, the time available for learning is a strong predictor of learning success for students in 
foreign-language and second-language programs. It is also a source of many unreasonable expecta-
tions on the part of policy makers, who anticipate, incorrectly, that most second-language learners 
can reach age-appropriate levels of language proficiency and be ready for mainstream academic 
learning after a year of instruction (see Collier, 1989; Cummins, 1984). The point of this discussion is 
not to discourage teachers and students whose time for language teaching and learning is limited but 
rather to emphasize the importance of making the best use of the time available. Making the best use 
of the time means, at least in part, preparing students to continue learning outside the classroom—
through reading, media use, and community involvement where that is feasible (Lightbown, 1983, 
1986). 
 There is an important caveat in our discussion of the importance of time for language develop-
ment. Some educators and policy makers have interpreted the need for lots of time as a reason that 
minority group children who are second-language learners should be completely immersed in the 
L2 as early as possible and that they should not spend time studying or using their L1. The research 
on this topic provides strong evidence against the notion of language learning as a “zero-sum game,” 
where time spent learning one language takes away from growth and development in another (see, 
e.g., Cummins, 1980, 2000; Goldenberg, 2008). We will return to this topic in the section on the role 
of previously learned languages. 
 Developmental Stages 
 One SLA research finding that has attracted considerable attention is the extent to which L2 acquisi-
tion is characterized by developmental stages or sequences of learning. Many studies have shown, 
for example, that learners acquire the ability to spontaneously and accurately use certain grammati-
cal forms before others, regardless of the teaching sequence. In addition, there are studies showing 
that learners learn certain aspects of a grammatical feature before others. Although the number of 
language features that has been studied remains limited (e.g., some grammatical markers such as 
plural and verb tense markers, the forms and patterns of questions, negative sentences, and relative 
clauses), there is an accumulation of evidence that the order in which learners pass through develop-
mental stages is predictable and similar among learners (Lightbown & Spada, 2013; Ortega, 2009). 
 The evidence for developmental stages has led some researchers and teachers to ask whether it 
would be best to teach learners according to the observed order of acquisition (Pienemann, 1984). A 
number of researchers have used this question to design experimental studies in which some learners 
were taught what they were deemed “ready” to learn while others were taught what was considered 
“too advanced” for their current developmental level. The overall trend of these studies is to confirm 
that, while students can learn certain advanced language forms and patterns well enough to use them 
on tests that assess what was taught, they do not spontaneously begin to use the more advanced pat-
terns until they have first used those that are typical of the earlier developmental stages (Spada & 
Lightbown, 1993). 
 The existence of developmental stages fits well with the experience teachers have of teaching 
something, thinking it has been learned, and then discovering that students have not fully integrated 
the new knowledge. However, there are good reasons to question both the feasibility and desirability 
of teaching according to developmental sequences. First, as we have noted, the number of sequences 
that have been discovered and described in detail is a very small fraction of the patterns that second-
language learners must eventually learn. What we know about these sequences could not be used to 
create a complete course for any language, not even English, which has been studied more than any 
others. Second, at a simply practical level, students in a given class will not all be at the same devel-
opmental level, but teachers must provide instruction for all. Third, the research that has confirmed 

108 • Patsy M. Lightbown
the existence of developmental patterns has been done with learners who were learning—or being 
taught—in a great variety of circumstances. Inevitably, they were exposed to language that was at 
the right developmental level and other language that was not. Teaching these language patterns in 
isolation from others might actually interfere with overall development (Lightbown, 1985, 1998). 
 Age and SLA: When to Begin? 
 Perhaps the most discussed issue regarding time and timing in instruction is the age at which learning 
begins. Research has provided evidence to support the view that young children have the potential 
to acquire a second language so well that they can appear indistinguishable from someone who has 
learned only this language from birth. Such evidence has led to the hypothesis that there is, in human 
learning, a “critical” or “sensitive” period for language learning and that, outside of that period, the 
achievement of native-like language use is exceedingly rare and perhaps impossible (Long, 1990; 
Patkowski, 1980). 
 The notion of a sensitive period has been generalized to the context of language education at 
school, even though research has challenged the “common-sense” belief that “younger is better” for 
beginning foreign-language instruction. The generalization is so widely held that those who question 
it or seek to provide nuance to the claim are often simply ignored (Lightbown, 2008). The persis-
tence of this belief is somewhat frustrating to researchers who have shown repeatedly that, in many 
circumstances, not only are older students successful language learners, but in some situations, older 
learners can be  more successful  than younger ones. What has led to the strength of this belief and what 
is the evidence that refutes it? For this discussion, we’ll define “younger” as children under the age of 
10 and “older” as children beyond that age, as well as adolescents and adults. 
 Many children around the world grow up in environments where they hear more than one lan-
guage from the day they are born. “One parent/one language” is an approach that many families take 
to raising their children bilingually. In other families, one language is spoken at home, but another 
language is used with caregivers, playmates, and the wider community. Children who grow up in 
such circumstances have an excellent chance of becoming highly proficient in two or more languages. 
This is especially true if they continue to hear the languages into adulthood and if they develop 
literacy skills in the languages they hear and speak. In non-literate cultures too, fluency in several 
languages is widespread. Thus, there are many examples of successful simultaneous bilingualism or 
multilingualism when children are brought up in a multilingual environment from the very begin-
ning. This is seen as support for the generalization that “younger is better.” 
 In other cases, children hear one language at home and do not hear another until they go to school 
at the age of five or six years. Personal histories are full of stories about children who experience the 
shock of going to school and hearing a new language for the first time. Again, however, if these chil-
dren are surrounded by and supported in their learning of the new language and if they develop good 
relationships with their peers who are already proficient in that language, their chances of achieving 
what is sometimes called “native-like” proficiency are very high. As support for the generalization of 
“younger is better,” people also point to these children and compare them to their older siblings or to 
their parents, whose mastery of the new language appears to be less complete. 
 So, what’s wrong with the conclusion that “younger is better”? Let’s look at some circumstances 
where younger learners do not succeed in achieving native-like proficiency and, indeed, do not do 
better than older learners. The most familiar of these circumstances is foreign-language instruction, 
where children are taught a new language in drip-feed classes for a few hours per week. As early as the 
1970s, studies have shown that the head start children get by starting earlier does not result in their 
outperforming students who enter this kind of instruction in later school years, for example, at age 
11 or 12 (Burstall, 1975; García Mayo & García Lecumberri, 2003; Muñoz, 2007, 2014). 
www.ebook3000.com

SLA Research and Foreign-Language Teaching • 109
 Students in typical foreign-language instruction rarely acquire high levels of language knowledge 
or fluency, as we would have predicted from the discussion of the time it takes to learn a new lan-
guage. However, even in instruction that provides many more hours of exposure—for example, in 
French immersion programs in Canada—the advantages for learners who begin at age five or six “are 
not as great as one might expect” (Lyster, 2007, p. 11). In kindergarten and the early primary grades, 
young children in immersion instruction do make progress in their new language, but students who 
begin immersion later often catch up with those who started earlier (Genesee, 1987). 
 There is evidence that the abilities most associated with success in the early years are different 
from those that predict success for older learners. It has been suggested that while younger learners 
depend on their memory skills, older learners can use their analytic ability (Harley & Hart, 1997). 
Further, while younger learners depend almost entirely on “implicit” learning, older learners can 
 also  use “explicit” learning abilities, including metalinguistic awareness and problem-solving skills 
(DeKeyser, 2003; Muñoz, 2007). Important for both groups is the experience students have as they 
grow older and either continue to expand their use of the language or use it less and less as their L1 
resumes priority. Those who started earlier but do not continue to learn into adolescence will lose 
some of what they acquired, while those who continue to use the language, especially for academic 
pursuits, will continue to learn and improve their proficiency (Turnbull et al., 1998). 
 Even in contexts where families have relocated to a new country and must learn the school lan-
guage, older learners can make considerable early progress, especially if they arrive in the new lan-
guage environment having already developed literacy skills and some academic content knowledge 
through schooling in their L1 (Cummins, 2000; Snow & Hoefnagle Höhle, 1978). On the other hand, 
students who arrive in a new country with little or no prior schooling face not only the challenge 
of learning a new language but also of catching up with academic knowledge in areas from math-
ematics and science to history and literature. They often need to “learn how to learn” at school, and 
the learning curve is steep. For this reason and because older children, adolescents, and adults must 
often give priority to work or family responsibilities, time for language learning is scarce, and the 
kinds of language adults need in order to function in society are quite different from those expected 
of children (Tarone & Bigelow, 2005). Thus, an explanation for differences in success lies not—or 
not only—in age differences but rather in older learners’ lack of opportunity and inability to devote 
enough time to language learning. 
 Previously Learned Languages 
 “Interference” is a word that is often used in connection with the influence of students’ L1 or other 
previously learned languages on the acquisition of a new language. It suggests to some that the lan-
guage a student already knows will somehow get in the way of learning a new language. In fact, ample 
evidence shows that the L1 can make positive contributions to L2 learning. Researchers have found, 
however, that learners do not always draw on previously learned languages to help them acquire 
similar elements in the new language. For example, the fact that a word in the new language has a 
cognate in students’ L1 does not mean that they will automatically recognize it or know its meaning 
without guidance in using cognates as a resource. Indeed, they may assume that a given word is  not 
acceptable  because it resembles a word in their own language (Lightbown & Libben, 1984). 
 Some approaches to language teaching, most notably the audiolingual approach, made every 
effort to banish students’ L1 and any reference to it from the classroom. In the 1960s, in teacher 
training classes I took as a student of Nelson Brooks, we were told that the goal of instruction was 
“coordinate bilingualism,” which was interpreted as essentially two separate linguistic systems in the 
same mind (Brooks, 1960). He argued that if teachers never translated or made reference to students’ 
L1 but always led them to discover meaning by using mime or props, then they would develop a 

110 • Patsy M. Lightbown
separate system for the new language, not one that was tied to their L1. He deemed this type of bilin-
gualism superior to compound bilingualism, which he interpreted as the use of the second language 
in terms of the first. 
 Many studies have sought to determine how a multilingual individual’s languages are located in 
different parts of the brain. This research is beyond the scope of this chapter, and questions about 
“where” languages are stored in the brain are now investigated by means of sophisticated neurologi-
cal tools rather than in the metaphor of compound and coordinate bilingualism (Hernandez, 2013). 
However, it is essential to point out the fallacy of interpreting behaviors such as code switching or 
word borrowing as indicators of language confusion or low proficiency. These behaviors represent 
an essential aspect of human behavior and learning: building on what you know as you learn some-
thing new. They are also typical of highly proficient bilinguals, who choose among their language 
resources for a variety of reasons—to show solidarity with other bilinguals, to refer to something 
that is best understood within the cultural context of a particular language, or simply to make a joke 
(Cook, 2001). 
 The “mixing” of languages that was so problematic for audiolingual instruction has been shown to 
be both natural and desirable for language acquisition and use. Nevertheless, the role of the L1 in the 
foreign-language classroom is not uncomplicated. There are at least three important issues in finding 
the right role for the use of previously learned languages by the learner and by the teacher: linguistic 
interdependence, learner identity, and the role of L1 in classroom practice. 
 For many years, Cummins (1980, 1984, 2000) has made the case for linguistic interdependence, 
asserting that the continuing use of a learner’s L1, especially when the learner has the option of 
acquiring L1 literacy skills and academic language, enhances the growth and elaboration of L2 skills 
and academic language use. This idea appears to contradict a “common-sense” view that an indi-
vidual’s languages “compete” for mental space that led some educators to fear that bilingual develop-
ment would cause various kinds of intellectual and emotional problems (see Hakuta & Diaz, 1985 
for review). Such views are still held by some people, but Cummins’ assertion has been supported by 
substantial amounts of research (Goldenberg, 2008). In addition, for many years, in studies of mul-
tilinguals at all ages, researchers have found that the continued development and use of more than 
one language enhances cognitive flexibility and is associated with delays in the cognitive decline that 
comes with aging (e.g., Barac & Bialystok, 2012; Bialystok, 2001; Peal & Lambert, 1962). 
 With regard to learner identity, educators and researchers have come to recognize the relationship 
between a learner’s languages and his or her identity (Fu & Matoush, 2015; Toohey, 2000). Students 
from majority groups are likely to maintain a strong sense of connection to their L1 language and 
culture, even in programs such as immersion where they receive most of their instruction through 
the L2 (Genesee, 1987). Children from minority language groups, on the other hand, may feel that 
their L1 identity is devalued by the school where their home language is absent or even forbidden 
(Cummins, 2000; Cummins & Early, 2011). Research suggests that “additive” bilingualism, where 
learners  add  L2 while continuing to develop their L1, leads to better long-term outcomes than “sub-
tractive” education, where learners feel pressure to leave the L1 behind (Goldenberg, 2008; Lambert, 
1987; Lindholm-Leary, 2001). 
 Finally, what is the role of the L1 in the foreign-language classroom? If teachers also know stu-
dents’ L1, when should they use it? When should teachers allow students to use their L1? In class-
room-based studies, with learners at different ages and where teachers use different instructional 
approaches, researchers have found that the percentage of L1 use in the classroom ranges from nearly 
none to nearly all. Clearly, many factors explain this huge range, not least of which is the level of 
proficiency and ease that the teacher feels in using the L2 (Turnbull, 2001). However, other fac-
tors may also shape a teacher’s use of L1, including the teacher’s perception of the students’ ability 
to perform classroom tasks using only the L2. In my own research, I have often observed teachers 
www.ebook3000.com

SLA Research and Foreign-Language Teaching • 111
whose language proficiency was excellent switch to the students’ L1 for anything that was not part 
of the day’s lesson. That is, when there were doors to open or papers to distribute, the teacher used 
students’ L1 as a “management” language, thereby depriving students of an important opportunity 
to use the new language for genuine communication. 
 Ellis and Shintani (2014) have reviewed the research on L1 use in light of the importance of 
ensuring that second-language learners have as much access to L2 input as possible. On this basis 
they argue that “the L2 needs to become the medium as well as the object of instruction, especially in 
a foreign language setting” (p. 246). However, like many of the researchers whose work they review, 
they also recognize that “there is also a place for the strategic use of the L1.” Those strategic uses will 
be different according to whether learners are in a foreign-language or second-language setting, in 
typical language lessons or in CBLT. The specific uses will also differ according to the level of profi-
ciency of both the students and the teacher. The relationship between the L1 and the L2 is a complex 
one, but research shows that guided comparisons of L1 and L2 can help students recognize how their 
linguistic resources complement each other (Ammar, Lightbown, & Spada, 2010; White, 2008). 
 Student-Student Interaction 
 Instruction that relies mainly on activities such as teacher-directed drill or “transmission” models of 
teaching have increasingly been challenged, and teachers are encouraged to use approaches to language 
teaching that feature student-student interaction in the classroom. There are several reasons for this 
approach. At a very practical level, when the teacher controls every exchange and asks most of the ques-
tions, students have few opportunities to practice speaking, and placing students in pairs or groups can 
greatly increase those opportunities. In addition, having students work in pairs or small groups can 
enhance their engagement in learning and contribute to their motivation, giving them a reason to use 
the language immediately rather than at some vague time in the future (Oliver & Philp, 2014). 
 Student-student interaction is not without its problems, however, and teachers need to be aware 
of several possible pitfalls. First, tasks that are not inherently interesting or that do not have some 
clear purpose and endpoint are not likely to boost students’ motivation. If the tasks are not well 
designed, students may feel that the teacher is simply wasting their time and avoiding taking respon-
sibility for teaching! Second, when tasks are too difficult—that is, when students do not actually have 
the language ability that is necessary to complete the task with relative ease—they may use their L1 
more than is desirable. If, on the other hand, the task is too easy, some students may finish the task 
very quickly and then wonder what to do next, leading to off-task behavior that can be disruptive in 
a large class. Designing tasks that have the perfect balance of challenge and potential for success—
what Gibbons calls “learning in the challenge zone”—is not easy, but some important guidelines have 
emerged from research on effective task design (Gibbons, 2002, 2009). Klingner and Vaughn (2000) 
have shown how even young learners can benefit from well-planned tasks, working together in ways 
that support less-proficient group members and give those who are more proficient the opportunity 
to expand their language skills. 
 A number of researchers have observed that when learners interact with native speakers, they 
are likely to encounter misunderstandings. These “communication breakdowns” are hypothesized 
to provide learners with the opportunity to work with a more proficient speaker, who will adapt to 
their level of language and help them express meaning more effectively or accurately (Long, 1996). 
In some research, it has also been observed that even young students are able to provide feedback to 
each other when they work in pairs or groups (Collins & White, 2015; Klingner & Vaughn, 2000; Oli-
ver & Philp, 2014). In some classroom activities, however, students may not always “negotiate” when 
communication breaks down. Instead, they may pretend to understand, hoping that something will 
happen later in the conversation to help them fully understand the meaning (Foster, 1998). 

112 • Patsy M. Lightbown
 There is a related, potentially more serious, problem for student-student interaction when learn-
ers share the same L1. This is typical of the foreign-language classroom and of CBLT, where the focus 
is overwhelmingly on understanding the content, with little focus on language itself. In these cases, 
the interlanguage that students speak is likely to be characterized by the same errors of word choice, 
pronunciation, and syntax, and students do not feel a need to “negotiate for meaning” or to change 
the way they express themselves because there is no disruption of communication (Day & Shapson, 
1996; Ranta & Lyster, 2007). 
 Swain and her colleagues have shown one way to provide students with a model that can guide 
them to attend to meaning and language as they work together to reconstruct a text (e.g., Swain & 
Lapkin, 2002). Gibbons (2002, 2009), Klingner and Vaughn (2000), and Collins and White (2014) 
also provide examples of group or pair work activities in which students are guided to a clear goal 
and where each member of a group or pair has a contribution to make. 
 Form-Focused Instruction and Corrective Feedback 
 In grammar/translation and audiolingual approaches to foreign-language teaching, the curriculum 
was structured in terms of the vocabulary items and grammatical features that were to be taught. 
The sequence of presentation was based mainly on linguistic criteria that included going from what 
course creators saw as simple language to more complex structures. The two approaches differed in 
terms of how much attention was paid to the role of translation and to developing learners’ meta-
linguistic knowledge, but they were similar in their careful attention to ensuring that students used 
language forms correctly from the beginning. Such structure-based teaching placed the emphasis on 
the language itself, rather than on how language was used in natural interaction. Accuracy was the 
priority, and errors were to be avoided (Lightbown & Spada, 2013). 
 In the 1980s, communicative language teaching (CLT) and CBLT came to be popular approaches 
to the teaching of second and foreign languages. These innovations in language teaching were initi-
ated by applied linguists, who argued that language learning should focus more on meaning than on 
form, particularly with regard to preparing students to actually use language to accomplish certain 
types of interactions and functions (e.g., Brumfit & Johnson, 1979; Widdowson, 1979). These new 
approaches were not “caused” by findings from SLA research, but they were compatible with some of 
those findings. Developmental stages and systematic errors came to be seen as part of the language 
acquisition process. 
 As CLT and CBLT became more popular, and as SLA research became better known, some teach-
ers came to embrace the view that “comprehensible input” was necessary and sufficient for SLA 
and that explicit focus on language, especially in the form of corrective feedback, could raise the 
“affective filter,” inhibiting students’ success in language acquisition (Krashen, 1985). In addition, 
the widely reported research on French immersion was sometimes interpreted as evidence that there 
was no need to focus on language itself. Some teachers came to interpret CLT and CBLT as contexts 
where explicit metalinguistic instruction and feedback on error should be minimized because these 
practices would not improve students’ learning and might even harm it by reducing motivation, 
especially in oral interaction. However, some studies showed that learners expected teachers to offer 
language-focused instruction and corrective feedback and that when teachers did not do so, students 
felt that they were not able to learn as well (Cathcart & Olsen, 1976; Schulz, 2001). Furthermore, 
numerous studies of classroom-based learning found a positive relationship between form-focused 
instruction, including corrective feedback, and language development (see Lightbown & Spada, 2013 
and Lyster, 2007 for examples). Even in CBLT settings, it became clear that the absence of attention 
to language itself limited students’ progress toward proficiency. 
www.ebook3000.com

SLA Research and Foreign-Language Teaching • 113
 Classroom-based research in a variety of settings has shown that, within the limitations of time and 
circumstances in which they are learning, learners benefit from both meaning-focused and language-
focused instructional elements. Teaching approaches that exclude—or virtually exclude—either ele-
ment will deprive learners of opportunities to reach their potential for language development. 
 On the basis of their research in classrooms where different pedagogical approaches were imple-
mented, Lightbown and Spada (2013) endorsed language teaching that guides learners to “get it right 
in the end,” engaging in meaningful language interaction but also receiving form-focused guidance 
from each other, from teachers, and from learning materials. They point to the evidence that some 
language features are acquired without explicit instruction if learners have sufficient time to use 
the language meaningfully, but that other language features will not be noticed or acquired without 
form-focused instruction and corrective feedback. 
 Lyster’s (2007) extensive research on immersion and other content-based approaches led him 
to recommend a “counterbalanced” approach, “a principled means for systematically integrating 
content-based and form-focused instructional options” (pp. 3–4). One framework that is consistent 
with this notion and with SLA research in a variety of classrooms is Nation’s (2007) “four strands” 
for language teaching. This framework approach gives equal time and attention to meaning-focused 
input, meaning-focused output, fluency development, and language-focused learning. It is impor-
tant to emphasize that three of the four strands focus on meaningful language use and that the 
fourth, language-focused learning, is intended to engage learners in activities that focus on the lan-
guage features that they will need—and practice—in meaning-focused activities. 
 Conclusion 
 Making the best use of the limited time available for instruction means that the focus should be 
on preparing students to use the language outside the “language lesson.” Even when students are in 
immersion or other types of CBLT instruction, the goal of language lessons should be on giving stu-
dents experience in solving problems of comprehension and production that they will encounter in 
their content classes. Lowering the age at which instruction begins may appear to be a way to increase 
learning time, but the research shows that other approaches are more effective. Increasing the inten-
sity and improving the quality of instruction for older learners and supporting their L1—especially 
literacy—development has proven more effective than an early start for classroom-based L2 learning. 
 The evidence that language learners pass through developmental stages and learn language fea-
tures in predictable sequences does not mean that lessons should follow these stages and sequences. 
Rather, learners should encounter language that is rich, meaningful, and motivating. Instruction on 
specific features of grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation can increase students’ ability to notice 
these features when they encounter them in contexts of meaningful language use. The ability to use 
them spontaneously will emerge along a developmental path, but instruction can increase the rate of 
development. Instruction should include a balance of opportunities for students to engage in mean-
ingful interaction, including peer interaction. Lessons and corrective feedback that focus on language 
itself should target the specific language features that students need to successfully use language for 
comprehension and production in meaning-focused activities. 
 Research on L2 learning in a variety of classroom settings confirms what most teachers know 
from experience: every class has a different dynamic; every student has individual goals and capaci-
ties; every lesson is affected by events and conditions that change from day to day. Nevertheless, 
research evidence also provides some principles for teachers as they plan and implement instruction. 
More important, perhaps, when teachers know more about research on language learning, they are 
empowered to set more realistic expectations for themselves and for their students. 

114 • Patsy M. Lightbown
 References 
 Allen, P., Fröhlich, M., & Spada, N. (1984). The communicative orientation of language teaching: An observational scheme. 
In J. Handscome, R. A. Orem & B. Taylor (Eds.),  On TESOL ’83: The question of control  (pp. 231–252). Alexandria, VA: 
TESOL, Inc. 
 Ammar, A., Lightbown, P. M., & Spada, N. (2010). Awareness of L1/L2 differences: Does it matter?  Language Awareness, 19 , 
129–146. 
 Barac, R., & Bialystok, E. (2012). Bilingual effects on cognitive and linguistic development: Role of language, cultural back-
ground, and education.  Child Development, 83 , 413–422. 
 Bialystok, E. (2001).  Bilingualism in development: Language, literacy, and cognition . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Borg, S. (2009). English language teachers’ conceptions of research.  Applied Linguistics, 30 , 358–388. 
 Brooks, N. (1960).  Language and language learning . New York: Harcourt Brace. 
 Brumfit, C., & Johnson, K. (1979).  The communicative approach to language teaching . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Burstall, C. (1975). French in the primary school.  Canadian Modern Language Review, 31 , 388–402. 
 Carroll, J. (1975).  The teaching of French in eight countries . New York: Wiley. 
 Cathcart, R. L., & Olsen, J. E. W. B. (1976). Teachers’ and students’ preferences for correction of classroom conversation errors. 
In J. F. Fanselow & R. H. Crymes (Eds.),  On TESOL ’76 (pp. 41–53). Washington, DC: TESOL. 
 Chaudron, C. (1988).  Second language classrooms: Research on teaching and learning . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Collier, V. P. (1989). How long? A synthesis of research on academic achievement in second language.  TESOL Quarterly, 23 , 
509–531. 
 Collins, L., Halter, R., Lightbown, P., & Spada, N. (1999). Time and the distribution of time in second language instruction. 
 TESOL Quarterly, 33 , 655–680. 
 Collins, L., & White, J. (2014). The quantity and quality of language practice in typical interactive pair/group tasks.  TESL 
Canada Journal, 31, Special Issue 8 , 47–67. 
 Collins, L., & White, J. (2015).  Can they resolve it themselves ? Presentation at the SPEAQ convention, Montreal. 
 Cook, V. (2001). Using the first language in the classroom.  Canadian Modern Language Review, 57 , 302–423. 
 Coyle, D., & Baetens Beardsmore, H. (Eds.) (2007).  CLIL: Content and language integrated learning . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Cummins, J. (1980). The cross-lingual dimensions of language proficiency: Implications for bilingual education and the 
optimal age issue.  TESOL Quarterly, 14 , 175–187. 
 Cummins, J. (1984). Language proficiency, bilingualism, and academic achievement. In P. Richard-Amato & M. Snow (Eds.), 
 The multicultural classroom: Readings for content-area teachers (pp. 16–26). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
 Cummins, J. (2000).  Language, power, and pedagogy: Bilingual children in the crossfire . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Cummins, J., & Early, M. (Eds.) (2011).  Identity texts: The collaborative creation of power in multilingual schools . Oakhill, UK: 
Trentham Books. 
 Day, E., & Shapson, S. (1996).  Studies in immersion education . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 DeKeyser, R. (2003). Implicit and explicit learning. In C. J. Doughty & M. H. Long (Eds.),  The handbook of second language 
acquisition (pp. 313–348). Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Dulay, H., & Burt, M. K. (1974). Natural sequences in child second language acquisition.  Language Learning, 24 , 37–53. 
 Ellis, R. (1989). Are classroom and naturalistic acquisition the same? A study of the classroom acquisition of German word 
order rules.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 11 , 305–328. 
 Ellis, R. (2005a).  Instructed second language acquisition: A literature review . Report to the New Zealand Ministry of Education, 
Wellington. 
 Ellis, R. (2005b). Principles of instructed language learning.  System, 33 , 209–224. 
 Ellis, R., & Shintani, N. (2014).  Exploring language pedagogy through second language acquisition research . New York: Routledge. 
 Erlam, R. (2008). What do you researchers know about language teaching? Bridging the gap between SLA research and lan-
guage pedagogy.  Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 2 , 253–267. 
 Eurydice (2012).  Key data on teaching languages at school in Europe . Brussels: European Commission Education, Audiovisual 
and Culture Executive Agency: Education, Audiovisual and Culture Executive Agency. 
 Foster, P. (1998). A classroom perspective on the negotiation of meaning.  Applied Linguistics, 19 , 1–23. 
 Fröhlich, M., Spada, N., & Allen, P. (1985). Differences in the communicative orientation of L2 classrooms.  TESOL Quarterly, 
19 , 27–57. 
 Fu, D., & Matoush, M. M. (2015).  Focus on literacy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 García Mayo, M. P., & García Lecumberri, M. L. (Eds.) (2003).  Age and the acquisition of English as a foreign language . Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Genesee, F. (1987).  Learning through two languages . Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Gibbons, P. (2002).  Scaffolding language; scaffolding learning . Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
www.ebook3000.com

SLA Research and Foreign-Language Teaching • 115
 Gibbons, P. (2009).  English learners, academic literacy, and thinking: Learning in the challenge zone . Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
 Goldenberg, C. (2008). Teaching English language learners: What the research does—and does not—say.  American Educator, 
Summer, 8–23 , 42–44. 
 Hakuta, K., & Diaz, R. M. (1985). The relationship between degree of bilingualism and cognitive development: A critical 
discussion and some new longitudinal data. In K. E. Nelson (Ed.),  Children’s language, vol .  5  (pp. 319–344). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Harley, B. (1989). Functional grammar in French immersion: A classroom experiment.  Applied Linguistics, 10 , 331–360. 
 Harley, B., & Hart, D. (1997). Language aptitude and second language proficiency in classroom learners of different starting 
ages.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19 , 379–400. 
 Hernandez, A. E. (2013).  The bilingual brain . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Housen, A. (2012). Time and amount of L2 contact inside and outside the school—Insights from the European Schools. In 
C. Muñoz (Ed.),  Intensive exposure experiences in second language learning (pp. 111–138). Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Klingner, J., & Vaughn, S. (2000). The helping behaviors of fifth graders while using collaborative strategic reading during ESL 
content classes.  TESOL Quarterly, 34 , 69–98. 
 Krashen, S. (1985).  The input hypothesis: Issues and implications . London: Longman. 
 Krashen, S., & Seliger, H. (1975). The essential contributions of formal instruction in adult second language learning.  TESOL 
Quarterly, 9 , 173–183. 
 Lambert, W. E. (1987). The effects of bilingual and bicultural experience on children’s attitudes and social perspectives. In 
P. Homel, M. Palij & D. Aaronson (Eds.),  Childhood bilingualism: Aspects of linguistic, cognitive, and social development 
(pp. 197–221). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates. 
 Lightbown, P. M. (1983). Exploring relationships between developmental and instructional sequences in L2 acquisition. In 
H. Seliger & M. Long (Eds.),  Classroom-oriented research in language acquisition  (pp. 217–243). Rowley, MA: Newbury 
House. 
 Lightbown, P. M. (1985). Great expectations: Second language acquisition research and classroom teaching.  Applied Linguis-
tics, 6 , 173–189. 
 Lightbown, P. M. (1986). ESL: Time to teach.  SPEAQ-Out, 14 , 1, 3, 7–9, 11. 
 Lightbown, P. M. (1998). The importance of timing in focus on form. In C. Doughty and J. Williams (Eds.),  Focus on form in 
classroom second language acquisition (pp. 177–196). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Lightbown, P. M. (2000). Anniversary article: Classroom SLA research and second language teaching.  Applied Linguistics, 21 , 
431–462. 
 Lightbown, P. M. (2008). Easy as pie? Children learning languages.  Concordia Working Papers in Applied Linguistics, 1 , 1–25. 
 Lightbown, P. M. (2014).  Focus on content-based language teaching . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Lightbown, P. M., & Libben, G. (1984). The recognition and use of cognates by L2 learners. In R. W. Andersen (Ed.),  Second 
languages: A cross-linguistic perspective  (pp. 393–417). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Lightbown, P. M., & Spada, N. (1991). Étude des effets à long terme da l’apprentissage intensif de l’anglais, language seconde, 
au primaire.  Canadian Modern Language Review, 48 , 90–117. 
 Lightbown, P. M., & Spada, N. (1994). An innovative program for primary ESL in Quebec.  TESOL Quarterly, 28 , 563–579. 
 Lightbown, P. M., & Spada, N. (2013).  How languages are learned, fourth edition . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Lightbown, P. M., & Spada, N. (Series Eds.) (2014). Introduction. In  Oxford key concepts for the language classroom  (pp. xi–xii). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Lindholm-Leary, K. (2001).  Dual language education . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Long, M. (1983). Does second language instruction make a difference? A review of research?  TESOL Quarterly, 17 , 359–382. 
 Long, M. H. (1990). Maturational constraints on language development.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 12 (3), 251–285. 
 Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Ritchie & T. K. Bahtia 
(Eds.),  Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413–468). New York: Academic Press. 
 Lyster, R. (1994). The effect of functional-analytic teaching on aspects of French immersion students’ sociolinguistic compe-
tence.  Applied Linguistics, 15 , 263–287. 
 Lyster, R. (2007).  Learning and teaching languages through content: A counterbalanced approach . Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in communicative classrooms. 
 Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19 , 37–66. 
 Macaro, E. (2003).  Teaching and learning a second language: A review of recent research . London: Continuum. 
 Meisel, J., Clahsen, H., & Pienemann, M. (1981). On determining developmental stages in natural second language acquisition. 
 Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 3 , 109–135. 
 Muñoz, C. (2007). Age-related differences and second language learning practice. In R. DeKeyser (Ed.),  Practice in a second lan-
guage: Perspectives from applied linguistics and cognitive psychology  (pp. 229–255). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Muñoz, C. (2014). Contrasting effects of starting age and input on the oral performance of foreign language learners.  Applied 
Linguistics, 35 , 463–482. 

116 • Patsy M. Lightbown
 Nassaji, H. (2012). The relationship between research and language pedagogy: Teachers’ perspectives.  Language Teaching 
Research, 16 (3), 337–365. 
 Nation, I. S. P. (2007). The four strands.  Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 1 , 2–13. 
 Oliver, R., & Philp, J. (2014).  Focus on oral interaction . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Ortega, L. (2009).  Understanding second language acquisition . London: Hodder Education. 
 Ortega, L. (2011). Language acquisition research for language teaching: Choosing between application and relevance. In 
B. Hinger, D. Newby & E. M. Unterrainer (Eds.),  Sprachen lernen: Kompetenzen entwickeln? Performanzen (über)prüfen . 
Vienna: Präsens Verlag, Proceedings of the 2010 Annual Conference of the Austrian Society for Language Pedagogy, 
pp. 24–38. 
 Patkowski, M. (1980). The sensitive period for the acquisition of syntax in a second language.  Language Learning, 30 , 449–472. 
 Peal, E., & Lambert, W. (1962). The relation of bilingualism to intelligence.  Psychological Monographs, 76 , 1–23. 
 Pica, T. (1987). The selective impact of classroom instruction on second-language acquisition.  Applied Linguistics, 6 , 214–222. 
 Pienemann, M. (1984). Psychological constraints on the teachability of languages.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 6 , 
186–214. 
 Plonsky, L. (2013). Study quality in SLA: An assessment of designs, analyses, and reporting practices in quantitative L2 
research.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 35 , 655–687. 
 Ranta, L., & Lyster, R. (2007). A cognitive approach to improving immersion students’ oral language abilities: The awareness-
practice-feedback sequence. In R. DeKeyser (Ed.),  Practice in a second language: Perspectives from applied linguistics and 
cognitive psychology (pp. 141–160). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Schulz, R. (2001). Cultural differences in student and teacher perceptions concerning the role of grammar instruction and 
corrective feedback: USA−Colombia.  Modern Language Journal, 85 , 244–258. 
 Schumann, J. (1979). The acquisition of English negation by speakers of Spanish: A review of the literature. In R. W. Andersen 
(Ed.),  The acquisition and use of Spanish and English as first and second languages (pp. 3–32). Washington, DC: TESOL. 
 Seliger, H., & Long, M. (Eds.) (1983).  Classroom oriented research in second language acquisition . Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Selinker, L. (1972). Interlanguage.  International Review of Applied Linguistics, 10 , 209–231. 
 Serrano, R., & Muñoz, C. (2007). Same hours, different time distribution: Any difference in EFL?  System, 35 , 305–321. 
 Snow, C., & Hoefnagle Höhle, M. (1978). The critical period for language acquisition: Evidence from second language learn-
ing.  Child Development, 49 , 1114–1128. 
 Spada, N. (1987). Relationships between instructional differences and learning outcomes: A process-product study of com-
municative language teaching.  Applied Linguistics, 8 , 137–161. 
 Spada, N. (2015). SLA research and L2 pedagogy: Misapplications and questions of relevance.  Language Teaching, 48 , 69–81. 
 Spada, N., & Lightbown, P. M. (1993). Instruction and the development of questions in L2 classrooms.  Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 15 , 205–224. 
 Stern, H. H. (1985). The time factor and compact course development.  TESL Canada Journal, 3 , 13–27. 
 Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (2002). Talking it through: Two French immersion learners’ response to reformulation.  International 
Journal of Educational Research, 37 , 285–304. 
 Tarone, E., & Bigelow, M. (2005). Impact of literacy on oral language processing: Implications for SLA research.  Annual Review 
of Applied Linguistics, 25 , 77–97. 
 Toohey, K. (2000).  Learning English at school: Identity, social relations and classroom practice . Cleveland, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
 Turnbull, M. (2001). There is a role for the L1 in second and foreign language teaching, but . . .  Canadian Modern Language 
Review, 57 , 531–540. 
 Turnbull, M., Lapkin, S., Hart, D., & Swain, M. (1998). Time on task and immersion graduates’ French proficiency. In S. Lapkin 
(Ed.),  French second language education in Canada: Empirical studies  (pp. 31–55). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
 Ur, P. (2014). Practice and research-based theory in English teacher development.  The European Journal of Applied Linguistics 
and TEFL, 3 , 143–155. 
 White, J. (2008). Speeding up acquisition of his and her: Explicit L1/L2 contrasts help. In J. Philp, R. Oliver, A. Mackey (Eds.), 
 Second language acquisition and the younger learner: Child’s play? (pp. 193–228). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
 Widdowson, H. (1979).  Teaching language as communication . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

117
 9 
 Curriculum Approaches in Language Teaching 
 Jack C. Richards 
 The spread of English as the world’s de facto second language requires governments, ministries of 
education, schools and others involved in English language teaching to constantly review their Eng-
lish teaching programs. Language teaching policies and practices are subject to constant cycles of 
revision as one approach becomes “old”, failing to live up to its promises, and a new one is brought 
in to replace it. Central to any innovation in language teaching is the nature of the second language 
curriculum. In this chapter we seek to provide an overview of how curriculum has been understood 
and practiced in second language teaching. 
 The Curriculum as Product 
 Curriculum is understood in different ways and takes many different forms (Richards 2013; Chris-
tison and Murray 2014). The most familiar types of curriculum are those that are designed to guide, 
monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of teaching. They have an important planning and managing 
function. Here we refer to a curriculum as a set of statements, documents and resources, typically 
developed by teams of experts in a ministry of education, university, publisher’s office or school 
that represent a plan for the achievement of specific educational goals, which may be either at the 
national, regional, school or institutional level. Curriculum in this sense refers to a  product , and 
development of curriculum of this type can be described as a top-down expert-driven process. The 
curriculum can be seen to reflect the best interpretation of the current state of knowledge concern-
ing what a second language is and how it can be taught, as well as an understanding of how best 
to organize a language teaching program. It is seen as a technical or semi-scientific framework for 
teaching and learning that has been validated through current theory, research and expert knowl-
edge (Pinar and Irwin 2004). 
 There are several different kinds of product-designed curriculum, depending on what their pur-
poses are, who they intended for and how they are to be used. 

118 • Jack C. Richards
 A National or State Curriculum 
 This is typically a public document that describes the goals of the educational system in a particular 
country or state, generally covering education from K through 12 (kindergarten to year 12) but not 
including tertiary level education. It normally includes: 
 • an account of the underlying philosophy of the curriculum (e.g. the beliefs or principles on 
which it is based), 
 • the different subjects that will be taught such as English, science, and mathematics, 
 • what levels of attainment are expected for each subject, 
 • the teaching methods that are recommended in teaching the curriculum, and 
 • how learning will be assessed. 
 Curriculum documents of this kind are often very comprehensive, such as the  English Language 
Curriculum Guide primary 1–6  produced by the Curriculum Development Institute of the Hong 
Kong Department of Education, which contains 359 pages of information (http://bit.ly/1vMjv0N), 
or the  Massachusetts Adult Basic Education Curriculum Framework for English for Speakers of Other 
Languages (ESOL)  produced by the Massachusetts Department of Education Adult and Community 
Learning Services (http://bit.ly/1tCg2lc). Many countries have a single curriculum that provides the 
basis for teaching across the whole nation (e.g. Singapore, the United Kingdom). In some countries 
there is no national curriculum, and each state develops its own curriculum (e.g. Australia, the US). 
National and state curriculum documents are usually developed by specialists in the curriculum 
department in a ministry of education or a state planning agency. 
 Curriculum of this kind are developed through a process of research and consultation with uni-
versities and other educational institutions, curriculum specialists, employers, teachers, parents and 
sometimes learners. Such curriculum typically undergo periodic revision and renewal based on 
changes in goals, changes in educational philosophies, educational trends and developments, as well 
as their effectiveness in bringing about desired learning outcomes. 
 An Institutional Curriculum 
 The range of courses that universities, schools, institutes and other educational institutions offer is 
also referred to as a curriculum. It will reflect the needs of students in the institution at any given 
time—since students’ needs often change and changes in the curriculum may be needed to reflect 
changes in the student population. It may provide information that helps attract students to the 
institution, it provides accountability to parents and other stakeholders with an interest in the 
school’s performance, and it can serve as a basis for the selection of textbooks and the development 
of classroom materials, tests and other forms of assessment. It may describe in detail the language 
content and skills expected to be covered in each course. These may form the basis for syllabi for 
individual courses. An institutional curriculum is often developed by a team of teachers with rel-
evant experience and expertise and will often be based on a needs analysis of the different student 
groups or clients that the institution serves (Basturkmen 2010; Richards 2017). 
 A Teacher’s Curriculum 
 This is often referred to as a syllabus and is a document a teacher uses in planning his or her lessons. 
It can be thought of as an action plan based on the information given in the school curriculum for 
a particular course. It will typically describe the course goals, the objectives or learning outcomes 
www.ebook3000.com

Curriculum Approaches in Language Teaching • 119
and the scope and sequence of materials to be covered. It may also list specific items to be taught 
and tested at different stages of the course. It may be developed by an individual teacher or group of 
teachers or by others in the institution who have the responsibility for developing courses. The level 
of detail included in the teacher’s curriculum will depend on how the teacher or the school intends it 
to be used. Two teachers may develop a course that addresses the same aims and learning outcomes, 
but both teachers take very different routes to achieve their outcomes. In some settings, teachers may 
be required to prepare a fully elaborated syllabus and associated scheme of work that is available for 
review by others. In others, much more leeway is given to teachers to develop a syllabus that reflects 
their own personal working style. It may be a much more provisional set of guidelines that will be 
used as a “springboard” by the teacher rather than as a lesson-by-lesson template that he or she will 
follow (Graves 1996, 2000). 
 A General Curriculum 
 Some curricula are developed by national or international educational bodies or organizations, such 
as the Council of Europe or the United Nations (http://bit.ly/1pptxh4), and they are available to 
be used by anyone for whom they are relevant. An example of a curriculum of this kind was the 
Council of Europe’s  Threshold Level— one of a series of communicative syllabi for the teaching of 
general English at the elementary, intermediate and upper-intermediate levels and that has been 
widely used as the basis for the development of courses and textbooks. Another example is the  Com-
mon European Framework of Reference , which has been similarly used. While the latter is not a fully 
developed curriculum, it is often used world-wide as a reference in developing courses for particular 
groups of learners (http://bit.ly/1iNvAIB). Curricula of this kind are often promoted as examples 
of expert-derived curricula based on research and needs analysis (depending on the target learn-
ers) and include social-survival or occupationally related curricula (e.g. curricula for engineers, new 
arrivals, nurses, factory workers, restaurant employees, telephone operators) (Council of Europe 
2001; Kantarcioglu and Papageorgiou 2012). 
 Developing and Implementing a Product-Focused Curriculum 
 In designing a curriculum, the designers have to make a variety of decisions concerning what is to 
be taught (e.g. vocabulary, grammar, texts, skills), what outcomes are to be achieved (e.g. ability to 
take part in a job interview; ability to write business correspondence) and the teaching methods that 
will be employed. These decisions will also reflect the context and manner in which the curricu-
lum will be implemented. Contextual factors relate to the setting for the curriculum, the institution, 
the teachers, the learners, available means and resources, and are identified through what is referred 
to as situational or environment analysis (Nation and Macalister 2010; Richards 2017). The man-
ner of implementation may be face-to-face, blended, or online, each of which will have a different 
impact on aspects of the curriculum design. 
 In language curriculum development, two complementary processes have been used to develop a 
curriculum. These can be described as forward design and backward design. 
 Forward Design 
 Forward design is based on the assumption that curriculum design constitutes a sequence of stages 
that occur in a fixed order—an approach that has been referred to as a “waterfall” model (Tessmer 
and Wedman 1990), where the output from one stage serves as the input to the stage that follows. 

120 • Jack C. Richards
The starting point in forward design is the language syllabus. This approach is described in Richards 
and Rodgers (2014, 155), summarizing Docking’s (1994) comment: 
 the traditional approach to developing a syllabus involves using one’s understanding of subject 
matter as the basis for syllabus planning. One starts with the field of knowledge that one is 
going to teach (e.g. contemporary European history, marketing, listening comprehension, or 
French literature) and then selects concepts, knowledge, and skills that constitute that field of 
knowledge. A syllabus and the course content are then developed around the subject. Objec-
tives may also be specified, but these usually have little role in teaching or assessing of the 
subject. Assessment of students is usually based on norm referencing, that is, students will be 
graded on a single scale with the expectation that they spread across a wide range of scores or 
that they conform to a pre-set distribution. 
 Syllabus Design 
 Syllabus design is central to the notion of forward design. This was a growth industry from the mid-
1920s through to the latter part of the 20th century and led to a number of key publications in which 
different approaches to syllabus design were proposed (e.g. Wilkins 1976; Munby 1978). Debate over 
criteria for the choice of syllabus items ( selection ), as well as criteria for their sequencing ( grada-
tion ), was a dominant issue in applied linguistics in the early and mid-20th century, as described in 
Mackey’s influential book  Language Teaching Analysis  (Mackey 1965). Intuition, frequency counts, as 
well as text analysis have all been used as procedures in syllabus design and have resulted in different 
kinds of lists that have been used as the basis for language courses. 
 For example, West’s  General Service List  (1953) identified a core set of some 2,000 lexical items 
needed to sustain language ability. Hindmarsh (1980) identified 4,500 words grouped into seven 
levels, a similar total to the list included in the Council of Europe’s Threshold Level (Van Ek and 
Alexander 1975). Lists of the core set of grammatical items learners needed to master were also 
developed, such as Hornby’s  Guide to Patterns and Usage in English  (1954), which together with sub-
sequent variants (e.g. Alexander, Stannard Allen, Close and O’Neill 1975) have provided the basis for 
the grammatical syllabi underlying language courses and course books ever since. Communicative 
language teaching replaced grammar and lexis as the primary components of a syllabus with com-
municative units of syllabus organization. This led to proposals for a number of additional different 
syllabus models, including notional, functional, lexical, text (Mickan 2013) and task-based models 
(Ellis 2003; Van den Branden 2012; Long 2014). More recently, corpus analysis and discourse analysis 
have been used to update or replace the earlier generations of lists that have been used in syllabus 
design. O’Keefe, Anne, McCarthy and Carter (2007, 22) suggest that “course book dialogues, and 
even entire syllabi, can be informed by corpus data”. An example of a vocabulary syllabus based on 
corpus data is Coxhead’s Academic Word List (2000), which identifies some 570 head words beyond 
a core vocabulary of 3,000 or so words which are common across a range of academic disciplines. 
Discourse analysis has also played an important role in the design of courses in English for Special 
Purposes, where the identification of the lexical, syntactic and textual structures of different genres 
is a pre-requisite to teaching specialized genres (Basturkmen 2010). 
 Syllabus and Methodology 
 With a forward design approach, decisions about teaching processes or methodology  follow  from syl-
labus specification. Ideally, the planner starts with a theory of language and a syllabus derived from 
it and then looks for a learning theory that could be used as the basis for an appropriate pedagogy. 
www.ebook3000.com

Curriculum Approaches in Language Teaching • 121
However, a syllabus does not necessarily imply a particular methodology. A structural syllabus can 
be embodied in an audiolingual as well as a task-based course, and there are many different ways in 
which a text-based or functional syllabus can be taught. 
 Two Examples of Forward Design Approaches in Language Teaching 
 Communicative language teaching (CLT) and content and language integrated learning (CLIL) are 
both relatively recent examples of forward design applications in language teaching (Richards and 
Rodgers 2014). CLT was part of a paradigm shift in language teaching in the 1960s and ’70s in which 
grammar-based approaches to teaching seen in the then-dominant teaching methods of audiolin-
gualism and situational language teaching were replaced by a methodology that sought to teach lan-
guage both  as  and  through  communication. Central to this enterprise was a communicative syllabus 
and a related communicative methodology. The best known of the communicative syllabi that were 
developed was known as Threshold level (Trim 2012, 26), which contained a syllabus made up of 
functions, notions and topics as well as more traditional language-based units. 
 Content-based Instruction (CoBI) and its more recent variant CLIL are also examples of forward 
design (Coyle, Hood and Marsh 2010). They seek to develop language proficiency as well as the mas-
tery of subject matter, critical thinking and other cognitive skills through the use of a syllabus that 
integrates both language and subject matter (e.g. science, geography, history, environmental studies). 
Although CoBI and CLIL may take many different forms, as with other forward design models the 
process of developing a curriculum typically starts with the design of a syllabus that contains both 
content and language components. This then leads to the choice of suitable instructional materials as 
well as selection of activities for delivering, reviewing and assessing instruction (Crandall 2012, 150). 
The following example (from Mehisto, Marsh and Frigols 2008, 50–69) illustrates in summary form 
the procedures used to develop a one-week science unit on volcanoes: 
 1. Content and language needed for the topic of volcanoes is identified. 
 2. Aims in terms of content learning, language learning and skills learning are identified. 
 3. Resources are chosen to facilitate a variety of whole-class, group-based and individual activi-
ties focussing on different aspects of content and language. 
 4. Informal assessment procedures are used to assess student learning. 
 Like other communicative approaches, the instructional processes used in CoBI/CLIL are varied, 
and no specific teaching methods are prescribed. 
 With forward design approaches, the planning and development of each stage in the curriculum 
development process is often carried out by different specialists who have expertise in each process, 
such as specialists in syllabus design, methodology and assessment. Graves (2008, 150) describes this 
as a “specialist approach” and comments: 
 In the specialist approach, the potential for mismatch [i.e. lack of alignment between the dif-
ferent components of the curriculum—author’s note] is great because each different group of 
people performs different curricular functions, uses different discourses, and produces differ-
ent curricular products. 
 Backward Design 
 The second approach used in developing a product-based curriculum is known as backward design 
(Wiggins and McTighe 2005). Backward design starts with a careful statement of the desired 

122 • Jack C. Richards
results or outcomes: appropriate teaching activities and content are derived from the learning out-
comes. Three steps are required: 
 1. Identify desired results 
 2. Determine acceptable evidence of learning 
 3. Plan learning experiences and instruction 
 In education this approach is more commonly associated with the use of objectives in curriculum 
planning. 
 Backward Design through Objectives 
 The use of objectives in curriculum design is a well-established tradition in general education and 
was sometimes described as an “ends-means” approach, as seen in the work of Tyler (1949) and Taba 
(1962), who viewed instruction as the specification of ends as a pre-requisite to devising the means 
to reach them. The process consists of: 
 Step 1: diagnosis of needs 
 Step 2: formulation of objectives 
 Step 3: selection of content 
 Step 4: organization of content 
 Step 5: selection of learning experiences 
 Step 6: organization of learning experiences 
 Step 7: determination of what to evaluate and of the ways of doing it 
 Taba (1962, 12) 
 The role of methodology was to determine which teaching methods were most effective in attaining 
the objectives, and a criterion-referenced approach would be used for assessment. Tyler’s work had 
a considerable impact on curriculum planning and helped establish the use of objectives as plan-
ning units in instructional design. An objectives-based approach reflects the essential assumptions 
of backward design. The planning process begins with a clear understanding of the ends in mind. 
A variety of teaching strategies can be employed to achieve the desired goals, but teaching methods 
cannot be chosen until the desired outcomes have been specified. 
 Needs Analysis in Backward Design 
 Identifying learning outcomes or objectives is often seen to depend upon a systematic analysis of the 
learners’ communicative needs, and procedures referred to as needs analysis emerged in the 1960s 
as part of the systems approach to curriculum development. Needs analysis is part of the process 
by which aims and objectives are determined (Nunan 1988; Long 2005; Huhta, Vogt, Johnson and 
Tulkki 2013). The steps involved are: 
 1. Identify learner’s communicative needs 
 2. Develop statements of learning objectives 
 3. Identify linguistic content and skills needed to attain the objectives 
 4. Prepare course plans 
 5. Select materials and teaching methods 
www.ebook3000.com

Curriculum Approaches in Language Teaching • 123
 Backward Design in Task-Based Language Teaching 
 Needs analysis is also the starting point for curriculum development in some versions of Task-Based 
Language Teaching and is used to determine an inventory of target tasks that learners need to be able 
to master in the target language. 
 The design of a task-based syllabus preferably starts with an analysis of the students’ needs. 
What do these students need to be able to do with the target language? What are the tasks 
they are supposed to perform outside of the classroom? Using different sources and different 
methods (such as interviews, observations, and surveys) a concrete description of the kinds of 
tasks students will face in the real word is drawn up. This description, then, serves as the basis 
for the design and sequencing of tasks in the syllabus. 
 Van den Branden (2012, 134) 
 The methodology of this approach to TBLT is then built around activities or tasks that require com-
municative language use, from which the learners need for particular aspects of language are derived: 
 In TBLT, students do not first acquire elaborate knowledge about language then face the daunt-
ing challenge to translate all the acquired knowledge into spontaneous and natural language 
use. In a task-based approach, students are confronted with approximations and simulations 
of the kinds of tasks they are supposed to be able to perform outside the classroom and learn 
about relevant forms of language while trying to understand and produce the language that 
these communicative tasks involve. 
 Van den Branden (2012, 133) 
 Competency-Based Instruction 
 Competency-Based Instruction (CpBI) is another widely used example of backward design (Auer-
bach 1986; Christison and Murray 2014; Richards and Rodgers 2014). With CpBI the starting point 
of curriculum design is a specification of the learning outcomes in terms of “competencies”—the 
knowledge, skills and behaviors learners involved in performing everyday tasks and activities and 
which learners should master at the end of a course of study. Curriculum development with CpBI 
starts from a similar stage as TBLI in the version described in the previous section. Advocates of 
CpBI suggest it has similar advantages to the backward design approach proposed by Wiggins and 
McTighe (2005). 
 Competency-based approaches to teaching and assessment offer teachers an opportunity 
to revitalize their education and training programs. Not only will the quality of assessment 
improve, but the quality of teaching and student learning will be enhanced by clear specifica-
tion of expected outcomes and the continuous feedback that competency-based assessment 
can offer. 
 Docking (1994, 15) 
 Like other backward design approaches, CpBI makes no assumptions about teaching methods, since 
any set of classroom activities can be used that enables students to master the desired competencies. 
However, since student learning is assessed on the basis of performance and the ability to demon-
strate mastery of pre-specified skills and behaviours, teaching is generally based on helping learners 

124 • Jack C. Richards
acquire the communicative skills needed for specific situations, tasks and activities. As with other 
backward design approaches, needs analysis is the starting point in curriculum development. 
 Standards and the Common European Framework of Reference 
 A related approach to backward design is through the use of  standards  (also known as  benchmarks, 
core skills, performance profiles  and  target competencies ) (Samway 2000; Katz and Snow 2009; Chris-
tison and Murray 2014). Standards are descriptions of the outcomes or targets that students should 
be able to reach in different domains of curriculum content, including language learning, and are 
generally specified in very general terms. For example, standards related to the use of both oral and 
written language could include the following: 
 Students will develop knowledge and understanding of: 
 • The relationship between texts and contexts 
 • Cultural reference in text 
 • The relationship between purposes and structures of texts 
 • Language forms and features of texts 
 McKay (2000) 
 The primary motivation for an increased emphasis on statements of learning outcomes in the design 
of language programs and particularly the use of “standards” as ways of identifying learning targets 
across a curriculum is described by Leung (2012, 165): 
 the prominence of outcomes-based teaching in the past thirty years or so can be associated 
with the wider public policy environments in which the twin doctrines of corporatist manage-
ment (whereby the activities in different segments of society are subordinated to the goals of 
the state) and public accountability (which requires professionals to justify their activities in 
relation to declared public policy goals) have predominated. 
 In order to assist in the planning process, standards are generally accompanied with more specific 
“indicators” that “describe assessable, observable activities or behaviors that may be performed to 
show the standard is being met” (Katz and Snow 2009, 67). These are often described in terms of 
competencies. Perhaps the most widespread example of backward design using standards in current 
use is the  Common European Framework for Reference for Languages  (CEFR) (Council of Europe 
2001), which is designed to provide a “common basis for explicit description of objectives, content 
and methods of the study of modern languages, within a wider purpose of elaboration of language 
syllabuses, curriculum guidelines, examinations, textbooks’ etc. across Europe” (Council of Europe 
2001, 1). It describes six levels of achievement divided into three broad divisions from lowest (A1) 
to highest (C2), which describe what a learner should be able to do in reading, listening, speaking 
and writing at each level. However, no language content is specified, and it is the teacher’s or course 
designer’s responsibility to work out how the outcomes can be achieved and to develop teaching 
strategies and materials and content relevant to the context in which they are teaching. 
 Evaluation in a Product-Based Curriculum 
 With a product curriculum, curriculum processes are seen as ways of bringing order, control and 
direction into language teaching and language course design. Evaluation is viewed as essential to 
www.ebook3000.com

Curriculum Approaches in Language Teaching • 125
maintaining the effectiveness of a program. As Kiely comments (2009, 99): “[program evaluation] 
is about effectiveness, and traditionally the answer has been sought in terms of test results, a lan-
guage learning theory, or a particular syllabus”. The role of evaluation is hence to determine the 
extent to which planned outcomes have been achieved and syllabus content has been mastered. It is 
improvement-oriented. The rigor with which curriculum development is carried out—employing 
processes such as needs analysis, determining learning outcomes, designing a course and syllabus 
framework and using effective methods of teaching and learning—will determine the success of the 
outcomes. Each component of the curriculum—the assumptions on which it is based, the objec-
tives, the syllabus, the teachers, the teaching methods, the learners and the forms of assessment 
used—is subject to scrutiny during this process. The questions asked and the processes used during 
the evaluation will depend on who the primary stakeholders are, such as policy makers, education 
officials, providers of language programs, teachers, parents and learners (Elley 1989; Kiely and Rea-
Dickins 2005). 
 Curriculum as Process 
 While the development of product-focussed curriculum frameworks is a major educational enter-
prise occupying specialists in ministries of education, universities, schools and private institutes, the 
enactment or realization of the curriculum at the school and classroom level is the primary deter-
minant of success in teaching and learning. The way the curriculum is understood by teachers, how 
they adapt curriculum guidelines, syllabi and materials to their learners’ needs, and the classroom 
processes that result as they engage in day-to-day teaching are all aspects of the  curriculum as process . 
The focus of the curriculum as process is how the teacher seeks to create affordances for learning 
within the classroom through interactions among the teaching context, teaching resources and the 
learner (Graves 2008). This view of a curriculum involves viewing the classroom as a site where 
teachers and learners participate in classroom tasks and activities, adapt and extend teaching materi-
als and resources based on moment-to-moment incidents that arise during the teaching process, and 
where teachers and learners negotiate their identities through the interactional processes involved 
(K. Richards 2006). The participants in the curriculum—teachers and learners—“create” the cur-
riculum through the processes of interaction they use to negotiate and understand the content of 
their course and the materials and resources that they employ. This is what Aoki refers to as the  lived 
curriculum (Pinar and Irwin 2004). 
 In general education, this approach was advocated by Bruner (1966) and Stenhouse (1975), who 
argued that curriculum development should start by identifying the processes of inquiry and delib-
eration that drive teaching and learning—processes such as investigation, decision-making reflec-
tion, discussion, interpretation, critical thinking, making choices, co-operating with others and so 
on. Content is chosen on the basis of how it promotes the use of these processes, and outcomes do 
not need to be specified in any degree of detail, if at all. 
 Clark’s description of the features of “progressivism” captures the essence of the curriculum as 
process: 
 • It places less emphasis on syllabus specification and more on methodological principles and 
procedures. 
 • It is more concerned with learning processes than predetermined objectives. 
 • It emphasizes methodology and the need for principles to guide the teaching learning process. 
 • It is learner-centered and seeks to provide learning experiences that enable learners to learn by 
their own efforts. 
 • It regards learners as active participants in shaping their own learning. 

126 • Jack C. Richards
 • It promotes the development of the learner as an individual. 
 • It views learning as a creative problem-solving activity. 
 • It acknowledges the uniqueness of each teaching-learning context. 
 • It emphasizes the role of the teacher in creating his or her own curriculum in the classroom. 
 Clark (1987, 49–90) 
 The “curriculum as process” perspective has been reflected in language teaching in a number of dif-
ferent ways. 
 Novel Methods of the 1980s 
 A number of language teaching proposals emerged in the second half of the 20th century that rejected 
the need for pre-determined syllabi or statements learning outcomes and were built instead around 
specifications of classroom activities. For example, Krashen and Terrell’s Natural Approach (1983) 
proposed that communicative classroom processes engaging the learners in meaningful interaction 
and communication and at an appropriate level of difficulty were the key to a language course, rather 
than building teaching around a predetermined grammatical syllabus. There is no need for clearly 
defined outcomes or objectives. The purpose and content of a course “will vary according to the 
needs of the students and their particular interests” (Krashen and Terrell 1983, 65). Goals are stated 
in very general terms, such as “basic personal communication skills: oral” and “basic personal com-
munication skills: written”. 
 Curran’s  Counseling Learning  was another process-centered method that attracted some atten-
tion when it was introduced in the 1980s and was an application of principles of counseling learning 
to language teaching. The classroom becomes a community of learners and teacher (the knower) 
and students enter into a process in which their interactions, experience and response to learning 
is seen as central to driving the teaching-learning process. There is no pre-determined syllabus and 
no specific linguistic or communicative goals. These are specific to each class and an outcome of the 
social interaction that occurs during the lesson. Students typically sit in a circle and express what they 
want to say. Translation by the teacher is used to help express the learner’s intended meaning. Later, 
interactions and messages are recorded and revisited as a source of reflection, analysis and further 
practice. 
 Dogme 
 A more recent example of a process view of the curriculum has been labelled Dogme (a term taken 
from the film industry that refers to filming without scripts or rehearsal) by Scott Thornbury, who 
introduced the approach to language teaching (Meddings and Thornbury 2009). It is based on the 
idea that instead of basing teaching on a pre-planned syllabus, a set of objectives and published 
materials, teaching is built around conversational interaction between teacher and students and 
among students themselves. The syllabus or language focus is not pre-planned, and language and 
content emerge from the processes of interaction and negotiation that the teacher initiates. Midlane 
comments: 
 A Dogme approach focuses on emergent language; teaching is not a question of imposing an 
external language syllabus, but of nurturing the students’ in-built language-learning mecha-
nisms and language acquisition agenda. 
 www.deltapublishing.co.uk/content/pdf/teaching-unplugged/
TU_TEFL_review.pdf, accessed 9 July 2015 
www.ebook3000.com

Curriculum Approaches in Language Teaching • 127
 Post-Method Teaching 
 This term is sometimes used to refer to teaching which is not based on the prescriptions and procedures 
of a particular method or which follows a pre-determined syllabus but which draws on the teacher’s 
individual conceptualizations of language, language learning and teaching, the practical knowledge 
and skills teachers develop from training and experience, the teacher’s knowledge of the learners’ needs, 
interests and learning styles, as well as the teacher’s understanding of the teaching context (Kumara-
vadivelu 1994). The teacher’s ‘method’ is constructed from these sources rather than being an applica-
tion of an external set of principles and practices. The kinds of content and activities that the teacher 
employs in the classroom, as well as the outcomes he or she seeks to achieve, will depend upon the 
nature of the core principles that serve as the basis for the teacher’s thinking and decision making. 
 The Ecological Classroom 
 Van Lier (2010) captures the notion of the curriculum as process when he refers to the classroom as 
an ‘ecology’. As summarized by Graves (2008, 168): 
 In a classroom as an ecology, learning is not a system of ‘inputs’ which individual learners con-
vert into ‘output’. Rather, the environment provides affordances or opportunities for meaning-
ful action. . . . In the ecological perspective, the curriculum does not start out by specifying and 
sequencing materials, but with the ‘activities, needs, and emergent purposes of the learner. On 
the basis of activities and emergent needs, the teacher makes resources available in the envi-
ronment, and guides the learner’s perception and action towards an array of affordances that 
can further his or her goals’. 
 Tsui (2005, cited in Graves 2008, 168) contrasts the ecological approaches with traditional product-
based approaches by comparing the kinds of questions a teacher might ask working within both 
approaches: 
 Product-Based Issues 
 What linguistic forms do we want to teach? 
 How do we represent these items in the form of tasks or activities? 
 How do we get learners to use the target items to complete the tasks or activities, either individu-
ally or in pairs/groups? 
 Are there any gaps between the target language structures/functions and those produced by the 
students? 
 Process-Based Issues 
 What opportunities are afforded for learners to participate in meaning making? 
 What kind of shared understanding needs to be established among the learners? 
 What kind of participation framework is being set up and what are the role conﬁ gurations for the 
group and for the individual learner over time? 
 What opportunities have been created by learners in the process of participation? 
 The examples of process-focussed curriculum cited in the previous list have in common the priority 
they attribute to learning processes, classroom participation, and the role of the teacher and the learners 
in creating opportunities for learning. The syllabus or learning input—rather than being something 

128 • Jack C. Richards
that is pre-determined or prescribed and regarded as essential in initiating curriculum development, 
is rather an  outcome of teaching and learning. In the product-focussed curriculum, testing has the role 
of assessment  of  learning (i.e. achievement testing) while with the process curriculum a more dynamic 
role for assessment is assumed—assessment  for  learning—where teaching and assessment inform each 
other at every stage of the teaching/learning process. There is more of an emphasis on  understanding 
than on  judging.  There is a greater role for teachers, through engaging in reflective practice, action 
research, classroom research, exploratory practice (Allwright 2003) and other forms of classroom 
inquiry—which in addition to helping better understand the way curriculum is enacted can “constitute 
a source of inspiration, personal fulfilment, and career development for teachers” (Kiely 2009, 101). 
 Evaluation within a Process-Based Curriculum 
 Evaluation from a process perspective has two aspects: one is to collect information on different aspects 
of the curriculum for anyone who may need such information. This can be called  descriptive evalua-
tion . Examples of issues that might be explored from this perspective could include timing, time on 
task, classroom management, how the teacher organized and managed classroom activities, grouping 
arrangements, participation patterns, feedback, etc. Much classroom action research or teacher inquiry 
can be regarded as evaluation of this kind and may be either teacher initiated or be carried out by others. 
 The other aspect of process evaluation can be referred to as  reflective evaluation.  This view of 
evaluation is inquiry based and is concerned with knowledge building, with understanding and with 
explanation. The focus is less on diagnosing and improving and more on a holistic exploration of 
teaching in context. A reflective view of evaluation views the classroom as a complex ecological site 
in which unfolding events and processes in the classroom shape the way in which participants think, 
feel and act. Questions that evaluation seeks to answer from this perspective include: 
 • How do teachers and learners understand the curriculum? 
 • What is the nature of language teaching and learning? 
 • What does it mean to the participants? 
 • What roles do they participate in? 
 • What is the nature of the experiences they participate in? 
 • What learning opportunities arise during lessons? 
 • What do these activities mean to them? 
 • What underlying values and beliefs underlie the curriculum? 
 • How does the teacher realize her principles and values in teaching? 
 • How are teacher and learner identities negotiated through their interactions? 
 The following activities illustrate a reflective and ecological approach to evaluation. 
 Reflective Teaching 
 Reflective teaching refers to teaching that is accompanied by critical processing and review of prac-
tice (Richards and Lockhart 1994; Farrell 2008). Dewey proposed this approach when he wrote of 
“reflective inquiry” (1933). Rogers clarifies the notion of reflective inquiry and reflective teaching: 
 a reflective teacher does not merely seek solutions, nor does he or she do things in the same way 
very day without an awareness of both the source and the impact of his or her actions. Rather, 
from his or her practice and the students’ learning, the teacher seeks meaning and creates from this 
a theory to live by, a story that provides structure for the growth of the students and of the teacher. 
www.ebook3000.com

Curriculum Approaches in Language Teaching • 129
When the teacher seeks solutions, he or she also pursues connections and relationships between 
solutions so that a theory might grow. This theory guides practice (which includes but is not lim-
ited to problem solving) until it encounters a situation where the theory no longer serves, at which 
point, through more reflection, it is either revised, refined, or discarded, and a new theory is born. 
 Rogers (2002, 849) 
 Exploratory Practice 
 This refers to a form of practitioner inquiry elaborated originally by Allwright (2003) that involves 
focus on an issue or question (such as the teacher’s role in the classroom), exploring the issue from 
multiple directions and using information that results as a basis for critical reflection and awareness 
raising. Central to the notion of exploratory practice is that it involves adding a dimension to one’s 
existing teaching practice rather than intervening in some way to change practice (as is the case 
with action research). The processes involved could include peer observation, discussions, narra-
tives, blogs, reviewing video or written accounts of lessons, or analysis of critical incidents in order 
to arrive at new understandings of the meaning of everyday classroom life. 
 Lesson Study 
 This is a form of collaborative inquiry in which a group of teachers co-plan a lesson that focusses on 
a particular piece of content of unit of study (Fernandez 2002). Throughout the planning process, 
they draw on outside resources, including textbooks, research and teaching theories, and they engage 
in extended conversations while focussing on student learning and the development of specific out-
comes. Once the plan has been developed, one member of the team volunteers to teach it, while the 
others observe. (Sometimes outsiders are also invited to observe.) After the lesson, the group mem-
bers discuss their findings in a colloquium or panel discussion. 
 Conclusions 
 All curriculum depend on the interaction between product and process; one cannot be consid-
ered without its relation to the other. An over-emphasis on the technical-rationalist and top-down 
approach to the curriculum reflected in a product-based approach can fail to acknowledge the per-
sonal and situated nature of the curriculum in action. In the past, this has often lead to failed efforts 
to implement curriculum changes, since they gave insufficient attention to the context for which 
it was intended and to the roles of teachers and learners in “re-imagining” the curriculum. Carless 
(2015, 368) commenting on the failure of CLT in Hong Kong, reports: 
 The CLT syllabus of the 1980s failed to take root fully because of the failure of policymakers to 
take into account features of the Hong Kong context which would clearly militate against the 
implementation of a learner-centred, process-oriented teaching approach. 
 On the other hand, a focus on process without consideration of the intended outcomes—a bottom-
up approach—can lead to teaching without purpose. As Wiggins and McTighe (2005, 16, 17) 
comment: 
 The error of activity-oriented design might be called “hands-on without being minds-on”—
engaging experiences that lead only accidentally, if at all, to insight or achievement . . . activity-
oriented curricula lack an explicit focus on important ideas and approach evidence of 

130 • Jack C. Richards
learning. . . . [Learners] are led to think the learning is the activity instead of seeing that the 
learning comes from being asked to consider the meaning of the activity. 
 Graves (2008, 152) hence emphasizes the interrelationship between the different dimensions of 
curriculum—referred to here as the product and process dimensions: 
 The processes of planning, enacting and evaluating are interrelated and dynamic, not sequen-
tial. They move back and forth to inform and influence each other. Classroom enactment 
shapes planning and vice versa. Planning shapes evaluation and vice versa. 
 Hence the product and process perspective on the curriculum can be thought of as providing two 
different lenses with which to focus on the nature and process of the second language curriculum. 
 References 
 Alexander, L. G., W. Stannard Allen, R. A. Close and R. J. O’Neill 1975.  English Grammatical Structure . London: Longman. 
 Allwright, D. 2003. Exploratory practice: Rethinking practitioner research in language teaching.  Language Teaching Research 
7(2): 113–141. 
 Auerbach, E. R. 1986. Competency-based ESL: One step forward or two steps back?  TESOL Quarterly 20(3): 411–415. 
 Basturkmen, H. 2010.  Designing Courses in English for Specific Purposes . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Bruner, J. 1966.  The Process of Education . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Educational Press. 
 Burns, A. and J. C. Richards (eds.) 2012.  The Cambridge Guide to Pedagogy and Practice in Language Teaching . New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Carless, D. 2015. Teachers’ adaptations of TBLT: The Hong Kong story. In M. Thomas & H. Reinders (eds.) Contemporary 
Task-Based Language Teaching in Asia (pp. 366–380). London: Bloomsbury.
 Christison, M. A. and D. Murray 2014.  What English Teachers Need to Know Volume 111: Designing Curriculum . New York: 
Routledge. 
 Clark, J. L. 1987.  Curriculum Renewal in School Foreign Language Learning . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Council of Europe 2001.  Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assessment . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Coxhead, A. 2000. A new academic word list.  TESOL Quarterly 34: 213–238. 
 Coyle, D., P. Hood and D. Marsh 2010.  Content and Language Integrated Learning . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Crandall, J. 2012. Content-based language teaching. In A. Burns and J. C. Richards (eds.)  The Cambridge Guide to Pedagogy 
and Practice in Second Language Teaching (pp. 149–160). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Curran, C. A. 1976.  Counseling-Learning in Second Languages . Apple River, IL: Apple River Press. 
 Dewey, J. 1933.  How We Think . New York: D.C. Heath Classic. 
 Docking, R. 1994. Competency-based curricula—The big picture.  Prospect 9(2): 8–17. 
 Elley, W. 1989. Tailoring the evaluation to fit the context. In R. K. Johnson (ed.)  The Second Language Curriculum  (pp. 270–285). 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Ellis, R. 2003.  Task-based Learning and Teaching . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Farrell, T. 2008.  Reflective Language Teaching: From Research to Practice . New York: Bloomsbury. 
 Fernanez, C. 2002. Learning from Japanese approaches to professional development: The case of lesson study.  Journal of 
Teacher Education 53(5): 393–405. 
 Graves, K. 1996.  Teachers as Course Developers . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Graves, K. 2000.  Designing Language Courses: A Guide for Language Teachers . Boston, MA: Heinle and Heinle. 
 Graves, K. 2008. The language curriculum: A social contextual perspective.  Language Teaching 41(2): 147–181. 
 Hindmarsh, R. 1980.  The Cambridge English Lexicon . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Hornby, A. S. 1954.  The Teaching of Structural Words and Sentence Patterns . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Huhta, M., K. Vogt, E. Johnson and H. Tulkki 2013.  Needs Analysis for Language Course Design . Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
 Kantarcioglu, E. and S. Papageorgiou 2012. The common European framework of reference. In C. Coombe, P. Davidson, 
B. O’Sullivan and S. Stoynoff (eds.)  The Cambridge Guide to Second Language Assessment  (p. 88). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press 
 Katz, A. and M.A. Snow 2009. Standards and second language teacher education. In A. Burns and J.C. Richards (eds.)  The 
Cambridge Guide to Second Language Assessment (pp. 66–76). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

Curriculum Approaches in Language Teaching • 131
Kiely, R. 2009. Learning from language program evaluation. Language Teaching Research 13(1): 99–116.
 Kiely, R. and P. Rea-Dickins 2005.  Program Evaluation in Language Education . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave. 
 Krashen, S. and T. Terrell 1983.  The Natural Approach: Language Acquisition in the Classroom . Oxford: Pergamon. 
 Kumaravadivelu, B. 1994. The post-method condition: (E)merging strategies for second/foreign language teaching.  TESOL 
Quarterly 28(1): 27–48. 
 Leung, C. 2012. Outcomes-based language teaching. In A. Burns and J. C. Richards (eds.)  The Cambridge Guide to Pedagogy 
and Practice in Language Teaching (pp. 161–179). New York: Cambridge University Press,. 
 Long, M. 2005.  Second Language Needs Analysis . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Long, M. H. 2014.  Second Language Acquisition and Task-based Language Teaching . New York: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Mackey, W. F. 1965.  Language Teaching Analysis . London: Longman. 
 McKay, P. 2000. On ESL standards for school-age learners.  Language Testing 7(2): 185–214. 
 Meddings, Luke and Scott Thornbury 2009.  Teaching Unplugged: Dogme in English Language Teaching . Peaslake, UK: DELTA. 
 Mehisto, P., D. Marsh and M. Frigols 2008.  Uncovering CLIL . Oxford: Macmillan. 
 Mickan, P. 2013.  Language Curriculum Design and Socialization . Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Munby, J. 1978.  Communicative Syllabus Design . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Nation, I. S. P. and J. Macalister 2010.  Language Curriculum Design . New York: Routledge. 
 Nunan, D. 1988.  The Learner-centred Curriculum . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 O’Keefe, A., M. McCarthy and R. Carter 2007.  From Corpus to Classroom . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Pinar, W. F. and R. Irwin (eds.) 2004.  Curriculum in a New Key: The Collected Works of Ted. T. Aoki . New York: Routledge. 
 Richards, J. C. 2013. Curriculum approaches in language teaching: Forward, central and backward design.  RELC Journal 44(1): 
5–33. 
 Richards, J. C. 2015.  Key Issues in Language Teaching . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Richards, J. C. 2017.  Curriculum Development in Second Language Teaching: 2nd Edition . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Richards, J. C. and C. Lockhart 1994.  Reflective Teaching in Second Language Classrooms . New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Richards, J. C. and T. Rodgers 2014.  Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching . Third Edition. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Richards, K. 2006. Being the teacher: Identity and classroom conversation.  Applied Linguistics 27(1): 51–77. 
 Rogers, C. 2002. Defining reflection: Another look at John Dewey and reflective thinking.  Teachers College Record  104(4 June 
2002): 842–866. 
 Samway, K. D. (ed.) 2000.  Integrating ESL Standards into Classroom Practice . Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
 Stenhouse, L. 1975.  An Introduction to Curriculum Research and Development . London: Heinemann. 
 Taba, H. 1962.  Curriculum Development: Theory and Practice . New York: Harcourt Brace. 
 Tessmer, M. and J. F. Wedman 1990. A layers-of-necessity instructional development model.  Educational Research and Develop-
ment 38(2): 77–85. 
Trim, J. L. M. 2012. The common European framework of reference for languages and its background: A case study of cultural 
politics and educational influences. In M. Byram and L. Parmenter (eds.) The Common European Framework of Refer-
ence: The Globalization of Language Education Policy (pp. 14–34). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Tsui, A. B. 2005. Young foreign language learners and collaborative group work: A sociocultural perspective. Paper presented 
at the 37th Annual TESOL Conference, San Antonio, TX.
 Tyler, R. 1949.  Basic Principles of Curriculum and Instruction . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Van den Branden, K. 2012. Task-based language education. In Anne Burns and Jack C. Richards (eds.)  The Cambridge Guide 
to Pedagogy and Practice in Language Teaching (pp. 140–148). New York: Cambridge University Press,. 
 Van Ek, J. L. and L. G. Alexander 1975.  The Threshold Level in a Unit/Credit System for Modern Language Learning by Adults . 
Oxford: Pergamon. 
 Van Lier, L. 2009. Action-based teaching, autonomy and identity.  Innovation in Language Teaching and Learning 1(1): 1–19. 
 Van Lier, L. 2010. The ecology of language learning: Practice to theory, theory to practice.  Procedia: Social and Behavioral 
Sciences 3: 2–6. 
 West, M. 1953.  A General Service List of English Words . London: Longman. 
 Wiggins, G. and J. McTighe 2005.  Understanding by Design . New York: Pearson. 
 Wilkins, D. A. 1976.  Notional Syllabuses . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

132
 10 
 Application of Research to Materials Design 
 Penny Ur 
 This chapter explores the phenomenon that writers of language-teaching materials—particularly 
coursebooks—regularly ignore evidence provided by relevant research and base their composition 
rather on a combination of intuition, creativity, professional experience-based judgement, and mar-
ket demands. The evidence and arguments are largely based on English language teaching (ELT), 
since much of the applied linguistics research relates to this language; however, the main conclusions 
apply equally to the teaching of other languages. 
 After some preliminary definitions, the earlier sections of this chapter are devoted to an explo-
ration of reasons why the research literature is so little studied, still less applied, in the language-
teaching profession. The discussion focuses first on the primary practitioners, the teachers, and then 
moves to consider whether similar reasons can apply to the same phenomenon among materials 
writers. Later sections express the position of the author that, although understandable, it is never-
theless regrettable that materials writers do not consider insights from the research in the course of 
composition, and suggest which types of studies might be more, or less, appropriate for this purpose, 
with examples. 
 Preliminary Definitions 
 Teaching Materials and Their Writers 
 The term ‘teaching materials’ in the context of language teaching covers a variety of print and digi-
tal sources: coursebooks; supplementary textbooks focusing on particular skills or aspects of lan-
guage; visual materials such as pictures or diagrams; audio and video recordings; worksheets or sets of 
practice exercises; reference material such as dictionaries and grammars. The range of target popula-
tions for whom such materials are intended is very broad. Perhaps the largest such population is the 
teachers and students of courses for children and teenagers in state and private schools world-wide. 
Another major population is those involved in university language courses, most frequently English 
for Academic Purposes (EAP), where English is studied for purposes of programs leading to academic 
qualifications. Then there are private language schools—and more. In all such contexts, the most 
widely used type of teaching material is the coursebook, which is usually print but sometimes digital. 
The coursebook is often based on some kind of approved syllabus: it supplies language information 
and practice, as well as reading and listening texts and communicative activities in all four skills. 
www.ebook3000.com

Application of Research to Materials Design • 133
 The writers of such materials are typically people with some teaching experience of their own, 
though not necessarily in precisely the same context as that for which their materials are intended. 
Some continue to teach as they are writing; others are full-time materials writers. They are normally 
not researchers, though occasionally they may be. 
 Research 
 The definition of the concept  research  may seem on the face of it fairly straightforward: it is what 
researchers do when they check hypotheses by collecting evidence, and it is normally published 
in books or scholarly journals. Or, as Lawrence Stenhouse (1978) succinctly defined it: disciplined 
enquiry made public. But in the language-teaching literature, the word ‘research’ seems often to be 
treated as synonymous with ‘theory’: see, for example, the implications of the use of these terms in 
the opening passage from a recent book on applied linguistics and materials development: 
 For many years applied linguists have been lamenting the gap between applied linguistics 
theory and language teaching practice while at the same time predicting that it is about to be 
reduced. For example, Allwright and Bailey (1991: xv) admitted that many researchers ‘have 
given research a bad name’ by failing to demonstrate that they are concerned with ‘what works 
in the classroom’. 
 (Tomlinson, 2013: 1) 
 or a similar implied equivalence in the following quotation from a major applied linguist: 
 to consider how the divide between researchers and teachers, between theory and practice, can 
be bridged. 
 (Ellis, 2010: 186) 
 It is often implied that it is not the empirical research findings themselves which should be applied to 
teaching or materials design, but rather the general models and hypotheses that the applied linguists 
propose: ‘there remains a mismatch between pedagogical approaches incorporating the findings of 
applied linguistics research, and the teaching materials which (should) apply them’ (Mishan, 2013: 280). 
 In short, the term ‘research literature’ in ELT refers, as often as not, to books and articles that pres-
ent not actual research studies, but rather theoretical positions with regard to some aspect of English 
teaching, and consist mainly of the author’s discussion of relevant arguments. 
 The ELT research literature may thus be classified into three major categories: 
 1. Primary research: studies of data, producing evidence that may be used to support a general 
theoretical position with regard to an aspect of English teaching 
 2. Secondary research: surveys, summaries, or macro-analyses of a set of primary research 
studies on a particular English-teaching-related topic, which attempt to draw generalized 
conclusions 
 3. Papers or books arguing in favor of a certain position, theory or procedure; the present chap-
ter is an example of this type. The references brought in support of the writer’s argument are 
sometimes primary or secondary research; more often they are publications by other writers 
who have argued in favor of similar positions. 
 All three types typically suggest practical implications for teaching based on their theoretical conclu-
sions.  TESOL Quarterly , for example, says explicitly in its guidelines to authors published at the end 

134 • Penny Ur
of each issue that ‘theoretical articles and reports of research must contain a discussion of implica-
tions or applications to practice’. 
 But it is open to argument whether the best person to draw such practical conclusions is really 
the author of such articles, as claimed by Chapelle (2007), or whether it is the practitioner-reader, 
as suggested by Ellis (2010). My own position on this point is close to that of Ellis. Many researchers 
have very little—if any—actual teaching experience themselves, and they are ill-qualified to deter-
mine the practical classroom applications of their research findings. In many cases, sections that 
describe ‘practical implications’ in such articles contain suggestions that, to an experienced teacher, 
are clearly impracticable. A researcher on corpus linguistics, for example, suggests that the learners 
should explore corpus concordances to find out for themselves which collocations are most common 
(Römer, 2011); but for teachers and learners, the amount of time and effort invested in such a process 
is out of all proportion to the small amount of learning that would result. 
 The Neglect of Research as a Source of Knowledge for Teachers and Materials Writers 
 The Teachers 
 It is a well-documented fact that the research literature is rarely read by teachers (Borg, 2009), and 
that recommendations growing out of such research are even more rarely applied (Ellis, 2010): a 
phenomenon which applies not only to education, but to many other professional occupations as 
well, including business, nursing, and social work. Within the field of English teaching, various rea-
sons have been put forward as to why practitioners do not pay attention to the research (Borg, 2009; 
Ellis, 2012; Maley, 2016; Ur, 2014): 
 1.  It is unnecessary . The research is simply not needed for daily practice: teaching can be effec-
tive even if it is based only on experience and reflection, practical advice from trainers or 
senior teachers, common sense, and careful preparation. Obviously, research-based insights 
can contribute, but they are not essential. 
 2.  There is no time . Many practitioners have very full teaching schedules, often with a lot of asso-
ciated paperwork, and studying the research literature is not built into their job description. 
Most teachers will prefer to spend any work-time left after the actual teaching on preparation, 
checking student assignments, or consulting colleagues. 
 3.  It is difficult . Much of the research literature is written in fairly difficult English and is inacces-
sible for this reason to many teachers whose academic English may not be of the required level. 
 4.  There is too much . The sheer quantity of research literature available, particularly on ELT, 
is so enormous—and increasing daily—that even without the time constraints mentioned 
previously, nobody could possibly keep up with it. There is, therefore, a problem of selection. 
 5.  It is expensive.  Although an increasing number of articles and even books are available freely 
on the Internet, many can only be read—whether in digital or print form—if you pay for 
them. Few teachers’ salaries allow for much spending on research literature, and their employ-
ers do not usually see setting up and maintaining a library of professional literature as a 
justifiable investment. 
 6.  It is often inconclusive.  Much of the actual research, whether primary or secondary, does 
not lead to conclusive results (‘more research is needed’ is a typical comment at the end of a 
research report). Different studies may produce incompatible, even contradictory, results. 
 7.  It is often irrelevant.  Studies done on a specific population or teaching context may not be 
relevant to those of a teacher-reader. Empirical research on teaching is predominantly based 
on a student population of young adults studying at a university (since this is the population 
www.ebook3000.com

Application of Research to Materials Design • 135
most conveniently available to university researchers); most teachers are teaching young or 
adolescent learners in schools. 
 8.  It may not have any practical relevance to teaching.  Research topics are normally (and quite 
justifiably, see the following discussion) selected by the researchers for reasons other than practi-
cal relevance to teaching: because they are interesting in themselves, because they are amenable 
to research, and/or because they are likely to result in publishable papers. Even if implications 
for teaching are explicitly described, these may not, as mentioned earlier, be very sensible. 
 Whatever the reasons, the phenomenon of the lack of attention paid by teachers to the research 
literature is conventionally deplored as a gap that needs to be bridged (Ellis, 2012 and  passim ). This 
approach is based on the assumption that research-based theory is an essential basis for teaching. 
 The teaching profession, as with all high-standard professions, needs the best available aca-
demic knowledge in order to fulfil its commitments to society. . . . Teachers have to be familiar 
with the latest knowledge and research about the subject matter. 
 (Niemi, 2008) 
 My own position here is quite different (Ur, 2002, 2014; see also Maley, 2016). I see teaching and 
research as two quite distinct fields of activity, with different goals, modes of work, and assessment 
criteria. The researcher’s main goal is, in any discipline, to ‘push back the boundaries of knowledge’: to 
produce evidence that can support a hypothesis. The researcher thus does not need to show any imme-
diate concrete, real-world beneficial result from his or her work; he or she does need to produce, and be 
able to defend, evidence-based and clearly argued theoretical constructs. The professional, in contrast, 
has no obligation to discover facts or produce evidence in support of a hypothesis, but he or she does 
have a responsibility to bring about some kind of real-time change: a doctor aims to cure patients, for 
example, and a teacher works to get students to learn something. Their work is, similarly, assessed quite 
differently: the researcher’s work is evaluated on the basis of how far the hypotheses he or she produces 
are seen to be innovative and supported by solid evidence, interpreted according to rigorous scholarly 
norms; the professional, on the other hand, is judged by how far the change he or she sets out to make 
is in fact successfully achieved. It does not, therefore, make sense to talk about a ‘gap’ that needs to be 
bridged, as if the two enterprises were similar in their long-term goals and therefore necessarily con-
nected. The mission of researchers is to propose interesting evidence-based hypotheses; they are under 
no obligation to suggest practical implementations for the teacher. The mission of teachers is to bring 
about or facilitate learning; they are under no obligation to use research findings in order to do so. 
 There can, however, be some useful give-and-take between the two. The connection between them 
is, in my view, a looser one than is usually envisaged: educational researchers elicit interesting prob-
lems and issues to be researched from the ‘real world’ of the classroom, and teachers may occasion-
ally benefit from research-based insights that can clearly be applied to practice. How such insights 
may, and should, be made accessible to the teacher I have discussed elsewhere (Ur, 2014); the present 
discussion now moves to focus on the issue as it relates to materials writing. 
 The Materials Writers 
 The same loose relationship between research and teaching applies to that between research and 
materials writers. Materials writers are also practitioners: their goal is to support the teaching-
learning process by providing texts, tasks, and information. Like teachers, moreover, their work can 
benefit from knowledge of selected research in the field, whether this is based on aspects of applied 
linguistics (e.g. Tomlinson, 2013) or on the materials themselves (Tomlinson & Masuhara, 2010). 

136 • Penny Ur
 It appears, however, that materials writers, like teachers, make little or no use of the research litera-
ture when designing their products (Chan, 2009; Koprowski, 2005; Scurfield, 2005). Descriptions of 
the process of materials writing (e.g. Prowse, 2011) indicate that most writers base their composition 
primarily on a gut feeling as to what will ‘work’ in the classroom, supported by their own creativity 
and repertoire of ideas for components and awareness of what has been well-accepted (i.e. has been 
successfully marketed) in the past. 
 Some of the considerations that deter teachers from reading and using the research apply also 
to materials writers: for example, the huge amount of research available and problems of selec-
tion, issues of relevance or practicability. But others do not apply, or are less convincing. Materials 
writers are not subjected to the relatively rigid and demanding weekly work schedules that are 
typical of teaching, and if they felt that reading the research was important to them, they could 
find time for it. Materials writers by the nature of their occupation are likely to have a good com-
mand of English, and they should have less difficulty coping with the academic language used in 
research studies. 
 For materials writers, as for teachers, moreover, the research literature has something to offer. 
There are insights about language teaching and learning available through empirical research, which 
are unlikely to be discovered through practical experience and which even the most intellectually 
gifted and creative materials writer could not discover unaided. Such knowledge may not be the pri-
mary basis for the composition of good materials, just as it is not the primary basis for good teaching; 
but it would be perverse and counter-productive to deny its value as a substantial contributor. 
 The writers’ output, moreover, is designed to be implemented in hundreds, possibly thousands, of 
classrooms, rather than the few under the direct influence of any one teacher. It would seem essential, 
therefore, that as responsible professionals they should use the research as an important source of 
knowledge that could enhance the validity and effectiveness of such output. But most of them do 
not. The reasons suggested previously for this neglect imply a commercial profit-driven, rather than 
professional, approach to the practice of materials writing. 
 Current Trends in Suggestions for the Use of Research in Materials Design 
 Occasionally—but this is the exception rather than the rule—materials writers lay out a set of theo-
retical principles that will guide their writing (Bell & Gower, 2011; Tomlinson, 2012). Such principles 
may be, in theory, research-based, but as in the example shown later in this section, they are more 
likely to represent fashionable trends in ELT, introduced by phrases like ‘It is generally agreed that . . .’ 
(e.g. Tomlinson, 2013: 12). 
 Let us take, for example, the main set of principles presented as rooted in applied-linguistics 
research by Tomlinson (2013): 
 • A rich and meaningful exposure to language use 
 • Affective and cognitive engagement 
 • Making use of those mental resources typically used in communication in the L1 
 • Noticing how the L2 is used 
 • Being given opportunities for contextualized and purposeful communication in the L2 
 • Being encouraged to interact 
 • Being allowed to focus on meaning 
 Apart from the obvious overlap between some of the categories (how could you communicate pur-
posefully without focusing on meaning and interacting?), there are three problems with this list as a 
representation of research-based insights intended to inform materials design. 
www.ebook3000.com

Application of Research to Materials Design • 137
 1. They are very clearly biased towards the current trend in favor of a communicative task-based 
approach to language teaching, including a tendency to stress learning processes rather than 
the teaching processes that facilitate them. The fundamental theoretical position underlying 
such a selection of principles arguably owes more to prevailing ideologies (Waters, 2009) 
than to scholarly analysis of the research available. There is no mention of such principles as 
the provision of information about the language, or of focused practice of language features, 
or of use of the mother tongue, or indeed of language instruction in principle—although 
research evidence can be found in support of all of these   (Dekeyser, 2007; Hall & Cook, 2012; 
Long, 1983). 
 2. Even regarding those principles which are generally true and not limited to a communicative 
methodology, some of the points are obvious and unhelpful. The item ‘Being allowed to focus 
on meaning’ is one example: it is difficult to imagine any language materials, whatever the 
basic approach of the writers, which would  not  allow their users to focus on meaning. Such 
principles are generally accepted by practitioners, and the provision of research evidence that 
confirms them adds very little. 
 3. The majority of the research papers cited are of the third type of the categories of research 
listed under Research above, and present generalized hypotheses, models, or positions 
which the writer supports both by citing research studies that are compatible with it and 
by logical argument. An example is the popular ‘focus on form’ model proposed by Long 
and Robinson (1998). The contribution of this construct to professional thinking and 
discussion is undeniable. Its practical application to materials design, however, is prob-
lematical, since it lends itself to a very wide variety of interpretations, some of which are 
virtually indistinguishable from traditional grammar practice   (Ellis et al., 2002; Shak & 
Gardner, 2008). 
 Similar lists to that shown above, open to similar criticisms, can be found in McDonough et al. 
(2013) and in Bell and Gower (2011). 
 Guidelines such as these are not, therefore, of much practical help to materials writers. 
A strong communicative emphasis in materials is not normally acceptable to publishers, as 
the market prefers a more traditional approach. Writers who try to implement communica-
tive principles such as the use of authentic materials find themselves under pressure from the 
publisher to shift to the more conventional simplified or specially written texts (Bell & Gower, 
2011), and most textbooks include a substantial component of traditional grammar exercises, 
although these are generally criticized in the applied linguistics literature (Aski, 2003; Nitta & 
Gardner, 2005). 
 Suggested Criteria for Selection of Research for Materials Design 
 Not all published ELT research is necessarily relevant to materials design. Some, like that on oral 
corrective feedback, for example, may be of great interest to the teacher but not to the materials 
writer, who is only indirectly concerned with ongoing classroom interaction. Of that which is clearly 
relevant to materials design, I would suggest that the range of relevant published research can be 
narrowed further and selected in accordance with the following criteria: 
 1. It should, primarily, be based on empirical research that explores a hypothesis or research 
question through accepted quantitative or qualitative methods. Of the three types of research 
literature listed earlier, therefore, the first two are of most practical use (see items 2 and 3). 
The third—papers arguing a particular overall position, method, or model—are important 

138 • Penny Ur
for any professional, in that they are likely to advance thinking or raise key issues for discus-
sion, but they do not usually provide much practical help in materials design. One reason 
for this is that their conclusions tend to be rather generalized and wide-ranging (a quality 
they share with some empirical research, see item 3). Another is, as discussed above, that the 
approach advocated in many such papers today is characterized by a fairly strong communica-
tive approach: an approach which is not on the whole, when implemented in course materials, 
acceptable to the market. 
 2. The research should provide new insights or clarify a previously dubious or controversial 
issue, rather than simply confirming writers’ own previous understandings. It is, of course, 
good to have one’s own teaching intuitions confirmed, but if this is all that the research does, 
then it obviously does not make much difference to the writer’s thinking, and therefore does 
not make a significant contribution to the improvement of materials design. The meta-
analysis described in Norris and Ortega’s seminal paper (2001), for example, provides very 
convincing evidence for the inclusion of explicit grammar teaching, in principle, in ELT, but 
experienced language teachers know this anyway, and it would be difficult to find general 
coursebooks that do not provide it. The research on lexical sets described in the following 
section, in contrast, is innovative and counter-intuitive, and has the potential to influence 
writers and lead to significant improvement of the lexical component of materials design. 
 3. The research should present evidence-based conclusions that are clearly usable, in that they 
are a) specific, b) robust, in the sense that they are relatively uncontroversial and consistently 
re-confirmed by continuing research, and c) clearly relevant to practice. 
 a)  Specific . Very broad and generalized conclusions such as those supporting a wide range 
of practical implementations, or those that lend themselves to a variety of interpretation, 
are not very helpful to materials writers. An example is the research on focus on form, as 
mentioned in an earlier section. 
 b)  Robust.  A number of issues in ELT are controversial, and we can find contradictory evi-
dence in the research literature. An example is Krashen’s ‘Input hypothesis’: the claim that 
comprehensible input is a necessary and sufficient condition for language acquisition to 
take place. With regard to grammar teaching, for example, Krashen can produce evidence 
in favor of this hypothesis (Krashen, 1999); other researchers (e.g. Robinson, 1996) have 
published research that apparently refutes it. 
 c)  Relevant. The relevance to practice is a criterion which is often not obvious on a first 
reading of a research study, but it is clearly crucial. The research on natural conversational 
discourse, for example (McCarthy, 1998), is fascinating, and would appear at first glance 
to have clear implications for language teaching. But on further investigation, it transpires 
that most characteristics of natural speech that have been researched are either language-
universal and therefore not particularly helpful in the study of an additional language or 
cannot be integrated into teaching materials because they are too difficult, confusing, or 
simply unhelpful to learners. Jack Richards, an applied linguist as well as the author of 
successful ELT materials, concludes: 
 
 Does this mean that the vast body of research . . . in the field of discourse analysis and 
conversational analysis is not relevant to those developing teaching materials? Sadly, 
much of it is not, or at least not in preparing materials for EFL contexts   (Richards, 
2006: 20). 
www.ebook3000.com

Application of Research to Materials Design • 139
 Research Relevant to Materials Design: Three Examples 
 I have chosen three areas of research connected to the vocabulary component of coursebooks which 
seem to me to accord with the criteria defined in the previous section, and which in my view would 
contribute to the effectiveness of such materials without detracting from their appeal to the market 
(indeed, arguably enhancing it). The first is the use of the mother tongue (L1); the second is the 
effect of teaching words in lexical sets; the third is corpus research and the use of frequency lists. 
 The Use of the L1 in Vocabulary Teaching 
 Until relatively recently, use of the L1 in the ELT classroom has been severely discouraged, or actu-
ally prohibited, for various reasons. One is the reaction against the traditional ‘grammar-translation’ 
method, which stressed the learning of the formal features of the language rather than its use as a 
tool for communication, and involved extensive translation both to and from the L1. With the move 
towards the use of the language for practical communication purposes, this method was rejected, 
and there was a move to audio-lingual and later communicative methodologies that focused on use 
of the target language. In the case of English, an ‘English-only’ policy is convenient for the native-
speaker teacher who often is not fluent in the language(s) of the learners and may even carry political 
implications in promoting the hegemony of English (Phillipson, 1992). Finally, there is the problem 
of the tendency of many teachers to over-use the L1, either because they are not confident in their 
proficiency in the target language or because it is simply an easy option also favored by many students. 
 Interestingly, I have found it difficult to find any literature which explicitly supports the exclusion 
of the L1 from language classes. There are some generalized recommendations to teachers in some 
handbooks or teachers’ guides of textbooks but no actual research to back these up. The research has 
in fact produced consistent evidence for the reverse. Studies summarized in Nation (2003) and Hall 
and Cook (2012) all show benefits for occasional use of L1 in the classroom for a variety of purposes. 
Further research on the topic is reported in Witte et al. (2009). 
 With regard to the use of L1 for vocabulary teaching specifically, a number of studies show a 
clear advantage for such use. Prince (1996) studied Francophone learners who were in the process of 
acquiring new items in English. These learners were divided into two groups, one of which learned 
the meanings of 44 words through bilingual lists (each English word matched with its French trans-
lation) and the other through encountering the same new words within meaningful contexts. The 
group who learned using bilingual lists consistently outperformed the ones who learned through 
sentence context. A study by Laufer and Girsai (2008) looked at learning outcomes by Hebrew-
speaking students who were given translations to new items as compared to those who studied them 
in form- and meaning-focused procedures that used only English. Again, those who were given 
translations performed better. A similar effect was reported with Malaysian students by Ramachan-
dran and Rahim (2004) and with Chinese students by Liu (2008). 
 A slightly different angle is provided by an interesting piece of research by Mondria (2003), whose 
main stated purpose was to explore the place of inferencing in vocabulary learning. It compared two 
groups of Dutch-speaking students who were studying new words in French. One group inferred 
meanings from clear ‘pregnant’ contexts, then verified their guesses using a glossary, and finally stud-
ied and memorized the target words. The other group was simply provided with the meanings of the 
words using Dutch translations. In a post-test there was no significant difference between the scores 
of the two groups. The important point about this experiment, however, is the time factor: the first 

140 • Penny Ur
group spent on average 27% more time on the task. The conclusion has to be that if two procedures 
lead to the same result, then obviously in practice there is an advantage to the one that takes less time. 
 Note that all of these studies focus on the learning of isolated items which the students had not 
encountered before. The implications for teaching and materials writing, therefore, would apply only to 
this situation. There is obviously a place for engaging with items in various target-language contexts in 
order to give learners opportunities to learn aspects which can only be demonstrated by contextualized 
use: for example, how the item behaves within different kinds of sentences (grammar), how it combines 
with other words (collocation), or within what types of discourse it typically appears (appropriateness). 
 It seems clear, however, from the research that initial clarification of the basic meaning of a new 
item is best done through translation. In materials written or adapted for a specific target population 
sharing a mother tongue, it makes sense to gloss new words as they appear in texts with L1 transla-
tions and to provide bilingual lists of new items as a basis for later review. 
 Lexical Sets 
 A lexical set is a group of words which are all the same part of speech and which relate to a cluster of 
referents in the real world that are all ‘the same kind of thing’. Examples are colors ( red, yellow, green, 
etc.), parts of the body ( eyes, nose, head, hand,  etc.), or prepositions of place ( on, in, under, behind, 
near,  etc.). Conventionally, such sets are very frequently presented and taught together, particularly 
in elementary teaching materials. 
 The research, however, has produced convincing evidence that teaching such sets of words together, 
when all of them are new to the learner, is not effective. In an experiment by Tinkham (1993), subjects 
were asked to learn the ‘meanings’ of pseudo-words, where one set of such words was translated by 
connected words (‘sweater’, ‘coat’, ‘shirt’, etc.) and another by disconnected ones (‘frog’, ‘car’, ‘sky’, etc.). 
Pseudo-words were linked to real English words in a variety of combinations, but in all cases the learn-
ers consistently remembered better the ones that they were told represented disconnected concepts. 
Interestingly, the same limitations did not seem to apply to words that were linked thematically: words 
that were connected in that they related to the same real-word theme but were not necessarily the same 
part of speech and did not necessarily mean the same ‘kind of thing’; for example,  buy, money, market, 
customer, sale, shop, cheap , connected to the theme of buying and selling. Replications of Tinkham’s 
research have been carried out with various populations in a variety of languages (Erten & Tekin, 
2008; Papathanasiou, 2009; Waring, 1997; Wilcox & Mednab, 2013); they all produced similar results. 
 It appears that there is a phenomenon of interference at work (Nation, 2000): simultaneous 
encounter with new items that are perceived as similar to one another and function the same way in 
a sentence confuses the learner and hinders learning. Words that are syntagmatically and themati-
cally linked—they could be used in the same sentence or text relating to a given theme—however, do 
not interfere with each other and are learnt together well: for example,  blue + sky,  or  boil + water , or 
the buying and selling items listed earlier. 
 The reason for using lexical sets as the basis for vocabulary selection in a coursebook unit is prob-
ably the convenience of the writer and teacher: they are easy to compose, easy to illustrate, and easy 
to design practice exercises for. But since the research demonstrates fairly conclusively that their use 
does not lead to good learning, there seems to be good reason to recommend abandoning them in 
favor of grouping lexical items by theme, or even without grouping them at all. 
 Corpus Research and Frequency Lists 
 A corpus provides an enormous amount of data composed of natural, mostly mother-tongue, dis-
course, both spoken and written. The frequency lists that can be compiled from analysis of such data 
can be of substantial help to the materials writer. 
www.ebook3000.com

Application of Research to Materials Design • 141
 Vocabulary taught in coursebooks is normally based on that associated with a theme, or that 
which comes up in a reading text. In the case of text, the choice of which specific items to be 
taught may be left to the teacher. Where, however, items from a text are selected by the materials 
writer for focused explanation or practice, such selection is rarely, if ever, based on a preliminary 
check of which ones, according to corpus-based frequency lists, are more common and therefore 
likely to be more useful to the learner. Items tend to be selected according to the writer’s own 
intuition. 
 I wish to stress at this point that I am not suggesting that the selection of vocabulary to be taught, 
reviewed, and tested in English-teaching materials should be solely based on frequency lists, but 
rather that these lists can supply data which, together with insights provided by professional experi-
ence and judgement, can inform—not determine—decisions, and should be used to do so. Other 
considerations besides frequency may influence selection: it is helpful, for example, to teach words 
and phrases for classroom interaction which may not be very common overall ( board , for example); 
it may be important to teach words that express concepts or referents important for a specific group 
of learners in a specific location which do not appear as frequent items in a native-speaker-based 
corpus (the word  mosque , for example, for a Muslim community); and it may be preferable to teach 
a short, easily pronounced word, or one that has a cognate in the L1, rather than its more frequent 
synonym simply because it is easier to learn. Acknowledging such reservations, it remains true that 
the most common items tend to be most useful and that corpus linguistics can provide materials 
writers with reliable information about what they are. 
 This is particularly true for materials at beginner or elementary stages. Beginner learners need to 
be equipped as soon as possible with a range of vocabulary that will enable them to understand and 
convey basic messages both in speech and in writing. It is a waste of time, therefore, to teach them 
rare words that they are unlikely to need at this stage at the expense of useful ones. The inclusion of 
relatively useless items may be a result of indiscriminate listing of new words from a text, but at the 
early stages it may also derive from motives that have to do with convenience of teaching rather than 
the needs of learners. This is the main reason for the grouping of words in lexical sets, as discussed in 
the previous section, and for the preference for concrete and specific concepts that can be represented 
in pictures or by mime. The word  thing , for example, is very common indeed, according to all the 
frequency lists I have looked at: certainly within the top 150 words. But because it is very difficult 
to depict, does not have a single clear referent, and is not a member of a conventional lexical set, it 
tends to get taught relatively late. Similarly, words like  knee  and  toes  are taught simply because they 
are parts of the body, even though the chances that beginner learners—indeed, anyone!—will need 
to use them very often is minimal. 
 Another reason why corpus frequency lists are most useful at the earlier stages is that the higher 
up the list you go—the rarer the item being checked—the more variation there is between different 
corpora, and we may find widely different ratings for specific words in different corpus-based fre-
quency lists. For words like  thing ,  mean , or  think , the different corpora are more or less in agreement 
that they are very common, but this agreement decreases as we move to more infrequent items. A 
relatively advanced word like  research , for example, is rated 601 in the Cambridge Corpus, but only 
3739 in the Corpus of Contemporary American English. This does not mean that corpus ratings 
are useless, but it does mean that materials writers may need to use more than one corpus and that 
their own professional judgement as a factor in decision making on which items to include becomes 
progressively more important as the lexis becomes more advanced. 
 Multi-word lexical chunks are more difficult to list in order of frequency, but much progress has 
been made in this area as well, and some very useful lists of such items are available today (Dong-
kwang & Nation, 2007; Hsu, 2014; Liu, 2003; Schmitt & Martinez, 2012). These too can be used by 
materials writers, and the unsystematic ‘hit or miss’ selection noted in research on multi-word items 
in textbooks (Koprowski, 2005) can be avoided. 

142 • Penny Ur
 Conclusion 
 It is my contention that exchange of information between researchers and practitioners can, although 
not essential, be productive and useful. In the present case, I suggest that the use of insights from 
the research can contribute to the effectiveness of materials design, and that it is to be regretted that 
this in fact happens so little. Research studies that can make such contributions are those which have 
produced clear, specific, robust, and consistent evidence that is obviously relevant to practice, such 
as that described in the examples in this chapter. 
 Writers, editors, and publishers of materials for ELT should find the time to read the research, 
using their own professional judgement in order to determine which findings are more, or less, rel-
evant to their work. It is obviously unreasonable to expect such people to prioritize research-based 
considerations over market forces: a publisher has to make a profit, and the estimated needs of the 
target audience will always take precedence (Amrani, 2011), but there does not necessarily have to be 
a conflict between the two. I would suggest that the implementation in ELT materials of insights that 
clearly contribute to more effective learning and teaching is likely to make materials more attractive 
to teachers who are likely to be the main buyers, as well as ultimately promoting better learning on 
the part of the students who use them. 
 References 
 Allwright, D., & Bailey, K. M. (1991).  Focus on the language classroom: An introduction to classroom research for language teach-
ers . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Amrani, F. (2011). The process of evaluation: A publisher’s view. In Tomlinson, B. (Ed.)  Materials development in language 
teaching (pp. 267–295). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Aski, J. M. (2003). Foreign language textbook activities: Keeping pace with second language acquisition research.  Foreign 
Language Annals, 36 (1), 57–65. 
 Bell, J., & Gower, R. (2011). Writing course materials for the world: A great compromise. In Tomlinson, B. (Ed.)  Materials 
development in language teaching  (2nd Ed.) (pp. 135–150). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Borg, S. (2009). English language teachers’ conceptions of research.  Applied Linguistics, 30 (3), 358–388. 
 Chan, C. S. C. (2009). Forging a link between research and pedagogy: A holistic framework for evaluating business English 
materials.  English for Specific Purposes, 28 , 125–136. 
 Chapelle, C. (2007). Pedagogical implications in TESOL Quarterly? Yes, please!  TESOL Quarterly ,  41 (2), 404–406. 
 Dekeyser, R. (Ed.) (2007).  Practice in a second language: Perspectives from applied linguistics and cognitive psychology . New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Dongkwang, S., & Nation, P. (2007). Beyond single words: The most frequent collocations in spoken English.  ELT Journal, 
62 (4), 339–348. 
 Ellis, R. (2010). Teaching-based research and language pedagogy.  Language Teaching Research, 4 (3), 193–220. 
 Ellis, R. (2012).  Language teaching research and language pedagogy . Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H., & Loewen, S. (2002). Doing focus-on-form.  System, 30 (4), 419–432. 
 Erten, I. H., & Tekin, M. (2008). Effects on vocabulary acquisition of presenting new words in semantic sets versus semantically 
unrelated sets.  System, 36 (3), 407–422. 
 Hall, G., & Cook, G. (2012). Own language use in language teaching and learning.  Language Teaching, 45 (3), 271–308. 
 Hsu, W. (2014). The most frequent opaque formulaic sequences in English-medium college textbooks.  System, 47 , 146–161. 
 Koprowski, M. (2005). Investigating the usefulness of lexical phrases in contemporary coursebooks.  ELT Journal, 59 (4), 322–332. 
 Krashen, S. D. (1999). Seeking a role for grammar: A review of some recent studies.  Foreign Language Annals, 32 (2), 245–254. 
 Laufer, B., & Girsai, N. (2008). Form-focused instruction in second language vocabulary learning: A case for contrastive analy-
sis and translation.  Applied Linguistics, 27 (4), 694–716. 
 Liu, D. (2003). The most frequently used spoken American English idioms: A corpus analysis and its implications.  TESOL 
Quarterly, 37 (4), 671–700. 
 Liu, J. (2008). L1 use in L2 vocabulary learning: Facilitator or barrier?  International Education Studies, 1 (2), 66–70. 
 Long, M. H. (1983). Does second language instruction make a difference? A review of research.  TESOL Quarterly ,  17 (3), 359–382. 
 Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In Doughty, C. & Williams, J. (Eds.)  Focus 
on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 15–41). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

Application of Research to Materials Design • 143
 Maley, A. (2016). ‘More research is needed’: A mantra too far?  Humanising Language Teaching , 18(3). Available at http://www.
hltmag.co.uk/jun16/index.htm 
 McCarthy, M. (1998).  Spoken language and applied linguistics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Mcdonough, J., Shaw, C., & Masuhara, H. (2013).  Materials and methods in ELT: A teacher’s guide . Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
 Mishan, F. (2013). Studies of pedagogy. In Tomlinson, B. (Ed.)  Applied linguistics and materials development  (pp. 269–286). 
London: Bloomsbury. 
 Mondria, J.-A. (2003). The effects of inferring, verifying and memorizing on the retention of L2 word meanings.  Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 25 (4), 473–499. 
 Nation, P. (2000). Learning vocabulary in lexical sets: Dangers and guidelines.  TESOL Journal, 9 (2), 6–10. 
 Nation, P. (2003). The role of the first language in foreign language learning.  Asian EFL Journal, 5 (2), 1–8. 
 Niemi, H. (2008). Advancing research into and during teacher education. In Hudson, B. & Zgaga P. (Eds.)  Teacher education 
policy in Europe  (p. 184). Faculty of Teacher Education, University of Umeå, in co-operation with the Centre for Educa-
tional Policy Studies, Faculty of Education, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. 
 Nitta, R., & Gardner, S. (2005). Consciousness-raising and practice in ELT coursebooks . ELT Journal, 59 (1), 3–13. 
 Norris, J. M., & Ortega, L. (2001). Does type of instruction make a difference? Substantive findings from a meta-analytic 
review.  Language Learning, 51 (Supplement 1), 157–213. 
 Papathanasiou, E. (2009). An investigation of two ways of presenting vocabulary.  ELT Journal, 63 (4), 313–322. 
 Phillipson, R. (1992).  Linguistic imperialism . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Prince, P. (1996). Second language vocabulary learning: The role of context versus translations as a function of proficiency. 
 The Modern Language Journal, 80 (4), 478–493. 
 Prowse, P. (2011). How writers write: Testimony from authors. In Tomlinson, B. (Ed.)  Materials development in language teach-
ing (2nd Ed.) (pp. 151–173). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Ramachandran, S., & Rahim, H. (2004). Meaning recall and retention: The impact of the translation method on elementary 
level learners’ vocabulary learning.  RELC, 35 (2), 161–178. 
 Richards, J. C. (2006). Materials development and research—Making the connection.  RELC Journal, 37 (1), 5–26. 
 Robinson, P. (1996). Learning simple and complex second language rules under implicit, incidental, enhanced and instructed 
conditions.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 18 (1), 27–68. 
 Römer, U. (2011). Corpus research applications in second language teaching.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics ,  31 , 205–225. 
 Schmitt, N., & Martinez, R. (2012). A phrasal expressions list.  Applied Linguistics, 33 (2), 299–320. 
 Scurfield, S. (2005). Vocabulary and acquisition: Still in the dark ages?  Research News: The Newsletter of the IATEFL research 
SIG, 15 , 55–58. 
 Shak, J., & Gardner, S. (2008). Young learner perspectives on four focus-on-form tasks.  Language Teaching Research, 12 (3), 
387–408. 
 Stenhouse, L. (1978). Case study and case records: Towards a contemporary history of education.  British Educational Research 
Journal ,  4 (2), 21–39. 
 Tinkham, T. (1993). The effect of semantic clustering on the learning of second language vocabulary.  System, 21 (3), 371–380. 
 Tomlinson, B. (2012). Materials development for language learning and teaching.  Language Teaching, 45 (2), 143–179. 
 Tomlinson, B. (2013).  Applied linguistics and materials development . London: Bloomsbury Academic. 
 Tomlinson, B., & Masuhara, H. (Eds.) (2010).  Research for materials development in language learning: Evidence for best practice . 
London: Continuum. 
 Ur, P. (2002). The English teacher as professional. In Renandya, W. A. & Richards, J. C. (Eds.)  Methodology in language teaching 
(pp. 388–392). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Ur, P. (2014). Practice and research-based theory in English teacher development.  The European Journal of Applied Linguistics 
and TEFL, 3 (2), 143–155. 
 Waring, R. (1997). The negative effects of learning words in semantic sets: A replication.  System, 25 (2), 261–274. 
 Waters, A. (2009). Ideology in applied linguistics for language teaching.  Applied Linguistics, 30 (1), 138–143. 
 Wilcox, A., & Mednab, A. (2013). Effects of semantic and phonological clustering on L2 vocabulary acquisition among novice 
learners.  System, 42 (4), 1056–1069. 
 Witte, A., Harden, T., & de Oliveira Harden, A. R. (2009).  Translation in second language learning and teaching . Bern: Peter 
Lang. 

144
 11 
 Teaching Language Skills 
from a Discourse Perspective 
 Elite Olshtain and Marianne Celce-Murcia 
 Introduction 
 The Learner 
 The backbone of any course of study that focuses on language skills from a discourse perspective in 
a second language (L2) must be  the learner , or in other words, the target audience of the course of 
study. The program, the pedagogical approach, and the curriculum should be adapted and adjusted 
to the needs of the target learners. The choices, the strategies, and the foci have to be compatible with 
the needs and expectations of the students. Our focus in this chapter will be on  instructed contexts , 
where learning and teaching interact. 
 L2 learners become involved in second language acquisition either by personal choice or as part 
of a school program. When it is individual choice, learners are aware of their own needs and expec-
tations. When it is just another school subject, learners are often disengaged in the learning process, 
and their goals are limited to the course requirements. In both cases these learners often bring along 
prior experience of both success and failure in language learning encounters, and therefore their own 
perspectives on the nature and efficacy of the course of study are quite significant. Such  personal 
factors interact with the larger linguistic and social context within which learning takes place, and 
societal expectations are thus added to personal perspectives. 
 For any successful L2 acquisition, there is a clear need for the learner’s sustained and  active 
engagement in the learning process during the course of study, as well as active engagement in lan-
guage use, long after the course has ended. It is therefore important that learners develop autonomy 
and personal initiative as they move through a learning sequence. The course of study must supply 
learners with both relevant content and appropriate psychological support (Kotik-Friedgut, 2008), 
which can then lead to their becoming  strategic language users . 
 Much has been written in the literature about the importance of motivation in L2 learning (e.g., 
Dörnyei, 2014), yet a particularly important contribution to this field of inquiry is Norton’s (2000) 
and Darvin and Norton’s (2015) notion of  investment . While most theories assume that motiva-
tion is a characteristic of the learner, which reflects a psychological perspective, Norton makes the 
case for investment, which is a sociological construct complementing the psychological construct of 
motivation (Dörnyei & Ushioda, 2009). When learners invest in the target language, they are usually 
aware of the advantages that will come with proficiency in that language. This, in turn, enhances their 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching Language from a Discourse Perspective • 145
willingness to exert effort in the learning process. Kramsch (2013) expresses it most clearly: “Norton’s 
notion of investment . . . accentuates the role of human agency and identity in engaging with the task 
at hand” (p. 195). This approach places more responsibility for learning on the learners themselves, 
who then become engaged learners. 
 Engaged learners typically become  strategic learners . They plan their learning, they take 
advantage of the language experiences available in the broader environment they live in, and they 
seek out meaningful interactions in the target language. The personal initiative of such learners 
increases both their actual progress and their overall self-image and identity as successful learn-
ers (Hall, 2012). When the instructional situation facilitates metacognitive understanding and 
considerations, then the learners can develop personal autonomy, thus enabling them to further 
their learning beyond any formal course of study. A good knowledge of the various components of 
discourse also greatly supports such autonomous learning, as will be discussed later in this chapter. 
Strategic learners are strategic listeners, strategic readers, strategic speakers, and strategic writers 
in the target language. 
 Communication at the Core of the Course 
 Communication is central to second language study since most L2 learners expect to use the target 
language for communication. Human linguistic communication can entail the transmission of ideas, 
information, beliefs, emotions, and/or attitudes. The language user may be at the production end, 
which requires speaking or writing, or at the receiving end, which entails understanding the intended 
message via listening or reading. All of these are very important communication skills in an L2. In 
all these situations, three important factors interact: the initiator of the communicative act (speaker 
or writer), the message (or text), and the receiver (listener or reader). In order to be a successful 
participant in a communicative interaction, one must recruit one’s language knowledge, cognitive 
resources, discourse understanding, and processing skills. 
 The immediate or understood context in which communication takes place can greatly support 
any act of language processing. L2 learners already know how to communicate in their first language 
(hereafter L1), but with the new language they often have to deal with a new culture. Cultural norms 
and rules of appropriacy differ across languages, requiring the acquisition of new understandings 
and expectations (Hall, 2012). 
 A Usage-Based Approach 1 
 Usage-based theories of language learning are highly compatible with a discourse perspective. A 
usage-based approach sees language as a complex, adaptive system that places the interaction between 
cognition and use at the center (Tomasello, 2003). Accordingly, language representation is constructed 
out of use. A discourse-based approach focuses on the different communicative encounters that provide 
learners with exposure to natural language and thus enhance usage-based opportunities for learning. 
 Exposure to natural language use allows all learners, including L2 learners, to recognize and 
understand recurring routinized sequences (Hall, Hellermann & Doehler, 2011; Hall, 2015), thus 
encouraging learners to use these sequences in their own communication. Through natural interac-
tion, large amounts of language are available to learners such that linguistic structure, pragmatic 
knowledge, and social practices converge in the learner’s L2 acquisition. In L2 contexts, the natural 
encounter with communication in the real world can provide ample data; however, in instructed 
contexts, organized teaching activities and materials are needed to enhance the effectiveness of the 
input provided to learners. 

146 • Elite Olshtain and Marianne Celce-Murcia
 A Discourse Perspective 
 As we stated elsewhere, “Discourse-based approaches to language teaching allow for target language 
engagement that focuses on meaning and real communication” (Celce-Murcia & Olshtain, 2005, 
p. 734). Discourse analysis should thus provide the main frame of reference for decision-making in 
language teaching and learning. The classroom should become a discourse community for inter-
acting meaningfully through the use of all four language skills. The communicative goal for each 
instructional activity needs to be emphasized, and learners should have the opportunity to recruit 
their language knowledge, pragmatic knowledge, and content knowledge—along with their com-
municative processing capabilities—based on what they have learned in the classroom and on what 
has emerged from extended exposure to natural language in use. 
 The Language Skills 
 The  Understanding/Interpretation or  Comprehension Skills 
 In an open and digital world the “understanding” skills deserve special attention. People all over the 
world are constantly trying to understand messages, positions, ideologies, a variety of subject matter, 
etc. in a language other than their L1. The  understanding skills (i.e., listening and reading) require 
that recipients decode messages that they hear or read, and on the basis of this process to arrive at 
effective interpretations. From the learners’ perspective, the comprehension skills often take priority 
over the production skills. The comprehension skills require certain levels of knowledge regarding 
the target language and good processing abilities. 
 Both language knowledge and content knowledge play a very important role in interpretation. 
This section will provide examples and ways to improve proficiency by emphasizing the discourse 
perspective. The reading skill provides the biggest challenge for the learner since it is a very impor-
tant vehicle for learning. Some educators refer to the comprehension skills 2  as ‘passive’, a term we 
want to avoid. The comprehension skills require considerable engagement and active strategies on 
the learner’s part. L2 learners today have more opportunities to use language in a variety of situa-
tions and contexts. Technology, in particular, allows for a variety of interactions where the L2 learn-
ers become ‘legitimate’ interactors in and interpreters of the L2 (Darvin & Norton, 2015). In many 
situations, learners are willing to invest in order to reach effective levels of reading comprehension, 
since for many learners real ‘capital gain’ relates to the ability to read and understand accurately 
(Darvin & Norton, 2015, p. 40). 
 Much research has been devoted in the past few decades to the study of reading comprehension, 
while less investigation has focused on listening comprehension, though listening seems to be the 
most frequently used language skill in everyday life. Both of these comprehension skills require a 
combination of top-down and bottom-up processing. Top-down processes involve the activation of 
schematic knowledge: (1)  content schemata , which refer to background knowledge of the content, 
and (2)  formal schemata , which consist of knowledge about how discourse is organized with respect 
to different genres and different purposes (Carrell & Eisterhold, 1983). Furthermore, top-down 
activation also includes  contextual knowledge  and  pragmatic knowledge , which are particularly 
important for the processing of oral discourse; for reading comprehension,  knowledge of discourse 
structure is the most significant factor (Celce-Murcia & Olshtain, 2000). 
 Bottom-up processing involves the learner’s knowledge of the L2 system (i.e., phonology, gram-
mar, and vocabulary). For both listening and reading, there seem to be two separate processes to deal 
with: a  decoding phase  and an  interpretation phase . Without good mastery of the decoding process, 
learners cannot arrive at the interpretation phase. Decoding is closely related to bottom-up skills 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching Language from a Discourse Perspective • 147
that rely on language knowledge such as phonemic decoding, stress, and intonation for listening and 
sound-spelling correspondences for reading. Yet, an understanding of the given discourse (spoken or 
written) cannot be achieved without an effective integration of top-down (general knowledge) and 
bottom-up (language-specific) processes. 
 Four important phases seem to be common to both of the comprehension skills: (1) setting the 
goal for listening or reading, while reevaluating one’s decoding skill mastery; (2) preparing for the 
activity by recruiting top-down strategies (what do we know about the topic?, etc.); (3) combining 
top-down and bottom-up strategies while trying to understand the text (sometimes listening to or 
reading the text several times and activating a self-questioning process);3 and (4) evaluating the activ-
ity and applying the information gained from it. 
 The Listening Skill 
 As Goh (2014) claims, “listening is not just hearing. It is an active process that may begin before the 
first speech signal is recognized, and it may go on long after the input or spoken information has 
stopped” (p. 73). The emphasis here is on the fact that listening comprehension requires construc-
tion of meaning during the entire listening act. This construction involves all the elements men-
tioned in the previous section. The listening activity can be of a reciprocal nature when the speaker 
and the listener interact in a face-to-face conversation, or it can be nonreciprocal when we listen to 
recorded messages or instructions, to a live formal lecture, a radio broadcast, or a television program. 
When listening is reciprocal and part of a conversational exchange, there is room for clarification 
and ongoing feedback and repair (i.e., correction or modification of the message by the speaker or 
others). There is also time to react to body language and gestures, and there is the possibility of rely-
ing on the immediate context. All of these elements help the listener understand the message of the 
delivered spoken text. 
 When we listen to recorded material, we usually have a  well-defined goal : to understand and fol-
low instructions, to get some important information that we need to apply in real-life situations, or 
to learn new facts and details on a topic we are studying. Comprehension, in these situations, relates 
to whether the listeners have achieved their objective. The comprehension must be accurate (e.g., 
when we need to operate a new piece of equipment) or it can be rather general (when we need to get 
the gist of a message). Sometimes people tend to think that listening takes place only when we are 
exposed to the flow of speech, but it could involve simply ‘hearing’ without focus (this often happens 
in classrooms when teachers deliver long oral presentations). In reciprocal listening and in listening 
with a well-defined objective, we tend to make the effort to practice full attention. This kind of listen-
ing is most relevant to teaching, learning, and practicing the skill in an instructed context and from 
a discourse perspective. On the other hand, when one just listens to some segment on television, to 
a lecture, or to ambient speech in a social encounter, minds can wander and listening is not always 
fully focused. 
 Both in listening and in reading, vocabulary knowledge is crucial. The selection of lexical items 
and phrases (i.e., multi-word expressions) is part of the production process over which the listener or 
reader has no control. Thus, one needs to have an understanding of the key words and lexical phrases 
selected by the producer of the discourse. This is a prerequisite for comprehension. 
 Strategic listeners  have developed good mastery of the decoding stage, and they can therefore 
attend to stress and intonation and pick out meaningful words in the stream of speech. By further 
recruiting grammatical knowledge, they can segment the stream of speech into meaningful units. 
The top-down strategies that relate to background knowledge, context, and socio-cultural informa-
tion can help the listener make sense of the oral discourse. 

148 • Elite Olshtain and Marianne Celce-Murcia
 The Reading Skill 
 One usually engages in reading as an individual activity, yet today’s perception of reading empha-
sizes its interactive nature. This interactive nature, the communication between writer and reader, is 
most relevant to a discourse-based approach. Most of our reading is  goal-oriented : we read to learn, 
we read for information, and we read for pleasure. Good readers may also read just because some 
written materials are available: at the dentist’s office, on a nearby billboard, or in any other situation 
where the material does not relate to a specific purpose. 
 Reading comprehension is a complex skill for either L1 or L2 readers since it entails cognitive top-
down processes as well as language-focused bottom-up decoding processes, all of which need to be 
activated with respect to understanding a given text. Discourse and textual knowledge are crucial in 
this process, and so is knowledge of relevant vocabulary, as mentioned earlier. Therefore, one cannot 
discuss reading comprehension in an L2 without referring in depth to both vocabulary acquisition 
and awareness of the discourse structure of written texts. 
 When focusing on the skill of reading, Koda (2005) provides a useful definition of comprehen-
sion: “Comprehension occurs when the reader extracts and integrates various information from 
the text and combines it with what is already known” (p. 4). Yet, since there are so many different 
purposes for reading, we may need to refine this statement or add more elements to the definition. 
In international testing, where achievement tests are administered every few years in a large number 
of countries throughout the world under the auspices of Progress in International Reading Literacy 
Study (PIRLS) and Program for International Student Assessment (PISA), one of their definitions 
is: “Reading literacy is the ability to understand and use those written forms required by society 
and/or valued by the individual” (Mullis, Kennedy, Martin & Sainsbury, 2006, p. 8). This definition 
allows us to focus both on the cognitive and on the socio-cultural perspectives. The definition should 
also include one’s ability to reflect critically on written material in order to achieve one’s goals and 
develop one’s potential to participate in society. 
 Much research on reading has focused on the “good”, the “effective”, or the “successful” reader. 
We will use Grabe’s (2009) term “the strategic reader” for this topic. Grabe describes cognitive and 
metacognitive strategies for reading. Cognitive strategies are those strategies that learners have been 
trained to use, such as guessing meaning from context, noticing discourse organization, identifying 
known words, or forming questions about the author or the content. Metacognitive strategies, on 
the other hand, are defined by Grabe as those strategies that require explicit awareness of the reading 
process itself: awareness of miscomprehension, ability to repair, and continued maintenance of com-
prehension (p. 223). These refer to the learners’ ability to reflect on language knowledge and to the 
learners’ ability to manipulate this knowledge in the interpretation process. Enhanced metalinguistic 
awareness facilitates the reading comprehension process. In such an approach, it seems logical that 
instruction should help learners develop useful reading comprehension strategies. 
 From the different studies done on good or successful readers (Gibson & Levin, 1975; Celce-
Murcia & Olshtain, 2000; Grabe, 2009), we can extract some basic characteristics of a strategic reader: 
 1. Strategic readers adjust to the reading matter at hand—they fit relevant strategies to the text 
and the purpose of reading. 
 2. When “mismatches” occur, they know how to abandon unsuccessful strategies and select new 
ones. 
 3. The strategic reader moves through a sequence of quick mental questions in a recursive man-
ner: What is the purpose for my reading this text? What do I expect to learn from it? What 
do I already know? What new strategies can I use to overcome difficulties encountered? Do I 
understand all the important words in this text? How can I read this text faster and better? 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching Language from a Discourse Perspective • 149
 4. Strategic readers are quick and effective decoders. They recognize words, phrases, and expres-
sions quickly. 
 5. Strategic readers recruit all their background and linguistic knowledge to “make sense” of the 
text. They have a strong drive to comprehend. 
 6. Strategic readers know that a less familiar text (i.e., text for which they lack background 
knowledge) requires more top-down considerations, while a linguistically more difficult text 
requires more bottom-up strategies and metalinguistic processing. 
 7. Strategic readers have had experience reading and have gained self-confidence, which enhances 
their ability and drive to make sense of texts. 
 Less effective readers lack many or all of the aforementioned sub-skills and abilities: they may 
have decoding difficulties, they are often unable to recruit relevant language knowledge, and they 
lack the cognitive ability to make content connections within the text. They have trouble processing 
the text since they do not have a good understanding of cohesive features (Halliday & Hasan, 1976), 
and therefore they do not arrive at a coherent understanding of the text they are reading (cohesive 
features such as reference, ellipsis, and conjunctive forms will be discussed later). Less effective read-
ers also lack experience in reading, and because they often are not strategic readers in their L1, they 
therefore also lack self-confidence. As a result, they do not possess the necessary skills to “make sense 
of the text” and just give up. A course of study intended to improve reading comprehension in an 
L2 will have to encourage use of “effective” strategies while trying to overcome some of the obstacles 
that less-skilled learners face. 
 The  Production/Expression or  Composing Skills 
 In human communication, production of L2 speech and writing enables individuals to share ideas, 
wants, needs, perceptions, and feelings with others in a language that is not their L1. The L2 user 
in a communicative exchange can set the communication goal and select the content much as L1 
users do. The  speaking  and  writing  skills both require a certain level of language knowledge (i.e., 
vocabulary and grammar), encoding skills (i.e., sounds, letters, etc.), knowledge about socio-cultural 
features of the target community, and a drive to communicate. The main difference between speak-
ing and writing is the fact that speaking usually takes place in the  here and now  with an interlocutor 
who interacts with the speaker, while writing is usually removed in time and space from the reader. 
Moreover, writing is usually planned and the output can be monitored and edited or adjusted in the 
rewriting and revising process. 
 In both spoken or written interaction, L2 users need to  create  discourse and choose the linguistic 
forms that will transmit their intended message. The users need to choose relevant vocabulary and 
grammatical constructions that will best support their message and ultimately create the text. Such 
a text has to be cohesive and coherent, which is the main responsibility of the initiator. The writer 
takes responsibility for the effective flow of content and information in the written discourse and 
has to provide contextual support within the text in order to ensure the reader’s understanding. The 
speaker, on the other hand, can rely more heavily on the immediate context to provide the cohesion 
and coherence that will help the interlocutor understand the message. 
 Research in this area often refers to the  oral-literate connection,  as Belcher and Hirvela (2011) do in 
their book. The articles in their book focus primarily on the common features of speaking and writ-
ing and the mutual support that they provide each other. Two basic perspectives are relevant to both 
speaking and writing: the cognitive dimension, which focuses on the organization and flow of con-
tent, and the socio-cultural dimension, which focuses on ensuring understanding and interpretation 
at the receiving end (the listener for spoken discourse or the potential reader for written discourse). 

150 • Elite Olshtain and Marianne Celce-Murcia
 The Spoken Language 
 The spoken language mediates oral communication between a speaker and a hearer. The speaker 
produces a spoken utterance in an attempt to communicate with the hearer while the hearer tries 
to understand the speaker’s message. In this exchange the speaking skill, which is productive, 
encounters the listening skill, which is receptive. Both skills share some of the features of speech: 
pronunciation, rate of speech, and of course knowledge of the language—all this within the com-
municative exchange that creates the interactive discourse. Speakers in such interactions bring a 
knowledge of L2 phonology (even if limited) and the ability to pronounce words and expressions 
in the L2 (even if not completely accurately). They bring knowledge of vocabulary and gram-
mar of the L2 (even if this is an early stage of L2 proficiency), thus expressing thoughts, ideas, 
and information. In natural spoken interactions, “clarity of meaning” is crucial while accuracy of 
delivery is less important. 
 Hearers need to match the stream of speech produced with comprehension of the pronunciation, 
vocabulary, and grammar, but they too rely on the context and top-down features of the exchange. 
The speaker’s responsibility is to be aware of how well the hearer seems to interpret the message in 
order to do some “repair” if necessary. (Repair occurs when one immediately corrects oneself or if 
one responds to a misunderstanding or comprehension query from the listener.) Such repair can 
be linguistic, cultural, or pragmatic. In general, an oral exchange, beyond relying on context, is also 
influenced by the purpose of the communication, familiarity with the interlocutor, and body lan-
guage. It is usually viewed as part of face-to-face communication in the here and now. Speech can 
also be a carefully planned activity, such as when we prepare a speech, a presentation, or a monologue 
for an interview. Such planning makes the speech activity more like writing than conversation, where 
one normally uses a written script as a bridge between planning and oral delivery. 
 In order to teach the speaking and listening skills from a discourse perspective, the teacher 
must ensure that the learners experience an abundance of natural or simulated interactions. 
Learners need to participate in authentic communicative exchanges of different sorts. In some 
situations the learners have a better ability to understand the spoken L2 than to speak it; in other 
instances they can express themselves by speaking in the L2 (up to a point), but their listening 
comprehension is very limited. Their abilities depend greatly on the amount and type of exposure 
they have encountered in the L2 on a regular basis and the type and amount of instruction they 
have received. 
 The Written Language 
 The two skills related to written texts are reading and writing. In most cases, learners can read better 
than they can write, and reading comprehension, which we discussed earlier, is often the backbone of 
an L2 course of study. Writing is often neglected in L2 courses; however, it deserves a major place in 
the L2 curriculum since it supports the acquisition of reading, vocabulary, and grammar and since it 
allows students to express themselves. When writing, it is the responsibility of the producer to plan 
the scope and focus of the message, while taking into consideration the knowledge and readiness of 
the reader to comprehend the message. 
 Both L1 and L2 learners need to acquire creative strategies for composing texts. Sometimes adult 
learners can rely on the strategies they use in their L1 to improve their L2 writing, but often cultural 
adjustments are necessary. Some examples can support this statement. When L2 writers are required 
to write a narrative in their new language, they can definitely rely on their familiarity with the struc-
ture of a “good story”—a plot with complications and resolutions, a coda and evaluation of the story, 
etc. These are basically similar elements for all languages when writing a narrative, but new linguistic 
elements for cohesion and intra-textual connections in the L2 will be necessary. On the other hand, 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching Language from a Discourse Perspective • 151
things are much more complex when writing an expository passage. Western academic writing con-
ventions require the writer to state the purpose of the passage in an explicit manner from the outset. 
This may be in contrast to the cultural convention in the learner’s L1, where the writer avoids stating 
the purpose and instead gradually leads the reader towards, what seems, a logical understanding. In 
other words, the structure of the expository genre is not necessarily universal and needs to be discussed 
and analyzed in class. 
 Researchers who have studied  strategic writers  (i.e., writers who can control and shape the writ-
ten text so as to convey the meaning and the message intended) have described a number of impor-
tant writing strategies (Celce-Murcia & Olshtain, 2000; Weigle, 2014; Hinkel, 2015): 
 1. Strategies related to the  purpose of writing . These strategies enable the writer to construct 
a written text that presents the essence of the message and fits the goal of the communica-
tive act. 
 2. Strategies that recruit the  discourse knowledge  necessary to make the written text cohesive 
and coherent while adhering to the acceptable text-structure features of the genre in question. 
 3. Strategies that recruit the writer’s  general content knowledge  related to the message in order 
to make the text informative for the reader, according to Grice’s (1975) maxims of quantity, 
quality, relation/relevance, and manner. 4  It is often necessary to provide scaffolding for con-
tent, such as reading some materials on the subject or doing a search of online resources. 
 4. Strategies for recruiting  language knowledge , which help the writer choose the grammatical 
constructions and the vocabulary items that best serve the communicative purpose of the text. 
 5. Personal writing strategies necessary for expressing the personal perspective of a writer that 
reflects one’s individual style and preferences. 
 These strategies help a writer construct a text both from the cognitive and the socio-cultural per-
spectives. Cognitive strategies guide the writer in doing the following: 
 1. Organizing the content of the text to suit the overall purpose and to create a “global whole”; 
 2. Choosing the genre or text type within which the main propositions are presented and text 
coherence is created; and 
 3. Selecting grammatical features and cohesive elements in order to create an effective piece of 
writing. 
 The socio-cultural strategies guide the writer to work with a “reader-based” approach, which 
means that the writer constantly tries to interact with a real or imaginary reader. In order to main-
tain this real or imaginary communication, writers need to adhere to writing conventions that fit 
the practices of the relevant community of writers, and they need to pay attention to the amount 
and the type of information that needs to be imparted and supported in the text in order to ensure 
understanding. The cognitive and socio-cultural perspectives interact in the process of  planning 
the writing of a text. Such planning combines top-down considerations, which deal with the main 
ideas, supporting ideas, and effective organization, with due consideration given to the reader’s back-
ground knowledge. Since the writers’ responsibility is to prepare a text that will be understood by 
the intended reader audience, the processes of rewriting, monitoring, and editing become vitally 
important and must be part of the teaching process. 
 The revision process must be emphasized in a discourse-based approach to writing. In revision 
there are contextual considerations, evaluation of choices made (as compared to alternatives), and 
perhaps, most importantly, a well-supported conclusion for an expository text and a literary, content 
evaluation for a narrative. The written text, whether it is on paper or on the screen, has a relatively 

152 • Elite Olshtain and Marianne Celce-Murcia
stable existence. The writer ideally has the time to improve the text before transmission; therefore, 
learning to self-edit any written product is an important skill. At this point there will be a great dif-
ference between learners who are willing to “invest” in becoming good writers in the L2 and those 
who only write as part of a course requirement. 
 The Integration of Language Skills and Mutual Scaffolding 
 Scaffolding  is a term introduced to American education by Bruner (1986); it is related to prior work 
by Vygotsky (1978). Scaffolding refers to support provided to learners to promote their effective 
acquisition of a subject matter, a set of concepts or skills, etc. The idea behind scaffolding is to help 
learners make the leap from what they know to new knowledge and skills by giving them guidance 
and tools. Once they have achieved their learning goals, these supports can be gradually removed, 
and learners can take on responsibility for their own further learning. 
 Speaking can scaffold writing and listening can scaffold reading. For instance, when learners 
engage in a topic of current importance, first they may speak about it in a class discussion, and then 
they are guided to write an essay on the basis of this spoken interaction. Similarly, when working on 
a topic that requires deeper understanding, they may listen first to an oral report or lecture, and then 
on the basis of the content and language that they were exposed to, they can read about it, probably 
at a slightly higher level than they could without preparation. 
 Although a learner has to develop strategies for each of the language skills according to the par-
ticular features of each skill, in reality all four language skills interact. We use all the skills for com-
municative purposes, and the road to becoming a  strategic skill user  will involve different forms of 
mutual scaffolding. Scaffolding can take place within the interpretation skills. For instance, if our 
main topic is “hurricanes”, before we read a factual, scientific passage, we could help students pre-
pare for the major key words related to this topic by listening to a conversation, a radio broadcast, 
an explanation, or a personal narrative related to a hurricane. This listening experience would act as 
scaffolding for the target reading passage. Conversely, before listening to a radio report from an area 
hit by a hurricane, the learners could read an informative passage, which would help prepare them for 
the listening task by focusing on key words, expressions, and content about hurricanes. This would 
be a case where reading is scaffolding listening. 
 When thinking of the production skills, it is common practice to prepare for a writing activity 
by first having a group discussion or doing an oral presentation of sorts. Thus, for instance, if our 
topic is gender equality in the high-tech world, the preparatory activity for writing could be an oral 
presentation individually prepared and delivered or prepared as a group project and delivered by one 
member. This would be an example of speaking scaffolding writing, but the reverse could be done 
just as effectively if students are given a few minutes to prepare a brief written list-type outline to help 
them give an extemporaneous speech. 
 In the case of the interpretation skills (listening and reading), emphasis is placed on activat-
ing top-down and bottom-up skills. Furthermore, textual structure needs to be addressed for both 
listening and reading, but it is even more crucial for reading. Self-evaluation as a strategic listener 
or a strategic reader should be an important feature of working with the interpretation skills. This 
self-evaluation can be done before or during the listening or reading using a checklist or a series of 
questions such as those listed earlier for reading (p. 148, item 3, bottom). 
 For the production skills, emphasis is placed on planning. Some of this planning needs to address 
top-down decisions: how do we ensure that a reader-based written text or a listener-based spoken 
text gets produced? The organization of the main ideas or propositions, the choice of vocabulary 
items and of grammatical connectors, and other elements of cohesion have to be discussed in detail 
before students embark on the assignment. 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching Language from a Discourse Perspective • 153
 Scaffolding can and should also take place across production and comprehension skills. When 
dealing with reciprocal listening or speaking, and face-to-face communication, the emphasis needs 
to be on the simulation of natural communication. This is often done in classrooms through role-
play activities. Students are given roles to act out according to prior information, which very often is 
presented in written form on individual cards. The point of any such interaction, however, is to make 
sure that student speakers plan and adjust their spoken language to the needs and the capabilities of 
the listeners and maintain ongoing attention to how well the listeners interpret the message. Student 
listeners, on the other hand, have to pay attention to the flow of speech and react accordingly. What 
is particularly important in such exchanges is the repair work that each of the participants carries out 
or asks for. Such communicative activities can also be carried out in oral group projects, where each 
student acts both as listener and speaker at different times. 
 Reading and writing have traditionally been viewed as scaffolding each other. Thus, we may write 
in order to read or we may read in order to write. In preparation for reading about a topic, we may 
have students do a simpler writing task (even just preparing a brief outline) in which they think 
and plan both the content that needs to be imparted and the language elements that will allow this 
interaction. Following the writing task, they will be much better prepared for the reading of a topi-
cally related challenging text. The opposite works at least just as well and is even more common in 
language courses: learners read one or more texts in order to gain knowledge and information, and 
then they write about their own position on the same issues. An even simpler activity is to write 
a summary of the article(s) one has read, in which case the article(s) also serve as a model and a 
resource for the writing process. 
 The discussion here focused on instructed learning contexts where students work with a 
teacher and where we draw the learner’s attention to strategies. These types of activities should 
help learners develop into strategic skill users, where they are aware of the metacognitive and 
metalinguistic features of the tasks. An adequate amount of practice in planned communica-
tive interaction will generally prepare students for when they encounter natural communication 
outside the classroom. 
 Language Resources to Serve Communicative 
Interaction and the Effective Use of Language Skills 
 In a discourse-based approach to language teaching and language learning, communication is a piv-
otal force. When context-free language forms are practiced in the classroom only in order to help 
students acquire automatic use of targeted constructions—or when we focus on procedural decod-
ing or encoding sub-skills—we can do this without communication. In all other learning situations 
and contexts, there has to be a communicative goal to the language learning activity. This com-
municative exchange can be simulated (role-play) or real in the classroom discourse community 
(presenting one’s opinion or personal information, etc.). The learner has to feel engaged in real 
communication and take responsibility for producing or interpreting messages. 
 Vocabulary in a Skills-Based Approach 
 Vocabulary is often viewed as the main language resource necessary for communication at all lev-
els and therefore becomes the core of many language courses. Nation’s (2010) four basic strands 
of vocabulary teaching, which he requires for any balanced language course, seem to fit with the 
approach presented in this chapter. Nation’s first strand is meaning-focused vocabulary, which actu-
ally relates to the comprehension/interpretation skills. This means that learners should encounter 
new words through listening and reading activities where the main focus is on the content or on 

154 • Elite Olshtain and Marianne Celce-Murcia
information that the learners are seeking. The new words can be learned within relevant contexts 
that can help foster meaning; however, care needs to be taken with respect to the number of new 
words presented since learners cannot cope with too many new words within one text. 
 Nation’s second strand has to do with form-focused instruction, which places emphasis on the 
form of lexical items leading to accurate use of the words (e.g., recognizing that  quantity  is a noun 
because of the - ity  ending). The third strand relates to meaning-focused output, which is relevant to 
the production skills. Here learners should be given ample opportunity to use new vocabulary items 
in discourse-based speaking and writing activities. Finally, Nation’s fourth strand relates to learners 
using what they already know in fluency activities involving all four language skills. This approach 
allows learners to develop fluency of use in both the comprehension skills and the production skills. 
Most importantly, this also allows learners to develop personal strategies and thus become autono-
mous and strategic vocabulary learners. 
 From the point of view of the language user, we need to distinguish between receptive vocabu-
lary and productive vocabulary. Receptive vocabulary consists of lexical items that the learner can 
understand in context or in familiar situations. This is crucial for the comprehension skills. However, 
decoding features also play a significant role here: we need to recognize the pronunciation of words 
when we listen (sounds, stress, rhythm), and we need to recognize the written form of words when 
we read (spelling, morphological endings, derivational affixes). 
 Productive vocabulary is the total lexical stock that the language user can employ when com-
municating in speaking and writing. It is here that Nation’s fourth strand is most important since 
the learner needs fluency of use in order to turn this stock of items into truly  active vocabulary. 
A variety of communicative activities incorporating all skills is needed to constantly activate and 
expand the learners’ productive vocabulary. Formal instruction is useful for learning the core pro-
ductive vocabulary, and the academic word lists compiled by Coxhead (2000) are a very valuable 
resource for teachers to select the most appropriate target items. The following practices all help 
establish and develop a useful productive vocabulary: explicit information about the meaning of 
words, contrastive analysis to show the differences (and similarities) in meaning between L1 and 
L2 lexical items, discourse considerations such as genre or degree of formality, which play a role in 
word choice, and specific meanings of words related to text types and to communicative preferences 
among language users. 
 Considerable debate and increased research have identified appropriate ways to teach vocabulary. 
We thus turn to some of the issues that particularly relate to a discourse-based approach. One of the 
central issues related to vocabulary instruction is the question of whether we should leave learn-
ing vocabulary to exposure through giving learners an abundance of reading material or whether 
vocabulary should be taught systematically. 
 What is the required proportion of lexical items a learner must know in a text in order to under-
stand the text? Earlier studies argued the need for a high percentage of vocabulary knowledge: 95% 
(Laufer, 1989) and 98% (Hu & Nation, 2000), respectively. Schmitt, Jiang and Grabe (2011) studied 
this issue again and came to the conclusion that there is no “threshold” for vocabulary knowledge, 
but that improved vocabulary knowledge increases comprehension significantly. Schmitt et al. fur-
ther reinforced the 98% estimate for academic texts in particular. It is also important to consider the 
impact of vocabulary knowledge on writing. Hinkel (2015, 187) cites several studies demonstrating 
that by increasing the vocabulary range of L2 learners, an improvement in their L2 writing follows 
(Laufer & Nation, 1999; Folse, 2006; Lee & Muncie, 2006). 
 Some questions have focused on identifying contexts that are most conducive to vocabulary 
acquisition with conflicting results: while some have claimed that rich and informative contexts 
enhance vocabulary acquisition (Schouten-van Parreren, 1989), others have shown that such con-
texts actually interfere with the acquisition process (Mondria & Wit-De Boer, 1991). Zahar, Cobb 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching Language from a Discourse Perspective • 155
and Spada (2001) found that the frequency at which a learner encounters a lexical item relates to the 
learner’s acquisition of that item, whereas contextual richness does not. Furthermore, they found 
that incidental encounters are important but cannot be a substitute for deliberate and planned 
teaching and review of vocabulary items. The selection of texts and of teaching techniques is thus 
quite important. 
 Another issue relates to the most appropriate way to present new vocabulary items. Many 
experts suggest using a semantic set of related words. Erten and Tekin (2008) set out to investi-
gate this question and found that semantic sets do not contribute to vocabulary acquisition, and 
that they may, in fact, even hinder it due to cross-associations. It seems that combining thematic 
meaning with syntactic environments might be the best way to present vocabulary (e.g., “write 
a letter”, “wear a winter coat,” etc.). Researchers seem to agree that what is needed is careful 
planning of learners’ first exposure to new words in familiar and relevant contexts, considerable 
review and recycling of the items intended for active use, and ample opportunities for students 
to use what they know. Finally, learners need to develop their own strategies for vocabulary use 
and retention. 
 Grammar in a Skills-Based Approach 
 We listen, read, speak, and write at the level of discourse. Thus, we need to consider the role that 
grammar plays in the comprehension and production of discourse. As McCarthy (1991, 62) so aptly 
stated: 
 A discourse-oriented approach to grammar would suggest not only a greater emphasis on 
contexts larger than the sentence, but also a reassessment of priorities in terms of what is 
taught about such things as word order, articles, ellipsis, tense and aspect, and some of the 
other categories. 
 McCarthy (1991) further notes that grammar plays a direct role in “welding clauses, turns, and sen-
tences into discourse” (p. 62). Therefore, while sentence-level grammar is not irrelevant, it must now 
be viewed as a resource for creating discourse, and not as an end in itself. 
 We thus must ask ourselves: what is needed for a grammar of discourse? Halliday and Hasan 
(1976) were among the first to address this question. They proposed that forms expressing refer-
ence are crucial (e.g., pronouns, demonstratives, the definite article, etc.). These forms often cross 
clause and sentence boundaries, thereby giving a text cohesion. Other devices proposed by Halliday 
and Hasan help the speaker or writer to avoid repetition via either use of a substitute expression 
( one(s), do, If so/not , etc.) or ellipsis; the context makes the meaning of the substitute words clear 
or allows reconstruction of elements that were deleted in lieu of repetition. Finally, Halliday and 
Hasan discuss conjunction as a grammatical device that allows the expression of logical relations 
(e.g., addition, contrast, sequence, etc.) that hold between propositions in discourse to be expressed 
explicitly. Their work thus provided a beginning, and subsequent research has shown how specific 
grammatical forms and constructions play a crucial role in the organization of discourse (Larsen-
Freeman & Celce-Murcia, 2016). 
 The type and amount of grammar necessary on the part of L2 users varies greatly from skill to 
skill. When we consider the comprehension skills, we see that listening seems to depend the least on 
knowledge of grammar; listening relies more on the decoding of sounds, recognition of vocabu-
lary items, and how the lexical elements form thought groups, which are often marked by pauses, 
for listeners to reconstruct the overall meaning of the speaker’s discourse. In oral interaction it is 
important to distinguish statements from questions (often done through intonation) and affirmative 

156 • Elite Olshtain and Marianne Celce-Murcia
from negative propositions, and to focus on stressed words and expressions to discern the important 
features of the speaker’s message. 
 Moving to comprehension of the written language, it appears that good reading comprehension 
of anything that is more demanding than very basic written messages requires greater explicit or 
implicit knowledge of grammar rules than listening since the communication is not face-to-face or 
even simultaneous as it would be over the telephone or via Skype. Readers need to be able to rec-
ognize the temporal meanings of the tense-aspect system, whether a given proposition is in active 
or passive voice, as well as the meanings signaled by articles and prepositions at the propositional 
level. Readers must also be able to recognize when a referential item such as  it  or  this  refers back to 
an entire proposition and not just to a noun phrase, as in the following example (paraphrased from 
a TV news report): 
 People living near Freeway 60 in Ontario, California breathe in the highest levels of soot in South-
ern California.  This  contributes to the high occurrence of asthma, emphysema, and premature 
deaths in this population. 
 In this passage the pronominal use of  this refers to the preceding proposition, not simply to one 
preceding noun. In short, readers must have good receptive knowledge of the grammar of discourse, 
which includes an understanding of what various referential forms refer back to and what logical 
connectors (e.g.,  however, therefore, secondly , etc.) tell them about the semantic relationship between 
the prior and the subsequent discourse. 
 When we consider the productive skills, we know that speaking requires enough knowledge and 
control of grammar to sequence words and phrases and to use meaning-bearing inflections and 
function words for speakers to utter their intended meanings. Thus, speaking with a modicum 
of fluency and accuracy requires greater control of grammar than does listening. Furthermore, 
as McCarthy and O’Keeffe (2014) have pointed out, the grammar of spoken language is often 
markedly different from that of the written language. To give a few simple examples, speech has 
more ellipsis than writing (unless special telegraphic language is used in writing), and speech uses 
elisions and contractions much more frequently than all but the most informal writing, which 
is often intended to reflect speech. These conventions can make comprehension difficult for L2 
learners, who often avoid using contractions in their L2 speech, which in turn makes them sound 
stilted and unnatural. 
 Without a doubt, the writing skill demands the greatest amount of grammatical knowledge 
and control on the part of L2 users. Grammatical errors that can be glossed over in speech often 
become embarrassingly obvious in writing. L2 writers, along with appropriate word choice, need 
to attend to word order, tense-aspect usage, choice of active or passive voice, use of inflections 
to signal number, tense, degree, etc., accurate use of functions words such as articles and prepo-
sitions, and the structure of complex modifiers (reduced relative clauses, multiword prenomi-
nal modifiers, participles, subordinate clauses, etc.). To our list of grammar needed for effective 
writing, Hinkel (2015, p. 224) would add the use of adverbs to mark the information flow in 
discourse (e.g.,  in addition, as a result, for this reason ) and functions and uses of hedging devices 
(e.g.,  usually, typically, occasionally/in some cas es). All the above are just the surface features. L2 
writers also need to produce texts that are coherent (regarding both content and organization), 
cohesive (hold together structurally), and that meet the requirements of the discourse genre 
involved (e-mail messages, business letters, research reports, essays, etc.). What is crucial to keep 
in mind is that L2 writing is a demanding process on many levels and that grammatical accuracy 
is one important element, which is why the teaching of revision and editing become essential 
skills (Frodesen, 2014). 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching Language from a Discourse Perspective • 157
 Conclusion/Future Directions 
 Our chapter began by calling for a focus on the learner within a discourse-based communicative 
approach to L2 learning. The current and future needs of L2 learners require that they have access 
to multi-modal language use. Individual learners are best suited to identify what their L2 needs are, 
and thus the language program has to allow for choices, which will motivate learners and enhance 
their personal investment in learning the L2. The role of teachers in such an approach becomes one 
of facilitating access to resources to help learners develop their L2 proficiency with the goal of their 
becoming autonomous learners. 
 We discussed the need for learners to become strategic L2 learners and develop communication 
strategies (ability to use effectively the L2 language they know) and learning strategies (ways to con-
tinue learning the L2 on their own). Teachers need to provide ample learner engagement in activities 
that promote strategy development. 
 Although learners need opportunities to practice and acquire each skill, in actual communica-
tion today (and in the foreseeable future) the skills function interdependently to a far greater degree 
than ever before, and we see this trend continuing in the future and predict that the role of each skill 
in communication will continue to evolve. For example, L2 learners need writing skills in order to 
participate in social media (SMS, email, Twitter, etc.). So much communication is now digital that 
writing skills are needed to function in many areas where speech alone formerly was used (Darvin 
& Norton, 2015, p. 41). 
 Notes 
 1. There has been much discussion in Applied Linguistics over the meanings of the terms ‘use’ and ‘usage’. Some have argued 
that the former is descriptive and the latter prescriptive. However, recent research (e.g., Tomasello, 2000, 2003; Hall, 2015) 
employs the term ‘usage’ to refer to language in use (i.e., descriptively), and this is how we are using the term. 
 2. In referring to the comprehension skills, some writers will say ‘receptive skills’ and others will say ‘recognition’ skills. We are 
using ‘understanding’ skills and ‘comprehension’ skills (and sometimes the other two terms) as equivalents. 
 3. Re-listening is often not possible unless a conversation, lecture, or other live presentation has been recorded. 
 4. By ‘quantity’ Grice is referring to amount of information required—not too much; not too little. ‘Quality’ refers to the truth 
of the message from the speaker’s point of view, i.e. what s/he believes to be true. ‘Relation/relevance’ refers to the message 
making a relevant contribution to the communication. ‘Manner’ refers to the clarity of meaning and avoidance of obscurity 
in the delivery of the message. All of Grice’s maxims are relative and subject to the expectations of the culture in which the 
communication takes place (e.g., what is sufficient quantity in one culture may be deemed insufficient in another). 
 References 
 Belcher, D. & Hirvela, A. (Eds.) (2011).  The oral-literate connection . Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press. 
 Bruner, J. (1986).  Actual minds, possible worlds . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Carrell, P.L. & Eisterhold, J.C. (1983). Schema theory and ESL reading pedagogy.  TESOL Quarterly , 17(4), 553–574. 
 Celce-Murcia, M. & Olshtain, E. (2000).  Discourse and context in language teaching: A guide for language teachers . Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Celce-Murcia, M. & Olshtain, E. (2005). Discourse-based approaches: A new framework for second language teaching and 
learning. In E. Hinkel (Ed.)  Handbook of research in second language teaching and learning  (pp. 729–741). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list.  TESOL Quarterly , 34(2), 213–238. 
 Darvin, R. & Norton, B. (2015). Identity and a model of investment in applied linguistics.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics , 
35, 36–56. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Dörnyei, Z. (2014). Motivation. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton & M.A. Snow (Eds.)  Teaching English as a second or foreign 
language , 4th Edition (pp. 518–531). Boston, MA: Heinle Cengage Learning. 
 Dörnyei, Z. & Ushioda, E. (Eds.) (2009).  Motivation, language identity and the L2 self . Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Erten, I.K. & Tekin, M. (2008). Effects on vocabulary acquisition of presenting new words in semantic sets versus semantically 
unrelated sets.  System , 36(3), 407–422. 

158 • Elite Olshtain and Marianne Celce-Murcia
 Folse, K. (2006). The effect of written exercises on L2 vocabulary retention.  TESOL Quarterly , 40(2), 273–293. 
 Frodesen, J. (2014). Grammar in second language writing. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton & M.A. Snow (Eds.)  Teaching Eng-
lish as a second or foreign language , 4th Edition (pp. 238–253). Boston, MA: Heinle Cengage Learning. 
 Gibson, E.J. & Levin, H. (1975).  The psychology of reading . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Goh, C.C.M. (2014). Second language listening comprehension: Process and pedagogy. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton & 
M.A. Snow (Eds.)  Teaching English as a second or foreign language , 4th Edition (pp. 72–89). Boston, MA: Heinle Cengage 
Learning. 
 Grabe, W. (2009).  Reading in a second language: Moving from theory to practice . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. Morgan (Eds.)  Syntax and s emantics 3: Speech acts  (pp. 41–58). New 
York, NY: Academic Press. 
 Hall, J.K. (2012).  Teaching and researching language and culture , 2nd Edition. Harlow, UK: Longman Pearson. 
 Hall, J.K. (2015, March 21). Conversation analysis’s contribution to a usage-based understanding of SLA. Presentation at the 
AAAL Conference in Toronto in an invited colloquium, “Toward an integrative framework for SLA”. 
 Hall, J.K., Hellermann, J. & Doehler, S.P. (Eds.) (2011).  L2 interactional competence development . Bristol, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
 Halliday, M.A.K. & Hasan, R. (1976).  Cohesion in English . London, UK: Longman. 
 Hinkel, E. (2015).  Effective curriculum for teaching L2 writing: Principles and techniques . New York and London: Routledge. 
 Hu, M. & Nation, I.S.P. (2000). Vocabulary density and reading comprehension.  Reading in a Foreign Language , 23, 403–430. 
 Koda, K. (2005).  Insights into second language reading . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Kotik-Friedgut, B.S. (2008). Enhancement of autonomy in language learners. In A. Stavans & I. Kupferberg (Eds.)  Studies in 
language and language education (pp. 243–260). Jerusalem, Israel: The Hebrew University Magnes Press. 
 Kramsch, C.J. (2013). Afterword. In B. Norton (Ed.)  Identity and language learning: Extending the conversation , 2nd Edition 
(pp. 192–201). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Larsen-Freeman, D. & Celce-Murcia, M. (2016).  The grammar book: Form, meaning, and use for English language teachers , 3rd 
Edition. Boston, MA: Heinle Cengage Learning. 
 Laufer, B. (1989). What percentage of text-lexis is essential for comprehension? In C. Lauren & M. Nordman (Eds.)  Special 
language: From humans to thinking machines  (pp. 316–323). Clevendon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Laufer, B. & Nation, I.S.P. (1999). A vocabulary size test of controlled productive ability.  Language Testing , 16(1), 33–51. 
 Lee, S. & Muncie, J. (2006). From receptive to productive: Improving ESL learners’ use of vocabulary in a postreading composi-
tion task.  TESOL Quarterly , 40(2), 295–320. 
 McCarthy, M. (1991).  Discourse analysis for language teachers . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 McCarthy, M. & O’Keeffe, A. (2014). Spoken Grammar. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton & M.A. Snow (Eds.)  Teaching English 
as a second or foreign language , 4th Edition (pp. 271–287). Boston, MA: Heinle Cengage Learning. 
 Mondria, J.A. & Wit-De Boer, M. (1991). Guessability and the retention of words in a foreign language.  Applied Linguistics , 
12(3), 249–263. 
 Mullis, I.V.S., Kennedy, A.M., Martin, M.O. & Sainsbury, M. (2006).  PIRLS 2006 assessment framework and specifications . 
Amsterdam, Netherlands: International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA). 
 Nation, I.S.P. (2010).  Learning vocabulary in another language . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Norton, B. (2000).  Identity and language learning: Gender, ethnicity and educational change . Essex, UK: Pearson. 
 Schmitt, N., Jiang, X. & Grabe, W. (2011). The percentage of words known in a text and reading comprehension.  The Modern 
Language Journal , 95(1), 26–43. 
 Schouten-van Parreren, C. (1989). Vocabulary learning through reading: Which conditions should be met when presenting 
words in texts?  AILA Review , 6, 75–85. 
 Tomasello, M. (2000). First steps toward a usage-based language of acquisition.  Cognitive Linguistics , 11(1/2), 61–82. 
 Tomasello, M. (2003).  Constructing a language: A usage-based theory of language acquisition . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press. 
 Vygotsky, L.S. (l978).  Mind in society . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Weigle, S.C. (2014). Considerations for teaching second language writing. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton & M.A. Snow (Eds.) 
 Teaching English as a second or foreign language , 4th Edition (pp. 222–237). Boston, MA: Heinle Cengage Learning. 
 Zahar, R., Cobb, T. & Spada, N. (2001). Acquiring vocabulary through reading: Effects of frequency and contextual richness. 
 The Canadian Modern Language Review , 57(4), 544–572. 
www.ebook3000.com

159
 12 
 Content-Based Language Teaching 
and Academic Language Development 
 Marguerite Ann Snow 
 Introduction 
 Content-based language teaching is an approach to the teaching of second/foreign languages in 
which language and content are integrated in instruction. What constitutes “content” in language 
teaching methodology has changed over the decades as methods for second/foreign languages have 
evolved from specifying structures (e.g., tenses) in the grammatical syllabus to language functions 
(e.g., invitations) in the notional functional approach. By the 1980s, content in many language teach-
ing programs had come to be defined as the topics, themes, or subject matter through which second 
language learners could learn both forms and functions as well as the four skills of reading, writing, 
listening, and speaking (Snow, 2014). For more than three decades, content-based instruction (CBI) 
has taken its place alongside other approaches such as task-based learning as a form of communica-
tive language teaching (Dueñas, 2004; Duff, 2014; Larsen-Freeman & Anderson, 2011; Richards & 
Rodgers, 2014). 
 Since Mohan’s (1986) seminal book  Language and Content , CBI has expanded to a great variety 
of settings world-wide, serving young learners through adult students. Stoller (2008) character-
izes CBI as an umbrella term referring to instructional approaches that “make a dual, though not 
necessarily equal, commitment to language and content-learning objectives” (p. 59). The goal of 
CBI and Content Integrated Language Learning (CLIL), its European counterpart, is to create 
interesting and motivating instruction that taps into learners’ interests and needs in a variety of 
settings, with students of different age groups and educational levels (Snow, 2013). CBI takes the 
form of what Reynolds (2015) has called “name-branded models” such as the Sheltered Instruction 
Observation Protocol (SIOP) (Echevarria, Vogt & Short, 2012) and Cognitive Academic Language 
Learning Approach (CALLA) (Chamot & O’Malley, 1987) to describe well-known and widely 
established models of CBI; Wesche (2010) called “tailor made programs” for selected populations 
of students or particular program goals. As Wesche (2010) noted, CBI is “likely to continue to 
flourish, particularly in contexts where learners’ main opportunity for developing advanced L2 
proficiency is a school or postsecondary context and where they need to develop academic L2 
ability” (p. 293). This chapter focuses on the nexus between CBI and the teaching of academic 
language (AL) in school-based CBI programs. The chapter starts with a discussion of models of 
CBI; the focus then shifts to an examination of AL and the challenges of integrating language and 
content in CBI settings. 

160 • Marguerite Ann Snow
 Models of Content-Based Instruction 
 Models of CBI cross over all educational levels—elementary through post-secondary—and are 
international in scope and implementation (Brinton, Snow & Wesche, 1989, 2003). One way to dis-
tinguish the models is by setting—whether offered in a second or foreign language teaching context. 
Another is by whether the model serves language majority or language minority students (Light-
bown, 2014). Starting with elementary immersion programs in Canada, the immersion model for 
language majority school students is the most widely recognized and researched model of CBI to 
date (Genesee, 1987; Lambert & Tucker, 1975; Rhodes, 2014; Tedick, Christian & Fortune, 2011). 
The immersion model has also been extensively implemented in the U.S. (Center for Applied Lin-
guistics, 2011) and in international settings (Hoare, 2010; Johnson & Swain, 1997). More recently, 
two-way immersion programs in the United States and elsewhere have evolved. In these settings, 
language majority (e.g., English-speaking) and language minority (e.g., Spanish-speaking) students 
are combined in classes so as to develop their respective target languages and serve as role models for 
each other (Center for Applied Linguistics, 2012; Lindholm-Leary, 2001; Lindholm-Leary & Gen-
esee, 2010). 
 The sheltered model of CBI evolved first at the post-secondary level to teach university courses 
in French to native speakers of English or English to native speakers of French (Edwards, Wesche, 
Krashen, Clément & Kruidenier, 1984; Hauptman, Wesche & Ready, 1988). It was then adapted to 
other educational settings to teach content courses to second language learners. In Britain, Gaffield-
Vile (1996) reported on a sheltered sociology course designed to help non-native English-speaking 
students with academic reading, writing, and speaking skills. In the post-secondary setting, the shel-
tered course served as “a helpful bridge between skill-based EAP courses for non-native students and 
regular university subject-matter courses” (Dueñas, 2004, p. 82). 
 In the United States, sheltered courses have become a widespread, if somewhat controversial, 
option for instruction in students’ primary language in states such as California, where voters passed 
Proposition 227 in 1998 effectively banning bilingual education (Crawford, 2000; Echevarria & Short, 
2010). Sheltered courses are typically offered at the secondary school level and taught by content spe-
cialists (i.e., a history teacher) as a way to give English learners (ELs) access to the core curriculum. 
The original immersion and sheltered courses shared the basic feature that second language students 
would benefit from being in the “same linguistic boat” (Krashen, 1984), separated for purposes of 
instruction so that teachers could cater to students’ developing proficiency during instruction of the 
standard school curriculum. The sheltered model has also gone by different labels such as Specially 
Designed Academic Instruction in English (see Reynolds, 2015 for an overview). The best known 
and most widely studied is the SIOP, which incorporates strategies that teachers can use to provide 
students with access to core content and focuses on the development of students’ academic English 
skills (Echevarria & Short, 2010; Echevarria, Vogt & Short, 2017). 
 The theme-based model of CBI, in which language classes are designed around topics of interest 
or need, has become hugely popular in both ESL and EFL settings. Typically designed by language 
instructors and adaptable to all proficiency levels, thematic instruction is popular at all educational 
levels. Pierce (2008) describes thematic units developed for a K–12 school district in rural Pennsylva-
nia around themes like “Life in the United States” and “Living in Two Cultures.” At the post-secondary 
level, especially in intensive English programs (IEPs), theme-based classes have been designed to 
enhance student interest and motivation in the curriculum. At Aoyama Gakuin University in Japan, 
for example, Strong (2007) describes the development of a new thematic curriculum for different 
proficiency levels, which include themes such as “Memories,” “Urban Life,” and “Changing Times.” 
Thematic instruction has benefited greatly from the 6Ts framework, which offers a principled 
approach to add coherence to the theme-based curriculum (Stoller & Grabe, 1997, in press). In 
www.ebook3000.com

Content-Based Language Teaching • 161
this framework, curriculum designers develop theme-based courses/curricula around topics, themes, 
tasks, texts, transitions, and threads. 
 Found mainly at the post-secondary level, adjunct programs are a model of CBI where language 
and content courses are paired; students enroll concurrently in a language and content class, for 
example, in an advanced ESL and a political science class (Brinton, Snow & Wesche, 1989, 2003; 
Johns, 2001; Snow, 2014). Variants include content courses paired with study groups led by under-
graduate/graduate students from the discipline who work with language teachers and content profes-
sors to assist students to learn the critical reading and writing skills required of the History course, 
for example (Bernier, 1997; Snow, 1997; Snow & Kamhi-Stein, 2002; Srole, 1997). Further, Brinton 
and Jensen (2002) describe a “simulated adjunct” in which video excerpts of university content lec-
tures and the accompanying readings provide the materials for the CBI language course. The adjunct 
model has also been implemented at the secondary level where ESL, Biology, and History teachers 
collaborated on course activities and assignments (Wegrzecka-Kowalewski, 1997). In an interesting 
implementation in a Canadian secondary school, Roessingh and Kover (2002) reported on a shel-
tered English class paired with an ESL adjunct class, with the sheltered class primarily focusing on 
concepts and the adjunct class dealing explicitly with teaching the learning strategies and AL needed 
to understand concepts in the English class. 
 In 2004, Dueñas noted propitiously that: “CBI cannot be conceptualized as a fixed, immovable 
method; quite the contrarily, it is commonly perceived as a flexible operational framework for lan-
guage instruction, with heterogeneity of prototype models and application options available for dif-
ferent contexts and pedagogical needs” (p. 75). In addition to the three prototype models of CBI 
discussed above, Brinton and Snow (in press) note the “changing architecture” of content-based 
instruction in which features of the models have been adjusted for a variety of reasons—to accom-
modate specific student populations, extant resources, challenging logistics, or where experience 
over time with a particular model has suggested curricular improvements or responses to perceived 
deficiencies. For example, Murphy and Stoller (2001) promote Sustained Content Language Teach-
ing (SCLT), noting that in the early years of CBI, programs often developed theme-based courses 
around short unconnected themes that limited opportunities for students to recycle vocabulary or 
grammatical structures or develop expertise in the content under study. They advocated for treating a 
carefully selected theme/subthemes over an extended period of time—a semester or an entire school 
year—in order for learners to engage the content more deeply and have sustained exposure to the tar-
geted language skills as well as extended practice in critical thinking and language learning strategies. 
 In Europe and, increasingly, in other settings, CLIL offers another approach to content-based 
language teaching. CLIL is a “dual-focused” educational approach developed as a response to the 
need for plurilingual ability as a consequence of the integration of the European Union (Coyle, Hood 
& Marsh, 2010). It is an educational model for contexts where the classroom is the primary setting 
for access to the target language. Thus, CLIL is “about either foreign languages or lingua francas” 
(Dalton-Puffer, 2011, p. 182). Marsh and Frigols Martín (2013) note that CLIL involves the use of 
“language-supportive methodologies” leading to authentic learning, where attention is given to both 
the topic and the language of instruction (p. 5). Though CLIL can be found at all levels of education 
in Europe, it is most common in secondary schools; at the present time English is the most com-
mon target language. Research comparing CLIL and non-CLIL learners generally reveals that CLIL 
instruction benefits learners in the development of general competencies in the second language (L2) 
(Dalton-Puffer, 2011). Other research focuses on determining outcomes for specific areas of gram-
mar (Adrián & Mangado, 2015). 
 Another more recent variant is English-medium instruction (EMI), viewed by some as a post-
secondary application of CLIL. In this model, content instruction is delivered in the students’ L2 
typically by a professor from the target discipline. EMI, also called Integrated Content and Language 

162 • Marguerite Ann Snow
in Higher Education, is sometimes used synonymously to refer to a form of EMI that has a more 
explicit language focus. Found in such diverse international arenas as Europe, Africa, North America, 
the Middle East, and Asia, EMI courses aim to enhance students’ language proficiency through the 
means of content instruction in the target language. Doiz, Lasagabaster and Sierra (2013) present 
case studies of EMI that focus on issues in the EMI context such as course design, language and 
content teacher training and collaboration, language proficiency of students and content faculty, 
demands of EMI on faculty and students, language outcomes, and the scope and extent of current 
research. van Wyk (2014) provides an account of the use of EMI in the multilingual setting of South 
Africa, where students face challenges with access to higher education due to the limited develop-
ment of their academic language proficiency. 
 Dellicarpini and Alonso (2013) present a feature analysis of several “methods” of CBI (CALLA, 
SIOP, CLIL, ESP, immersion, sheltered, adjunct, and theme-based). Reynolds (2015) provides a com-
prehensive overview of CBI approaches and models such as CALLA, SIOP, SDAIE, and CLIL, men-
tioned previously, as well as Content-Based Language Teaching with Technology (CoBaLLT), projects 
at the Center for Research in English Development and Education (CREDE), and Expediting Com-
prehension for English Language Learners (ExC-ELL). 
 Despite the variations in CBI approaches, there are common features (Crandall, 2012): 
 • focus on meaningful, relevant content; 
 • focus on language development; 
 • use of relevant and appropriate authentic and adapted texts and tests; 
 • participation in engaging tasks that promote learning of content and language; and 
 • development of learning strategies and academic skills. 
 (p. 153) 
 Met’s (1999) well-known distinction between language-driven models and content-driven models 
of CBI provides a continuum of content and language integration. Language classes with use of con-
tent for language practice or theme-based classes fall on the language-driven side of the continuum 
whereas total immersion and sheltered courses fall on the content-driven end. Regardless of whether 
the selected CBI model is more language driven or content driven, most CBI programs, as noted by 
Wesche (2010), are school-based programs, requiring students to learn AL in the course of instruc-
tion. The next sections of this chapter take an in-depth look at AL and consider implications for the 
teaching and learning of AL in content-based programs. 
 Academic Language: Some Conceptualizations 
 The focus of this chapter is on the ways in which learners acquire the language needed to access and 
master content in school-based CBI programs, in both second and foreign language settings. Cum-
mins’ (1980) seminal distinction between everyday social language and the type of language used in 
school was the earliest springboard for work in AL. He coined the phrases basic interpersonal com-
municative skills (BICS) to refer to social conversational language and cognitive academic language 
proficiency (CALP) to describe the more cognitively complex language of school. While some inter-
preted Cummins’ early work as a dichotomous view of language acquisition, Cummins later stressed 
that learners develop social and cognitive features of language simultaneously (Cummins, 2000) 
and that the most critical distinction is the degree to which there is contextual support in language 
use situations such as the classroom. More recent work focuses on the language of school (Bailey, 
2007; Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 2014; Schleppegrell, 2004), describing features of AL and pedagogy for 
teaching the language of school. 
www.ebook3000.com

Content-Based Language Teaching • 163
 The notion of AL as it relates to second/foreign language learning can be seen in many early types 
of CBI programs. Chamot and O’Malley (1987), in their CALLA model, defined AL as “the language 
that is used by teachers and students for the purposes of acquiring new knowledge . . . imparting new 
information, describing abstract ideas, and developing students’ conceptual understanding” (p. 40). 
Schleppegrell (2004) asserts that 
 school-based texts are difficult for many students precisely because they emerge from dis-
course contexts that require different ways of using language than students experience outside 
of school. . . . [They draw] on a different constellation of linguistics resources from what is 
typical or expected of everyday conversation. 
 (p. 9) 
 She also made the connection between AL and content learning: “Students need to use language in 
particular ways in order to be successful in science, history, and other subjects; to develop interpreta-
tions, construct arguments, and critique theories” (p. 5). Bailey (2007) offered a conceptualization 
of school language as a “precise and predictable way of using language that places demands on the 
user not typically encountered in everyday settings” (p. x). In their comprehensive review of teaching 
academic English to English learners (ELs), Anstrom, DiCerbo, Butler, Katz, Millet and Rivera (2010) 
refer to academic English as a “variety of English, as a register, or as a style . . . typically used within 
specific sociocultural academic settings” (pp. iv-v). 
 Schleppegrell (2004) has also argued that interactional spoken language can be complex and cog-
nitively demanding, claiming that cognitive demand lies in the relationship between the task and the 
learner, not necessarily the text or the task. Bailey (2007) has further cautioned against characterizing 
social language as less sophisticated or less cognitively demanding than language used in academic 
contexts. In an expanded definition of AL, she suggests that it is perhaps more accurate to speak of 
the differences between social and AL as differences in the “relative frequency” of complex grammati-
cal structures, specialized terminology, and uncommon language functions (p. 9). 
 In a more recent conceptualization, Bailey and Heritage (2008) divide AL into  School Navigational 
Language  and  Curriculum Content Language. School Navigational Language  is the language students 
use “to communicate with teachers and peers in the school setting in a very broad sense” (p. 15), such 
as in classroom management.  Curriculum Content Language  is the language used in the process of 
teaching and learning content material. This conceptualization applies to all students, native English 
speakers and ELs, given that all students must master the language of school. Drawing on Bailey and 
Heritage (2008), Scarcella (2008) adds the notions of  Foundational Knowledge of English  and  Essential 
Academic Language  to their conceptualization, maintaining that these, along with  School Navigational 
Language , are three types of essential knowledge that students need to learn . Foundational Knowledge 
of English  refers to the basics of the English language and requires explicit, systematic instruction. 
 Essential Academic Language , on the other hand, consists of “the basic features of academic language 
that are used  across all content areas ” (p. 6). 
 Zwiers (2008) posits that there are three interrelated roles of AL. Speakers and writers use AL to 
describe: (1) complexity in clear and concise ways; (2) higher-order thinking such as the complex 
thinking processes used to solve problems and express ideas; and (3) abstract ideas and relationships. 
Wong Fillmore and Fillmore (2012) have analyzed the language of academic texts, complex texts in 
particular, and identified grammatical structures and devices for framing ideas, indicating relation-
ships, and structuring arguments. 
 In sum, DiCerbo, Anstrom, Baker and Rivera (2014), in their most recent distillation of the cur-
rent literature, note that different frameworks for looking at academic English (AE) are “neither 
mutually exclusive nor contradicting, but they attend to different types and features of AE” (p. 448). 

164 • Marguerite Ann Snow
Furthermore, while experts offer somewhat different characterizations, there is general agreement 
that AE exists in both general and content-specific forms (U.S. Department of Education, 2012). 
 Descriptions of Academic Language 
 Descriptions of the features of AL have proliferated over the past decade. Snow (2005) highlighted 
the role of language functions, distinguishing between social language functions such as inviting 
or complimenting and academic language functions like defining and sequencing. Saunders and 
Goldenberg (2010) note that AL entails all aspects of language, from grammatical structures to 
vocabulary and discourse features. It also involves the particular language used for various language 
functions such as comparing and contrasting, classifying, or predicting. In the same volume, Snow 
and Katz (2010) describe the role of AL in integrating English language development (ELD) and the 
core curriculum for elementary ELs; Dutro and Kinsella (2010) describe the explicit AL needed for 
content learning for secondary ELD instruction. 
 Describing features of academic literacy, Short and Fitzsimmons (2007) include reading, writing, 
and oral discourse for school that varies from subject to subject; requires knowledge of multiple 
genres of text, purposes for text use, and text media; and, is influenced by students’ personal, social, 
and cultural experiences (p. 15). Gottlieb and Ernst-Slavit (2014) further delineate the description 
of AL into three dimensions: (1) the discourse level, including text types, genres, cohesion of text, 
and coherence of ideas; (2) the sentence level, involving types of sentences (i.e., simple, compound, 
complex, compound-complex), word order, prepositional phrases, and phrasal verbs; and (3) the 
word/expression level, covering colloquial expressions, general, specialized, and technical content 
words, and nominalizations (p. 6). 
 Researchers have also described the particular discourse features of selected content and begun 
to apply the descriptions to classrooms both to validate the extant descriptions and to consider 
the implications for instruction and assessment. In their observations of fourth- and fifth-grade 
science classes, Bailey, Butler, LaFramenta and Ong (2001/4) found that teachers primarily used 
four language functions: (1) description (e.g.,  A sunflower has bright yellow petals and a long green 
stem. ); (2) explanation (e.g.,  Clownfish will actually protect the sea anemone. That’s a mutualistic 
relationship .); (3) comparison (e.g.,  Flowers have mechanisms of attraction like whales have echolo-
cation ); and (4) questioning (e.g.,  What did we learn in our last unit on water properties ?). Student 
talk, according to their observations, consisted of these four language functions as well as com-
menting. Carr, Sexton and Lagunoff (2006) present the many discourse functions of science, such 
as hypothesizing, providing evidence, and reporting findings; they also list connectors like  since, 
consequently,  and  as a result to show cause and effect in science. 
 The Challenge of Teaching Academic Language and Content 
 Over the four decades of CBI, one of the most significant developments is the recognition of the 
need for purposeful planning for language and content learning. Swain (1988) was one of the first 
to raise awareness that “not all content teaching is necessarily good language teaching” (p. 68). Lyster 
and Ranta (1997) reemphasized Swain’s observation: “Subject-matter teaching does not on its own 
provide adequate language teaching: Language used to convey subject matter needs to be highlighted 
in ways that make certain features more salient to L2 learners” (p. 41). More recently, Lyster (2011) 
observed that the “two for one” approach often touted as a benefit of CBI is not a given. In fact, he 
takes the position that by learning content through a second language, the second language does 
not come “for free . . . that a great deal of attention still needs to be drawn to the second language, 
which needs to be manipulated and enhanced during content teaching” (p. 612). Perhaps Short and 
www.ebook3000.com

Content-Based Language Teaching • 165
Fitzsimmons’ (2007) characterization of the demands of learning language and content as “double 
the work” is the most apt description for what we have learned over time. 
 Short (2002) was one of the first to train teachers for content and language integrated teaching. 
Four middle school teachers who taught sheltered U.S. History participated; two were trained ESL 
instructors and two had social studies certification. Class observations revealed that the four teach-
ers placed much more emphasis on addressing content and tasks than language: 44% of utterances 
addressed content, 35% addressed tasks, and only 20% addressed language. Even the ESL teachers 
devoted only one-fifth or less of their oral interactions to language; when the teachers did address 
language, 95% of their comments related to vocabulary comprehension or pronunciation. Similarly, 
in an in-depth study of six Spanish immersion teachers, Fortune, Tedick and Walker (2008) found 
that the “Vs” of language teaching—vocabulary and verbs—predominated; these were the language 
components that the teachers mainly targeted in instruction. Studies in other content-based settings 
have, not surprisingly, found that content-trained teachers tend to emphasize content, not language, 
and language-trained teachers tend to focus more on language at the expense of in-depth exploration 
of content (Dalton-Puffer, 2007; Hoare & Kong, 2008). 
 Lyster (2007) has proposed  counter-balanced instruction  where teachers assist students to vary 
their attentional focus between content learning, classroom discourse, and target language features. 
The approach involves pedagogical techniques such as enhanced input through noticing and aware-
ness tasks that draw the learner’s attention to form-function relationships while also focusing on 
meaning-based tasks (Lyster, 2011) and an awareness-practice-feedback sequence in which the 
teacher makes learners aware of what they need to learn or change, creates opportunities, and pro-
vides feedback so that the learners know whether their use of language forms and features has been 
successful or unsuccessful (Lyster & Ranta, 2007). 
 Mohan and Slater (2006), using a systemic functional view (SFL) of language, examined the teach-
ing and learning of science content and language in a ninth-grade science class. In this class, the 
science teacher used question-answer sequences and problem-solving activities to help students to 
classify/describe a physical property such as density in order to achieve his goal of teaching science 
register. In the mathematics arena, Barwell (2006) investigated how students learning English as 
an additional language worked together to solve word problems. He found that student learning 
encompassed both mathematics and language learning over the course of the study and that over 
time students became socialized into the discursive practices of the word problem genre. 
 In a study with middle school teachers in China, Kong and Hoare (2011) investigated the degree 
to which the teachers fostered cognitive engagement with academic content and language use in 
the course  Nature and Society  taught in English. The researchers found that the teacher facilitated 
the students’ use of AL through activities that required the students to process challenging content 
material deeply (i.e., water and the classification of living things) and to use complex content-related 
AL needed to explain why, for instance, a bat is classified as a mammal by referring to its defining 
characteristics. 
 Noting that the research on immersion teaching has consistently shown that immersion teachers 
tend to focus on subject matter content at the expense of language teaching, Cammarata and Tedick 
(2012) set out to describe the experiences of immersion teachers as they attempted to balance lan-
guage and content. Adopting a phenomenology approach, they examined the experiences of three 
immersion teachers who had participated in a year-long professional development program that 
had exposed them to a variety of strategies to attend to both content and language in curricular 
planning and instruction. The results revealed five dimensions of their experience: (1) identity 
transformation as they saw themselves as content  and  language teachers; (2) external challenges such 
as facing time constraints, lack of resources, district pressures, and other factors; (3) a growing sense 
of isolation that they were on their own; (4) awakening as they developed an increased awareness of 

166 • Marguerite Ann Snow
the interdependence of content and language; and (5) having difficulty in identifying what language 
to focus on in the context of content instruction. 
 Preparing Teachers to Integrate Language and Content 
 Overall, the research informs us that there is evidence that teaching key linguistic elements (i.e., syn-
tax, language functions) explicitly is justified in educational programs where the goal is for students 
to access content through a second/foreign language (Saunders & Goldenberg, 2010). A more recent 
review of research noted that there is “some consensus in the field that academic English may need 
to be taught explicitly; instructors should not assume that students will acquire it independently or 
passively” (U.S. Department of Education, 2012, p. 35). We can conclude that CBI teachers in all set-
tings need to better hone their knowledge, skills, and dispositions in order to integrate language and 
content more effectively. How we prepare teachers to carry out this complex role is one of the most 
prominent issues in the current CBI literature. 
 Planning for instruction which integrates language and content has been an ongoing challenge. 
Early on, Snow, Met and Genesee (1989) developed a framework to assist language and content 
teachers to define two types of language teaching objectives: (1)  content-obligatory  objectives delin-
eate the language (e.g., vocabulary, functions, structures), which is required for students to master 
content concepts or materials; and (2)  content-compatible objectives specify the types of language 
that pair naturally with content materials and provide students with extended practice in trouble-
some grammar points through contextualized academic tasks. The design of objectives continues 
to receive attention in the literature as a viable way to help teachers integrate language and content 
instruction (Hoare, Kong & Bell, 2008; Baecher, Farnsworth & Ediger, 2014). 
 Pursuing another avenue, Lindahl, Baecher and Tomaš (2013) apply aspects of the Teacher Lan-
guage Awareness (TLA) model (Andrews, 2007) to assist teachers to apply TLA during CBI lesson 
plan development. And Wong Fillmore and Fillmore (2012) suggest a “One Sentence at a Time” 
approach to introduce ELs and language minority students to the complexity of academic text. In 
this approach, teachers plan a daily instructional session in which they lead students in a discussion 
about language focused on a single sentence drawn from a text that the class is working on. The goal 
of these conversations is to help students unpack the complex texts and, in doing so, develop aware-
ness of the specific linguistic patterns and functions found in the selected texts. 
 Others have developed more extensive models for CBI teacher preparation. Inspired by the chal-
lenges ESL teachers face with the demands of language and content teaching, Bigelow, Ranney and 
Dahlman (2006) proposed a dynamic  Connections Model  for content–language integration that has 
helped their teachers learn to conceptualize lesson planning in K–12 settings in the U.S. In the model, 
they argue for the need for ESL teachers to maintain a “strong hold” on their roles as language teach-
ers. The model has three points of entry for lesson planning: the content materials or tasks, the 
language functions, and the linguistic structures, with the point of entry depending on the circum-
stances of instruction (i.e., which CBI model, which task, which standards, etc.). Teachers go back 
and forth between content, language functions, and structures in a dynamic process ensuring that 
the points of entry align. 
 Gibbons (2006) outlines a five-step framework to guide teachers to integrate language and con-
tent in the Australian context: (1) find out about learners’ language needs (e.g., writing a narrative 
structure or following a set of instructions); (2) unpack the topic for language (i.e., will students 
need to summarize and take notes? Write a recount with connectives and past tense?); (3) select 
the focus language based on previous steps; (4) develop activities that focus on language (e.g., jig-
saw reading, cloze, split dictation); and (5) evaluate the unit—what have students learned in terms 
of language and content? Gibbons (2014, in press) presents strategies for designing challenging 
www.ebook3000.com

Content-Based Language Teaching • 167
curricula that included targeted language scaffolding, a “high challenge, high support” curriculum 
with emphasis on inquiry, collaborative learning, and problem-solving along with high-level literacy 
expectations. 
 To teach the discourse of history, Schleppegrell and de Oliveira (2006) used an SFL framework to 
assist secondary history teachers “to maintain a focus on historical content while at the same time 
enabling their students to see how the content is constructed in the language choices of the historian” 
(p. 255). In particular, the teachers used linguistic notions such as sentence constituents and their 
meaning relationships, time markers/connectors, complex nominal groups, and referencing devices 
to scaffold their students’ understanding of disciplinary language and engage in discussions of his-
tory content. Focusing on how nouns in history are used to package information, expand historical 
explanations, and structure reasoning throughout a text, de Oliveira (2010a) illustrates these devices 
with excerpts from history texts. Similarly, de Oliveira (2010b) demonstrates the functions of nouns 
in fourth-grade science texts, making the claim that key linguistic features are already present at the 
elementary level and that science instruction is more than “just technical terms” (p. 135). de Oliveira 
and Lan (2014) apply a genre-based approach to teaching science writing to ELs. 
 SIOP, one of the strongest research bases of CBI, is a model of instruction for teaching subject 
matter content to student learning through a second language (Echevarria, Vogt & Short, 2012). 
SIOP components include lesson preparation, building background, comprehensible input, strate-
gies, interaction, practice and application, lesson delivery, and review and assessment. Short, Fidel-
man and Louguit (2012) investigated the effects of SIOP instruction on the academic performance of 
middle school and high school English learners and found that there were significant gains in written 
and oral language by ELs when compared to similar students whose teachers had not received SIOP 
training. 
 More recently, Baecher, Farnsworth and Ediger (2014) developed a typology to examine the les-
son plans of practicum teachers to identify potential areas of difficulty in the design of language 
and content objectives. According to their findings, TESOL Master’s degree candidates had more 
difficulty designing language objectives than content objectives. The teachers also had a tendency to 
write language objectives that focused mainly on the four skills and on vocabulary and, less often, 
on grammatical structures, functions, or language learning strategies. In their more recent work, 
Baecher, Ediger and Farnsworth (in press) have developed lesson planning templates that teachers 
can use to design CBI units of study in which they develop language and content objectives. 
 Collaboration between language and content teachers is another important focus in CBI settings. 
Tan (2011) explored the beliefs of mathematics, science, and language teachers in Malaysia and how 
these beliefs influenced their pedagogical practices in CBI classrooms. The results revealed that there 
was a lack of collaboration between the language and content teachers and that their perceptions 
about their respective roles as only content teachers or only language teachers limited their students’ 
language learning opportunities. Similarly, Pawan and Ortloff (2011) investigated teacher collabora-
tion in the U.S. context, focusing specifically on barriers to collaboration such as trust and respect 
and factors that sustained collaboration such as positive involvement of principals or other adminis-
trators and formal collaborative procedures such as professional learning communities. 
 Conclusion and Further Directions 
 In the nearly four decades of the CBI movement, there has been a marked shift from the laissez-
faire attitude—just teach the content and the language will come—to very careful deliberation 
about ways to create the most effective conditions for language and content integration. This shift 
includes greater interest in the target language itself, such as the features of AL described in this 
chapter, and the varieties found in all types of school-based discourse, from classroom management 

168 • Marguerite Ann Snow
to the demands of specific topics, themes, and discipline subject matter. While work continues on 
the descriptions of AL in English, other target languages in immersion and CLIL programs should 
receive attention as well. Along with enhanced understanding of the target language and content 
demands comes the challenge of preparing teachers to undertake their roles in all their complexities. 
The important work on models designed to better prepare teachers at all educational levels for the 
interface of language and content reveal significant insights into the teaching-learning process and 
should help make the challenges more manageable for teachers. 
 As we look forward, there are other critical challenges. In the U.S. context, Menken (2013) dis-
cusses the AL and literacy expectations for secondary school “emergent bilinguals.” In particular, she 
focuses on implications for students with interrupted formal school (i.e., refugee students), long-
term English learners (those who have not met the requirements to be reclassified to Fluent English 
Proficient students), and Generation 1.5 students, who have primarily been educated in the receiv-
ing country but may not possess the full range of academic reading and writing skills needed for 
school success. Menken and others (Garcia, Sylvan & Witt, 2011) view  translanguaging pedagogies 
as a promising practice for instruction of emergent bilinguals. 1  Implementation of the Common 
Core State Standards in the U.S. also has profound implications for instruction and assessment of 
ELs at both elementary and secondary schools (Bunch, Walqui & Pearson, 2014; Kibler, Valdés & 
Walqui, 2014). In Australia, the national curriculum board has taken the position that  all teachers 
are responsible for the English language development of students whose first language or dialect 
is not Standard Australian English, making collaboration between language and content teachers 
essential (Alford & Windeyer, 2014). Research will continue as well, with ambitious research agendas 
set for CBI programs, including one-way, two-way, and indigenous language immersion education 
(Lindholm-Leary & Genesee, 2014; Lyster & Tedick, 2014), CLIL (Dalton-Puffer, in press), and other 
types of CBI models (Snow & Brinton, in press). As we move into the fifth decade of CBI, there will 
be expanded perspectives on the current challenges discussed in this chapter, and new issues will arise 
in this dynamic approach to second and foreign language teaching. 
 Note 
 1. For a complete discussion of translanguaging and the study of multilingualism in school contexts, see the special issue of 
 The Modern Language Journal (2011),  95 (3). 
 References 
 Adrián, M. M., & Mangado, M. J. G. (2015). Is CLIL instruction beneficial in terms of general proficiency and specific areas of 
grammar?  Journal of Immersion and Content-Based Language Education, 3 (1), 51–76. 
 Alford, J., & Windeyer, A. (2014). Responding to national curriculum goals for English language learners: Enhancing reading 
strategies in junior high school content areas.  Journal of Immersion and Content-Based Language Education, 2 (1), 74–95. 
 Andrews, S. (2007).  Teacher language awareness . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Anstrom, K., DiCerbo, P., Butler, F., Katz, A., Millet, J., & Rivera, C. (2010).  A review of the literature on academic English: 
Implications for K–12 English language learners . Arlington, VA: The George Washington University Center for Equity and 
Excellence in Education. 
 Baecher, L., Ediger, A., & Farnsworth, T. (in press). Designing language objectives in content-based instruction: The impor-
tance of language awareness in the planning stage. In M. A. Snow & D. M. Brinton (Eds.),  The content-based classroom: 
New perspectives on integrating language and content . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Baecher, L., Farnsworth, T., & Ediger, A. (2014). The challenge of planning language objectives in content-based ESL instruc-
tion.  Language Teaching Research, 18 (1), 118–136. 
 Bailey, A. L. (Ed.) (2007).  The language of school: Putting academic English to the test . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Bailey, A. L., Butler, F. A., LaFramenta, C., & Ong, C. (2001/4).  Towards the characterization of academic language in upper ele-
mentary science classrooms (CSE Tech. Rep. No. 621). Los Angeles: University of California, National Center for Research 
on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing (CRESST). 
www.ebook3000.com

Content-Based Language Teaching • 169
 Bailey, A. L., & Heritage, H. M. (2008).  Formative assessment for literacy, grades K-6: Building reading and academic skills across 
the curriculum . Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 
 Barwell, R. (2006). Integrating language and content: Issues from the mathematics classroom.  Linguistics and Education, 16 , 
205–218. 
 Bernier, A. (1997). The challenge of language and history terminology from the student optic. In M. A. Snow & D. M. Brinton 
(Eds.),  The content-based classroom: Perspectives on integrating language and content  (pp. 95–103). White Plains, NY: 
Longman. 
 Bigelow, M., Ranney, S., & Dahlman, A. (2006). Keeping the language focus in content-based ESL instruction through proac-
tive curriculum-planning.  TESL Canada Journal, 24 (1), 40–58. 
 Brinton, D. M., & Jensen, L. (2002). Appropriating the adjunct model: English for academic purposes at the university level. 
In J. Crandall & D. Kaufmann (Eds.),  Content-based instruction in higher education settings  (pp. 125–137). Alexandria, 
VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages. 
 Brinton, D. M., & Snow, M. A. (in press). The evolving architecture of content-based instruction. In M. A. Snow & D. M. Brin-
ton (Eds.),  The content-based classroom: New perspectives on integrating language and content . Ann Arbor, MI: University 
of Michigan Press. 
 Brinton, D. M., Snow, M. A., & Wesche, M. B. (1989).  Content-based second language instruction . New York, NY: Newbury 
House. 
 Brinton, D. M., Snow, M. A., & Wesche, M. B. (2003).  Content-based second language instruction—Michigan classics edition . 
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Bunch, G. C., Walqui, A., & Pearson, P. D. (2014). Complex text and new common standards in the United States: Pedagogical 
implications for English learners.  TESOL Quarterly, 48 (3), 533–559. 
 Cammarata, L., & Tedick, D. J. (2012). Balancing content and language in instruction: The experience of immersion teachers. 
 The Modern Language Journal, 96 , 251–269. doi:10.1111/j.1540–478.2012.01330.x 
 Carr, J., Sexton, U., & Lagunoff, R. (2006).  Making science accessible to English learners: A guidebook for teachers . San Francisco, 
CA: WestEd. 
 Center for Applied Linguistics (2011).  Directory of foreign language immersion programs . Retrieved from www.cal.org/
resources/immersion 
 Center for Applied Linguistics (2012).  Directory of two-way bilingual immersion programs . Retrieved from www.cal.org/twi/
directory 
 Chamot, A. U., & O’Malley, J. M. (1987). The cognitive academic language learning approach: A bridge to the mainstream. 
 TESOL Quarterly, 21 (2), 227–249. 
 Coyle, D., Hood, P., & Marsh, D. (2010).  Content and language integrated learning . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Crandall, J. (2012). Content-based and content and language integrated learning. In A. Burns & J. C. Richards (Eds.),  The 
Cambridge guide to pedagogy and practice in second language teaching (pp. 149–160). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
 Crawford, J. (2000).  At war with diversity: U.S. language policy in an age of anxiety . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Cummins, J. (1980). Psychological assessment of immigrant children: Logic or intuition?  Journal of Multilingual and Multi-
cultural Development, 1 , 97–111. 
 Cummins, J. (2000).  Language, power and pedagogy: Bilingual children in the crossfire . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Dalton-Puffer, C. (2007).  Content and language integrated learning (CLIL) classrooms: Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Ben-
jamins. 
 Dalton-Puffer, C. (2011). Content-and-language integrated learning: From practice to principles?  Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 31 , 182–204. doi:10.1017/S0267190511000092 
 Dalton-Puffer, C. (in press). Same but different: Content and language integrated learning and content-based instruct. In 
M. A. Snow & D. M. Brinton (Eds.),  The content-based classroom: New Perspectives on integrating language and content . 
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Dellicarpini, M., & Alonso, O. B. (2013).  Content-based instruction . Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other 
Languages. 
 de Oliveira, L. C. (2010a). Nouns in history: Packaging information, expanding explanations, and structuring reasoning.  The 
History Teacher, 43 (2), 191–203. 
 de Oliveira, L. C. (2010b). Enhancing content instruction for English language learners. In D. Sunal, C. Sunal, M. Mantero, 
& E. Wright (Eds.),  Teaching science with Hispanic ELLs in K-16 classrooms  (pp. 135–150). Charlotte, NC: Information 
Age Publishing. 
 de Oliveira, L. C., & Lan, S.-W. (2014). Writing science in an upper elementary classroom: A genre-based approach to teaching 
English language learners.  Journal of Second Language Writing, 25 (1), 23–39. 
 DiCerbo, P. A., Anstrom, K. A., Baker, L. L., & Rivera, C. (2014). A review of the literature on teaching academic English to 
English language learners.  Review of Educational Research, 84 (3), 446–482. 

170 • Marguerite Ann Snow
 Doiz, A., Lasagabaster, D., & Sierra J. M. (Eds). (2013).  English-medium instruction at universities: Global challenges . Bristol, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Dueñas, M. (2004). The whats, whys, hows and whos of content-based instruction in second/foreign language education. 
 International Journal of English Studies, 4 (1), 73–96. 
 Duff, P. A. (2014). Communicative language teaching. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. M. Brinton, & M. A. Snow (Eds.),  Teaching 
English as a second or foreign language  (4th ed., pp. 15–30). Boston, MA: National Geographic Learning Heinle Cengage. 
 Dutro, S., & Kinsella. K. (2010). English language development: Issues and implementation at grades six through twelve. 
In California Department of Education (Ed.),  Improving education for English learners: Research-based approaches 
(pp. 151–207). Sacramento, CA: California Department of Education. 
 Echevarria, J., & Short, D. (2010). Programs and practices for effective sheltered content instruction. In California Department 
of Education (Ed.),  Improving education for English learners: Research-based approaches  (pp. 251–321). Sacramento, CA: 
California Department of Education. 
 Echevarria, J., Vogt, M. E., & Short, D. (2017).  Making content comprehensible for English learners: The SIOP model  (5th ed.). 
Boston, MA: Pearson. 
 Edwards, H. P., Wesche, M., Krashen, S., Clément, R., & Kruidenier, B. (1984). Second language acquisition through subject 
matter learning: A study of sheltered psychology classes at the University of Ottawa.  Canadian Modern Language Review, 
41 (2), 268–282. 
 Fortune, T. W., Tedick, D. J., & Walker, C. L. (2008). Integrated language and content teaching: Insights from the immersion 
classroom. In T. W. Fortune & D. J. Tedick (Eds.),  Pathways to multilingualism: Evolving perspectives on immersion educa-
tion  (pp. 71–96). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Gaffield-Vile, N. (1996). Content-based second language instruction at the tertiary level.  ELT Journal, 50 (2), 108–114. 
 Garcia, O., & Sylvan, C. E. (with Witt, D.) (2011). Pedagogies and practices in multilingual classrooms: Singularities in plurali-
ties.  The Modern Language Journal, 95 (3), 385–400. 
 Genesee, F. (1987).  Learning through two languages: Studies of immersion and bilingual education . Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Gibbons, P. (2006). Steps for planning an integrated program for ESL learners in mainstream classes. In P. McKay (Ed.),  Plan-
ning and teaching creatively within a required curriculum for school-age learners  (pp. 215–233). Alexandria, VA: Teachers 
of English to Speakers of Other Languages. 
 Gibbons, P. (2014).  Scaffolding language, scaffolding learning (2nd ed.). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
 Gibbons, P. (in press). Bringing together academic language and subject learning. In M. A. Snow & D. M. Brinton (Eds.),  The 
content-based classroom: New Perspectives on integrating language and content . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan 
Press. 
 Gottlieb, M., & Ernst-Slavit, G. (2014).  Academic language in diverse classrooms: Definitions and contexts . Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Corwin. 
 Hauptman, P. C., Wesche M. B., & Ready, D. (1988). Second language acquisition through subject-matter learning: A follow-up 
study at the University of Ottawa.  Language Learning, 38 (3), 433–475. 
 Hoare, P. (2010). Content-based language teaching in China: Contextual influences on implementation.  Journal of Multilin-
gual and Multicultural Development, 31 , 69–86. 
 Hoare, P., & Kong, S. (2008). Late immersion in Hong Kong: Still stressed or making progress? In T. W. Fortune & D. J. Tedick 
(Eds.),  Pathways to multilingualism: Emerging perspectives on immersion education (pp. 242–263). Clevedon, UK: Mul-
tilingual Matters. 
 Hoare, P., Kong, S., & Bell, J. (2008). Using language objectives to integrate language and content instruction: A case history 
of planning and implementation challenges.  Language and Education, 22 (3), 187–205. 
 Johns, A. M. (2001). An interdisciplinary, interinstitutional learning communities program: Student involvement and student 
success. In I. Leki (Ed.),  Academic writing programs  (pp. 61–72). Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other 
Languages. 
 Johnson, R. K., & Swain, M. (Eds.). (1997).  Immersion education: International perspectives . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
 Kibler, A., Valdés, G., & Walqui, A. (2014). What does standards-based educational reform mean for English language learner 
populations in primary and secondary schools?  TESOL Quarterly, 48 (2), 433–453. 
 Kong, S., & Hoare, P. (2011). Cognitive content engagement in content-based language teaching.  Language Teaching Research, 
15 (3), 307–324. doi:10.1177/1362168811401152 
 Krashen, S. P. (1984). Immersion: Why it works and what it has taught us.  Language and Society, 12 , 61–64. 
 Lambert, W. E., & Tucker, G. R. (1975).  The bilingual education of children: The St. Lambert experiment . Rowley, MA: Newbury 
House. 
 Larsen-Freeman, D., & Anderson, M. (2011).  Techniques and principles in language teaching  (3rd ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Lightbown, P. (2014).  Focus on content-based language teaching . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

Content-Based Language Teaching • 171
 Lindahl, K., Baecher, L., & Tomaš, Z. (2013). Teacher language awareness in content-based activity design.  Journal of Immersion 
and Content-Based Language, 1 (2), 198–225. 
 Lindholm-Leary, K. J. (2001).  Dual language education . Avon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Lindholm-Leary, K. J., & Genesee, F. (2010). Alternative educational programs for English learners. In California Department 
of Education (Ed.),  Improving education for English learners: Research-based approaches  (pp. 323–382). Sacramento, 
CA: California Department of Education. 
 Lindholm-Leary, K. J., & Genesee, F. (2014). Student outcomes in one-way, two-way, and indigenous language immersion 
education.  Journal of Immersion and Content-Based Language Education, 2 (2), 165–180. 
 Lyster, R. (2007).  Learning and teaching through content: A counterbalanced approach . Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. 
 Lyster, R. (2011). Content-based second language teaching. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of research in second language teaching 
and learning  (Vol. 2, pp. 611–630). New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in communicative classrooms. 
 Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19 (1), 37–66. 
 Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (2007). A cognitive approach to improving immersion students’ oral language abilities: The awareness-
practice-feedback sequence. In R. M. DeKeyser (Ed.),  Practice in second language: Perspectives from applied linguistics and 
cognitive psychology (pp. 141–169). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Lyster, R., & Tedick, D. J. (2014). Research perspectives on immersion pedagogy: Looking back and looking forward.  Journal 
of Immersion and Content-Based Language Education, 2 (2), 210–224. 
 Marsh, D., & Frigols Martín, M. J. (2013). Content and language integrated learning. In C. Chapelle (Ed.),  The encyclopedia of 
applied linguistics (pp. 1–10). Malden, MA: Wiley- Blackwell. doi:10.1002/9781405198431.wbeal0190 
 Menken, K. (2013). Emergent bilingual students in secondary school: Along the academic language and literacy continuum. 
 Language Teaching, 46 (4), 438–476. doi:10.1017/S0261444813000281 
 Met, M. (1999, January). Content-based instruction: Defining terms, making decisions.  NFLC reports . Washington, DC: The 
National Foreign Language Center. 
 Mohan. B. A. (1986).  Language and content . Reading, MA: Addison Wesley. 
 Mohan, B. A., & Slater, T. (2006). Examining the theory/practice relation in a high school science register: A functional lin-
guistic approach.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 5 (4), 302–316. 
 Murphy J., & Stoller, F. L. (2001). Sustained-content language teaching: An emerging definition.  TESOL Journal, 10 (2/3), 3–5. 
 Pawan, F., & Ortloff, J. H. (2011). Sustaining collaboration: English-as-a-second-language, and content teachers.  Teaching and 
Teacher Education, 27 , 463–471. 
 Pierce, J. (2008). Weaving meaning into ESOL curriculum using thematic matrices. In D. Hayes & J. Sharkey (Eds.),  Revitaliz-
ing a curriculum for school-age learners  (pp. 53–75). Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages. 
 Reynolds, K. M. (2015).  Approaches to inclusive English classrooms: A teacher’s handbook for content-based instruction . Bristol, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Rhodes, N. C. (2014). Elementary foreign language teaching: Lessons learned over three decades (1980–2010).  Foreign Lan-
guage Annals, 47 (1), 115–133. 
 Richards, J. C., & Rodgers, T. S. (2014).  Approaches and methods in language teaching  (3rd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Roessingh, H., & Kover, P. (2002). Working with younger-arriving ESL learners in high school English: Never too late to 
reclaim potential.  TESOL Canada Journal, 19 (2), 1–19. 
 Saunders, W., & Goldenberg, C. (2010). Research to guide English language development instruction. In California Depart-
ment of Education (Ed.),  Improving education for English learners: Research-based approaches  (pp. 21–81). Sacramento, 
CA: California Department of Education. 
 Scarcella, R. (2008). Academic language: Clarifying terms . AccELLerate! The Quarterly Newsletter of the National Clearinghouse 
for English Language Acquisition, 1 (1), 5–6. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J. (2004).  The language of schooling: A functional linguistics perspective . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J., & de Oliveira, L. C. (2006). An integrated language and content approach for history teachers.  Journal of 
English for Academic Purposes, 5 (4), 254–268. 
 Short, D. J. (2002). Language learning in sheltered social studies classes.  TESOL Journal, 11 (1), 18–24. 
 Short, D. J., Fidelman, C. G., & Louguit, M. (2012). Developing academic language in English language learners through shel-
tered instruction.  TESOL Quarterly, 46 (2), 334–361. 
 Short, D. J., & Fitzsimmons, S. (2007).  Double the work: Challenges and solutions to acquiring language and academic literacy 
for adolescent English language learners—A report to Carnegie Corporation of New York . Washington, DC: Alliance for 
Excellent Education. 
 Snow, M. A. (1997). Teaching academic literacy: Discipline faculty take responsibility. In M. A. Snow & D. M. Brinton (Eds.), 
 The content-based classroom: Perspectives on integrating language and content  (pp. 290–304). White Plains, NY: Longman. 

172 • Marguerite Ann Snow
 Snow, M. A. (2005). A model of academic literacy for integrated language and content instruction. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Hand-
book of research in second language teaching and learning (pp. 693–712). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Snow, M. A. (2013). Content-based language instruction and content and language integrated learning. In C. Chapelle (Ed.), 
 The encyclopedia of applied linguistics (pp. 693–712). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
 Snow, M. A. (2014). Content-based and immersion models of second/foreign language teaching. In M. Celce-Murcia, 
D. M. Brinton & M. A. Snow (Eds.),  Teaching English as a second or foreign language  (4th ed., pp. 438–454). Boston, 
MA: National Geographic Learning Heinle Cengage. 
 Snow, M. A., & Brinton, D. M. (Eds.) (in press).  The content-based classroom: New perspectives on integrating language and 
content . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Snow, M. A., & Kamhi-Stein, L. D. (2002). Teaching and learning academic literacy through Project LEAP. In J. Crandall & 
D. Kaufman (Eds.),  Content-based instruction in higher education settings  (pp. 169–181). Alexandria, VA: Teachers of 
English to Speakers of Other Languages. 
 Snow, M. A., & Katz, A. (2010). English language development: Foundations and implementation in kindergarten through 
grade five. In California Department of Education (Ed.),  Improving education for English learners: Research-based 
approaches (pp. 83–148). Sacramento, CA: California Department of Education. 
 Snow, M. A., Met, M., & Genesee, F. (1989). A conceptual framework for the integration of language and content in second/
foreign language instruction.  TESOL Quarterly, 23 (2), 201–217. 
 Srole, C. (1997). Pedagogical responses from content faculty: Teaching content and language in history. In M. A. Snow & 
D. M. Brinton (Eds.),  The content-based classroom: Perspectives on integrating language and content  (pp. 104–116). White 
Plains, NY: Longman. 
 Stoller, F. L. (2008). Content-based instruction. In N. Van Deusen-Scholl & N. H. Hornberger (Eds.),  Encyclopedia of language 
and education (2nd ed., Vol. 4, pp. 59–70). New York, NY: Springer. 
 Stoller, F. L., & Grabe, W. (1997). A six T’s approach to content-based instruction. In M. A. Snow & D. M. Brinton (Eds.), 
 The content-based classroom: Perspectives on integrating language and content (pp. 78–94). White Plains, NY: Longman. 
 Stoller, F. L., & Grabe, W. (in press). Building coherence into the content-based curriculum: 6 Ts revisited. In M. A. Snow & 
D. M. Brinton (Eds.),  The content-based classroom: New perspectives on integrating language and content . Ann Arbor, MI: 
University of Michigan Press. 
 Strong, G. (2007). Curriculum design: Furniture for a college EFL program. In M. Carroll (Ed.),  Developing a new curriculum 
for adult learners  (pp. 153–176). Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages. 
 Swain, M. (1988). Manipulating and complementing content teaching to maximize second language learning.  TESL Canada 
Journal ,  6 (1), 68–83. 
 Tan, M. (2011). Mathematics and science teachers’ beliefs and practices regarding the teaching of language in content learning. 
 Language Teaching Research, 15 (3), 325–342. doi:10.1177/1362168811401153 
 Tedick, D. J., Christian, D., & Fortune, T. W. (Eds.) (2011).  Immersion education: Practices, policies, possibilities . Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
 U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development, Policy and Program Studies Service 
(2012).  Language instruction educational programs (LIEPS): A review of the foundational literature . Retrieved from http://
www.ed.gov/about/office/list/opepd/ppss/reports.html 
 van Wyk, A. (2014). English-medium education in a multilingual setting: A case in South Africa.  IRAL, 52 (2), 205–220. 
 Wegrzecka-Kowalewski, E. (1997). Content-based instruction: Is it possible in high school? In M. A. Snow & D. M. Brinton 
(Eds.),  The content-based classroom: Perspectives on integrating language and content  (pp. 319–323). White Plains, 
NY: Longman. 
 Wesche, M. B. (2010). Content-based second language instruction. In R. B. Kaplan (Ed.),  Oxford handbook of applied linguistics 
(2nd ed., pp. 275–293). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 Wong Fillmore, L., & Fillmore, C. (2012).  What does text complexity mean for English learners and language minority students? 
Paper presented at the Understanding Language Conference, Stanford, CA. Retrieved from http://ell.stanford.edu/sites/
default/files/pdf/academic-papers/06-LWF%20CJF%20Text%20Complexity%20FINAL_0.pdf 
 Zwiers. J. (2008).  Building academic language: Essential practices for content classrooms, grades 5–12 . San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
www.ebook3000.com

173
 13 
 Research in Corpora in 
Language Teaching and Learning 
 Elaine Vaughan and Michael McCarthy 
 Introduction 
 A corpus (plural: corpora) is simply a large collection of texts, typically nowadays stored on a com-
puter. The idea of understanding individual texts or any part of a text by assembling large quantities 
of texts that have something in common long predates modern computerized corpora (for a brief 
history, see McCarthy & O’Keeffe 2010: 3–5). The use of the word  corpus  to refer to a body of texts 
(e.g. all the works of one author) goes back to at least the early 18th century, and for many centuries 
before that biblical scholars treated the Bible as a corpus, seeking out all instances of particular words 
and bringing them together in manually produced concordances. Equally, scholars of literature have 
long sought to understand an author’s mindset or ‘fingerprint’ by examining his or her work as a 
body. And that is what we still do when we use corpora in language teaching: we seek evidence as to 
how the language is used and how it is learnt by looking at lots of texts assembled together. This way 
of approaching language is considered by corpus linguists to be a more reliable yardstick than look-
ing at any single text or expression in a text, or else putting aside the textual evidence and looking 
inwardly, the process of introspection, which some linguists believe to be equally valid. 
 Discussion of the relationship between corpora, corpus research and second language pedagogy 
is in some ways well-trodden ground; in a 2011 overview, McEnery and Xiao identify at least 25 
authored or edited volumes with the pedagogical applications of language corpora more or less 
loosely as their theme (McEnery & Xiao 2011). In 1996, Jan Svartvik, a key figure in the establishment 
of corpus linguistics as a disciplinary paradigm with a distinctive voice, claimed that corpora were 
becoming ‘mainstream’, no longer the province of the ‘boffin’ (as they had been perceived hitherto). 
The relatively recent appearance of handbooks specific to the domain of corpus linguistics reflects 
its growing maturity as a diverse but cohesive domain of research (O’Keeffe & McCarthy 2010; Biber & 
Reppen 2015). 
 Rundell and Stock (1992) used the memorable phrase the “corpus revolution” to refer to the 
impact that corpora had had—and still have—on lexicography and lexicology. In contrast, the 
impact of corpus linguistics on second language teaching and learning has been more gradual. In 
what follows, we trace the impact that access to corpora has had on key areas such as reference works 
and classroom materials. We look at ways in which corpus research has challenged and supported the 
edifices of second language teaching and learning, and we give an overall flavor of some of the ways 
in which research into various types of corpora has changed the way we look at language. 

174 • Elaine Vaughan and Michael McCarthy
 Pioneers: Corpora and Reference Books for Language Learners 
 Learners’ Dictionaries 
 The first major effect computerized corpora had on language teaching was the publication of corpus-
informed dictionaries for learners. Traditionally, dictionaries had been written based on time-
consuming manual annotation of how words were used in the works of great writers and with what 
meanings. Using a computer had four major effects on this process: (1) the amount of data to be 
examined could be increased to a scale previously unimagined and could include thousands of 
books, newspapers, magazines, official documents, letters, transcripts of speech, and, more recently, 
the vast textual resources of the world wide web; (2) the massive task of producing a comprehensive 
dictionary of a language could be sped up to an extent never achieved before; (3) dictionaries could 
be better targeted towards groups of users with specific needs; and (4) the evidence of usage pre-
sented by the computer often challenged conventional knowledge and ideas about language and the 
way linguists understood the process of meaning-making. 
 Point 4 is particularly important. For instance, a computer storing millions of words of English 
texts is able very quickly to examine its data and produce a frequency list of all the words in the 
corpus ranging from the most frequent to the rare and obscure, something that is impossible to 
achieve purely through introspection. Such information is invaluable in the design of dictionaries 
for learners and teaching materials. Knowing what the most frequent words of a language are and 
what their most frequent meanings are enables lexicographers to produce dictionaries targeted 
at learners at different levels of proficiency. For an elementary learner of English who wants to 
progress to a higher level, for example, a dictionary the size of the massive  Oxford English Diction-
ary  might be a less than practical purchase, whereas one that covers the 5,000–10,000 or so most 
frequent words could be very useful indeed, for example, the  Collins COBUILD Essential English 
Dictionary  (COBUILD 2010), aimed at learners approximately up to the B1 (lower intermedi-
ate) level of the Common European Framework of References for Languages (CEFR). COBUILD 
dictionaries were pioneers in the field of corpus-based dictionaries, thanks to the work of John 
Sinclair and his team at the University of Birmingham, UK, but other major publishers soon fol-
lowed suit; there now exists a popular range of corpus-based dictionaries for learners of English 
at different levels. 
 Crucially, and also in relation to point 4, pioneers in the field of corpus-based dictionaries, such 
as Sinclair and his associates, were struck by the way computer analysis revealed very heavy, regular 
patterning in the use of English (Sinclair 1991). For example, a concordance of the word form  see 
in the five-million-word CANCODE corpus of everyday spoken English (see McCarthy 1998 for 
details of the corpus) yields some 10,800 lines of examples, far too many for one human individual 
to manually find and examine. However, corpus software quickly reveals a visual and statistically 
supported pattern: around 4,500 of the concordance lines (45%) are accounted for by either  You 
see  or  I see , which occur as frequent discourse markers in conversation.  You see  and  I see , along with 
thousands of other strings of two or more words in both speaking and writing, have become frozen 
or fossilized into routine formulae, also referred to as chunks, lexical bundles, clusters or phrasal/
fixed expressions (Carter & McCarthy 2002; Biber et al. 2004; O’Keeffe et al. 2007; Martinez & 
Schmitt 2012). Many of these chunks proved to be as frequent as or even more frequent than many 
common, everyday single words (for a discussion, see Shin & Nation 2008). In this respect, the 
by-products of corpus analysis for dictionary making were to have a profound impact on thinking 
about what and how to teach. 
 However, it was not just chunks of the pragmatic/discoursal kind that impacted on reference 
works; soon, specialized dictionaries of phrasal verbs and idioms based on corpus evidence were 
made available for learners (e.g. the  Cambridge International Dictionary of Phrasal Verbs  of 1997 and 
www.ebook3000.com

Research in Language Teaching and Learning • 175
its partner the  Cambridge International Dictionary of Idioms  of 1998). Equally, dictionary research 
had revealed the ubiquity of collocations (combinations of words of varying degrees of fossiliza-
tion). For example, the adverb  strictly , although common in the pragmatic chunk  strictly speaking , 
also shows a very strong tendency in the written segment of the British National Corpus (BNC) 1 to 
collocate with adjectives such as  controlled, limited, necessary, confidential  and  forbidden , suggesting 
that it commonly functions as an intensifier with a preference for contexts of restriction and author-
ity. Knowing what the typical collocations are for thousands of words is not necessarily something 
that native speakers or non-native expert users of a language can access through intuition and intro-
spection, and corpus-based dictionaries of collocations for learners have come to the rescue (e.g. 
the  Oxford Collocations Dictionary for Students of English of 2002 and the  Macmillan Collocations 
Dictionary  of 2010). More recent corpus research into collocation has confirmed its centrality in 
meaning-making (notably Cheng et al. 2009). 
 Dictionaries for learners have come of age, and it would now seem odd for any major publisher 
to trumpet a learner’s dictionary that was  not  corpus-based, such is the expectation that has built 
over the last 30 years. 
 Grammar Reference Works 
 As with dictionaries, the evidence of corpora forced a rethink of what aspects of grammar should 
be taught and how. Once again, the COBUILD team occupied the vanguard of publishing corpus-
based grammar reference for learners (COBUILD 1990). Sinclair, in his introduction to the first 
COBUILD grammar, was clear in his commitment to the use of natural examples to illustrate 
grammar in functional contexts, saying: “It is sad that many teachers seem doomed to work with 
invented material”, and, in a clear rejection of introspection, “The mind plays tricks, and, spe-
cially, is unreliable when one is thinking about very short utterances, without a clear context to 
support them” (Sinclair 1990: xi). For Sinclair, the only proper source for understanding gram-
mar was the corpus. 
 The extent to which research into corpora brought into relief distinctions between spoken and 
written grammars of various types (so that we can now talk about grammars in the plural and do 
not necessarily mean ‘grammar reference books’) has been one of the major contributions of corpus 
research. Traditional, sentence-based grammar (mostly created in an era before easy voice recording 
was possible) relied heavily on written evidence, but spoken corpora revealed a number of gram-
matical features that distinguished speaking from writing in important ways. In their major refer-
ence grammar, Biber et al. (1999) observed significant differences between the grammar of, on the 
one hand, written registers (fiction writing, news writing and academic writing) and, on the other, 
conversation. Earlier, McCarthy and Carter (1995) had argued for greater attention to spoken gram-
mar in language pedagogy. Spoken corpora showed that (a) there were often major differences in the 
frequency of grammatical items and structures between writing and speaking (especially everyday 
conversation); (b) a good deal of spoken ‘grammar’ could be subsumed within fossilized chunks; and 
(c) some common features of conversational grammar in corpora had gone unnoticed and had never 
found their way into materials or the classroom. 
 The steady transformation of grammar reference books has mirrored that of dictionaries, with the 
major language publishers putting out titles that boast corpus-informed content, for example, Biber 
et al. (2002), Swan (2005), Carter and McCarthy (2006), Parrott (2010), Carter et al. (2011a, 2011b). 
In his introduction to the  Collins-COBUILD English Grammar , Sinclair optimistically concluded: 
“in a few years’ time teachers will look back and wonder how they coped with the lifeless examples 
they used to work with” (Sinclair 1990). The popularity and widespread acceptance of corpus-based 
grammar reference books suggest he was right. 

176 • Elaine Vaughan and Michael McCarthy
 Teaching and Learning Materials 
 Vocabulary and Grammar Learning 
 An important spin-off from the lexicographical research of the 1980s and 1990s was the move 
towards bringing corpus information into learners’ materials. Lexical research into corpora had 
thrown up information revealing the phrasal nature of large swathes of the vocabulary of English, 
including fossilized chunks, phrasal verbs and idioms, and collocations. The 1990s and 2000s were 
to see corpus-informed materials covering all of these aspects. The special nature of some of these 
materials was that they also included information based on research into learner corpora. The evi-
dence of large corpora such as the Cambridge Learner Corpus (http://languageresearch.cambridge.
org/index.php/cambridge-english-corpus, hereafter CLC) has been used in a variety of ways that 
materials writers have benefitted and continue to benefit from. 
 Learner corpora can provide both ‘negative’ and ‘positive’ evidence of how learners use the target 
language. If the corpus is error-coded (i.e. what raters perceive to be errors of usage are coded in some 
way in the data to make them searchable), recurring problems can be spotted and addressed in the 
materials. Moreover, if the data is also linked to a database containing information about the learners 
(e.g. age, gender, first language, CEFR level, etc.), then more specifically targeted content concerning 
errors, such as errors common to a particular first-language user group or language family, or com-
mon at a particular proficiency level can be incorporated into the material. For example, McCarthy 
and O’Dell (2012: 172–173), based on their research into the error-coded CLC, select for teaching 
and practice a range of uncountable nouns (e.g.  information, advice, transport, knowledge ), which 
seem to remain stubbornly problematic even at B2 and advanced levels of the CEFR. 
 While error warnings might seem a negative way of using learner corpora information (i.e. what 
a learner should  not  do), much positive information has been exploited, too. The English Profile 
project (see http://www.englishprofile.org/), a multi-disciplinary research program into how learners 
actually use the target language at the different levels of proficiency described in the CEFR, has led to 
the creation of the  English Vocabulary Profile , a free online resource based on corpus research, where 
teachers and learners can see what vocabulary typical, internationally profiled learners have command 
of at any particular CEFR level (for further information, see http://www.englishprofile.org/wordlists). 
This database has become a major source of information for materials writers, with more published 
materials based on it becoming available. There now exist a large number of learner corpora, not just 
for English, which will undoubtedly influence and contribute to the creation of corpus-informed 
vocabulary materials over the coming years. At the time of writing, the Université catholique de Lou-
vain’s Centre for English Corpus Linguistics lists more than 150 learner corpora of various types on its 
 Learner Corpora around the World  webpage (http://www.uclouvain.be/en-cecl-lcworld.html). 
 The COBUILD project, as before, led the way with various books exploiting general and spe-
cialized vocabulary from corpora (e.g. Goodale 1995; Maskull 1995, 1996, 1997), and continues 
to provide vocabulary materials for all levels of the CEFR (COBUILD 2013a). Materials using 
corpus data include teaching and practice books on idioms, phrasal verbs, collocations, and spe-
cialized areas such as business vocabulary and academic vocabulary (Maskull 2010; McCarthy & 
O’Dell 2016). The COBUILD  Key Words  series (COBUILD 2013b) gives corpus-based examples 
and practice in vocabulary on a range of special subjects such as accounting, hospitality, chemical 
engineering, etc. 
 One notable feature of corpus-informed vocabulary materials is the growing focus on chunks as 
a central aspect of vocabulary learning. Traditionally, vocabulary learning was dominated by single 
words, often in lists and often in the form of words in the L2 with a translation into the learner’s L1; 
only phrasal verbs and colorful idioms provided variation. However, in recent years, more attention 
has been paid in materials to the forms and functions of common chunks extracted from corpora. 
www.ebook3000.com

Research in Language Teaching and Learning • 177
 In the case of grammar teaching and learning, at the time of writing, less is available in terms of 
corpus-informed material than for vocabulary, though this is changing rapidly. Grammar materials 
reflect the corpus insights incorporated into grammar reference works, principally the distinction 
between spoken and written grammar, along with a move towards blurring the distinction between 
grammar and lexis. Hughes and McCarthy (1998) argued for greater attention to spoken contexts 
for the understanding of grammatical meanings and functions in teaching (e.g. the uses of the past 
perfect in conversation for providing background information), while McCarthy and Carter (2001) 
offer 10 criteria for establishing a spoken grammar in pedagogical contexts, based on corpus research. 
 Spoken grammar materials include features such as situational ellipsis, that is to say, the non-
occurrence of items often taught as obligatory with regard to writing. So the golden rules of English 
finite clauses always requiring subject pronouns and requiring auxiliary or modal verbs in questions 
are routinely absent in banal, everyday utterances such as “Finished yet?”, “Sorry, don’t know” and 
“You still got that book I lent you?”. Such natural and fully grammatical utterances present a two-
pronged dilemma for teachers. On the one hand, stakeholders in the language teaching enterprise 
(teachers and students, curriculum bosses, publishers, parents, politicians) often perceive such usage 
as impoverished or downright wrong (see Hughes 2010). On the other hand, features like situational 
ellipsis are typically context-embedded and not amenable to out-of-context, sentence-based gram-
mar teaching, requiring considerable skill on the part of material writers and/or teachers in creating 
appropriate situations for their non-forced use in the classroom or self-study exercises. Despite this, 
practical guidelines have been offered (e.g. Hilliard 2014), and spoken grammar materials have met 
with a positive response from teachers and learners (Carter & McCarthy 1997; Carter et al. 2000; 
Carter et al. 2011a; Paterson et al. 2012). 
 With regard to the grammar-lexis distinction and the way corpus evidence challenges the division, 
considerable attention has been paid to the implications for language teaching of pattern grammar 
(Hunston & Francis 2000; Willis 2003) and the lexical approach (Willis 1990; Lewis 1997). In these 
paradigms, the emphasis is on the patterned relationship between grammatical configurations and 
the lexical items they regularly co-occur with. For example, in the North American COCA corpus, 
the English subjunctive form (where all persons utilize the base form of the verb without inflexion, 
as in “I insist that she  be  allowed to attend”) is not a free-floating form but seems strongly wedded 
to contexts where it is governed by lexical verbs such as  request, demand, require, suggest, urge, direct, 
insist  (i.e. verbs related to directive or persuasive speech acts). The suggestion for pedagogical gram-
mar is that it would be more helpful to learners, when teaching structures, to list at the same time, the 
lexical verbs most frequently to be found in their environments. Thornbury (2005) is an extension 
of this principle, working around the lexico-grammar of the most frequent words in English. These 
approaches thus blur the distinction between the ‘grammar’ lesson and the ‘reading and vocabulary’ 
lesson, which was often the hallmark of syllabi and class timetables. The potential of evidence from 
corpora to challenge intuited or cherished notions of ‘grammar’ or ‘correct’ and ‘incorrect’ usage can 
be said to have been both instructive and disruptive where second language teaching and learning 
is concerned. 
 General Course Books and Skills Teaching 
 An interesting direction in the pedagogical research has been to critique the nature of second lan-
guage learning materials, such as textbooks, and how representative they are of the sort of language 
that learners will encounter outside of the classroom, based on corpus evidence. Mindt (1996) sug-
gested that, based on his analysis of English language textbooks designed for the German market, 
there was “a kind of School English which does not seem to exist outside the language classroom” 
(p. 232). Learners exposed to such material were (in his view) ill-equipped to handle authentic 

178 • Elaine Vaughan and Michael McCarthy
interactions with ‘native’ [sic] speakers (Mindt 1996). Meanwhile, Römer (2004, 2005), examines the 
disparity between input in textbooks and the samples of naturally occurring use in corpora, such as 
the use of modal verbs and progressives; Conrad (2004) examines the authentic use of the linking 
adverbial  though ; and Rühlemann (2009) focuses on an area of language—the reporting of direct 
speech—where the incongruity between everyday use and pedagogical grammar are missing an 
essential element. Rühlemann (2009: 429) notes the concentration in pedagogical materials on indi-
rect reporting of speech typical primarily of written discourse, involving backshift, rather than the 
more overwhelmingly common, narratized versions typical of naturally occurring spoken language 
(see also McCarthy 1998: ch. 8). This disparity has been addressed in some more recent textbooks 
and is discussed in depth by McCarten (2010). 
 Perhaps the biggest challenge of the corpus revolution has been the exploitation of corpus informa-
tion beyond the more formal aspects of language encoded in the grammar and vocabulary. Already in 
the 1990s and early 2000s, applied linguists were advocating more discourse- and pragmatics-based 
approaches to language teaching, including, in addition to contextual and discoursal approaches 
to grammar, discourse-level teaching of speaking and writing skills (Celce-Murcia 1991; McCarthy 
1991, 1998; Hinkel 1997a, b, 2002; Celce-Murcia & Olshtain 2001). However, considerable obstacles 
faced those interested in exploiting corpora and in mediating corpus information to create practical, 
usable and appropriate teaching materials for the four skills, especially speaking. The earliest corpus-
informed general course books once again came out of the COBUILD project (Willis & Willis 1988/ 
1989). The COBUILD course was ahead of its time in several ways. Not only did it adopt a task-based 
approach (new enough in its day) and an emphasis on oral performance, but it also incorporated 
the lexical approach and graded its language content according to the frequency of the core vocabu-
lary of English as measured by the COBUILD corpus (e.g.  Part 1  focused on the first 700 most fre-
quent words,  Part 2  extended coverage to the next 850 words, and so on). This corpus-led approach 
resulted in what was perhaps an unfamiliar set of tools for many language teachers steeped in more 
conventional materials—in many parts of the world, the notional-functional and communicative 
approaches were still struggling to make an impact—and the course was not without its critics for the 
demands it placed on its users (e.g. Fillips McCreary 1991). It was to be more than a decade later that 
authors and publishers took up again the gauntlet of corpus-informed general courses. McCarthy et 
al. (2005–6, 2012–14) was an attempt to put into a more familiar package for teachers and learners (in 
terms of design, activity types, etc.) corpus-derived content which included practice with pragmatic 
markers, lexical chunks, rhetorical strategies in writing, interpersonal speaking strategies, along with 
information about corpus frequency of items in graphic displays. The whole syllabus, not just word 
lists, was corpus-informed, based on corpora compiled with the end users in mind rather than simply 
exploiting existing corpora gathered for purposes such as dictionary writing. 
 Corpora and L2 Pragmatics 
 Spoken corpora are an invaluable resource for studying pragmatic phenomena in interaction 
(Vaughan & Clancy 2013), given the recent focus of pragmatic research on ‘authentic’ or naturally 
occurring spoken language. Many of the linguistic resources whose patterns spoken corpus research 
has uncovered are characterised by their contribution to the interpersonal functioning and structural 
flow of conversation (see Clancy & McCarthy 2015). Where second language teaching and learning 
is concerned at least, there exists a twinned postulation of what have been termed  pragmalinguis-
tic and  sociopragmatic knowledge (e.g. Thomas 1983). These refer to, in the first place, knowledge 
of the conventional linguistic formulations by which an act may be accomplished (e.g. a greeting 
or a compliment) and awareness that a number of different options for its accomplishment may 
exist (pragmalinguistic knowledge). This implies another type of competence for learners: control 
www.ebook3000.com

Research in Language Teaching and Learning • 179
of appropriate pragmalinguistic choices, or sociopragmatic knowledge. From a research perspective, 
there are many different ways to get at what learners know in this regard and what they need to know. 
Pragmatic competence as a critical aspect of second language use has been a strong focus of research 
for quite some time. A combination of attention to what has been called  interlanguage pragmatics , or 
how second language speakers use and acquire L2 pragmatics (see Blum-Kulka & Kasper 1993), and 
exploitation of language corpora of various types has been advanced as a way of complementing or 
augmenting conventional modes of investigation. For example, specific pragmatic phenomena such 
as speech acts have often been studied using discourse completion tasks (DCTs). This work has been 
usefully supplemented by comparative studies of speech act realizations, such as Golato’s (2003) 
research on compliments and Schauer and Adolphs’ (2006) focus on expressions of gratitude, where 
the evidence of DCTs is compared with evidence from corpora of naturally occurring language. 
 In a more general sense, access to language corpora has meant that varieties of language can be 
described in systematic ways. One of the ways in which different spoken varieties of pluricentric 
languages like English can tend to make their uniqueness visible is in ‘small’ items, such as pragmatic 
markers—items such as  well ,  you know ,  sort of  and  kind of , amongst other things. It has been noted 
that items such as these are perceived as connected to fluency (see Hasselgren 2002; McCarthy 2010). 
Patterns of fossilization of pragmatic markers in learner language have been discussed by Romero-
Trillo (2002), as have distinctive patterns of use in the speech of second language speakers of English 
(e.g. Fung & Carter 2007; Gilquin 2008) and developmental aspects of their acquisition (e.g. Polat 
2011). Other pragmatic features of “conversational grammar” (Rühlemann 2007), such as vague 
language forms and politeness and hedging strategies, have suggested new directions for pedagogy, 
especially in the teaching of speaking. McCarthy (2010) highlights the relationship between per-
ceptions of fluency and how fluency is interactively constructed via aspects of naturally occurring 
language such as turn-taking, using corpus evidence. Thus, corpora would seem to have much to 
contribute to pragmatics and the study of learner pragmatic competence. However, much remains 
to be achieved in the general field of learner interlanguage and what contributions corpus linguistics 
might make to it. 
 Learner Corpora and Second Language Acquisition (SLA) 
 Research in mainstream SLA has traditionally relied on learner language data elicited in experi-
mental conditions and less so on natural language data, which may explain what might appear on 
the surface to be a rather surprising lack of direct interaction between SLA and corpus linguistics. 
Corpus research has given birth to hybrid disciplines such as corpus-based stylistics, semantics, prag-
matics and sociolinguistics (cf. McEnery & Wilson 1996 and the chapters in O’Keeffe & McCarthy 
2010) and, as we have shown, has generated a critical mass of applications to language pedagogy. 
Nonetheless, Granger has noted a tendency for researchers in the fields of SLA and foreign lan-
guage teaching to maintain “a certain distance” (2009:13). While there had long been an interest 
in how second and foreign languages are and should be learned (see some early examples cited in 
Carter & McCarthy 2015), the first empirical studies in SLA date from the 1960s (Ellis & Shintani 
2014)—around the time, in fact, when the first computer corpora were being compiled. Although 
both enterprises started to crystallize around the same time, practical and theoretical interactions 
between the two are not as well developed. 
 However, some early voices advocated the application of corpus-linguistic approaches in SLA, for 
example, the idea of applying corpus-based L1 acquisition techniques to L2 acquisition (Rutherford 
& Thomas 2001), while Granger has consistently suggested that learner corpus research may provide 
a “bridge between the two disciplines” (2009: 13). Myles (2015) also highlights the importance of a 
bidirectional relationship between the two, advocating wider use of learner corpora in SLA research, 

180 • Elaine Vaughan and Michael McCarthy
as well as learner corpora to be designed and analysed with SLA theory in mind. One small irony 
is that SLA researchers often collect large amounts of elicited data from student activities such as 
paired-tasks, role-plays or discourse completion tasks (DCTs), data which are, in effect, learner cor-
pora, albeit small and limited in scope (Myles 2005), but which are typically the object of analysis 
using statistical software packages (sometimes accompanied by qualitative analysis) rather than cor-
pus-linguistic tools. Golato (2003) offers an interesting discussion of how different data elicitation 
techniques, including naturalistic data, offer distinct resources for SLA researchers, but it is still clear 
that corpus-analytical approaches live somewhat in the shadow of statistics-based empirical studies. 
 Many of the research questions central to SLA are amenable to corpus-based research, and there 
are potentially a number of  post facto connections that could be made among studies and findings 
that emerged while corpora and SLA research were developing along parallel lines. For example, Ellis 
and Shintani (2014) connect Sinclair’s (1991: 110) corpus-derived  idiom principle , or the observa-
tion that language users have available to them “a large number of semi-preconstructed phrases that 
constitute single choices, even though they might appear to be analyzable into segments” with Pawley 
and Syder’s (1983) claim that second language learners’ linguistic competence could be characterized 
as consisting of “a store of familiar collocations” (p. 192) or “memorized chunks” (Ellis & Shintani 
2014: 56; see also McCarthy 2010). 
 A considerable boost to cross-fertilization between corpus linguistics and SLA has come from 
the English Profile project, mentioned above. The English Profile sets out to create profiles of typi-
cal learners at each level of the CEFR, based on learner corpora gathered world-wide. Needless to 
say, noting every individual characteristic of every one of the thousands of learners represented in 
the learner corpora available to the project would be both interminable and impractical, which has 
prompted researchers instead to develop the notion of  criterial features . These are core features of 
acquisition which emerge and are controlled by most or all learners at any given level, offering a sort 
of identikit picture of the interlanguage of the typical learner at each level. Hawkins and Buttery 
(2010) give the examples of mastery of ditransitive verbs (e.g.  She gave him a present ), which are 
criterial for learners at CEFR level B1 and upwards, while object + complement structures (e.g.  He 
made everyone angry ) are criterial for B2 and upwards—‘upwards’ meaning that once the feature is 
controlled at any given level, it remains actively present in all the levels above that level. Murakami 
and Alexopoulou (2015), also researchers on the English Profile project, have used learner corpora to 
great effect to challenge the long-standing SLA doctrine of a universal order of acquisition of gram-
matical morphemes, suggesting instead, on the basis of their corpus, that L1 influence is a decisive 
factor in morpheme acquisition and accuracy. The SLA-oriented research within the English Profile 
both shows how corpora can be used to address classic SLA issues and also how corpora might sup-
port or challenge SLA findings based on other types of data and analysis. 
 Corpora, Varieties and Variation 
 A number of studies give an overview of different types of corpora and exemplars of freely or com-
mercially available corpora (for different types, see Hunston 2002: 14–16; for types and exemplars, 
see Vaughan & O’Keeffe 2015). One other issue relevant for modelling second language pedagogy 
is the nature of the language targeted during corpus compilation. This is particularly so in the 
case of English, with its plurality of varieties in common currency. This goes beyond our discus-
sion of specialized corpora: specialized corpora have been compiled to flesh out descriptions of 
particular varieties, but of equal significance is broadening the scope of what are considered to be 
legitimate  models  of English, a challenge greatly relevant to the practice of second language peda-
gogy. We refer to the concept of World Englishes, and Kachru’s (1985) model of describing variet-
ies of English in terms of Inner, Outer and Expanding concentric circles. The Inner Circle refers 
www.ebook3000.com

Research in Language Teaching and Learning • 181
to countries where English is the primary native language, such as the UK or Australia; the Outer 
Circle describes former colonies of these Inner Circle countries, where English is used as an official 
or second language; and the Expanding Circle refers to countries where English is not used as a 
first or second language but is used as a lingua franca, for business, for example. There is much to 
problematize within these definitions; for example, the multiplicity of native varieties would justify 
referring to native English es  (cf. Gilquin 2015), and there are obviously complex issues of contact 
history, status and prestige for some of what Kachru classes as Inner Circle varieties (Irish English is 
a good example here). There is also the question of whether English as a lingua franca is properly a 
variety or simply a set of functional strategies adopted for immediate communicative purposes and 
as varied as the number of situations in which lingua franca communications occur (for a discus-
sion, see Seidlhofer 2001). 
 In order to capture the variety of native Englishes for comparative purposes, projects such as the 
International Corpus of English (ICE) developed. Starting in 1990, the ICE corpora have been built 
according to a common design, making them amenable for direct comparison. There are currently 
14 varieties of English represented in ICE (http://ice-corpora.net/ICE/INDEX.HTM). With regard 
to non-native user corpora (as distinct from learner corpora), at the time of this writing, corpora 
such as the VOICE corpus (see https://www.univie.ac.at/voice/page/index.php) and the ELFA corpus 
(a corpus of spoken academic English in lingua franca situations: see http://www.helsinki.fi/englanti/
elfa/elfacorpus.html) are providing important additions to the potential for modelling English in 
international pedagogical contexts. 
 Variety and variation have been considerably enhanced by the trend in recent years towards 
smaller, more carefully targeted corpora. Examples include classroom corpora of the type exploited 
by Seedhouse (2004) and Walsh (2011), where the manageable size of the corpus allows for close 
scrutiny using conversation-analytical techniques. Equally important have been business English 
corpora (Handford 2010), which have led to a new generation of corpus-based business English 
materials (McCarthy et al. 2009; Handford et al. 2012). There is clearly plenty of room in the arena of 
corpus-based teaching and learning for all sorts of corpora to play a role, from large-scale native-user 
corpora, through targeted, specialized corpora, to learner corpora and non-native user corpora, and 
the field can only be enriched by such variety. 
 Conclusion 
 The corpus revolution in language teaching and learning has undoubtedly had a major impact 
on thinking about what we teach, how we approach it, and on teaching and learning resources 
(McCarthy 2008). In the case of English, not only have corpora changed the face of reference works 
and other materials, but they have also increasingly enhanced our understanding of the differ-
ences between speaking and writing and generated fresh interest in aspects of SLA such as the 
development of interlanguage as evidenced in learner corpora, along with a better understand-
ing of social and pragmatic aspects of competence. Alongside these developments there have been 
healthy debates on the models of English which corpora can offer and a move from the early days of 
mega-corpora compiled to assist the writing of dictionaries and reference grammars to more var-
ied, smaller and specialized corpora that have underpinned academic, professional and vocational 
English teaching and given a new impetus to the study of the great variety of English used in the 
contemporary world. 
 The future will see more and more multi-modal corpora (Knight 2011), where audio, video and 
transcript can be viewed simultaneously on-screen, offering greater potential for the understanding 
of language in its contexts of use and consequent benefits for language pedagogy. Learner corpora 
will also undoubtedly prove more influential in language testing and assessment (see the discussion 

182 • Elaine Vaughan and Michael McCarthy
in Barker 2010). We can also expect huge spin-offs from the data accumulated in blended and online 
learning programs, which will give us massive corpora of learner production that can be exploited 
both in the general senses discussed in this chapter and also in technology-led developments such as 
adaptive learning (San Pedro & Baker 2016) and automated assessment, as exemplified in the work 
of Buttery and her associates (see http://apc38.user.srcf.net/research/#alta). We can safely conclude 
that in research in language teaching and learning, corpora are here to stay. 
 Note 
 1. Data cited herein has been extracted from the British National Corpus Online service, managed by Oxford University 
Computing Services on behalf of the BNC Consortium. All rights in the texts cited are reserved. 
 References 
 Barker, F. (2010) How can corpora be used in language testing? In O’Keeffe, A. & McCarthy, M. J. (eds.)  The Routledge Hand-
book of Corpus Linguistics . Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 633–645. 
 Biber, D., Conrad, S. & Cortes, V. (2004) If you look at . . . : Lexical bundles in university teaching and textbooks.  Applied 
Linguistics 25 (3): 371–405. 
 Biber, D., Conrad, S. & Leech, G. (2002)  Longman Student Grammar of Spoken and Written English . Harlow: Pearson Educa-
tion Limited. 
 Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S. & Finegan, E. (1999)  The Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English . 
London: Longman. 
 Biber, D. & Reppen, R. (eds.) (2015)  The Cambridge Handbook of English Corpus Linguistics . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Blum-Kulka, S. & Kasper, G. (1993)  Interlanguage Pragmatics . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Carter, R. A., Hughes, R. & McCarthy, M. J. (2000)  Exploring Grammar in Context . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Carter, R. A. & McCarthy, M. J. (1995) Grammar and the spoken language.  Applied Linguistics 16 (2): 141–158. 
 Carter, R. A. & McCarthy, M. J. (1997)  Exploring Spoken English . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Carter, R. A. & McCarthy, M. J. (2002) From conversation to corpus: A dual analysis of a broadcast political interview. In Sánchez-
Macarro, A. (ed.)  Windows on the World: Media Discourse in English . Valencia: University of Valencia Press, 15–39. 
 Carter, R. A. & McCarthy, M. J. (2006)  Cambridge Grammar of English . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Carter, R. A. & McCarthy, M. J. (2015) Spoken grammar: Where are we and where are we going? In  Applied Linguistics . First 
published online January 30, 2015. doi:10.1093/applin/amu080 
 Carter, R. A., McCarthy, M. J., Mark, G. & O’Keeffe, A. (2011a)  English Grammar Today . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Carter, R. A., McCarthy, M. J., Mark, G. & O’Keeffe, A. (2011b)  English Grammar Today: Workbook . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Celce-Murcia, M. (1991) Grammar pedagogy in second and foreign language teaching.  TESOL Quarterly 25 (3): 459–480. 
 Celce-Murcia, M. & Olshtain, E. (2001)  Discourse and Context in Language Teaching: A Guide for Language Teachers . Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Cheng, W., Greaves, C., Sinclair, J. McH. & Warren, M. (2009) Uncovering the extent of the phraseological tendency: Towards 
a systematic analysis of concgrams.  Applied Linguistics 30 (2): 236–252. 
 Clancy, B. & McCarthy, M. J. (2015) Co-constructed turn-taking. In Aijmer, K. & Rühlemann, C. (eds.)  Corpus Pragmatics . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 430–453. 
 COBUILD (1990)  Collins COBUILD English Grammar . London: HarperCollins Publishers. 
 COBUILD (2010)  Collins COBUILD Essential English Dictionary . Glasgow: HarperCollins Publishers. 
 COBUILD (2013a)  Work on Your Vocabulary . [five volumes covering A1 to C1 CEFR levels]. London: HarperCollins 
Publishers. 
 COBUILD (2013b) Collins COBUILD Key Words. [series of volumes on special types of English vocabulary. See http://www.
collins.co.uk/category/English+Language+Teaching/English+for+Specific+Purposes/Collins+COBUILD+Key+
Words#esp_pg=1. 
 Conrad, S. (2004) Corpus linguistics, language variation, and language teaching. In Sinclair, J. (ed.)  How to Use Corpora in 
Language Teaching . Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 67–85. 
 Ellis, R. & Shintani, N. (2014)  Exploring Language Pedagogy through Second Language Acquisition Research . London: 
Routledge. 
www.ebook3000.com

Research in Language Teaching and Learning • 183
 Fillips McCreary, C. (1991) Review of Collins COBUILD English course, level III.  The Modern Language Journal  75 (2): 248–249. 
 Fung, L. & Carter, R. (2007) Discourse markers and spoken English: Native and learner use in pedagogic settings.  Applied 
Linguistics 28 (3): 410–439. 
 Gilquin, G. (2008) Hesitation markers among EFL learners: Pragmatic deficiency or difference? In Romero Trillo, J. (ed.) 
 Corpus and Pragmatics: A Mutualistic Détente . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 119–149. 
 Gilquin, G. (2015) At the interface of contact linguistics and second language acquisition research. New Englishes and learner 
Englishes compared.  English World-Wide 36 (1): 91–124. 
 Golato, A. (2003) Studying compliment responses: A comparison of DCTs and recordings of naturally occurring talk.  Applied 
Linguistics 24 (1): 90–121. 
 Goodale, M. (1995)  Collins COBUILD Concordance Samplers: Book 2: Phrasal Verbs . London: HarperCollins. 
 Granger, S. (2009) The contribution of learner corpora to second language acquisition and foreign language teaching: A criti-
cal evaluation. In Aijmer, A. (ed.)  Corpora and Language Teaching . Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 13–32. 
 Handford, M. (2010)  The Language of Business Meetings . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Handford, M., Lisboa, M., Koester, A. & Pitt, A. (2012)  Business Advantage . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Hasselgren, A. (2002) Learner corpora and language testing: Small words as markers of learner fluency. In Granger, S., Hung, 
J. & Petch-Tyson, S. (eds.)  Computer Learner Corpora, Second Language Acquisition and Foreign Language Teaching . 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 143–174. 
 Hawkins, J. & Buttery, P. (2010) Criterial features in learner corpora: Theory and illustrations.  English Profile Journal  1 (1): e5. 
doi:10.1017/S204153621000010 
 Hilliard, A. (2014) Spoken grammar and its role in the English language classroom.  English Teaching Forum 4: 2–13. 
 Hinkel, E. (1997a) Indirectness in L1 and L2 academic writing.  Journal of Pragmatics 27 (3): 360–386. 
 Hinkel, E. (1997b) The past tense and temporal verb meanings in a contextual frame.  TESOL Quarterly 31 (2): 289–314. 
 Hinkel, E. (2002) Teaching grammar in writing classes: Tenses and cohesion. In Hinkel, E. & Fotos, S. (eds.)  New Perspectives 
on Grammar Teaching in Second Language Classrooms . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 233–260. 
 Hughes, R. (2010) What a corpus tells us about grammar teaching materials. In O’Keeffe, A. & McCarthy, M. J. (eds.)  The 
Routledge Handbook of Corpus Linguistics . Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 401–413. 
 Hughes, R. & McCarthy, M. J. (1998) From sentence to discourse: Discourse grammar and English language teaching.  TESOL 
Quarterly 32 (2): 263–287. 
 Hunston, S. (2002)  Corpora in Applied Linguistics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Hunston, S. & Francis, G. (2000)  Pattern Grammar: A Corpus-Driven Approach to the Lexical Grammar of English . Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 
 Kachru, B. B. (1985) Standards, codification and sociolinguistic realism: The English language in the outer circle. In Quirk, 
R. & Widdowson, H. G. (eds.)  English in the World: Teaching and Learning the Language and Literatures . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 11–30. 
 Knight, D. (2011)  Language, Corpus and Gesture: A Multimodal Corpus Approach . London: Continuum. 
 Lewis, M. (1997)  Implementing the Lexical Approach: Putting Theory Into Practice . Hove: Language Teaching Publications. 
 Martinez, R. & Schmitt, N. (2012) A phrasal expressions list.  Applied Linguistics 33 (3): 299–320. 
 Maskull, B. (1995)  Collins COBUILD Key Words in the Media . London: Collins Educational. 
 Maskull, B. (1996)  Collins COBUILD Key Words in Business . London: Collins Educational. 
 Maskull, B. (1997)  Collins COBUILD Key Words in Science & Technology . London: Collins Educational. 
 Maskull, B. (2010)  Business Vocabulary in Use . Second Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 McCarten, J. (2010) Corpus-informed course book design. In O’Keeffe, A. & McCarthy, M. J. (eds.)  The Routledge Handbook 
of Corpus Linguistics . Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 413–427. 
 McCarthy, M. J. (1991)  Discourse Analysis for Language Teachers . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 McCarthy, M. J. (1998)  Spoken Language and Applied Linguistics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 McCarthy, M. J. (2008) Accessing and interpreting corpus information in the teacher education context.  Language Teaching 
41 (4): 563–574. 
 McCarthy, M. J. (2010) Spoken fluency revisited.  English Profile Journal 1: e4. doi:10.1017/S2041536210000012 
 McCarthy, M. J. & Carter, R. (1995) Spoken Grammar: What is it and how can we teach it?  English Language Teaching Journal 
49 (3): 207–218. 
 McCarthy, M. J. & Carter, R. A. (2001) Ten criteria for a spoken grammar. In Hinkel, E. & Fotos, S. (eds.)  New Perspectives on 
Grammar Teaching in Second Language Classrooms . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 51–75. 
 McCarthy, M. J. & Carter, R. A. (2002) ‘This, that and the other’: Multi-word clusters in spoken English as visible patterns of 
interaction.  Teanga (Yearbook of the Irish Association for Applied Linguistics) 21: 30–52. 
 McCarthy, M. J., McCarten, J., Clark, D. & Clark, R. (2009)  Grammar for Business . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 McCarthy, M. J., McCarten, J. & Sandiford, H. (2005–2006)  Touchstone Student’s Books 1, 2, 3 and 4 . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

184 • Elaine Vaughan and Michael McCarthy
 McCarthy, M. J., McCarten, J. & Sandiford, H. (2012–14)  Viewpoint Student’s Books 1 and 2 . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 McCarthy, M. J. & O’Dell, F. (2012)  English Vocabulary in Use Upper Intermediate . Third Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 McCarthy, M. J. & O’Dell, F. (2016)  Academic Vocabulary in Use . Second Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 McCarthy, M. J. & O’Keeffe, A. (2010) Historical perspective: What are corpora and how have they evolved? In O’Keeffe, A. & 
McCarthy, M. J. (eds.)  The Routledge Handbook of Corpus Linguistics . Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 3–13. 
 McEnery, T. & Wilson, A. (1996)  Corpus Linguistics . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
 McEnery, T. & Xiao, R. (2011) What can corpora offer in language teaching and learning. In Hinkel, E. (ed.)  Handbook of 
Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning, Volume II . London: Routledge, 364–380. 
 Mindt, D. (1996) English corpus linguistics and the foreign language teaching syllabus. In Thomas, J. & Short, M. (eds.)  Using 
Corpora for Language Research: Studies in Honour of Geoffrey Leech . London: Longman, 232–247. 
 Murakami A. & Alexopoulou, T. (2015) L1 influence on the acquisition order of English grammatical morphemes: A learner 
corpus study.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition 1–37. 
 Myles, F. (2005) Interlanguage corpora and second language acquisition research.  Second Language Research 21 (4): 373–391. 
 Myles, F. (2015) Second language acquisition theory and learner corpus research. In Granger, S., Gilquin, G. & Meunier, 
F. (eds.)  The Cambridge Handbook of Learner Corpus Research . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 309–331. 
 O’Keeffe, A. & McCarthy, M. J. (2010) (eds.)  The Routledge Handbook of Corpus Linguistics . Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge. 
 O’Keeffe, A., McCarthy, M. J. & Carter, R. (2007)  From Corpus to Classroom: Language Use and Language Teaching . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Parrott, M. (2010)  Grammar for English Language Teachers . Second Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Paterson, K., Caygill, C. & Sewell, R. (2012)  A Handbook of Spoken Grammar . Peaslake, Surrey: Delta Publishing. 
 Pawley, A. & Syder, F. (1983) Two puzzles for linguistic theory: Nativelike selection and nativelike fluency. In Richards, 
J. & Schmidt, R. (eds.)  Language and Communication . London: Longman, 191–226. 
 Polat, B. (2011) Investigating acquisition of discourse markers through a developmental learner corpus.  Journal of Pragmatics 
43 (15): 3745–3756. 
 Römer, U. (2004) A corpus-driven approach to modal auxiliaries and their didactics. In Sinclair, J. McH. (ed.)  How to Use 
Corpora in Language Teaching . Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 185–199. 
 Römer, U. (2005)  Progressives, Patterns, Pedagogy: A Corpus-Driven Approach to English Progressive Forms . Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 
 Romero Trillo, J. (2002) The pragmatic fossilization of discourse markers in non-native speakers of English.  Journal of Prag-
matics 34 (6): 769–784. 
 Rühlemann, C. (2007)  Conversation in Context: A Corpus-Driven Approach . London: Continuum. 
 Rühlemann, C. (2009) Discourse presentation in EFL textbooks: A BNC-based study. In Renouf, A. & Kehoe, A. (eds.)  Corpus 
Linguistics: Refinements and Reassessments . Amsterdam: Rodopi, 415–435. 
 Rundell, M. & Stock, P. (1992) The corpus revolution.  English Today 8 (3): 21–32. 
 Rutherford, W. & Thomas, M. (2001) The child language data exchange system in research on second language acquisition. 
 Second Language Research 17: 195–212. 
 San Pedro, M. O. Z. & Baker, R. S. (2016) Adaptive learning. In McCarthy, M. J. (ed.)  The Cambridge Guide to Blended Learning 
for Language Teaching . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 234–247. 
 Schauer, G. A. & Adolphs, S. (2006) Expressions of gratitude in corpus and DCT data: Vocabulary, formulaic sequences and 
pedagogy.  System 34 (1): 119–134. 
 Seedhouse, P. (2004)  The Interactional Architecture of the Language Classroom: A Conversation Analysis Perspective . Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
 Seidlhofer, B. (2001) Closing a conceptual gap: The case for a description of English as a Lingua Franca.  International Journal 
of Applied Linguistics 11: 133–158. 
 Shin, D. & Nation, P. (2008) Beyond single words: The most frequent collocations in spoken English.  ELT Journal  62 (4): 
339–348. 
 Sinclair, J. (1990) Introduction. In COBUILD (ed.)  Collins COBUILD English Grammar . London: HarperCollins Publishers, 
v–xi. 
 Sinclair, J. (1991)  Corpus, Concordance and Collocation . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Svartvik, J. (1996) Corpora are becoming mainstream. In Thomas, J. & Short, M. (eds.)  Using Corpora for Language Research . 
London: Longman, 3–13. 
 Swan, M. (2005)  Practical English Usage . Third Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Thomas, J. (1983) Cross-cultural pragmatic failure.  Applied Linguistics 4 (2): 91–112. 
 Thornbury, S. (2005)  Natural Grammar . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Vaughan, E. & Clancy, B. (2013) Small corpora and pragmatics. In Roméro-Trillo, J. (ed.)  The Yearbook of Corpus Linguistics 
and Pragmatics :  New Domains and Methodologies , vol. 1. Dordrecht: Springer, 53–73. 
www.ebook3000.com

Research in Language Teaching and Learning • 185
 Vaughan, E. & O’Keeffe, A. (2015) Corpus analysis. In Tracy, K. (ed.)  The International Encyclopedia of Language and Social 
Interaction . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1–17. 
 Walsh, S. (2011)  Exploring Classroom Discourse: Language in Action . London: Routledge. 
 Willis, D. (1990)  The Lexical Approach . London: Collins ELT. 
 Willis, D. (2003)  Rules, Patterns and Words: Grammar and Lexis in English Language Teaching . Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
 Willis, J. & Willis, D. (1988/1989)  Collins COBUILD English Course . Parts 1, 2 and 3. London: HarperCollins Publishers. 

186
 14 
 Technology in Language 
Teaching and Learning 
 Greg Kessler 
 Statement of Purpose 
 This chapter provides a comprehensive overview of the role of technology in language teaching 
and learning according to the existing body of research. This is an exciting and rapidly developing 
area that has been informed by decades of extant research into human learning, language learn-
ing, technological adoption, technological design, instructional design and varied other aspects of 
human behavior. It is quite probable that there is no topic within the domain of language teaching 
and learning that is not influenced by technology. The way that we gather and disseminate informa-
tion, conduct research, keep records and approach our teaching have all been significantly altered 
through a variety of technologies. The breadth of research into the role of technology in language 
teaching and research reflects this diversity. This discipline is commonly referred to as computer 
assisted language learning (CALL), although there is some minor controversy around the use of this 
term (which will be addressed in this chapter). CALL is a multi-faceted and multi-lineal area within 
applied linguistics. This complex nature is partly the result of this emerging field being influenced 
by a diversity of research and pedagogical practices over the past few decades. As a result, it is quite 
difficult to maintain currency as a generalist in this field. This field has diversified over the years, 
and few scholars are able to stay abreast of these varied developments. Research into the various 
aspects of CALL can appear too broad and diverse for many outside the field to truly appreciate. 
As with many academic disciplines, CALL researchers are likely to focus upon distinct areas of spe-
cialization, such as linguistic communities, language skill areas, pedagogical contexts, pragmatics 
or discourse features. 
 Traditions in CALL 
 CALL paradigms and theoretical perspectives are drawn from a diverse range of sources. The inter-
disciplinary nature of CALL is the result of drawing from fields as diverse as education, linguistics, 
instructional technology, psychology, computer science and engineering. The synthesis of influences 
from these varied fields has created a complex and rich combination of theoretical perspectives. 
Levy and Stockwell (2006) identified an array of theoretical and methodological structures that have 
informed CALL research. We know that there are many different ways to observe the implementa-
tion of technology in language learning, and we are beginning to see evidence of a more varied and 
www.ebook3000.com

Technology in Language Teaching and Learning • 187
thorough awareness of these complex situations. The way we are planning and conducting research 
in the field of CALL has become more sophisticated as the field has matured. 
 Today’s CALL studies are likely to involve detailed and longitudinal observation of teacher and 
student behavior in specific contexts. They are less likely than in the past to rely solely on survey data 
or isolated observations. This is largely due to the increased methodological rigor that is valued by 
today’s CALL scholars (Hubbard, 2009). Similarly, today’s CALL research is more likely to focus on 
specific situated contexts rather than attempting to address broad research questions. In fact, CALL 
research has matured so that most scholars are focused upon specific sub-topics within the field, 
whereas there were numerous generalists in the recent past. We have also witnessed an increased criti-
cal stance across CALL research when juxtaposed with some early work. Similarly, we have benefitted 
greatly from methodological advances put forth by CALL scholars, including identifying important 
paradigms upon which we should focus research (Chapelle, 1997), approaching research from a 
more sociocultural and ecological perspective (Thorne, 2003), and capturing valuable data through 
innovative means that may otherwise elude us (Smith, 2008). As we have developed more sophis-
ticated research paradigms, we have also witnessed a diversification of perspectives on the role of 
CALL. Research has also expanded to include student and teacher perspectives and performance, 
the effectiveness of tools and tasks, and the role of the context or environment in which the learning 
occurs. 
 The potential for CALL research has also benefitted from increased computational abilities 
(Heift & Schulze, 2007), the emergence of large data collections and aggregators (Kessler, 2013), 
and a movement toward open access to research data and results (Chanier, 2007). We have also wit-
nessed the release of a number of syntheses of extant CALL research that should help guide future 
researchers (e.g. Levy & Stockwell, 2006; Hubbard, 2009). These developments have contributed 
to a more mature, sophisticated discipline. In recent years we have seen additional methodological 
expansion, including psychometric observations such as eye tracking as an indicator of the effec-
tiveness of recasts (Smith, 2010) and noticing (Smith, 2012), as well as the use of captions (Winke, 
Gass & Sydorenko, 2013). However, we are still faced with great limitations in regards to conducting 
research that captures all aspects of a learning experience to inform future practice. Most research 
is situated in such specific learning contexts that replication, which is rarely even attempted, would 
be quite challenging. This is likely true for much classroom research (McKay, 2006). CALL research 
is challenged by the same factors that make all educational research difficult, but technological 
and human factors also come into play. Some of these circumstances include individual learner 
and teacher characteristics, environmental circumstances and institutional idiosyncrasies. Such dif-
ferences can often be significant predictors of success or failure with CALL intervention (Levy & 
Stockwell, 2006). While we have seen improvements in research, the awareness of these challenges 
should guide us toward new research approaches. 
 Trends 
 Mobility 
 Currently, an obvious paradigm shift is underway toward increased use of mobile devices for edu-
cational purposes. This is largely due to the increased use of such devices in our personal lives. In 
many countries mobile devices have leapfrogged desktop computers, increasing access significantly 
(Wang & Smith, 2013). This has influenced language instruction so much that the term mobile 
assisted language learning (MALL) was coined a few years ago (Ogata & Yano, 2005). While the 
excitement around mobility is promoting new interest in the use of technology for language teach-
ing, it is hyperbolic to argue that MALL is a suitable replacement. It is reasonable to view MALL as 

188 • Greg Kessler
one emerging area of CALL along an evolutionary trajectory that is likely to continue in varied ways. 
We can certainly anticipate that we will identify benefits and be challenged by future technologi-
cal developments, but we do not need to redefine the field each time a new technology or valuable 
experience comes along. Essentially, rather than sounding a death knell to CALL, these recent devel-
opments have invigorated, diversified and solidified the field. The following explores the current 
realities and potential developments in this exciting, expanding and challenging field. 
 Mobile devices have been associated with incidental vocabulary learning due to their ubiquity 
and portability (Lee & Lee, 2013). Mobile device use has often been compared to the use of station-
ary desktop computing equivalents. These experimental design comparative studies have found that 
mobile devices were associated with better listening performance (Oberg & Daniels, 2013), speaking 
and vocabulary gains (Hwang & Chen, 2013) and pronunciation (Anaraki, 2009). Other studies have 
recognized associations between the use of mobile devices and increased time on task (Stockwell, 
2007), increased motivation (Lan, Sung & Chang, 2013) and improved interaction and negotiation 
(Zurita & Nussbaum, 2004). Perhaps the most important aspect of mobile technologies is that they 
are familiar to students and always available. Lys (2013) found that the enhanced access to listening 
and speaking tasks provided by iPads supported an increased quantity and quality of student oral 
production. However, teachers should recognize many caveats when using mobile devices. With the 
increase of attention to mobile learning, some have observed that challenges are often associated 
with introducing these personal and individual technologies for more institutional instructional 
purposes (Kim et al., 2013). Stockwell (2008) observed that students may often perceive cell phones 
as personal and recreational and avoid using them for learning. Further, language lab managers 
have long recognized the challenge of managing or delivering content consistently across different 
individual devices. 
 Digital Worlds and Pedagogical Perspectives 
 The growth of social media compels many to participate in the construction of community through 
computer-mediated communication (CMC) in their personal lives. Social and linguistic norms are 
also evolving in response to the various forms of social media in which we find ourselves increasingly 
immersed (Crystal, 2008). However, it is not evident if these developments will ultimately influence 
our social and linguistic futures in positive ways. Carr (2010) argues that reading from screens rather 
than paper is making us less capable of thinking deeply and critically. Of course, these observations 
are being made as we transition from paper- to screen-based reading. It is impossible to predict how 
we will process information in the future after we have generations who have learned to read on 
screens and will likely find that practice most familiar and comfortable. Certainly, this will continue 
to be a fascinating area of research for reading in general and CALL more specifically. However, we 
should consider this as one area within the many changing aspects of language across social and new 
media use. 
 The social practices associated with these contexts provide meaningful and authentic opportuni-
ties for individuals to use language, and these activities can be adapted for the language classroom 
(Kessler, 2013). There have been a number of studies into the increasingly popular use of CMC tools, 
including wikis, which have been found to promote a variety of collaborative activities, strategies 
and skills (Lund, 2008; Kessler, 2009; Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Kost, 2011); blogs, which promote agency 
and reflection (Lee, 2010); and text chat, which promotes rapid cognitive processing (Sotillo, 2000). 
Some new classroom contexts that have emerged include digital storytelling (Vinogradova, 2011) 
and Fanfiction (Black, 2006), which have both been found to promote agency and therefore engage 
second language writers. Some have observed that the incorporation of gaming promotes engage-
ment among learners and provides them with authentic and meaningful language and experiences 
www.ebook3000.com

Technology in Language Teaching and Learning • 189
(Gee & Hayes, 2011; Reinders & Wattana, 2014). These characteristics of authenticity have been 
recognized by many SLA researchers as beneficial in the design of learning materials and environ-
ments (Egbert, Hanson-Smith & Chao, 2007). Gaming has also been recognized as promoting moti-
vation (Gee, 2003), autonomy and community (Chik, 2014), and social engagement (Allen et al., 
2014). The importance of student motivation has been recognized previously (Dörnyei, 2001) and 
is a common underpinning for much contemporary CALL research. Motivation has also been rec-
ognized by many as a component of learner autonomy, which has received significant attention in 
CALL research contexts (Reinders & Hubbard, 2012). Numerous studies have been conducted that 
support the premise that CALL practices can positively affect student motivation, particularly when 
providing opportunities for mobility (Ushioda, 2013), increased engagement (Allen et al., 2014) and 
collaboration (Kessler, 2009). 
 Collaboration 
 Collaborative language learning practices are becoming more common as the tools that support 
them are better understood and utilized (Kessler, 2013). Tools such as wikis, which allow multiple 
contributors to share equal responsibility and control over a written product, promote increased 
participation and audience awareness (Lund, 2008), which can improve self and peer editing abilities 
(Kessler, 2009) across a variety of task types (Aydin & Yildiz, 2014). Collaboration has also been asso-
ciated with promoting an individual writer’s abilities even if perceived as unfamiliar (Elola & Oskoz, 
2010). These contexts are also becoming increasingly common in a variety of professional contexts 
in which our language students will ultimately find themselves working (Kessler, Bikowski & Boggs, 
2012). Collaborative dialogues can support students as they reconstruct knowledge when writing 
academically (Sun & Chang, 2012). Collaborative practices can also be beneficial across a range of 
teacher intervention, group sizes and structures, providing teachers take these circumstances into 
consideration (Kessler, 2012). 
 While we do not fully understand the pedagogical shift that collaborative learning presents, it is 
so potentially dramatic that Storch (2005) argues it will require, “A reconceptualization of classroom 
teaching” (p. 169). This is magnified by the potential to combine such collaborative practice with 
the collaboratively constructed world of social media (Kessler, 2013). While it is obvious that there 
is potential for using social and new media to create meaningful and authentic opportunities for 
language learning and practice, we do not know how these contexts can be leveraged for optimal use 
in academic learning contexts. It is not yet obvious how social media practices are best adjusted for 
specific language learning contexts. Further, the design of collaborative activities that utilize these 
resources has received little research attention thus far. Since these activities are social and collabora-
tive in their essence, we can only assume that future research will explore their potential in a variety 
of social collaborative contexts. One product of the extensive collaboration taking place online today 
is the creation of extensive authentic corpora. 
 Corpora 
 The use of corpora in linguistic research is well established, but the use of corpora in language 
learning is still a nascent area of investigation. The availability of corpora through the Internet 
has changed society in recent years by providing us all with an overwhelming wealth of infor-
mation that can be represented through innovative means such as maps, word clouds, and other 
visually meaningful aids (Kessler, 2013). While corpora have much to offer language teachers and 
learners in terms of providing rich, authentic linguistic models, the ease with which users can 
gather text from such large corpora can tempt some toward academic dishonesty. Like other online 

190 • Greg Kessler
information, the growing body of academic writing available today is staggering. It is estimated 
that Google scholar alone contains more than 160 million documents (Orduña-Malea, et al., 2014). 
As a corpus of academic writing, this immensely valuable resource can be used across a variety 
of activities. Consequently, students and faculty can locate and search within an abundance of 
academic texts quite easily. This ability has resulted in both an increase in potential plagiarism as 
well as improved abilities to identify this academic misconduct (Pecorari & Petrić, 2014). Corpora 
have been recognized as valuable sources of authentic linguistic input. The use of corpora has been 
studied to support interlanguage challenges (MacDonald, García-Carbonell & Carot-Sierra, 2013), 
enhancing contextualized vocabulary (Huang & Liou, 2007), and the ability to adjust vocabulary 
for different language levels (Cobb, 2007). Yoon and Jo (2014) found that corpora were very useful 
for students when their use was guided effectively by teachers. This confirms previous observations 
and concerns about the challenges of incorporating corpora into language instruction (Bennett, 
2010). Consequently, this underscores the importance of familiarizing teachers with the potential 
of these emerging tools. Once teachers develop an awareness of this potential, they are likely to be 
better prepared for future iterations of such tools, as well as wholly new emerging tools they will 
encounter later in their careers. 
 Feedback and Assessment 
 There are numerous benefits for delivering feedback and conducting assessment through digital 
means. Various digital tools can support improved exchange of feedback (Ducate & Arnold, 2012; 
Ferris, 2012). However, language instructors are likely to choose tools or resources based on idio-
syncratic or individual preference rather than critical evaluation of the effectiveness of the tool for 
feedback purposes (Kessler, 2013). This is unfortunate since we know that numerous consider-
ations can influence the potential effectiveness of feedback practices. These include flexibility with 
the nature, quality and mode of feedback, including embedded comments (Ferris, 2012), screen-
casts (Ducate & Arnold, 2012), and teacher-mediated automated feedback (Li, Link & Hegelheimer, 
2015). We look forward to more detailed and situated research to help us better understand the 
ideal circumstances for delivering feedback. Currently, we do not know when and how feedback is 
best disseminated (Ferris, 2004), but we are developing a better understanding through ongoing 
classroom research. 
 Learner Behavior and Training 
 One area of increasing interest is focused upon understanding human behavior when using tech-
nology. The field of human computer interaction (HCI) has taught us much about how we use 
technology in various social and educational contexts (Kaptelinin & Nardi, 2012). This knowledge 
contributes to increased awareness of effective CALL practice, as well as an increased understanding 
of those aspects of individuals in specific language learning contexts that require further investiga-
tion. We can anticipate great improvements in this area in the future. However, HCI only captures 
a fraction of the activity that is beneficial for understanding the future of CALL. Many aspects of 
human behavior relate specifically to language learning, learning environments, learning tasks, and 
other characteristics that inform language pedagogy. 
 Since CALL offers the potential for a highly contextualized and individualized approach to 
instruction, it is critical that we develop a solid understanding of learner behavior. Researchers have 
observed learner behavior in regard to language production across a variety of tasks and tools. From 
being able to observe learners closely, we know that learners often behave in unpredictable ways 
that are often more effective and productive than the ways we expect them to behave (Fischer, 2007; 
www.ebook3000.com

Technology in Language Teaching and Learning • 191
Kessler, Bikowski & Boggs, 2012). These observations have offered insight into student behavior 
that is rarely taken into account when designing learning experiences. While this understanding can 
inform many aspects of CALL implementation, it is perhaps most important in the area of learner 
training. 
 Learner training has often been overlooked across language teaching and learning research (Hub-
bard, 2004). There has been an expectation that learners will inherently understand and value the 
learning activities in which they participate, but some have observed that more explicit guidance and 
instruction can be quite valuable. Kolaitis et al. (2006) observed that learners benefit from explicit 
instruction in technology use. They also suggest that instructors can benefit from adopting a student 
perspective on particular activities, tools and goals in order to better prepare students. Hubbard 
(2004) created a five-step approach to conducting learner training that suggests: 
 1. Teachers should experience CALL from a learner’s perspective to develop a “sense of empa-
thy” (p. 52). 
 2. Provide Learners with teacher training to help them make a “connection between a particular 
CALL activity and some desired learning outcome” (p. 53). 
 3. Present training cyclically to “remind students of points they may easily forget over time” 
(p. 53). 
 4. Debrief training collaboratively to “maintain a balance between the task objectives and lan-
guage learning objectives” (p. 54). 
 5. Guide students toward generalizing strategies to allow for transferable use across tools and 
programs. 
 O’Bryan (2008) found that students who were provided with learner training following Hubbard’s 
five-step approach were more likely to engage with instructional materials. However, despite the 
observation that learners benefit from explicit and contextualized orientation to learning materials 
and expectations, there continues to be a lack of attention to learner training. As Hubbard (2004) 
wrote, “little in the way of literature showing that learner training in the pedagogical uses of CALL 
software is taking place” (p. 50). This continues to be evident in the number of articles published that 
reflect on the ineffective or inefficient use of technology-based tools by students who have received 
no apparent training. 
 Telecollaboration 
 Telecollaboration is an established and widely practiced aspect of contemporary CALL. While these 
exchanges can take place in varied ways, all telecollaborative projects share some common charac-
teristics. They are all designed to take advantage of information and communication technology 
(ICT) to allow groups of students, teachers and other cultural informants to interact with one 
another from distant locations. Quite often these are constructed around project-based learning 
activities focused upon language and culture. These projects have been found to support writing 
conventions (Elola & Oskoz, 2010), focus on form (Lee, 2008), and peer feedback (Ware & O’Dowd, 
2008). Many have focused upon the role that telecollaborative practices can play in promoting 
greater intercultural communicative competence (ICC) (Chen & Yang, 2014). In fact, the unique 
characteristics associated with telecollaborative experiences create a context that may require 
greater ICC development than a traditional classroom (Ware & Kessler, 2014). Telecollaboration 
has also been valued for allowing learners to engage in interactions with otherwise unavailable 
native speakers (Lee, 2008). Telecollaboration can also provide access to cultural informants, native 
speakers or others whose presence can inform a particular lesson or motivate student engagement. 

192 • Greg Kessler
 Controversies 
 Some terminology in the field of CALL has been misunderstood by members of the language teach-
ing and learning community. It may not even be obvious to all readers what is meant by the term 
CALL, particularly since this has changed over time (Levy & Hubbard, 2005). In the early years of 
the field, CALL was often associated with standalone software that was largely tutorial in nature, and 
some have perpetuated this association. However, CALL researchers recognize that use of the term 
CALL has evolved in ways that reflect changing use of technology throughout society over the past 
few decades. As computer technology has become ubiquitous, some have argued that CALL should 
become transparent or “normalized” within language education (Bax, 2003). This normalization 
presents an idealized view of CALL within language education that relies upon the assumptions 
that language teachers, students, administrators and teacher trainers are all fully aware of the foun-
dational research in the field of CALL and are prepared to engage in the ongoing identification, 
evaluation and implementation of emerging technologies and their usefulness in language educa-
tion. These currently seem to be insurmountable challenges, and they serve as a springboard for 
discussing what we know about CALL as well as what we need to know. This field is rich and diverse 
and cannot be exhaustively addressed in a single article. Therefore, I focus upon aspects I believe are 
most important in regard to the role of language teachers and their current and future pedagogical 
practices, as this is my area of expertise. 
 Since technology use in language learning and teaching has changed so dramatically over the 
years, it is important first that readers have an understanding of what the term CALL means today. 
Addressing issues of nomenclature may seem trivial, but somewhat ironically, it seems that as 
we move toward a world that is so immersed in ubiquitous computer mediated communication 
(CMC), we are also witnessing an increase in obituaries for the use of the term CALL. Recently, 
there have been suggestions that CALL may be obsolete (Jarvis & Krashen, 2014) and has “no 
experimental thrust” (MacWhinney, 2013). Thus, proposals (respectively) include replacing the 
acronym CALL with mobile enabled language use (MELU) and experimental computer assisted 
language learning (E-CALL). These suggestions fail to acknowledge that these domains already 
exist within the current broad landscape of CALL as a discipline. These declarations come from 
outside the field by observers who are witnessing some new potential for technology in regard to 
language instruction. They generally do not recognize the work that those within the field have 
already been exploring. In fact, those who are prescient about the field are aware of the immense 
diversity that is currently included under the umbrella of CALL. This indicates that it is important 
to provide the reader with a description of CALL as it exists today. Some casual observers may 
not realize that, during the past few decades, CALL has expanded to include a breadth of theories, 
frameworks, approaches and practices. The field has also embraced various changes to human 
communication that have emerged through digital tools and social media. Many of these have 
great potential to support language learning. 
 It is helpful to reference two pieces that directly address this issue of nomenclature, so that the 
reader has a sense of perspectives from within the field. From a very practical position, Egbert (2005) 
weighed in on this issue a decade ago and defined CALL as “learning language in any context with, 
through, and around computer technologies” (p. 4). This broad and inclusive definition allows for a 
variety of computer-related and pedagogical developments that may emerge in the future. Similarly, 
Levy and Hubbard (2005) recognized the benefits associated with the inclusive and established use of 
this term in their editorial entitled  Why call CALL “CALL”?  They conclude, “In the final analysis, the 
term CALL is simply useful. Avoiding the term simply fuels the idea that CALL is somehow locked 
into some kind of 1980s, pre-network time warp” (2005, p. 148). One of the most prominent devel-
opments that has attracted such attention recently is the shift toward mobile technologies. 
www.ebook3000.com

Technology in Language Teaching and Learning • 193
 Privacy, Tracking and Student Rights 
 There is also some controversy over the extent to which we should support students’ privacy in jux-
taposition with our ability to monitor, track or use online tools that require sharing personal infor-
mation. Today we are able to track, observe and remotely manage student language production and 
technology use. This can be accomplished through the use of tools that are explicitly designed for 
such purposes as well as those for which tracking may not seem obvious. There are numerous poten-
tial benefits in tracking student behavior, including an increased awareness of student understand-
ing, improvement of feedback salience, identification of linguistic and technological challenges, and 
general insight into student behavior (Fischer, 2007). Chun (2013) observed that CALL activities and 
environments allow student behavior to be tracked at a very discreet and detailed level. This detailed 
data can reveal important details about student interactions, including aspects that have yet to be 
recognized and understood. 
 Automation 
 We have seen extremely impressive development in the area of automation. The ability to aggregate 
and mine textual data is growing exponentially as this area becomes more commercially success-
ful. Companies such as Google, Facebook and Apple are both envied and reviled for their ability to 
gather, aggregate and present authentic data about all of us in new and intriguing ways. Many of 
the same capabilities upon which these technologies are supported can be repurposed or adapted 
for language learning circumstances. Such repurposing is a critical aspect of understanding the true 
potential of CALL practice (Kessler, 2010). Some examples include automated tools that have been 
designed to assess lexical complexity (Lu, 2012) and diversity (Crossley & McNamara, 2009), as well 
as syntactic complexity (Lu, 2011). Some of the most interesting developments are in the area of 
Automated Writing Evaluation (AWE). 
 AWE has witnessed many advances in recent years. Research into AWE has revealed that students 
find it helpful (Elliot & Mikulas, 2004) and motivating (Warschauer & Grimes, 2008), but not as use-
ful as peer feedback (Lai, 2010). Ware (2011) found AWE tools to be reliable within specific genres 
and contexts. Some have observed challenges with AWE, including a focus on local errors and lack 
of attention to global issues (Warschauer & Grimes, 2008) and an inclination toward formulaic writ-
ing (Ware & Warschauer, 2006). Warschauer and Grimes (2008) conclude: “Automated assessment 
will neither destroy nor rescue writing instruction” (p. 34). There is consensus that AWE requires 
the attention of informed teachers (Chen & Cheng, 2008; Cotos, 2012). As Shermis and Burstein 
(2013) note, when automated essay evaluation fails, it is generally a result of ineffective or inad-
equate teacher training and support rather than a problem with the technology itself. Consequently, 
it is important for language teachers to understand AWE so they can make effective decisions about 
implementation. Most recently there have been significant developments in predicting the behavior 
of students based upon some of these previous observations in addition to other information. 
 Researchers with interests that overlap CALL and natural language processing (NLP) have recog-
nized the potential for learner modeling. Automated systems that are specifically designed for lan-
guage instruction rely on learner modeling, which utilizes static properties about learners, such as L1 
and learning style preferences, as well as extant learner performance as a means of predicting future 
performance (Dickinson, Brew & Meurers, 2013). Such information allows designers to achieve an 
ideal prioritization of feedback within the system. These systems are increasingly capable of present-
ing students with interactive experiences that provide salient feedback at important moments in the 
learning process. Despite the developments we have witnessed in NLP, it is not clear to what extent 
we can rely on learner modeling and automated tools. 

194 • Greg Kessler
 While there is an increasing potential for delivering customized feedback at a particular point 
during instruction, there appear to still be concerns that the feedback is often not as salient as that 
which may be provided by an experienced instructor and that an instructor is often necessary to help 
interpret such feedback (Li, Link & Hegelheimer, 2015). As Amaral and Meurers (2011) note, most 
ICALL systems focus upon specific linguistic aspects of language, primarily grammatical, and do not 
address issues related to individual learner or task characteristics, or strategic, discourse and socio-
linguistic competencies. Thus, we should anticipate that there will continue to be a need for human 
intervention for some time. This reality emphasizes the importance for instructors to understand 
and be able to adapt these emerging tools to their teaching contexts, utilizing the aspects that can be 
automated while compensating for those that cannot (Kessler, 2013). It is not clear how well teachers 
will be able to integrate the emerging array of automated tools that can be used for language evalu-
ation and feedback (Cotos, 2012). Since this is such a new area of development, there is little that we 
know, but those who are involved in researching such projects anticipate significant developments 
in the near future in terms of reliability of evaluation (Li et al., 2014), as well as an improved aware-
ness of the role of teachers in mediating feedback (Li, Link & Hegelheimer, 2015) and interpreting 
automated feedback (Ware, 2014). 
 Conclusions/Future Directions 
 There is obviously potential for using social and new media to create meaningful and authentic 
opportunities for language learning and practice, but we do not know how these contexts can be 
leveraged for optimal use in academic learning contexts. It is not yet obvious how social media 
practices are best adjusted for specific language learning contexts. Furthermore, the design of collab-
orative activities that utilize these resources has received little research thus far. Since these activities 
are social and collaborative in essence, we can only assume that future research will explore their 
potential in a variety of contexts. 
 We know that many general-use tools at our disposal offer great potential for language learning, 
but they often go unnoticed or neglected. Word processing software offers feedback with increasing 
salience as well as opportunities to blend written and spoken language production. Web browsers 
offer an increasing array of functionality, including Chrome (voice searching with auditory feed-
back), Safari (text-only reader) and Firefox (language packs). I anticipate seeing research that inves-
tigates how these ubiquitous help functions can be exploited for language learning purposes. 
 We have learned much about the role of technology in language teaching over the past few decades. 
We have also witnessed dramatic shifts in the way that technology is used throughout society, largely 
as a means of supporting social and communicative endeavors. Throughout this evolution, CALL 
researchers have developed robust and complex approaches to effectively observe, assess and reflect 
upon changing language learning and teaching practices. The results of these efforts should serve as 
a foundation upon which future research and pedagogical developments are constructed. While we 
do have some insights into specific areas of instructional practice, we are far from a comprehensive 
understanding of which tools, language skills and practices are best aligned. This is likely to vary 
across teaching contexts. Furthermore, while some readers may tend to focus upon the technological 
developments, the literature indicates that the focus should be on supporting instructors to have all 
the resources they need to meet their pedagogical goals (Hubbard, 2009). In fact, it may not even be 
the most technologically savvy instructors who use CALL most effectively, but rather those who have 
a moderate level of competence partnered with the ability to adapt their practices to specific situ-
ated and contextualized teaching circumstances (Kessler & Plakans, 2008). Consequently, it is more 
important to prepare teachers to think critically about their teaching contexts and pedagogical goals 
than it is to teach them how to use a particular technology (Kessler, 2010). 
www.ebook3000.com

Technology in Language Teaching and Learning • 195
 As an astute reader will note, there are so many emerging opportunities, but only instructors who 
are aware of the opportunities to adopt and adapt technologies to their specific needs will be able to 
realize their potential. Such awareness does not require technological expertise, but rather the will-
ingness to experiment and be reflective (Lockhart & Richards, 1994). It is highly desirable that such 
investigation be conducted both from a more traditional quantitative approach as well as from varied 
qualitative perspectives that allow researchers to observe language learning and use within complex 
ecological systems (Thorne, 2003). We should also anticipate that we are moving toward something 
resembling CALL normalization. Certainly we can expect that technology will continue to influence 
language instruction in varied ways, and we will benefit from a continued observation of these changes 
by those who are familiar with where we have been thus far. Recently we have seen an increase in stud-
ies that attempt to discriminate which tasks align best with various tools from across the potentially 
overwhelming array of possibilities (Golonka et al., 2014). We can anticipate many future develop-
ments in this area, and such understanding aligns with all of the aspects presented in this chapter. 
 References 
 Allen, L. K., Crossley, S. A., Snow, E. L., & McNamara, D. S. (2014). L2 writing practice: Game enjoyment as a key to engage-
ment.  Language Learning & Technology, 18 (2), 124–150. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/varneretal.pdf 
 Amaral, L., & Meurers, D. (2011). On using intelligent computer-assisted language learning in real-life foreign language teach-
ing and learning.  ReCALL, 23 (1), 4–24. 
 Anaraki, F. (2009). A Flash-based mobile learning system for learning English as a second language. Proceedings International 
Conference on Computer Engineering and Technology. Singapore, 400–404. 
 Aydin, Z., & Yildiz, S. (2014). Using wikis to promote collaborative EFL writing.  Language Learning & Technology, 18 (1), 
160–180. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/aydinyildiz.pdf 
 Bax, S. (2003). CALL—Past, present and future.  System, 31 (1), 13–28. 
 Bax, S. (2011). Normalisation revisited: The effective use of technology in language education.  International Journal of Com-
puter-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 1 (2), 1–15. 
 Bennett, G. R. (2010).  Using corpora in the language learning classroom: Corpus linguistics for teachers . Ann Arbor, MI: University 
of Michigan Press. 
 Black, R. W. (2006). Language, culture, and identity in online fanfiction.  E-Learning and Digital Media, 3 (2), 170–184. 
Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.2304/elea.2006.3.2.170 
 Carr, N. G. (2010).  The shallows: What the Internet is doing to our brains . New York: W.W. Norton. 
 Chanier, T. (2007). Open access to research and the individual responsibility of researchers.  Language Learning & Technology, 
11 (2), 142–148. 
 Chapelle, C. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms?  Language Learning & Technology, 1 (1), 19–43. 
 Chen, C.-F. E. C., & Cheng, W.-Y. E. C. (2008). Beyond the design of automated writing evaluation: Pedagogical practices and 
perceived learning effectiveness in EFL writing classes.  Language Learning & Technology,12 (2), 94–112. 
 Chik, A. (2014). Digital gaming and language learning: Autonomy and community.  Language Learning & Technology, 18 (2), 
85–100. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/chik.pdf 
 Chun, D. (2013). Contributions of tracking user behavior to SLA research. In P. Hubbard, M. Schulze & B. Smith (Eds.), 
 Learner-computer interaction in language education: A festschrift in honor of Robert Fischer  (pp. 256–262). San Marcos, 
TX: CALICO. 
 Cobb, T. (2007). Computing the vocabulary demands of L2 reading.  Language Learning & Technology, 11 (3), 38–64. 
Cotos, E. (2012). Towards effective integration and positive impact of automated writing evaluation in L2 writing. In G. 
Kessler, A. Oskoz & I. Elola (Eds.), Technology across writing contexts and tasks (pp. 81–112). San Marcos, TX: CALICO.
 Crossley, S. A., & McNamara, D. S. (2009). Computational assessment of lexical differences in L1 and L2 writing.  Journal of 
Second Language Writing, 18 , 119–136. 
 Crystal, D. (2008).  Txtng: The gr8 db8 . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Dickinson, M., Brew, C., & Meurers, D. (2013).  Language and computers . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Dörnyei, Z. (2001).  Teaching and researching motivation . Harlow: Longman. 
 Ducate, L., & Arnold, N. (2012). Computer-mediated feedback: Effectiveness and student perceptions of screen-casting soft-
ware versus the comment function. In G. Kessler, A. Oskoz & I. Elola (Eds.),  Technology across writing contexts and tasks 
(pp. 31–56). San Marcos, TX: CALICO Publications. 
 Egbert, J. (2005).  CALL essentials: Principles and practice in CALL classrooms . Alexandria: TESOL Inc. 

196 • Greg Kessler
 Egbert, J., Hanson-Smith, E., & Chao, C. C. (2007). Introduction: Foundations for teaching and learning. In J. Egbert & E. 
Hanson-Smith (Eds.),  CALL environments: Research, practice, and critical issues (2nd ed., pp. 1–18). Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
Elliot, S. M., & Mikulas, C. (2004). The impact of MY Access!™ use on student writing performance: A technology overview and 
four studies. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA.
 Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2010). Collaborative writing: Fostering foreign language and writing conventions development.  Lan-
guage Learning & Technology, 14 (3), 51–71. 
 Ferris, D. (2004). The “grammar correction” debate in L2 writing: Where are we, and where do we go from here? (And what 
do we do in the meantime?).  Journal of Second Language Writing, 13 , 49–62. 
 Ferris, D. R. (2012). Technology and corrective feedback for L2 writers: Principles, practices, and problems. In G. Kessler, A. 
Oskoz & I. Elola (Eds.),  Technology across writing contexts and tasks  (pp. 7–29). San Marcos, TX: CALICO Monograph 
Series. 
 Fischer, R. (2007). How do we know what students are actually doing? Monitoring students’ behavior in CALL.  Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 20 , 409–422. 
 Gee, J. P. (2003).  What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy . New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Gee, J. P., & Hayes, E. R. (2011).  Language and learning in the digital age . London, UK: Routledge. 
 Golonka, E. M., Bowles, A. R., Frank, V. M., Richardson D. L., & Freynik, S. (2014). Technologies for foreign language learning: 
A review of technology types and their effectiveness.  Computer Assisted Language Learning, 27 (1), 70–105. 
 Heift, T., & Schulze, M. (2007).  Errors and intelligence in computer-assisted language learning: Parsers and pedagogues : New York 
& Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Huang, H. T., & Liou, H. C. (2007). Vocabulary learning in an automated graded reading program.  Language Learning & 
Technology, 11 (3), 64–82. 
 Hubbard, P. (2004). Learner training for effective use of CALL. In S. Fotos & C. Browne (Eds.),  New perspectives in CALL for 
second language classrooms (pp. 45–67). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Hubbard, P. (Ed.) (2009).  Computer assisted language learning: Critical concepts in linguistics, volumes I-IV . London & New 
York: Routledge. 
 Hwang, W. Y., & Chen, H. S. L. (2013). Users’ familiar situational contexts facilitate the practice of EFL in elementary schools 
with mobile devices.  Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26 (2), 101–125. 
 Jarvis, H., & Krashen, S. (2014). Is CALL obsolete? Language acquisition and language learning revisited in a digital age.  TESL-EJ, 
17 (4). Retrieved from http://www.teslej.org/wordpress/issues/volume17/ej68/ej68a1/ 
 Kaptelinin, V., & Nardi, B. (2012).  Activity Theory in HCI: Fundamentals and Reflections . Morgan & Claypool. 
 Kessler, G. (2009). Student initiated attention to form in wiki based collaborative writing.  Language Learning & Technology, 
13 (1), 79–95. 
 Kessler, G. (2010). When they talk about CALL: Discourse in a required CALL class.  CALICO Journal, 27 (2), 376–392. 
 Kessler, G. (2012). Preparing today’s teachers to use tomorrow’s technology tools. In G. Kessler, A. Oskoz & I. Elola (Eds.), 
 Technology across writing contexts . San Marcos, TX: CALICO Monograph. 
 Kessler, G. (2013). Collaborative language learning in co-constructed participatory culture.  CALICO Journal, 30 (3), 307–322. 
 Kessler, G., Bikowski, D., & Boggs, J. (2012). Collaborative writing among second language learners in academic web-based 
projects.  Language Learning & Technology, 16 (1), 91–109. 
 Kessler, G., & Plakans, L. (2008). Does teachers’ confidence with CALL equal innovative and integrated use?  Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 21 (3), 269–282. 
 Kim, D., Rueckert, D., Kim, D.-J., & Seo, D. (2013). Students’ perceptions and experiences of mobile learning.  Language Learn-
ing & Technology, 17 (3), 52–73. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/kimetal.pdf 
 Kolaitis, M., Mahoney, M., Pomann, H., & Hubbard, P. (2006). Training ourselves to train our students for CALL. In P. Hub-
bard & M. Levy (Eds.),  Teacher education in CALL (pp. 317–334). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Kost, C. (2011). Investigating writing strategies and revision behavior in collaborative wiki projects.  CALICO Journal, 28 (3), 
606–620. 
Lai, Y. H. (2010). Which do students prefer to evaluate their essays: Peers or computer program. British Journal of Educational 
Technology, 41(3), 432–454.
 Lan, Y.-J., Sung, Y.-T., & Chang, K.-E. (2013). From particular to popular: Facilitating EFL reading through mobile-supported 
cooperation.  Language Learning & Technology, 17 (3), 23–38. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/
action.pdf 
 Lee, H., & Lee, J. H. (2013). Implementing glossing in mobile-assisted language learning environments: Directions and out-
look.  Language Learning & Technology, 17 (3), 6–22. 
 Lee, L. (2008). Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction.  Language Learning & 
Technology, 12 (3), 53–72. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/lee.pdf 
 Lee, L. (2010). Fostering reflective writing and interactive exchange through blogging in an advanced language course. 
 ReCALL, 22 , 212–227. 
www.ebook3000.com

Technology in Language Teaching and Learning • 197
 Levy, M., & Hubbard, P. (2005). Why call CALL “CALL”?  Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18 (3), 143–149. 
 Levy, M., & Stockwell, G. (2006).  CALL dimensions: Options and issues in computer assisted language learning . Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Li, J., Link, S., & Hegelheimer, V. (2015). Rethinking the role of automated writing evaluation in ESL writing instruction. 
 Journal of Second Language Writing, 27 , 1–18. 
 Li, Z., Link, S., Ma, H., Yang, H., & Hegelheimer, V. (2014). The role of automated writing evaluation holistic scores in the ESL 
classroom.  System, 44 , 66–78. 
 Lockhart, C. & Richards, J. C. (1994).  Reflective teaching in second language classrooms . New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Lu, X. (2011). A corpus-based evaluation of syntactic complexity measures as indices of college-level ESL writers’ language 
development.  TESOL Quarterly, 45 (1), 36–62. 
 Lu, X. (2012). The relationship of lexical richness to the quality of ESL learners’ oral narratives.  The Modern Language Journal, 
96 (2), 190–208. 
 Lund, A. (2008). Wikis: A collective approach to language production.  ReCALL, 20 (1), 35–54. 
 Lys, F. (2013). The development of advanced learner oral proficiency using iPads.  Language Learning & Technology, 17 (3), 
94–116. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/lys.pdf 
 MacDonald, P., García-Carbonell, A., & Carot-Sierra, J. (2013). Computer learner corpora: Analysing interlanguage errors in 
synchronous and asynchronous communication.  Language Learning & Technology, 17 (2), 36–56. Retrieved from http://
llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/ macdonaldetal.pdf 
 MacWhinney, B. (2013).  Embedded cyberlearning: A modest proposal . Dallas, TX: American Association of Applied 
Linguistics. 
 McKay, S. L. (2006).  Researching second language classrooms . London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Oberg, A., & Daniels, P. (2013). Analysis of the effect a student-centred mobile learning instructional method has on language 
acquisition.  Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26 (2), 177–196. 
 O’Bryan, A. (2008). Providing pedagogical training in CALL: Impacts on student language learning strategies and glosses. 
 CALICO Journal, 26 , 142–159. 
 Ogata, H., & Yano, Y. (2005). Knowledge awareness for computer-assisted language learning using handhelds.  International 
Journal of Learning Technology, 5 (1), 435–449. 
 Orduña-Malea, E., Ayllón, J. M., Martín-Martín, A., & Delgado López-Cózar, E. (2014).  About the size of google scholar: Playing 
the numbers . Granada: EC3 Working Papers, 18(8). 
 Pecorari, D., & Petrić, B. (2014). Plagiarism in second-language writing.  Language Teaching, 47 , 269–302. doi:10.1017/
S0261444814000056 
 Reinders, H., & Hubbard, P. (2012). CALL and autonomy: Affordances and constraints. In M. Thomas, H. Reinders & 
M. Warschauer (Eds.),  Contemporary CALL (pp. 359–375). New York: Continuum. 
 Reinders, H., & Wattana, S. (2014). Can I say something? The effects of digital gameplay on willingness to communicate.  Lan-
guage Learning & Technology,18 (2), 101–123. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/reinderswattana.pdf 
 Shermis, M. D., & Burstein, J. (Eds.) (2013).  Handbook of automated essay evaluation . New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Smith, B. (2008). Methodological hurdles in capturing CMC data: The case of the missing self-repair.  Language Learning & 
Technology, 12 (1), 85–103. 
 Smith, B. (2010). Employing eye-tracking technology in researching the effectiveness of recasts in CMC. In F. M. Hult (Ed.), 
 Directions and prospects for educational linguistics (pp. 79–97). New York: Springer Verlag. 
 Smith, B. (2012). Eye tracking as a measure of noticing: A study of explicit recasts in SCMC.  Language Learning & Technology, 
16 , 53–81. 
 Sotillo, S. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous communication.  Language 
Learning & Technology, 4 (1), 82–119. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/ 
 Stockwell, G. (2007). Vocabulary on the move: Investigating an intelligent mobile phone-based vocabulary tutor.  Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 20 (4), 365–383. 
 Stockwell, G. (2008). Investigating learner preparedness for and usage patterns of mobile learning.  ReCALL, 20 (3), 253–270. 
 Storch, N. (2005). Collaborative writing: Product, process, and students’ interactions.  Journal of Second Language Writing, 14 , 
153–173. 
 Sun, Y. C., & Chang, Y. J. (2012). Blogging to learn: Becoming EFL academic writers through collaborative dialogues.  Language 
Learning & Technology, 16 (1), 43–61. 
 Thorne, S. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication.  Language Learning and Technology, 7 , 38–67. 
 Ushioda, E. (2013). Motivation matters in mobile language learning: A brief commentary.  Language Learning & Technology, 
17 (3), 1–5. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/ october2013/commentary.pdf 
 Vinogradova, P. (2011). Digital storytelling in ESL instruction: Identity negotiation through a pedagogy of multiliteracies. 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD. 

198 • Greg Kessler
 Wang, S., & Smith, S. (2013). Reading and grammar learning through mobile phones.  Language Learning & Technology, 17 (3), 
117–134. 
 Ware, P. (2011). Computer-generated feedback on student writing.  TESOL Quarterly, 45 (4), 769–774. 
 Ware, P. (2014). Feedback for adolescent writers in the English classroom: Exploring pen-and-paper, electronic, and auto-
mated options.  Writing & Pedagogy, 6 (2), 223–249. 
 Ware, P., & Kessler, G. (2014). Telecollaboration in the secondary language classroom: Impact of an international blogging 
project . Computer Assisted Language Learning. 
 Ware, P., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration.  Language Learning & Technology, 12 (1), 
43–63. Retrieved January 10, 2009, from http:// llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/wareodowd/default.html 
Ware, P., & Warschauer, M. (2006). Electronic feedback and second language writing. In K. Hyland & F. Hyland (Eds.), Feed-
back on ESL writing:  Context and issues (pp. 105–122). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Warschauer, M., & Grimes, D. (2008). Automated writing assessment in the classroom. Pedagogies, 3(1), 22–36.
 Winke, P., Gass, S., & Sydorenko, T. (2013). Factors influencing the reading of captions by foreign language learners: An eye-
tracking study.  Modern Language Journal, 97 (1), 245–275. 
 Yoon, H., & Jo, J. W. (2014). Direct and indirect access to corpora: An exploratory case study comparing students’ error cor-
rection and learning strategy use in L2 writing.  Language Learning & Technology, 18 (1), 96–117. Retrieved from http://
llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/yoonjo.pdf 
 Zurita, G., & Nussbaum, M. (2004). Computer supported collaborative learning using wirelessly interconnected handheld 
computers.  Computers & Education, 42 (3), 289–314. 
www.ebook3000.com

 III 
 Listening and Speaking 

www.ebook3000.com

201
 15 
 L2 Listening 
 Steven Brown 
 Listening is both a language skill to be acquired and a major means of input for language acquisition. 
Listening, in both L1 and L2, is a meaning-making activity that requires, in the fraction of a second, 
the parallel employment of top-down and bottom-up processing. The listener must segment the 
string of sounds in the input, link the sounds to words, and utilize long-term memory and contex-
tual information to give meaning to the utterance (Rost, 2011; Cutler, 2012). 
 Listening is purpose-driven. In the classroom and in language testing, the purpose-driven nature 
of listening is recognized by a division of listening task types into finding the topic (main idea), 
finding specific details, and making inferences about the message. Song (2008) was able to show that 
listening and reading skills were divisible into these three sub-skills and also to suggest that reading 
and listening have different paths to comprehension. 
 This chapter is organized around topics of current pedagogical concern in listening. It begins with 
findings on factors in successful listening comprehension and presents research on those factors. It 
then looks at two widely researched issues, the use of multimedia and strategies and, finally, at two 
strands of classroom research, on reading while listening and extensive listening. 
 Factors in Listening 
 Numerous studies have looked at the factors that affect the process of listening. The studies have 
been conceived in two broad ways: through questionnaires and simulated recalls looking at percep-
tions of difficulties by students and through factor-analytic studies looking at listener, speaker, text, 
and task. 
 Learners, when asked about their problems in listening, often cite the speaker’s delivery speed and 
individual style (hesitation behavior, accent) as troublesome; they also identify vocabulary, including 
breaking up the speech stream into recognizable words, as a major issue (Wu, 1998; Hasan, 2000; 
Graham, 2006). Goh (2000), in a study that combined questionnaires and interviews, enumerated 
10 perceived problems. The problems fell broadly into the categories of (a) word recognition (break-
ing up the speech stream, failing to recognize known words, getting caught focusing on a word and 
losing the thread of the input), (b) attention (missing the beginnings of texts, having problems with 
concentration), and (c) the inability to form a coherent representation of the text (seeing the trees, 
but not the forest). 

202 • Steven Brown
 In a study by Chang, Wu and Pang (2013), students had the following problems in listening: 
unknown words, grammar, long sentences; noise in the room and distortion in the input; uninterest-
ing topics; attention; anxiety; speech rate and accent; and absence of repetition and other support. 
 Listener factors were addressed in Andringa, Olsthoorn, van Beuningen, Schoonen and Hulstijn 
(2012). The listening comprehension of non-native speakers of Dutch was strongly correlated with 
knowledge (vocabulary, grammatical accuracy, and ability to segment the speech stream) and pro-
cessing speed. It was less strongly correlated with IQ. The correlation with memory was weak. 
 Vandergrift and Baker (2015) explored the roles of listener variables in listening comprehension 
for late French immersion classes in Canada. L2 vocabulary, L1 vocabulary, auditory discrimina-
tion ability, and metacognition were all significantly related to L2 listening comprehension, with L2 
vocabulary having the strongest association. Vandergrift and Baker posited a path model wherein 
auditory discrimination and working memory contribute to L1 vocabulary, and L1 vocabulary and 
metacognition favorably influence L2 comprehension through L2 vocabulary. 
 Vandergrift (2006) concluded that L2 listening comprehension ability is a combination of L1 lis-
tening ability and L2 proficiency, but that L2 proficiency contributes more. Vandergrift saw vocabu-
lary knowledge as particularly useful for answering “literal” (specific information) questions. 
 In their review of speaker factors, Bloomfield et al. (2010) reported that L2 listeners are affected 
by unfamiliar accents as well as distortion and noise in the environment. They also reported that lis-
teners may have difficulty with reduced and rapid speech. Comprehension is facilitated by discourse 
markers. 
 Révész and Brunfaut (2013) studied advanced learners’ actual and perceived listening difficul-
ties, focusing on the listening text. Listening passages were significantly easier to comprehend if 
they contained more common function words, fewer academic words, and were less dense in terms 
of the information they conveyed. Difficulty was not related to syntactic complexity. In question-
naires and recalls, participants agreed that lexical complexity was an important factor, and they also 
added as less important speed of delivery, clarity of pronunciation, lack of explicitness, and syntactic 
complexity. 
 Brunfaut and Révész (2015) explored learner and task characteristics and found that lexical, dis-
course, and phonological complexity correlated significantly with comprehension. High levels of 
anxiety in the students correlated with low performance. 
 Bloomfield et al. (2010) reported strong evidence for the facilitating effects of redundancy (par-
ticularly exact repletion), familiar topics, and global coherence. 
 Many of the above factors in listening have been extensively researched. We will now look in more 
depth at decoding issues, vocabulary, the use of prior knowledge, and the role of affect. 
 Decoding Issues 
 Decoding is the process of breaking up the speech stream into recognizable words, which are then 
held in working memory and combined with prior knowledge; situational context and co-text (what 
has been said, predictions of what might be said); and knowledge of the language system (Anderson 
& Lynch, 1988). 
 While sentences on the page are broken into words, utterances have no white space. Sounds have 
effects on neighboring sounds, and speech is subject to assimilation, deletion, and insertion. In class-
rooms, learners tend to learn the dictionary form of words and may not, because of changes in pro-
nunciation due to word stress and sentence intonation, recognize those words when they are spoken 
(Field, 2008a). 
 As we have seen, learners perceive speech rate as a major obstacle to breaking up the speech 
stream. Speech rate is both idiosyncratic and subject to speech situations. Griffiths (1990) claimed 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Listening • 203
that speech faster than 200 words per minute, 3.8 syllables per second, impairs comprehension for 
lower-level students. 
 Speech rate interacts with other variables, including attitude toward or familiarity with the speaker 
or the speaker’s accent. Anderson-Hsieh and Koehler (1988), for example, reported that American 
university students who had a favorable view of foreigners better understood faster and less profi-
cient speech by a trio of native speakers of Chinese. 
 Speech rate also interacts with an utterance’s grammatical complexity and speaker behaviors such 
as pausing and hesitating. While grammatical complexity had no effect on comprehension in Blau 
(1990), inserting pauses into the input increased comprehension significantly, compared to slowed 
versions of the text. However, the filled hesitations ( um, uh ) of everyday speech may present chal-
lenges to learners when they interpret filler words or repetition for words or parts of words (Voss, 
1979). 
 As a compensatory strategy to improve comprehension, teachers frequently tell their students to 
listen for “key words,” the most important words in the input. Graham and Santos (2013) found that, 
for students, “key words” often meant “nouns” and that students may have a noun-based approach 
to listening. Thus, teachers might profitably focus on verbs in the classroom. Nouns and verbs are 
both examples of content words. Field (2008a) was interested in the differential processing of con-
tent words and function words. He compared L1 English secondary students to higher- and lower-
achieving English language learners at the same school. Regardless of proficiency or L2, both English 
language learner groups transcribed the content words significantly (on average 20%) better than 
the function words. 
 When facing new words in the input, learners may ignore both context and word class to sub-
stitute a known word for an unknown one (Field, 2004). Broersma and Cutler (2008) looked at 
phantom word activation, essentially incorrect guesses in the decoding process. Successful compre-
hension relies in part on suppressing the wrong guesses and choosing the correct ones. Broersma 
and Cutler showed that L2 listeners cannot suppress non-words as quickly as they can in their L1. 
They conclude that a major problem in word recognition is distinguishing real words from non-
words or near words. More competitors to real words are activated in L2; these competitors are often 
words that do not make sense in the utterance and would be quickly discarded in L1 (Broersma & 
Cutler, 2011). Field (2008c) reported that English language learners were reluctant to abandon their 
first segmentation hypothesis, their preliminary guess at where one word ended and another began. 
Field’s prescription for the classroom is to practice both segmentation and to probe learners on their 
certainty and comprehension strategies. 
 One way that learners use to recognize words is phonotactics, or the probabilities of given sounds 
occurring at given places in the speech stream. This is something we learn implicitly in L1 and some-
thing, claim Weber and Cutler (2006), that highly proficient, highly experienced listeners have in L2. 
It is also something that can be taught explicitly, at least to adults (Al-jasser, 2008). Prince (2013) sug-
gests that incorporating the dictogloss technique into a listening comprehension program might be 
effective in increasing comprehension and vocabulary retention, because it potentially helps learners 
note the presence of unknown words and chunks of language. Hulstijn (2003) argues that multi-
media is particularly useful for training students in automatic word recognition. 
 Vocabulary and Listening 
 The importance of word recognition has been noted in previous sections. This section will focus on 
the role of vocabulary knowledge in listening. Folse (2004) has argued for the primary importance 
of vocabulary in language learning, and Vandergrift (2006) has argued specifically for a larger role 
for vocabulary in listening development. 

204 • Steven Brown
 How large a vocabulary is optimal for listening comprehension? Nation (2006) estimated that 
knowledge of 6,000–7,000 word families would provide 98% coverage of the Wellington Corpus of 
Spoken English. Other estimates are Adolphs and Schmitt’s (2003) that knowledge of 5,000 word 
families would be sufficient to understand 96% of conversational English and Webb and Rodgers’ 
(2009) that 3,000 of the most frequent word families, plus proper nouns and marginal words, would 
give 95% coverage of television programs. Fewer words may be needed for listening comprehension 
than reading comprehension because prosody and gestures may help compensate (vanZeeland & 
Schmitt, 2013). While 98% coverage is usually recommended for reading comprehension, vanZee-
land and Schmitt argue that 95% of coverage, or 2,000–3,000 frequent word families, might be a good 
target for comprehension of informal aural narratives. 
 Staehr (2009) investigated the role of vocabulary breadth and depth on listening comprehension. 
Together, breadth and depth predicted 51% of the variance in listening scores among Danish uni-
versity students learning English. Further analysis showed that by far the greatest contribution was 
made by vocabulary breadth; depth contributed only 2% to the total. In reality, vocabulary size and 
how well the words are known are strongly correlated to each other, and it is difficult to completely 
pry them apart. Bonk (2000) found a moderate positive correlation between lexical knowledge and 
comprehension scores; some low-scoring individuals attained good comprehension, however, per-
haps because of the use of compensatory strategies. 
 Prior Knowledge and Listening 
 The pioneering work of Bartlett (1932) showed that prior knowledge and experience have an effect 
on cognition. Prior knowledge is organized in schemata: abstract, generalized mental representa-
tions of experience that are available to facilitate comprehension of new experiences (Anderson, 
1994). Schemata have been divided into content schemata, knowledge of the world or the topic at 
hand, and text schemata, knowledge of discourse in general and genres in particular (Long, 1989). 
Another metaphor for the storing of prior knowledge is scripts (Schank & Abelson, 1977). 
 The importance of schema activation activities in the classroom has been studied extensively. The 
role of life experience was studied by Markham and Latham (1987), Long (1990), Chiang and Dunkel 
(1992), Schmidt-Rinehart (1994), and Lesser (2004). Learners comprehended more when listening 
to familiar topics. Tyler (2001) found that provision of a topic before listening lessened demands on 
working memory, elevating the scores of English language learners to a level not significantly differ-
ent from that of native speakers of the language. 
 That schema activation is a useful pre-listening activity in classrooms is clear at this point. 
Researchers and practitioners have explored a variety of other pre-listening activities as well. The 
role of visual support, for example, has been of some interest. In a study by Wilberschied and Ber-
man (2004), previews illustrating summaries of the video input had a significantly greater effect on 
comprehension than the same summaries alone. Ginther (2002) distinguished between “context” 
and “content’ visuals. Context visuals are general descriptions of the situation found in the aural 
input, while content visuals more closely illustrate the content of the input. Content visuals facili-
tated comprehension, but, interestingly, context visuals had a small negative effect, perhaps because 
they activated the wrong schema. 
 In language testing, the role of visuals in listening comprehension is an important issue. There is 
some evidence that visuals enhance comprehension. There is also some evidence that learners differ 
in their use of visual information, some essentially ignoring it (Ockey, 2007). Perhaps the foremost 
concern for test developers is that the inclusion of non-verbal information may test skills other 
than listening ability (Batty, 2015). See Wagner (2010) for a review of issues concerning visuals in 
language testing. 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Listening • 205
 Another common classroom listening exercise is the pre-teaching of vocabulary. Research results 
about its efficacy are mixed. Berne (1995), Elkhafaifi (2005a), and Chang and Read (2006) all found 
that vocabulary instruction given immediately prior to a listening task had no significant facilitative 
effects. Students in Chang (2007) were presented vocabulary lists at different times before tests. The 
length of time that learners could study the word list had an effect on a test of the words themselves 
but not on listening comprehension scores. Mehrpour and Rahimi (2010) looked at both reading 
and listening comprehension. General vocabulary knowledge had no effect on listening comprehen-
sion, although providing specific key words before the test marginally improved performance on the 
listening test. Previewing vocabulary had a greater effect on reading comprehension. 
 Some support for pre-teaching vocabulary has emerged, however, in studies of the efficacy of 
question preview, in which learners had time to study the comprehension questions they would be 
asked (Berne, 1995; Chung, 2002; Elkhafaifi, 2005a; Jafari & Hashim, 2012; Alavi & Janbaz, 2014). 
Chung (2002), for example, found a combination of question and vocabulary preview effective, more 
so for high-achieving students, suggesting an interaction between proficiency level and task. Jafari 
and Hashim (2012) showed that a pre-listening activity providing statements giving the gist of the 
listening passage and another providing a list of vocabulary items were equally effective. Alavi and 
Janbaz (2014) reported no difference in listening comprehension between a question preview group 
and a group that was given a list of topics (which could be considered a type of vocabulary preview), 
although both groups performed better than the control group, which had no pre-listening task. 
 In Elkhafaifi (2005a), both question and vocabulary preview were superior to no preview at all. 
However, mere repetition of the audio, a second chance to listen, increased comprehension scores for 
all groups. Repetition, perhaps not surprisingly, increases comprehension (Iimura, 2007; Sakai, 2009; 
Bloomfield et al., 2010). Indeed, repetition increased comprehension 18% from the control baseline 
in Chang and Read (2007). A lingering question for the classroom is how much repetition should 
be allowed, given time constraints and, sometimes, the necessity to prepare students for high-stakes 
examinations that do not allow repetition of input. No firm prescription has emerged, but King and 
East (2011) found that a single repetition was more effective than a slowed-down version of the input 
at increasing comprehension. Jensen and Vinther (2003) suggest that returns for repetition may 
diminish as soon as the second repetition. Robin (2007) points out that repeated listening is now the 
norm, given digital video recorders and downloadable audio and video clips on websites. Listening 
is potentially becoming as recursive an activity as reading. 
 Listening and Affect 
 Rost (2014) reminds us that the affective domain is at the heart of L2 listening, presenting one of the 
key challenges to success. Gaining the expertise necessary to enter a target language community “can 
be emotionally trying, cognitively challenging, and interpersonally frustrating” (p. 133). 
 Research on anxiety in L2 listening has grown in the past decade, since Elkhafaifi (2005b) studied 
the relationship between general foreign language anxiety and listening anxiety, finding them sepa-
rate but related phenomena that both have a negative effect on listening comprehension. Negative 
correlations between anxiety and performance on measures of listening comprehension have been 
reported by Chang (2008), Berkleyen (2009), Golchi (2012), Zhang (2013), and Brunfaut and Révész 
(2015). Pae (2012) found that each of the four skills made an independent contribution to students’ 
foreign language anxiety, but that listening made the largest contribution. 
 The pedagogical question is what can be done to alleviate anxiety. Mills, Pajares and Herron 
(2006) suggest that taking steps to boost learners’ self-efficacy would improve listening proficiency 
and lower anxiety. Lee and Lee (2015) suggest adding a visual component to lower anxiety and raise 
comprehension scores. Chang (2010) compared a class taught through extensive listening (EL) to 

206 • Steven Brown
one taught traditionally. The EL class comprehended more than the traditional class when tested on 
both narratives and dialogues, but it also scored higher in anxiety at the end of the experiment, sug-
gesting a disconnect between competence and anxiety. Chang claims that this is facilitative anxiety 
or increased attention. 
 Graham (2006) raised the issue of the importance of motivation to listening, saying that giving 
more practice to students who already find listening difficult will only demotivate. She called for 
teaching students how to listen. Vandergrift (2006) argued for more research into motivation as a 
potential explanation for variance in L2 listening ability. 
 In addition to these factors, current research in listening has often focused on the use of multi-
media, the use and teaching of strategies, reading while listening, and extensive listening. We take up 
these topics next. 
 Listening and Multimedia 
 Listening input is available both aurally and visually on a variety of platforms. Addition of visuals to 
sound allows learners to use paralinguistic features such as gestures to comprehend, and the role of 
gestures in listening comprehension is important (Harris, 2003; Sueyoshi & Hardison, 2005). 
 In a review of a decade of research on the use of media in language teaching, Vanderplank (2010) 
devoted a substantial portion of his text to captioning (in which the text of the audio is presented on 
screen in the same language) and subtitling (in which the text is a translation of the audio). Research-
ers have found captions and subtitles useful for the development of word recognition, for compre-
hension of details, and for reducing anxiety. Some research shows that captioning is more effective 
than subtitling, however (Hayati & Mohmedi, 2011). A central issue, according to Vanderplank, is 
this: do captions simply allow the viewer to comprehend input that would, without the captions, be 
incomprehensible, or do captions help develop listening comprehension? Research on captioning 
remains very active. 
 Captioning helps learners do at least two things. It assists in form-meaning mapping, connecting 
sounds and/or writing with meaning. It also helps learners chunk the speech stream and perhaps bet-
ter retain vocabulary (Winke, Gass & Sydorenko, 2013). Winke, Gass and Sydorenko (2013) report, 
however, that languages, writing systems, content familiarity, and experience using captions in learn-
ing may all have an effect on learner performance. Proficiency levels may have an effect on caption 
reliance and achievement as well (Lin, 2010; Leveridge & Yang, 2013). 
 Taylor (2005) reviewed a number of studies that show closed captioning of video improves lis-
tening comprehension, but not necessarily among beginners, who actually performed worse when 
shown captions, perhaps because of cognitive overload. Guichon and McLornan (2008) remark that 
while video provides context, it can also prove distracting, particularly when audio does not match 
video. 
 The question of cognitive overload has been addressed by keyword captioning. The rationale 
for keyword captioning is that it provides support for learners without overwhelming them with 
too much information (Perez, Peters & Desmet, 2013). Hsu, Hwang, Chang and Chang (2013) and 
Hsu, Hwang and Chang (2014) compared targeting specific difficult vocabulary, a form of keyword 
captioning based on frequency, to full captioning. The targeted-word condition performed as well or 
better than the full-captioning one. Yang and Chang (2013) measured the effects of full captioning, 
keyword-only captioning, and annotated keyword captioning. The last type of captioning combined 
display of a reduced form with a visual such as a yellow curve indicating linked sounds or a gray 
letter showing a reduced sound. They found that annotated keyword captioning was the most effec-
tive technique of the three for both comprehension and recognition of reduced forms themselves. 
Li (2014) compared an advance organizer, captioning, and a combination of advance organizer and 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Listening • 207
captioning and found no significant difference among the three experimental groups, although all 
were more effective than the control condition. 
 Strategies 
 O’Malley and Chamot (1990) presented the classic division of language learning strategies into 
cognitive, metacognitive, and social/affective. Vandergrift (1997) enumerated listening-specific 
strategies. Field (2000) noted the confusion between learning strategies, such as note-taking and 
memorization, and compensatory strategies, such as guessing words in context and circumlocution. 
 Berne’s (2004) review of listening strategy research concluded that more proficient listeners use 
strategies more often, use a wider range of strategies, and use them interactively, in combination. Skilled 
listeners were more aware of text structure and attended to larger chunks of text than did less 
skilled listeners, who tended to listen word by word and rely on translation and individual key words. 
Good listeners also monitored their comprehension and in the process related what they heard to 
what they knew. Similarly, intermediate students in Farrell and Mallard (2006) used about three times 
more strategies than did beginners, more than the advanced students. The most-used strategies in 
their study of interactional listening were giving feedback to the interlocutor, hypothesis testing, and 
repeating utterances from the interaction. Cai and Lee (2012) reported use of inference, the local 
co-text, and background knowledge and showed that flexible use of strategies helped comprehension. 
 There is little evidence that most learners will develop strategy use in the absence of overt instruc-
tion (Graham, Santos & Vanderplank, 2011). There is some evidence, however, that a program that 
presents strategies in a coordinated and combined fashion leads to results. Graham and Macaro 
(2008) focused on teaching a set of interconnected strategies to adolescent learners: predicting, con-
firming predictions, identifying key words, inferring, recognizing familiar words, and separating the 
speech stream. There were two experimental groups, which differed in the amount of scaffolding 
that was provided. Both conditions were effective in increasing comprehension, compared to the 
control group, and both experimental groups claimed greater self-efficacy as a result of the training. 
Vandergrift and Tafaghodtari (2010) taught a group of Canadian university high beginner and lower 
intermediate learners of French a process that combined and coordinated a number of strategies. 
The process led to improved comprehension overall, but lower proficiency students were helped the 
most. Indeed, improvement scores for higher proficiency students were not significantly different for 
the experimental and control groups. Cross (2009), on the other hand, found no effect for strategy 
training among his Japanese adult subjects and, in another study, an effect only for the less-skilled 
listeners (Cross, 2011a). 
 Yeldham and Gruba (2014) claimed that instruction in bottom-up skills was ineffective. Yeldham 
(2015) compared a group that was taught strategies with an “interactive” group that was taught both 
strategies and bottom-up skills. The strategies-only group improved significantly in listening profi-
ciency, while the interactive group improved only a little. Both groups improved significantly on tests 
of bottom-up skills like reduced speech, word recognition, and intonation. 
 A number of studies have followed Goh (2008) and Vandergrift and Goh (2012) in moving away 
from strategy training and from thinking about metacognitive strategies in isolation to thinking 
about the larger issue of metacognition and metacognitive knowledge, including personal knowledge 
(knowledge of self as listener), task knowledge (understanding the nature of listening), and strategy 
knowledge (knowledge of when to apply strategies). Goh and Hu (2014) report that 12–15% of the 
variance in listening performance has been attributable to metacognitive awareness, measured by the 
Metacognitive Awareness Listening Questionnaire (MALQ; Vandergrift, Goh, Mareschal & Tafag-
hodtari, 2006). In Goh and Hu’s study, metacognitive awareness accounted for 22% of the variance. 
In addition to Goh (2008) and Goh and Hu (2014), Rahimirad and Shams (2014) and Bozorgian 

208 • Steven Brown
(2014) reported that teaching metacognitive strategies led to improved listening test scores. While 
Rahimirad and Shams found that learners, in simulated recall sessions, reported using problem-
solving skills, planning, and evaluation, Bozorgian’s learners did not report significant use of meta-
cognitive strategies. He suggests that the learners might have been sufficiently proficient not to need 
compensatory strategies. 
 Dissents about the efficacy of strategy training come from Renandya and Farrell (2010), who 
believe that most teachers have neither the time nor the expertise to teach strategies effectively, and 
Macaro (2006), who questions the theoretical framework of language learning strategies. He locates 
strategies in working memory and believes strategies must work in clusters. 
 Classroom Interventions 
 A number of studies have investigated the combination of listening and reading, reading while 
listening (RWL), to further acquisition. University students listened to texts while simultaneously 
reading them. Brown, Waring and Donkaewbua (2008) found no significant gains for vocabulary 
acquisition for RWL, compared to only listening or only reading. Chang (2009) and Woodall (2010) 
found modest gains for comprehension in the RWL condition. Gobel and Kano (2014) reported 
that RWL increased reading rate and vocabulary recognition but not general English proficiency. 
Moussa-Inaty, Ayres and Sweller (2012) argued that reading while listening is redundant and cre-
ates an increased cognitive load. Learners in their study performed better on listening tasks after the 
material was first presented in the read-only mode. 
 Reading while listening is sometimes labeled extensive listening, though in principle the two are 
separate. Extensive listening focuses on students listening to a variety, and relatively large amount, 
of input, often outside of class. Students need not read along. In Chang and Millet (2014), the RWL 
condition was more effective than either the listen-only or read-only condition in increasing listen-
ing test scores. Partially because the students had control over their own learning, Chang and Millet 
labeled their method “extensive listening.” Cross and Vandergrift (2015) pointed out that research on 
extensive listening can be problematic in that it often does not control for time on task. 
 Nevertheless, in terms of recommendations for the classroom, Renandya and Farrell (2010) urged 
adoption of an extended listening program that combines teacher dictations, teacher read-alouds, 
and listening-while-reading, as well as self-directed listening and narrow/repeated listening. Their 
proposals generated some controversy, particularly with respect to their allied criticism of teaching 
listening strategies (Siegel, 2011; Blyth, 2012). 
 Future Directions 
 A perennial issue in the classroom has been that of teaching versus testing. Many, including Richards 
(2005) and Field (2008b), have noted that classroom approaches to listening often stress the compre-
hension of a single piece of input. This is the testing of listening: how accurately can the learner com-
prehend two or three minutes of audio? However, if learners are to succeed in listening to another 
language, teachers must go beyond testing to teaching, whether it be teaching learners awareness 
of the bottom-up processes involved in listening (Field, 2008b), the use of metacognitive strategies 
(Vandergrift & Goh, 2012), or the vocabulary and syntax used in the input (Richards, 2005). 
 More studies are needed on how teachers actually teach listening. For example, while comprehension-
monitoring activities accounted for a significant proportion of the listening lessons investigated by 
Siegel (2014), they were accompanied by bottom-up activities, prediction activities, metacognitive 
instruction, and teacher modeling. Techniques by which teachers link in-class listening skills and 
strategies to possible future listening situations were relatively rare in the lessons of the 10 teachers 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Listening • 209
examined. If this sort of work is undertaken more widely, there will have to be more standardized 
agreement on how to identify each activity. 
 Finally, much of listening research has ignored the social-cultural-historical factors (Cross, 2011b). 
There has been, to be sure, recent research on pragmatic comprehension (Taguchi, 2005, 2008, 2011), 
which Garcia (2004) differentiates from “linguistic comprehension.” Farrell and Mallard’s (2006) 
work on interactive listening strategies is another example that takes into account the context in 
which listening exists. Given its origins in psycholinguistics, however, listening research has focused 
largely on trying to figure out what goes on in the listener’s head. Listening goes on between and 
among people, and we need to know more about the interactions between speakers and listeners, 
with a focus on listeners rather than the usual one of speakers. 
 References 
 Adolphs, S. & Schmitt, N. (2003). Lexical coverage of spoken discourse.  Applied Linguistics, 24 , 425–438. 
 Alavi, S.M. & Janbaz, F. (2014). Comparing two pre-listening supports with Iranian EFL learners: Opportunity or obstacle. 
 RELC Journal, 45 , 253–267. 
 Al-jasser, F. (2008). The effect of teaching English phonotactics on the lexical segmentation of English as a foreign language. 
 System, 36 , 94–106. 
 Anderson, A. & Lynch, T. (1988).  Listening . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 Anderson, R.C. (1994). Role of the reader’s schema in comprehension, learning and memory. In R.B. Ruddell, M.R. Ruddell & 
H. Singer (Eds.),  Theoretical models and processes of reading  (4th ed) (pp. 469–482). Newark, DE: International Reading 
Association. 
 Anderson-Hsieh, J. & Koehler, K. (1988). The effect of foreign accent and speaking rate on native speaker comprehension. 
 Language Learning, 38 , 561–613. 
 Andringa, S., Olsthoorn, N., van Beuningen, C., Schoonen, R. & Hulstijn, J. (2012). Determinants of success in native and non-
native listening comprehension: An individual differences approach.  Language Learning, 62 (Suppl. 2), 49–78. 
 Bartlett, F.C. (1932).  Remembering . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Batty, A.O. (2015). A comparison of video- and audio-mediated listening tests with many-facet rasch modeling and differen-
tial distractor functioning.  Language Testing, 32 , 3–20. 
 Berkleyen, N. (2009). Helping teachers become better English students: Causes, effects, and coping strategies for foreign lan-
guage listening anxiety.  System, 37 , 664–675. 
 Berne, J.E. (1995). How does varying pre-listening activities affect second language listening comprehension?  Hispania, 78 , 
316–329. 
 Berne, J.E. (2004). Listening comprehension strategies: A review of the literature.  Foreign Language Annals, 37 , 521–533. 
 Blau, E.K. (1990). The effect of syntax, speed, and pauses on listening comprehension.  TESOL Quarterly, 24 , 746–753. 
 Bloomfield, A., Wayland, S.C., Rhoades, E., Blodgett, A., Linck, J. & Ross, S. (2010).  What makes listening difficult? Factors affect-
ing second language listening comprehension . University of Maryland Center for Advanced Study of Language. Retrieved 
from University of Maryland: http://www.casl.umd.edu/sites/default/files/TechDetails.TTO%2081434%20Final%20
Tech%20Report%20E.3.pdf 
 Blyth, A. (2012). Extensive listening versus listening strategies: Response to Siegel.  ELT Journal, 66 , 236–239. 
 Bonk, W.J. (2000). Second language lexical knowledge and listening comprehension.  International Journal of Listening, 14 , 
14–31. 
 Bozorgian, H. (2014). The role of metacognition in the development of EFL learners’ listening skill.  International Journal of 
Listening, 28 , 149–161. 
 Broersma, M. & Cutler, A. (2008). Phantom word activation in L2.  System, 36 , 22–34. 
 Broersma, M. & Cutler, A. (2011). Competition dynamics of second-language listening.  The Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 64 , 74–95. 
 Brown, R., Waring, R. & Donkaewbua, S. (2008). Incidental vocabulary acquisition from reading, reading-while-listening, 
and listening to stories.  Reading in a Foreign Language, 20 , 136–163. Retrieved from http://www.nflrc.hawaii.edu/rfl/
October2008/brown/brown.pdf 
 Brunfaut, T. & Révész, A. (2015). The role of task and listener characteristics in second language listening.  TESOL Quarterly, 
49 , 141–168. 
 Cai, W. & Lee, B.P.H. (2012). Processing unfamiliar words: Strategies, knowledge sources, and the relationship to text and word 
comprehension.  The Canadian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 15 , 122–145. 

210 • Steven Brown
 Chang, A.C.-S. (2007). The impact of vocabulary preparation on L2 listening comprehension, confidence and strategy use. 
 System, 35 , 534–550. 
 Chang, A.C.-S. (2008). Sources of listening anxiety in learning English as a foreign language.  Perceptual and Motor Skills, 106 , 
21–34. 
 Chang, A.C.-S. (2009). Gains to L2 listeners from reading while listening vs listening only in comprehending short stories. 
 System, 37 , 652–663. 
 Chang, A.C.-S. (2010). Second-language listening anxiety before and after a 1-yr. intervention in extensive listening compared 
with standard and foreign language instruction.  Perceptual and Motor Skills, 110 , 355–365. 
 Chang, A.C.-S. & Millet, S. (2014). The effect of extensive listening on developing L2 listening: Some hard evidence.  ELT 
Journal, 68 , 31–40. 
 Chang, A.C.-S. & Read, J. (2006). The effects of listening support on the listening performance of EFL learners.  TESOL Quar-
terly, 40 , 375–394. 
 Chang, A.C.-S. & Read, J. (2007). Support for foreign language listeners: Its effectiveness and limitations.  RELC Journal, 38 , 
375–395. 
 Chang, A.C.-S., Wu, B.W.-P. & Pang, J.C.-L. (2013). Second language listening difficulties perceived by low-level learners. 
 Perceptual & Motor Skills, 116 , 415–434. 
 Chiang, C.S. & Dunkel, P. (1992). The effect of speech modification, prior knowledge, and language proficiency on EFL lecture 
learning.  TESOL Quarterly, 26 , 345–374. 
 Chung, J.-M. (2002). The effects of two advance organizers with video texts for the teaching of listening in English.  Foreign 
Language Annals, 35 , 231–241. 
 Cross, J. (2009). Effects of listening strategy instruction on news videotext comprehension.  Language Teaching Research, 13 , 
151–176. 
 Cross, J. (2011a). Metacognitive instruction for helping less-skilled learners.  ELT Journal, 65 , 408–416. 
 Cross, J. (2011b). Social-cultural-historical contradictions in an L2 listening: A joint activity system.  Language Learning, 61 , 
820–886. 
 Cross, J. & Vandergrift, L. (2015). Guidelines for designing and conducting L2 listening studies.  ELT Journal, 69 , 86–89. 
 Cutler, A. (2012).  Native listening: Language experience and the recognition of spoken words . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
 Elkhafaifi, H. (2005a). The effect of prelistening activities on listening comprehension in Arabic learners.  Foreign Language 
Annals, 38 , 505–513. 
 Elkhafaifi, H. (2005b). Listening comprehension and anxiety in the Arabic language classroom.  Modern Language Journal, 
89 , 206–220. 
 Farrell, T.S.C. & Mallard, C. (2006). The use of reception strategies by learners of French as a foreign language.  Modern Lan-
guage Journal, 90 , 338–352. 
 Field, J. (2000). ‘Not waving but drowning’: A reply to Tony Ridgway.  ELT Journal, 54 , 186–195. 
 Field, J. (2004). An insight into listeners’ problems: Too much bottom-up or too much top-down?  System, 32 , 363–377. 
 Field, J. (2008a). Bricks or mortar: Which parts of the input does a second language listener rely on?  TESOL Quarterly, 42 , 
411–432. 
 Field, J. (2008b).  Listening in the language classroom . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Field, J. (2008c). Revising segmentation hypotheses in first and second language listening.  System, 36 , 35–51. 
 Folse, K. (2004).  Vocabulary myths: Applying second language research to classroom teaching . Ann Arbor, MI: University of 
Michigan Press. 
 Garcia, P. (2004). Pragmatic comprehension of high and low level language learners.  TESL-EJ, 8 (2), 1–15. Retrieved from 
http://www.tesl-ej.org/wordpress/issues/volume8/ej30/ej30a1/ 
 Ginther, A. (2002). Context and content visuals and performance on listening comprehension stimuli.  Language Testing, 19 , 
133–167. 
 Gobel, P. & Kano, M. (2014). Implementing a year-long reading while listening program for Japanese university EFL students. 
 Computer Assisted Language Learning, 27 , 279–293. 
 Goh, C. (2000). A cognitive perspective on language learners’ listening comprehension problems.  System, 28 , 55–75. 
 Goh, C. (2008). Metacognitive instruction for second language listening development: Theory, practice and research implica-
tions.  RELC Journal, 39 , 188–213. 
 Goh, C.C.M. & Hu, G. (2014). Exploring the relationship between metacognitive awareness and listening performance with 
questionnaire data.  Language Awareness, 23 , 255–274. 
 Golchi, M.M. (2012). Listening anxiety and its relationship with listening strategy use and listening comprehension among 
Iranian IELTS learners.  International Journal of English Linguistics, 2 , 115–128. 
 Graham, S. (2006). Listening comprehension: The learner’s perspective.  System, 34 , 165–182. 
 Graham, S. & Macaro, E. (2008). Strategy instruction in listening for lower-intermediate learners of French.  Language Learn-
ing, 58 , 747–783. 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Listening • 211
 Graham, S. & Santos, D. (2013). Selective listening in L2 learners of French.  Language Awareness, 22 , 56–75. 
 Graham, S., Santos, D. & Vanderplank, R. (2011). Exploring the relationship between listening development and strategy use. 
 Language Teaching Research, 15 , 435–456. 
 Griffiths, R. (1990). Speech rate and NNS comprehension: A preliminary study in time-benefit analysis.  Language Learning, 
40 , 311–336. 
 Guichon, N. & McLornan, S. (2008). The effects of multimodality on L2 learners: Implications for CALL resource design. 
 System, 36 , 85–93. 
 Harris, T. (2003). Listening with your eyes: The importance of speech-related gestures in the language classroom.  Foreign 
Language Annals, 36 , 180–187. 
 Hasan, A.S. (2000). Learners’ perceptions of listening comprehension problems.  Language, Culture and Curriculum, 13 , 137–153. 
 Hayati, A.M. & Mohmedi, F. (2011).The effect of films with and without subtitles on listening comprehension of EFL learners. 
 British Journal of Educational Technology, 42 , 181–192. 
 Hsu, C.-K., Hwang, G.-J. & Chang, C.-K. (2014). An automatic caption filtering and partial hiding approach to improving the 
English listening comprehension of EFL students.  Educational Technology & Society, 17 , 270–283. 
 Hsu, C.-K., Hwang, G.-J., Chang, Y.-T. & Chang, C.-K. (2013). Effects of video caption modes on English listening comprehen-
sion and vocabulary acquisition using handheld devices.  Educational Technology & Society, 16 , 403–414. 
 Hulstijn, J.H. (2003). Connectionist models of language processing and the training of listening skills with the aid of multi-
media software.  Computer Assisted Language Learning, 16 , 413–428. 
 Iimura, H. (2007). The listening process: Effects of types and repetition.  Language Education and Technology, 44 , 75–85. 
 Jafari, K. & Hashim, F. (2012). The effects of using advance organizers on improving EFL learners’ listening comprehension: 
A mixed-method study.  System, 40 , 270–281. 
 Jensen, E.D. & Vinther, T. (2003). Exact repetition as input enhancement in second language acquisition.  Language Learning, 
53 , 373–428. 
 King, C. & East, M. (2011). Learners’ interaction with listening tasks: Is either input repetition or a slower rate of delivery of 
benefit?  New Zealand Studies in Applied Linguistics, 17 , 70–85. 
 Lee, S.-P. & Lee, S.-D. (2015). Effects of audio-visual aids on foreign language test anxiety, reading and listening comprehen-
sion, and retention in EFL learners.  Perceptual & Motor Skills, 120 , 576–590. 
 Lesser, M.J. (2004). The effects of topic familiarity, mode and pausing on second language learners’ comprehension and focus 
on form.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 26 , 587–615. 
 Leveridge, A.N. & Yang, J.C. (2013). Testing learner reliance on caption supports in second language listening comprehension 
multimedia environments.  ReCall, 25 , 199–214. 
 Li, C.-H. (2014). An alternative to language learner dependence on L2 caption-reading input for comprehension of sitcoms in 
a multimedia environment.  Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 30 , 17–29. 
 Lin, L.-F. (2010). A video-based CALL program for proficient L2 learners’ comprehension ability, incidental vocabulary acqui-
sition,  Educational Media International, 47 , 199–216. 
 Long, D.R. (1989). Second language listening comprehension: A schema-theoretic perspective.  Modern Language Journal, 73 , 
32–40. 
 Long, D.R. (1990). What you don’t know can’t help you: An exploratory study of background knowledge and second language 
listening comprehension.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 12 , 65–80. 
 Macaro, E. (2006). Strategies for language learning and for language use: Revising the theoretical framework.  Modern Lan-
guage Journal, 90 , 320–337. 
 Markham, P. & Latham, M. (1987). The influence of religion-specific background knowledge on the listening comprehension 
of adult second-language students.  Language Learning, 37 , 157–170. 
 Mehrpour, S. & Rahimi, M. (2010). The impact of general and specific vocabulary knowledge on reading and listening com-
prehension: A case of Iranian EFL learners.  System, 38 , 292–300. 
 Mills, N., Pajares, F. & Herron, C. (2006). A reevaluation of the role of anxiety: Self-efficacy, anxiety, and their relation to read-
ing and listening proficiency.  Foreign Language Annals, 39 , 276–295. 
 Moussa-Inaty, J., Ayres, P. & Sweller, J. (2012). Improving listening skills in English as a foreign language by reading rather than 
listening: A cognitive load perspective.  Applied Cognitive Psychology, 26 , 391–402. 
 Nation, I.S.P. (2006). How large a vocabulary is needed for reading and listening?  The Canadian Modern Language Review, 
63 , 59–82. 
 Ockey, G.J. (2007). Construct implications of including still image or video in computer-based listening tests.  Language Test-
ing, 24 , 517–537. 
 O’Malley, J.M. & Chamot, A.U. (1990).  Learning strategies in second language acquisition . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
 Pae, T.-I. (2012). Skill-based L2 anxieties revisited: Their intra-relations and the inter-relations with general foreign language 
anxiety.  Applied Linguistics, 34 , 232–252. 

212 • Steven Brown
 Perez, M.M., Peters, E. & Desmet, P. (2013). Is less more? Effectiveness and perceived usefulness of keyword and full captioned 
video for L2 listening comprehension.  ReCAll, 26 , 21–43. 
 Prince, P. (2013). Listening, remembering, writing: Exploring the dictogloss task.  Language Teaching Research, 17 , 486–500. 
 Rahimirad, M. & Shams, M.R. (2014). The effect of activating metacognitive strategies on the listening performance and 
metacognitive awareness of EFL students.  International Journal of Listening, 28 , 162–176. 
 Renandya, W.A. & Farrell, T.S.C. (2010). ‘Teacher, the tape is too fast’: Extensive listening in ELT.  ELT Journal, 65 , 52–59. 
 Révész, A. & Brunfaut, T. (2013). Text characteristics of task input and difficulty in second language listening comprehension. 
 Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 35 , 31–65. 
 Richards, J.C. (2005). Second thoughts on teaching listening.  RELC Journal, 36 , 85–92. 
 Robin, R. (2007). Commentary: Learner-based listening and technological authenticity.  Language Learning & Technology 11 , 
109–115. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/robin 
 Rost, M. (2011).  Teaching and researching listening (2nd ed). Harlow, UK: Longman. 
 Rost, M. (2014). Listening in a multilingual world: The challenge of second language (L2) listening.  International Journal of 
Listening, 28 , 131–148. 
 Sakai, H. (2009). Effect of repetition of exposure and proficiency level in L2 listening tests.  TESOL Quarterly, 43 , 360–372. 
 Schank, R.C. & Abelson, R.P. (1977).  Scripts, plans, goals and understanding: An enquiry into human knowledge structure . Hill-
sdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Schmidt-Rinehart, B.C. (1994). The effects of topic familiarity on second language listening comprehension.  Modern Lan-
guage Journal, 78 , 179–189. 
 Siegel, J. (2011). Thoughts on L2 listening pedagogy.  ELT Journal, 65 , 318–321. 
 Siegel, J. (2014). Exploring L2 listening instruction: Examinations of practice.  ELT Journal, 68 , 22–30. 
 Song, M.-Y. (2008). Do divisible subskills exist in second language (L2) comprehension? A structural equation modeling 
approach.  Language Testing, 25 , 435–464. 
 Staehr, L.S. (2009). Vocabulary knowledge and advanced listening comprehension in English as a foreign language.  Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 31 , 577–607. 
 Sueyoshi, A. & Hardison, D.M. (2005). The role of gestures and facial cues in second language listening comprehension.  Lan-
guage Learning, 55 , 661–699. 
 Taguchi, N. (2005). Comprehending implied meaning in English as a foreign language.  Modern Language Journal, 89 , 543–562. 
 Taguchi, N. (2008). Pragmatic comprehension in Japanese as a foreign language.  Modern Language Journal, 92 , 558–576. 
 Taguchi, N. (2011). The effect of L2 proficiency and study-abroad experience on pragmatic comprehension.  Language Learn-
ing, 61 , 904–939. 
 Taylor, G. (2005). Perceived processing strategies of students watching captioned video.  Foreign Language Annnals, 38 , 422–427. 
 Tyler, M.D. (2001). Resource consumption as a function of topic knowledge in nonnative and native comprehension.  Language 
Learning, 51 , 257–280. 
 Vandergrift, L. (1997). The comprehension strategies of second language (French) listeners: A descriptive study.  Foreign Lan-
guage Annals, 30 , 387–409. 
 Vandergrift, L. (2006). Second language listening: Listening ability or language proficiency?  The Modern Language Journal, 
90 , 6–18. 
 Vandergrift, L. & Baker, S. (2015). Learner variables in second language listening comprehension: An exploratory path analysis. 
 Language Learning, 65 , 390–416. 
 Vandergrift, L. & Goh, C.M. (2012).  Teaching and learning second language listening: Metacognition in action . New York: Rout-
ledge. 
 Vandergrift, L., Goh, C.C.M., Mareschal, C.J. & Tafaghodtari, M.H. (2006). The metacognitive awareness listening question-
naire: Development and validation.  Language Learning, 56 , 431–462. 
 Vandergrift, L. & Tafaghodtari, M.H. (2010). Teaching L2 learners how to listen does make a difference: An empirical study. 
 Language Learning, 60 , 470–497. 
 Vanderplank, R. (2010). Déjà vu? A decade of research on language labs, TV and video in language teaching.  Language Teach-
ing, 43 , 1–37. 
 vanZeeland, H. & Schmitt, N. (2013). Lexical coverage in L1 and L2 listening comprehension: The same or different from 
reading comprehension?  Applied Linguistics, 34 , 457–479. 
 Voss, B. (1979). Hesitation phenomena as sources of perceptual errors for non-native speakers.  Language and Speech, 22 , 
129–144. 
 Wagner, E. (2010). The effect of the use of video texts on ESL listening test-taker performance.  Language Testing, 27 , 493–513. 
 Webb, Stuart & Rodgers, M.P.H. (2009). Vocabulary demands of television programs.  Language Learning, 59 , 335–366. 
 Weber, A. & Cutler, A. (2006). First-language phonotactics in second-language listening.  Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, 119 , 597–607. 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Listening • 213
 Wilberschied, L. & Berman, P.M. (2004). Effect of using photos from authentic video as advance organizers on listening com-
prehension of an FLES Chinese class.  Foreign Language Annals, 37 , 534–540. 
 Winke, P., Gass, S. & Sydorenko, T. (2013). Factors influencing the use of captions by foreign language learners: An eye-
tracking study.  Modern Language Journal, 97 , 254–275. 
 Woodall, B. (2010). Simultaneous listening and reading in ESL: Helping second language learners read (and enjoy reading) 
more efficiently.  TESOL Journal, 1 , 186–205. 
 Wu, Y. (1998). What do tests of listening comprehension test? A retrospection study of EFL test-takers performing a multiple-
choice task.  Language Testing, 15 , 21–44. 
 Yang, J.C. & Chang, P. (2013). Captions and reduced forms instruction: The impact on EFL students’ listening comprehension. 
 ReCAll, 26 , 44–61. 
 Yeldham, M. (2015). Second language listening instruction: Comparing a strategies-based approach with an interactive, strate-
gies/bottom-up skills approach.  TESOL Quarterly, 50 (2), 394–420. 
 Yeldham, M. & Gruba, P. (2014). Toward an instructional approach to developing interactive second language listening.  Language 
Teaching Research, 18 , 33–53. 
 Zhang, X. (2013). Foreign language listening anxiety and listening performance: Conceptualizations and causal relationships. 
 System, 41 , 164–177. 

214
 16 
 Cognition, Metacognition, and L2 Listening 
 Christine C. M. Goh 
 Introduction 
 The domain of second language (L2) listening has been developing a robust research tradition in the 
past three and a half decades. Although it is the least researched language skill compared with more 
established ones such as reading and writing, the various lines of inquiry in L2 listening have yielded 
important insights that inform both teaching and learning. This chapter begins with a description 
of the nature of L2 listening that involves various enabling skills, cognitive processes and types of 
listening. It then gives an overview of important developments, trends and traditions in L2 listening 
research and instruction, focusing on areas such as factors that influence listening comprehension, 
methods in investigating L2 listening and listening in English for Specific Purposes (ESP). This is 
followed by a discussion of current issues that concern the field and concludes with some possible 
new directions for L2 listening research. 
 Nature of L2 Listening 
 Listening is one of the four language communication skills in second language acquisition and learn-
ing. Apart from the role it has in communication, listening provides an important source of linguis-
tic input for language learners (Krashen, 1981) and opportunities for language development through 
negotiations during oral interactions (Gass, 1997). While listening comprehension in a first language 
(L1) is viewed as a relatively easy process, L2 listening often presents language learners with some of 
the greatest challenges in their language development. 
 In order to understand what it means for language learners to listen effectively, it is useful to 
consider the nature of L2 listening. Listening processes are often invisible to teachers and even to the 
learners themselves because they occur ‘inside the listener’s head’. For a long time, listening teachers 
had focused on what learners did to demonstrate their comprehension, such as by providing the 
correct answers to comprehension questions and making notes of what they hear. Over the years, 
however, knowledge about language comprehension emanating from related fields, most notably 
being cognitive psychology, has led L2 researchers to devote more attention to trying to understand 
the processes that influence L2 learners’ comprehension. In addition, researchers were also keen to 
investigate pedagogical procedures that can help learners with these processes. The investigation of 
www.ebook3000.com

Cognition, Metacognition, and L2 Listening • 215
L2 listening also expanded to include a better understanding of how learners cope with listening in 
specific situations of studies and work. 
 The construct of listening has been defined in numerous ways by L1 communication and L2 lis-
tening scholars. There are nevertheless some key characteristics that are common to these definitions: 
skills that listeners need to comprehend oral texts effectively, cognitive processes that they engage in 
before, during and after listening, and the non-participatory and interactive contexts of L2 listening. 
These are explained in the following sections. 
 Enabling Skills for Communication 
 It is widely acknowledged that L2 listening comprehension is enabled by a number of sub-skills. 
These have been presented as taxonomies and lists of varying lengths and levels of detail. For exam-
ple, Richards (1983) proposed two lists of listening skills, one for general listening and another for 
academic listening. Munby’s (1978) list, which is the longest, covers a wide range of communicative 
functions involving listening. Buck (2001) makes a distinction between skills needed for listening 
for explicit information and those for inferring implicit information that language testers could use 
when designing tests, and Field (2008) presents various skills for decoding small units of sounds and 
words, as well as for making interpretations based on these decoded sounds. Rost (1990, 2013) pres-
ents skills that are needed for low- and high-level inferencing that range from recognising words to 
applying processes for interpreting and constructing models of understanding. Vandergrift and Goh 
(2012) suggest that listeners require six core skills in order to engage with listening input in ways that 
are relevant to their communicative purposes. Depending on the length of the input and the purpose 
that an individual has for listening, he or she may use one or more of these enabling skills. These are 
listening for details, listening to infer, listening for global understanding, listening for main ideas, 
listening to predict and listening selectively. 
 These skills have been accepted and applied in language teaching and testing to different extents. 
The rationale of these skills has been applied to developing teaching and learning materials, and vari-
ous practice activities have been designed for learners to work from listening texts. Such an approach 
has been helpful to both teachers and learners because they enable learners to model their listening 
behaviour after what expert L1 listeners appear to do successfully. The question of the psychological 
reality of these sub-skills is sometimes raised, and there remains a paucity of research on the divis-
ibility of listening into sub-skills. There is therefore still a lack of strong evidence supporting or 
refuting such divisions within the listening construct which teachers and material developers have 
been advocating. A recent study by Goh and Aryadoust (2015) offered some preliminary insights 
into this aspect of the construct of L2 listening. They examined whether listening abilities listed for 
an international standardised test of academic listening could be empirically separated based on test 
takers’ performance. The results showed that the sub-skills in the test were empirically divisible, and 
this has lent support to the sub-skill approach to teaching and assessment. 
 Decoding Skills 
 In addition to the communication-oriented skills suggested in the previous sections, certain text- or 
language-oriented skills are also necessary for supporting listening comprehension. An important 
skill is lexical segmentation, which is one of the key decoding skills, and it enables listeners to rec-
ognise sounds in the speech stream and match them to the vocabulary store in memory (Field, 
2008). There are other decoding skills, such as recognising phonemes, but these tend to occur almost 

216 • Christine C. M. Goh
simultaneously with the recognition of larger units such as words and phrases, since a strictly linear 
process of building up meaning from the smallest units of sounds is a view that is hard to defend 
(G. Brown, 1990). Researchers and listening testers have also been cautioned against testing such 
low-level decoding skills because the recognition of phonemes is only useful for supporting listen-
ers in applying communication-focused skills such as listening for literal meaning or listening to 
infer meaning (Dunkel, Henning & Chaudron, 1993). On the other hand, the recognition of larger 
phonological patterns, such as stress and intonation (Cauldwell, 2013), can play a far greater role in 
helping learners recognise important units of information from a speech stream, which they can use 
for constructing a reasonable interpretation (G. Brown, 1990). 
 Cognitive Processes 
 The operationalization of the aforementioned listening skills is made possible by several cognitive 
processes that take place within the listener. It is now widely accepted that listening comprehension 
comprises two processes that frequently occur together: bottom-up and top-down.  Bottom-up pro-
cessing  refers to the way meaning is built up from the sounds that are heard. The other is  top-down 
processing , where meaning is constructed by listeners applying their prior knowledge about the world 
and the L2 system. These two manners of processing often interact during listening to enable listen-
ers to interpret what is heard by using both their linguistic ability to recognise sounds and words and 
their prior knowledge or ‘schema’ to infer, embellish and construct an interpretation of the words 
and sounds they hear. In effective listening, these cognitive processes occur harmoniously as different 
sources of input and knowledge are connected to produce understanding. Posited as a connection-
ist model, comprehension is viewed as the result of concurrent processing of input through the 
activation of interconnected or associative neural networks in the brain that attend to audio signals 
and the retrieval and application of stored linguistic and world knowledge in long-term memory 
(Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 1991). 
 In language comprehension, the working memory plays a central role by processing the sounds 
in the speech through the phonological or articulatory loop as well as monitoring and controlling 
the processes to enable some interpretation to occur (Baddeley, 2003). The phonological loop holds 
verbal information for as long as possible so that the information can be processed. In L2 listening, 
however, learners often complain that they are unable to remember the words which they have just 
heard (Goh, 2000), indicating that their cognitive capacities are so stretched by various demands that 
breakdown in comprehension is often a problem. Monitoring and managing of aural information 
is carried out by the central executive, the system that is responsible for directing attention to the 
inputs, coordinating smooth and harmonious interaction of cognitive processes, as well as regulating 
and redirecting attention to the input and unfolding interpretation. These monitoring and manage-
ment efforts are metacognitive processes that enable learners to manage their listening processes 
(Chamot, 1995). 
 A Listening Comprehension Model 
 These processes are represented in a comprehension model that consists of three recurrent and over-
lapping cognitive phases— perception ,  parsing  and  utilization  (Anderson, 1995). Perception is also 
referred to as decoding, the process in which listeners match the sounds in a stream of speech to 
words they have in their memory store. Parsing occurs when decoded words are analysed (often 
simultaneously) in larger units according to the listeners’ knowledge of grammar or use of lexical 
cues. Utilisation is the process by which listeners relate the processed linguistic information to their 
prior knowledge of the world and knowledge about the context of interaction. Utilisation enables the 
www.ebook3000.com

Cognition, Metacognition, and L2 Listening • 217
listener to arrive at a reasonable interpretation of the meaning and communicative function of the 
utterances heard. In face-to-face interactions, listeners will need to formulate appropriate responses 
to what they have understood to be the meaning and intention of the speaker. This process can also 
be a challenge to L2 listeners because of the need to cope with both comprehension and production 
of language. If, however, such a need does not arise, the interpretation will be transferred to long-
term memory to be stored and retrieved at a later time if necessary. 
 These cognitive processes in L1, particularly perception and parsing, occur in an automatised 
manner requiring little or no special effort on the listener’s part. The utilisation phase may some-
times require more effort and control, as higher-level processes such as inferring may need more 
work depending on the context of interaction and the explicitness on the speaker’s part. L2 listeners, 
on the other hand, experience difficulties at all three phases, in particular the perception or decoding 
phase (S. Brown, 2011; Goh, 2000; Graham, 2006). In discussing learner listening, G. Brown (1990) 
identified three important abilities needed for constructing reasonable interpretations: using phono-
logical cues, learning to use contextual information and drawing constrained inferences. 
 For many learners, using phonological cues can be a huge challenge because their lexical segmen-
tation skills are underdeveloped. Lexical segmentation is the ability to distinguish words from one 
another within a stream of speech and the concomitant ability to group them into meaningful units 
so that they can use the words and phrases to construct minimally a literal interpretation (Field, 
2008). While prior knowledge is often helpful for learners, it can also distract them (Macaro, Graham 
& Vanderplank, 2007), cause them to ignore useful textual cues (Field, 2004) and limit their interpre-
tations owing to over-reliance on background knowledge (Tsui & Fullilove, 1998). 
 Some research has also been conducted on the role of working memory in L2 listening, though 
more studies are clearly needed for this line of inquiry because the results are still inconclusive. 
While some research found no association between working memory and L2 listening comprehen-
sion (Taguchi, 2008; Wolfgramm, Suter & Goeksel, 2016), a significant relationship between the two 
has been reported in at least two other studies (Brunfaut & Révész, 2014; Kormos & Safar, 2008). 
Concentration which appeared to be a correlate of working memory was able to predict listening 
comprehension reasonably well (Wolfgramm et al., 2016). 
 One-Way and Interactive Listening 
 There are two kinds of L2 listening. The first involves the listeners to attend to and comprehend the input 
without the need to respond in any overt manner to what they have or have not understood. Informa-
tion that has been processed may be stored and used at another time or even discarded if it is deemed 
unimportant. This type of listening is commonly referred to as one-way or non-participatory listening. 
It occurs when L2 learners listen to a talk, attend a lecture, watch television or listen to the radio or pod-
casts. The second type of listening is interactive listening; as the name suggests, listeners have to engage 
with others in an interaction and use what they have comprehended to formulate appropriate responses. 
In these oral interactions, L2 learners switch between the role of listener and speaker. 
 Interactive listening may appear to be a more challenging form of L2 listening because learners 
have limited time to process what is heard before responding in real time to their interlocutors, and 
this could add pressure and affect their performance. While this may be true in some situations, 
learners generally can use communication strategies to request help from their interlocutors by ask-
ing them to repeat or clarify what is said. They are also able to check their understanding with their 
interlocutors. These helping procedures are typically absent in one-way listening, so learners have 
to resort to other means of enhancing their comprehension, such as by using listening strategies to 
solve these problems in order to process the meaning of texts on their own (Chamot, 1995). Further 
discussions about strategy use are found later in this chapter. 

218 • Christine C. M. Goh
 Developments and Trends in L2 Listening Research 
 Although listening research has a relatively shorter history in L2 research, there is now a substantial 
body of knowledge concerning the nature and role of various cognitive processes in L2 listening com-
prehension. It has its foundations in earlier discussions (e.g. G. Brown, 1990; Dirven & Oakeshott-
Taylor, 1984, 1985; Dunkel, 1991; Rost, 1990) and is now further informed by new developments in 
psychology and other related fields (e.g. Field, 2008; Flowerdew & Miller, 2005; Rost, 2013; Vandergrift 
& Goh, 2009, 2012). Dunkel (1991), in surveying the field of L1 and L2 listening 20 years ago, provided 
a blueprint for areas of focus in L2 listening research, which many researchers still find useful today: 
 1. Understand the causative role participatory and non-participatory listening plays in 
second language acquisition (both in naturalistic environments and in formal contexts 
such as classrooms). 
 2. Determine the role listening comprehension skill development does or should play in 
the L2 curriculum, especially in the beginning stages of learning. 
 3. Pinpoint the factors “inside and outside the head” that enhance or depress comprehen-
sion of L2 input. 
 4. Identify the components (subskills) of listening and to deduce the dynamic process(es) 
involved in L2 listening comprehension 
 5. Deduce specific instructional tasks and classroom activities that enhance listening skill 
development for L2 learners. 
 (p. 434, 435) 
 Most of the studies conducted to date have focused predominantly on the last three areas, particu-
larly on the internal and external factors that affect L2 listening performance as well as the interaction 
of these factors on processes and outcomes of L2 listening comprehension. In her review of listening 
research, Rubin (1994) identified studies that investigated the respective effects of text, interlocutor, 
task, listener and processing characteristics on successful L2 comprehension. Goh (2005) focused on 
the role of linguistic and metacognitive knowledge as well as strategies in creating expertise in L2 
listening while Vandergrift (2007) examined the results of research on cognitive and affective factors 
along with external factors in the form of top-down and bottom-up instructional approaches. 
 Prior and Linguistic Knowledge 
 A common thread that runs through L2 listening research is the extent to which learner knowledge 
can enhance comprehension. Learner knowledge consists mainly of three kinds, namely linguis-
tic (systemic) knowledge, prior knowledge and metacognitive knowledge. Research has shown that 
applying prior knowledge enhances L2 listening comprehension (Goh, 1998; Long, 1990), but this 
strategy is not without its limitations if learners rely too heavily on it (Macaro, Graham & Vander-
plank, 2007). Prior knowledge is used to enhance or embellish an interpretation. In situations when 
the spoken input is unclear or ambiguous, listeners may use their prior knowledge to fill in the gaps 
so as to construct a reasonable interpretation of what is said. 
 Phonological Knowledge 
 Linguistic knowledge is an important factor in listening comprehension, and it consists of phono-
logical, lexical and syntactic knowledge as well as knowledge about pragmatics and discourse (Rost, 
2013; Vandergrift & Goh, 2012). Listening comprehension can be greatly enhanced when learners’ 
www.ebook3000.com

Cognition, Metacognition, and L2 Listening • 219
L2 linguistic knowledge is partially automatised or proceduralised. Phonological knowledge of pho-
nemes, syllables and intonation can help them in lexical segmentation during the perception phase, 
and syntactic knowledge can facilitate the process of parsing (Brown, 1990; Field, 2008; Lynch, 1998). 
While some L2 learners believed that familiarity with speakers’ accents can assist or impede listening 
comprehension (Goh, 1999), some recent studies have shown that accents may not have such great 
effects on listening performance as was generally thought (Abeywickrama, 2013; Ockey, Papageor-
giou & French, 2016). 
 Vocabulary Knowledge 
 Learners’ vocabulary or lexical knowledge has been shown to influence listening comprehension in 
various L2 learning contexts (Bonk, 2000; Kelly, 1991; Meccarty, 2000; Wolfgramm et al., 2016). Two 
recent studies in particular indicated strong and significant correlations between the two (Andringa, 
Olsthoorn, van Beuningen, Schoonen & Hulstijn, 2012; Stæhr, 2009). Stæhr took a more fine-tuned 
approach that examined the respective effects of breadth and depth of vocabulary and reported that 
breadth contributed to greater variance in comprehension. L2 learners have an additional challenge 
with vocabulary, as they may actually know the words in print but are unable to recognise them 
acoustically in spoken texts (Goh, 1998). Comprehension can also be affected by unfamiliarity with 
idiomatic and metaphorical language, as found in Littlemore’s (2001) study of overseas students’ 
lecture comprehension. 
 Discourse and Pragmatic Knowledge 
 Knowledge about how discourse is organised can also assist L2 listening comprehension. In partic-
ular, when the role of discourse signalling cues is understood by L2 learners, their comprehension 
of longer texts such as lecture can be enhanced (Flowerdew & Tauroza, 1995; Jung, 2003). Cross 
(2014) highlighted the importance of cultivating L2 listeners’ knowledge about the structural and 
functional properties of texts, or what he called metatextual skills, to help them recognize cul-
turally specific conventions of construction and production of text. Equally useful is pragmatic 
knowledge that enables learners to understand speakers’ intentions and attitudes (also known as 
implicatures) beyond what is understood literally. In this regard, higher-proficiency listeners seem 
to be more successful (Taguchi, 2005). The ability to provide speakers with backchannelling, such 
as through receipt tokens ( Mm-hm, yeah, mm ) in interactive listening, is another factor that helps 
listeners maintain their participation and indicate their engagement or ‘listenership’ (Farr, 2003; 
Gardner, 1998). 
 Metacognition 
 Metacognition refers to thinking about one’s cognitive processes, according to Flavell (1976), and 
there are two aspects to it: knowledge about cognitive processes and the “active monitoring and con-
sequent regulation and orchestration of these processes” (p. 232). The role of metacognition in L2 
listening was identified by Goh (1997) in her study of Chinese ESL learners, and the relevance of this 
construct to L2 listening research and instruction was further elaborated upon in the articulation of 
pedagogical approaches and techniques (Goh, 2008, 2010). Metacognitive knowledge about listening 
has three dimensions, namely knowledge and beliefs about oneself and others as listeners (person 
knowledge), the nature and demands of listening tasks (task knowledge), and special heuristics or 
strategies that can be used to facilitate comprehension (strategy knowledge). The processes of moni-
toring, regulation and orchestration of cognitive processes constitute strategy use by an individual 

220 • Christine C. M. Goh
(Vandergrift, 2003). These are the actual application of special plans and techniques to facilitate 
comprehension before, during and after listening. 
 Research on metacognition in L2 listening to date has focused on two areas: learners’ awareness 
of their listening and metacognitive processes and the effectiveness of teaching learners about their 
listening and metacognitive processes and how to apply listening strategies to achieve better compre-
hension (Goh & Zhang, 2013). 
 Metacognitive Awareness 
 There is abundant evidence now to show that learners of different age groups and learning contexts 
possess some metacognitive knowledge about L2 listening. Young learners around the ages of 10–12 
demonstrated knowledge about factors that affected their listening comprehension, for example, the 
topic of the listening text and the types of questions asked (see Cross, 2009; Goh & Kaur, 2013; Goh & 
Taib, 2006; Vandergrift, 2002). Many of these learners were also able to articulate strategies that they 
believed would improve their listening performance, such as by ignoring difficult words and mak-
ing inferences. Richer metacognitive knowledge was elicited from adolescent and adult learners who 
demonstrated more nuanced understanding of the strengths and limitations of strategies (Cross, 
2009, 2010; Goh, 1999; Graham, 2006; Zeng, 2012; Zhang & Goh, 2006). These listeners across age 
groups were also aware of the challenges and factors that influenced their listening, thus demonstrat-
ing their person knowledge about L2 listening. They reported problems such as not being able to 
hear important words and interpret what was heard beyond a literal interpretation of the input as 
well as being distracted by unfamiliar words. Their knowledge is uneven, however, and learners can 
benefit from talking about their strategy use and other areas of metacognitive knowledge with one 
another. 
 Listening Strategies 
 The seminal study by O’Malley, Chamot and Küpper (1989) that identified L2 listening strategies 
provided an important impetus for further research in this area, and the field has since seen a number 
of studies that reported the strategies used by L2 listeners, with several taxonomies being proposed 
(e.g. Chen, 2007; Goh, 1998, 2002; Vandergrift, 1996, 1997, 1998; Young, 1997). Many of these tax-
onomies have been guided by a cognitive-metacognitive-social/affective framework, drawing from 
the framework of learning strategies of O’Malley and Chamot (1990). Despite some differences in 
these taxonomies, several commonalities existed. 
 Vandergrift and Goh (2012, pp. 277–284) proposed 12 groups of strategies that represented men-
tal processes and learning behaviours for L2 listening. Most of these strategies are used to facilitate 
cognitive processing during listening and often in an orchestrated manner: focusing attention, mon-
itoring, evaluation, inferencing, elaboration, contextualisation and reorganizing. Other strategies, 
namely planning, prediction, and using linguistic and learning resources, enable learners to make 
better preparations for listening and to self-direct their overall listening development. Last, but not 
least, cooperation and managing emotions are strategies that learners can use to cope with stressful 
face-to-face interactional listening or high-stakes one-way listening situations. 
 Learning to Use Strategies 
 L2 learners have also demonstrated gains in listening performance when they were taught listen-
ing strategies. Canadian French L2 learners who were guided through a sequence of steps involving 
predicting, planning, monitoring, evaluating, and problem solving during their listening task made 
www.ebook3000.com

Cognition, Metacognition, and L2 Listening • 221
significant gains in listening comprehension after 13 weeks of instruction compared with their coun-
terparts in the control group (Vandergrift & Tafaghodtari, 2010). In addition, they also experienced 
an increase in metacognitive knowledge as measured by the Metacognitive Awareness Listening 
Questionnaire (MALQ; Vandergrift, Goh, Mareschal & Tafaghodtari, 2006). Positive results of strat-
egy instruction were also reported in a UK study of younger French learners who received strategy 
instruction in listening and reading over a nine-month period (Harris, 2007; see also Carrier, 2003). 
 Several studies which reported learning success had conducted metacognitive instruction for lis-
tening that enriched learners’ metacognitive knowledge through planning and reflection, and embed-
ded strategy training within listening comprehension lessons that required students to work directly 
with texts (Goh, 2008). Zeng (2014) conducted a 10-week study of Chinese college EFL learners, 
who went through a weekly sequence of individual self-reflection, group discussions and teacher-
led awareness-raising of strategies underlying four metacognitive processes: planning, monitoring, 
evaluating, and problem-solving/inferencing. Although both experimental and comparison groups 
showed significant improvements, an independent t-test revealed significantly greater progress in the 
metacognitive group, who also revealed increased confidence through their post-lesson reflections. 
 When language learners had the opportunities to engage in strategy learning tasks, not only did 
their metacognitive knowledge of listening increase, but their motivation and self-efficacy was also 
enhanced (e.g. Graham, Santos & Vanderplank, 2011; Harris, 2007; Zeng, 2012, 2014). Less-skilled 
L2 listeners also benefitted more compared with their more-skilled counterparts (Cross, 2011a; Goh 
& Taib, 2006; Vandergrift & Tafaghodtari, 2010). 
 Methods of Investigating L2 Listening 
 Vandergrift (2007, 2015) distinguished between methods employed to investigate listening as prod-
uct and listening as process as follows: when investigating the product or outcome of listening, 
researchers would typically use experimental designs to determine the existence of causal relation-
ships through tests of significance in performance gains. Correlational studies are conducted to 
investigate associations among different variables. The process of listening can be examined through 
questionnaires, interviews, stimulated recall protocols, diaries, observation notes, think-aloud pro-
tocols, tracking software and auditory perception processing. To measure listening ability for both 
types of studies, proficiency test scores and free-written recall protocols are used, with the former 
being the more common method as it is less labour-intensive and can be easily administered to large 
groups (Vandergrift, 2015, pp. 301–302). Scores may be taken from tests that immediately follow a 
pedagogical treatment or are administered after a time interval. Administering both immediate and 
delayed post-tests are useful for examining longer-term effects of the treatment. 
 It is common for L2 listening researchers to investigate correlations between learners’ test perfor-
mance and other variables such as motivation, metacognition and self-efficacy by using scores from 
instruments that measure these constructs. The MALQ, for example, is a 21-item instrument used for 
eliciting L2 listeners’ metacognitive awareness and perceived use of strategies, and it comprises five 
distinct factors in listening: problem-solving, planning and evaluation, mental translation, person 
knowledge, and direct attention metacognitive knowledge and strategy use (Vandergrift et al., 2006). 
Triangulating data from various sources using a mixed-methods approach is increasingly recognised 
as essential for increasing the validity of any study on listening processes (Vandergrift, 2015). 
 Goh and Aryadoust (2016) also observed the adoption of different methods in L2 listening 
research, which included think-aloud protocol analysis, latent trait and latent class modelling, regres-
sion analysis of questionnaire data, data mining techniques and a combination of qualitative and 
quantitative methods in mixed-methods approaches. They further reported that test scores from very 
large samples were often used to determine the effects of variables such as age, L1 background, topic 

222 • Christine C. M. Goh
difficulty or bias, gender and frequency of exposure to listening test input on performance. Such 
effects have been investigated through the use of quantitative statistical methods such as regression 
analysis and psychometric and statistical modelling in the form of Rasch measurement Differential 
Item Functioning (DIF) and Structural Equation Modelling (SEM). 
 Listening in ESP 
 An area of L2 listening research that is often discussed separately is listening in English for Specific 
Purposes (ESP), which comprises English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and English for Occupa-
tional Purposes (EOP). In general, there has been limited interface between general L2 listening 
and ESP listening, even though the two share many fundamental learner and process characteris-
tics (Goh, 2013). Main differences lie in the additional skills and types of vocabulary and discourse 
knowledge required for EAP and EOP purposes. As Fulcher (1999) noted about EAP testing, it had 
focused overly on subject knowledge, thereby detracting it from the main purpose of drawing valid 
inferences about language knowledge, skills or abilities from test scores. He highlighted that it was 
language proficiency, not subject knowledge, that mainly accounted for variance in EAP test scores, 
suggesting therefore that general L2 listening ability had a greater impact on learners’ overall EAP 
listening performance. 
 EAP listening programmes in general prioritise the development of new skills such as note-taking 
during lectures, but programmes may also value interactive listening in face-to-face communication 
(Feak & Salehzadeh, 2001). In some EOP contexts, such as hospitality and aviation, listening teach-
ers may be working with students of lower English proficiency than EAP students, and they would 
therefore need to enhance their pedagogy to strengthen general comprehension processes. Research 
into factors affecting L2 listening can assist ESP teachers to understand issues concerning listening 
problems, needs and pedagogical practices. Although EAP listening has had a relatively long tradi-
tion (see, for example, Chaudron & Richards, 1986; Flowerdew, 1994; Graham, 2011), there is still a 
paucity of research on ESP listening in EOP contexts. It is suggested therefore that research insights 
in general L2 listening be used to inform and stimulate further research in ESP listening, in particular 
listening in EOP contexts, where there is a conspicuous lack of attention. 
 Controversy and Developments 
 An area of research that has received much attention in recent years is L2 listeners’ metacognition: 
metacognitive knowledge, strategy use and the effects of teaching learners how to use strategies. The 
benefits of strategy training, however, have been called into question by Renandya and Farrell (2011), 
who cited two reasons, namely a lack of success with the strategy approach for lower-proficiency 
learners and the heavy burden it placed on teachers. In its place, the authors have argued for an 
approach that focused on extensive listening instead. Cross (2011b) criticised the commentary for 
a lack of evidence from rigorous empirical studies to support the authors’ views. Siegel (2011) also 
refuted the authors’ claim by citing more recent research that was beginning to establish a foun-
dation that listening pedagogy that included listening strategies was valuable. Five reasons against 
strategy instruction were further put forward by Renandya (2012): weak empirical evidence, unrea-
sonable demand and opportunity cost, teachers’ and students’ views, threshold level and learners do 
not need strategies. 
 In his point-by-point rebuttal, Cross (2012) pointed out that the studies used to support the 
argument concerning a lack of evidence of success were mostly dated (15–20 years ago) and did not 
represent contemporary knowledge and developments in the field. This echoed Siegel’s (2011) obser-
vation. Indeed, if we were to consider research in the last five to ten years, it would not be difficult 
www.ebook3000.com

Cognition, Metacognition, and L2 Listening • 223
to see the growing number of studies that have reported the positive effects of teaching learners to 
use strategies (see earlier ‘Metacognition’ section). It must be qualified, nevertheless, that many of 
these studies which showed positive effects did not deliver the original form of strategy instruction, 
which advocated an explicit focus on presentation and practice of strategies followed by a review of 
the strategies in the classroom (see Mendelsohn, 1995). This approach has some limitations, one of 
which is that strategies are taught in an isolated manner and not contexualised within a communi-
cation and language learning task or lesson. Learners may therefore not see the relevance of such 
training, especially when they are already aware of these strategies in their L1 (Chamot, 1995) and 
they cannot see how they could apply these strategies when confronted with real-time listening that 
they find challenging. 
 Recent studies instead adopted a metacognitive approach that planned pedagogical procedures to 
raise learners’ awareness of comprehension processes and teach learners how to use relevant strate-
gies during listening and for self-regulating listening activities beyond class (Vandergrift & Goh, 
2012). Such an approach can address concerns that strategy instruction took time away from learn-
ers working from texts (Ridgway, 2000). The most notable metacognitive instruction method is the 
metacognitive pedagogical cycle proposed by Vandergrift (2004, 2007). It consists of several stages 
where strategies and other metacognitive processes are integrated with listening to texts in a coher-
ent lesson sequence. The sequence enables learners to work from text through close listening at three 
separate stages and engage in metacognitive processes such as planning, checking and evaluating 
through peer work. 
 Goh (2008, 2010) distinguished between two kinds of metacognitive instructional activities: inte-
grated experiential listening tasks where metacognitive reflection and strategy learning are embedded 
within a lesson sequence (Vandergrift’s pedagogical cycle is one such example) and guided reflections 
for listening which provide prompts and structure to guide learners in evaluating and planning their 
listening experiences before and after a listening task or event. Research findings on the effectiveness 
of metacognitive instruction have been encouraging in terms of gains in listening comprehension, 
improvement in regulation of cognitive processes during listening and improved motivation and 
confidence (e.g. Baleghizadeh & Rahimi, 2011; Cross, 2011a; Goh & Taib, 2006; Mareschal, 2007; 
O’Bryan & Hegelheimer, 2009; Vandergrift & Tafaghodtari, 2010; Zeng, 2012, 2014). 
 Defending the more traditional form of explicit strategy training, Cross (2012) argued that it 
was an instructional approach that was worth persevering with, and more time should be given to 
researchers to refine the pedagogy and research methodology before any conclusions about its use-
fulness should be made. As Cross has previously pointed out in a strategy instruction study that saw 
limited success (2009), the methodology of intervention would need to be refined. Cross also argued 
for a broader view concerning the benefits of strategy instruction to learners beyond a narrow focus 
on proficiency, pointing out that increased levels of control and improved self-efficacy are important 
to learners, as Graham (2011) has shown. 
 Cross also warned of another kind of potential opportunity cost if students were not taught sys-
tematically how to listen, and suggested that teacher capacity for conducting strategy training, one 
of Renandya’s concerns, be addressed through professional development. While acknowledging that 
teachers’ and learners’ views were important, Cross also cautioned that strategy instruction should 
not be dismissed on account of the views of a handful of teachers and students who viewed it nega-
tively. Positive perceptions of strategy instruction by learners had been reported by Siegel’s (2012) 
study, and gradual changes in perceptions from negative to positive ones have also been recorded 
among L2 students who participated in another study (Liu & Goh, 2006). 
 With regard to Renandya’s speculation of a proficiency threshold for strategy instruction to be 
useful, Cross asserted that this perspective would require rigorous theoretical and research substan-
tiation. To delay strategy training till such a purported threshold was reached would be wrong, he 

224 • Christine C. M. Goh
added. Once again, research findings from studies involving less-skilled listeners (Cross, 2011a; Goh 
& Taib, 2006) suggest that age and proficiency levels may not be an issue when it comes to learners 
benefitting from learning how to use listening strategies. Renandya’s last point that learners did not 
need strategies was challenged by Cross, who cited Field’s (2008) argument that automatic transfer 
of L1 strategies would not be instinctive because L2 listening is carried out under different circum-
stances. Even in situations where learners could use some strategies on their own, some form of 
strategy instruction had also been recommended (Farrell & Mallard, 2006).The broader field of L2 
learner strategies also shows that although learners apply strategies in the different domains and 
modalities of language learning and use, strategy instruction was still found to be needed and ben-
eficial because of the challenges of learning a language (Cohen, 2011). 
 The recent debates and developments surrounding strategy instruction in L2 listening have high-
lighted the need for further strengthening of this line of research in the field. However, critics should 
also recognise that strategy instruction that was first proposed 20 years ago has undergone various 
levels of improvement, particularly through the metacognitive approach, and research in general has 
reported greater all-round benefits for learners. Nevertheless, more could still be done in refining the 
pedagogy and research designs to produce further insights into an approach that engages learners’ 
learning and thinking processes in a direct way. For researchers and teachers who adopted a metacog-
nitive approach, the determination and motivation to persist is strengthened by research findings in 
general education, which demonstrated the impact of metacognition on creating successful learning 
(Hacker, Dunlosky & Graesser, 2009). 
 The importance of extensive listening, however, should not be recognised, as it can be another 
potential avenue for improving learners’ listening. In fact, the extensive listening approach can co-
exist with strategy instruction (Siegel, 2011), and teachers can benefit by applying principles of meta-
cognition to support their students’ extensive listening endeavours, making them teacher-scaffolded 
and learner-directed. To this end, Vandergrift and Goh (2012) have offered some suggestions on 
projects for extensive listening, which includes a metacognitive dimension. These suggestions may 
provide ideas not only for teaching and learning but also possible pedagogical interventions that can 
be further examined through research and teacher enquiry. 
 Conclusion and Future Directions 
 This chapter has presented an overview of research in the field of L2 listening comprehension, which 
has seen tremendous growth in the last two decades. Owing to this ever-widening scope, the review 
in this chapter was by necessity selective. For example, it has not discussed the role of technology, 
which plays an important role in supporting the learning of L2 listening in this era of technology-
enabled learning. A discussion of this topic can be found in Vandergrift (2007) and Vandergrift and 
Goh (2012). With the growth in interest and more rigorous efforts at understanding L2 listening, 
theoretical perspectives and emerging insights from research that have been posited need to be inves-
tigated further. New teaching methods and approaches will also require closer inquiry at various 
levels. As the field continues to draw from developments in related disciplines such as psychology, 
human communication and learning sciences, it is hoped that new lines of research will emerge. 
 The focus on cognitive processes so far has offered valuable insights into the role of stored and 
proceduralised linguistic and prior knowledge in L2 listening. An area that merits greater attention is 
the role of working memory in L2 listening. It is a complex area to investigate, but L2 researchers can 
now benefit from the deeper knowledge that has emerged concerning human cognition. Methods 
used in fields such as psychology can also be adopted or adapted for examining L2 listening com-
prehension. Given the importance of intercultural communication in our globalised world, more 
research is needed in interactive listening. Collaborations between L2 listening and researchers in 
www.ebook3000.com

Cognition, Metacognition, and L2 Listening • 225
the areas of pragmatics and spoken discourse can yield useful insights that will enrich the respective 
fields. Last, but not least, there needs to be greater confluence of ideas from L2 listening researchers 
working in what presently appears to be three distinct areas: general L2 listening, ESP listening and 
testing listening. Collaborations among researchers from these three areas of L2 listening can pro-
vide much-needed synergy and directions for the development of pedagogy and techniques in order 
to strengthen the teaching, learning and assessment of L2 listening. This is the next frontier for L2 
listening research. 
 References 
 Abeywickrama, P. (2013). Why not non-native varieties of English as listening comprehension test input?  RELC Journal, 44 (1), 
59–74. 
 Anderson, J. R. (1995).  Cognitive psychology and its implications (4th ed.). New York: Freeman. 
 Andringa, S., Olsthoorn, N., van Beuningen, C., Schoonen, R., & Hulstijn, J. (2012). Determinants of success in native and 
non-native listening comprehension: An individual differences approach.  Language Learning, 62 , 49–78. 
 Baddeley, A. (2003). Working memory and language: An overview.  Journal of Communication Disorders, 36 , 189–208. 
 Baleghizadeh, S., & Rahimi, A. H. (2011). The relationship among listening performance, metacognitive strategy use and 
motivation from a self-determination theory perspective.  Theory and Practice in Language Studies ,  1 (1), 61–67. 
 Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (1991).  Connectionism and the mind: An introduction to parallel processing in networks . Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
 Bonk, W. J. (2000). Second language lexical knowledge and listening comprehension.  International Journal of Listening, 14 , 14–31. 
 Brown, G. (1990).  Listening to spoken English (2nd ed.). London: Longman. 
 Brown, S. (2011).  Listening myths: Applying second language research to classroom teaching . Ann Arbor, MI: University of 
Michigan Press. 
 Brunfaut, T., & Révész, A. (2014). The role of task and listener characteristics in second language listening.  TESOL Quarterly , 
n/a-n/a. doi:10.1002/tesq.168 
 Buck, G . (2001).  Assessing listening . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Carrier, K. (2003). Improving high school English language learners’ second language listening through strategy instruction. 
 Bilingual Research Journal, 27 (3), 383–408. 
 Cauldwell, R. (2013).  Phonology for listening . Birmingham, UK: Speech in Action. 
 Chamot, A. U. (1995). Learning strategies and listening comprehension. In D. J. Mendelsohn & J. Rubin (Eds.),  A guide for the 
teaching of second language listening  (pp. 13–30). San Diego: Dominie Press. 
 Chaudron, C., & Richards, J. (1986). The effect of discourse markers on the comprehension of lectures.  Applied Linguistics, 
7 , 113–127. 
 Chen, Y. (2007). Learning to learn: The impact of strategy training.  ELT Journal, 61 (1), 20–29. 
 Cohen, A. D. (2011). Second language learner strategies. In Hinkel, E. (Ed.)  Handbook of research in second language teaching 
and learning ,  2  (pp. 681–698). New York: Routledge. 
 Cross, J. (2009). Effects of listening strategy instruction on news videotext comprehension.  Language Teaching Research, 13 , 
151–176. 
 Cross, J. (2010). Raising L2 listeners’ metacognitive awareness: A sociocultural theory perspective.  Language Awareness, 19 (4), 
281–297. 
 Cross, J. (2011a). Metacognitive instruction for helping less-skilled listeners.  ELT journal, 65 (4), 408–416. 
 Cross, J. (2011b). Correspondence.  ELT Journal, 65 (3), 362. 
 Cross, J. (2012). Listening strategy instruction (or extensive listening?): A response to Renandya.  ELTWorldOnline.com, 4 . 
Available online at: http://blog.nus.edu.sg/eltwo/2012/02/22/five-reasons-why-listening-strategy- instruction-might-
not-work-with-lower-proficiency-learners/ 
 Cross, J. (2014). Promoting autonomous listening to podcasts: A case study.  Language Teaching Research ,  18 (1), 8–32. 
 Dirven, R., & Oakeshott-Taylor, J. (1984). Listening comprehension (Part I).  Language Teaching, 17 (4), 326–343. 
 Dirven, R., & Oakeshott-Taylor, J. (1985). Listening comprehension (Part II).  Language Teaching, 18 (1), 2–20. 
 Dunkel, P. (1991). Listening in the native and second/foreign language: Toward an integration of research and practice.  TESOL 
Quarterly, 25 (3), 431–457. 
 Dunkel, P., Henning, G., & Chaudron, C. (1993). The assessment of an L2 listening comprehension construct: A tentative 
model for test specification and development.  Modern Language Journal, 77 (2), 180–191. 
 Farr, F. (2003). Engaged listenership in spoken academic discourse: The case of student–tutor meetings.  Journal of English for 
Academic Purposes, 2 (1), 67–85. 

226 • Christine C. M. Goh
 Farrell, T. S. C., & Mallard, C. (2006). The use of reception strategies by learners of French as a foreign language.  The Modern 
Language Journal, 90 (3), 338–352. 
 Feak, C., & Salehzadeh, J. (2001). Challenges and issues in developing an EAP video listening placement assessment: A view 
from one program.  English for Specific Purposes, 20 , 477–493. 
 Field, J. (2004). An insight into listeners’ problems: Too much bottom-up or too much top-down?  System, 32 , 363–377. 
 Field, J. (2008).  Listening in the language classroom . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Flavell, J. H. (1976). Metacognitive aspects of problem solving. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.),  The nature of intelligence  (pp. 231–235). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Flowerdew, J. (Ed.) (1994).  Academic listening: Research perspectives . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Flowerdew, J., & Miller, L. (2005).  Second language listening: Theory and practice . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Flowerdew, J., & Tauroza, S. (1995). The effects of discourse makers on second language lecture comprehension . Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 17 , 435–458. 
 Fulcher, G. (1999). Assessment in English for academic purposes: Putting content validity in its place.  Applied linguistics, 
20 (2), 221–236. 
 Gardner, R. (1998). Between speaking and listening: The vocalisation of understandings.  Applied Linguistics, 19 , 204–224. 
 Gass, S. (1997).  Input, interaction and the second language learner . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Goh, C. C. M. (1997). Metacognitive awareness and second language listeners.  ELT Journal, 51 (4), 361–369. 
 Goh, C. C. M. (1998). How ESL learners with different listening abilities use comprehension strategies and tactics.  Language 
Teaching Research, 2 (2), 124 −147. 
 Goh, C. C. M. (1999). What learners know about the factors that influence their listening comprehension.  Hong Kong Journal 
of Applied Linguistics, 4 (1), 17–42. 
 Goh, C. C. M. (2000). A cognitive perspective on language learners’ listening comprehension problems.  System, 28 , 55–75. 
 Goh, C. C. M. (2002). Exploring listening comprehension tactics and their interaction patterns.  System, 30 , 185–206. 
 Goh, C. C. M. (2005). Second language listening expertise. In K. Johnson (Ed.),  Expertise in second language learning and teach-
ing (pp. 64–84). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Goh, C. (2008). Metacognitive instruction for second language listening development: Theory, practice and research implica-
tions.  RELC Journal, 39 (2), 188–213. 
 Goh, C. C. M. (2010). Listening as process: Learning activities for self-appraisal and self-regulation. In N. Harwood (Ed.), 
 Materials in ELT: Theory and practice (pp. 179–206). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Goh, C. C. M. (2013). ESP and listening. In B. Paltridge & S. Starfield (Eds.),  The handbook of English for specific purposes 
(pp. 77–94). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell Publishers. 
 Goh, C. C. M., & Aryadoust, V. (2015). Examining the notion of listening sub-skill divisibility and its implications for second 
language listening.  International Journal of Listening, 29 (3), 109–133. 
 Goh, C. C. M., & Aryadoust, V. (2016). Research into learner listening: New Insights and directions from empirical studies. 
 International Journal of Listening, 30 (1, 2), 1–7. 
 Goh, C. C. M., & Kaur, K. (2013). Insights into young learners’ metacognitive awareness about listening.  European Journal of 
Applied Linguistics and TEFL, 3 , 5–26. 
 Goh, C. C. M., & Taib, Y. (2006). Metacognitive instruction in listening for young learners.  ELT Journal, 60 (3), 222–232. 
 Goh, C. C. M., & Zhang, L. (2013). Metacognition theory and research in second language listening and reading: A compara-
tive critical review.  Contemporary Foreign Language Studies, 396 (12), 94–110. 
 Graham, S. (2006). Listening comprehension: The learners’ perspective.  System: An International Journal of Educational Tech-
nology and Applied Linguistics, 34 , 165–182. 
 Graham, S. (2011). Self-efficacy and academic listening.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 10 (2), 113–117. 
 Graham, S., Santos, D., & Vanderplank, R. (2011). Exploring the relationship between listening development and strategy use. 
 Language Teaching Research, 15 , 435–456. 
 Hacker, D. J., Dunlosky, J., & Graesser, A. C. (2009).  Handbook of metacognition in education . Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum/Taylor & Francis. 
 Harris, V. (2007). Exploring progression: Reading and listening strategy instruction with near-beginner learners of French. 
 Language Learning Journal, 35 (2), 189–204. 
 Jung, E. H. (2003). The role of discourse signaling cues in second language listening comprehension.  The Modern Language 
Journal, 87 , 562–577. 
 Kelly, P. (1991). Lexical ignorance: The main obstacle to listening comprehension with advanced foreign language learners. 
 International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 29 (2), 135–149. 
 Krashen, S. D. (1981).  Second language acquisition and second language learning . Oxford: Pergamon. 
 Kormos, J., & Safar, A. (2008). Phonological short-term memory, working memory and foreign language performance in 
intensive language learning.  Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 11 (2), 261–271. 
 Littlemore, J. (2001). The use of metaphor in university lectures and the problems that it causes for overseas students.  Teaching 
in Higher Education, 6 (3), 333–349. 
www.ebook3000.com

Cognition, Metacognition, and L2 Listening • 227
 Liu, X. L., & Goh, C. C. M. (2006). Improving second language listening: Awareness and involvement. In T. S. C. Farrell (Ed.), 
 Language teacher research in Asia (pp. 91–106). Alexandria: TESOL International. 
 Long, D. R. (1990). What you don’t know can’t help you: An exploratory study of background knowledge and second language 
listening comprehension.  Studies in Second language Acquisition, 12 , 65–80. 
 Lynch, T. (1998). Theoretical perspectives on listening.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 18 , 3–19. 
 Macaro, E., Graham, S., & Vanderplank, R. (2007). A review of listening strategies: Focus on sources of knowledge and on suc-
cess. In E. Macaro & A. Cohen (Eds.),  Language learner strategies: 30 years of research and practice  (pp. 165–185). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Mareschal, C. (2007).  Student perceptions of a self-regulatory approach to second language listening comprehension development . 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Ottawa, Ontario. 
 Meccarty, F. (2000). Lexical and grammatical knowledge in reading and listening comprehension by foreign language learners 
of Spanish.  Applied Language Learning, 11 , 323–348. 
 Mendelsohn, D. J. (1995). Applying learning strategies in the second/foreign language listening comprehension lesson. 
In D. J. Mendelsohn & J. Rubin (Eds.),  A guide for the teaching of second language listening  (pp. 132–150). San Diego: 
Dominie Press. 
 Munby, J. (1978).  Communicative syllabus design . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 O’Bryan, A., & Hegelheimer, V. (2009). Using a mixed methods approach to explore strategies, metacognitive awareness and 
the effects of task design on listening development.  Canadian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 12 , 9–37. 
 Ockey, G., Papageorgiou, S., & French, R. (2016). Effects of strength of accent on an L2 interactive lecture listening comprehen-
sion test.  International Journal of Listening, 30 (1, 2), 84–98. 
 O’Malley, J. M., & Chamot, A. U. (1990).  Learning strategies in second language acquisition . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 O’Malley, J. M., Chamot, A. U., & Küpper, L. (1989). Listening comprehension strategies in second language acquisition. 
 Applied Linguistics, 10 (4), 418–437. 
 Renandya, W. (2012). Five reasons why listening strategy instruction might not work with lower proficiency learners. 
 ELTWorldOnline.com, 3 . Available online at: http://blog.nus.edu.sg/eltwo/2012/02/22/five-reasons-why-listening-strategy- 
instruction-might-not-work-with-lower-proficiency-learners/ 
 Renandya, W. A., & Farrell, T. S. C. (2011). “Teacher, the tape is too fast”: Extensive listening in ELT.  ELT Journal, 65 , 52–59. 
 Richards, J. C. (1983). Listening comprehension: Approach, design, procedure.  TESOL Quarterly, 17 (2), 219–240. 
 Ridgway, T. (2000). Listening strategies—I beg your pardon?  ELT Journal, 54 (2), 179–185. 
 Rost, M. (1990).  Listening in language learning . London: Longman. 
 Rost, M. (2013).  Teaching and researching: Listening (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge. 
 Rubin, J. (1994). A review of second language listening comprehension research.  Modern Language Journal, 78 (2), 199–221. 
 Siegel, J. (2011). Thoughts on L2 listening pedagogy.  ELT Journal, 65 (3), 318–321. 
 Siegel, J. (2012). Second language learners’ perceptions of listening strategy instruction.  Innovation in Language Learning and 
Teaching, 7 (1), 1–18. 
 Stæhr, L. S. (2009). Vocabulary knowledge and advanced listening comprehension in English as a foreign language.  Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 31 (4), 577–607. 
 Taguchi, N. (2005). Comprehending implied meaning in English as a foreign language.  The Modern Language Journal, 89 (4), 
543–562. doi:10.2307/3588625 
 Taguchi, N. (2008). The effect of working memory, semantic access, and listening abilities on the comprehension of conversa-
tional implicatures in L2 English.  Pragmatics & Cognition, 16 (3), 517–539. doi:10.1075/p&c.16.3.05tag 
 Tsui, A., & Fullilove, J. (1998). Bottom-up or top-down processing as a discriminator of L2 listening performance.  Applied 
Linguistics, 19 (4), 432–451. 
 Vandergrift, L. (1996). The listening comprehension strategies of core French high school students.  Canadian Modern Lan-
guage Review, 52 , 200–223. 
 Vandergrift, L. (1997). The strategies of second language (French) listeners: A descriptive study.  Foreign Language Annals, 30 , 
387–409. 
 Vandergrift, L. (1998). Successful and less successful listeners in French: What are the strategy differences?  The French Review, 
71 (3), 370–394. 
 Vandergrift, L. (2002). It was nice to see that our predictions were right: Developing metacognition in L2 listening comprehen-
sion.  Canadian Modern Language Review, 58 , 555–575. 
 Vandergrift, L. (2003). Orchestrating strategy use: Toward a model of the skilled second language listener.  Language Learning, 
53 , 463–496. 
 Vandergrift, L. (2004). Learning to listen or listening to learn.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 24 , 3–25. 
 Vandergrift, L. (2007). Recent developments in second and foreign language listening comprehension research.  Language 
teaching, 40 (3), 191–210. 

228 • Christine C. M. Goh
 Vandergrift, L. (2015). Researching listening. In B. Paltridge & A. Phakiti (Eds.),  Research methods in applied linguistics: A 
practical resource (pp. 299–314). London: Bloomsbury Publishing. 
 Vandergrift, L., & Goh, C. C. M. (2009). Teaching and testing listening comprehension. In M. Long & C. Doughty (Eds.),  The 
handbook of language teaching (pp. 395–411). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 
 Vandergrift, L., & Goh, C. C. M. (2012).  Teaching and learning second language listening: Metacognition in action . New York: 
Routledge. 
 Vandergrift, L., Goh, C. C. M., Mareschal, C., & Tafaghodtari, M. H. (2006). The Metacognitive Awareness Listening Question-
naire (MALQ): Development and validation.  Language Learning, 56 (3), 431–462. 
 Vandergrift, L., & Tafaghodtari, M. H. (2010). Teaching L2 learners how to listen does make a difference: An empirical study. 
 Language Learning, 60 , 470–497. 
 Wolfgramm, C., Suter, N., & Goeksel, E. (2016). The role of concentration and vocabulary in listening and reading comprehen-
sion.  International Journal of Listening, 30 (1, 2), 25–46. 
 Young, M. (1997). A serial ordering of listening comprehension strategies used by advanced ESL learners in Hong Kong.  Asian 
Journal of English Language Teaching, 7 , 35–53. 
 Zeng, Y. (2012).  Metacognition and self-regulated learning (SRL) for Chinese EFL listening development . Unpublished PhD 
thesis, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 
 Zeng, Y. (2014). Investigating the effects of metacognitive instruction on Chinese EFL learners’ listening performance.  Inter-
national Journal of Innovation in ELT and Research, 3 (2), 139–158. 
 Zhang, D., & Goh, C. C. M. (2006). Strategy knowledge and perceived strategy use: Singaporean students’ awareness of listen-
ing and speaking strategies.  Language Awareness, 15 (3), 199–219. 
 ∗ ∗ ∗ 
 This chapter is dedicated to Larry Vandergrift (1946–2015). 
www.ebook3000.com

229
 Introduction 
 Speech is ubiquitous in language classrooms, just as it is privileged in popular language teaching 
methods, both traditional and contemporary. This is true even of approaches which otherwise 
share little common ground, such as the Audio-lingual Method and Task-based Language Teaching 
(TBLT). However, as Hughes (2012) notes, “there may be a great deal of speaking going on in class-
rooms, but this may be different from the effective teaching of speaking as holistic skill” (p. 7). In 
other words, much of the speaking in classrooms plays a ‘speaking-to-learn’ rather than a ‘learning-
to-speak’ role, a distinction Hughes also makes. 
 Classroom-based applied linguistics research shows the same reliance on speaking/spoken data 
and the same focus on language development through speaking rather than speaking skill devel-
opment. However, this distinction is often blurred. For example, research on fluency development 
addresses theoretical questions concerning the underlying factors that account for fluency develop-
ment as well as pedagogic questions concerning how learners can be helped to develop fluent L2 
language skills. Similarly, research on interaction reflects psycholinguistic perspectives on language 
development and instructional perspectives on learning speaking skills. For this reason, in this chap-
ter I take a broad view, examining research on language development through and for speaking. 
 With this point in mind, the chapter organization requires some explanation. Its conceptual struc-
ture draws on a framework of learning opportunities proposed by Crabbe (2003). This framework 
offers a well-theorized and elegant representation of the core ingredients of instructed language 
learning in the form of seven categories of learning opportunities. These are: (1) Input, (2) Output, 
(3) Interaction, (4) Feedback, (5) Rehearsal, (6) Language Understanding and (7) Learning Under-
standing. Of these categories, five (2, 3, 4, 5 and 6) are particularly relevant to the chapter and will be 
used to frame the main sections. In making this chapter about classrooms, I nevertheless acknowl-
edge that much of the learning of speaking skills takes place outside of the classroom and that the 
very notion of the classroom is evolving as technology erodes boundaries between classrooms and 
the world beyond the classroom walls. The chapter concludes with a brief overview of future direc-
tions for research on teaching and learning speaking skills, which picks up this point. 
 Before proceeding, it is important to recognize the large body of descriptive research on the nature 
and features of spoken language which underpins this chapter. Space allows only a brief mention of 
its impact here. As Hughes (2012) notes, this research addresses three levels of analysis of spoken 
 17 
 Learning-to-Speak and Speaking-to-Learn 
 Five Categories of Learning Opportunity 
 Jonathan Newton 

230 • Jonathan Newton
language: (1) the level of discourse and social interaction (e.g., Cutting, 2011); (2) the level of lan-
guage choice (grammar and vocabulary) (e.g., Biber, 2006); and (3) the level of speech production 
(pronunciation and fluency) (e.g., Cauldwell, 2013; Segalowitz, 2010). But as Hughes argues, this 
research has less influence on the design of instruction for speaking skills than it warrants. One 
obvious consequence is that the representation of spoken genre in teaching materials is often a poor 
reflection of authentic instantiations of those genre. In a study typical of many on this topic, Foley 
(2011) compared scripted textbook versions of conversations with naturally occurring versions of 
conversations and unsurprisingly found marked differences. Notably, textbooks emphasized the 
‘transactional’ function of talk while interpersonal functions, which are much more prevalent in 
naturally occurring conversations, were largely absent. Authenticity is a widely contested topic (Day, 
2003; Gill, 2008; Guariento & Morley, 2001) with important implications for the selection and design 
of classroom materials and tasks for speaking skills instruction. 
 The Five Learning Opportunity Categories 
 The following sections address research on the teaching and learning of speaking skills related to each 
of the five learning opportunity categories identified previously. These categories are discussed in the 
following order (with some elaboration of the names). This reordering is designed to group together 
the three kinds of speaking practice (1–3) and two kinds of explicit attention to form/skill (4–5): 
 1. Rehearsal (Controlled language practice) 
 2. Interaction 
 3. Output (Task-based language production) 
 4. Feedback 
 5. Language understanding (Direct instruction) 
 Rehearsal (Controlled Speaking Practice) 
 Practice—rehearsal in Crabbe’s (2003) terms—is fundamental to any skill development. But what is 
practice? In general terms, it is defined as “a repeated performance of the same (or closely similar) 
routines” (Carlson, 1997, p. 56). From an L2 learning perspective, DeKeyser (2007) defines it as 
“specific activities in the second language, engaged in systematically, deliberately, with the goal of 
developing knowledge of and skills in the second language” (p. 1). Although this section is primarily 
about controlled forms of speaking practice associated with teacher-centered instruction, towards 
the end of the section I also discuss emerging research on practice within communicative and task-
based teaching contexts. 
 In scholarship on language teaching, if not in actual classroom practice, controlled speaking prac-
tice went out of favor with the growth of communicative language teaching (CLT) in the 1970s and 
with Krashen’s claims for the primacy of input in language acquisition (Krashen, 1982). Nevertheless, 
controlled speaking exercises, such as set dialogue practice and substitution tables, have continued to 
be used widely in classrooms around the world (e.g., Carless, 2009). They are also extensively advo-
cated in teaching guidebooks; Scrivener (2005), for example, contains 10 pages on how to use drills 
and set dialogues (pp. 255–264). 
 Unfortunately, the potential value of practice, as both a topic for research and instruction, has 
been hamstrung by two negative associations. The first is an association with mechanistic choral 
drills and tightly scripted, artificial and often stilted dialogues. As DeKeyser (2007) argues, “mechani-
cal drills can only serve a very limited purpose, because they do not make the learner engage in 
what is the essence of language processing, i.e., establishing form-meaning connections” (p. 11). The 
www.ebook3000.com

Learning-to-Speak and Speaking-to-Learn • 231
second negative association is with behaviorist theories of learning and the discredited belief that 
language is best acquired through sequentially staged practice of rule-based structures. (See Long 
and Robinson [1998] for a critique of this view of language learning.) 
 These negative associations are unfortunate since Skill Learning Theory (SAT) posits an essential 
role for focused practice of the sub-skills which make up skilled performance (DeKeyser, 2014). A key 
claim in SAT is that skill development goes through three stages: declarative, procedural and auto-
matic (Anderson, 1982). The stages are distinguished by differences in how knowledge is represented 
and used. In the declarative stage, knowledge is conscious and is typically  about  some aspect of the 
target skill. In the procedural stage, knowledge is acted on and translates into behaviors or proce-
dures. Typically, in this stage, declarative knowledge is deliberately drawn on to perform the proce-
dure, but this knowledge is now represented as procedural chunks, which can be accessed quickly and 
with increasing efficiency. As DeKeyser (1998) explains it, “proceduralization is achieved by engaging 
in the target behavior—or procedure—while temporarily leaning on declarative clutches” (p. 49). 
In the final stage, gradual automatization is achieved through extensive practice. Automatization is 
characterized by increased speed or fluency, reduced errors and reduced attention. 
 Practice is fundamental to skill development in this model, but perhaps because of the commu-
nicative orthodoxy in language teaching, there is little recent empirical classroom-based research on 
the role of controlled practice in language learning. I will discuss two representative studies here. 
In the first, de Guerro and Commander (2013) investigate a controlled speaking technique called 
shadowing in which learners repeat, either completely or selectively, what a speaker is saying. In 
their study, the authors investigated a form of shadowing, which they refer to as shadow-reading, 
by a group of 26 Spanish-L1 learners of English who worked in pairs shadowing each other reading 
aloud. This encouraged the learners to focus on ‘chunking’ speech units. The researchers conclude 
that the shadowing tasks were effective in “providing affordances for persistent, meaningful imitation 
and internalization of second language (L2) exemplars as well as story comprehension and retention” 
(p. 433). Shadowing has also been implicated in improving listening skills (Hamuda, 2014) and in 
particular with improved phonemic perception (Hamuda, 2016). More than anywhere else in the 
world of which I am aware, shadowing is widely advocated and used in EFL instruction in Japan 
(e.g., Kadota, 2012), thus highlighting the influence of context and educational culture on preferred 
approaches to language teaching (Holliday, 1994). 
 In the second study, Ding (2007) investigated the role of memorization and imitation in the 
learning of English by three university English majors who had won prizes in nationwide English 
speaking competitions and debate tournaments in China. He found that all three learners used these 
techniques extensively and, in interviews, advocated strongly for the value of these modes of learning. 
Ding concludes that “the study shows that text memorization and imitation have a legitimate place 
in second language education” (p. 279). 
 It seems likely that the learning gains from memorization in Ding (2007) and from chunking in 
de Guerro and Commander (2013) may accrue in two ways: (1)  directly , in the form of faster access 
to an expanded bank of lexicalized chunks, and (2)  indirectly , as when a learner ‘decomposes’ learned 
chunks, notices patterns in them, and generalizes rules or structural properties of the language from 
these (Ellis, 2003, p. 114). 
 Although repeated practice is typically associated with traditional lock-step teaching approaches, 
its value in communicative settings is increasingly being recognized (e.g., Aubrey, 2015; Fukuta, 2015; 
Nguyen, 2013; Pinter, 2007; Skehan, Bei, Li & Zhan, 2012; van de Guchte, Braaksma, Rijlaarsdam & 
Billel, 2015). I will illustrate this point with brief comments on three of the studies listed here. First, 
Skehan, Bei, Li and Zhan (2012) show that repetition, as a task implementation factor, had “huge” 
effect sizes for the accuracy and fluency of language production by tertiary EFL learners in China/
Hong Kong in the three separate studies described in this article (p. 181). Second, in a refreshing 

232 • Jonathan Newton
change from research involving college or university age participants, Pinter (2007) studied two 
10-year-old children performing information gap tasks. Her research showed how task repetition had 
marked positive effects on their fluency development, conversation management and engagement 
with each other’s input. Third, in the context of a Vietnamese high school, Nguyen (2013) showed 
how opportunities to rehearse a task prior to public performance prompted pairs of EFL learners in 
intact classes to engage in form-focused episodes as they co-constructed talk. The subsequent public 
performances showed consistently high levels of uptake of the more target-like language which had 
evolved in rehearsal. 
 In these studies we see a blurring of the distinction between controlled and communicative prac-
tice and one which is likely to rehabilitate practice to some degree. This promises to be a productive 
area for ongoing research activity. However, debate continues on the role of controlled practice and 
whether and how it might be integrated into communicative use. This is not surprising. As Gat-
bonton and Segalowitz (2005) point out, communicative language teaching (CLT) has largely failed 
to provide a satisfactory role for practice. Consequently, teachers too often fall back on the kind of 
mechanistic pattern practice critiqued by DeKeyser (2010). Gatbonton and Segalowitz propose an 
alternative under the acronym ACCESS— Automatization in Communicative Contexts of Essential 
Speech Elements.  ACCESS consists of three phases, each involving authentic communicative practice: 
a creative automatization phase in which essential speech segments are elicited, a language consolida-
tion phase in which learners strengthen control of these utterances, and a free communication phase. 
 The performance-oriented view of practice in this model resonates with the transfer-appropriate 
processing (TAP) model of memory (Goldstein, 2008), which claims that the way we process infor-
mation determines the facets we remember or get better at. The implication for teaching speaking 
skills is that the use of language required by a target task should be reproduced in the classroom 
activities intended to prepare learners for it. In other words, learning involves practicing the per-
formance, an idea that will be familiar to many teachers and learners. The TAP model offers further 
support for DeKeyser’s argument that form-focused drills are not adequate preparation for com-
municative performance, whereas communicative drills are (DeKeyser, 2010). It also mirrors Long’s 
(2015) rationale for TBLT, which we return to in the final section. 
 The ACCESS approach stands in contrast to perhaps the most well-known and explicit articula-
tion of how controlled and communicative practice should be sequenced, namely the Presentation, 
Practice and Production (PPP) approach. In the PPP approach, the presentation of rules and struc-
tures is followed by controlled practice of these items, which is in turn followed by the production 
phase in which the structures are put to communicative use. While advocates of PPP view commu-
nicative use of language as a goal or outcome of practice, advocates of task-based teaching see com-
municative use as essential to the whole learning process and even a preferred starting point. Willis 
and Willis (2007), for instance, argue that communicative performance should lead  to  rather than 
 from  a focus on form. From this perspective, the appropriate place for controlled speaking practice 
is in the post-task phase—in effect, PPP in reverse. The value of PPP is hotly debated in ELT (e.g., 
Klapper, 2003; Sato, 2010; Willis & Willis, 2009), reflecting persistent contention about the role of 
controlled practice in language teaching and learning. 
 Interaction 
 In contrast to the paucity of research on controlled speaking practice, the body of research on com-
municative speaking is huge and ever-expanding. In the main, this research draws on three theo-
retical perspectives: interactionalist-cognitivist theories of SLA (e.g., Long, 1996; Mackey, 2007), 
including the Output Hypothesis (Swain, 1985); sociocultural theory (e.g., Swain, 2000); and con-
versational analysis (CA) (e.g., Kitajima, 2013; Seedhouse, 2004). 
www.ebook3000.com

Learning-to-Speak and Speaking-to-Learn • 233
 Viewed from an interactionalist-cognitivist perspective (Long, 1996; Mackey, 2007), a key affor-
dance of interaction is the opportunities it provides for learners to attend to language form in the 
context of meaningful language use. This affordance has generated research on two closely related 
constructs, negotiation for meaning (NfM) and language-related episodes (LREs). Here, I will only 
discuss NfM, although because of the overlap between the two concepts, the main findings from NfM 
research are equally pertinent to LRE research. 
 NfM involves interlocutors working interactively to resolve communication problems triggered 
by comprehension or comprehensibility difficulties. This process is argued to optimize the quality 
of input for acquisition by highlighting learnable language features in the input (Long, 1996). It also 
provides opportunities for learners to obtain feedback on the comprehensibility of their output and, 
in so doing, to test out their hypotheses about the language (Swain, 1995). The general consensus 
from research on NfM is that tasks containing an information gap and requiring a single convergent 
outcome (i.e., there is only one solution and all participants must agree on it) require higher levels of 
mutual comprehension and comprehensibility and so generate more negotiation than tasks without 
these design features (Long, 1996; Pica, Kanagy & Falodun, 1993). Such tasks are, therefore, argued 
to offer particularly rich learning contexts for developing interactive speaking skills. 
 Perhaps the strongest evidence of learning from NfM comes from studies focused on vocabulary 
learning during task interaction. Ellis and He (1999) showed that when learners had the opportunity 
to interact and negotiate meaning in a one-way information gap task, they made significantly greater 
learning gains than when such opportunities were not available. De La Fuente (2002) obtained simi-
lar findings in a study of Spanish language learners performing listening comprehension tasks with 
native speakers, noting in addition that only when negotiation included pushed output did it pro-
mote both receptive and productive vocabulary learning. 
 These studies all involve interaction with a teacher or native speaker. However, communication 
tasks are typically performed by learners interacting with each other, so it is also important to estab-
lish the learning opportunities available through learner-learner interaction. Adams (2007) used tailor-
made post-tests to measure learning of targeted forms (both grammatical forms and vocabulary) 
negotiated by pairs of adult ESL learners when they performed a series of communication activities. 
She found moderate to high rates of learning for all four forms tested, although she cautions that 
some of this learning was not in the direction of the target form. Newton (2013) also found that unfa-
miliar words negotiated by adult ESL learners during task-based group interaction showed a much 
greater likelihood of being learned in performance on a vocabulary post-test than did unfamiliar 
words met in the tasks and not negotiated for meaning. These studies provide support for the claim 
that, at least for vocabulary learning, when learners can negotiate meaning during a task, learning is 
more likely to occur than in tasks in which such opportunities are not available. 
 However, other researchers have challenged the value of task-based NfM. Foster (1998) found that 
the effect of task type on negotiation shown in laboratory studies failed to extend to the intermediate-
level EFL classroom setting in which her study was situated. Learners in the study negotiated for mean-
ing very infrequently and then, almost invariably, over vocabulary items, findings confirmed by Smith 
(2005) in the context of computer-mediated interaction. Foster’s (1998) claims were, however, chal-
lenged by Gass, Mackey and Ross-Feldman (2005), who also compared tasks performed in laboratory 
and classroom settings. In contrast to Foster, they found that information exchange tasks generated 
significantly more NfM than opinion gap tasks, with task type having a greater effect on the amount 
of negotiation than the setting in which the research was carried out (classroom or laboratory). Two 
other classroom-based studies also found greater levels of learner-learner negotiation than Foster, but 
in lower amounts than in the laboratory (Slimani-Rolls, 2005) and with little task effect (Eckerth, 2009). 
 Nakahama, Tyler and Van Lier (2001) also investigated negotiating behavior in information gap 
activities compared to unstructured conversations, but in native speaker–non-native speaker (NS-NNS) 

234 • Jonathan Newton
interaction. Their close analysis of syntactic and pragmatic features of their interaction data revealed 
more negotiation in information gap tasks but a richer range of learning opportunities in conversations. 
Similarly, but drawing on sociocultural theory, Foster and Ohta (2005) show how focusing on NfM 
sequences overlooks other learning affordances available in interaction. The authors gathered data 
on interactions between young adult learners completing dyadic information exchange tasks and ana-
lyzed the data for NfM and other forms of peer-to-peer assistance. Quantitative analysis revealed little 
in the way of NfM, but qualitative analysis highlighted many instances of co-construction and self- and 
other-correction by the learners, which, they argue, show language development in progress. 
 Their argument draws on sociocultural understandings of scaffolding and collaboration fore-
shadowed by Evelyn Hatch in 1978 when she argued that “language learning evolves out of learning 
how to carry on conversations,” and in both first and second language acquisition, “one learns how to 
do conversation, one learns how to interact verbally, and out of this interaction syntactic structures 
are developed” (Hatch, 1978, p. 404). Here again, we see a fusing of the speaking-to-learn and learning-
to-speak distinction introduced at the beginning of the chapter. In sum, research on interaction has 
extended its focus beyond NoM and LREs to the wider range of ways in which language and skill 
development are fostered in classroom interaction. 
 Output (Task-Based Language Production) 
 In addition to the interactionalist research reviewed in previous sections, communicative language 
practice has also been widely researched from a cognitive perspective. Here the focus is on how learn-
ers allocate attention to the complexity, accuracy and/or fluency (CAF) of their language production 
during task performance and how task design and implementation decisions affect these dimensions 
of language production. 
 Two theoretical accounts have dominated this research. In the first, the trade-off hypothesis, Ske-
han (1998) argues that communicative language use puts pressure on learners’ limited attentional 
resources, requiring them to allocate attention differentially to the complexity, accuracy and fluency 
of their production. This attentional allocation, Skehan argues, shapes the language development 
opportunities available through using language in task-based language production. An alternative 
view proposed by Robinson (2001) in the Cognition Hypothesis claims that because learners have 
access to parallel non-competing resource pools, complexity and accuracy do not compete with each 
other. Consequently, Robinson claims that with appropriate task design, language production can 
push development along both dimensions simultaneously. 
 Both perspectives continue to generate dozens of research studies on a wide range of task design 
and implementation variables (e.g., Baralt, Gilabert & Robinson, 2014). One which has been widely 
researched from both perspectives is planning time (Ellis, 2005). The research on planning time has 
generally showed that when learners are provided with planning time prior to performing an oral 
production task, their language production tends to be more fluent and either more accurate or more 
complex, but not both (Ellis, 2005; Skehan & Foster, 1999). This finding lends support to Skehan’s 
trade-off hypothesis. 
 The issue of fluency development has also attracted research interest from outside of a cognitive 
perspective. From a pedagogic perspective, Nation and Newton (2009) argue that spoken fluency 
is likely to develop if three main conditions are met. First, the activity must be meaning-focused so 
that the learners are communicating a message (DeKeyser, 2007) and experiencing the ‘real time’ 
pressures of normal communication. Second, the learners should take part in activities where the 
language items are within their previous experience (Lynch & Maclean, 2000). To achieve this, learn-
ers can work with familiar topics and types of discourse and use known vocabulary and structures. 
Providing planning time is another way to meet this condition, as confirmed by the finding that 
www.ebook3000.com

Learning-to-Speak and Speaking-to-Learn • 235
planning time consistently leads to fluency gains (Skehan & Foster, 1999). Third, there needs to be 
pressure for learners to perform at a higher level, for instance, by being encouraged to use larger 
chunks of formulaic language (Wood, 2006) or to increase the speed at which they speak. One way 
to increase speed is through the timed 4–3–2 speaking activity. This activity has been the focus of a 
number of recent studies, which we will now consider. 
 In the 4–3–2 activity, learners give a short talk on a familiar topic three times consecutively, each 
time to a different partner, and with the time reducing from four to three to two minutes for each 
talk. This activity meets all three of the conditions listed previously (i.e., meaningful language use, 
familiar topic/language, pressure to improve performance). In an early small-scale study, Arevart 
and Nation (1991) found that learners performing the activity improved their fluency from the four-
minute to the two-minute talk. While this was largely achieved through increased speed of delivery 
and reduced pausing, some evidence showed that fluency gains were also achieved through greater 
grammatical complexity in the repeated talk, such as when two simple sentences in the first talk were 
recast as a complex sentence containing a relative clause in the final talk. 
 In a more recent study, De Jong and Perfetti (2011, p. 31) also investigated the fluency gains 
from repeated speaking practice in the 4–3–2 activity. In this study they compared two groups of 
intermediate ESL students at a North American university performing the activity under different 
conditions. The first group carried out the activity in the usual way with each repetition of the talk on 
the same topic. The second group spoke on a  new  topic each time. While fluency increased for both 
groups, only the group who spoke on the same topic each time maintained their improved fluency 
on a post-test (a two-minute talk on a new topic). The authors conclude that “[s]peech repetition in 
the 4/3/2 task may cause changes in underlying cognitive mechanisms, resulting in long-term and 
transferable effect on performance fluency” (p. 31). This is an important claim for teachers who are 
unsure of the value of task repetition. 
 An issue not addressed by De Jong and Perfetti was what happens to accuracy and errors when 
learners are speaking under time pressure. Boers (2014) pursued this question in a study involving 
10 adult ESL learners performing a 4–3–2 task. As with De Jong and Perfetti (2011), Boers found the 
learners’ fluency improved from the first to third iteration of the talk. However, he also found a high 
number of errors were repeated from the first to the third talk as time pressure forced learners to fall 
back on verbatim duplication rather than attending to the accuracy or complexity of their utterances. 
To counter this problem, Boers suggests relatively simple interventions such as providing guided 
planning time and/or corrective feedback after the first talk. 
 Feedback 
 Researchers have taken a keen interest in oral corrective feedback, notably since Lyster and Ranta’s 
landmark 1997 study into the types of oral feedback occurring in communicative classrooms and 
their differential effects of learner uptake. This burgeoning interest in feedback dovetails with com-
municative approaches to language teaching within which incidental focus on form, such as pro-
vided by corrective feedback, is seen to play a pivotal role in language development (Long, 1996). 
Research on feedback seeks to understand, among other things, the types of feedback typically avail-
able in classrooms, the kinds of learning opportunities each type opens up, and evidence of learning 
from feedback. Research has also investigated teachers’ beliefs about feedback. Because of length 
constraints, these issues will only be addressed briefly here; readers interested in pursuing this topic 
are encouraged to consult in-depth discussions of the feedback research in, for example, Ellis (2012) 
and Lyster, Saito and Sato (2013). 
 First, descriptive research on types of feedback typically distinguish between more explicit 
forms of feedback such as  explicit corrections  and  metalinguistic feedback  (i.e., information about the 

236 • Jonathan Newton
targeted error) from more implicit forms such as  clarification requests ,  recasts  and  elicitations . This 
research shows a general teacher preference for recasts (Lyster & Ranta, 1997), although as Sheen 
(2004) found, teaching context has a strong influence on feedback preferences, a point also high-
lighted by Lyster, Saito and Sato (2013). 
 Second, in terms of effect on learning, the overall conclusion one can draw from the now sizeable 
amount of research on corrective feedback is that, perhaps not surprisingly, feedback does aid lan-
guage development, and that more explicit types of feedback are more effective than more implicit 
forms of feedback (Ellis, 2012). As researchers have noted, however, the various types of implicit 
feedback can vary greatly in their degree of implicitness or explicitness. A recast, for example, can be 
delivered in such a way that the error is made perceptually salient through intonation, stress and/or 
pausing. In this way, the explicitness of an error correction function is greatly increased. 
 Finally, research reveals dissonance between teacher and learner preferences for feedback, with 
learners often reported as preferring more feedback than teachers feel comfortable providing (Lyster, 
Saito & Sato, 2013). Teachers, on the other hand, tend to be concerned with the negative effects of 
feedback on learner confidence and the communicative flow of a lesson. Interestingly, Vasquez and 
Harvey (2010) showed how a group of practicing teachers enrolled in a university SLA course became 
less preoccupied with the impact of feedback on learner affect as they were guided to reflect on the 
nature of feedback, including the impact of different types of feedback on uptake. 
 Among the conclusions Lyster, Saito and Sato (2013) draw from their extensive review of research 
on corrective feedback is that “[t]he most effective teachers are likely to be those who are willing and 
able to orchestrate, in accordance with their students’ language abilities and content familiarity, a 
wide range of CF types that fit the instructional context” (p. 30). Finally, Ellis and Shintani (2014) 
caution from research that over-correction, including not being selective in which errors are cor-
rected, is counter-productive, and that uptake and learning is more durable when the learner and 
not the teacher corrects the error. 
 Language Understanding (Direct Instruction) 
 This final category involves learning speaking skills through direct, planned and pre-emptive 
instruction. Again, this topic has generated a huge body of research. To tackle it, I have chosen to 
illustrate this body of research with two studies, addressing pragmatics and pronunciation, respec-
tively. These two studies present snapshots of research focused on each end of the spectrum of levels 
of spoken language as identified at the beginning of the chapter (namely, discourse, language choice 
and language production). Until recently, the effect of instruction on these two areas was relatively 
under-researched. 
 The first of these studies, Bardovi-Harlig, Mossman and Vellenga (2015), addresses the role of 
instruction in learning pragmatic features of spoken English. In this study, the researchers investi-
gated the acquisition by students in intact university EAP classes of the pragmatic routines used in 
academic discussions. An experimental design was adopted in which students were placed in either 
an experimental or control group, and pre-/post-tests were used to measure learning. Results showed 
that the experimental group who received instruction on the targeted pragmatic routines signifi-
cantly outperformed a control group on production of the targeted expressions and speech acts, thus 
confirming a positive role for instruction. As with the results of this study, there is now a substantial 
and relatively recent body of research providing robust evidence that a range of features of second 
language pragmatics benefit from direct instruction and that “without instruction in pragmatics, 
learners do not achieve sufficient ability in a range of pragmatic areas” (Rose, 2005, p. 397). 
 The second study addresses the effect of instruction on pronunciation. In this study, Couper 
(2006) investigated the effect of instruction on epenthesis (addition of a sound) and absence 
www.ebook3000.com

Learning-to-Speak and Speaking-to-Learn • 237
(inappropriate omission of a consonant) by migrants in ESL classes in New Zealand. The study 
was quasi-experimental in design, with an experimental group of 21 students from an intact class 
and a baseline group of 50 students from four other classes, and learning was measured on pre-, 
post- and delayed post-tests. The intervention consisted of twelve 30-minute sessions of training 
over 12 weeks in which learners in the experimental group received instruction on, and controlled 
practice opportunities with, the target structures. Couper found that learners in the experimental 
group made “dramatic gains” as seen in a marked drop in errors in both a post- and delayed post-
tests, while learners in the control group registered no such change (p. 46). The results of this study 
reflect the general finding from recent research that direct pronunciation instruction is beneficial 
(Derwing & Munro, 2015). However, research results are naturally more mixed on the finer-grained 
issues such as what form that instruction should take (stand-alone or integrated; perception-based or 
production-based), what features (including segmental and suprasegmental features) benefit from 
or are resistant to instruction, and what learner and contextual factors mediate the effectiveness of 
instruction (Derwing & Munro, 2015). Promisingly, the past decade has seen a significant upsurge in 
research addressing these issues after a long period in which research on pronunciation instruction 
was relatively dormant. 
 Conclusions and Future Directions 
 I conclude with a brief discussion of two topics on which research continues to inform the teaching 
and learning of speaking skills. I chose the first, TBLT, because it is relevant to much of the research 
discussed in this chapter and the second, technology, because of its pervasive influence on class-
rooms now and into the future. 
 First, as will be clear from the discussion up to this point, research on teaching communicative 
speaking draws extensively on task-based language learning (TBLT), just as tasks permeate a great 
deal of research in applied linguistics and instructed SLA (Loewen, 2014). TBLT has been extensively 
theorized and researched over the past 30–40 years and increasingly informs the design of national 
language curricula in many parts of the world. Partly as a consequence, scholarship in the field has 
increasingly taken an ecological perspective, focusing on the role of context in mediating the way 
teachers interpret the practice of TBLT (e.g., Adams & Newton, 2009; Bao & Du, 2015; Shehadeh & 
Coombe, 2012; Thomas & Reinders, 2015). This recent orientation towards the particular stands in 
synergistic contrast to a well-established experimental/quasi-experimental research tradition focus-
ing on tasks but not teachers, on learning but not learners, and on conditions but certainly not 
context. It also aligns with Long’s (2015) contention that ‘true’ TBLT is only ever derived from a 
situated needs analysis, ensuring that tasks are, by definition, local and specific. For this reason, Long 
identifies “detailed classroom studies of the ways teachers and students perform classroom lessons” 
(p. 371) as one of the “obvious areas in need of serious research effort” (p. 372). 
 Second, new technologies are having a profound effect on the teaching and learning of speak-
ing skills and generating a great deal of research activity (e.g., Gruba & Hinkelman, 2012; Thomas, 
Reinders & Warschauer, 2012). These new technologies open up learning opportunities in each of 
the areas of pedagogy discussed in this chapter. Some examples follow. First, for a focus on qualities 
of speech production, technology allows learners to analyze recordings of their voices and compare 
their recording to a model, aided by visual display of wave forms and pitch contours, animations of 
the movement of articulatory organs and automatic conversion of recorded speech into IPA sym-
bols. Second, computer-mediated communication (CMC) offers learners opportunities to develop 
their productive language skills through communicating online in modalities unhindered by time or 
space. Media for such talk include Skype, text chat, Twitter and other interactive platforms and forms 
of social media, including channels such as Tandem Exchange set up specifically to link classrooms 

238 • Jonathan Newton
in different parts of the world. Third, virtual worlds such as those available through Open Sim or 
Second Life allow teachers and communities of learners to create their own immersive learning envi-
ronment (Milton, 2012). Finally, the fully portable nature of these capabilities via mobile technology 
offers a fresh wave of opportunities for innovative pedagogy (Godwin-Jones, 2012). The challenge 
for research is to keep pace with such rapid innovation. 
 Research continues to pursue many other current themes related to the topic of this chap-
ter but beyond its scope. These include the role of L1 and translanguaging in L2 teaching and 
learning (Garcia & Wei, 2014), intercultural dimensions of speaking skills (Aubrey, 2015; Newton, 
2016), and the implications of the emergence of English as an International Language for speak-
ing attainment standards and targets (Kirkpatrick & Sussex, 2012). I have highlighted these three 
topics from among many because each speaks to a broader theme, namely the dynamic relation-
ship between languages education and global currents of social, cultural and political change, and 
indeed, upheaval, in the 21st century. These and the topics discussed earlier are current and vibrant 
fields of research, which will continue to inform and shape the teaching and learning of speaking 
skills into the future. 
 References 
 Adams, R. (2007). Do second language learners benefit from interacting with each other? In Mackey, A. (Ed.),  Conversational 
interaction in second language acquisition: A series of empirical studies (pp. 29–52). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Adams, R. & Newton, J. (2009). TBLT in Asia: Opportunities and constraints.  Asian Journal of English Language Teaching , 19, 
1–17. 
 Anderson, J. R. (1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill.  Psychological Review , 89, 369–403. 
 Arevart, S. & Nation, I. S. P. (1991). Fluency improvement in a second language.  RELC Journal , 22(1), 84–94. 
 Aubrey, S. (2015).  Effect of inter-cultural contact on L2 motivation and L2 learning: A process product study  (Unpublished PhD 
thesis). The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. 
 Bao, R. & Du, X. (2015). Implementation of task-based teaching in Chinese as a foreign language: Benefits and challenges. 
 Language, Culture and Curriculum , 28(2), 170–190. 
 Baralt, M., Gilabert, R. & Robinson, P. (2014).  Task sequencing and instructed second language learning . New York: Bloomsbury 
Academic. 
 Bardovi-Harlig, K., Mossman, S. & Vellenga, H. E. (2015). The effect of instruction on pragmatic routines in academic discus-
sion.  Language Teaching Research , 19, 324–350. 
 Biber, D. (2006).  University language: A corpus-based study of spoken and written registers . Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Boers, F. (2014) A reappraisal of the 4/3/2 activity.  RELC Journal , 45(3), 221–235. 
 Carless, D. (2005). Implementing task-based learning with young learners.  Innovations in Education and Teaching Interna-
tional 44 (1), 57–66. 
 Carless, D. (2009). Revisiting the TBLT versus P-P-P debate: Voices from Hong Kong.  Asian Journal of English Language Teach-
ing , 19, 49–66. 
 Carlson, R. (1997).  Experienced cognition . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Cauldwell, R. (2013).  Phonology for listening . Birmingham, UK: Speech in Action. 
 Couper, G. (2006). The short and long-term effects of pronunciation instruction.  Prospect , 21(1), 46–66. 
 Crabbe, D. (2003). The quality of language learning opportunities.  TESOL Quarterly , 37(1), 9–34. 
 Cutting, J. (2011). Spoken discourse. In K. Hyland & B. Paltridge (Eds.),  The Bloomsbury companion to discourse analysis 
(pp. 155–170). London: Bloomsbury. 
 Day, R. (2003). Authentic materials: A wolf in sheep’s clothing.  Guidelines , 25(2), 21–24. 
 de Guerro, M. C. M. & Commander, M. (2013). Shadow-reading: Affordances for imitation in the language classroom.  Lan-
guage Teaching Research , 17(4), 433–453. 
 De Jong, N. & Perfetti, C. A. (2011). Fluency training in the ESL classroom: An experimental study in fluency development 
and proceduralization.  Language Learning , 61(2), 533–568. 
 DeKeyser, R. M. (1998). Beyond focus on form: Cognitive perspectives on learning and practising second language grammar. 
In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.),  Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition  (pp. 42–63). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 DeKeyser, R. M. (2007). Situating the concept of practice. In R. DeKeyser (Ed.),  Practice in a second language  (pp. 1–18). Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

Learning-to-Speak and Speaking-to-Learn • 239
 DeKeyser, R. M. (2010). Practice for second language learning: Don’t throw the baby out with the bathwater.  International 
Journal of English studies , 10(1), 155–165. 
 DeKeyser, R. M. (2014). Skill acquisition theory. In B. VanPatten & J. Williams (Eds.),  Theories in second language acquisition: 
An introduction (2nd ed.) (pp. 94–112). London: Routledge. 
 De La Fuente, M. J. (2002). Negotiation and oral acquisition of L2 vocabulary: The roles of input and output in the receptive 
and productive acquisition of words.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition , 24, 81–112. 
 Derwing, T. M. & Munro, M. J. (2015).  Pronunciation fundamentals: Evidence-based perspectives for L2 teaching and research . 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Ding, Y. (2007). Text memorization and imitation: The practices of successful Chinese learners of English.  System , 35, 271−280. 
 Eckerth, J. (2009). Negotiated interaction in the L2 classroom.  Language Teaching , 42(1), 109–130. 
 Ellis, R. (2003).  Task-based language learning and teaching . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Ellis, R. (Ed.) (2005).  Planning and task-performance in a second language . Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Ellis, R. (2012).  Language teaching research and language pedagogy . Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Ellis, R. & He, X. (1999). The roles of modified input and output in the incidental acquisition of word meanings.  Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition , 21, 319–333. 
 Ellis, R. & Shintani, N. (2014).  Exploring second language pedagogy through second language acquisition research . New York, 
NY: Routledge. 
 Foley, J. A. (2011). Issues in teaching speaking for adult learners of English. In H. P. Widodo & A. Cirocki (Eds.),  Innovation 
and creativity in ELT methodology (pp. 29–42). Munich: Lincom Europa. 
 Foster, P. (1998). A classroom perspective on the negotiation of meaning. Ap plied Linguistics , 19(1), 1–23. 
 Foster, P. & Ohta, A. S. (2005). Negotiation for meaning and peer assistance in second language classrooms.  Applied Linguistics , 
26(3), 402–430. 
 Fukuta, J. (2015). Effects of task repetition on learners’ attention orientation in L2 oral production.  Language Teaching 
Research , 21. doi:10.1177/1362168815570142 
 Garcia, O. & Wei, L. (2014).  Translanguaging: Language, bilingualism and education . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Gass, S., Mackey, A. & Ross-Feldman, L. (2005). Task-based interactions in classroom and laboratory settings.  Language Learn-
ing , 55(4), 575–611. 
 Gatbonton, E. & Segalowitz, N. (2005). Rethinking communicative language teaching: A focus on access to fluency.  Canadian 
Modern Language Review , 61, 325–353. 
 Gill, M. (2008). Exclusive boundaries, contested claims: Authenticity, language and ideology. Proceedings of the BAAL Confer-
ence 2007, 41–42. 
 Godwin-Jones, R. (2012). Emerging technologies for language learning. In C. Chapelle (Ed.),  The encyclopedia of applied 
linguistics . London: Blackwell. doi:10.1002/9781405198431.wbeal0365 
 Goldstein, E. B. (2008)  Cognitive psychology: Connecting mind, research, and everyday experience  (2nd ed.). Belmont: Thomson 
Wadsworth. 
 Gruba, P. & Hinkelman, D. (2012)  Blending technologies in second language classrooms . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Guariento, W. & Morley, J. (2001). Text and task authenticity in the EFL classroom.  ELT Journal , 55(4), 347–353. 
 Hamuda, Y. (2014). The effectiveness of pre- and post-shadowing in improving listening comprehension skills.  The Language 
Teacher , 38, 3–10. 
 Hamuda, Y. (2016). Shadowing: Who benefits and how? Uncovering a booming EFL teaching technique for listening compre-
hension.  Language Teaching Research , 20(1), 35–52. 
 Hatch, E. (1978). Discourse analysis and second language acquisition. In E. Hatch (Ed.),  Second language acquisition: A book 
of readings (pp. 401–435). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Holliday, A. (1994).  Appropriate methodology and social context . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Hughes, R. (2012).  Teaching and researching speaking (2nd ed.). Harlow: Longman. 
 Kadota, S. (2012). Shadoingu to ondoku to eigoshutoku no kagaku. [ Science of shadowing, oral reading, and English acquisi-
tion ]. Tokyo: Cosmopier Publishing Company. 
 Kirkpatrick, A. & Sussex, R. (Eds.) (2012).  English as an international language in Asia: Implications for language education . 
New York: Springer. 
 Kitajima, R. (2013). Interactional features of repair negotiation in NS–NNS interaction on two task types: Information gap 
and personal information exchange.  Linguistics and Education , 24, 165–178. 
 Klapper, J. (2003). Taking communication to task? A critical review of recent trends in language teaching.  The Language Learn-
ing Journal , 27(1), 33–42. 
 Krashen, S. D. (1982).  Principles and practice in second language acquisition . Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
 Loewen, S. (2014).  Introduction to instructed second language acquisition . New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistics environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia 
(Eds.),  Handbook of language acquisition Vol .  2: Second language acquisition (pp. 413–468). New York: Academic Press. 

240 • Jonathan Newton
 Long, M. H. (2015).  Second language acquisition and task-based language teaching . West Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons. 
 Long, M. H. & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research, and practice. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.),  Focus 
on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 15–41). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Lynch, T. & Maclean, J. (2000). Exploring the benefits of task repetition and recycling for classroom language learning.  Lan-
guage Teaching Research , 4(3), 221–250. 
 Lyster, R. & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in communicative classrooms. 
 Studies in Second Language Acquisition , 19(1), 37–66. 
 Lyster, R., Saito, K. & Sato, M. (2013). Oral corrective feedback in second language classrooms.  Language Teaching , 46, 1–40. 
 Mackey, A. (Ed.) (2007).  Conversational interaction in second language acquisition . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Milton, J. (2012). Second language acquisition via second life. In C. Chapelle (Ed.),  The encyclopedia of applied linguistics 
(pp. 1–7). London: Blackwell. doi:10.1002/9781405198431.wbeal1318 
 Nakahama, Y., Tyler, A. & van Lier, L. (2001). Negotiation of meaning in conversational and information gap activities: 
A comparative discourse analysis.  TESOL Quarterly , 35(3), 377–405. 
 Nation, I. S. P. & Newton, J. (2009).  Teaching ESL/EFL listening and speaking . New York: Routledge. 
 Newton, J. (2013). Incidental vocabulary learning in classroom communication tasks.  Language Teaching Research , 17(2), 
164–187. 
 Newton, J. (2016). Teaching English for intercultural spoken communication. In H. P. Widodo & W. Renandya (Eds.),  English 
language teaching today: Building a closer link between theory and practice (pp. 161–178). New York: Springer. 
 Nguyen, T. B. T. (2013).  The roles of rehearsal and performance in teaching and learning through tasks in Vietnamese EFL high 
school classrooms  (Unpublished PhD thesis). Victoria University of Wellington. 
 Pica, T., Kanagy, R. & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language instruction. In G. 
Crooks & S. Gass (Eds.),  Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and practice  (pp. 9–34). Clevedon, UK: Multi-
lingual Matters. 
 Pinter, A. (2007). Some benefits of peer–peer interaction: 10-year-old children practising with a communication task.  Lan-
guage Teaching Research , 11(2), 189–207. 
 Robinson, P. (2001). Task complexity, task difficulty, and task production: Exploring interactions.  Applied Linguistics , 22(1), 
27–57. 
 Rose, K. (2005). On the effects of instruction in second language pragmatics . System , 33, 385–399. 
 Sato, R. (2010). Reconsidering the effectiveness and suitability of PPP and TBLT in the Japanese EFL classroom.  JALT Journal , 
32(2), 189–200. 
 Scrivener, J. 2005.  Learning teaching: The essential guide to English language teaching . Oxford: MacMillan. 
 Seedhouse, P. (2004).  The interactional architecture of the language classroom: A conversation analysis perspective . Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
 Segalowitz, N. (2010).  Cognitive bases of second language fluency . New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Sheen, Y. (2004). Corrective feedback and learner uptake in communicative classrooms across instructional settings.  Language 
Teaching Research , 8(3), 361–392. 
 Shehadeh, A. & Coombe, C. A. (Eds.) (2012).  Task-based language teaching in foreign language contexts: Research and imple-
mentation . Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
 Skehan, P. (1998).  A cognitive approach to language learning . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Skehan, P., Bei, X., Li, Q. & Zhan, W. (2012). The task is not enough: Processing approaches to task-based performance . Lan-
guage Teaching Research , 16(2), 170–187. 
 Skehan, P. & Foster, P. (1999). The influence of task structure and processing conditions on narrative retellings.  Language 
Learning , 49(1), 93–120. 
 Slimani-Rolls, A. (2005). Practitioner research: Rethinking task-based language learning: What we can learn from the learners. 
 Language Teaching Research , 9(2), 195–218. 
 Smith, B. (2005). The relationship between negotiated interaction, learner uptake, and lexical acquisition in task-based com-
puter-mediated communication.  TESOL Quarterly , 39(1), 33–58. 
 Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles for comprehensible input and comprehensible output in its devel-
opment. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.),  Input in second language acquisition  (pp. 235–253). Rowley, MA: Newbury 
House. 
 Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer (Eds.),  Principles and 
practice in applied linguistics (pp. 125–144). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf 
(Ed.),  Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Thomas, M. & Reinders, H. (Eds.) (2015).  TBLT in Asia: Challenges and opportunities . London: Bloomsbury. 
 Thomas, M., Reinders, H. & Warschauer, M. (Eds.) (2012).  Contemporary computer-assisted language learning . New York: 
Bloomsbury. 
www.ebook3000.com

Learning-to-Speak and Speaking-to-Learn • 241
 van de Guchte, M., Braaksma, M., Rijlaarsdam, G. & Billel, P. (2015). Focus on form through task repetition in TBLT.  Language 
Teaching Research , 21. doi:10.1177/1362168815609616 
 Vasquez, C. & Harvey, J. (2010). Raising teachers’ awareness about corrective feedback through research replication.  Language 
Teaching Research , 14(4), 421–443. 
 Willis, D. & Willis, J. (2007).  Doing task-based teaching . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Willis, D. & Willis, J. (2009). TBL: Some questions and answers.  The Language Teacher , 33(3), 3–8. 
 Wood, D. (2006). Uses and functions of formulaic sequences in second language speech: An exploration of the foundations of 
fluency.  Canadian Modern Language Review , 13, 13–33. 

242
 Introduction 
 This chapter reviews the theory and practice of recent approaches to the teaching of speaking. It 
begins by outlining key theoretical areas that need to be considered: the nature of speaking and the 
skills, knowledge and affective factors involved, the processing of speech, the features of spoken lan-
guage, differences between spoken and written language, and what discourse analysis reveals about 
its textual and grammatical features. I argue that teachers need to have awareness of a range of such 
theoretical areas in order to understand and address the speaking needs of their students explicitly. 
To this end, I survey some key areas of research that could enhance pedagogical knowledge. The 
chapter concludes by considering further directions in research on the teaching of speaking. 
 The Increasing Demand for Competent English Speakers 
 Teachers have long known that mastery of speaking skills is important for many second language learn-
ers; however, the teaching of this skill is problematic for many teachers because of the complexity of spo-
ken interaction and a lack of consensus about what principled approaches should be adopted to teach 
speaking (Bygate, 2001). In recent years, however, competence in speaking English has come into much 
greater prominence in many educational systems, many of which have been criticized for placing too 
heavy an emphasis on reading and writing instruction and national testing (Baldauf et al., 2012). Wit-
ness, for example, the most recent Course of Study guidelines (2008) implemented in junior high school 
from 2012 by the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), 
which seek greater balance in English teaching “to develop students’ basic communication abilities, such 
as listening, speaking, reading and writing (MEXT, 2008, p. 1). The policy places particular emphasis 
on teachers using English in the classroom, increasing vocabulary, and fostering communicative abil-
ity through communication practice (Tahira, 2012). Such moves are to be found in many other recent 
policy developments in Asia (see Kirkpatrick & Sussex, 2012) and elsewhere and are driven by the glo-
balization of English and international pressure for countries to produce English-competent citizens to 
enhance their geopolitical and economic development and competitiveness. As Lazaraton (2014, p. 106) 
comments, however, “the act of speaking is staggeringly complex” (and one might add, so is the immense 
body of literature on speaking and the spoken language), which makes it one of the most perplex-
ing of the traditional four skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing to teach and assess. Given 
 18 
 Research and the Teaching of Speaking 
in the Second Language Classroom 
 Anne Burns 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching in the Second Language Classroom • 243
increasing demands to foreground speaking in language curricula, it is important that English language 
teachers have an awareness of some of the key areas relevant to teaching speaking so that they can “teach 
speaking” effectively rather than simply “do speaking” (Goh & Burns, 2012, p. 2) in the classroom. 
 The Complexity of Speaking and Speaking Competence 
 Speaking is complex because speakers are involved in a rapid and dynamic process incurring “a high 
element of doing various things at the same time” (Johnson, 1996, p. 55). To be competent they must 
combine various skills, knowledge, and processes that take account of the contexts of production, 
and result in speech that is culturally and socially relevant, appropriate, and comprehensible to their 
interlocutors, as well as managing micro-level reactions and responses to what they utter. Competent 
speakers must at the same time be listeners who can take account of the interactional and unpredict-
able dynamics of speech (Ellis, 2014). As Bygate (2001, p. 16) comments, “all this happens very fast, 
and to be successful depends on automation.” Goh and Burns (2012) propose that speaking compe-
tence can be thought of as “combinatorial,” involving the use of linguistic knowledge, core speaking 
skills, and communication strategies, which must all cohere simultaneously to constitute speaking 
competence and to facilitative fluent and intelligible speech production. 
 Linguistic Knowledge 
 Linguistic knowledge encompasses structure, meaning, and use (Canale & Swain, 1980; Canale, 
1983) through four types of knowledge:  phonological ,  grammatical ,  lexical , and  discourse . Speakers 
must know how to produce the language at the segmental (micro—consonant and vowel sounds, 
word stress) and suprasegmental (macro—utterance stress, rhythm, intonation) levels of pronun-
ciation and to appreciate what communicative functions are served by features such as prominence 
(weak/strong emphasis) and tone (chunking of sounds) (see Burns & Seidlhofer, 2010). In recent 
years, attention has been drawn to the importance of raising learners’ awareness of suprasegmental 
features to enhance their abilities in global communication (e.g. Zhang, 2004). Grammatical knowl-
edge is a fundamental requirement for speaking any language. Speakers need to have syntactical 
knowledge of, for example, word order to create meaning, verb inflection to denote tense and aspect, 
the ability to parse utterances to make further responses (Rost, 2001), and understanding of how 
spoken grammar differs from written (McCarthy & Carter, 1995). 
 Lexical knowledge relates to the number of words or individual vocabulary size (estimated by 
Owens, 2001, to be around 80,000 words for a native speaker by the end of high school) that a speaker 
knows. However, a distinction is usually made between productive (what learners can produce) and 
receptive (what learners can recognise but not produce) vocabulary. Learning fixed and idiomatic 
utterances—formulaic “prefabricated” expressions (Wray, 2002, p. 9)—is said to enhance a learner’s 
productive performance, particularly at early stages, as does learners’ awareness of semantic rela-
tionships among lexical sets (words related to the same topic, function, or form) and collocations 
(words that cohere semantically) (Webb & Boers, in press); in this respect, Nation (2011) points 
to the value of knowledge of high-frequency multiword groups (see also Shin, 2007) in facilitating 
spoken language production. Ways of expressing modality (lexical phrases denoting stance, attitudes, 
and levels of certainty) are also an important area for development of pragmatic competence in 
spoken language (Bardovi-Harlig, 2003). Finally, discourse knowledge relates to an understanding 
of the functional purpose of different kinds of talk and how different contextual factors influence 
the various linguistic resources that are harnessed for organising and structuring stretches of speech 
(e.g. narrative, recount, lecture, casual conversations). Speakers also need to be aware of pragmatic 
norms (e.g. three-part exchanges in short conversations; Carter, 1998) and sociocultural practices 

244 • Anne Burns
and expectations in different societies, particularly in an era where English is widely used globally 
and intercultural pragmatic knowledge is increasingly important in meaning negotiation. 
 Core Speaking Skills 
 In many traditional classrooms, there is a heavy focus on teaching knowledge about pronunciation, 
grammar, vocabulary, and discourse. However, as many learners who have experienced these types of 
classrooms have come to realize, such knowledge is not sufficient in itself to enable them to become 
effective speakers. They must also learn how to proceduralize or ‘put into action’ such knowledge 
through use in different contexts. Four broad categories of core speaking skills for proceduraliza-
tion can be outlined: pronunciation, speech function, interaction (or discourse) management, and 
discourse organisation skills. Pronunciation skills mean that learners can articulate and blend the 
sounds of the language, assign word stress to create meaning, and use appropriate intonation pat-
terns (see Burns & Seidlhofer, 2010). Various studies have shown that prosodic features such as stress 
and intonation have a greater impact on learner intelligibility than articulation of single sounds or 
phonemes (Derwing et al., 1998; Hahn, 2004). More recently, McKay and Brown (2015) have argued 
that in light of the use of English as an international language, English teachers and learners need to 
move away from native speaker norms and sensitize themselves to both global and local standards 
for intelligibility. Speech function skills (Cohen, 1996) enable learners to perform a communicative 
function or speech act, such as requesting (permission), expressing (agreement), explaining (rea-
sons), giving (instructions), offering (advice), or describing (settings), while interaction manage-
ment is to do with regulating speech during interactions (e.g. initiating conversations or clarifying 
meaning). An important consideration in relation to speech functions is that learners need to be 
aware of appropriate usage in different cultural contexts, such as who has seniority or status, or what 
politeness markers (such as hedging) may be important to create effective communication. 
 In the spontaneous two-way process that characterises much natural speech, the management of 
interaction is also an important skill. While interaction skills overlap to some extent with speech-
function skills, they have a specific regulatory purpose in enabling speakers to create, negotiate, and 
(re-)direct the interaction (Gass & Torres, 2005). These skills entail recognising what speakers are 
trying to achieve and reading non-verbal clues such as body language. Learners need practice in skills 
such as gaining, keeping and offering turns, and managing topics in order to initiate, sustain, and 
negotiate interactions (Bygate, 1987). Discourse organisation skills relate to the ability to manage the 
unfolding of the interaction, including being able to anticipate how particular genres and sub-genres 
are structured and patterned (Bygate, 1998) and knowing how to select grammar and lexis to estab-
lish coherence and cohesion. Coherence (Gernsbacher & Givón, 1995) is created cognitively through 
both domain-specific lexical knowledge using devices such as noun-pronoun referencing, reiteration 
of lexis, and relexicalisation drawing on related vocabulary, and grammatical processing cues, with 
both processes contributing to the construction of local and global coherence. Cohesion (Halliday & 
Hasan, 1976/2013) refers to construction of text so that it ‘hangs together’; speakers create cohesion 
through semantic resources that link the text to what has gone before, including joining different 
parts through devices such as conjunction or connection, or employing signposting expressions that 
indicate additions or changes to the message. 
 Communication Strategies 
 Communication strategies (e.g. Dörnyei & Scott, 1997) enable speakers to deal with the constraints 
of cognitive processing in a situation where face-to-face interaction is rapid, spontaneous, and 
unpredictable. Because speakers often cannot afford time to prepare what they say in advance, they 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching in the Second Language Classroom • 245
need coping strategies to deal with the “mismatch between their communicative intentions and their 
linguistic resources” (Váradi, 1992, p. 437). Cognitive communication strategies fulfill two broad 
purposes to enable the interaction to continue. First, reduction strategies can help the speaker avoid 
having to keep on speaking; they are a form of face-saving device, but they also limit the continuity 
of the interaction, as they include topic avoidance (moving away from or shifting the focus of the 
topic), message abandonment (being unable to continue the message), or meaning replacement or 
semantic avoidance (becoming less specific or vague). Achievement strategies, on the other hand, are 
psycholinguistic strategies (Kellerman & Bialystock, 1997) to enable the speakers to communicate 
with whatever resources they have: such strategies include lexical substitution, generalisation (e.g. 
president for principal), exemplification (e.g. cat, dog, horse for animals), circumlocution (e.g. with 
big ears and tail like horse for donkey), word coinage (e.g. tall hill for mountain), or literal transla-
tion (e.g. going to the house of me for going home). Apart from these kinds of cognitive strate-
gies, metacognitive strategies—or strategies to manage thinking and speech production—may be 
employed. Speakers may prepare what to say by planning ahead, self-monitoring, noticing how they 
create and negotiate meaning while speaking, or self-evaluating how and what was produced fol-
lowing interaction. Interactional strategies are a further type of communication strategy that enable 
speakers to manage meaning negotiation: these kinds of strategies include confirmation checks (ask-
ing listeners if they have understood), comprehension checks (paraphrasing to confirm understand-
ing), repetition (repeating all or part of what is said) and repetition requests (asking someone to 
repeat), clarification (asking for further explanation), or assistance appeals (asking for help with 
difficult expressions). 
 Speaking and Cognitive Processing 
 From the above discussion it is clear that speaking is a highly dynamic psycholinguistic process 
involving complex cognitive, linguistic, and motor skills. To conceptualize speaking as a cognitive 
process, Levelt (1989) proposed a model of speech processing (see  Figure 18.1 ) that has influenced 
CONCEPTUAL 
PREPARATION
FORMULATION
ARTICULATION
Interactive 
processing of 
speech in 
working 
memory
Long-Term Memory
Speech
Knowledge about the topic
Knowledge 
about the 
language: 
grammar, 
vocabulary, 
register and 
discourse 
structure
Knowledge 
about the 
language:
pronunciation
SELF-MONITORING
Knowledge about the topic, language and context 
of interaction
SELF-MONITORING
 Figure 18.1 Cognitive Demands on Learners During Speech Processing (Based on Levelt’s Model of Speech Processing) 

246 • Anne Burns
the theorisation of second language speech production (e.g. McLaughlin, 1987; Poulisse, 1993; John-
son, 1996; Bygate, 1998). To produce speech, the speaker must engage in processes that express both 
form, or structure, and meaning, or content. The model presents three components that are directly 
involved in the production of speech: (i) conceptual preparation, (ii) formulation, and (iii) articula-
tion. A fourth component of this model is self-monitoring, which operates at a superordinate level 
of the other three components (see  Figure 18.1 ). While presented separately in the model, these 
components are likely to recur and overlap throughout speech production, as interconnected neural 
networks in the brain are activated at about the same time (Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 1991). 
 Conceptual preparation is where speech production begins, as speakers select topics or contribute 
to preceding speech content, using their background or ‘encyclopedic’ world knowledge. In the case 
of language learners, conceptual preparation relates to how much learners already know and com-
prehend, to the linguistic repertoire at their disposal, and to their sociocultural awareness. Formula-
tion involves mapping the messages speakers have in mind on to their available lexico-grammatical 
system and stringing them together (Garman, 1990). In order to do this, speakers must make lexico-
grammatical choices relevant to the intended message and flesh them out syntactically, selecting 
appropriate forms of ‘bounded markers’ (of tense, mood, number, and so on), as well as pay attention 
to overall discourse coherence and register variance. Language learners may resort to translation or 
mental representations of how messages are structured and produced from their first language to 
assist in this process. Articulation brings in physiological skills, which are closely linked to memory 
and information processing. The articulatory system must be activated to produce streams of sound 
through control of muscle groups (vocal tract, larynx, and lungs). For fluent speakers, phonological 
encodings have become automated, enabling them to manipulate and draw attention to meaning 
through assigning stress and intonation at various points in the speech stream. For learners, espe-
cially beginners, articulation can be very challenging and may provoke anxiety as they struggle to 
reach greater automisation and thus greater comprehensibility. The fourth dimension at work in 
speech processing, according to Levelt’s model, is self-monitoring. This is a metacognitive process 
that works at a higher level than the other components, involving checking speech for accuracy and 
acceptability, and managing disfluencies, or errors in pronunciation or grammar. Self-monitoring of 
speech in first language speakers has been shown to begin at an early age (Foster-Cohen, 1999), but 
there is also evidence that language learners make productive use of oral communication strategies 
to monitor speech (Nakatani & Goh, 2007). 
 Speaking and Affective Factors 
 Language teachers frequently point to their learners’ lack of motivation and reluctance to speak in 
class (Wiltse, 2006). Such comments touch on emotional and cognitive factors that can have a sub-
stantial impact on learners’ willingness to speak. Arnold (1999, p. 8) notes that “anxiety is possibly 
the affective factor that most pervasively obstructs the learning process”; it creates feelings of tension, 
apprehension, nervousness, embarrassment, and worry, and it is interwoven with factors of social 
pressure, personality, self-esteem, inhibition, and risk-taking. In some individuals it may substan-
tially impair cognitive processes and memory during speech production. Horwitz and her colleagues 
(Horwitz et al., 1986) elaborated the concept of language anxiety, describing it as “a composite of 
self-perceptions, beliefs, feelings, and behaviors related to the learning process and arising from the 
unique situation in the classroom (p. 31). They argue that because “complex and non-spontaneous 
mental operations are required in order to communicate at all, any performance in the L2 is likely 
to challenge an individual’s self-concept as a competent communicator and lead to reticence, self-
consciousness, fear, or even panic” (p. 128). Several studies have built on the concept of language 
anxiety. Gregerson (2003) found that anxious learners exhibit a high degree of frustration and may 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching in the Second Language Classroom • 247
fail to monitor and respond to their own mistakes. Ohata (2005) reports that for Japanese learn-
ers, anxiety was related to negative evaluation by others, leading to a sense of loss of face in oral 
presentation situations. Various other studies show that reticence to speak should not necessarily be 
interpreted as a lack of motivation; rather, it may reflect deep-seated beliefs and fears when having 
to perform in class in front of peers (Tsui, 1996; Lui & Jackson, 2008). It follows that teachers need to 
create a supportive and collaborate classroom environment (Wiltse, 2006), where they are attuned 
to learners’ verbal and non-verbal behaviour, where learning is carefully scaffolded, and where the 
notion of error and disfluencies in performance are portrayed as a natural part of language learning. 
Teachers can also assist learners to manage their language anxiety through strategies such as keeping 
a portfolio (Öztürk & Çeçen, 2007). 
 Fluency, Accuracy, and Complexity 
 The interaction of linguistic knowledge and skills, cognitive processing, and affective factors place 
heavy demands on speakers, and on language learners in particular, and can have a direct impact on 
the quality, characterised as fluency, accuracy, and complexity (e.g. Bygate, 2009), of spoken perfor-
mance. The main priority of speakers is to exchange meaning (Skehan, 1998), for which fluency is 
vital so that the message is conveyed coherently with few pauses and hesitations, and with maximum 
comprehensibility for listeners. However, there is limited consensus on what constitutes fluency, and 
Koponen and Riggenbach (2000) argue that fluency and pronunciation overlap and can be difficult 
to differentiate. Language learner fluency in learners may, however, be restricted by the pressure to 
process speech rapidly, so that accuracy, the ability to create syntactically accurate messages and to 
articulate them appropriately, is impaired. Limited working memory capacity may mean that accu-
racy, or form, is sacrificed when formulating meaning. With growing automisation of processes such 
as lexical retrieval, greater complexity is possible. Complexity combines both form and meaning, 
leading to greater precision and use of more advanced grammatical forms such as clause embedding, 
subordination, and superior awareness of social roles and relationships with interlocutors. 
 Fluency is likely to be of greatest concern to learners of English at all levels. Studies measuring 
what constructs underlie the notion of fluency, and therefore contribute to its measurability, are still 
relatively scarce. A study by Kormos and Dénes (2004), conducted in Hungary on native speaker lis-
teners’ perceptions of fluency, concluded that “fluency is best conceived of as fast, smooth and accu-
rate performance”, which can also be characterised temporally by pace (the number of stressed words 
per minute), which includes a specific feature, stress, that it is possible to calculate. They found that 
mean length of runs and speech rate were also found to be good indicators of fluency. Nation (2011) 
argues that fluency practice needs to be skill specific, but that there is likely to be transfer of fluency 
between the four skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing, with greatest transfer between 
productive and receptive skills in the same mode (e.g. speaking and listening). He suggests that 
fluency development requires the following conditions: familiarity of content and language (lexico-
grammar); communicative tasks where meaning can be conveyed; pressure to perform at faster than 
usual speed (e.g. 4/3/2 task where learners change partners and time in minutes to perform the same 
task is reduced); and quantity of practice where fluency activities form the majority of the course. 
 Discourses of Speech 
 A major criticism of Levelt’s model of speech processing is that it “appears not to take too much 
account of the interpersonal collaborative nature of talk” (Bygate, 2009, p. 408). Speakers do not 
formulate utterances based on individualized conceptualisations of what they want to say. Rather, 
speech is produced in cultural and social contexts where speakers must take account of the topics 

248 • Anne Burns
they wish to raise, their relationships with other speakers, and the ways in which they can express 
their meanings within particular cultural and social conditions. They build interaction in the light of 
what their interlocutors can already be expected to know and how they expect these interlocutors to 
respond pragmatically (Wilkes-Gibbs, 1997). The growing trend over the last decades in researching 
and analyzing naturally occurring interaction has provided considerable insights into pedagogical 
knowledge for the teaching of speaking. Some of these areas are now briefly surveyed. 
 Spoken and Written Grammar 
 Significant insights have arisen from the analysis of speech compared with writing over several 
decades. Bygate (1998, citing Hatch, 1992) notes the major characteristics relate to three areas: 
planning, contextualization, and formality. Unlike writing, speech is more commonly unplanned, 
embedded in contexts of immediate use, and must respond to reciprocity conditions. Prototypically, 
speech is less formal than writing and characterized by features of clausal and phrasal organization 
(in comparison with sentence organization); lower levels of grammatical formality; left dislocation 
(occurrence of a noun/prepositional phrase, or pronoun to the immediate left of an already com-
plete clause); involvement versus detachment; parataxis (or nextness); parallelism; repetition; repair; 
and conjunction (in contrast to subordination). To these could be minimally added grammatical 
intricacy (in contrast to lexical density), grammatical congruence (unmarked typical realisations of 
meaning), ellipsis, relexicalisation, and exophoric reference (out into the context). McCarthy and 
Carter argue that awareness of differences in spoken and written grammars is pedagogically impor-
tant since “descriptions that rest on the written mode or on restricted genres and registers of spo-
ken language are likely to omit many common features of everyday informal grammar and usage” 
(McCarthy & Carter, 1995, p. 154). 
 In recent years, major (if not definitive) contributions to descriptive grammars of spoken gram-
mars have come from such compilations as Biber et al. (1999) and Carter and McCarthy (2006). Each 
of these works is based on naturally occurring language in contrast to invented examples; the data are 
drawn from large corpora (40 million words British and American English in 37,000 texts in Biber et al. 
and up to 900 million words in Carter and McCarthy), and strong emphasis is placed on linguistic 
function, rather than form, the importance of register in grammatical choice, and explicit emphasis 
on relationships between discourse factors and syntactic and lexical choices. While acknowledging 
that spoken and written English are based on the same foundational grammar (cf. Halliday, 1989), 
they each clearly reflect “the increasing attention that has been paid to register variation of language 
in use, ‘the lexical end of grammar’ and phraseology, in linguistic studies of English over the past two 
decades” (Rowley-Jolivet, 2002, p. 91). McCarthy and O’Keeffe (2004; see also O’Keeffe et al., 2009; 
Reppen, 2010) point to the gradually growing impact that spoken corpora analysis is having on the 
theory and practice of speaking pedagogy, including those for English (e.g. British National Corpus, 
British/Irish CANCODE spoken corpus, Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English, Longman 
Spoken American Corpus) as well as other language varieties (e.g. International Corpus of English 
with data from the Englishes of the Caribbean, Hong Kong, Nigeria, and Singapore). Other corpora, 
such as the Vienna-Oxford International Corpus of English (VOICE) corpus, have emerged to con-
test the predominance of so-called native speaker models that have so long underpinned English 
language teaching. Given the expansion of English globally, they argue for the need to capture the use 
of English as a lingua franca which can represent more realistically how the language is being used 
by speakers from a wide variety of first language backgrounds, whose upbringing and education did 
not involve English (Seidlhofer, 2004). 
 VOICE data are unscripted, largely face-to-face, and cover a range of settings, both formal and 
informal, functions, and participant roles and relationships. According to Seidlhofer, the corpus 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching in the Second Language Classroom • 249
demonstrates that errors most English teachers spend much time and effort correcting can be consid-
ered as unproblematic, since in the data they do not appear to impede comprehension. These include 
omission of third-person present tense -s, confusion of relative pronouns  who and  which , omission 
or insertion of definite and indefinite articles, failure to use grammatically correct question tags, 
insertion of redundant prepositions ( study about ), overuse of verbs of high semantic generality (e.g. 
 have, make, put, take ), replacement of infinitive constructions with  that -clauses, and over-explicitness 
( black colour ). Communication problems are more noticeably caused by vocabulary unfamiliarity, 
lack of paraphrasing skills, and incomprehension of idiomatic expressions. 
 Speaking and Discourse Analysis 
 Mohan (2011) notes that linguistic research on language and learning has largely been dominated by 
20th-century structuralist models analysing items below the sentence. Advances in discourse analy-
sis (as well as the advent of sophisticated recording technologies) have significantly expanded the 
detailed examination of naturally occurring speech and have illuminated typical patternings that 
characterise spoken text. At its heart, contemporary discourse analysis unites form and function to 
scrutinise the work that language does (what it accomplishes) in naturalistic settings, rather than 
through invented examples. Various approaches to discourse analysis, including (but not exclusively) 
systemic-functional linguistics (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014), conversation analysis (Garfinkel, 
1967; Sacks et al., 1974), pragmatics (Austin, 1962; Searle, 1969; Grice, 1975), and critical discourse 
analysis (Fairclough & Wodak, 1997), have constituted a social and critical “turn” in approaches to 
language analysis and have been instrumental in these advances (Silberstein, 2011). While there are 
differentiations in epistemology and the primary locus of analysis, all of these approaches unite in a 
common interest in language above the level of the sentence and in interrelationships between texts 
and the contexts in which they arise. Systemic functional linguistics (SFL) is a linguistic theory: 
 oriented to descriptions of language as a resource for meaning, rather than as a system of rules. 
It is oriented, in other words, to speakers’ meaning potential (what they can mean). . . . SFL is 
concerned with texts, rather than sentences, as the basic unit through which meaning is nego-
tiated. It treats grammar, in other words, as the realisation of discourse. 
 (Halliday & Martin, 1993, p. 22) 
 The contribution of SFL to the teaching of speaking is that it can illuminate the primary social and 
functional motivation of the text (transactional or interactional), prototypical generic structures in 
spoken discourse (e.g. narrative, recount), and how ideational, interpersonal, and textual register 
variables are played out through particular choices of language. Burns et al. (1996), Paltridge (2001), 
and Martinez (2011) outline ways in which spoken texts can be analysed generically and provide 
suggestions for practical classroom activities. While text is the analytical unit of meaning in systemic-
functional linguistics, in conversation analysis it is primarily the analysis of the turn (Atkinson & 
Heritage, 1984). Conversation analysis (CA) is concerned with ethnomethodological questions of 
how people interpret everyday life and develop a sense of social order. Garfinkel (1967, p. 1) 
was interested in “paying attention to the most common activities of daily life the attention usually 
accorded extraordinary events”. As the term implies, CA is concerned mainly with informal spoken 
discourse and employs fine-grained analysis to illuminate the “detailed organization of everyday 
language” (McCarthy et al., 2010, p. 58). Key questions are related to how people take and keep turns 
in conversation, how they commence and shut down conversation, how they initiate, close, and shift 
topic, and how they collaborate to negotiate communication from utterance to utterance. Major 
contributions from conversation analysis are the analysis of turn-taking and the underlying localized 

250 • Anne Burns
‘rules’ for taking turns, with the basic pattern being the adjacency pairs, which highlights the related-
ness of one type of turn to another (e.g. offer-acceptance). 
 Based on classroom research, Barraja-Rohan (2011) shows how CA initially raised awareness in 
lower and intermediate second language learners of the mechanisms and norms of spoken interac-
tion, and also eventually helped them to become analysts of conversation and more effective con-
versationalists. Bowles and Seedhouse (2007) contains a collection of studies considering how CA 
can be applied in language for specific purpose contexts. Nicholas (2015), wishing to combine socio-
cultural, concept-based ideas with findings from CA research. employed a three-stage process for 
speech act instruction: (1) orientation (instruction in fundamental concepts relevant to interactional 
competence; (2) execution (strategic interaction tasks carried out with a partner); and (3) control 
(reflection on videotaped performances in the light of understanding of the relevant concepts). He 
concludes that enabling EFL learners to gain more nuanced conceptual understandings of pragmatic 
norms should equip them to apply this knowledge in other contexts. 
 Pragmatics has its roots in philosophy. Grice (1975) proposed the notion of conversational maxims, 
based on what he termed ‘the cooperative principle’. He argued that the maxims of quality (be true), 
quantity (be brief), relevance (be relevant), and manner (be clear) enable conversational partners to 
relate to each other but also trace implicatures, or hidden or indirect meanings. Speakers must infer 
from implicatures what a speaker intends by drawing on both linguistic and contextual knowledge, 
including the cooperative principle (Schiffrin, 1990). In pragmatic theory, a primary unit of analysis is 
the speech act, the realisation of particular purposes, such as greeting, apologising, requesting, comple-
menting, threatening, disagreeing, and so on, through language. Speech act theory focuses on the illo-
cutionary act, or the performance of a particular piece of language, given form and meaning in relation 
to the surrounding situation. Illocutionary acts (Austin, 1962) can be both direct and indirect (as when 
a question is used as a command, or a statement of identification can also be an offer of service). 
 Brock and Nagasaka (2005) suggest a pedagogical heuristic that teachers can use to raise prag-
matic awareness when teaching speaking: See, Use, Review, and Experience (SURE). See involves 
helping students observe language in context and raising awareness of pragmatic factors; Use intro-
duces activities where students can choose how to interact based on their understanding of real 
or simulated contexts; Review allows for revision and recycling of areas of pragmatic competence 
focused on in previous activities; and Experience exposes students to video, television shows, or other 
media, where they observe the role pragmatics plays in communication. Tatsuki and Houck (2010) 
provide a range of studies that demonstrate practical examples of the use of pragmatics in language 
classrooms, while Wigglesworth and Yates (2007) report on a study designed to provide specific 
information to help teachers develop classroom activities on how native English speakers (NESs) 
mitigate difficult requests in the workplace context in English-speaking countries. 
 Critical discourse analysis (CDA) has its base in the poststructuralist theories of social philosophers 
such as Foucault, Bourdieu, and Habermas and in the work of critical linguists such as Fowler at el. 
(1979), Fairclough (e.g. 1989), and Gee (e.g. 1990). CDA interrogates how discourses are used in the 
construction of power relationships and in the maintenance of institutional and social dominance. 
CDA theorists are concerned with issues of how language operates to construct and maintain ideolo-
gies of hegemony, race, gender, discrimination, class, politics, immigration, and crime. Van Dijk (2003, 
p. 352) notes that while other approaches in discourse analysis may to a greater or lesser extent include 
critical perspectives, CDA “aims to offer a different ‘mode’ or ‘perspective’ of theorizing, analysis, and 
application throughout the whole field.” Fairclough and Wodak (1997, pp. 271–280) set out the main 
principles of CDA: 
 1. CDA addresses social problems. 
 2. Power relations are discursive. 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching in the Second Language Classroom • 251
 3. Discourse constitutes society and culture. 
 4. Discourse does ideological work. 
 5. Discourse is historical. 
 6. The link between text and society is mediated. 
 7. Discourse analysis is interpretative and explanatory. 
 8. Discourse is a form of social action. 
 Applied to the teaching of speaking, a critical discourse perspective enables teachers and learners to 
consider areas such as who or what dominates or is omitted from talk, what underlying social norms 
are at play and how they are maintained or contested, and what gatekeeping roles are incurred. Recent 
studies applying a CDA perspective to spoken language are Eggins and Slade (2005), who analyse 
genres of casual conversation such as story-telling, gossiping, and joke-telling, and Harrington et al. 
(2008), focusing on language and gender research. Considering applications to language teaching, 
Cots (2006) argues that the development of learners’ capacities to examine and judge critical world 
issues is too often absent from language programs and proposes how CDA can be deployed through 
specific kinds of language activities. He suggests a three-part framework that raises questions teach-
ers can discuss with learners when introducing a text: (1) social practice (e.g. In what kind of social 
situation is the text produced? What social identities are involved? What are the social consequences 
of the text?); (2) discourse practice (e.g. Does it require us to read between the lines? How conven-
tional is the text in its context of use?); (3) textual practice (e.g. Is it obvious in any way that one of 
the participants is more in control of the construction than the others? How does syntactic structure 
as well as lexical choice affect the meaning? Are there alternatives?). 
 Despite the considerable advances in discourse analysis research, and calls from Firth and Wagner 
(1997), Rampton (1997), and Boxer and Cohen (2004), for example, for closer interconnectedness 
between second language acquisition research and discourse analysis, it can still be argued that such 
approaches are only spasmodically exploited in teacher education. Where would-be and currently 
serving teachers are exposed to courses in discourse analysis, it is rarely the case, I would argue, that 
discourse analytical insights are readily transposed into language teaching classroom practice, and 
perhaps even less readily in the case of teaching speaking (see, for example, findings from the studies 
edited by Bartels, 2005). As Borg (2005, p. 339) in Bartel’s collection argues: 
 Even in teacher education contexts where [knowledge about language] and methodology are 
addressed directly, it is not productive for what and how teachers learn about language to be 
disconnected from the roles their KAL [knowledge about language] will play in the classroom. 
 The interconnection of teacher education courses in second language acquisition, discourse analysis, 
and methodology is an area for research that should attract much wider attention if the findings 
from research on speaking are to be productively applied (see also Andrews, 2001). 
 Conclusions and Future Directions 
 The recent research on speaking outlined above has greatly enhanced knowledge of what content 
and skills development could potentially be covered in the teaching of speaking. In many contexts, 
however, the contextualisation of speaking syllabi, content, and activities within learner experiences 
and needs and in relation to current theories of learning are still lacking (see Hughes, 2002; McCar-
thy & O’Keeffe, 2004). Many curricula mandated for the teaching of speaking are still introspected 
by curriculum developers or policy makers who follow (all too often slavishly) widespread trends 
in teaching methodology and are subsequently decontextualised from the cultural and social lives 

252 • Anne Burns
and interests of learners. An expansion of curriculum theory for speaking to incorporate the nature 
and features of spoken language within local and global communities of practice would be a fruitful 
direction for future research and a valuable addition to local pedagogical practices. 
 Related to this orientation for future development is the greater availability of course textbooks 
that reflect empirical knowledge about speaking (see Gilmore, 2015, for a recent review of what is 
and is not getting through to practice from discourse analysis research). Much textbook analysis from 
numerous international contexts indicates widespread biases of gender (e.g. Amini & Birjandi, 2010; 
Hamdan, 2010), racism (e.g. Lee, 2009; Mohamed, 2015), and cultural stereotyping (e.g. Magogwe, 
2009; Hilliard, 2014), as well as a lack of meaningful incorporation of what is known about the 
naturalistic features and patterns of speech from pragmatics (e.g. Vallenga, 2004; Limberg, 2015), 
conversation analysis (Wong, 2002; Teng & Sinwongsuwat, 2015), and systemic-functional linguistics 
(Lähdesmäki, 2009; Chew, 2012). Such developments imply the urgency of much greater attention to 
spoken language knowledge and analysis (and it might be said to written language analysis also) in 
the training of teachers if effective outcomes are to be achieved (Burns, 2001; Achugar et al., 2007). 
In the light of such knowledge, teachers would also be in a better position to adapt textbook mate-
rial which falls short of their students’ cultural, social, and personal needs. In this respect they would 
also be better equipped to exploit authentic materials and to advise students about developing their 
speaking abilities beyond the classroom (Nunan & Richards, 2015). 
 New technology offers great potential for wider-ranging developments in the teaching of spoken 
language. Increasing numbers of studies point to the benefits of computer-mediated communica-
tion for speaking pedagogy. Yang and Chen (2014), for example, using web-based tools (e.g. online 
forums, weblogs, Skype, and email), found that Taiwanese seventh-grade students interacting with 
students in Dubai held strongly positive attitudes toward this form of learning and enhanced their 
linguistic competence, use of pragmatic skills, and intercultural knowledge. The authors argue that 
technology-enhanced intercultural language learning approximates real-life learning contexts by 
allowing students to use a language for the same purposes that they will use it outside of school life. 
The papers in Mottram (2013) explore ways in which technologies can be exploited for learners at 
different ages and for different purposes, while Dudeney et al. (2013) employ the term ‘digital litera-
cies’ to delineate the “individual and social skills needed to effectively interpret, manage, share and 
create meaning in the growing range of digital communication channels” (p. 2) and provide a wealth 
of activities that teachers can use to incorporate technology into their teaching of speaking, as well as 
other skills. As this volume points out, the impact of new technologies is enormous and will inevita-
bly be a source of significant future research and development in the teaching of speaking. 
 Technology will also greatly expand the capacity of researchers to continue to develop spoken 
language corpora and to deepen knowledge of the use of English locally and internationally. It is less 
likely that in future such “scant attention” (Mauranen, 2004, p. 195) will be paid to spoken corpora 
for classroom purposes as their value in achieving authenticity, communicative utility, and relevance 
to learners’ language needs become more evident. Much greater attention will also need to be paid, as 
Mauranen argues, to raising teachers’ awareness of the relevance of corpora for classroom pedagogy. 
Much has been achieved from empirical research and practical application in enhancing the potential 
for more effective instruction in speaking. The future promises to bring even more intriguing devel-
opments for this important foundational skill. 
 References 
 Achugar, M., Scheleppergrell, M., & Otiéza, T. (2007). Engaging teachers in language analysis: A functional linguistics approach 
to reflective literacy.  English Teaching Practice and Critique , 6(2), 8–24. 
 Amini, M., & Birjandi, P. (2010). Gender bias in the Iranian high school EFL textbooks.  English Language Teaching , 5(2), 134–147. 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching in the Second Language Classroom • 253
 Andrews, S. (2001). The language awareness of the L2 teacher: Its impact upon pedagogical practice . Language Awareness , 
10(2&3), 75–90. 
 Arnold, J. (1999).  Affect in language learning . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Atkinson, J. M., & Heritage, J. (Eds.) (1984).  Structures of social action: Studies in conversation analysis . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Austin, J. (1962).  How to do things with words . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Baldauf, R. B., Kaplan, R. B., Kamwangamalu, K., & Bryant, P. (Eds.) (2012).  Language planning in primary schools in Asia . 
Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Bardovi-Harlig, K. (2003). Understanding the role of grammar in the acquisition of L2 pragmatics. In A. Martinez Flor, 
E. Usό Juan & A. Fernández Guerra (Eds.),  Pragmatic competence and foreign language teaching  (pp. 25–45). Castello 
de la Plana: Universidad Jaume 1. 
 Barraja-Rohan, A. (2011). Using conversation analysis in the second language classroom to teach interactional competence. 
 Language Teaching Research , 15(4), 479–507. 
 Bartels, N. (2005).  Applied linguistics and language teacher education . New York: Springer. 
 Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (1991).  Connectionism and the mind: An introduction to parallel processing in networks . Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing. 
 Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999).  Longman grammar of spoken and written English . Harlow, 
Essex: Pearson Education. 
 Borg, S. (2005). Experience, knowledge about language and classroom practice in teaching grammar. In A. Bartels (Ed.), 
 Applied linguistics and language teacher education  (pp. 323–340). New York: Springer. 
 Bowles, H., & Seedhouse, P. (Eds.) (2007).  Conversation analysis and language for specific purposes . Bern: Peter Lang. 
 Boxer, D., & Cohen, A. (2004).  Studying speaking to inform second language learning . Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Brock, M., & Nagasaka, Y. (2005). Teaching pragmatics in the EFL classroom? Sure you can!  TESL Reporter , 38(1), 17–26. 
 Burns, A. (2001). Analysing spoken discourse: Implications for TESOL. In A Burns & C. Coffin (Eds.),  Analysing English in a 
global context: A reader (pp. 123–148). London: Routledge. 
 Burns, A., Joyce, H., & Gollin, S. (1996).  ‘I see what you mean’: Using spoken discourse in the classroom . Sydney: National Centre 
for English Language Teaching and Research. 
 Burns, A., & Seidlhofer, B. (2010). Speaking and pronunciation. In N. Schmitt (Ed.),  An introduction to applied linguistics 
(pp. 197–214). Second edition. London: Hodder Education. 
 Bygate, M. (1987).  Speaking . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Bygate, M. (1998). Theoretical perspectives on speaking.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics , 18, 20–42. 
 Bygate, M. (2001). Speaking. In R. Carter & D. Nunan (Eds.),  The Cambridge guide to teaching English to speakers of other 
languages (pp. 14–20). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Bygate, M. (2009). Teaching the foreign spoken language. In K. Knapp & B. Seidlhofer (Eds.),  Handbook of foreign language 
communication and learning  (pp. 401–438). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
 Canale, M. (1983). On some dimensions of language proficiency. In J. W. Oller Jr. (Ed.),  Issues in language testing research 
(pp. 333–342). Rowley, MA.: Newbury House. 
 Canale, M., & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches in second language teaching and testing. 
 Applied Linguistics , 1(1), 1–47. 
 Carter, R. (1998). Orders of reality: CANCODE, communication and culture.  ELT Journal, 52 (1), 43–56. 
 Carter, R., & McCarthy, M. (2006).  Cambridge grammar of English . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Chew, P. (2012). Language teaching methods in Singapore primary schools: An historical overview. In B. Spolsky & Y. Moon 
(Eds.),  Primary school English language education in Asia: From policy to practice (pp. 39–58). New York: Routledge. 
 Cohen, A. (1996). Developing the ability to perform speech acts.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition , 18(2), 253–267. 
 Cots, J. M. (2006). Teaching ‘with an attitude’: Critical discourse analysis in EFL teaching.  ELT Journal , 60(4), 336–345. 
 Derwing, T., Munro, M. J., & Wiebe, G. (1998). Evidence in favor of a broad framework for pronunciation instruction.  Lan-
guage Learning , 48(3), 393–410. 
 Dörnyei, Z., & Scott, M. (1997). Communication strategies in a second language: Definitions and taxonomies.  Language 
Learning , 47, 173–210. 
 Dudeney, G., Hockly, N., & Pegrum, M. (2013).  Digital literacies . London: Pearson. 
 Eggins, S., & Slade, D. (2005).  Analysing casual conversation . London: Equinox. 
 Ellis, R. (2014). Principles of instructed second language learning. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. M. Brinton & M. A. Snow (2014). 
 Teaching English as a second or foreign language  (pp. 31–45). Boston: National Geographic Learning/Heinle Cengage 
Learning. 
 Fairclough, N. (1989).  Language and power . London: Longman. 
 Fairclough, N., & Wodak, R. (1997). Critical discourse analysis. In T. A. van Dijk (Ed.),  Discourse as social interaction 
(pp. 258–284). London: Sage. 

254 • Anne Burns
 Firth, A., & Wagner, J. (1997). On discourse, communication and (some) fundamental concepts in SLA research.  Modern 
Language Journal , 81(3), 285–300. 
 Foster-Cohen, S. (1999).  An introduction to child language development . London: Longman. 
 Fowler, R., Hodge, K., Kress, G., & Trew, T. (1979).  Language and control . London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
 Garfinkel, H. (1967).  Studies in ethnomethodology . Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall. 
 Garman, M. (1990).  Psycholinguistics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Gass, S., & Torres, M. J. (2005). Attention when? An investigation of the ordering effect of input and interaction.  Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition , 27, 1–31. 
 Gee, J. P. (1990).  Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses . London: Falmer Press. 
 Gernsbacher, M. A., & Givón T. (Eds.) (1995).  Coherence in spontaneous text . Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Gilmore, A. (2015). Research into practice: The influence of discourse studies on language descriptions and task design in 
published ELT materials.  Language Teaching , 48(4), 506–530. 
 Goh, C. C. M., & Burns, A. (2012).  Teaching speaking: A holistic approach . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Gregerson, T. (2003). To err is human: A reminder to teachers of language-anxious students.  Foreign Language Annals , 36(1), 
25–32. 
 Grice, H. G. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. Morgan (Eds.),  Syntax and semantics 3: Speech acts (pp. 41–58). 
New York: Academic Press. 
 Hahn, L. D. (2004). Primary stress and intelligibility: Research to motivate the teaching of suprasegmentals.  TESOL Quarterly , 
38(2), 201–223. 
 Halliday, M. A. K. (1989).  Spoken and written language . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (2013).  Cohesion in English . London: Routledge (first published 1976 by Pearson). 
 Halliday, M. A. K., & Martin, J. R. (1993).  Writing science: Literacy and discursive power . Pittsburgh, PA: The University of 
Pittsburgh Press. 
 Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2014).  An introduction to functional grammar . Fourth edition. London: 
Routledge. 
 Harrington, K., Litosseliti, L., Sauntson, H., & Sunderland, J. (Eds.) (2008).  Gender and language research methodologies . Bas-
ingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Hatch, E. (1992).  Discourse and language education . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Hamdan, S. (2010). English-language textbooks reflect gender bias.  Advances in Gender and Education , 2, 22–26. 
 Hilliard, A. (2014). A critical examination of representation and culture in four English language textbooks.  Language Educa-
tion in Asia , 5(2), 238–252. 
 Horwitz, E. K., Horwitz, M. B., & Cope, J. (1986). Foreign language classroom anxiety.  Modern Language Journal , 70(2), 
125–132. 
 Hughes, R. (2002).  Teaching and researching speaking . London: Pearson Education. 
 Johnson, K. (1996).  Language teaching and skill learning . Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Kellerman, E., & Bialystock, E. (1997). On psychological plausibility in the study of communication strategies. In G. Kasper 
& E. Kellerman (Eds.),  Communication strategies: Psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic perspectives  (pp. 31–48). London: 
Longman. 
 Kirkpatrick, A., & Sussex, R. (Eds.) (2012).  English as an international language in Asia: Implications for language education . 
Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Koponen, M., & Riggenbach, H. (2000). Overview: Varying perceptions on fluency. In H. Riggenbach (Ed.),  Perspectives on 
fluency  (pp. 5–24). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
 Kormos, J., & Dénes, M. (2004). Exploring measures and perceptions of fluency in the speech of second language learners. 
 System , 32(2), 145–164. 
 Lähdesmäki, S. (2009). Intertextual analysis of Finnish EFL textbooks: Genre embedding as recontextualization. In C. Bazer-
man, A. Bonini & D. Figueiredo (Eds.),  Genre in a changing world (pp. 375–399). Colorado: Parlor Press. 
 Lazaraton, A. (2014). Second language speaking. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. M. Brinton & M. A. Snow (Eds.),  Teaching English as 
a second or foreign language (pp. 106–120). Boston: National Geographic Learning/Heinle Cengage Learning. 
 Lee, I. (2009). Situated globalization and racism: An analysis of Korean high school EFL textbooks.  Language and Literacy , 
1(1), 1–14. 
 Levelt, W. J. M. (1989).  Speaking: From intention to articulation . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Limberg, H. (2015). Teaching how to apologize: EFL textbooks and pragmatic input.  Language Teaching Research . Published 
online before print August 17, 2015. doi: 1362168815590695 
 Lui, M., & Jackson, J. (2008). An exploration of Chinese EFL learners’ unwillingness to communicate and foreign language 
anxiety.  Modern Language Journal , 92(1), 71–86. 
 Magogwe, J. M. (2009). The influence of cultural bias on motivation to learn English: The case of Khoe primary school stu-
dents in eastern Botswana.  Language, Culture and Curriculum , 22(1), 1–13. 
www.ebook3000.com

Teaching in the Second Language Classroom • 255
 Martinez, D. F. (2011).  Introducing discourse analysis in class . Newcastle-on-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Press. 
 Mauranen, A. (2004). Speech corpora in the classroom. In G. Aston, S. Bernardini & D. Stewart (Eds.),  Corpora and language 
learners  (pp. 195–212). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 McCarthy, M., & Carter, R. (1995). Spoken grammar: What is it and how can we teach it?  ELT Journal , 49(3), 207–218. 
 McCarthy, M., Matthiessen, C., & Slade, D. (2010). Discourse analysis. In N. Schmitt (Ed.),  An introduction to applied linguistics 
(pp. 53–69). London: Hodder Education. 
 McCarthy, M., & O’Keeffe, A. (2004). Research in the teaching of speaking.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics , 24, 26–43. 
 McKay, S. L., & Brown, J. D. (2015).  Teaching and assessing EIL in local contexts around the world . New York: Routledge. 
 McLaughlin, B. (1987).  Theories of second language learning . London: Edward Arnold. 
 MEXT (2008). Measures based on the four basic policy directions. http://www.mext.go.jp/english/lawandplan/1355354.htm 
Downloaded 30 October, 2015. 
 Mohamed, M. A. S. (2015). Textbooks in the reproduction of racism.  IJ-ELTS , 3(1), 95–108. 
 Mohan, B. (2011). Social practice and register: Language as a means of learning. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of research in 
second language teaching and learning, Vol. II (pp. 57–74). New York: Routledge. 
 Mottram, G. (Ed.) (2013).  Innovations in language learning technologies for English language teachin g. London: The British 
Council. 
 Nakatani, Y., & Goh, C. C. M. (2007). A review of oral communication strategies: Focus on interactionist and psycholinguistic 
perspectives. In A. D. Cohen & E. Macaro (Eds.),  Language learner strategies  (pp. 207–227). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Nation, I. S. P. (2011). Second language speaking. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of research in second language teaching and 
learning Volume II (pp. 444–454). New York: Routledge. 
 Nicholas, A. (2015). A concept based approach to teaching speech acts in the EFL classroom.  ELT Journal , 69(4), 383–394. 
 Nunan, D., & Richards, J. C. (Eds.) (2015).  Language learning beyond the classroom . New York: Routledge. 
 Ohata, K. (2005). Potential sources of anxiety for Japanese learners of English: Preliminary case interviews with five Japanese 
college students in the US.  TESL-EJ , 9(3), 1–21. 
 O’Keeffe, A., McCarthy, M., & Carter, R. (2009).  From corpus to classroom . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Owens, R. E. (2001).  Language development: An introduction . Fifth Edition. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 
 Öztürk, H., & Çeçen, S. (2007). The effects of portfolio keeping on writing anxiety of EFL students.  Journal of Language and 
Linguistic Studies , 3(2), 218–236. 
 Paltridge, B. (2001).  Genre and the language learning classroom . Michigan: University of Michigan Press. 
 Poulisse, N. (1993). A theoretical account of lexical communication strategies. In R. Schreuder & B. Weltens (Eds.),  The bilin-
gual lexicon  (pp. 157–189). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Rampton, B. (1997). Second language research in late modernity: A response to Firth and Wagner.  Modern Language Journal , 
81(3), 329–333. 
 Reppen, R. (2010).  Using corpora in the language classroom . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Rost, M. (2001). Listening. In R. Carter & D. Nunan (Eds.),  The Cambridge guide to teaching English to speakers of other lan-
guages (pp. 7–13). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Rowley-Jolivet, E. (2002). Douglas Biber et al., Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English.  Recherche et Pratiques 
Pédagogiques en Langues de Spécialité , 21(3) 3, 91–93. 
 Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organisation of turn-taking for conversation. 
 Language , 50, 696–735. 
 Schiffrin, D. (1990). Conversation analysis.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics , 11, 3–16. 
 Searle, J. (1969).  Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Seidlhofer, B. (2004). Research perspectives on teaching English as a lingua franca.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics , 24, 
209–242. 
 Shin, D. (2007). The high frequency collocations of spoken and written language.  English Teaching , 62(1), 199–218. 
 Silberstein, S. (2011). Constrained but not determined: Approaches to discourse analysis. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of 
research in second language teaching and learning, Vol. II (pp. 274–290). New York: Routledge. 
 Skehan, P. (1998).  A cognitive approach to language learning . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Tahira, M. (2012). Behind MEXT’s new course of study guidelines.  The Language Teacher , 36(3), 3–8. 
 Tatsuki, D. H., & Houck, N. R. (2010).  Pragmatics: Teaching speech acts . Alexandria: TESOL International. 
 Teng, B., & Sinwongsuwat, K. (2015). Teaching and learning English in Thailand and the integration of conversation analysis 
(CA) into the classroom.  English Language Teaching , 8(3), 13–23. 
 Tsui, A. B. M. (1996). Reticence and anxiety in second language learning. In K. M. Bailey & D. Nunan (Eds.),  Voices from the 
language classroom (pp. 145–168). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Van Dijk, T. (2003). What is critical discourse? In D. Schiffrin, D. Tannen & H. E. Hamilton (Eds.),  Handbook of critical dis-
course analysis (pp. 352–371). Oxford: Blackwell. 

256 • Anne Burns
 Vallenga, H. (2004). Learning pragmatics from ESL and EFL textbooks: How likely?  TESL-EJ , 8(2), 1–18. 
 Váradi, T. (1992). Book review of  communication strategies: A psychological analysis of second-language use , by E. Bialystok 
and  The use of compensatory strategies by Dutch learners of English  by N. Poulisse, T. Bongaerts, & E. Kellerman.  Applied 
Linguistics , 13, 434–440. 
 Webb, S., & Boers, F. (in press). Research timeline: Teaching and learning collocation in adult second and foreign language 
learning.  Language Teaching (to be completed). 
 Wigglesworth, G., & Yates, L. (2007). Mitigating difficult requests in the workplace: What learners and teachers need to know. 
 TESOL Quarterly , 41(4), 791–803. 
 Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1997). Studying language use as collaboration. In G. Kasper & E. Kellerman (Eds.),  Communication strate-
gies: Psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic perspectives (pp. 238–274). London: Longman. 
 Wiltse, L. (2006). “Like pulling teeth”: Oral discourse practices in a culturally diverse language arts classroom.  Canadian 
Modern Language Review , 63, 199–223. 
 Wong, J. (2002). “Applying” conversation analysis in applied linguistics: Evaluating dialogue in English as a second language 
textbooks.  IRAL , 40, 37–60. 
 Wray, A. (2002).  Formulaic language and the lexicon . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Yang, S. C., & Chen, J. J. (2014). Fostering foreign language learning through technology-enhanced intercultural projects. 
 Language Learning & Technology , 18(1), 57–75. 
 Zhang, L. J. (2004). Teaching suprasegmental features of English speech to EFL students: Student voices and sociocultural and 
psychological considerations.  ITL International Journal of Applied Linguistics , 145(1), 219–268. 
www.ebook3000.com

257
 Introduction 
 Pronunciation was once central to language teaching. In the heyday of audiolingualism, under-
scored by the theory of contrastive analysis, which guided many of its practices, prospective 
teachers of second/foreign languages (S/FL) received rigorous training in contrastive analysis 
and in how to teach the sound system to S/FL learners. These teachers were taught to employ 
the phonetic alphabet, visual aids such as sagittal diagrams and charts illustrating the features 
of the vowels and consonants of the language, and drills in their efforts to help learners acquire 
the new sounds and features of the target language. However, with the advent of Communicative 
Language Teaching in the late 1970s and early 1980s, interest in teaching pronunciation waned 
(Thomson, 2013). This decrease in emphasis in classroom teaching was accompanied by a similar 
decrease in the pronunciation training that prospective teachers in Teaching English to Speakers 
of Other Languages (TESOL) Certificate and Master’s (MA) in TESOL programs received (Murphy, 
1997, 2014). 
 Combined, these two trends led to a generation of teachers who had little or no idea how to 
address the skill of pronunciation and to a generation of S/FL learners who were deprived of empha-
sis on this skill—causing researchers such as Levis and LeVelle (2010b) to lament that the “infrastruc-
ture” for pronunciation was in serious disrepair. Calling for a “rebranding” of pronunciation, Levis 
and Levelle set out an agenda to rebuild a professional space for pronunciation in the field of S/FL 
teaching and learning. Central to this rebranding was the call for parallel paradigm shifts in pronun-
ciation teaching and learning; also central was the call for increased research on second language (L2) 
pronunciation acquisition that could inform practitioners. 
 Indeed, prior to the beginning of the current decade, the status of pronunciation research 
contributed to a view of a crumbling infrastructure, with researchers such as Derwing (2010) 
and Gilbert (2010) characterizing it as the “orphan” of L2 acquisition research. As documented by 
Deng and colleagues (2009), the percentage of articles devoted to pronunciation that were pub-
lished in Applied Linguistics journals remained well under 10% of the total. Despite this rather 
disheartening news for those interested in pronunciation research and its classroom applications, 
the outlook for both pronunciation teaching and research in the future gives rise to cautious 
optimism. 
 19 
 Pronunciation 
 Donna M. Brinton 

258 • Donna M. Brinton
 The Resurgence of Interest in Pronunciation Teaching and Research 
 There is justification for this optimism. Interest among teachers and teacher educators in pronun-
ciation is on the rise, as is research in the area. Several possible factors underlie the resurgence of 
activity. One significant impetus is the 2005 commissioned volume of  TESOL Quarterly dedicated to 
pronunciation research and edited by John Levis. In his introduction to the special issue, Levis (2005) 
discusses the changing contexts and shifting paradigms of pronunciation teaching and research. 
Noting that pronunciation teaching has in the past largely been guided by teachers’ intuitions rather 
than by a solid research base, Levis underscores the need for a solid research agenda in factors affect-
ing learner intelligibility. Included in this research agenda, according to Levis, are topics such as the 
role of suprasegmentals (stress, rhythm, and intonation) in learners’ overall intelligibility and estab-
lishing priorities for pronunciation instruction in English as a lingua franca contexts (international 
settings where English functions as a language of wider communication). 
 The 2005  TESOL Quarterly  issue, which included a compilation of articles by the primary research-
ers in the field of L2 pronunciation research, marked an important milestone in the establishment 
of a new infrastructure for teaching and research. Further support for this new infrastructure came 
from special interest groups (SIGs) within the organizations of the International Association of 
Teachers of English as a Foreign Language (IATEFL) and Teachers of English to Speakers of Other 
Languages (TESOL). Both IATEFL’s PronSIG, founded in 1989, and TESOL’s Speech, Listening, and 
Pronunciation (SPLIS) group, founded in 1995, provided an important venue for pronunciation 
practitioners and researchers to present their findings; their newsletters (IATEFL’s  Speak Out! and 
TESOL’s  As We Speak ) also paved—and continue to pave—the way for other professional journals to 
expand their focus on pronunciation research. 
 Paralleling the growth of pronunciation research articles and the increasing number of conference 
presentations on pronunciation research and pedagogy is the ever-expanding collection of teacher 
handbooks on the topic. Prior to 1990, the only two comprehensive handbooks available were by 
Bowen (1975) and Prator and Robinett (1985). However, the 1990s saw in rapid succession the publi-
cation of teacher handbooks by Avery and Ehrlich (1992), Dalton and Seidlhofer (1994), Celce-Murcia, 
Brinton, and Goodwin (1996), and Pennington (1996). Today, as the textbook market continues to 
produce volumes aimed at pre-service and in-service teachers, it is safe to say that teacher preparation 
programs have an adequate number of thorough, suitable texts on the topic from which to choose. 
 Yet another critical impetus for rebuilding the infrastructure for L2 pronunciation research was 
the establishment of an annual conference dedicated to S/FL pronunciation issues. This conference, 
Pronunciation in Second Language Learning and Teaching (PSLLT), was first held on the campus 
of Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa in 2009. From its beginning, the conference welcomed class-
room teachers and researchers alike and stressed the application of theory to practice. Its annual 
proceedings (Levis, Le, Lucic, Simpson, & Vo, 2016; Levis & Levelle, 2010a, 2011, 2012, 2013; Levis & 
McCrocklin, 2014; Levis, Mohammed, Qian, & Zhou, 2015), disseminated online, provided an 
important venue for researchers and practitioners to share their work. As a critical mass of pronun-
ciation research began to build and be published in the PSLLT proceedings and elsewhere, the pub-
lishing world at long last recognized the need for a dedicated, refereed journal in the area. Published 
by Benjamins, the new  Journal of Second Language Pronunciation  brings the legitimacy to pronuncia-
tion research that is its due and (as noted by its editor in the inaugural issue) constitutes “an essential 
step toward disciplinary identity” (Levis, 2015a, p. 1). 
 Research Foci 
 In their seminal work on teaching pronunciation, Celce-Murcia, Brinton, and Goodwin (2010) high-
light the following variables as being prominent in research on the learner’s acquisition of the L2: the 
www.ebook3000.com

Pronunciation • 259
effects of age; exposure to the target language; aptitude, attitude, and motivation; and the role of the 
learner’s first language (L1). While these issues continue to play a role in the research that is being 
conducted on S/FL pronunciation, the research foci have expanded to include numerous other areas. 
Broadly sketched, these research areas include the following: 
 1.  Pronunciation as a construct : Research into the general nature of pronunciation and its 
subcomponents; 
 2.  The learner : Research into issues that affect the learner’s acquisition of L2 phonological 
features; 
 3.  The teacher : Research into issues that affect the teacher’s ability to function effectively in the 
pronunciation classroom; and 
 4.  The classroom : Research into issues related to classroom pedagogy. 
 In the sections that follow, we will look at each of these areas to discover the ways in which pronun-
ciation research can inform the discipline, provide increased insight into learner variables, guide 
teachers in their practice, and inform us about more effective classroom practices. 
 Pronunciation as a Construct 
 Most commonly, when people think about teaching pronunciation, they identify or equate it with 
the process of “accent improvement” or “accent modification.” In fact, the construct of pronuncia-
tion is far more complex than this view might suggest, as is the process of teaching pronunciation. 
Included in the equation of what constitutes pronunciation are factors such as the relation between 
accent, intelligibility, and comprehensibility along with the relative roles played by accuracy and flu-
ency in terms of the learner’s output. 
 As summarized by Grant (2014),  accent  and  intelligibility  are two separate but related constructs. 
On the one hand, the term  accent  is used to refer to the degree to which a speaker sounds “foreign” 
or deviates from a given variety of English. 1  Intelligibility, on the other hand, refers to the extent to 
which that speaker’s utterances are easily understood by the interlocutor. Yet another close corollary 
of these two is  comprehensibility , which is defined as the degree of effort required on the listener’s 
part to comprehend the speaker. The fact that these three constructs are related but independent is 
of great significance to pronunciation pedagogy, as teachers need to understand that learners can 
retain an accent and yet be highly intelligible and comprehensible. 2 In fact, the general consensus 
among pronunciation practitioners is that the goal for learners in the L2 pronunciation classroom 
is comfortable intelligibility (Abercrombie, 1949) rather than native speaker or native speaker-like 
proficiency. 
 Given the above-stated goal of the pronunciation classroom, it stands to reason that Applied 
Linguistics research should guide teachers in this endeavor. Goodwin (2014) provides the following 
useful summary of factors that have been identified in pronunciation research as contributing to 
learner intelligibility: 
 1. misplacement of or missing prominence in a thought group; 
 2. incorrect word stress; 
 3. rate of speech (either too slow or too fast); 
 4. overabundance of/overly lengthy pauses in the stream of speech; 
 5. lack of clearly articulated consonants in stressed syllables or in syllable final position; and 
 6. lack of differentiation in pitch or vowel duration. 

260 • Donna M. Brinton
 A second challenge for pronunciation research is identifying the role of fluency and accuracy in 
intelligible oral communication. According to Thornbury (2000), accuracy is understood globally 
to refer to the extent to which the learner’s output matches some externally imposed standard (e.g., 
a grammar rule, native speaker usage of a lexical item, or native speaker pronunciation of a word). 
Fluency, on the other hand, refers globally to “relatively effortless and fluid speech” or “the learner’s 
capacity to produce language in real time without pausing or hesitation” (p. 3). 
 While there are few who would disagree with the above definition of  accuracy , the definition of 
 fluency  is considerably more contested. Hartmann and Stork (1976), for example, consider a person 
fluent when he or she can (a) use the language’s structures accurately while at the same time concen-
trating on meaning (not form) and (b) use correct patterns automatically at normal conversational 
speed. Fillmore (1979) considers a person fluent when he or she can (a) talk without awkward pauses 
for relatively long periods of time, (b) talk in coherent and semantically dense sentences that show 
mastery of syntax and semantics, (c) say appropriate things in varied contexts, and (d) use language 
creatively and imaginatively. Finally, Richards and Schmidt (2010) consider a person fluent when he 
or she can (a) speak naturally and normally, with native-like pausing, rhythm, intonation, stress, and 
rate of speaking and (b) use interjections and interruptions appropriately. 
 Given the above lack of consensus about how to define fluency, we can begin to recognize the 
challenges that pronunciation researchers face in making judgments concerning learner fluency. As 
is evident, numerous elements in the above definitions do not pertain to pronunciation at all, but 
rather address sentence syntax and semantics. Thus, assessing a learner’s fluency would entail first 
determining those elements that pertain solely to pronunciation (e.g., “speaking with native-like 
pausing, rhythm, intonation, stress, and rate of speaking” or “talking without awkward pauses for a 
long period of time”). 
 In general, research has used a wide-angle lens to examine the diverse issues involving the accu-
racy and fluency of L2 learners. A cross-section of these issues includes: 
 1. learner variables contributing to pronunciation accuracy (Purcell & Suter, 1980; Suter, 1976); 
 2. factors impacting the ability of untrained raters to assess learner fluency on a variety of tasks 
(Derwing, Rossiter, Munro, & Thomson, 2004); 
 3. the relation between the learner’s L1 fluency and his/her L2 fluency development (Derwing, 
Munro, Thomson, & Rossiter, 2009); and 
 4. an examination of fluency-oriented tasks in ESL textbooks (Rossiter, Derwing, Manimtim, & 
Thomson, 2010). 
 Although the above studies contribute to our understanding of the relative importance of accuracy 
and fluency in the learner’s L2 pronunciation, they are generally limited in nature. Thus, the conclu-
sions to be drawn, while of interest, are preliminary. This area of research would benefit greatly from 
additional studies into the above and related issues. 
 The Learner 
 No party has been more subjected to the researcher’s lens in the field of pronunciation than the 
learner him/herself. Not only have research studies critically examined the characteristics of learn-
ers in the classroom (and their individual differences), but they have also surveyed specific popula-
tions of learners (e.g., adult learners vs. young or teen learners; Thai speakers vs. Spanish speakers, 
low-proficiency vs. advanced students), examining how these populations exhibit differential learning 
tendencies. These studies lend partial support to lay beliefs about the acquisition of pronunciation, 
such as the premise that certain individuals have a special “gift” for language learning, or that those 
www.ebook3000.com

Pronunciation • 261
individuals who acquire the L2 at an early age are more apt to acquire a native-like pronunciation than 
those who acquire it at a later age. However, just as individuals are complex beings, so too is the con-
stellation of individual variables that contribute to successful language acquisition. The act of teasing 
out the significance of only one of these variables is an arduous, and sometimes almost impossible, 
task. Thus, while we might surmise that someone has special aptitude for learning a foreign language, 
we need to take into account that he or she might also be more highly motivated to learn the language; 
or in the case of the adult who cannot acquire fluency in a S/FL, we might need to also take into 
account his or her lack of exposure to and limited interaction with native speakers of the language. 
 In the literature on L2 pronunciation learners, several primary research topics have predomi-
nated. The first of these concerns the learner’s L1 and the role it plays in L2 acquisition. As sum-
marized by Brinton (2014), in the past (i.e., at the height of audiolingualism), the learner’s L1 was 
seen as interfering with the learner’s acquisition of the target language; thus, research in this era 
concentrated on predicting areas of interference in phonological acquisition via the examination of 
mismatches in the learner’s L1 phonological inventory with the phonological features of the target 
language. 3  Today, there is general recognition that transfer from the L1 to the L2 can be both positive 
and negative, and that transfer alone cannot account for all aspects of L2 phonological acquisition. 
Overall, however, practitioners concur that the learner’s L1 strongly influences all aspects of his/her 
acquisition of L2 pronunciation. 
 In addition to the role of the learner’s L1, an array of other learner variables have been examined, 
including age of L2 acquisition, gender, language aptitude, attitude toward the L2 and L2 speakers, 
type and amount of motivation, length of residence in an English-speaking country, amount of 
formal L2 instruction, and the relative amount of L1 and L2 use. According to Piske, MacKay, and 
Flege’s (2001) thorough review of the existing research literature, the most accurate of these variables 
in predicting L2 pronunciation success is age of L2 acquisition. 4  This does not, however, mean that 
the other variables are insignificant. As the authors explain, in many of the studies conducted, there 
was a lack of adequate experimental control and/or variables became confounded, thus limiting their 
significance. 
 Recent research studies continue to probe into the learner variables that contribute to pronuncia-
tion mastery. The following sampling of studies provides an overview of current topics of interest 
believed to correlate with the development of English pronunciation: 
  1. length of residence and age of acquisition (Saito & Brajot, 2013); 
  2. the effect of aptitude, strategy use, and learning context (Smemoe & Haslam, 2013); 
  3. the role of learner attitude (Moyer, 2007b); 
  4. the role of ethnic affiliation and identity (Gatbonton, Trofimovich, & Magid, 2005); 
  5. learner engagement and self regulation (Moyer, 2014); 
  6. learners’ views on social issues (Levis, 2015b); 
  7. learners’ views on the role of accent (McCrocklin & Link, 2014); 
  8. learners’ confidence and willingness to speak (Zielinski, 2012); 
  9. learners’ self-efficacy and strategy use (Rokoszewska, 2012; Sardegna, 2012); 
 10. pronunciation anxiety and willingness to communicate (Baran-Łucarz, 2014); 
 11. adult immigrants’ perceptions of their pronunciation difficulties and strategies used during 
communication breakdown (Derwing & Rossiter, 2002); and 
 12. the effect of age and ways of strengthening methodological approaches with older learners 
(Moyer, 2007a). 
 It is clear from the above discussion that the number of possible learner variables in this area of 
research is large. Also, as noted above, in some of these studies the variables became confounded or 

262 • Donna M. Brinton
there was a lack of experimental control. Thus, what are lacking are large-scale, carefully controlled 
studies that look at how the many learner variables congregate in the learner’s L2 phonological 
acquisition. Future research will hopefully contribute deeper insights into this topic. 
 The Teacher 
 As Celce-Murcia, Brinton, and Goodwin (2010) note, all teachers function within a larger educa-
tional context where factors such as the quality of teacher preparation, opportunities for professional 
development, the guidelines of language policies and/or educational standards, and the availability 
of teacher resources all contribute to the larger picture of an individual teacher’s skill level. Addi-
tionally, there is the issue—particularly germane to the discussion of teaching pronunciation and to 
the use in many parts of the world of English as a global language or lingua franca—of whether the 
teacher is a native or non-native speaker. Given that most of these factors are rooted in the society 
or culture in which the teachers are working, we can infer that individual teachers are very much a 
product of the environment in which they have received their initial training and of the contexts in 
which they are teaching. 
 Of the above factors, by far the greatest amount of attention has been devoted to researching 
whether adequate preparation is provided in teacher training programs to prospective teachers 
of pronunciation (Murphy, 1997; Baker & Murphy, 2011). The facts that emerge from this body 
of research more than support Gilbert’s (2010) contention that pronunciation is the “orphan” of 
TESOL preparation programs. Murphy (2014), in a research study that surveyed 19 studies of teacher 
preparation programs, concludes that professional training in pronunciation typically consists of a 
phonology component within an introductory linguistics course and that only a minority of teacher 
preparation programs offer a full course devoted to the sound system of English. Furthermore, he 
contends, the programs lack a focus on pedagogy, leaving teachers feeling ill-prepared to address 
pronunciation in the classroom. 
 As documented by Baker and Murphy (2011), the dearth of attention to teacher preparation 
is also evident in studies of teacher cognition (i.e., the study of teachers’ knowledge, beliefs, and 
understandings), which (with only a few exceptions) exclude investigation into the knowledge base 
from which pronunciation teachers operate. Those studies that do exist delve into the area of teach-
ers’ reported cognitions and instructional practices—e.g., (a) teachers’ belief in the need for direct 
modeling of native speaker (NS) norms when correcting students’ errors, (b) their reluctance to 
address discourse prosody in the classroom, and (c) their preference for NS norms over English as 
an international language (EIL) norms. According to Baker and Murphy, the teacher beliefs reported 
in these studies reflect ignorance of research findings in these three areas. As well, they note that “no 
studies to date have investigated the relationship between teachers’ cognitions and actual pronuncia-
tion in teaching practice” (p. 37) but instead on teacher reports of their practices. Baker and Murphy’s 
conclusions are further supported by Thomson’s (2013) survey of English language teachers (ELTs). 
In the study, Thomson sought to determine if teachers could critically assess questionable claims 
from pronunciation materials (i.e., books, websites, videos) concerning pronunciation teaching. The 
findings suggest that the ELTs surveyed lack the background and confidence to make determinations 
about the claims, thus substantiating the need for more pre- and in-service education of teachers in 
pronunciation theory and pedagogy. 5 
 One final area of investigation that is related to the teacher’s ability to function effectively in the 
pronunciation classroom concerns the native or non-native status of the teacher. The issue is a com-
plex one, all the more so given the widespread belief in the superiority of native English-speaking 
teachers (NESTs)—especially where the skill of pronunciation is concerned (Benke & Medgyes, 2005; 
Mahboob, 2004). This belief is not restricted to L2 students alone; in fact, it is one shared by many 
www.ebook3000.com

Pronunciation • 263
teachers, both native and non-native English-speaking teachers (NNESTs) alike (Foote, Holtby, & 
Derwing, 2011). Although widely studied as it impacts the teaching of other skill areas, empirical 
research reporting on the experiences and qualifications of NNESTs in the pronunciation classroom 
is sparse if non-existent, thus leaving the field wide open to future researchers of the topic. 6 
 The Classroom 
 In the field of Applied Linguistics, there is often an all-too-tenuous link between the research con-
ducted and the reality or concerns of the classroom. Fortunately, this tends not to be the case in the 
field of pronunciation research, where numerous research studies directly address issues of peda-
gogy. Included in the researcher’s scope are topics that cover a wide spectrum of classroom concerns, 
such as how effective an explicit focus on pronunciation is, which methods of pronunciation feed-
back lead to better results, whether teaching materials reflect research findings, how most effectively 
to assess learners’ pronunciation, how to integrate technological advances into the teaching of pro-
nunciation, and which items are most crucial to include in the pronunciation syllabus for EIL. 
 Regarding the issue of whether pronunciation instruction makes an impact, Baker and Murphy 
(2011) summarize the existing classroom-based research studies on the topic. Although limited in 
number, these studies suggest that explicit instruction does result in improved comprehensibility or 
intelligibility on the part of the learners. However, they concur with Derwing (2013), who states that: 
 [t]here is still a paucity of classroom-based research on pronunciation instruction. Ongoing 
assessment of students who have completed pronunciation training is necessary to deter-
mine how long the effects of instruction last, and whether improved pronunciation leads to 
increased exposure to the target language. 
 (p. 4) 
 Given the significant role played by error correction in the overall history of TESOL methods, we 
might expect that research in pronunciation would yield results in kind. Yet again here, there are lim-
ited numbers of studies available. Of these, some of the most interesting are those by Saito and Lyster 
(2012a, 2012b), who investigate the value of teacher recasts of student vowel and consonant errors. 7 
Taking into account that recasts have been shown in other skill areas to have limited effectiveness, 
the researchers tested out the hypothesis that in the area of pronunciation instruction, the technique 
might be more effective because of the high potential of pronunciation errors for misunderstanding. 
In the two studies reported, the experimental group of students receiving recasts showed significant 
improvement, not only at a controlled-speech level but also in spontaneous speech, whereas the con-
trol groups did not. The researchers conclude that, at least pertaining to pronunciation, recasts can 
be an effective technique to assist teachers in drawing student attention to accuracy of production 
and in encouraging students to practice target-like pronunciation. 
 In an ideal world, the materials used by teachers in the classroom should both reflect current 
research findings and provide the necessary guidance for teachers to implement new practices. 
Although significant advances have been made in the quality of classroom materials over the past 
several decades, there remains a lag between research findings and the integration of these findings 
into the teaching materials, with the vast majority of materials exhibiting the following shortcomings 
(Jones, 2002): 
 1. a “listen and repeat” focus still pervades the materials; 
 2. the materials follow the tradition of aural discrimination practice before oral production; 
 3. dialogue reading and minimal pair practice is presented as communicative practice; 

264 • Donna M. Brinton
 4. the materials fail to take learners’ needs into account (e.g., their sociocultural context, values, 
and attitudes); and 
 5. psychological and social factors are largely ignored. 
 Adding to this critique, Derwing and Munro (2005) claim that the majority of teaching materials are 
guided by intuitive notions rather than by research findings; as a result, these materials fail to resolve 
many of the issues faced by classroom teachers. Next, Levis (2005) comments that the majority of 
teaching materials continue to pay short shrift to suprasegmentals, despite evidence from Applied 
Linguistics research concerning the overriding importance of suprasegmentals for learner intelligibil-
ity. Furthermore, he notes, most materials on the market today continue to reflect the goal of learners 
attaining native-speaker competence in the language rather than the high degree of comfortable intel-
ligibility espoused by researchers. And finally, Rossiter, Derwing, Manimtim, and Thomson (2010), 
in their analysis of fluency-building activities in 28 ESL learner texts and 14 teacher resource texts, 
found that both types of texts—while including some free production activities—lacked the full range 
of activities (e.g., rehearsal or repetition activities, consciousness-raising activities, and formulaic 
sequences) required for enhancing oral fluency. 
 As Winke (2013) observes, assessing oral language is a complex and intricate process. Key fac-
tors that figure in the process include the construction and/or choice of rating instrument, effects 
of rater training, and conditions of test-taking (e.g., online, face-to-face, individual, or pair/small 
group). Advances in research improve our understanding of all of the above; 8  thus, the landscape of 
oral assessment is constantly changing. Confounding the process, however, is the fact that there is 
no one universally accepted definition of intelligibility; nor is there any agreed-upon consensus for 
how to measure it, thus calling into question whether intelligibility is an adequate measure of oral 
proficiency (Isaacs, 2008). 
 Any discussion of classroom teaching and the role that research plays in shaping classroom prac-
tice would not be complete without the mention of advances in technology. The obvious function 
of research here is to provide guidance to teachers in (a) making informed choices of which hard-
ware/software resources to use and (b) how best to integrate technology into their teaching practice. 
Indeed, the field of pronunciation teaching has a long tradition of embracing technology (Hincks, 
2015), starting from its embrace of audio recordings and the language lab during the audiolingual 
era and continuing today as it embraces digital recordings, web-based threaded voice boards (e.g., 
Wimba), 9  mobile apps, and computer-assisted pronunciation training. Regarding the latter, Hincks 
(2015) notes that despite the enormous promise this technology holds for the future of pronuncia-
tion teaching, effective automated feedback via speech analysis software remains for the most part 
an elusive goal. Derwing (2013) goes one step further, cautioning teachers against purchasing such 
programs without thoroughly researching them in advance: 
 As instructors and language program coordinators make choices for new software or online 
courses, they should take to heart the caveat “Buyer beware.” There are exciting innovations in 
technology that can enhance learners’ perception and production . . . but potential purchasers 
should conduct some research themselves before their students invest time and money. 
 (p. 6) 
 A final area of classroom-related research that has wide-reaching socio-political impact in the field 
concerns the role of English as a lingua franca (ELF)—or language of wider communication—and its 
implications for the teaching of pronunciation. Research in this area 10  seeks to establish a minimum 
“common core” (Jenner, 1989) of phonological features that will allow non-native speaking (NNS) 
users of ELF to communicate effectively and intelligibly with other NNS ELF users. Based primarily 
www.ebook3000.com

Pronunciation • 265
on corpora of NNS-NNS interactions, continuing research into this area identifies instances of com-
munication breakdown that occur as the result of non-target-like use of phonological features, thus 
arriving at a reduced inventory (or common core) of features that are deemed essential to communi-
cation. In terms of the practical application of this research, these features could then be prioritized 
in the ELF pronunciation syllabus. 11 
 It is important to note that research into ELF is still in its relative infancy and that there is no 
complete consensus among researchers concerning which features constitute the common core. 
Nonetheless, this area of research is significant in that it challenges the traditional notion of the pro-
nunciation syllabus, which addressed the entire spectrum of the sound system, often at the expense 
of focusing on those sound contrasts that were most problematic for learners of a given L1. As noted 
by Crawford (2005), the implications of ELF for pronunciation instruction are manifold: 
 1. ELF challenges the learner’s purpose for studying pronunciation by questioning the pronun-
ciation standard to which the learner is held (i.e., English as an international language rather 
than a native speaker variety such as British or North American English); 
 2. It challenges the use to which the learner will put the language by altering the goal from being 
able to converse with native speakers of the language to being able to use English to converse 
with other ELF speakers of the language; 
 3. It challenges teachers to abandon a normbound approach (i.e., one that focuses on the lin-
guistic and sociocultural knowledge needed to interact with native speakers) and replaces it 
with one that focuses on intercultural pragmatics and understanding; and 
 4. It requires that teachers rethink their classroom strategies and the materials that they use to 
ensure that they are aligned with the curricular focus of ELF. 
 Looking beyond the immediate classroom, ELF also poses challenges to existing language policies, 
curriculum design, teaching methodology, and pre-service and in-service teacher education. Finally, 
it calls into question speaker identity, the ownership of English, the nature of intelligibility, and cer-
tain linguistic processes, such as the ways in which ELF speakers accommodate to other ELF speakers 
(Sifakis, 2014). 
 Conclusions and Future Directions 
 The intent of this chapter has been to provide a sketch of the landscape of pronunciation research 
as it applies to S/FL classroom practices. As we have seen, both interest in teaching pronunciation 
and the concomitant role that it plays today in Applied Linguistics research are on the rise. From 
its original concentration on L1 factors that might impede the learner’s ability to acquire the target 
language features, the field of pronunciation research has grown exponentially, encompassing factors 
related to the four broad fields of research that we have examined in this chapter. The great bulk of 
this research bears directly on classroom issues and serves to reinforce the effectiveness of pronun-
ciation teaching. 
 As Derwing and Munro (2010) note, the field has recently expanded to include investigations into 
the social implications of speaking with an accent while engaging with an interlocutor (either an NS 
or an NNS). The research that has sprung from this interest involves teasing out the complex rela-
tionship between accent, intelligibility, and comprehensibility; it also focuses on the role of identity 
and ethnic affiliation in L2 accented speech, the cognitive processes that underlie phonological acqui-
sition, and listeners’ perceptions of accented speech. As well, advances in technology have allowed for 
more sophisticated acoustic analyses of accented speech. According to the authors, the end outcome 
of such research engenders “a more sophisticated view of L2 phonological learning and teaching” 

266 • Donna M. Brinton
that provides invaluable guidance in “identifying reasonable, achievable goals in the pronunciation 
classroom, establishing appropriate instructional foci, and evaluating outcomes” (p. 366). 
 In their examination of the history of pronunciation teaching, Murphy and Baker (2015) charac-
terize pronunciation as being in the midst of its “fourth wave”—a period during which (for the first 
time) the empirical research being conducted serves to support advances in pronunciation teaching. 
This fortuitous juncture of research and practice is all too rare in Applied Linguistics in general and 
sets the stage for a future where researchers and practitioners can work side by side to continue build-
ing a bright future for pronunciation research and pedagogy. 
 Despite pronunciation’s “fourth wave” advances in research, the field is still wide open to those 
interested in investigating any of the wide range of topics that encompass pronunciation research. 
Derwing (2013) notes the need for additional research on those aspects of L2 pronunciation that 
most interfere with learners’ intelligibility and comprehensibility, as these can provide important 
guidance in L2 pronunciation syllabus design. She also advocates research on the relative effective-
ness of various classroom methods. Additional useful suggestions for priority areas of pronunciation 
research are suggested by Munro and Derwing (2015), who note that the area of individual learner 
differences in perception and production is still under-researched, as is the related issue of the rela-
tion between individual learner differences and reactions to differing methodological approaches 
for pronunciation. They also call for additional research on the effect of varying interlocutors on 
learners’ oral performance. Finally, as noted on the website for the Seventh Annual Pronunciation 
for Second Language Learning and Teaching Conference, “understanding the pronunciation features 
of speech in natural contexts has become increasingly relevant to both research perspectives and 
pedagogical approaches to L2 pronunciation.” 12 
 Notes 
  1. Grant points out that even native speakers can have an accent (i.e., to the extent that their speech deviates from what is 
considered “standard”). Thus, we can speak, for example, of a “Southern accent” or a “Brooklyn accent” when referring to 
certain regional varieties of North American English. 
  2. Likewise, two speakers both may be intelligible, yet it may require a bit more effort for the interlocutor to understand one 
of the two speakers, rendering that speaker slightly less comprehensible. 
  3. As an example, Spanish speakers, who come from a five-vowel system, would be predicted to have difficulty both distin-
guishing and producing the increased number of vowels of North American and/or British English. 
  4. It is tempting to conclude that this finding confirms the belief in a “critical period,” beyond which age a second language 
can no longer be fluently acquired. However, for a refutation of this belief and a highly informed discussion, see Moyer 
(1999, 2007b). 
  5. Note, however, that in a study of 120 experienced NEST and NNEST in Japan (Saito, 2014), much more positive results 
were obtained regarding teachers’ ability to perform the task of ranking problematic pronunciation features for Japanese 
English language learners. One possible explanation for this has to do with the experience level of the subject pool. 
  6. One notable exception is the study by Sifakis and Sougari (2005), who surveyed attitudes of Greek English teachers 
regarding the appropriateness of native speaker vs. EIL norms in the Greek foreign language classroom. Interestingly, 
despite the subjects’ awareness of the role of English as an international language in Greece, they reported a preference for 
the native speaker norm. 
  7. A recast is a teacher reformulation of a student’s error, usually directed to the student immediately following the error. It 
may entail correcting a student’s grammar, word choice, or pronunciation. 
  8. One example of such a study is Iwashita, Brown, McNamara, and O’Hagan (2008), who conclude that as a result of the 
addition of phonological features to the regular battery of features analyzed in oral assessment, the measurement of per-
formance at various levels of proficiency may be enhanced. 
  9. For information, visit http://www.wimba.com/solutions/higher-education/wimba_classroom_for_higher_education. 
 10. See, for example, Jenkins (2000, 2006), Sifakis (2014), Crawford (2005), Walker (2010) and Deterding (2013). 
 11. Some examples of pronunciation features proposed as part of the ELF inventory include aspirated /p, t, k/ at the beginning 
of a stressed syllable, consonant clusters in syllable initial and medial position, long/short vowel contrasts, and nuclear stress. 
 12. Retrieved from http://www.tamuc.edu/academics/colleges/humanitiessocialsciencesarts/departments/literatureLanguages/
appliedLinguistics/conferences/default.aspx 
www.ebook3000.com

Pronunciation • 267
 References 
 Abercrombie, D. (1949). Teaching pronunciation.  English Language Teaching ,  3 , 113–122. 
 Avery, P., & Ehrlich, S. (1992).  Teaching American English pronunciation . New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
 Baker, A., & Murphy, J. (2011). Knowledge base of pronunciation teaching: Staking out the territory.  TESL Canada Journal , 
 28 (2), 29–50. 
 Baran-Łucarz, M. (2014). The link between pronunciation anxiety and willingness to communicate in the foreign language 
classroom: The Polish EFL context.  The Canadian Modern Language Review ,  70 (4), 445–473. 
 Benke, E., & Medgyes, P. (2005). Differences in teaching behavior between native and non-native speaker teachers: As seen by 
the learners. In E. Llurda (Ed.),  Nonnative language teachers: Perceptions, challenges and contributions to the profession 
(pp. 195–216). New York, NY: Springer. 
 Bowen, J. D. (1975).  Patterns of English pronunciation . Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Brinton, D. M. (2014). Epilogue to the myths: Best practices for teachers. In L. Grant (Ed.),  Pronunciation myths: Applying 
second language research to classroom teaching (pp. 225–242). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D. M., & Goodwin, J. M. (1996).  Teaching pronunciation: A reference for teachers of English to speak-
ers of other languages . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
 Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D. M., & Goodwin, J. M. (with Griner, B.) (2010).  Teaching pronunciation: A reference for teachers 
of English to speakers of other languages  (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
 Crawford, J. C. (2005). English as a lingua franca: Implications for teacher education programs. In  Proceedings of the 22nd 
international conference on English teaching and learning in the Republic of China (pp. 77–87). Taipei, Taiwan: Crane. 
 Dalton, C., & Seidlhofer, B. (1994).  Pronunciation . New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
 Deng, J., Holtby, A., Howden-Weaver, L., Nessim, L., Nicholas, B., Nickle, K., Pannekoek, C., Stephan, S., & Sun, M. (2009). 
 English pronunciation research: The neglected orphan of second language acquisition studies?  (PMC Working paper WP 
O5–09). Edmonton, AB: Prairie Metropolis Centre. 
 Derwing, T. M. (2010). Utopian goals for pronunciation teaching. In J. Levis & K. LeVelle (Eds.),  Proceedings of the 1st pronun-
ciation in second language learning and teaching conference (pp. 24–37). Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
 Derwing, T. M. (2013). Pronunciation instruction. In C. Chapelle (Ed.),  The encyclopedia of applied linguistics . New York, NY: 
Blackwell. 
 Derwing, T. M., & Munro, M. J. (2005). Second language accent and pronunciation teaching: A research-based approach. 
 TESOL Quarterly ,  39 (3), 379–397. 
 Derwing, T. M., & Munro, M. J. (2010). Accentuating the positive: Directions in pronunciation research.  Language Teaching , 
 43 (3), 366–368. 
 Derwing, T. M., Munro, M. J., Thomson, R. I., & Rossiter, M. J. (2009). The relationship between L1 fluency and L2 fluency 
development.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition ,  31 , 533–557. 
 Derwing, T. M., & Rossiter, M. J. (2002). ESL learners’ perceptions of their pronunciation needs and strategies.  System ,  30 , 
155–166. 
 Derwing, T. M., Rossiter, M. J., Munro, M. J., & Thomson, R. I. (2004). Second language fluency: Judgments on different tasks. 
 Language Learning ,  54 (4), 655–679. 
 Deterding, D. (2013).  Misunderstandings in English as a lingua franca: An analysis of ELF interactions in South-East Asia . Boston, 
MA: de Gruyter. 
 Fillmore, C. J. (1979). On fluency. In C. J. Fillmore, D. Kempler & W. S. Y. Wang (Eds.),  Individual differences in language ability 
and language behavior (pp. 85–101). New York, NY: Academic Press. 
 Foote, J. A., Holtby, A., & Derwing, T. M. (2011). Survey of pronunciation teaching in adult ESL programs in Canada, 2010. 
 TESL Canada Journal, 29 , 1–22. 
 Gatbonton, E., Trofimovich, P., & Magid, M. (2005). Learners’ ethnic group affiliation and L2 pronunciation accuracy.  TESOL 
Quarterly ,  39 , 489–512. 
 Gilbert, J. (2010). Pronunciation as orphan: What can be done?  Speak Out! ,  43 , 3–7. 
 Goodwin, J. (2014). Teaching pronunciation. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. M. Brinton, & M. A. Snow (Eds.),  Teaching English as a 
second or foreign language (4th ed., pp. 136–152). Boston, MA: Cengage/National Geographic Learning. 
 Grant, L. (2014). Prologue to the myths: What teachers need to know. In L. Grant (Ed.),  Pronunciation myths: Applying second 
language research to classroom teaching (pp. 1–33). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Hartmann, R. R., & Stork, F. C. (1976).  Dictionary of languages and linguistics . New York, NY: Wiley. 
 Hincks, R. (2015). Technology and learning pronunciation. In M. Reed & J. M. Levis (Eds.),  The handbook of English pronun-
ciation  (pp. 505–519). Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell. 
 Isaacs, T. (2008). Toward defining a valid assessment criterion of pronunciation proficiency in non-native English-speaking 
graduate students.  The Canadian Modern Language Review ,  64 (4), 555–580. 
 Iwashita, N., Brown, A., McNamara, T., & O’Hagan, S. (2008). Assessed levels of second language speaking proficiency: How 
distinct?  Applied Linguistics ,  29 (1), 24–49. 

268 • Donna M. Brinton
 Jenkins, J. (2000).  The phonology of English as an international language . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Jenkins, J. (2006). Current perspectives on teaching world Englishes and English as a lingua franca.  TESOL Quarterly ,  40 (1), 
157–181. 
 Jenner, B. (1989). Teaching pronunciation: The common core.  Speak Out! 4 , 2–4. 
 Jones, R. H. (2002). Beyond ‘listen and repeat’: Pronunciation teaching materials and theories of second language acquisition. In 
J. C. Richards & W. A. Renandya (Eds.),  Methodology in language teaching: An anthology of current practice  (pp. 178–187). 
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
 Levis, J. M. (2005). Changing contexts and shifting paradigms in pronunciation teaching.  TESOL Quarterly ,  39 , 369–377. 
 Levis, J. M. (2015a). The journal of second language pronunciation: An essential step toward a disciplinary identity.  Journal of 
Second Language Pronunciation ,  1 (1), 1–10. 
 Levis, J. M. (2015b). Learners’ views of social issues in pronunciation learning.  Journal of Academic Language Learning ,  9 (1), 
A42-A55. 
Levis, J., Le, H., Lucic, I., Simpson, E., & Vo, S. (2016). Proceedings of the 7th pronunciation in second language learning and 
teaching conference. Ames, IA: Iowa State University.
 Levis, J., & LeVelle, K. (Eds.). (2010a).  Proceedings of the 1st pronunciation in second language learning and teaching conference . 
Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
 Levis, J., & LeVelle, K. (2010b). Rebuilding a professional space for pronunciation. In J. Levis & K. LeVelle (Eds.),  Proceedings 
of the 1st pronunciation in second language learning and teaching conference (pp. 1–9). Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
 Levis, J., & LeVelle, K. (Eds.). (2011).  Proceedings of the 2nd pronunciation in second language learning and teaching conference . 
Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
 Levis, J., & LeVelle, K. (Eds.). (2012).  Proceedings of the 3rd pronunciation in second language learning and teaching conference . 
Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
 Levis, J., & LeVelle, K. (Eds.). (2013).  Proceedings of the 4th pronunciation in second language learning and teaching conference . 
Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
 Levis, J., & McCrocklin, S. (Eds.). (2014).  Proceedings of the 5th pronunciation in second language learning and teaching confer-
ence . Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
Levis, J., Mohammed, R., Qian, M., & Zhou, Z. (2015). Proceedings of the 6th pronunciation in second language learning and 
teaching conference. Ames, IA: Iowa State University.
 Mahboob, A. (2004). Native or nonnative: What do students enrolled in an intensive English program think? In L. D. Kamhi-
Stein (Ed.),  Learning and teaching from experience: Perspectives on nonnative English-speaking professions (pp. 121–147). 
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 McCrocklin, S., & Link, S. (2014). What is identity? ELL and bilinguals’ views on the role of accent. In J. Levis & S. McCrocklin 
(Eds.),  Proceedings of the 5th pronunciation in second language learning and teaching conference  (pp. 137–144). Ames, IA: 
Iowa State University. 
 Moyer, A. (1999). Ultimate attainment in L2 phonology: The critical factors of age, motivation, and instruction.  Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition ,  21 , 81–108. 
 Moyer, A. (2007a). Do language attitudes determine accent? A study of bilinguals.  Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Development ,  28 , 502–518. 
 Moyer, A. (2007b). Empirical considerations on the age factor in L2 phonology.  Issues in Applied Linguistics ,  15 (2), 109–127. 
 Moyer, A. (2014). Exceptional outcomes in L2 phonology: The critical factors of learner engagement and self regulation. 
 Applied Linguistics ,  35 (4), 418–440. 
 Munro, M. J., & Derwing, T. M. (2015). A prospectus for pronunciation research in the 21st century.  Journal of Second Lan-
guage Pronunciation ,  1 (1), 11–42. 
 Murphy, J. (1997). Phonology courses offered by MATESOL programs in the United States.  TESOL Quarterly ,  31 (4), 741–764. 
 Murphy, J. (2014). Myth 7: Teacher training programs provide adequate preparation in how to teach pronunciation. In L. 
Grant (Ed.),  Pronunciation myths: Applying second language research to classroom teaching  (pp. 188–234). Ann Arbor, 
MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Murphy, J. M., & Baker, A. A. (2015). History of ESL pronunciation teaching. In M. Reed & J. M. Levis (Eds.),  The handbook 
of English pronunciation  (pp. 36–65). Malden, MA: Wiley. 
 Pennington, M. C. (1996).  Phonology in English language teaching . New York, NY: Addison Wesley Longman. 
 Piske, T., MacKay, I. R. A., & Flege, J. E. (2001). Factors affecting degree of foreign accent in an L2: A review.  Journal of Phonet-
ics ,  29 , 191–215. 
 Prator, C. H. Jr., & Robinett, B. W. (1985).  Manual of American English pronunciation (4th ed.). New York, NY: Holt. 
 Purcell, E., & Suter, R. (1980). Predictors of pronunciation accuracy: A reexamination.  Language Learning ,  30 , 271–287. 
 Richards, J. C., & Schmidt, R. (2010).  Longman dictionary of language teaching and applied linguistics  (4th ed.). New York, NY: 
Pearson Education. 
www.ebook3000.com

Pronunciation • 269
 Rokoszewska, K. (2012). The influence of pronunciation learning strategies on mastering English vowels.  Studies in Second 
Language Learning and Teaching ,  2 (3), 391–413. 
 Rossiter, M. J., Derwing, T. M., Manimtim, L. G., & Thomson, R. I. (2010). Oral fluency: The neglected component in the 
communicative language classroom.  The Canadian Modern Language Review ,  66 (4), 583–606. 
 Saito, K. (2014). Experienced teachers’ perspectives on priorities for improved intelligible pronunciation: The case of Japanese 
learners of English.  International Journal of Applied Linguistics ,  24 (2), 250–277. 
 Saito, K., & Brajot, F.-X. (2013). Scrutinizing the role of length of residence and age of acquisition in the interlanguage pro-
nunciation development of English /ɹ/ by late Japanese bilinguals.  Bilingualism: Language and Cognition ,  16 (4), 847–853. 
 Saito, K., & Lyster, R. (2012a). Effects of form-focused instruction and corrective feedback on L2 pronunciation development 
of /ɹ/ by Japanese learners of English.  Language Learning 62 (2), 595–633. 
 Saito, K., & Lyster, R. (2012b). Investigating the pedagogical potential of recasts for L2 vowel acquisition.  TESOL Quarterly , 
 46 (2), 387–398. 
 Sardegna, V. G. (2012). Learner differences in strategy use, self-efficacy beliefs, and pronunciation improvement. In J. Levis & 
K. LeVelle (Eds.),  Proceedings of the 3rd pronunciation in second language learning and teaching conference  (pp. 39–53). 
Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
 Sifakis, N. (2014). Teaching pronunciation in the post-EFL era: Lessons from ELF and implications for teacher education. 
 Utrecht Studies in Language Communication ,  27 , 127–146. 
 Sifakis, N. C., & Sougari, A. M. (2005). Pronunciation issues and EIL pedagogy in the periphery: A survey of Greek state school 
teachers’ beliefs.  TESOL Quarterly ,  39 , 467–488. 
 Smemoe, W. B., & Haslam, M. (2013). The effect of language learning aptitude, strategy use and learning context on L2 pro-
nunciation learning.  Applied Linguistics ,  34 (4), 435–456. 
 Suter, R. W. (1976). Predictors of pronunciation accuracy in second language learning.  Language Learning ,  26 , 233–53. 
 Thomson, R. I. (2013). ESL teachers’ beliefs and practices in pronunciation teaching: Confidently right or confidently wrong? 
In J. Levis & K. LeVelle (Eds.),  Proceedings of the 4th pronunciation in second language learning and teaching conference 
(pp. 224–233). Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
 Thornbury, S. (2000, July). Accuracy, fluency, and complexity.  English Teaching Professional ,  16 , 3–6. 
 Walker, R. (2010).  Teaching the pronunciation of English as a lingua franca . New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
 Winke, P. (2013). Rating oral language. In C. Chapelle (Ed.),  The encyclopedia of applied linguistics . New York, NY: Blackwell. 
 Zielinski, B. (2012). The social impact of pronunciation difficulties: Confidence and willingness to speak. In J. Levis & K. LeVelle 
(Eds.),  Proceedings of the 3rd pronunciation in second language learning and teaching conference  (pp. 18–26). Ames, IA: 
Iowa State University. 

www.ebook3000.com

 IV 
 Literacies, Reading, and Writing 

www.ebook3000.com

273
 Introduction 
 It is a surprising revelation that there are more individuals around the world learning Second Lan-
guage Literacy (L2L) than there are learning First Language Literacy (L1L) skills (Gunderson, D’Silva, 
& Murphy Odo, 2014). The language of literacy instruction in elementary and secondary classrooms 
varies globally as a result of colonization, jurisdictional policies related to language unification, pro-
grams for language revitalization, or the perceived value of the language in the world economy. We 
define the terms  literacy ,  second language ,  multiliteracies , and  second language literacy  and propose 
that variables such as digital and programming code are L2Ls. We conclude with observations about 
the teaching and learning occurring in K–12 classrooms where students learn L2L. 
 Defining Literacy 
 The origin of the word  literacy  is Latin, meaning “one who knows the letters.”  Read , to “understand 
the meaning of written symbols,” is unique to Old English, while  write  meant to scratch or draw 
(Diringer, 1968). Willinsky (1990) notes, “‘literate,’ dates back to the fifteenth century, and was used 
to describe one who can read and write” (p. 14). Leu (1981) proposed that reading involves “produc-
tion” and/or “comprehension,” and we maintain that production without comprehension is a feature 
of L2L. 
 Some suggest the term “multiple literacies,” within which literacy is viewed as ways of “read-
ing the world” in different contexts in different ways (see Cope & Kalantzis, 2000; Lankshear & 
Knobel, 2003; Street, 2003). New Literacy Studies (NLS) focuses on the local, everyday experience 
in particular communities of practice (Barton, 1994; Barton & Hamilton, 1998). Literacy practices 
vary within areas such as education, religion, workplace, public services, and family and community 
activities. Practices change over time and are supported and shaped by different institutions and 
social relationships. 
 The term  multiliteracies  was advocated by the New London Group and represents “the multiplic-
ity of communications channels and media” and the “increasing salience of cultural and linguistic 
diversity” (Cope & Kalantzis, 2000, p. 5). They also note that, “[w]hat we might term ‘mere literacy’ 
remains centred on language only, and usually on a singular national form of language at that, being 
conceived as a stable system based on rules such as mastering sound-letter correspondence” (p. 5). 
 20 
 Second Language Literacy
Kindergarten to Grade 12 
 Lee Gunderson and Reginald Arthur D’Silva 

274 • Lee Gunderson and Reginald Arthur D’Silva
 Lead pencils, pens of various kinds, the typewriter, radio, television, the word processor, the com-
puter, cellular technology, the Internet, and social networking have all been associated with different, 
sometimes subtle, changes in the concept of literacy. Watching the 2016 Olympics live on television 
while tweeting with others about what is happening as it happens argues for an expanded view of 
literacy. We applaud Lo Bianco’s (2000) notion that 
 [l]anguages caught up in the multimodal environment of contemporary communication, 
which combine verbal linguistics meaning-making with the gestural, visual, spatial, and the 
radically altered writing and reading regimes of computer literacy, such as the oral-like writing 
and writing-like oralism in voice instruction, complicate literacy practices with multicultural 
contexts as the modes, codes and cultural meaning interact with each other. 
 (pp. 93–94) 
 The term  second language  is used to designate the language of those who speak one language at 
home (perhaps, a mother tongue) and an additional language (or more) outside of the home. The 
term is misrepresentative in many cases. When we refer to L2 in this chapter it may actually be the third 
or fourth language. L2 is used here as a term to represent “not the first language or mother tongue.” 
 First Languages 
 Lewis, Simons, and Fennig (2015), editors of  Ethnologue: Languages of the World , note: 
 This edition lists a total of 7,102 living languages worldwide—a net decrease of 4 living lan-
guages since the 17th edition of  Ethnologue was published one year ago. 
 (https://www.ethnologue.com/about) 
  Figure 20.1  shows the number of living languages broken down by area reported by Lewis et al. 
(2015). 
Africa =2,138 
Americas        
=1,064 
Asia= 2,301 
Europe = 
286 
Pacific = 1,313 
Living Languages Count 
 Figure 20.1 Number of Living Languages Broken Down by Area 
(Lewis et al., 2015, ﬁ gure by R. D’Silva) 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Literacy • 275
 Many languages have orthographies (Daniels, 1996). Joshi and Aaron (2006) classify them as 
“morphemic writing (Chinese), syllabic writing (Japanese Kana), alphabetic-syllabic system (Kanada 
and Tamil), and alphabetic writing (Italian and Spanish)” (p. xiii). They also note that there are dif-
ferent scripts: “The graphic format in which writing is presented” (p. viii). The Roman, Arabic, and 
Indic scripts are used to represent many different languages. A script is often borrowed or adopted to 
represent a language for various complex reasons. Urdu, for instance, is written in a modified Arabic 
script in Pakistan and in some cases in Devanagari script in India (D’Silva, personal communication, 
August 2015). Many L2s are written in a script different from the script used to write L1s. 
 Second Languages 
 Ostler (2005) estimates the number of L2 users to be as follows: Mandarin (1,052,000,000), English 
(508,000,000), Hindi (487,000,000), Spanish (417,000,000), Russian (277,000,000), Bengali (211,000,000), 
Portuguese (191,000,000), German (128,000,000), French (128,000,000), and Japanese (126,000,000), 
but the number is difficult to know, especially for the K–12 population. 
 Immigrants and others learn Norwegian, Danish, Swedish, French, German, Italian, Spanish, Por-
tuguese, Arabic Kurdish, Malay, Indonesian, Turkish, Russian, Hebrew, Swahili (Kiswahili), English, 
Mandarin, and hundreds of other languages as L2s as a result of migration, economics, technology, 
and governmental educational policies. Some are doing so because the language of instruction is dif-
ferent from their L1 as a result of colonialism, some are doing so because of immigration, and some 
are doing so because the L2 is thought to be the key to technology or to access to the local, national, 
or world economy. 
 Second Language Literacy 
 There are more human beings involved in L2L than in first language literacy (L1L). We have 
encountered individuals who can decode Greek, Arabic, Korean, and Hindi but who do not under-
stand the discourse. They have learned the sound–symbol relationships and can “read—that is, 
decode—L2 texts without understanding them. One can learn to decode Korean orthography in 
an hour or two because it is a very shallow orthography (Dennis Murphy Odo, personal com-
munication, August 2015,). Students can often decode an L2 because of their knowledge of the 
phoneme-grapheme correspondences of their L1. They are helped to read an L2 by their knowl-
edge of their L1. There are instances in which learning to decode an L2 is an integral part of a cul-
ture, such as the Kalaodi in eastern Indonesia who learn to read the Koran but do not understand 
the Arabic (Baker, 1992). 
 Chinese: Second Language Literacy 
 There is one national language (Mandarin) and seven regional languages in China. Fifty-three per-
cent of Chinese people can communicate with the language known as “Putonghua” (http://www.
chinadaily. com.cn/english/doc/2004–12/26/content_403419.htm). Putonghua is taught to students 
in school. It has also been adopted in Singapore as one of the four official languages, even though 
very few speak it as an L1. For the large majority of Chinese in China and in Singapore, Putonghua is 
a second language. Students in China are taught literacy skills initially through the use of the inter-
national-phonetic alphabet (i.p.a.), called Pinyin, as a method to introduce sound-symbol relation-
ships. Simplified characters are introduced with Pinyin added so that students are able to “decode” 
the characters. This system is used until about the third grade, with new characters being introduced 
with Pinyin, but not thereafter (Hudson-Ross & Dong, 1990). 

276 • Lee Gunderson and Reginald Arthur D’Silva
 In Taiwan, students are introduced to a phonetic transcription system that involves non-Roman 
syllables called  zhùyýīnfúhào  or  bopomofo . Students in Taiwan learn to read standard, classic Chi-
nese characters. In Hong Kong, until recently, students learned to read Cantonese by a system that 
involved drill and rote memorization of classic Chinese characters using a “flash card” approach 
that begins at about age three for many students (Gunderson, 2007, pp. 195–197). The commonly 
held view, however, is that spoken Chinese is not difficult to learn because it has simple phonologi-
cal (except tones) and grammatical structures. The most difficult aspect is to learn to recognize and 
write the calligraphy. Putonghua appears to have been adopted to unify China in terms of language: 
“One obvious advantage of the logographic and morphosyllabic nature of Chinese is that the same 
script can be used in a large population in which people speak different dialects” (Ho, Chan, Tsang, 
Chan, & Lee, 2002, p. 544). There are cases where the L2 has not been adopted but has been imposed. 
 Spanish: Second Language Literacy 
 Spanish is actually an L2 in many countries. In Mexico, for instance, the national language is Span-
ish. López-Gopar states that, “For 500 years, Indigenous people have been discriminated against 
and manipulated to believe that they need to abandon their language and culture if they want to 
succeed in Mexican society” (2007, p. 161). In essence, L2L skills are promoted as a key to success 
in Mexico at the expense of the L1. López-Gopar (2007, p. 166) states that “[t]he writing systems 
developed by Aztecs, Mayans, Zapotecs, and Mixtecs are represented in what are generically called 
codices.” Codices involve images, logograms, and phonetic representations. L2L instruction has had 
a negative effect on many students from different L1 backgrounds in Mexico (López & Gunderson, 
2006). Spanish as an L2 has had similar effects on L1s in South and Central America. Peréz (2009), in 
reference to Peru, notes: “Formal education has played a central role in the promotion of a Spanish-
only policy” (p. 202). She states that “90% of indigenous pupils still receive education that does not 
involve their language or culture” (p. 206). 
 English: Second Language Literacy 
 English is spoken in 112 countries as an official or major language (Lewis et al., 2015). The British 
Council reports that: 
 English has official or special status in at least seventy five countries with a total population of 
over two billion; English is spoken as a first language by around 375 million and as a second 
language by around 375 million speakers in the world; speakers of English as a second language 
probably outnumber those who speak it as a first language; around 750 million people are 
believed to speak English as a foreign language, and one out of four of the world’s population 
speak English to some level of competence; demand from the other three-quarters is increasing. 
 (http://www.britishcouncil.org/learning-faq-the-english-language.htm) 
 The concept of World Englishes is “the result of [the language’s global] spread [as a result of 
which] both formally and functionally, English now has multicultural identities. The term ‘English’ 
does not capture this sociolinguistic reality; the term ‘Englishes’ does” (Kachru, 1992, p. 357). In 
countries where English has an official or special status among other national and regional languages, 
students learn and acquire a variety of World Englishes characterized by different accents and styles. 
 It is also argued that English is the main language of books, newspapers, airports and air-traffic 
control, international business and academic conferences, science, technology, diplomacy, 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Literacy • 277
sport, international competitions, pop music, and advertising; over two-thirds of the world’s 
scientists read in English, three-quarters of the world’s mail is written in English, 80% of the 
world’s electronically stored information is in English and, of the estimated 200 million users 
of the Internet, some 36% communicate in English. 
 (http://www.britishcouncil.org/learning-faq-the-english-language.htm) 
 Literacy learning in English and in English as a second language (ESL), especially reading, appears 
to have received the most research attention over the years (Gunderson, D’Silva, & Chen, 2010). Joshi 
and Aaron (2006) note: “Until about two decades ago, the study of writing systems and its relation-
ships to literacy acquisition has been generally modeled after studies of the English language” (p. xiii). 
 India: Second Language Literacy 
 English and Hindi are the national “official” languages. Lewis et al. (2015) report that there are 
179,000 native English speakers in India, but there are also 11,021,610 English L2 speakers. Hindi 
speakers include 180,000,000 L1 and 120,000,000 L2 individuals (Lewis et al., 2015). 
 With overwhelming numbers of people ages 7 and up with no basic literacy skills in either their 
L1 or L2, literacy initiatives are a major focus of the country’s ministry of Human Resource Develop-
ment. Bhargava (2008) reports that the ministry’s 
 multi-pronged approach [that is] being implemented by the Bureau of Elementary Educa-
tion, through the State Governments, for formal elementary education catering to children age 
6–14 [and] the Bureau of Secondary Education . . . for formal education for the 14–18-year-old 
age group, facilitating their entry into higher education and work situations [is designed to] 
combat this problem of illiteracy. 
 (p. 51) 
 As a result, hundreds of millions are involved in L2 literacy in India at all ages but also particularly 
in the K–12 context. The L2 issues in India are so complex that it is impossible to adequately address 
them here. One of the authors of this chapter (Reginald D’Silva), for instance, speaks six languages. 
He is L1 literate in English. He subsequently learned Hindi, Kannada, Konkani, Tulu, and German 
literacy skills. Kannada, Konkani, and Tulu in his region are represented by the same orthography, 
but not in other regions. 
 Schools are mandated to provide literacy instruction (Sinha, 2000), and although curriculum 
guidelines from the Government of India—Department of Education suggest that in the “first two 
years of primary stage (Classes I and II) the child should be helped to acquire the basic skills in 
reading and writing in his/her mother tongue/regional language” (Ministry of Human Resource 
Development Department Of Education Website, n.d.), most students in these complex multilingual 
contexts develop literacies in languages other than their mother tongue. 
 Jhingran (2009) notes that “[a] rough assessment indicates that almost 25% of primary school 
children face moderate to severe problems in the initial months and years of primary school because 
their home language differs from the school language” (p. 267) and that 103,732 primary schools 
have populations of 90% who have a home language different from the language of instruction. 
Mohanty, Mishra, Reddy, and Ramesh (2009) argue that “[f]orced submersion of minority children 
in dominant or majority language classrooms with subtractive effects on their mother tongues con-
tinues to be the most pressing educational issue in multilingual settings” (p. 283). The National Lit-
eracy Mission (NLM) established in 1988 provides functional literacy instructional support to school 
dropouts among other marginalized populations in the 15–35 age range, and while literacy projects 

278 • Lee Gunderson and Reginald Arthur D’Silva
across the nation have being recognized by UNESCO as successful, significant work in literacy for all 
ages remains to be done (Bhargava, 2008). 
 According to the National Network of Education (2010), there are about 106 million people in 
the age group of 15–24 years in north India alone, but only about 33.4 million are likely to enroll 
for higher and vocational education. This rate is significantly lower than other regions such as 
Kerala. Indian Human Resource Development (HRD) Minister Kapil Sibal concluded that “north 
Indian states cannot emulate the model of education in southern states as they have an inherently 
indigenous culture of learning” (http://www.indiaedunews.net/Today/Northern_India_fares_low_
in_literacy_rate,_says_study_11184/). 
 Same language subtitling (SLS) has proven to be a simple yet effective way of providing literacy, 
including L2L, to people of all ages through high-interest television programming. Successfully used 
in rural India to promote mass literacy usually in Hindi or an official scheduled language, this feature 
also called “literacy karaoke” uses subtitles in the same language as the visual content to promote 
reading. This highly cost-effective literacy tool is also a winner of the 2002 World Bank’s Global 
Innovation Competition (planetread.org). The SLS technology has now extended to educational 
resources such as digital books in over 20 languages (bookbox.com). It appears to help students 
improve their L2L skills. Recent reports suggest that although “only a quarter of Indian children 
become good readers at school. When exposed to just 30 minutes of subtitled film-songs a week, that 
proportion doubles” (Staff Writer, 2015). 
 It seems that the majority of students in India are involved in learning literacy skills in an L2 and 
that the L2 varies both between and within regions. Success in learning L2L skills is difficult for many 
students, particularly those who speak a language at home other than the language of instruction. 
 Africa: Second Language Literacy 
 Africa has about one-third of the languages in the world (Bendor-Samuel, 1996). Colonists brought 
both their religions and their alphabets to Africa. The Church Missionary Society in 1848 estab-
lished an approach for writing different African languages using a Roman alphabet (Bendor-Samuel, 
1996). In 1928 the International African Institute published “The Practical Orthography of African 
Languages,” which established the “Africa” alphabet (Bendor-Samuel, 1996). Most African languages, 
mostly sub-Saharan, are written using either a modified Roman alphabet or the International Pho-
netic Alphabet (i.p.a.). Africa is unique and complex in terms of orthographies (Heine & Nurse, 
2000; Prah, 1998). Heugh (2009) notes: “European languages have generally come to be used for 
high-level purposes in each African country south of the Sahara” (p. 105). She notes that English 
has come to be used even in countries that were never British colonies (i.e., Namibia and Ethiopia). 
Heugh’s (2009) review is an excellent overview. The following is a sampling of the complexities of 
L2Ls in Africa. The following data are from Lewis et al. (2015). Angola has 41 living languages and the 
official language is Portuguese. Benin has 54 living languages, with French as a national or official lan-
guage. Botswana’s official language is English, with 29 living languages. Burundi has three national or 
official languages: French, Rundi, and Swahili. Chad’s official languages are Standard Arabic and French, 
with 131 living languages. Equatorial Guinea has two official languages, Spanish and French. Ethio-
pia has Amharic, English, and Tigrinia as official languages, with 85 living languages. Hassaniyya is 
the official language of Mauritania. South Africa has Afrikaans, Ndebele, Northern Sotho, Southern 
Sotho, Swati, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu, and English as national or official languages. L2L 
and bilingual instruction are features of many countries in Africa. Okedara and Okedara (1992) 
claimed that mother-tongue literacy was important, especially for a country such as Nigeria. They 
concluded that “[a] local language or mother tongue facilitates the acquisition of literacy” (p. 92). 
An interesting point of view was that “[a]n individual illiterate may thus end up being bilingual or 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Literacy • 279
multilingual before he or she can truly be regarded as functionally literate since he or she has to be 
able to communicate with neighbours but also the wider community” (p. 102). 
 “Swahili is now the official language in the states of Tanzania and Kenya, and widely used in 
the neighbouring countries of Uganda, Mozambique, Burundi, the Congos, Madagascar and the 
Comoros” (Ostler, 2005, pp. 104–105). It is mostly an L2. “Despite the vast number who use it 
(estimated at 40 million), Swahili is learnt as a native language only on the islands and coast close 
to Zanzibar” (Ostler, 2005, p. 105). Heugh (2009) argues that “literacy instruction and language 
learning programmes and materials that originate from or that may be currently fashionable in 
English-dominant contexts beyond Africa cannot be trans/imported successfully to Africa” (p. 122). 
She speaks of Mother Tongue (MT) and Mother Tongue Medium (MTM). She also notes that 
“explicit teaching of literacy in the MT and the L2; and that MTM education is required for at least 
eight years of schooling, along with L2 teaching and learning” (pp. 104–105). In general it appears 
that L2 literacy across Africa often results in lower achievement than bilingual programs. UNESCO 
(2008) states that “the detailed analysis of these regional patterns shows that: whilst there have been 
substantial gains in East Asia and especially China, the Arab States, Bangladesh and Sub-Saharan 
Africa are lagging behind” (p. 48). 
 The recent launch of Internet.Org in countries in Africa is poised to significantly impact edu-
cation in a positive way, given the easy access to the Internet that it promises to provide (Zucker-
berg, 2015), while further complicating the L2L literacies that students will develop when mediated 
through the new technologies available in K–12 contexts in various regions of this continent. Some 
believe teachers will need to play a key role in developing students’ literacies amidst this new wave of 
technologies in classrooms (Schmitt, 2015). 
 Europe: Second Language Literacy 
 The history of language is complex and involves the influence of Greek, Latin, German, French, 
English, and other languages (Ostler, 2005). It is impossible to describe the complexities in this 
chapter (see Ostler, 2005). Many immigrants are involved in Finnish, Norwegian, and Swedish L2L 
programs. The Sámi in Finland, Norway, and Sweden have “their own language(s) and distinct 
culture(s)” (Aikio-Puoskari, 2009, p. 238). “From the mid-19th to the mid-20th century, the Sámi 
were subjected to a conscious and, at times, very harsh assimilation policy” (Aikio-Puoskari, 2006, 
p. 238). However, “the Sámi language can be the language of instruction, or a subject called ‘the 
mother tongue/first language,’ or ‘a foreign/second language’ in the schools of Norway Sweden and 
Finland” (p. 245). Overall, there are hundreds of L1s in Europe (Lewis et al., 2015), and they are often 
not represented in schools (Ostler, 2005). Phillipson (2006) concludes that, “roughly 300 languages 
are in use in EU member states” (p. 90). It is clear that many learners are involved in L2L in their 
home countries. Phillipson (2006) concludes that “English linguistic hegemony has been progres-
sively asserted in the EU system” (p. 91). 
 Programming Code: Second Language Literacy 
 Some languages are not typically identified as L2s. Musical notation literacy skills are used around 
the world. The L2 transcends the L1. An Urdu speaker can read and write music that a Zambuangan 
speaker can read and understand, although they cannot communicate in L1 with each other. Math 
is also an international L2. There are others. However, the most significant is likely to be program-
ming language. The perforated paper roll used in player pianos to control the playing of the piano 
is a kind of program. Programming code for computers has been around since the 1940s. There are 
about 2,500 programming languages and hundreds of “dialects,” which are variants of programs. 

280 • Lee Gunderson and Reginald Arthur D’Silva
Computers are inflexible machines that only accept specific forms of input. Program languages have 
syntactic and semantic features. Syntax refers to the grammar and “spelling” of a programming lan-
guage. In essence, the syntax of a language determines the expected form, and different programs 
have defined their own syntactical rules that determine which words, what order the words should be 
in, and what punctuation the computer can “understand.” Semantics refers to meaning, and in many 
cases is written in natural language, often English, or mathematical terms. 
 The following is a program written by Reginald D’Silva in Java ( Figure 20.2 ). This is a typical 
program written by students to practice writing different languages such as BASIC, Fortran IV, and 
COBAL. The program tells a computer to print out on the screen the phrase “Hello World.” Syn-
tax statements include English, mathematical, and punctuation components that follow particular 
language-specific syntactic patterns. A compiler is a language-specific program that is used to make 
the program readable by the computer. A program may run successfully because of its syntax but 
results in an incorrect outcome because of semantic problems. A programmer can both read and 
write code. The underlying syntax and semantics of programming code are related to English in sig-
nificant ways. There are those who write and read programming code but who cannot communicate 
orally or in writing with each other because their L1s are different. The proliferation of computer 
viruses, worms, and trojans argues for the position that programming code is a major L2L.   
 Recent efforts, such as the non-profit initiative “code.org,” to make programming code an essen-
tial L2L that students need to acquire highlights its importance in the continually expanding presence 
of technologies in modern educational contexts (Partovi, 2014). Programming code also makes pos-
sible a great variety of digital applications, including, of course, the Internet. Experts believe recent 
advancements like the Internet of Everything (IoE) that brings “together people, process, data and 
things to make networked connections more relevant and valuable than ever before” will soon “trans-
form pedagogy” (Selinger, Sepulveda, & Buchan, 2013, p. 4). Recent successes like the Khan Academy, 
for instance, have influenced K–12 education in significant ways. L2Ls such as programming code, as 
suggested by code.org’s vision, may be useful to both elementary and secondary students. 
 Figure 20.2  An Example of a Java Program 
 (Source: R. D’Silva) 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Literacy • 281
 Multiliteracies: Second Language Literacy 
 Kress (2003) identifies two distinct modes— writing  and  image— and their associated media, namely 
the  book  and  screen , respectively. Some identify  web literacies  as making meaning in the  context of 
the web (Eagleton & Dobler, 2007). Every literary act has a  purpose , which may be one of making 
meaning or that of communicating. However, the  importance ,  relevance , and  legitimacy  of literacy 
skills are determined by the communities where they are situated. With the rapid advancement of 
information and communication technology (ICT), the importance, relevance, and legitimacy of 
online literacy is growing at an unprecedented rate. “The former constellation of  medium of book 
and  mode of writing  is giving way, and in many domains has already given way, to the new constella-
tion of  medium of screen  and  mode of image ” (Kress, 2003, p. 9). In the last decade, Internet use has 
grown dramatically by around 400% (Internetworldstats.com, 2010), making online literacy, the 
skills needed to read, write, publish, and interact online, one of the most important and relevant 
concepts in academic and non-academic domains in the developed world. With large-scale, transna-
tional efforts like Internet.org, and its motto “Every one of us, Everywhere, Connected,” access to the 
Internet is seen as a basic human right, making online literacies essential in the developing world. 
Some believe in the notion of a  digital language  that mediates online literacy and suggest that those 
born into the age of ICTs are native speakers or  digital natives , while those who have acquired the 
skills and have been socialized into these environments are  digital immigrants  (Prensky, 2001). With 
26.6% of the world currently online (Internetworldstats.com, 2010), this view implies that an over-
whelming majority of the world’s population will gain access in the near future and will have digital 
as a second language (DSL) (Haynes, 2007). 
 The Internet raises debate concerning redefinitions of the terms related to  online literacy . New 
Literacies (upper case “N” and “L”) seems to be subsuming recent terms such as new literacies 
(lower case “n” and “l”)—which describe a range of literacies from the reading of texts in differ-
ent modes such as print, image, and sound to wider social practices in making meaning of texts 
(Castek, Zawilinski, McVerry, O’Byrne, & Leu, 2011). New Literacies include new skills and strate-
gies required by the new technologies for information and communication, and change as their 
defining technologies change (Leu & Zawilinski, 2007). The demands that New Literacies wield 
on our educational goals when juxtaposed with those of traditional literacies continue to intensify 
instructional challenges. Rather than eliminate literacy problems, technology seems to create a wide 
range of them, making what is current, appropriate, and effective literacy instruction a moving 
target. Teachers are faced with the need to identify, evaluate, and integrate digital literacy tools to 
scaffold classroom instruction and prepare learners for literacy skills mediated by digital technolo-
gies needed in their workplaces. Issues of access to technology, availability of infrastructure to use 
technology in classrooms, and teachers’ lack of knowledge and skills in employing digital technolo-
gies in the classrooms have plagued schools in the past decade, contributing to “Digital Disconnect” 
as teachers and administrators fail to incorporate digital ways of meaning making. Students report 
that there is 
 a substantial disconnect between how they use the Internet for school and how they use the 
Internet during the school day and under teacher direction. For the most part, students’ edu-
cational use of the Internet occurs outside of the school day, outside of the school building, 
outside of the direction of their teachers. 
 (Pew, 2002, p. iii) 
 With the proliferation of the IoE (Internet of Everything), schools will have to develop ways to pro-
vide students with  online literacies that are relevant and legitimate for the 21st century. 

282 • Lee Gunderson and Reginald Arthur D’Silva
 At the turn of the millennium, one of the authors, in speculating on how literacy will be defined 
in the new millennium, suggested that 
 Electronic learning disabilities will be a factor in the increasing diversity as some students find 
it difficult or impossible to deal with electronic and hypertexts. An increasing number will 
favor electronic information processing and will become unable to deal with printed texts—
they will become print disabled. 
 (Gunderson, 2000, p. 69) 
 While this insight is still relevant, challenges in making meaning with digital and print texts will 
intensify in our classrooms as students use both digital and print texts in complex ways. A recent 
literacy study, for instance, found that girls have a stronger preference than boys to read online texts 
(Adams, 2015; Clark, 2015). This finding suggests that reading online may be a challenge to some 
digital natives. Our understanding of this complex L2L continues to be in a state of flux. 
 Second Language Literacy Instruction 
 There are three major L2Ls—Putonghua, Spanish, and English—but there are many others as well 
(Lewis et al., 2015). Learners involved in instruction of a language other than their home languages 
generally have lower L2L achievement (Elley, 1992; Schnepf, 2008; UNESCO Institute for Statistics, 
2004, available at http://ftp.iza.org/dp3337.pdf). Second-language literacy is complex. Learners, who 
typically begin formal reading instruction at about five or six years of age (or seven in some coun-
tries), have good-sized speaking vocabularies and a well-ingrained working knowledge of grammar. 
Beginning L2 learners, regardless of their chronological age, may be learners with no L2 vocabulary 
or syntactic knowledge. This represents a significant hurdle for them and their teachers. We refer to 
this as the L1-to-L2 developmental ratio. We have developed a number of instructional heuristics to 
help design instructional programs for school-age students learning English as an L2 that is based 
on two important factors: English development and L1 literacy background (Gunderson, 1991, 2009; 
Gunderson et al., 2014). This approach may have some applicability for languages other than English. 
 English is the major L2. Many immigrants to English-speaking nations appear to be at risk. They 
appear to be failing to learn English literacy skills, are failing to read and learn from their textbooks, 
are failing to learn from lectures in their academic classes, and are failing to acquire the literacy skills 
they need to get work in anything but low-level, labor-intensive work (Gunderson, 2007). Joshi and 
Aaron (2006) state: “It was also tacitly believed, if not overtly stated, that what is true of English is 
also true for other writing systems” (p. xiii). The problem is that the learning of English literacy skills 
is likely one of the most difficult L2L tasks (Gunderson et al., 2010). L2 problems appear often to 
be related to the learning of ESL. Ziegler, Perry, Ma-Wyatt, Ladner, and Schulte-Körne (2003) note 
that “[t]he slower rate of learning to read in English does not seem to occur because of variations in 
teaching methods across different countries, rather it seems due to the relatively low orthographic 
consistency of English” (p. 13). English is the most difficult language to learn to read, and there 
appear to be more individuals who have trouble learning to read it. “The empirical evidence that is 
presented . . . clearly suggests that reading acquisition in the English writing system proceeds more 
slowly than any other orthography that has been looked at so far” (Landerl, 2006, p. 514). Hispanic 
students who are born in the United States and immigrants who have Spanish as their L1 are over-
represented in remedial reading and special education classes (Klingner, Artilles, & Barletta, 2006; 
Rueda & Windmueller, 2006). Languages such as Spanish have fairly shallow orthographies since 
there is a high degree of regularity in grapheme-phoneme correspondence. In general, it appears that 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Literacy • 283
students who first learn to read in a shallow orthography, depending on their age, may experience 
initial difficulty learning an L2 with a deep orthography such as English. 
 Conclusion 
 More school-age students around the world learn literacy skills in an L2 than they do in their own 
L1. It appears to us that many view English as  the  primary L2. This is, of course, an English-centric 
notion that does not reflect the realities of the world. Chinese appears to be the major L2. Spanish, 
Russian, English, Hindi, Swahili, and others are also significant L2s. It appears that learners involved 
in L2L instruction generally do not do as well in learning the L2 as those involved in L1 literacy 
instruction. L2 is the language of instruction as a result of colonialism, political choice, immigration, 
or overt assimilationist policies. 
 The term “second language literacy” is inadequate to describe the complex interactions occur-
ring in multiple multimodal environments. A single human being has the potential to learn literacy 
skills in a number of second or additional languages that are not necessarily traditional in nature. A 
monolingual Farsi speaker, for instance, may have programming code literacy skills, digital as an L2, 
and music or math as an L2. Rather than the term “second,” it may be more appropriate to categorize 
these languages as “additional.” English, for the moment, does appear to be a significant component 
of the World Wide Web. However, this seems to be changing as use of the Web increases around the 
globe. The underlying program codes continue to employ English-like languages. 
 Multiliteracies broaden the view of what literacy activities L2 students should and can be involved 
in. There is a significant need to explore L2L issues as the scope of multiliteracies expands and the 
world grows smaller. As our understanding of what constitutes multiliteracies expands, defining the 
term will become more complex and difficult. 
 References 
 Adams, R. (2015, May 20). Girls like digital media while boys prefer print, finds study on reading habits.  The Guardian . 
Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/20/girls-like-digital-media-while-boys-prefer-print-
finds-study-on-reading-habits 
 Aikio-Puoskari, U. (2009). The ethnic revival, language and education of the Sámi. In T. Skutnabb-Kangas, R. Phillipson, A. K. 
Mohanty, & M. Panda (Eds.),  Social justice through multilingual education (pp. 238–262). Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Baker, J. N. (1992). The presence of the name: Reading scripture in an Indonesian village. In J. Boyarin (Ed.),  The ethnography 
of reading (pp. 98–138). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
 Barton, D. (1994).  Literacy: An introduction to the ecology of written language . Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
 Barton, D., & Hamilton, M. (1998).  Local literacies: Reading and writing in one community . London: Routledge. 
 Bendor-Samuel, J. (1996). African languages. In P. T. Daniels & W. Bright (Eds.),  The world’s writing systems  (pp. 689–691). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Bhargava, A. (2008). Functional literacy in India: A progress report.  Education Canada ,  48 (2), 50–52. 
 Castek, J., Zawilinski, L., McVerry, G., O’Byrne, I., & Leu, D. J. (2011). The new literacies of online reading comprehension: 
New opportunities and challenges for students with learning difficulties. In C. Wyatt-Smith, J. Elkins, & S. Gunn (Eds.), 
 Multiple perspectives on difficulties in learning literacy and numeracy . New York, NY: Springer. 
 Clark, C. (2015). Children’s and young people’s reading in 2014.  Findings from the 2014 National Literacy Trust’s annual survey . 
London: National Literacy Trust. 
 Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (Eds.). (2000).  Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and the design of social features . New York: Routledge. 
 Daniels, P. T. (1996). The study of writing systems. In P. T. Daniels & W. Bright (Eds.),  The world’s writing systems  (pp. 1–20). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Diringer, D. (1968).  The alphabet (Vols. 1 & 2). New York: Funk & Wagnalls. 
 Eagleton, M. B., & Dobler, E. (2007).  Reading the web: Strategies for internet inquiry . New York: The Guilford Press. 
 Elley, W. B. (1992).  How in the world do students read?  Hamburg: The International Association for the Evaluation of Educa-
tional Achievement. 

284 • Lee Gunderson and Reginald Arthur D’Silva
 Government of India: Ministry of Human Resource Development Department Of Education Website. (n.d.).  Informa-
tion repository of education in India . Retrieved August 10, 2015, from http://www.teindia.nic.in/mhrd/50yrsedu/q/91/
HL/91HL0402.htm 
 Gunderson, L. (1991).  ESL literacy instruction: A guidebook to theory and practice . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Regents. 
 Gunderson, L. (2000). How will literacy be defined in the new millennium?  Reading Research Quarterly ,  35 , 68–69. 
 Gunderson, L. (2007).  English-only instruction and immigrant students in secondary school: A critical examination . Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates. 
 Gunderson, L. (2009).  ESL (ELL) literacy instruction: A guidebook to theory and practice (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Gunderson, L., D’Silva, R., & Chen, L. (2010). Second language reading disabilities: International themes. In R. Allington & 
A. McGill-Franzen (Eds.),  Handbook of research in reading disabilities (pp. 13–24). New York: Routledge. 
 Gunderson, L., D’Silva, R., & Murphy Odo, D. (2014).  ESL (ELL) literacy instruction: A guidebook to theory and practice  (3rd ed.). 
New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Haynes, J. (2007).  DSL—Digital as a second language . Retrieved 15 March, 2010, from http://www.everythingesl.net/inservices/
dsl__digital_second_language_11955.php 
 Heine, B., & Nurse, D. (Eds.). (2000).  African languages: An introduction . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Heugh, K. (2009). Literacy and bi/multilingual education in Africa. In T. Skutnabb-Kangas, R. Phillipson, A. K. Mohanty, & M. 
Panda (Eds.),  Social justice through multilingual education  (pp. 103–124). Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Ho, C. S.-H., Chan, D. W.-O., Tsang, S.-M., Chan, S.-H., & Lee, S.-H. (2002). The cognitive profile and multiple-deficit hypoth-
esis in Chinese developmental dyslexia.  Developmental Psychology ,  38 , 543–553. 
 Hudson-Ross, S., & Dong, Y. R. (1990). Literacy learning as a reflection of language and culture: Chinese elementary school 
education.  The Reading Teacher ,  44 , 110–123. 
 Internetworldstats.com. (2010).  World internet usage statistics . Retrieved March, 15, 2010, from http://www.internetworldstats. 
com/stats.htm 
 Jhingran, D. (2009). Hundreds of home languages in the country and many in most classrooms: Coping with diversity in pri-
mary education in India. In T. Skutnabb-Kangas, R. Phillipson, A. K. Mohanty, & M. Panda (Eds.),  Social justice through 
multilingual education (pp. 263–282). Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Joshi, R. M., & Aaron, P. G. (2006). Introduction to the volume. In R. M. Joshi & P. G. Aaron (Eds.),  Handbook of orthography 
and literacy (pp. xiii–xiv). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Kachru, B. (1992). Teaching world Englishes. In B. Kachru (Ed.),  The other tongue: English across cultures  (2nd ed., pp. 355–365). 
Urbana and Chicago, IL: University of Illinois Press. 
 Klingner, J. K., Artilles, A. J., & Barletta, L. M. (2006). English language learners who struggle with reading? Language acquisi-
tion or LD?  Journal of Learning Disabilities ,  39 , 108–128. 
 Kress, G. (2003).  Literacy in the new media age . London and New York: Routledge. 
 Landerl, K. (2006). Reading acquisition in different orthographies: Evidence from direct comparisons. In R. M. Joshi & P. G. 
Aaron (Eds.),  Handbook of orthography and literacy (pp. 513–530). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2003).  New literacies: Changing knowledge and classroom practice . Buckingham: Open University 
Press. 
 Leu, D. J. (1981). Questions from a metatheoretical perspective: The interdependence of solutions to issues involved in the 
development of reading comprehension models. In M. Kamil (Ed.),  Directions in reading: Research and instruction 
(pp. 96–107). Washington, DC: The National Reading Conference. 
 Leu, D. J., & Zawilinski, L. (2007). The new literacies of online reading comprehension.  New England Reading Association 
Journal ,  43 (1), 1–7. 
 Lewis, M. Paul, Simons, Gary F., & Fennig, Charles D. (Eds.). (2015).  Ethnologue: Languages of the world  (18th ed.). Dallas, TX: 
SIL International. Online version: http://www.ethnologue.com 
 Lo Bianco, J. (2000). Multiliteracies and multilingualism. In B. Cope & M. Kalantzis (Eds.),  Multiliteracies: Literacy learning 
and the design of social features (pp. 92–105). New York: Routledge. 
 López, M., & Gunderson, L. (2006). Oaxacan parents’ perception of literacy. In V. Pang & R. Jimenez (Eds.),  Race, ethnicity and 
education: Language, literacy and schooling (pp. 95–113). Westport, CT: Praeger. 
 López-Gopar, M. (2007). Beyond the alienating alphabetic literacy: Multiliteracies in indigenous education in Mexico.  Dias-
pora, Indigenous and Minority Education ,  1 (3), 159–174. 
 Mohanty, A. K., Mishra, M. K., Reddy, N. U., & Ramesh, G. (2009). Overcoming the language barrier for tribal children: Mul-
tilingual education in Andhra Pradesh. In T. Skutnabb-Kangas, R. Phillipson, A. K. Mohanty, & M. Panda (Eds.),  Social 
justice through multilingual education (pp. 283–297). Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 National Network of Education. (2010). net/Today/Northern_India_fares_low_in_literacy_rate,_says_study_11184/ February 5. 
Retrieved March 15, 2010, from http://www.indiaedunews 
 Okedara, J. T., & Okedara, C. A. (1992). Mother-tongue literacy in Africa.  Annals of the American Academy of Political and 
Social Science ,  520 , 91–102. 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Literacy • 285
 Ostler, N. (2005).  Empires of the word: A language history of the world . New York: HarperCollins. 
 Partovi, A. (2014, May 13).  Code.org: Why coding is imperative in public education . Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=YqRXgKKtoNg 
 Peréz, S. J. (2009). The contribution of post-colonial theory in intercultural bilingual education in Peru: An indigenous teacher 
education programme. In T. Skutnabb-Kangas, R. Phillipson, A. K. Mohanty, & M. Panda (Eds.),  Social justice through 
multilingual education (pp. 201–219). Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Pew. (2002).  The digital disconnect: The widening gap between Internet savvy students and their schools . Retrieved from http://
www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2002/The-Digital-Disconnect-The-widening-gap-between-Internetsavvy-students-
and-their-schools.aspx 
 Phillipson, R. (2006). The tension between linguistic diversity and dominant English. In T. Skutnabb-Kangas, R. Phillipson, A. 
K. Mohanty, & M. Panda (Eds.),  Social justice through multilingual education  (pp. 85–102). Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
 Prah, K. K. (Ed.). (1998).  Between distinction and extinction: The harmonisation and standardization of African Languages . 
Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press. 
 Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants.  On the Horizon ,  9 (5), 1–6. 
 Rueda, R., & Windmueller, M. P. (2006). English language learners, LD, and overrepresentation: A multiple-level analysis. 
 Journal of Learning Disabilities ,  39 , 99–107. 
 Schmitt, C. (2015, April 2).  Why a mobile-technology revolution needs teachers . Retrieved from http://www.dw.com/en/life-
links-education-mobile-africa/a-18358008 
 Schnepf, S. V. (2008).  Inequality of learning amongst immigrant children in industrialised countries  (Discussion Paper No. 3337). 
Retrieved from Institute for Study of Labour Website: http://ftp.iza.org/dp3337.pdf 
 Selinger, M., Sepulveda, A., & Buchan, J. (2013).  Education and the internet of everything: How ubiquitous connectedness can 
help transform pedagog y. San Jose, CA: Cisco & Affiliates (EMEAR Education Team). 
 Sinha, S. (2000). Acquiring literacy in schools. Retrieved August 10, 2015, from http://www.india-seminar.com/2000/493/
493%20shobha%20sinha.htm 
 Staff Writer. (2015). A bolly good read: Literacy in India.  The Economist ,  415 . Retrieved August, 10, 2015, from http://www.
economist.com/news/asia/21649537-india-tries-cheap-and-cheerful-way-teaching-people-read-bolly-good-read 
 Street, B. (2003). What’s “new” in new literacy studies? Critical approaches to literacy in theory and practice.  Current Issues in 
Comparative Education ,  5 (2), 72–91. 
 UNESCO. (2004).  Literacy: A UNESCO perspective . Paris: UNESCO. 
 UNESCO. (2008).  International literacy statistics: A review of concepts, methodology, and current data . Montreal: UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics. 
 Willinsky, J. (1990).  The new literacy: Redefining reading and writing in the schools . New York: Routledge. 
 Ziegler, J. C., Perry, C., Ma-Wyatt, A., Ladner, D., & Schulte-Körne, G. (2003). Developmental dyslexia in different languages: 
Language specific or universal?  Journal of Experimental Child Psychology ,  86 , 169–193. 
 Zuckerberg, M. (2015, April 16).  Internet.org  [Facebook Post]. Retrieved from https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/
10102033678947881 

286
 What Is Meant by Digital Literacies? 
 Few would argue with the assertion that digital technology is a ‘game changer’ as far as language 
learning is concerned. This is not just because computers and the Internet have introduced all kinds 
of new opportunities for language teachers to engage their students in creative learning activities, 
but also because, now more than ever, language learners have opportunities to use whatever lan-
guage they are learning in authentic ways outside of the classroom. The most important way digital 
technology has changed language learning, however, and the main reason why researchers of lan-
guage acquisition cannot ignore it, is that it has dramatically changed the way people  use language 
in their daily lives, introducing all sorts of new ‘literacy practices’ which did not exist before (Lank-
shear & Knobel, 2006). These literacy practices involve new forms of social interaction, new kinds 
of texts, and new understandings of authorship and agency (Gee & Hayes, 2011; Thorne et al. 2009; 
Warschauer & Grimes, 2007). The study of ‘digital literacies’ is the study of the everyday, vernacular 
literacy practices people engage in using digital technology and the ways these practices affect lan-
guage learning and language use (Jones & Hafner, 2012; Lankshear & Knobel, 2008). 
 It is important at the outset to clearly distinguish the study of digital literacies from the model of 
computer assisted language learning (CALL), which has dominated applied linguistics for the past 20 
years. These two approaches to the relationship between language learning and technology involve 
very different assumptions about what technology is, what learning is, and even what language is. In 
the CALL paradigm, the primary question is: “What is the relationship between a theoretically and 
empirically based understanding of the language learning process and the design and implementa-
tion of technology-based materials?” (Garrett, 1991: 74). Computers, and the Internet in this con-
ceptualisation, are chiefly seen as delivery mechanisms for language learning ‘materials’, facilitators 
of language learning ‘activities’ or, in some cases, as ‘language teachers’ in their own right (Crook, 
1996). The computer user is positioned first and foremost as a ‘learner’, whose engagement with 
technology is examined in terms of (usually cognitive) processes of learning. And what is learned—
‘language’—is understood as a discrete and purely linguistic system of meaning making which can 
be clearly labeled as, for example, ‘English’ or ‘French’. Although computer assisted language learning 
has the potential to take learners beyond the walls of the classroom, it usually promotes the same kind 
of ‘container’ metaphor associated with other forms of classroom instruction: learning is ‘contained’ 
within particular (physical or virtual) spaces, times, and domains of activity. 
 21 
 Digital Literacies 
 Rodney H. Jones 
www.ebook3000.com

Digital Literacies • 287
 The primary question asked by scholars of digital literacies is rather different. It is: What do people 
do with language and other semiotic resources using technology, and what impact do these practices 
have on their ability to become competent members of different communities? Computers and the 
Internet are seen as constituting  environments  in which people interact, engage in various social 
practice, and form alliances of various kinds (Gee & Hayes, 2011; Lam & Kramsch, 2003; Sockett, 
2014). Rather than ‘learners’, computer users are positioned as social actors who engage in practices 
that have practical consequences for their social lives and social relationships, and rather than learn-
ing, they are seen as  participating  in social groups in ways that afford gradually fuller opportunities 
to engage in these groups (Lave & Wenger, 1991). ‘Language’ is not seen as the thing being ‘learned’. 
Rather, it is seen as one resource, among many, that social actors  use  to show themselves to be com-
petent members of their communities. And language itself, as conceived of in this model, often 
defies traditional labels like ‘English’ or ‘French’: the ‘language’ people use in digital literacy practices 
usually involves unstable hybrids or ‘remixes’ of codes, modes, and ‘voices’ deployed in inventive and 
strategic ways (Jones, 2013; Knobel & Lankshear, 2008; New London Group, 1996). 
 Finally, work in digital literacies tends to look outside of the classroom walls and the contexts of 
formal instruction, trying to understand how people use language in their everyday lives. Rather than 
the ‘container’ metaphor that dominates most classroom instruction, work in digital literacies is often 
associated with metaphors of connectivity (Black, 2005; Leander, 2008), mobility (Leander et al., 2010), 
and transversals (Lemke, 1998). That is not to say that ‘language learning’ (as traditionally conceived) 
or ‘language classrooms’ (as places of learning) are of little interest to scholars of digital literacies. On 
the contrary, a primary preoccupation of such scholars is how language learning occurs in the con-
text of situated social practice and the role it plays in social identity and membership in communities. 
And rather than ignoring classrooms, they are seen as key sites into which social actors import their 
everyday literacy practices, sometimes in ways commensurate with traditional classroom practices, 
and sometimes in ways that conflict with or contest them (Jones, 2010). 
 Orienting Digital Literacies Research 
 Research in digital literacies is based chiefly on work in a number of different theoretical perspec-
tives, including ‘new literacies studies’ (Gee, 2011; Lankshear & Knobel, 2006; New London Group, 
1996; Street, 1984), sociocultural approaches to language learning (Lantolf, 2000; Lantolf & Thorne, 
2006), ecological approaches to language learning (Kramsch, 2003; van Lier, 2004), and mediated 
discourse analysis (Jones & Hafner, 2012; Norris & Jones, 2005; Scollon, 2001). Taken together, these 
perspectives orient researchers of language learning and technology to focus on five interrelated 
dimensions of literacy and learning:  practice ,  mediation ,  interaction ,  identity , and  agency . 
 Practice 
 The foundational idea of digital literacies studies is that language learning is not a matter of mastering 
an abstract code or set of decontextualised skills, but of becoming competent in particular social prac-
tices (such as Facebooking, Instagraming, memeing, tweeting, and gaming of various kinds). It goes 
beyond the insistence of adherents of communicative language teaching (Brown, 1987; Canale, 1983) 
that language is learned more effectively when learned within the context of social practices to insist 
that language cannot be separated from the social practice in which it is used. As van Lier (2004: 20) 
puts it, “if you take the context away, there is no language to be studied . . . it’s context all the way down.” 
 Digital literacies studies, therefore, take as the object of its study not ‘language learning’, but  lit-
eracies , defined as participation in concrete social practices in ways that allow social actors to show 
themselves to be competent members of communities. Participating in a social practice always 

288 • Rodney H. Jones
involves more than just making meaning: it also involves  doing  things,  relating  to others,  being  a cer-
tain kind of person, and developing certain ways of  thinking ,  acting , and  believing  (Gee, 2011; Jones 
& Hafner, 2012). 
 Mediation 
 The dimension of mediation orients us to the fact that all social practices are mediated through 
‘technologies’ (Lantolf, 2000; Vygotsky, 1981; Wertsch, 1991). What is meant here by ‘technologies’ 
includes not just things like computers, digital networks, and software programmes but any cultural 
tool that mediates between actors and the social worlds they inhabit. Practices like reading a book, 
listening to a lecture, or having a cup of coffee in Starbucks (Scollon, 2001) are all ‘technologically 
mediated’. The important thing about technologies is that they allow us to do certain things that we 
would not be able to do without them, and they prevent us from doing other things. In other words, 
all technologies involve  affordances  and  constraints  on the social practices we can engage in with 
them (Gibson, 1986; Norris & Jones, 2005). 
 Vygotsky (1981, see also Jones, 2016) distinguishes between material technologies such as screw-
drivers, hammers, and computers, and ‘psychological’ (or, as I call them,  semiotic ) technologies, 
which include “languages, various systems for counting; mnemonic techniques; algebraic symbol 
systems; works of art; writing; schemes, diagrams, maps, and mechanical drawings (and) all sorts 
of conventional signs” (Vygotsky, 1981: 137). In other words, from the perspective of a focus on 
mediation, ‘language’ is seen not as an end in itself (something to be learned), but as a ‘mediational 
means’ (Scollon, 2001), a ‘technology’ which social actors deploy, along with other ‘technologies’ like 
computers and mobile phones, in order to participate in concrete social practices. What is interest-
ing about social practices involving digital technologies is the way the affordances and constraints 
of different tools  interact , the way digital technologies affect the ways we can use language, and the 
way language (and other semiotic tools) affect the way we can use digital technologies. One obvi-
ous example of this, of course, is the way digital technologies allow users to creatively mix together 
different modes and different codes, and how, because of this, knowing how and when to combine 
languages and modes or to shift from one language or mode to another is much more important in 
digitally mediated communication than in many other contexts (such as traditional, school-based 
literacy practices) (Benson, 2013; Kress, 2003). 
 Interaction 
 Social practices (and the ‘technologies’ which mediate them) can only be mastered through  interaction 
with others in social groups. The way scholars of digital literacies understand interaction, however, 
is different from the way it is understood in interactional approaches to language acquisition (Long, 
1996), or even interactional perspectives on discourse analysis such as conversation analysis (Sacks et 
al., 1974) or interactional sociolinguistics (Gumperz, 1982), where the focus is on the cognitive (second 
language acquisition [SLA]) or communicative (discourse analysis) dimensions of (usually) dyadic 
interaction. For scholars of digital literacies, interactions always take place in the context of social 
groups (or ‘communities’). All social interactions, in fact, depend on participants’ ability to claim mem-
bership in some social group or another. Moreover, it is through interactions that we  become members 
of different social groups, and that social groups come into being. Lave and Wenger (1991) refer to such 
groups as ‘communities of practice’ and describe how, through doing things together, novice members 
of such communities learn from expert members. Literacy scholars, however, have also suggested other 
frameworks for understanding learning in groups, including ‘affinity spaces’ (Gee, 2004), ‘learning net-
works’ (Cummins et al., 2006), and ‘nexus of practice’ (Scollon, 2001). 
www.ebook3000.com

Digital Literacies • 289
 The questions for scholars of digital literacies around the dimension of interaction then include 
not just questions about the different forms of social interaction that digital technologies facilitate 
(such as the ‘one to many’ form of communication made possible by blogs, or the ‘networked’ forms 
of communication made possible by social network sites) but also what sorts of social groupings 
are made possible. Because of the ways digital technologies disrupt boundaries of time and space, 
they also disrupt social boundaries, making possible all sorts of new social affiliations and ways of 
organising social relationships (boyd, 2007). From the perspective of digital literacies studies, this 
is a crucial point, since social practices are seen as both contingent upon and constitutive of social 
relationships and social identities. 
 One important aspect of social interactions and social groupings that arise in online environ-
ments that is directly related to language learning is that they are often  translocal , involving par-
ticipants from a variety of cultures and language backgrounds often communicating using a  lingua 
franca  language (Leppänen et al., 2009). Such forms of globalised social engagement not only provide 
learners with more realistic contexts in which to use their L2 but also create the conditions in which 
participants can experiment with sharing and combining a range of different linguistic and cultural 
resources. 
 Identity 
 Over the past two decades, there has been considerable attention on the role of identity in language 
learning (see, for example, Norton, 2000). For digital literacies scholars, the notion of identity is insep-
arable from the notion of interaction in social groups discussed in the previous section. Literacy prac-
tices are always a matter of showing oneself to be a particular kind of person (Gee, 2011), and being 
a particular kind of person necessarily involves claiming membership in one or more social groups. 
 Digital technologies, however, have made the whole business of claiming social identities much 
more complicated. One reason for this is that, to a certain extent, the kinds of identities we are able 
to enact in online environments are less constrained by our physical and social circumstances. In 
some contexts, such as online gaming, participants are free to experiment with all sorts of different 
kinds of identities. At the same time, some online environments, like Facebook, demand that users 
make explicit connections between their online identities and their offline selves. In both cases, the 
relationship between identity and communicative competence is made particularly salient. 
 The questions around identity that scholars of digital literacies focus on have to do not just with 
the relationship between identity and learning, but also with how different technologies and the 
social situations they facilitate create opportunities for learners to  design  identities that facilitate 
language learning (Lam, 2000). Among the important things about digital practices is that, in the 
context of such practices, participants rarely orient towards identities as ‘language learners’. Although 
language learning is often taking place, they are more likely to orient towards identities or roles asso-
ciated with the particular social practice they are engaging in. The good thing about this is that many 
of these roles and identities allow learners to assume positions of ‘expertise’, which are often denied 
to them in formal language learning situations (Black, 2005; Jones, 2008). 
 Agency 
 Perhaps the most important question that lies beneath all of this attention to social practices, tech-
nological mediation, interaction, community, and identity is the question of  agency , to what degree 
and in what ways do digital technologies increase people’s ability to ‘act’ in the world with purpose, 
freedom, and autonomy. It is axiomatic that agency is a necessary condition for the development 
of the kinds of habits of lifelong learning necessary for mastering a language. Agency, however, is 

290 • Rodney H. Jones
a complex issue, involving a range of social and cognitive processes including control, motivation, 
feelings of self-efficacy, investment, social power and status, ‘speaking rights’, and access to different 
kinds of resources (McKay & Wong, 1996; Norton, 1995). Digital technologies potentially impact all 
of these different aspects of agency: (a) they provide tools with which people can control the kinds 
of interactions they wish to have with whom and when; (b) they provide opportunities for them to 
engage in practices which they find personally motivating and to enact social identities in which they 
wish to ‘invest’ (Norton, 1995); and (c) they provide chances for them to assume positions of power 
and expertise of the kind not normally available to them in offline contexts. At the same time, how-
ever, it is important to acknowledge the multiple ways digital technologies can impose  constraints 
on agency: (a) online social practices, communities, and affinity spaces can be just as hierarchal 
and rigid as offline practices, communities, and spaces; (b) technology can just as easily be used to 
reinforce dominant discourses and relationships of power as it can be used to challenge them; and 
(c) many people still have very limited access not just to digital technologies but also to the economic 
and political conditions in which debates about language learning and agency are even relevant. 
 A key aspect of agency in many discussions of language learning and technology is what has been 
referred to as ‘autonomy’, a term made popular during the flurry of interest in ‘self-access language 
learning’ of the 1990s (Little, 1990). According to Benson (2013), digital technologies have changed 
language learning researchers’ understanding of autonomy in two ways: first, they have dramatically 
increased learners’ ability to access important resources (texts, people, media) outside of institutional 
settings; and second, they have shifted the ‘locus of control’ from self-access centres and program-
matic materials to learners, who are more likely to initiate opportunities for learning themselves 
based on social goals that have nothing to do with teachers or schools. 
 The most important contribution a digital literacies approach has to make to the discussion of 
agency in language learning is its view of agency not as an individual capacity of learners, but as 
something that is  distributed  among individuals, meditational means, social groups, and the various 
contingencies governing the social practices that they engage in together (Emirbayer & Mische, 1998; 
S. Scollon, 2005). The advantage of such a view is that it shifts our attention away from individualistic 
notions of ‘autonomy’ and ‘motivation’ to a more holistic perspective on how individuals, environ-
ments, communities, and practices combine to create conditions in which learning can take place. 
 Digital Practices and Language Learning 
 As outlined in the previous section, digital literacies studies typically begin by considering literacies 
as social practices and proceed by examining the different technologies or ‘mediational means’ that 
are used to engage in these practices, including the affordances and constraints these technologies 
introduce, the kinds of social interactions these practices involve, and the kinds of social forma-
tions (‘communities’, ‘social networks’, ’affinity groups’) that they make possible. In this section I will 
review a number of practice-based studies in digital literacies to illustrate how this framework has 
been applied by researchers. 
 Social Networking 
 Social networking is the practice of sharing news, photos, updates, and other semiotic artefacts with 
one’s ‘friends’ or ‘followers’ over sites like Facebook and Twitter. Such sites allow users to make their 
networks publicly visible, to manage them in various ways, and to project different kinds of identities 
to different audiences. Although social networks themselves are hardly new, social networking viewed 
as a social practice in its own right separate from other social goals is. The purpose of participating in 
online social networks is, more often than not, to maintain (or grow) one’s network and to increase 
www.ebook3000.com

Digital Literacies • 291
one’s status in it rather than to accomplish some instrumental task. Social networking often takes on a 
game-like quality, with users strategising to build alliances and to gain attention from other users (in 
the form of ‘likes’). What is useful about social networking when it comes to language learning is that 
it encourages participants to focus on aspects of identity construction and social affiliation that, as I 
argued previously, are so central to learning. The practice of social networking is essentially the prac-
tice of ‘writing oneself into being’ (Mills, 2011). While some decry what they see as the shallow and 
narcissistic communication that takes place over online social networks, successful social networking 
involves a range of sophisticated literacy skills, including being able to direct the right kinds of mes-
sages to the right kinds of audiences, combine different modes and media into concise and effective 
messages, create and interpret implicature, and assume ‘subject positions’ in relation to other users 
through one’s choice and deployment of different symbolic resources (Kramsch, 2009). At the same 
time, the primarily ‘phatic’ nature of social networking (Jones & Hafner, 2012) is also what makes it so 
difficult to integrate into language classrooms, where well-meaning teachers often attempt to impose 
instrumental goals into these relatively free-flowing, spontaneous, and affinity-driven environments. 
 Early research on the impact of online social networking on language learning took place before 
social networking sites like Facebook were even invented. Perhaps the most famous among these 
studies is Lam’s (2000) case study of how a Chinese immigrant student in the United States used 
discussion boards, fan communities, and the instant messaging programme ICQ to build multi-
lingual networks of friends and gain confidence as a user of English. Lam’s study is important not 
just because it represents one of the pioneering works in digital literacies studies, but also because it 
identifies many of the unique aspects of learning in online social networks that have been taken up 
in later studies, including “how learners’ identities are created through . . . ritual(s) of role play and 
dramatic acts” and how participants “use . . . textual and other semiotic tools to create communal 
affiliations and construct social roles and narrative representations of self” (477). 
 More recent work on social networking and language learning ‘in the wild’ includes Pasfield-
Neofitou’s (2011) study of the way Japanese learners in Australia and English learners in Japan con-
struct different identities for themselves on different kinds of social network sites (namely, Facebook 
and a Japanese site called Mixi). Pasfield-Neofitou recruited participants who already had Japanese 
or Australian friends in their online social networks and observed how they managed their social 
relationships around topics like gaming and fashion through their choice of different languages. 
This study demonstrates how, though social networking, learners encounter natural opportunities 
to experiment with different linguistic resources and to reflect on the kinds of identities available 
to them as users of a foreign language. Another notable study is Chen’s 2013 two-year longitudinal 
study of two Chinese users of Facebook. What is interesting about Chen’s study is not just how the 
learners she observed changed their literacy practices over time, learning to better exploit the mul-
timodal affordances of Facebook, but also how they were able to develop and negotiate multiple 
identities with diverse audiences across their social networks. 
 Finally, there is Schreiber’s 2015 study of the multilingual identity and ‘translanguaging’ (Canaga-
rajah, 2013) practices of a Serbian university student and hip-hop artist. A key focus of Schreiber’s 
study is how social networking often involves acts of linking to or ‘curating’ (Snyder, 2015) content 
from other sites. In the case of Aleksandar, the subject of this study, this primarily involves posting 
music videos and ‘captioning’ them in various ways, a practice Schreiber argues enables Aleksandar 
to position himself as a member of a global hip-hop community. This observation points to two 
important aspects of digital literacies that are relevant to scholars interested in language learning. 
The first is the fact that, in many online environments (and in many offline environments as well), 
a key communication skill is the ability to appropriate texts and other semiotic objects from other 
sources and recontextualise (Bauman & Briggs, 1990) them into new situations, often ‘re-mixing’ 
them with other texts and semiotic objects (Hafner et al., 2015; Knobel & Lankshear, 2008), a skill 

292 • Rodney H. Jones
that is often ignored (and sometimes even discouraged) in many traditional learning contexts. The 
second is the fact that language learners, especially in global multilingual environments, do not nec-
essarily see themselves as having different identities tied to different languages, but instead often 
engage in practices of translanguaging to enact membership in communities that do not obey tradi-
tional national and linguistic boundaries. As Schneider points out, such practices present new peda-
gogical challenges to teachers who are accustomed to seeing languages as discrete, bounded entities. 
 Prosuming 
 Another widespread practice that has come under the scrutiny of scholars of digital literacies studies 
is that of  prosuming , the practice of ordinary Internet users creating and broadcasting different kinds 
of digital content, such as YouTube videos (Lange, 2014), ‘machinima’ and ‘fanvids’ (Marsh, 2015), 
‘memes’ (Knobel & Lankshear, 2005), and ‘fanfiction’ (Black, 2005, 2008, 2009). The term was coined 
by the futurist Alvin Toffler, who, in his 1980 book  The Third Wave , presciently imagined a time 
when the power to produce and customise products, including cultural products, would devolve to 
consumers. The explosion of user-created content online in the past decade is the result of two major 
technological advances: the development of easy-to-use software programs that allow amateurs to 
do things—such as edit video and ‘photoshop’ images—which before required specialist knowledge 
and expensive equipment, and the development of what is known as Web 2.0 or the ‘read-write web’, 
a series of web-based platforms which allow users to easily upload content to servers, to edit it, and to 
comment on or redistribute other users’ content. This latter development has dramatically destabi-
lised the traditional relationship between readers and writers, giving readers the chance to ‘talk back’ 
to the texts they read and to become ‘authors’ themselves. The advantages of these new technical 
affordances for language learners include the boosts in motivation learners can get from having an 
audience for their words, the chance to showcase their creativity, and the ability to get almost imme-
diate feedback on their work from a range of different kinds of people. 
 Perhaps the most well-known body of work on the benefits of prosumption for language learners 
is Black’s work on ‘fanfiction’ written by adolescent language learners. Fanfiction is a genre in which 
authors write their own stories featuring characters from popular television shows or movies. These 
stories are posted online on sites like  fanfiction.net , where they are read, rated, commented upon, and 
critiqued by readers who, more often than not, are also writers of fanfiction themselves. Like social 
networking sites, fanfiction sites also include areas where writers can create profiles of themselves as 
well as display their relationships with other writers. Black (2005) sees the benefits of this practice 
for language learning in terms of  access  and  affiliation . First, she argues, it gives users access to a 
range of opportunities to produce and consume language in the context of a genre in which they are 
heavily invested, as well as ample opportunities to engage in  metalanguage  (talk  about  language in 
which they reflect upon matters of structure, organisation, grammar, style, and vocabulary), which is 
purposeful and motivated by a genuine desire to improve their texts rather than the abstract goal of 
‘language learning’. Second, it provides users the opportunity to be part of a community of writers in 
which their writing and talk about writing serves the purpose of forging relationships and enacting 
different kinds of identities. These two dimensions of access and affiliation interact with and support 
each other as writers refer to one another’s stories in their work and use the peer-review process not 
just to comment upon the quality of each other’s work but also to maintain and strengthen com-
munity relationships. Fanfiction is also the focus of the work of Leppänen (2007), who has explored 
the online authoring practices of Finnish young people. Like Schreiber’s work described previously, 
Leppänen focuses not just on how authors use this practice to improve their English, but also on how 
they strategically alternate between English and Finnish in their texts in order to adapt US cultural 
products to their local contexts and construct translocal identities for themselves. 
www.ebook3000.com

Digital Literacies • 293
 Other scholars have explored other forms of  prosuming . Lange (2014), for example, focuses on 
how young people engage in practices of ‘peer teaching’ through the production of YouTube videos 
on such topics as fashion, makeup, and computer skills. Although it does not deal explicitly with 
language learning, Lange’s work dramatically demonstrates how the development of literacy skills 
among young people can be enhanced when they are given opportunities to assume ‘identities of 
expertise’, identities that are not always available to them in traditional learning situations. 
 Gaming 
 One of the most cognitively and socially complex online literacy practices language learners can 
engage in is playing massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs), in which they assume the char-
acters of avatars and collaborate with others in increasingly challenging, goal-oriented tasks in vir-
tual worlds. Such games require players to use language to master the intricacies of game play and to 
communicate with other players in multimodal and multilingual environments. In addition, players 
also regularly engage in other literacy practices associated with the games they play, including par-
ticipating in online discussion forums and posting videos in which they describe and comment upon 
their own and others’ performance in the game. 
 Online gaming has been a preoccupation of a number of scholars of digital literacies, the most 
prominent being James Paul Gee, who, in his 2003 book  What Video Games Have to Teach Us About 
Learning and Literacy , argues that good video games are designed in ways that naturally create the 
conditions for learning and literacy development. Among other things, games involve situated, expe-
riential learning in which what players do, say, or write has immediate and concrete consequences 
on their ability to get things done; players learn through exerting agency and taking an active role 
in co-creating the conditions of the game world with other players and with the game designers. 
Moreover, learning in video games tends to be staged, with tasks becoming increasingly difficult and 
information being provided ‘just in time’ when it is needed to solve problems. 
 Researchers who have explored the potential for video games to specifically aid second or for-
eign language learning include Steinkuehler (2004, 2006), who observes how games not only require 
players to master complex sets of communicative practices, but also how they become participants 
in ‘Discourses’ (Gee, 2011), ways of talking, acting, relating, and being that extend into online and 
offline spaces beyond the game, and Thorne (2008), who provides a case study of a multilingual 
interaction in the game World of Warcraft that occurred between a speaker of English living in 
the United States and a speaker of Russian living in Ukraine, noting how the game environment 
provides natural opportunities for peers to share linguistic and cultural knowledge. Of particular 
interest is the work of Chik (2011, 2014), who examines how second language learners intention-
ally  create  opportunities for language learning in the context of online games. In her participatory 
study of bilingual online gamers in Hong Kong, for example, she observes how players sometimes 
choose particular games and align themselves with particular kinds of players in order to maximise 
the possibilities for language learning, and, in her analysis of game-themed discussion boards and 
forums, she observes conversations in which participants engage in peer teaching, helping other play-
ers understand foreign language vocabulary items in the games they are playing. 
 Re-orienting Digital Literacies Research 
 While much has been learned from documenting and analysing the online vernacular literacy prac-
tices of language learners though the digital literacies framework outlined in the previous section, 
recent advances in technology compel us to re-examine this framework and to re-orient it to accom-
modate a new set of issues associated with new technologies and the kinds of social practices, social 

294 • Rodney H. Jones
relationships, and social identities associated with them. Among the most important issues scholars 
of digital literacies must contend with in future research are convergence, mobility, digicality, and 
surveillance. 
 Convergence 
 One limitation of the practice-based orientation described in the previous section is that it encour-
ages researchers to see practices as discrete and relatively bounded, with insufficient attention to or 
appreciation of how these practices often overlap and intersect. One of the most conspicuous phe-
nomena of the digital age, however, is the increased convergence (Jenkins, 2006) of different tech-
nologies: mobile phones are also cameras and web browsers, gaming platforms, and geo-positioning 
devices, and social networking sites are increasingly incorporating functions like instant messaging 
and gaming. Increased convergence naturally leads to increased ‘multitasking’ and increased inter-
actions between different kinds of social practices and different kinds of social actors. With only a 
few exceptions (see, for example, Jones, 2009, 2010), digital literacies scholars have paid little atten-
tion to how different literacy practices intersect, how participants distribute their social and cogni-
tive resources across these multiple practices, and the kinds of relationships this intersection creates 
among different social groups and different social identities. Rather than thinking in terms of social 
practices, then, future research in digital literacies should focus on how learning and literacy events 
take place at the ‘nexus’ of overlapping and interacting social practices (Scollon, 2001) and on map-
ping the different mediational means, social identities, and social relationships that cycle though 
these moments. 
 Mobility 
 Another important feature of contemporary digital literacy practices is that they are less and less tied 
to particular physical spaces; all of the practices described previously, for example, are nowadays as 
likely to take place in shopping malls, on public transport, or (often surreptitiously) in classrooms as 
they are in learners’ homes. Ling and Campbell (2011: 1) have argued that “the proliferation of wire-
less and mobile communication technologies” has given rise not just to changes in how people com-
municate and interact, but also to “important changes in how people experience space and time.” 
Although there has been a recent raft of work on the use of mobile phones in language learning 
(see, for example, Pegrum, 2014), there has so far been insufficient attention in the field of digital 
literacies to the issue of  mobility  itself, the way literacy practices ‘travel’, coming into contact with dif-
ferent physical spaces. What mobile technologies engender is a situation in which different learning 
environments (home, school, shopping mall) are seen not as bounded ‘containers’ but as nodes in 
complex trajectories or ‘geographies’ of learning that individuals transverse over the course of their 
everyday lives (Jones et al., 2001; Leander et al., 2010). This situation demands that digital literacies 
scholars develop methods that help us to understand how people use technologies to connect up dif-
ferent environments, different times, and different communities of practice. Of particular relevance 
is the way vernacular literacy practices travel into the spaces of institutional schooling and how 
school-based practices travel into more vernacular spaces. 
 Digicality 
 Related to the prior two issues is the fact that the physical world and the virtual world are interacting 
with each other in increasingly intimate ways, a phenomenon known as ‘digicality’ (Rigby, 2014). 
Most mobile devices, for example, include context-aware capabilities that allow them to collect 
www.ebook3000.com

Digital Literacies • 295
information about users’ immediate environments (including their physical location and nearby 
people and objects) and to offer content and communication opportunities tailored to those envi-
ronments. These new capabilities provide unprecedented opportunities for language learners to seek 
out and take advantage of learning opportunities, including locating conversational partners in pub-
lic spaces like restaurants, shopping centres, and museums. Moreover, the ‘internet of things’, which 
has the capacity to allow people to search and annotate their physical environments in the same 
way they are able to search and annotate the web, promises to allow language learners to experience 
the world as a “pervasive learning environment” (Laine et al., 2009). The possibilities and practices 
associated with these new technologies are only beginning to be imagined, but they will undoubtedly 
constitute a major focus of research in digital literacies in the future. 
 Surveillance 
 One thing that is absent from much work on digital literacies is acknowledgment of the fact that 
perhaps the most important impact of digital technologies on our everyday lives is the way they 
have opened people up to almost constant surveillance by private companies and advertisers, gov-
ernments and law enforcement agencies, and friends and family members (Jones, 2015). When-
ever people engage in any of the practices discussed previously, whether they are communicating 
over social networks, reading and writing fanfiction, or playing World of Warcraft, their words and 
actions are being recorded and used to make decisions about the kinds of online texts (including 
advertisements) that they will be exposed to in the future. Although this might not seem to be a 
central issue when it comes to language learning and literacies, the ways in which people manage 
their privacy online, the way they negotiate what information they make available to other people 
and can access from them, and the way they regulate how things that they post online are shared 
and recontextualised all involve sophisticated language and communication skills. Nowadays, users 
of digital technology must understand not just how to avoid unwanted surveillance but also how 
to compete in an “attention economy” (Lanham, 2007), which demands that they make themselves 
objects of surveillance in appropriate and creative ways. The surveillant capabilities of the Internet 
and digital technologies also give teachers opportunities to monitor the out-of-class digital literacy 
practices of their students, and learners the opportunity to monitor themselves and their peers, and 
scholars of digital literacies can contribute to understanding how these capabilities can be harnessed 
to help learners more effectively keep track of and plan their learning. Finally, attention to online 
surveillance and privacy can sensitise scholars of digital literacies to issues of power, hegemony, and 
the increasing colonisation of digital spaces by commercial interests which so far have been con-
spicuously absent from research on digital literacies. 
 Conclusion 
 One of the most important questions scholars of digital literacies can help to answer is: how can 
knowing more about the vernacular uses of digital technologies help teachers design more effective 
in-class learning activities for their students? Much of the recent work in the CALL paradigm, in fact, 
has explored, with varying degrees of success, the ways in which the kinds of practices described in 
this chapter can be imported into the classroom (see, for example, Blattner & Fiori, 2011; Mills, 2011; 
Reinders, 2012). What the socio-cultural approach of digital literacies reminds us of, however, is that, 
effective as this may sometimes be, such practices taken out of their natural contexts are no longer 
the same practices; the kinds of identities learners can enact, the kinds of agency they can exert, the 
kinds of communities they can align themselves to, and the kinds of social goals that motivate them 
are totally different. Students using Facebook for a class activity are not social networking; and those 

296 • Rodney H. Jones
playing games in class are not ‘gaming’, at least not in the same way they are outside of the class-
room. Rather than trying to replicate real-world digital literacies in the classroom, a digital literacies 
approach attempts to understand how teachers can build upon out-of-class learning rather than 
duplicate it. It acknowledges that learning is “not composed of isolated or strictly isolatable moments 
and spaces” (Thorne, 2008: 306), and seeks to understand how technology can help learners create 
pathways between different moments, different spaces, different identities, and different literacies. 
 References 
 Bauman, R., & Briggs, C. L. (1990). Poetics and performance as critical perspectives on language and social life.  Annual Review 
of Anthropology , 19, 59–88. 
 Benson, P. (2013). Learner autonomy.  TESOL Quarterly , 47(4), 839–843. 
 Black, R. W. (2005). Access and affiliation: The literacy and composition practices of English-language learners in an online 
fanfiction community.  Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy , 49(2), 118–128. 
 Black, R. W. (2008).  Adolescents and online fan fiction . New York: Peter Lang. 
 Black, R. W. (2009). Online fan fiction, global identities, and imagination.  Research in the Teaching of English , 43(4), 397–425. 
 Blattner, G., & Fiori, M. (2011). Virtual social network communities: An investigation of language learners’ development of 
socio-pragmatic awareness and multiliteracy skills.  CALICO Journal , 29(1), 24–43. 
 boyd, D. (2007). Why youth (heart) social network sites: The role of networked publics in teenage social life. In D. Buckingham 
(ed.),  Youth, identity, and digital media  (pp. 119–142). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Brown, H.D. (1987).  Principles of language learning and teaching . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
 Canagarajah, A. S. (2013).  Translingual practice: Global English and cosmopolitan relations . New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Canale, M. (1983). From communicative competence to communicative language pedagogy. In J. C. Richards & R. W. Schmidt 
(eds.),  Language and communication  (pp. 2–27). London: Longman. 
Chen, H. I. (2013). Identity practices of multilingual writers in social networking spaces. Language Learning & Technology, 
17(2), 143–170. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/chen.pdf
 Chik, A. (2011). Learner autonomy development through digital gameplay.  Journal of Digital Culture and Education , 3(1), 30–45. 
 Chik, A. (2014). Digital gaming and language learning: Autonomy and community.  Language Learning & Technology , 18(2), 
85–100. 
 Crook, C. (1996).  Computers and the collaborative experience of learning . New York: Psychology Press. 
 Cummins, J., Brown, K., & Sayers, D. (2006).  Literacy, technology, and diversity: Teaching for success in changing times . Boston: Pearson. 
 Emirbayer, M., & Mische, A. (1998). What is agency?  American Journal of Sociology , 103(4), 962–1023. 
 Garrett, N. (1991). Technology in the service of language learning: Trends and issues.  Modern Language Journal , 75, 74–101. 
 Gee, J. P. (2003).  What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Gee, J. P. (2004).  Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling . London: Routledge. 
 Gee, J. P. (2011).  Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses  (4th ed.). London: Routledge. 
 Gee, J. P., & Hayes, E. R. (2011).  Language and learning in the digital age . Abingdon: Taylor & Francis. 
 Gibson, J. J. (1986).  The ecological approach to visual perception . Boston: Psychology Press. 
 Gumperz, J. J. (1982).  Discourse strategies . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Hafner, C., Chik, A., & Jones, R. H. (2015). Digital literacies and language learning.  Language Learning & Technology , 19(3), 1–7. 
 Jenkins, H. (2006).  Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide . New York: NYU Press. 
 Jones, R. H. (2008). Technology, democracy and participation in space. In V. Koller & R. Wodak (eds.),  Handbook of applied 
linguistics vol .  4, language and communication in the public sphere (pp. 429–446). New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
 Jones, R. H. (2009). Inter-activity: How new media can help us understand old media. In C. Rowe & E. Wyss (eds.),  New media 
and linguistic change  (pp. 11–29). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press. 
 Jones, R. H. (2010). Cyberspace and physical space: Attention structures in computer mediated communication. In A. Jaworski 
& C. Thurlow (eds.),  Semiotic landscapes: Text, space and globalisation (pp. 151–167). London: Continuum. 
 Jones, R. H. (2013). Research methods in TESOL and digital literacies.  TESOL Quarterly , 47(4), 843–848. 
 Jones, R. H. (2015). Surveillance. In A. Georgakopoulou & T. Spilloti (eds.),  The Routledge handbook of language and digital 
communication  (pp. 408–411). London: Routledge. 
 Jones, R. H. (2016).  Spoken discourse . London: Bloomsbury. 
 Jones, R. H., & Hafner, C. A. (2012).  Understanding digital literacies: A practical introduction . London: Routledge. 
 Jones, R. H., Lou, J., Yeung, L., Leung, V., Lai, I., Man, C., & Woo, B. (2001). Beyond the screen: A participatory study of com-
puter mediated communication among Hong Kong youth. A paper presented at the annual meeting of the American 
Anthropological Association, Washington, DC. 
www.ebook3000.com

Digital Literacies • 297
 Knobel, M., & Lankshear, C. (2005). Memes and affinities: Cultural replication and literacy education. A paper presented to 
the annual NRC, Miami, November 30, 2005. 
 Knobel, M., & Lankshear, C. (2008). Remix: The art and craft of endless hybridization.  Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy , 
52(1), 22–33. 
 Kramsch, C. (Ed.). (2003).  Language acquisition and language socialization: Ecological perspectives . London; New York: 
Continuum. 
 Kramsch, C. (2009).  The multilingual subject: What language learners say about their experience and why it matters . Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Kress, G. (2003).  Literacy in the new media age . London; New York: Routledge. 
 Laine, T. H., Islas Sedano, C., Vinni, M., & Joy, M. (2009). Characteristics of pervasive learning environments in museum 
contexts. In D. Metcalf, A. Hamilton & C. Graffeo (eds.),  Proceedings of 8th world conference on mobile and contextual 
learning (pp. 26–34). Orlando: University of Central Florida. 
 Lam, W. S. E. (2000). L2 literacy and the design of the self: A case study of a teenager writing on the Internet.  TESOL Quarterly , 
34, 457–482. 
 Lam, E. W. S., & Kramsch, C. (2003). The ecology of an SLA community in computer mediated environments. In J. Leather & 
J. van Dam (eds.),  Ecology of language acquisition (pp. 141–159). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer. 
 Lange, P. (2014).  Kids on YouTube: Technical identities and digital literacies . Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press. 
 Lanham, R. A. (2007).  The economics of attention: Style and substance in the age of information . Chicago: University Of Chicago 
Press. 
 Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2006).  New literacies: Everyday practices and classroom learning  (2nd ed.). Milton Keyes: Open 
University Press. 
 Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2008).  Digital literacies: Concepts, policies and practices . New York: Peter Lang. 
 Lantolf, J. P. (Ed.). (2000).  Sociocultural theory and second language learning . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006).  Sociocultural theory and the genesis of L2 development . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991).  Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Leander, K. M. (2008). Toward a connective ethnography of online/offline literacy networks. In D. Leu, J. Cairo, M. Knobel & 
C. Lankshear (eds.),  Handbook of research on new literacies (pp. 33–65). New York: Erlbaum. 
 Leander, K. M., Phillips, N. C., & Taylor, K. H. (2010). The changing social spaces of learning: Mapping new mobilities.  Review 
of Research in Education , 34(1), 329–394. 
 Lemke, J. L. (1998). Metamedia literacy: Transforming meanings and media. In D. Reinking, M. C. McKenna, L. D. Labbo 
& R. D. Kieffer (eds.),  Handbook of literacy and technology : transformations in a post-typographic world  (pp. 312–333). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Leppänen, S. (2007) Playing with and policing language use and textuality in fan fiction. I. Hotz-Davies, A. Kirchhofer, & 
S. Leppänen (eds.),  Internet Fictions  (pp. 62–83). Newcastle Upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
 Leppänen, S., Pitkänen-Huhta, A., Piirainen-Marsh, A., Nikula, T., & Peuronen, S. (2009). Young people’s translocal new media 
uses: A multiperspective analysis of language choice and heteroglossia.  Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication , 
14(4), 1080–1107. 
 Ling, R., & Campbell, S. W. (2011).  The reconstruction of space and time: Mobile communication practices . New Brunswick, NJ: 
Transaction Publishers. 
 Little, D. (1990). Autonomy in language learning. In I. Gathercole (ed.),  Autonomy in language learning  (pp. 7–15). London: 
CILT. 
 Long, M. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie & T. Bhatia (eds.), 
 Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413–468). San Diego: Academic Press. 
 Marsh, J. (2015). The discourses of celebrity in the fanvid ecology of Club Penguin machinima. In R. H. Jones, A. Chik & C. 
Hafner (eds.),  Discourse and digital practices: Doing discourse analysis in the digital age  (pp. 193–208). London: Routledge. 
 McKay, S. L., & Wong, S.-L. C. (1996). Multiple discourses, multiple identities: Investment and agency in second-language 
learning among Chinese adolescent immigrant students.  Harvard Educational Review , 66(3), 577–608. 
 Mills, N. (2011). Situated learning through social networking communities: The development of joint enterprise, mutual 
engagement, and a shared repertoire.  CALICO Journal , 28(2), 326–344. 
 The New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures.  Harvard Educational Review , 66(1), 
60–93. 
 Norris, S., & Jones, R. H. (2005).  Discourse in action: Introducing mediated discourse analysis . London: Routledge. 
 Norton, B. (1995). Social identity, investment, and language learning.  TESOL Quarterly , 29 (1), 9–31. 
 Norton, B. (2000).  Identity and language learning: Gender, ethnicity and educational change . London: Longman. 
 Pasfield-Neofitou, S. (2011). Online domains of language use: Second language learners’ experiences of virtual community 
and foreignness.  Language Learning & Technology , 15(2), 92–108. 
 Pegrum, M. (2014).  Mobile learning: Languages, literacies and cultures . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 

298 • Rodney H. Jones
 Reinders, H. (2012).  Digital games in language learning and teaching . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Rigby, D. (2014). Digital-physical mashups.  Harvard Business Review , September, 1–10. 
 Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking for conversation. 
 Language , 50(4), 696–735. 
 Scollon, R. (2001).  Mediated discourse: The nexus of practice . London: Routledge. 
 Scollon, S. (2005). Agency distributed through time, space and tools: Bentham, babbage and the census. In S. Norris & R. H. 
Jones (eds.),  Discourse in action: Introducing mediated discourse analysis (pp. 172–182). London: Routledge. 
 Snyder, I. (2015).  Literacy in the age of online curation . London: Routledge. 
 Sockett, G. (2014).  The online informal learning of English . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Steinkuehler, C. A. (2004). Learning in massively multiplayer online games. In Y. B. Kafai, W. A. Sandoval, N. Enyedy, A. S. 
Nixon & F. Herrera (eds.),  Proceedings of the sixth international conference of the learning sciences  (pp. 521–528). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Steinkuehler, C. A. (2006). Massively multiplayer online videogaming as participation in a discourse.  Mind, Culture, & Activity , 
13(1), 38–52. 
 Street, B. (1984).  Literacy in theory and practice . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Thorne, S. L. (2008). Transcultural communication in open internet environments and massively multiplayer online games. 
In S. Magnan (ed.),  Mediating discourse online (pp. 305–327). Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
 Thorne, S. L., Black, R. W., & Sykes, J. M. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in internet interest com-
munities and online gaming.  The Modern Language Journal , 93, 802–821. 
 Toffler, A. (1980).  The third wave . New York: Morrow. 
 van Lier, L. (2004).  The ecology and semiotics of language learning: A sociocultural perspective . Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. 
 Vygotsky, L. S. (1981). The instrumental method in psychology. In J. V. Wertsch (ed.),  The concept of activity in Soviet psychol-
ogy (pp. 134–143). Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe. 
 Warschauer, M., & Grimes, D. (2007). Audience, authorship, and artifact: The emergent semiotics of Web 2.0.  Annual Review 
of Applied Linguistics , 27, 1–23. 
 Wertsch, J. V. (1991).  Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

299
 Reading comprehension in L2 settings, primarily in academic settings, is one of the most important 
complex language abilities needed by L2 students. I will assume in this chapter that reading compre-
hension issues center on the ability to understand complex texts, whether fictional narrative or infor-
mational. Moreover, the goal of L2 students is to succeed in academic settings, primarily secondary 
and post-secondary. To achieve success, students have to be able to understand texts at a reasonably 
detailed level, draw inferences about the information in the text, and use this information for vari-
ous other academic tasks. Multiple surveys of faculty and students point to the importance of many 
skills associated with reading comprehension abilities (Anderson, 2015; Rosenfeld et al., 2001). In 
this chapter, I briefly outline ways to understand reading comprehension more generally and identify 
major component skills and knowledge bases needed for reading comprehension. This foundation 
then provides a straightforward means to understand and explore differences between L1 and L2 
reading comprehension abilities. This foundation also generates implications for academic reading 
instruction (both L1 and L2), leading to research opportunities for translating research into practice. 
 How Does Reading Comprehension Work? 
 Reading can simply be defined as a complex ability to extract, or build, meaning from a text. However, 
this definition, by itself, is not very informative. The most commonly accepted way for researchers 
to explain the above definition is to identify the key component abilities and skills that allow read-
ing comprehension to emerge. Fluent reading comprehension involves abilities to recognize words 
rapidly and efficiently, develop and use a very large recognition vocabulary, process sentences in 
order to build comprehension, engage a range of strategic processes and underlying cognitive skills 
(e.g., setting goals, changing goals flexibly, monitoring comprehension), interpret meaning in rela-
tion to background knowledge, interpret and evaluate texts in line with reader goals and purposes, 
and process texts fluently over an extended period of time. These processes and knowledge resources 
allow the reader to generate text comprehension to the level required by a given task or reader goal 
(the required “standard of coherence” set by the task or the individual). 
 The identification of these skills and resources has been the outcome of many research studies, 
and it remains the source of much ongoing research. These skills work together in a complex, finely 
coordinated set of processes (Cain & Oakhill, 2012; Grabe, 2009; Koda, 2005; Perfetti & Adlof, 2012). 
In this section, research is reviewed that supports the relationship between reading skills and reading 
 22 
 L2 Reading Comprehension and Development 
 William Grabe 

300 • William Grabe
comprehension. Much of the research has been conducted in English L1 reading contexts, though 
increasing amounts of L1 reading research in other languages has also emerged in the past 15 years 
(Joshi & Aaron, 2006; Verhoeven & Perfetti, 2011). Reading comprehension draws on the following 
linguistic and cognitive skills and knowledges bases: 
 • Word recognition (rapid and automatic recognition, lexical access, sight word reading) 
 • Vocabulary knowledge 
 • Morphological knowledge 
 • Syntactic knowledge 
 • Clause and text meaning formation 
 • Discourse structure processing 
 • Main idea recognition 
 • Strategic comprehension processing 
 ° Previewing 
 ° Summarizing 
 ° Inferencing 
 ° Antecedent tracking 
 ° Comprehension monitoring 
 ° Background knowledge use 
 ° Goal setting and resetting 
 ° Surveying (skimming, text overviewing, scanning for key phrases) 
 ° Rereading 
 ° Introspecting on attitude and motivation for reading 
 ° Visualizing 
 ° Forming questions about the text 
 ° Talking about texts and comprehending 
 Further discussion of these linguistic and cognitive skills and knowledge bases are addressed 
below in the section on “Reading Processes.” The immediate issue is to understand that the com-
bined set of component skills, knowledge bases, and strategic responses, at a basic level, represent 
the “reading construct” (an alternate way to define reading ability). Other factors will intersect 
with these components to privilege certain components over others depending on the context, 
associated task, conceptual difficulty of text, reader motivation to persist, overall L2 proficiency, 
cognitive maturity, prior educational training, expected standard of coherence (based on pur-
pose and task), and physical factors: clarity of print, light, noise, competing demands on time 
and effort. Having a clear sense of the variability of component factors, the reading construct 
nonetheless can be defined in a fairly straightforward way: the reading construct identifies how a 
reader achieves a reasonable level of comprehension of a given text. The vast majority of instance 
of “reading” in L1 settings involves reading tasks that require what can be called a general level 
of comprehension during fluent reading conditions. We could call this a “general reading com-
prehension abilities.” 
 Determining the construct (in response to the co-occuring variables of context, background 
knowledge, purpose, etc.), then provides rationales for assessing the development of reading abilities 
and various instructional practices to improve reading abilities (e.g., Grabe, 2009; Koda, 2005; Per-
fetti & Adlof, 2012; Rayner et al., 2012). It should be apparent from this outline of component reading 
skills and knowledge bases that there will be much individual variation in measurable abilities across 
groups of learners, as well as differences across groups defined by age, training, available resources, 
etc. In this way, a components view of reading not only builds a reasonable definition of reading 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Reading Comprehension and Development • 301
comprehension but also connects closely with educational and cognitive psychology perspectives on 
individual differences. 
 Expertise and Reading: Get a Good Coach 
 The upper end of individual differences research is the study of expertise. This concept is important 
for understanding how so many people, both L1 and L2, become such fluent readers. 
 From time to time, researchers argue that reading extensively is all that a student needs to do to 
become a good reader. However, there is overwhelming evidence that effective instructional inter-
ventions significantly improve students’ reading abilities (e.g., Pressley & Allington, 2015; Trabasso 
& Bouchard, 2002; Taylor et al., 2006), and especially so in combination with an effective extensive 
reading program. Aside from many studies in reading research, an additional sub-field of cognitive 
psychology highlights the importance of an effective mentor or coach (or teacher). 
 Research on expertise (Ericsson, 2006; Ericsson et al., 2007) highlights the importance of getting 
a strong mentor or a good coach. People who develop levels of high expertise in various fields—
medicine, physics, law, math, chess, dance, wine tasting, sports, computer programming, and more—
all seek out coaches who bring them to higher levels of performance. If we see advanced fluent 
reading as a level of expertise, and we should, then the notion that students will gain enormously 
from effective teachers is a straightforward conclusion. Indeed, effective instruction in reading skills 
does lead to significant reading comprehension improvements. The notion that a person  only has to 
read, and read a lot, does not turn out to be sufficient for students’ reading development. Effective 
and focused reading instruction does make a difference. 
 A Brief Digression: The Miracle of Reading 
 The ability to read fluently is, in fact, quite  miraculous . Our brains were not designed to be reading 
brains. Reading comprehension abilities are not natural in the sense of being a part of automatic 
human maturation processes; instead, skilled reading must be culturally transmitted from one gen-
eration to the next. Parts of the brain used for visual word recognition and certain pathways for 
automatic word recognition processes are not genetically hard-wired in human brains but must 
be learned with every fluent reader (Dronjic & Bitan, 2016). An overwhelming number of us have 
 learned , from one generation to the next, to take graphic forms on a page and mentally interpret 
them into our own language, no matter what language. 
 As fluent readers, we do this at a rate that is even faster than our fluent listening abilities. What is 
more remarkable, we can do this for hours at a time if we choose to, and we often do this for enjoy-
ment! So what is it we do when we read, and how do we do it? I will address this large question, but 
do so in the context of academic reading, because that is the key concern for educators. 
 Reading Processes: How Does Fluent Reading Work? 
 In this brief section, I describe reading processes as cognitive operations that integrate component 
abilities to build comprehension of a text. I have divided reading abilities into lower-level and higher-
level processes. All processes occur in working memory, which can be understood as the pattern of 
cognitive neural network activations at any given moment. Lower-level processes do not mean that 
they are easier. In some respects, they are much harder to develop for L2 readers. Lower-level pro-
cesses include fast, automatic word recognition skills, automatic lexico-syntactic processing (auto-
matically recognizing word parts and morphological information, and automatically parsing the 
immediate clause for syntactic information), and semantic processing of the immediate clause into 

302 • William Grabe
relevant meaning units (or propositions), along with automatic disambiguation of word and phrasal 
meanings. Higher-level processing involves those processes and resources that more closely align 
with strategies and resources for comprehension with more difficult texts: (a) forming main idea 
meanings; (b) recognizing related and thematic information; (c) building a text model of compre-
hension (an author-driven summary understanding); and (d) using inferencing, background knowl-
edge, strategic processing, and context constraints to create a situation model of reading (a preferred 
personal interpretation) (Hannon, 2011; Perfetti & Adlof, 2012). 
 Lower-Level Processing 
 Research on reading has shown that beginning readers need to establish strong linkages between 
orthographic forms and the sounds of the language (Cain & Oakhill, 2012; Ehri, 2006; Rayner et al., 
2012). Extensive research in L1 contexts across languages has demonstrated that training in pho-
nological awareness and letter-sound correspondences predicts later reading development among 
children and beginning readers (Ehri, 2006). While L1 reading in other languages may not require 
that same level of instructional effort as does English for phonological awareness, all young learners 
benefit from explicit instruction in letter-sound correspondences (Lundberg, 1999). The automa-
tization of letter-sound relations is the foundation of all alphabetic reading and supports syllabic 
reading systems as well. Even Chinese, as a morpho-syllabic system, incorporates information from 
the phonetic radical within characters to aid word recognition and uses phonological information at 
the point of lexical access (Chow et al., 2005; He et al., 2005). 
 English word recognition becomes rapid and accurate as learners build automaticity through 
over-learned letter-sound correspondences and sight word reading of high-frequency words. English 
L1 research on eye-movement tracking has shown that good readers recognize words on average in 
about 200–250 milliseconds; they move their eyes ahead approximately 8 letter spaces per focus; 
they make regressive eye movements about 12% of the time (often for slight adjustments); and they 
actively focus on more than 80% of the content words and about 35% of functional words (see 
Rayner et al., 2012). In short, reading incorporates a process of very rapid word recognition carried 
out through fairly consistent eye behaviors. Automaticity is a key to this rapid word recognition 
process. The observable eye-movement processes of fluent readers are quite similar in all languages, 
with variation due to differing amounts of linguistic information provided by individual graphic 
forms. Word reading efficiency is thus going to vary somewhat by different orthographic systems 
(Frost et al., 2005). 
 Research on English L1 vocabulary knowledge has demonstrated that fluent readers have very 
large and automatic recognition-vocabulary knowledge and that vocabulary knowledge is highly 
correlated with reading ability (see Grabe, 2009; Grabe & Stoller, 2011). While estimates of English 
L1 word knowledge vary greatly (from 19,000 to 200,000; Anglin, 1993; Nation, 2013), the most 
widely accepted figure is that high school graduates know on average 40,000 words as fluent L1 read-
ers (Stahl & Nagy, 2006). This is a very large number of words to learn, and most accounts suggest 
that many of these words are learned by exposure to new words through  continual  reading practice. 
Stanovich (2000) has argued that extended exposure to print (reading extensively) over years leads 
to major differences in both vocabulary knowledge and comprehension abilities. Research on L2 
vocabulary knowledge has also shown that vocabulary is correlated with L2 reading comprehension. 
Droop and Verhoeven (2003) reported a strong relationship between third- and fourth-grade L2 
students’ vocabulary knowledge and their reading abilities. (See also Qian, 2002.) 
 Research on L1 morphological and syntactic knowledge shows that they both have an impact on 
reading comprehension. A number of studies have shown that morphological knowledge contributes 
to reading comprehension. Research by Anglin (1993), Nagy et al. (2006), and Wagner et al. (2007) all 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Reading Comprehension and Development • 303
argue that morphological knowledge (knowledge of word parts) is very important to more advanced 
word recognition and reading development (see also Bowers et al., 2010; Carlisle & Goodwin, 2014; 
Kieffer et al., 2013). There is also evidence that grammatical knowledge and discourse knowledge 
both play roles in L1 reading comprehension (Lesaux et al., 2006; Perfetti & Adlof, 2012; Trabasso & 
Bouchard, 2002). Research on L2 syntax has shown that there are strong relationships between these 
language knowledge bases (syntax and discourse awareness) and reading comprehension (see Grabe, 
2009; Shiotsu, 2010). 
 For the fluent reader, automatic semantic processing of texts occurs at the same time that auto-
matic syntactic parsing is being carried out (see Perfetti & Adlof, 2012; Rayner et al., 2012). For a 
brief explanation, Grabe and Stoller (2011) identify the importance of propositional meaning units 
in the building of text main-idea comprehension. There is strong research evidence to show that flu-
ent readers automatically process the meaning units that they extract from the syntactic parsing of 
clauses (e.g., who does what to whom, and how, and when). 
 Higher-Level Processing 
 Higher-level processing is not better, or harder; it is just processing that is closer to conscious intro-
spection on the reader’s part. Overall, comprehension of a text is created when the reader builds 
a semantic network of ideas drawn from the text to form a “text model of comprehension.” This 
basic text model—what the text is about—is supported and expanded by readers’ use of background 
knowledge, inferencing, and attitudes to the text information, thus creating a second “situation 
model of comprehension” (Kintsch, 2012). The text model of comprehension requires that semantic 
information from clause-level processing be combined in a network of central ideas and references 
that recur through the text. Readers form links across ideas that are repeated, are referred to again, 
or are inferred in order to maintain a coherent interpretation of what they read. This emerging net-
work of ideas is what produces the gist of the text. The situation model is built upon the text model 
to establish what the reader decides is necessary, relevant, appropriate, and useful. The active reader 
interprets the text to decide what it should mean to him or her. That interpretation is the informa-
tion that also is stored in long-term memory as learned information (Kintsch, 2012). 
 Our ability to attend selectively to certain information and to respond strategically to this infor-
mation is represented cognitively in working memory as executive control processing. We are all able 
to focus our attention on some point and “think” about it. During reading that requires learning 
(including both content and language learning), this attention typically involves strategic reading. 
L1 research on strategic processing during reading (e.g., inferencing, comprehension monitoring, 
goal setting) demonstrates that strategic processing and metacognitive awareness influence reading 
comprehension. Discourse comprehension researchers have shown that inferencing that arises from 
‘reading-to-learn’ has an important impact on comprehension (Goldman & Rakestraw, 2000; Perfetti 
& Adlof, 2012). Similarly, comprehension monitoring appears to be a good predictor of comprehen-
sion abilities. At the same time, these abilities, being metacognitive in nature, are not simple reading 
strategies. Rather, they constitute a range of skills and abilities and represent a range of strategic 
responses to text difficulties. 
 Experimental research on comprehension instruction and strategy training is extensive (see Tra-
basso & Bouchard, 2002). Many L1 studies demonstrate a causal impact of instructional skills and 
strategies on reading comprehension. Important evidence supports answering main idea questions 
as a post-reading task, using mapping of ideas from a text, previewing specific information from the 
text, asking students to formulate questions about a text, filling in and generating graphic organizers 
that reflect the organization of the text, visualizing information from the text, and raising aware-
ness of discourse organization of the text, among others. Overall, a number of effective strategies 

304 • William Grabe
have been identified in instructional research, though  combinations of strategic responses to texts appear 
to be more effective in supporting comprehension (see Grabe, 2009; Grabe & Stoller, 2011). 
 Research on L2 strategic processing is more limited. Relatively few studies demonstrate a direct 
relationship between reading strategies and reading comprehension. In a meta-analysis of L2 read-
ing strategy research, Taylor et al. (2006) reviewed the existing empirical research in L2 reading 
strategy training (10 published studies and 12 dissertations) and concluded that a low to moderate 
effect exists between strategy training and L2 reading comprehension improvement. The analysis is 
encouraging, but it should be treated cautiously due to the limited database available for the analysis. 
 Purposes for Reading 
 One of the most important factors in reading comprehension abilities is how reading processes vary 
depending on the reading purpose. It is clear that reading for entertainment is quite different from read-
ing to learn information or reading to integrate information from multiple sources. It is also clear that 
skimming a text for a very general idea involves distinct skill combinations from reading for main idea 
comprehension, the latter being by far the most common type of reading carried out by fluent readers. 
 A critical factor in teaching L2 reading is helping students understand that different tasks and 
different activities involve differing levels of demand on comprehension. Some tasks require a high 
level of detailed comprehension. Other tasks may involve the understanding of main ideas and some 
supporting information (see Grabe, 2009). 
 Further Factors: Reading Fluency and Extended Exposure to Print 
 L1 research on reading fluency has demonstrated that reading fluency, especially among children, is 
strongly correlated with reading comprehension (Klauda & Guthrie, 2008; Samuels, 2006). Fuchs 
et al. (2001) have shown that oral passage reading fluency—orally reading a text for one minute—is 
strongly related to reading comprehension abilities for L1 children (although training students to 
read faster without checking student comprehension is a problem). A number of studies have shown 
that training students to recognize words faster will lead to faster word recognition on other words 
if the training is sufficiently extensive (Martin-Chang & Levy, 2006). However, this type of train-
ing appears to have only limited direct benefits for reading comprehension. In the area of passage 
fluency training, primarily by rereading passages multiple times (sometimes aloud and sometimes 
silently), there is good evidence that passage rereading improves both reading fluency and compre-
hension (National Reading Panel, 2000). 
 At present, less research demonstrates a relationship between reading fluency and reading 
comprehension development in L2 contexts. However, Sawaki and Sabatini (2007) reported a 
strong relationship between oral passage reading fluency and reading comprehension (r 2  = .36) 
(see also Jeon, 2011). In a series of L2 training studies by Taguchi et al. (2012), evidence shows 
that fluency practice leads to increased L2 reading fluency and to some improvement in L2 read-
ing comprehension. Improved word reading fluency through training has also been reported by 
Fukkink et al. (2005). 
 L1 research on extended exposure to print (extensive reading) has demonstrated a strong rela-
tionship between amount of reading (over long periods of time) and improved reading comprehen-
sion (Grabe, 2009; Krashen, 2004; Stanovich, 2000). Stanovich and colleagues, in a series of studies, 
showed that exposure to print (amount of reading) was an important independent predictor of 
reading ability (see Stanovich, 2000 for overview). 
 Research on extensive reading is relatively unexplored in L2 reading (cf. Krashen, 2004, 2011). The 
one set of studies that has indicated the positive effects of extensive reading on reading comprehension 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Reading Comprehension and Development • 305
was those studies carried out by Elley over a period of 20 years (see Elley, 2000). In these studies, he 
has shown that getting students to read extensively over a long period of time consistently improved 
reading comprehension abilities as well as a number of other language skills. In most other studies 
on extensive reading, there is little carefully controlled empirical evidence that reading extensively 
significantly influences L2 reading development (cf. Nakanishi, 2015). 
 L1 and L2 Reading Differences 
 The prior sections developed the concept that L1 and L2 reading abilities share many of the same 
component skills and that the reading construct is very similar in terms of underlying cognitive and 
linguistic components. In most respects, this is a reasonable position to take. At the same time, any 
consideration of L2 reading abilities has to recognize that L2 reading differs from L1 reading abilities 
in several ways (Chen et al., 2016). Most of these differences center, either directly or indirectly, on 
the linguistic resources that a reader can bring to bear on text comprehension: 
 1. Learners have a much smaller L2 linguistic knowledge base when they begin reading. Their 
knowledge of vocabulary, grammar, and discourse structure is more limited. 
 2. L2 students, overall, will have much less experience with reading exposure in the L2. They 
simply will have had much less practice in L2 reading. 
 3. L2 students will experience L2 reading differently because they have experiences reading in 
two different languages and because cognitive processing will involve two language systems 
(e.g., accessing the bilingual lexicon, using a joint strategy system—Kern, 1994; Koda, 2016). 
 4. Aside from the possibilities of developing somewhat distinct cognitive processing, students 
engaged in L2 reading will also experience a range of transfer effects (cognitive skills, strate-
gies, and goals and expectations). Some transfer effects will involve interference from the L1; 
others will facilitate L2 reading processes (see Dressler & Kamil, 2006; Koda, 2005). 
 5. L2 readers rely on different combinations of general background knowledge when reading in 
the L2. Drawing on information about “how the world works” sometimes varies between L1 
and L2 reading experiences. 
 6. L2 readers will encounter distinct social and cultural assumptions in L2 texts that they may 
not be familiar with or find somewhat hard to accept. 
 There has been a growing debate about the extent of the differences between L1 and L2 read-
ers. Drawing on the arguments made by Koda (2005), Chen, Dronjic, and Helms-Park (2016), and 
Genesee et al. (2006), a number of statements can be developed. First, beginning and intermediate 
L2 reading abilities are more distinct from L1 reading than advanced L2 reading abilities will be. 
As an L2 reader becomes fluent and highly skilled in reading comprehension, the reading processes 
involved become more similar (though perhaps never the same). Second, the extent of the linguistic 
differences between L1 and L2 (e.g., the linguistic differences between Spanish and English vs. Chi-
nese and English) will have an impact on L2 reading. This impact of L1/L2 differences will diminish 
with increasing L2 reading proficiency but will not disappear. Third, higher-level skills relate to com-
prehension skills more generally and are not constrained by limited amounts of linguistic knowledge, 
so they will be essentially the same in both L1 and L2 contexts. 
 Finally, the actual  underlying cognitive processes  involved in L1 and L2 reading are generally the 
same, but the linguistic limitations, the processing practice limitations, and the fact that two lan-
guages are simultaneously available will create real L1/L2 differences until the L2 linguistic resources 
and processing practices have grown sufficiently strong and fluent. Nonetheless, overall patterns 
of component-skills development across L1s suggest that the underlying component skills are 

306 • William Grabe
essentially the same (see Geva & Farnia, 2012; Lipka & Siegal, 2012; Verhoeven & van Leeuwe, 2012). 
Moreover, as L2 reading proficiency increases, the reading comprehension process looks increasingly 
similar; there are numerous reasons for this increasing similarity, including greater amounts of read-
ing practice and exposure to L2 print, greater resource knowledge of the L2 and the sociocultural 
world of the L2, greater fluency and automaticity of L2 reading skills, recognition of successes in L2 
reading, and an increasing willingness to read in the L2 for various purposes. One conclusion to be 
taken from this discussion of L1/L2 differences is that many results of research on component skills 
that support reading comprehension will likely apply across both L1 and L2 learner groups, although 
not with the same patterns and combinations of strengths for comprehension. 
 L2 Implications for Reading Instruction 
 Overall, the combination of research on L1 and L2 reading abilities suggests that important implica-
tions for L2 reading instruction can be taken from research results. Reading comprehension requires 
the following skills and knowledge resources to varying degrees depending on levels of proficiency: 
  1. The ability to decode graphic forms for efficient word recognition 
  2. The ability to access the meanings of a large number of words automatically 
  3. The ability to draw meaning from phrase- and clause-level grammatical information 
  4. The ability to combine clausal-level meanings to build a larger network of meaning relations 
(comprehend the text) 
  5. The ability to recognize discourse-level relationships and use this information to build and 
support comprehension 
  6. The ability to use reading strategies with more difficult text and for a range of academic read-
ing tasks 
  7. The ability to set goals for reading and adjust them as needed 
  8. The ability to use inferences of various types and to monitor comprehension in line with read-
ing goals 
  9. The ability to draw on prior knowledge as appropriate 
 10. Abilities to evaluate, integrate, and synthesize information from a text to form a situation 
model of comprehension (what the reader learns from the text) 
 11. The ability to maintain these processes fluently for an extended period of time 
 12. The motivation to persist in reading and to use the text information appropriately in line with 
reader goals 
 In an ideal world, each of these implications from research would be subject to instructional train-
ing studies and longitudinal studies to determine the potential for turning implications into effective 
applications in the classroom. Once interesting specific applications are developed, it would then be 
important to explore the effectiveness of those applications more generally for the development of 
L2 reading abilities (see Grabe, 2009; Grabe & Jiang, 2015). In the real world, we cannot wait for all of 
this research. We need to improve L2 students’ reading abilities in the present moment. Fortunately, 
a number of teaching practices can provide the needed help. 
 Teaching L2 Reading 
 The major argument of the chapter to this point is that a number of key reading sub-skills 
can be taught successfully, and further, that the learning of these sub-skills will contribute to 
a learner’s reading comprehension abilities. How these skills should be taught most effectively 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Reading Comprehension and Development • 307
is indicated to some extent by the research reviewed previously. However, many instructional 
approaches potentially can contribute to the development of reading abilities, and they will 
need to vary depending on the students and on the context. I simply outline in the following 
section a core set of curricular principles for organizing instruction and establishing goals for 
learning. The section also notes eight topics that are important for reading instruction (see 
Grabe & Stoller, 2011, 2014 for specific descriptions). My comments conclude with two key 
instructional themes. 
 Curriculum Development Principles 
 The goal for reading instruction, at a general level, is to incorporate key component skills and knowl-
edge into a reading curriculum in a principled and consistent way (see Grabe & Stoller, 2011, 2014). 
Specific instructional activities included in a curriculum should follow from the major themes devel-
oped earlier in this article and the resulting implications. To frame instructional options for the read-
ing classroom, a set of more general principles are needed for building a reading curriculum. These 
principles include: 
 1. A curricular framework for conceptualizing L2 reading instruction that should integrate 
major skills instruction with extensive practice and exposure to print (building upon a needs 
analysis, goals and objectives for teaching and testing, plentiful resources, appropriate curricu-
lum planning, and effective teaching materials) 
 2. Reading resources that are interesting, varied, good-looking, abundant, and accessible 
 3. Some degree of student choice in selecting major reading sources 
 4. Reading skills that are introduced and taught by examining the primary texts used in the 
reading course. There should not be a need for special materials to introduce reading skills 
(though additional activities for further practice are necessary). 
 5. Lessons that are structured around pre-reading, during-reading, and post-reading activities, 
and these activities should be varied from one major reading to the next 
 6. Opportunities for students to experience comprehension success while reading 
 7. Expectations that reading occurs in class every day and that many extended reading opportu-
nities are provided on a regular basis 
 8. Instruction that is built on an integrated curriculum framework and can support the follow-
ing developmental goals: 
 A. Promote word recognition skills 
 B. Build a large recognition vocabulary 
 C. Practice comprehension skills that combine awareness of grammar, main idea identifica-
tion, and comprehension strategies: Strategy instruction is not separate from text com-
prehension instruction 
 D. Build awareness of discourse structure (recognize main ideas, recognize major organizing 
patterns, recognize how the information is organized in parts of the text, recognize overt 
signals of text structure, recognize anaphoric relations in texts, recognize other cohesive 
markers in texts) 
 E. Promote strategic reading 
 F. Practice reading fluency (build reading rate, build text passage reading fluency, read and 
reread at home with parent or tape or self) 
 G. Develop extensive reading 
 H. Develop motivation 
 I. 
Combine language learning with content learning 

308 • William Grabe
 Developing Extensive Reading 
 Students, and especially L2 students, will simply not become skilled advanced readers in English 
without reading a lot of material continuously over an extended period of time. There is no magic 
short instructional intervention as an alternative. Extensive reading needs to be understood as criti-
cal by administrators, curriculum developers, and teachers. 
 Extensive reading, to be reasonably successful, generally requires a significant effort in motivating 
students. Students need to be aware of the goals for working on extensive reading. They also need 
to be sold on the benefits of extensive reading, encouraged to read extensively at every reasonable 
opportunity, given many good opportunities to read extensively, and provided with many excellent 
extensive reading resources (e.g., graded readers and level-appropriate reading material). Extensive 
reading time in classes or in reading labs needs to provide a combination of teacher support for 
student reading, including active one-on-one interventions to support their comprehension and 
provide student engagement activities, and quiet time for students to read something appropriate 
and interesting for them. In addition, extensive reading in classroom contexts requires some type of 
accountability and evaluation, though this should be simple and not threatening (see Reutzel et al., 
2010). Despite these cautions, it is important to point out the obvious:  there is no way to get around 
the fact that students only become good readers by reading a lot . 
 Combining Language and Content Learning 
 A priority in building a reading curriculum is to consider which goals will have a high priority and 
how to combine all of the priority goals into a coherent overall educational plan. Any careful con-
sideration of academic reading development has to take into consideration the various component 
skills outlined in this article, but to practice these skills within a curriculum framework that priori-
tizes comprehension and use of knowledge from texts. While not every component skill and knowl-
edge base can receive equal amounts of attention, one strong approach to building a coherent and 
effective reading curriculum combines an emphasis on content learning as well as language learning 
(and language skill use), often labeled as content-based instruction. 
 Sustained content and language learning, if developed appropriately, provides opportunities for 
the development of various language skills and resources (much as other curricular models would). 
However, combined content and language learning also provides many opportunities for extended 
reading, motivational learning experiences, strategic responses to increasingly complex tasks, greater 
choices in reading materials, and growing challenges to match growing skills. The combination of 
content and language learning brings in opportunities for project learning, the recycling of impor-
tant skills and strategies on a regular basis, the rereading of many text resources, opportunities to 
talk about what students understand from texts, and more realistic needs to interpret, integrate, and 
evaluate information from multiple texts. These types of activities are what students should be trying 
to do with information resources in academic settings (Grabe & Stoller, 2014; Guthrie et al., 2004; 
Murphy et al., 2009). 
 Conclusion 
 This chapter sought to outline key research findings about the nature of reading abilities and connect 
them to possible instructional practices. Although several additional recommendations can be made 
for building L2 reading instruction and planning appropriate reading curricula, this chapter high-
lighted key skills and knowledge bases needed for academic reading and noted ways to develop effec-
tive instruction. A short chapter of this type can only begin to identify the potential instructional 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Reading Comprehension and Development • 309
options and variations that could help make a difference in reading success with L2 students. The key 
to these ongoing efforts is to continue exploring effective practices for reading instruction based on 
persuasive instructional research studies. 
 References 
 Anderson, N. (2015). Academic reading expectations and challenges. In N. Evans, N. Anderson & W. Eggington (Eds.),  ESL 
readers and writers in higher education (pp. 95–109). New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Anglin, J. (1993).  Vocabulary development: A morphological analysis .  Monographs of the society for research in child development, 
58 :10. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Bowers, P., Kirby, J., & Deacon, S. (2010). The effects of morphological information on literacy skills: A systematic review of 
the literature.  Review of Educational Research ,  80 (2), 144–179. 
 Cain, K., & Oakhill, J. (2012). Reading comprehension development from seven to fourteen years: Implications for assessment. 
In J. Sabatini, E. Albro & T. O’Reilly (Eds.),  Measuring up: Advances in how to assess reading abilities  (pp. 59–76). Lanham, 
MD: Rowman & Littlefield Education. 
 Carlisle, J., & Goodwin, A. (2014). Morphemes matter. In C. A. Stone, E. Silliman, B. Ehren & G. Wallach (Eds.),  Handbook of 
language and literacy , 2nd ed. (pp. 265–282). New York, NY: Guilford. 
 Chen, I., Dronjic, V., & Helms-Park, R. (Eds.). (2016).  Reading in a second language: Cognitive and psycholinguistic issues 
(pp. 32–69). New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Chow, B., McBridge-Chang, C., & Burgess, S. (2005). Phonological processing skills and early reading abilities in Hong Kong 
Chinese kindergartners learning to read English as a second language.  Journal of Educational Psychology ,  97 , 81–87. 
 Dressler, C., & Kamil, M. (2006). First- and second-language literacy. In D. August & T. Shanahan (Eds.),  Developing literacy 
in second-language learners (pp. 197–238). Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum. 
 Dronjic, V., & Bitan, T. (2016). Reading, brain, and cognition. In X. Chen, V. Dronjic & R. Helms-Park (Eds.),  Reading in a 
second language: Cognitive and psycholinguistic issues (pp. 32–69). New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Droop, M., & Verhoeven, L. (2003). Language proficiency and reading ability in first and second language learners.  Reading 
Research Quarterly ,  38 , 78–103. 
 Ehri, L. (2006). Alphabetics instruction helps students learn to read. In R. Joshi & P. Aaron (Eds.),  Handbook of orthography 
and literacy (pp. 649–677). Mahwah, NJ: L, Erlbaum. 
 Elley, W. (2000). The potential of book flooding for raising literacy levels.  International Review of Education ,  46 , 233–255. 
 Ericsson, K. A. (2006). The influence of experience and deliberate practice on the development of superior expert perfor-
mance. In K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. Feltovich & R. Hoffman (Eds.),  The Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert 
performance (pp. 683–703). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
 Ericsson, K. A., Piretula, M., & Cokely, E. (2007). The making of an expert.  Harvard Business Review , 85(7/8), 115–121. 
 Frost, R., Kugler, T., Deutsch, A., & Forster, K. (2005). Orthographic structure versus morphological structure: Principles 
of lexical organization in a given language.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition ,  31 , 
1293–1326. 
 Fuchs, L., Fuchs, D., Hosp, M., & Jenkins, J. (2001). Oral reading fluency as an indicator of reading competence: A theoretical, 
empirical, and historical analysis.  Scientific Studies of Reading ,  5 , 239–256. 
 Fukkink, R., Hulstijn, J., & Simis, A. (2005). Does training in second-language word recognition skills affect reading compre-
hension? An experimental study.  Modern Language Journal ,  89 , 54–75. 
 Genesee, F., Geva, E., Dressler, C., & Kamil, M. (2006). Synthesis: Cross-linguistic relationships. In D. August & T. Shanahan 
(Eds.),  Developing literacy in second language learners (pp. 153–174). Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum. 
 Geva, E., & Farnia, F. (2012). Developmental changes in the nature of language proficiency and reading fluency paint a more 
complex view of reading comprehension in ELL and EL1.  Reading and Writing ,  25 , 1819–1845. 
 Goldman, S., & Rakestraw, J. (2000). Structural aspects of constructing meaning from text. In M. Kamil, P. Mosenthal, P. D. 
Pearson & R. Barr (Eds.),  Handbook of reading research , Vol III (pp. 311–335). New York, NY: Longman. 
 Grabe, W. (2009).  Reading in a second language: Moving from theory to practice . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Grabe, W., & Jiang, X. (2015). The research—instruction cycle in second language reading. In N. Evans, N. Anderson & W. Egg-
ington (Eds.),  ESL readers and writers in higher education (pp. 130–146). New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Grabe, W., & Stoller, F. (2011).  Teaching and researching reading (2nd ed.). Harlow, UK: Pearson Longman. 
 Grabe, W., & Stoller, F. (2014). Teaching reading for academic purposes. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. Brinton & M. Snow (Eds.), 
 Teaching English as a second or foreign language (4th ed.) (pp. 189–205). Boston, MA: National Geographic Learning. 
 Guthrie, J., Wigfield, A., & Perencevich, K. (Eds.). (2004).  Motivating reading comprehension: Concept-Oriented reading Instruc-
tion . Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum. 

310 • William Grabe
 Hannon, B. (2011). Understanding the relative contributions of lower-level word processes, higher level processes, and working 
memory to reading comprehension performance in proficient adult readers.  Reading Research Quarterly ,  47 , 125–152. 
 He, Y., Wang, Q., &Anderson, R. (2005). Chinese children’s use of subcharacter information about pronunciation.  Journal of 
Educational Psychology ,  97 , 572–579. 
 Jeon, E. (2011). Contribution of morphological awareness to K2 reading comprehension.  Modern Language Journal ,  95 , 
217–235. 
 Joshi, R. M., & Aaron, P. (Eds.). (2006).  Handbook of orthography and literacy . Mahwah, NJ: L, Erlbaum. 
 Kieffer, M., Biancarosa, G., & Mancilla-Martinez, J. (2013). Roles of morphological awareness in the reading comprehension 
of Spanish-speaking language minority learners: Exploring partial mediation by vocabulary and reading fluency.  Applied 
Psycholinguistics ,  34 , 697–726. 
 Kern, R. G. (1994). The role of mental translation in second language reading.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition ,  16 , 
441–461. 
 Kintsch, W. (2012). Psychological models of reading comprehension and their implications for assessment. In J. Sabatini, E. 
Albro & T. O’Reilly (Eds.),  Measuring up: Advances in how to assess reading abilities (pp. 21–38). Lanham, MD: Rowman 
& Littlefield Education. 
 Klauda, S., & Guthrie, J. (2008). Relationships of three components of reading fluency to reading comprehension.  Journal of 
Educational Psychology ,  100 , 310–321. 
 Koda, K. (2005).  Insights into second language reading . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
 Koda, K. (2016). Development of word recognition in a second language. In X. Chen, V. Dronjic & R. Helms-Park (Eds.),  Read-
ing in a second language: Cognitive and psycholinguistic issues (pp. 70–98). New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Krashen, S. (2004).  The power of reading (2nd ed.). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
 Krashen, S. (2011).  Free voluntary reading . Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited. 
 Lesaux, N., Lipka, O., & Siegal, L. (2006). Investigating cognitive and linguistics abilities that influence the reading comprehen-
sion skills of children from diverse linguistic backgrounds.  Reading and Writing ,  19 , 99–131. 
 Lipka, O., & Siegal, L. (2012). The development of reading comprehension skills in children learning English as a second 
language.  Reading and Writing ,  25 (8), 1873–1898. 
 Lundberg, I. (1999). Learning to read in Scandinavia. In M. Harris & G. Hatano (Eds.),  Learning to read and write: A cross-
linguistic perspective (pp. 157–172). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
 Martin-Chang, S., & Levy, B. (2006). Word reading fluency: A transfer appropriate processing account of fluency transfer. 
 Reading and Writing ,  19 , 517–542. 
 Murphy, P., Wilkinson, I., Soter, A., & Hennessey, M. (2009). Examining the effects of classroom discussion on students’ com-
prehension of text: A meta-analysis.  Journal of Educational Psychology ,  101 , 740–764. 
 Nagy, W., Berninger, V., & Abbott, R. (2006). Contributions of morphology beyond phonology to literacy outcomes of upper 
elementary and middle-school students.  Journal of educational Psychology ,  98 , 134–147. 
 Nakanishi, T. (2015). A meta-analysis of extensive reading research.  TESOL Quarterly ,  49 , 6–37. 
 Nation, I. S. P. (2013).  Learning vocabulary in another language  (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
 National Reading Panel (NRP). (2000).  Teaching children to read: An evidence based assessment of the scientific research lit-
erature on reading and its implications for reading instruction . Washington, DC: National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development. 
 Perfetti, C., & Adlof, S. (2012). Reading comprehension: A conceptual framework for word meaning to text meaning. In J. 
Sabatini, E. Albro & T. O’Reilly (Eds.),  Measuring up: Advances in how to assess reading abilities (pp. 3–20). Lanham, MD: 
Rowman & Littlefield Education. 
 Pressley, M., & Allington, R. (2015).  Reading instruction that works (4th ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
 Qian, D. (2002). Investigating the relationship between vocabulary knowledge and academic reading performance: An assess-
ment perspective.  Language Learning ,  52 , 513–536. 
 Rayner, K., Pollatsek, A., Ashby, J., & Lofton, C. (2012).  The psychology of reading  (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Psychology Press. 
 Reutzel, D. R., Jones, C., & Newman, T. (2010). Scaffolded silent reading: Improving the conditions of silent reading practice 
in classrooms. In E. Hiebert & D. R. Reutzel (Eds.),  Revisiting silent reading (pp. 129–150). Newark, DE: IRA. 
 Rosenfeld, M., Leung, S., & Oltman, P. K. (2001).  Identifying the reading, writing, speaking, and listening tasks important for 
academic success at the undergraduate and graduate levels . [TOEFL Monograph Series MS-21]. Princeton, NJ: Educa-
tional Testing Service. 
 Samuels, S. (2006). Toward a model of reading fluency. In S. Samuels & A. Farstrup (Eds.),  What research has to say about flu-
ency instruction (pp. 24–46). Newark, DE: International Reading Association. 
 Sawaki, Y., & Sabatini, J. (2007).  Reading efficiency and reading comprehension . Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
 Shiotsu, T. (2010).  Components of L2 reading . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Stahl, S., & Nagy, W. (2006).  Teaching word meanings . Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum. 
 Stanovich, K. (2000).  Progress in understanding reading: Scientific foundations and new frontiers . New York: Guilford Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

L2 Reading Comprehension and Development • 311
 Taguchi, E., Gorsuch, G., Takayasu-Maass, M., & Snipp, K. (2012). Assisted repeated reading with an advanced-level Japanese 
EFL reader: A longitudinal diary study.  Reading in a Foreign Language ,  24 , 30–55. 
 Taylor, A., Stevens, J., & Asher, J. W. (2006). The effects of explicit reading strategy training on L2 reading comprehension. In 
J. Norris & L. Ortega (Eds.),  Synthesizing research on language learning and teaching  (pp. 213–244). Philadelphia, PA: J. 
Benjamins. 
 Trabasso, T., & Bouchard, E. (2002). Teaching readers how to comprehend texts strategically. In C. Block & M. Pressley (Eds.), 
 Comprehension instruction: Research-based best practices  (pp. 176–200). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Verhoeven, L., & Perfetti, C. (Eds.). (2011).  Morphological processing in reading acquisition: A cross-linguistics perspective . Spe-
cial issue of Applied Psycholinguistics, 32(3). 
 Verhoeven, L., & van Leeuwe, J. (2012). The simple view of second language reading throughout the primary grades.  Reading 
and Writing ,  25 , 1805–1818. 
 Wagner, R., Muse, A., & Tannenbaum, K. (2007). Promising avenues for better understanding implications of vocabulary 
development for reading comprehension. In R. Wagner, A. Muse & K. Tannenbaum (Eds.),  Vocabulary acquisition: Impli-
cations for reading comprehension  (pp. 276–291). New York: Guilford Press. 

312
 23 
 Reading and Technology 
 What’s New and What’s Old about Reading 
in Hyperlinked Multimedia Environments? 
 Thomas Cobb 
 Introduction 
 Until quite recently, reading and technology would have struck many in education as an arcane 
topic, of possible interest mainly to CALL (computer assisted language learning) enthusiasts or other 
techies and nerds. This has changed dramatically given that most people today, especially young 
people, probably do most of their reading and all of their out-of-school reading on digital screens. 
There is often no other choice as newspapers shut down their print editions in favor of phone or 
tablet, and print runs of books are a brief pause on the way to a Kindle or other eBook version (after 
the Kindle was launched by Amazon in 2007, sales of eBooks overtook sales of print versions in just 
four years). Whole universities have eliminated paper books from their undergraduate libraries (e.g., 
The University of Texas at Austin in 2005 and several others since). 
 Reading used to typically involve one individual decoding the carefully edited thoughts of another 
in linear fashion at some distance of both space and time with little possibility of further interac-
tion, but texts on screens are different in ways that impact the reading process. Screen texts are often 
authored collaboratively and are not necessarily intended for linear or even complete processing. A 
typical Web or smartphone document is interlaced with other documents including ads, offers, and 
distractions, and links to a series of ostensibly related documents via a header or sidebar menu (that 
unlike its namesake in a restaurant never goes away once a selection has been made). In the case of 
the blog format, readers have multiple opportunities to interact with the writer or other readers by 
giving feedback. Reading on screen is ever less a private matter and ever more a quasi-public event 
intermeshed with algorithms that track associated behaviors, including which document readers 
came from, where they go next, and all links, keywords, and lookups engaged in the meantime. 
 To say that such an upheaval in the nature of text and reading presents a challenge to educators 
and educational researchers is to state the obvious; however, the goal of this chapter is to argue that 
the challenge of modern text technologies is continuous with the reading challenge of the past, and 
that these technologies also present opportunities. In the final section I argue that research is crucial 
in determining the best ways of exploiting the opportunities. 
 The Challenges 
 It is popularly assumed that reading on screens and reading comprehension are inversely correlated, 
with more of the former being the cause for less of the latter. A subgenre of worrisome assessments 
www.ebook3000.com

Reading and Technology • 313
has sprung up to argue points like “The Internet is rotting your brain” (Miller, 2010) and “Google is 
making us stupid” (Carr, 2008). Carr’s  The Shallows  (2010) is a non-academic but still serious work 
expressing a growing unease about the kinds of mental experience that a fully linked docuverse leaves 
us with. The basic problem is that fully linked, mixed-quality, non-linear documents provide mainly 
distraction and overload rather than breadth of information, and far more of it than people can 
actually cope with. The problem is particularly pointed for those who have little previous experience 
with ‘real’ (i.e. paper) texts, such as children, now renamed ‘digital natives,’ or second language learn-
ers, who are meeting their new languages through digital texts. 
 How worried should we really be? The evidence Carr and his colleagues provide is mainly personal 
and anecdotal, but they may have a point. Research studies both broad and narrow are starting to 
look at the costs and benefits of hypertextual, lateral, or search-based reading (to name just a few 
of the terms competing to name the new reading). One broad empirical investigation is a five-year 
study by Rowlands and Nicholas (2008) of the computer logs from two heavily used UK research 
Web portals. They show that link-enabled researchers both young and old tend to skim rather than 
read, hop from one source to another, rarely return to any source they have already read, and rarely 
read more than two pages of any document. This is not so much reading deeply as ‘power browsing 
horizontally’ through abstracts and content pages in search of quick references for school assign-
ments or research papers. Similar evidence from a different angle comes from the US-based Citation 
Project study of students’ academic writing, which comments strongly on their reading: in a wide 
array of student submissions, 46% of citations were to the first page of the cited source and 77% to 
the first three pages. (Whether print reading was any different is, of course, a moot point, since there 
were fewer ways to track reading processes or products in the past.) 
 It is not clear whether a similar picture prevails in leisure reading where, as mentioned, the num-
ber of downloads is substantial. Downloaded, but read? The ‘Netflix for books’ eBook site Oyster 
(acquired by Google in 2015) tracks reader behavior in order to pay publishers only for books its 
users ‘have read,’ considering this to be the case when 10% of the number of pages of a book has been 
clicked open. There is also evidence that reading on screens per se—regardless of access (or not) to 
hyperlinks and multimedia—is problematic: Wästlund (2007) had 72 participants read the same five 
1,000-word examination texts on paper vs. screen for 30 minutes to determine whether there was a 
difference in the physical and cognitive resources demanded by the two media configurations. The 
screen readers scored slightly but significantly lower on a comprehension test and reported higher 
levels of stress and fatigue. 
 Research by DeStefano and Lefevre (2007) provides a closer look at the processes involved in read-
ing on screens. They synthesized results from 38 experimental studies of the cognitive consequences 
of hypertext reading in the early years of Internet penetration “in order to test the hypothesis that 
activities specific to hypertext can increase cognitive load and impair learning” (p. 1617). They asked 
whether, throughout this research, there was any indication that, “When people follow links, they 
may lose track of where they are in the text, of their reading goals, of the larger context for the node, 
or of material activated in working memory” (p. 1627). The review of L1 reading studies concludes 
that generally, in the experiments reviewed, “many features of hypertext resulted in increased cogni-
tive load and thus may have required working memory capacity that exceeded readers’ capabilities” 
(p. 1636). Since the capabilities of young and second language learners are limited, this finding con-
firms the challenges that such learners face. DeStefano and Lefevre (2007) go on to observe that “the 
various manipulations [entailed in linked or hypertext reading] were often most detrimental to the 
reading processes of less-knowledgeable readers and for readers with low working memory capacity” 
(p. 1636) compared to traditional linear presentations of text. 
 This research would seem to be quite relevant to reading researchers and instructors in early 
reading contexts, if a little underspecified for their purposes. As far as which particular parts of 

314 • Thomas Cobb
comprehension might be a risk in hypertext environments, Maryanne Wolf, Director of the Cen-
ter for Reading and Language Research at Tufts University, identifies “going beyond the text” (or 
“beyond the information given” in Bruner’s, 1973, phrase) as what is most likely to be compromised 
in computer-presented multimedia hypertexts. In other words, the ability to get into and then back 
out of a text in order to see it critically. Wolf feels that a linked multimedia text engulfs the reader in 
ways that a paper text does not: 
 This unique aspect of reading has begun to trouble me considerably as I consider the Google 
universe of my children. Will the constructive component at the heart of reading begin to 
change and potentially atrophy as we shift to computer-presented text, in which massive 
amounts of information appear instantaneously? In other words, when seemingly complete 
visual information is given almost simultaneously, as it is in many digital presentations, is there 
either sufficient time or sufficient motivation to process the information more inferentially, 
analytically, and critically? Is the act of reading dramatically different in such contexts? The 
basic visual and linguistic processes might be identical, but would the more time-demanding, 
probative, analytical, and creative aspects of comprehension be foreshortened? Or does the 
potential added information from hyperlinked text contribute to the development of chil-
dren’s thinking? Can we preserve the constructive nature of reading in our children alongside 
their growing abilities to perform multiple tasks and to integrate ever-expanding amounts of 
information? Should we begin to provide explicit instruction for reading multiple modalities 
of text presentation to ensure that our children learn multiple ways of processing information? 
I  stray  [emphasis added] with these questions. 
 (2007, p. 16) 
 These are all live questions that have only become more urgent since 2007 when this was written. It is 
interesting that these ponderings are seen as ‘straying’ from the main issue at hand, which of course 
she sees as print literacy. Wolf’s intervention work (the ‘RAVE-O’ curriculum, https://ase.tufts.edu/
crlr/RAVE-O/) is focused exclusively on print-based literacy with children, and her worries about 
Google reading are not focused as research questions. 
 Is there any actual data showing that L2 learners are engulfed by multimedia digital texts as Wolf 
speculates? By reducing Wolf’s ‘creative knowledge construction’ down to ‘find the main idea of a 
text’, the present author was able to confirm that there is indeed an issue here. I have observed that 
all beginning and most intermediate second language learners need training to cope with the clut-
ter of extraneous information on an online dictionary page like the one shown in  Figure 23.1 . Note 
that less than 10% of the screen space is devoted to presenting the main information a learner would 
be visiting the page to obtain, which is the definition of  fiscal  (the box minus the cut-out). The other 
90% of the space is devoted to a sound file for  fiscal , a  Visual Thesaurus  graphic of the word’s semantic 
space (which is really an ad), two large for-real ads, links to at least 15 other Cambridge dictionaries, 
links for Facebook and Twitter, and of course links to the publisher’s home page. 
 From intimations of difficulty with this relatively simple case of hypertext reading, I pressed on 
to explore how learners cope with a longer hypertext, where there is presumably even more potential 
for main idea loss. I investigated two similar groups of 23 and 25 advanced ESL learners who were 
training to be non-native-speaking ESL teachers in Quebec (Cobb, 2012). All were ‘very familiar’ 
with multimedia experiences but not with this particular topic, and they had read one of two ver-
sions of an account of Kenyan distance runner Sammy Wanjiru at the Chicago marathon in 2010. 
One group simply read the  New Yorker  summary of the main story on a computer screen (no links, 
see Figure 23.2a), while the other read the text linked as YouTube text plus a video rendition of the 
same story plus a small amount of complementary information. Following 25 minutes with these 
www.ebook3000.com

 Figure 23.1  Finding the Main Information in an Online Learners’ Dictionary 
(Entry for ‘Fiscal’ in  Cambridge Advanced Learners’ Dictionary, accessed June 2012) 
Figure 23.2a Text from Newyorker.com (Underlining Added)

316 • Thomas Cobb
materials, each of the groups was given five minutes to write a point-form summary of Wanjiru’s 
story. For those who had merely read the text on screen, none failed to arrive at the main point, which 
was that Wanjiru has taken his own life shortly after running the marathon. Of those who had experi-
enced the linked multimedia version, 72% failed to include this key fact in their summaries. Instead, 
their summaries related minor details of either the film or text, despite the presence of “RIP” and “his 
last marathon” at the top of the YouTube video ( Figure 23.2b ) and the fact that the tone of the story 
in either mode was building toward this tragically ironic conclusion throughout. So the worry about 
‘engulfment’ and failure to go beyond the information given (or even pick up all of the information 
given) may have some basis in the case of L2 learners. 
 Some simple explanations for this difference can be imagined, one being that more media may 
require more time to process. The explicit formulation of the main idea in the marathon text appears 
at the end—maybe some of the readers never got there. This raises the question of whether it is rea-
sonable to apply the equal reading time model to comparisons of normal and hypertext L2 reading. 
Maybe they would have done better handling the two media separately rather than going back and 
forth in non-linear fashion (if that is what they did)? It is odd, given the clear importance of the phe-
nomena involved, that basic information about the reading of linked multimedia documents does 
not appear to have been sought, let alone replicated and taxonomized into a usable knowledge base 
to share with L2 practitioners. 
     Proposals for the construction of such a knowledge base have not been lacking, and I have made 
them myself. In a study of acquiring new L2 vocabulary from reading with and without click-on 
Figure 23.2b
(YouTube from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZFPhCJ4IKeE)
www.ebook3000.com

Reading and Technology • 317
lexical resources (Cobb, 2006), I found an 84% advantage for with-resources over print and diction-
ary reading. A similar study by Chun and Plass (1996) had found a 77% advantage for the with-
resources group, and that this ostensible similarity would seem to augur well for integration of 
studies into a replicable knowledge base for the main features of hypertext L2 reading. 
 There is also relevant research from CALL, which looks specifically at learning tools/environments 
rather than simply reading environments, which is our focus here. Nonetheless, findings should 
be largely applicable; the body of work is sufficiently large to have been synthesized in successful 
meta-analyses. For instance, Taylor (2009) meta-analyzed results from 32 glossing studies to find an 
overall effect size of .92 (or just under one standard deviation) for comprehension of texts provid-
ing click-on glosses compared to similar texts providing glosses in print. Abraham (2008) presented 
findings from 11 glossing studies, finding a ‘large’ effect for vocabulary learning and a ‘medium’ effect 
on reading comprehension. These are optimistic findings about click-on glosses, but these are just 
one of many possible forms of hypertext, and also they require careful adaptation to the somewhat 
different context of natural online reading. Relevant variables to investigate include the types of 
media in the mix, information quality mix, and the placement of the glosses. Most important is how 
overall effects factor down to different types and levels of L2 learners. Some promising work on this 
topic has appeared in the moderating variables part of some of these syntheses, where, for example, 
Abraham (p. 209) found a strong effect size for intermediate learners (.88) and about half of that for 
beginners (.48). 
 Although this research has not yet been adapted to the specific area of hypertext/multimedia 
reading outside of CALL environments, it clearly provides a useful model that L2 reading researchers 
interested in the question of reading on screens might usefully follow. But models from the realm 
of L1 research have become scarce. Since the flurry of studies cited above that date from the period 
2005–2010, when digital reading was ‘going online,’ as it were, there is not much current evidence that 
researchers find these questions interesting or even researchable. Some simple online research shows 
how the topic has been dropped (maybe as digital reading is increasingly defined as reading per se). 
Google Scholar lists the many studies that have cited DeStefano and Lefevre’s work in the eight years 
since it was published, but only a handful of these are in education or reading journals and none are 
in second language journals. Further, of those in education who do cite it, none tackle questions of 
costs and benefits of hypertext reading and for whom. 
 For instance, a 2013 study by Mangen and colleagues begins with a citation from DeStefano and 
Lefevre but does not deal with the ‘for whom’ question. They asked 72 tenth-grade students of simi-
lar (L1) reading ability in Norway to study one narrative and one expository text of 1,500 words on 
PDF files either on paper or on computer screens and then answer comprehension questions (having 
access to the texts). Students who had read on computers performed a little but significantly worse 
than students who read on paper, possibly because (it was observed) the screen readers could only see 
one screen at a time while those with paper could see several and therefore integrate their informa-
tion more successfully (i.e. the documents were  not  true hypertexts with some menu or other way 
of getting non-linear access to other documents or parts of the same document). Furthermore, this 
finding, while giving more evidence about the challenge of digital reading, does not deal at all with 
how different readers are affected. In both Scandinavian studies cited (this and Wästlund, 2007), the 
readers were of  similar  ability, but for beginning or second language readers, the interesting question 
is how these media affect readers of different abilities, and that research does not seem to be carried 
forward. 
 More recent works on ‘literacy in the digital age’, or words to this effect, as they appear in the ‘Cus-
tomers Also Bought’ sidebar on www.amazon.com alongside the sample pages from Wolf’s, 2007, 
 Proust and the Squid , tend more to inspiration than research. They have titles like,  Why Libraries 
Matter More Than Ever in the Age of Google  (Palfrey, 2015) or  Tap, Click, Read  (Guernsey & Levine, 

318 • Thomas Cobb
2015). A more academically oriented title is linguist Naomi Baron’s (2015) review  Words Onscreen , 
which basically details the different yet complementary ‘affordances’ of print and screen. You can 
annotate a book more easily than a screen, so annotatability is one of its affordances; you can carry 
15 books on a Kindle more easily than in a suitcase, so portability is one of its affordances. Baron 
presents a host of research findings similar to those already discussed assessing the general impact of 
technology on text, including the fascinating finding that “92 percent of college students [from 300 
students in four countries] prefer reading print books to e-readers.” She explains the apparent incon-
sistency of this preference for print with the actual eBooks the students are downloading as basically 
a market squeeze. To understand the rise of eBooks, she suggests “start with the money trail” (p. 12; 
i.e. the high cost and low profitability of paper textbooks for publishers). Still, Baron concludes her 
analysis fairly optimistically with the idea that the uses of digital and print media will gradually sort 
themselves out. We have always read different types of texts in different ways for different purposes 
(a telephone book differently from a police report or Tolstoy novel), and dealing with a slightly more 
diverse range of media in the future will be no different. But once again, the specter of winners and 
losers is not raised, nor is any other learning-to-read-hypertext aspect that might have relevance to 
L2 contexts. Baron’s suggestion that reading will go on much as before does not take into account 
that print reading was already a problem for many before and seems headed to becoming a worse 
one in the future. 
 Everything that makes reading difficult for some readers (both L1 and L2) makes it more chal-
lenging in linked multimedia formats. For example, an important problem with reading has always 
been distraction from outside the text, but now the distraction comes from right inside the text itself. 
Screen readers today are faced with a row of button-links along the sides and top, links to ‘resources’ 
for every word in the body of the text, and many with ads that jump to a different text, sometimes 
with no obvious way back. Even when the hyper-journey to a second text (say to a definition or 
biographical note) is benign, it involves holding and coordinating two or more information sources 
at the same time while remembering where one had got to in the main text. This taxes memory 
resources that are almost definitively inadequate in the case of young and second language learners. 
What prevents reading from becoming an impossible exercise in multitasking is automaticity and 
chunking of all the cognitive bits and pieces involved (nicely detailed in Gough’s [1972] classic “One 
second of reading”). Achieving this level of fluency to any significant degree in a second language 
requires a large amount of exposure to text—on the order of 10,000 hours of low-stress, single-task 
reading—and a recognition lexicon of at least 8,000 word families (Nation, 2006). Even then, assum-
ing a text can be decoded by the L2 reader, the final goal of a critical assessment of its contents and 
their implications may well be difficult, as Wolf surmises because of the ‘engulfing’ nature of many 
digital texts. 
 At the end of her ‘Google reading’ speculations, Wolf (2007, p. 7) speculatively wonders, “Should 
we begin to provide explicit instruction for reading multiple modalities of text presentation?” In 
the context of DeStefano and other research, the answer seems an obvious Yes. Learning to read is 
not free, it takes effort, and all indications are that reading in a digital environment, while bringing 
benefits for strong readers, takes even more effort for weak readers. 
 2a. Teaching to the Challenge 
 What would training wheels for happy travel in the interlinked docuverse look like? A number of 
books are now available with usable teaching ideas, although most seem not to be based on evidence 
about where problems may lie and none seem devoted to second language learners. That said, Guern-
sey and Levine’s (2015)  Tap, Click, Read  offers several usable ideas for younger first language readers, 
and the author’s reading resource page on the website Lextutor (www.lextutor.ca) is designed to 
www.ebook3000.com

Reading and Technology • 319
support L2 reading on screens via experimental interfaces. A concrete issue that the site has tackled is 
the problem of linked texts where the first typically disappears behind the second, making it difficult 
to integrate information from both texts; the reader must hold the first in memory (or else return to 
it and then hold the second in memory). A common case in point is the native Apple smartphone 
tap-word dictionary feature, in which the dictionary requires two separate actions (tap to select and 
then choose ‘define’) to produce its meaning and then displaces the first text, taking up the whole 
screen.  Figure 23 . 3  shows this operation on iPhone 6 using a medium-difficulty story by Margaret 
Wente from the  Toronto Globe and Mail  of 9 April 2016. The story is about sexual assault on North 
American campuses, and the reader is stuck on the word ‘dull.’ The reader taps on the word (which 
may often involve technical hitches), and dictionary entries from three sources appear on the screen 
and displace the text; the reader must then return to the text when finished consulting the dictionary.     
 An experienced user of English can probably use this information to effect, owing to capacious 
memory resources provided by a lifetime of automaticity practice, but for an L2 reader for whom this 
is a true learning text (i.e. pushing the skill repertoire) the displacement of the text almost certainly 
makes it challenging to integrate the definition with the way  dull  is used in this particular context. 
Admittedly, the looked-up word remains conveniently highlighted on return from the definition, but 
even so, the integration of meaning and context must take place mainly in memory since they do not 
appear together. Had there been other media involved in this maneuver (such as a video or sound 
recording related to the text), the original text could be buried three layers deep. 
 Compare  Figure 23.3  to  Figure 23.4 , which illustrates a learner-oriented version of the same oper-
ation. The features to note are the several interrelated screens in fixed positions; the definition is 
 Figure 23.3 Apple iPhone’s Native Three-step, Original-displacing Multiple Definitions 

 Figure 23.3 (Continued) 
 Figure 23.4 Learner-friendly Look-up and Media Integration from Ted Talk by Terry Moore (Why Is ‘X’ the Unknown?) and Wordreference.com 
Mini Dictionary 
 (from http://www.lextutor.ca/hyp/2/) 
www.ebook3000.com

Reading and Technology • 321
produced in a single click, and importantly, the definition and contextualization of the target word 
can be examined simultaneously. The integration of the two types of information is facilitated by the 
clicked word remaining highlighted after the definition has been produced on the right screen. An 
accompanying video and soundtrack are also available, which can also be accessed without losing 
view of the main text. 
 Further examples could be furnished, but suffice it to say that all or most characteristics of hypertext/
multimedia reading that have been pared down for small screens and native speaker skill can be spread 
back out and made learner friendly without losing the main benefit. The assumption is that working 
with  Figure 23.4  would be some sort of preparation for  Figure 23.3 . The nature of the linguistic and 
cognitive resources needed to make the transition is an empirical and highly researchable question. This 
is a point I will explore in more detail in the final section. The next section returns to the point that 
hypertext reading is not so much something new but rather a continuation of something old. 
 The Continuities of New and Old Reading 
 The challenges posed by recent text technologies may appear to be a radical departure from those of 
‘normal’ reading, but in fact they are continuous. They are merely the latest and certainly not the last 
step in the “technologizing of the word” (Ong, 1982) that began when languages came to be writ-
ten down. Written texts and the producing or interpreting of such texts are and have always been 
instances of interacting with a technology. This is true whether we think of technology as a quasi-
industrial process involving particular tools and procedures (quill pen, printing press, keyboard) 
or in the broader sense of artifice involving arbitrary representations and extended learning curves. 
 Everyone gets spoken language for free, but written language comes at a cost. The variance in 
comprehension of a radio news broadcast is minor and can be traced to cognitive and knowledge 
factors unrelated to code handling; for the same news written down, the variance is significant and 
ability to decode makes a difference. This is because written language is not part of our biological 
inheritance, but rather an arbitrary code that must be learned. It is at several removes from both the 
familiar world around us and the spoken language we use to describe it. 
 Speaking and listening are universal acquisitions, which everyone in a social environment who 
is not disabled masters at roughly the same pace and to a similar level, but writing and reading are 
“unnatural acts” (so named by Gough & Hillinger, 1980) that are acquired unevenly, uncertainly, 
and with variability of outcome. Variants of the phrase are DeHaene’s (2009) “Writing is a human 
invention” (from his subtitle) that borrows abilities developed for other purposes through neuronal 
recycling, or Wolf’s (2007, p. 3) “We were never born to read”. All people of normal intelligence learn 
the spoken version of their first languages to the extent needed to function in their typical environ-
ments; the same cannot be said for writing and reading. An analogy is learning to swim: everyone 
learns to walk with no or minor assistance, but learning to swim takes effort and instruction and 
yields variable outcomes. And swimming functions by borrowing body parts that were adapted for 
other purposes (the arms and legs), which is exactly how DeHaene describes the reading process 
(perceptual abilities in the eyes and cortex originally designed for food identification). 
 The representations involved in writing are not only abstract and arbitrary but became ever more 
so with each step in its evolution. Writing systems began in ideographs or quasi-pictorial notation 
( = بba = cow horns = bacar/vache) but gradually gave way to combinations of pictures in hiero-
glyphs. Such combinations were used first to capture hard-to-picture concepts with other pictures 
(mouth + bread = eat) and then to capture the  sound  of hard-to-picture concepts with pictures (as 
in the hypothetical example  cell +  fish =  selfish ). The focus on sound rather than sight was complete 
when symbols represented not things but pieces of the speech stream, first the comparatively con-
crete unit of consonant-based syllables (as in Arabic, where  = ﻛﺘﺐ = ك ت بka-ta-ba represents the 

322 • Thomas Cobb
sounds meaning ‘he wrote’) and finally fully abstract individual sounds with representations for both 
vowels and consonants (d-o-g = dog). The point that the system is arbitrary is also evident in the fact 
that the spoken form for the barking pet can just as logically be spelled  dawg . With every additional 
step away from the visible world, writing became capable of representing a greater number and com-
plexity of concepts and was ultimately more useful as a means of storing and conveying information 
about the very world it had departed from—but at the cost that it took longer to learn and some 
users never really learned it. 
 One reason that some users of a language never really learn its writing system is the abstract 
nature of the code, and the other is the overwhelmingly large size of the lexicons that this abstraction 
makes possible. Before languages were fully written, it seems likely they comprised about the number 
of words that a typical adult of any time period would be likely to know, which is about 15,000–
20,000 word families. But with a fully developed written language, lexicons were free to proliferate in 
size and complexity since they did not need to be held in any one person’s memory. The lexicons of 
modern languages are truly enormous, comprising 2 million lexemes in the case of English, which 
of course are not fully known to everyone or even anyone; they are used in texts in numbers that go 
beyond what can be learned from experience and oral interaction. Spoken language uses about 3,000 
word families to express its meanings, supplemented by shared context, face and body language, 
and of course clarification opportunities; the other 15,000 families in relatively common use appear 
almost exclusively in texts (or in discussions of texts such as takes place in university seminars). These 
ideas are more fully developed in Cobb (2013). 
 By the time formal education begins, and with it learning to read, children know roughly 5,000 
word families. Spoken language production and processing are fully automatized and chunked 
(meaning that predictable sequences of sounds, word classes, and collocations are processed as single 
units, leaving working memory free to interpret intent and meaning). This means that further learn-
ing (vocabulary, pronunciation, style variation) can be assimilated within existing structures, but the 
same is not normally true for reading. Even precocious first-grade readers recognize in writing only a 
small proportion of the words they know in speech. Reading involves not only a lot of new knowledge 
but also new ways of acquiring this knowledge. Speech is learned in a rich, contextually dense envi-
ronment with many, many extra-textual and even extra-linguistic clues as to the meaning of what is 
being said or taking place. Text processing has far fewer cues, and these are mainly confined to within 
the text itself—and guesses about what things mean must be made without (immediate) feedback. 
 An attested phenomenon in reading development is the strong risk of a ‘fourth grade slump’ (Chall 
& Jacobs, 2003) as children make the necessary move from ‘learning to read’ to ‘reading to learn.’ Up 
until then, reading development has mainly involved attaching written labels to words already known 
in speech—the concepts are largely in place. But at about fourth grade, children are required to cope 
more and more with new words and new concepts that appear mainly in texts (technical, analytic, 
unfamiliar, infrequent). These will largely be learned from cues within texts themselves (although 
with varying amounts of support from whatever type of instruction they are in). 
 The slump idea applies to native speakers, but there is a second-language version of the same 
phenomenon, not necessarily at fourth grade but at a time relative to the age at which schooling 
in the second language began. Cummins (e.g. 1991) has detailed the extent to which children and 
adolescents being schooled in a second language are likely to pick up the language of conversation 
and personal interaction to an adequate degree (contextualized, with immediate feedback, etc.). Yet 
then, like Chall’s fourth graders, they tend to slump as they attempt to achieve ‘cognitive academic 
language proficiency’ (CALP in Cummins’ term) with its reduced contexts, augmented conceptual 
complexity, and greater dependence on instruction and effort. To this general picture Cummins 
adds evidence that in the case of older second language learners, there may also be a risk of failure 
to transfer reading ability already acquired in the first language if L2 resources (mainly vocabulary) 
are insufficiently developed. 
www.ebook3000.com

Reading and Technology • 323
 In summary then, if the ‘new reading’ requires deliberate instruction to realize the full benefits of 
text technologies and avoid the pitfalls suggested by DeStefano and Lefevre, then this should be no 
surprise since the old reading required it, too. Suffice it to say that not everybody gets the instruc-
tion or guided practice they need in print reading. Maybe we can do better with ‘Literacy  Part 2 ,’ as 
hypertext literacy has been called. 
 The Opportunities 
 Like most writing about hypertext literacy, this piece has dwelled mainly on its real or supposed 
negatives. (It is easier to complain than to adapt one’s teaching to real costs and benefits.) In fact, the 
potential advantages are considerable. Every negative mentioned so far has a large potential positive. 
For example, the notorious process of tracking Internet users for targeted advertising can also be 
used to answer ancient riddles about learning to read, allowing researchers to dig into the processes 
of reading rather than simply the products. Again: students may prefer print to digital, but along 
with digital text has come a vast multiplication of the amount and quality of text available and the 
ease with which it can be obtained and shared. Once upon a time, I would have spent a week in the 
library finding and photocopying materials for a piece such as this one, but now I have been able to 
devote most of that time to thinking and writing. In terms of more specific benefits, and given space 
constraints, I will focus on one or two ways that linked hypertexts may be able to solve some old 
reading problems raised in earlier sections. 
 One simple but serious problem in adult second language reading is that readers pause so often 
to look up or write down words that there is little chance of their forming a coherent representa-
tion of the text as a whole (or, getting the main idea). A simple solution to this is to allow learners a 
quick in-context look-up (as shown in  Figure 23.4 ), with minimal departure from the text. Another 
solution is to allow learners to collect the interesting words in a text as they read for  later  look-up. In 
 Figure 23.5 , again an illustration of a resource available at the author’s reading website, the French 
 Figure 23.5  Looking up  Affrontement but Saving  Emissaires and  Crise for Confirmation Later (in a news report and sound file in Français Facile 
on January 1, 2011, from Radio France International) 
 (RFI, at http://savoirs.rﬁ .fr/fr/apprendre-enseigner/langue-francaise/journal-en-francais-facile) 

324 • Thomas Cobb
 affrontements  got a look-up, but other words of interest were saved for later in the Word Box with an 
Alt-Click involving minimal departure from the text—and the whole file was sent to the teacher for 
incorporation into future reading and vocabulary work. 
   A more complex reading problem, as already discussed, is that as learning to read evolves into 
reading to learn, the vocabulary involved becomes less familiar. First and second language readers 
alike are likely to encounter the written forms of frequent words like  street  and  shop  often and in 
supportive contexts (e.g. on signs and in predictable stories). This is far less likely to so in the case 
of ‘school’ words like  determine, consequence , and  inhibit . Reference points for meanings are likely 
to be fewer and the informativeness of the contexts in which they appear is likely to be reduced, as 
discussed above in reference to work by Chall in first language and Cummins in second. Carefully 
designed hypertexts should be able to help deal with this problem by augmenting the context of 
the text. A rudimentary example of augmented contextualization is shown in  Figure 23.6 , where 
in addition to getting a definition, the reader of de Maupassant’s  Boule de Suif  (1880) can also see 
which other chapter ( chapitre ) of the same story contains further instances of any word; which of 
the author’s other works ( autres contes ) contains further instances; and, in addition, consult a back-
grounder on the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, the story’s setting. This approach is further discussed 
in Cobb (2006) under the title “Delivering the Teacher with the Text.” 
 Clearly, the contextual support integrated into the  Boule de Suif  hypertext is just a basic example 
in one topic area. Science texts with interactive graphs, diagrams, translations, and elaborations in 
the margins linked to specific parts of the text are imaginable and to some extent already in existence, 
although probably not widely and certainly without sufficient research into their effectiveness or 
most effective uses. Such contextualization clearly has to be done carefully and according to a plan, 
since as suggested by Wolf (and demonstrated in the marathon runner experiment), merely engulf-
ing readers in contextual information may impede rather than enhance comprehension. 
 Figure 23.6 A French Text Commonly Found in Courses by de Maupassant (1880) with Five Kinds of Supporting (or Distracting?) Context: Sound, 
Definition, Other Occurrences in the Same Text, Other Occurrences by the Same Author, and Historical Backgrounder 
www.ebook3000.com

Reading and Technology • 325
   Perhaps the supreme example of contextualization of a text involves the practice of inviting read-
ers to comment on a text, which then becomes part of the text for subsequent readers (as in the 
discussion forum linked to a dictionary look-up in  Figure 23.7, where the boundary between text 
and talk almost disappears). 
     How and how much context can be included without engulfing readers and making them miss 
their main ideas is of course a researchable question. 
 The Research Questions 
 The foregoing discussion has made or insinuated a number of claims about linked hypertext reading 
that deserve research investigation—first in the form of small, specific question-based research and then 
as meta-analysis to pull it (always provisionally) together. The goal as mentioned is to create a usable 
knowledge base. Questions are as follows: 
 1. Can DeStefano and Lefevre’s (2007) finding of differential effects of hypertext reading for 
strong and weak learners be replicated in practical language learning contexts? 
 2. Is successful print reading a precondition for successful hyper-reading, and if so, how much? 
 3. Should hyper-reading be specifically taught and practiced, or can it be fully mastered from a 
print base? 
 4. Do hypertext ‘training wheels’ in fact prepare readers for digital competence or is their time 
better spent simply reading more print materials? 
 5. In what conditions and at what learning stages is the amplified context made possible by 
digital text a help or a hindrance? 
 6. Can or should school examinations include a digital reading component? 
 7. Should teacher training include strategies to help learners become competent digital readers? 
 Figure 23.7  The Entry for  Serendipity on Wordreference.com Starts by Steering Readers to the Forum, Where Learners from UK and Poland Share 
Information About Its Pronunciation and Origin 

326 • Thomas Cobb
 Conclusion 
 To answer the question implicit in my subtitle, what’s new is that reading in a multimedia, hyper-
linked, mixed-quality environment is poised between benefits and challenges. What’s old is that 
reading has always been this way, although now in a particularly urgent way. 
 Pervasive digital text with all its problems and possibilities is upon us whether we like it or not. 
It is a transformation probably driven more by cost and financial opportunity than by intellectual 
adventure and novel ways of communicating. Despite that, the benefits probably outweigh the costs, 
if for nothing more than the access, portability, and transferability of digital text. Yet, the linking and 
multimedia aspects are important, too. What academic could imagine not having multiple docu-
ments open on a screen, or not being able to search through them all at once? Who has not read a 
news story and found the accompanying video pulled the story together in a way that text alone had 
not done and maybe could not do? 
 Print text will not go away, any more than speech went away after the invention of writing. Again, 
the two media or modalities will find their best affordances. Certainly there will always be reasons to 
read  War and Peace on paper (sentiment, absence of distraction, margin scribbling). Probably legal 
judgments, engineering reports, or roadway proposals will never be anything other than dull-looking 
paper tomes. On second thought, since the latter two already incorporate drawing and photographs, 
they probably have a place for embedded video; all three involve cross-references, so there is probably 
no reason these could not be hyperlinked. 
 For some constituencies, print media has already gone away. This does not mean that anyone 
enrolled in the education system should not be introduced to paper text and its effective handling, as 
this sort of reading will play some role for the foreseeable future and even may be the precondition 
to successful hypertext engagement. In any case, print literacy is unlikely to come under threat in the 
education system any time soon. On the contrary, many educators are likely to continue dealing with 
print reading as if it were the only kind of reading and ignore digital reading as an object of instruc-
tion, because of conservatism in the teaching/testing ranks and the association of digital reading with 
entertainment. But failure to provide instruction in best use of digital text is a mistake. 
 The research takeaway from this chapter is DeStefano and Lefevre’s (2007) meta-finding that “the 
various manipulations [entailed in linked or hypertext reading] were often most detrimental to the 
reading processes of less-knowledgeable readers and for readers with low working memory capacity.” 
If reading is not just learned by all like speech but needs to be taught, then it is a plausible extension 
that digital reading also needs to be taught, and probably more so. Whether and how well this will 
happen is probably predictable from how well it has happened for print literacy. 
 References 
 Abraham, L. (2008). Computer-mediated glosses in second language reading comprehension and vocabulary learning: A 
meta-analysis.  Computer Assisted Language Learning 21 (3), 199–226. 
 Baron, N. (2015).  Words onscreen: The fate of reading in a digital world . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Bruner, J. (1973).  Beyond the information given: Studies in the psychology of knowing . Oxford, UK: Norton. 
 Carr, N. (2008). Is Google making us stupid?  Atlantic Monthly , July/August, 56–63. 
 Carr, N. (2010).  The shallows: How the internet is changing the way we think, read and remember . New York: Norton. 
 Chall, J., & Jacobs, V. (2003). Poor children’s fourth-grade slump.  American Educator 27 (1), 14–15. 
 Chun, D., & Plass, J. (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition.  The Modern Language Journal 
80 (2), 183–196. 
 Citation Project. Online at http://site.citationproject.net/results/findings-sources-cited-in-paper/, accessed April 10, 2016. 
 Cobb, T. (2006). Internet and literacy in the developing world: Delivering the teacher with the text.  Educational Technology 
Research & Development 54 (6), 627–645. 
 Cobb, T. (June 2012).  New literacies: New challenges & new opportunities for language learners.  Talk presented at Pan-SIG con-
ference of the Japan Association of Language Teachers (JALT) Hiroshima, Japan. 
www.ebook3000.com

Reading and Technology • 327
 Cobb, T. (2013). Technology and learning vocabulary. In C. Chapelle (Ed.),  The encyclopedia of applied linguistics . New York: 
Wiley. 
 Cummins, J. (1991). Conversational & academic language proficiency. In J. Hulstijn & J. Matter (Eds.),  Reading in two lan-
guages (pp. 75–89). AILA Review. Amsterdam: Free University Press. 
 DeHaene, S. (2009).  Reading in the brain: The science and evolution of a human invention . New York: Viking. 
 DeStefano, L., & Lefevre, J. (2007). Cognitive load in hypertext reading: A review.  Computers in Human Behavior 23 , 1616–1641. 
 Gough, P. B. (1972). One second of reading.  Visible Language 6 (4), 291–320. 
 Gough, P. B., & Hillinger, M. L. (1980). Learning to read: An unnatural act.  Bulletin of the Orton Society 30 , 179–190. 
 Guernsey, L., & Levine, M. (2015).  Tap, click, read: Growing readers in a world of screens . San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass/Wiley. 
 Mangen, A., Walgermo, B., & Bronnick, K. (2013). Reading linear texts on paper versus computer screen: Effects on reading 
comprehension.  International Journal of Educational Research 58 , 61–68. 
 de Maupassant, G. (1880).  Boule de Suif . Paris: Gallimard (Folio). [Originally published 1880.] 
 Miller, L. (2010). Yes, the Internet is rotting your brain. Salon.com. Available online at: http://www.salon.com/2010/05/09/
the_shallows_2/ 
 Nation, P. (2006). How large a vocabulary is needed for reading and listening?  Canadian Modern Language Review 63 (1), 
59–82. 
 Ong, W. (1982).  Orality and literacy: The technologizing of the word . New York: Routledge. 
 Palfrey, J. (2015).  Bibliotech: Why libraries matter more than ever in the age of Google . New York: Basic Books. 
 Rowlands, I., & Nicholas, D. (2008).  Information behaviour of the researcher of the future . Centre for Information Behaviour & 
the Evaluation of Research (CIBER), University College London. [Online at http://www.bl.uk/news/pdf/googlegen.pdf.] 
 Taylor, A. M. (2009). CALL-based versus paper-based glosses: Is there a difference in reading comprehension?  CALICO Journal 
27 (1), 147–160. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/calicojournal.27.1.147 
 Wästlund, E. (2007). Experimental studies of human-computer interaction: Working memory and mental workload in com-
plex cognition. Göteborg University, Sweden: PhD thesis. 
 Wolf, M. (2007).  Proust and the squid: The story and science of the reading brain . New York: HarperCollins. 

328
 24 
 Research on L2 Writing 
 Contexts, Writers, and Pedagogy 
 Dana R. Ferris 
 In previous volumes of this handbook, the topic of research on second language (L2) writing has 
been approached in distinct ways. In Volume I, Hedgcock (2005) focused primarily on the pedagogi-
cal history of the teaching of L2 writing, including state-of-the-art summaries on “hot” subtopics 
such as writing assessment and error correction. In Volume II, Hinkel (2011) emphasized empirical 
work that has described the nature of L2 writing, especially in contrast with L1 writing (mostly in 
English, but not exclusively). 
 I intend to take this Volume III chapter in a somewhat different direction, so as to build upon their 
work without entirely duplicating it. The primary goal for this chapter is to discuss the space that 
L2 writing has come to occupy in the larger and intersecting worlds of writing studies and applied 
language studies, and how this broader perspective has shaped and will continue to shape research 
about and teaching of L2 writers. 
 Three distinct contextual realities will continue to shape L2 writing as a scholarly and pedagogical 
concern. First, writing (in any language) is gaining importance both as a stand-alone discipline and 
across the disciplines, not only in the US but also around the world. This is demonstrated both by 
the rapid growth of independent writing programs and especially by growth in degree programs in 
writing at both graduate and undergraduate levels (Brown, Enos, Reamer, & Thompson, 2007; Carlo 
& Enos, 2011; O’Neill, Crow, & Burton, 2002). It is also demonstrated by substantial scholarly work 
that describes how writing instruction is implemented around the world (Thaiss, Bräuer, Carlino, 
Ganobcsik-Williams, & Sinha, 2012) and how writing across the curriculum and in the disciplines is 
surviving and thriving in various contexts (Thaiss & Porter, 2010). 
 Second, as writing programs gain status and power in their local contexts and internationally, 
issues related to teaching L2/multilingual writers within and adjacent to such programs are also 
receiving more attention than in the past, when ESL departments were expected to simply “fix” any 
student “problems” before releasing them into the larger college/university environment. The rapid 
growth in international undergraduates in the US and elsewhere (Institute of International Educa-
tion, 2014) has accelerated broader interest in L2 writers/writing beyond the sole purview of applied 
linguists and other L2 writing specialists. Scholarly and administrative interest in writing in general 
and L2 writing in particular has grown, has higher stakes than in the past, and, sometimes to the 
discomfort of L2 writing specialists, has been taken up by others outside of our specialization. 
 Third, continued rapid advancement not only in technology for teaching writing but also in 
digital literacy/new media affordances and research is changing everything about how we and our 
www.ebook3000.com

Research on L2 Writing • 329
students read and write and how we teach, assess, and study L2 writers (Kessler, Oskoz, & Elola, 2012; 
Ware, 2011; Ware & Warschauer, 2006). We cannot talk about current and future directions for L2 
writing research and pedagogy without a constant awareness of what technology means for literacy 
development and reading/writing pedagogy. 
 In short, the landscape surrounding L2 writing has changed and will continue to do so. It is my 
task at this point in time to summarize where we have been, to try to capture a bit of where we are 
now, and to try to speculate where L2 writing as a field of inquiry and a site of practice may be 
headed in the near future. In the rest of this chapter, I will explain where L2 writing fits into the larger 
research picture of both writing and applied language studies; summarize important developments, 
trends, and traditions in the field to date; discuss ongoing controversies in the research; and conclude 
by briefly outlining some expected and proposed future directions. 
 The Place of L2 Writing in “Parent” Research Traditions 
 As Silva and Leki (2004) explain, L2 writing as a field evolved from two distinct research traditions, 
composition and applied linguistics, which respectively emerged from their own parent disciplines 
of rhetoric and linguistics. The interdisciplinary nature of L2 writing has provided useful breadth 
and depth in both research and pedagogy, but it has also led at points to some disjunction and ten-
sion. To give just one example, while composition studies (L1) has nearly abandoned the study of 
language and error in writing since the 1980s (Bitchener & Ferris, 2012; MacDonald, 2007; Matsuda, 
2012), in applied linguistics, research and publications on the topic of written corrective feedback in 
L2 writing instruction have been ubiquitous over the past 20 years. More broadly, composition stud-
ies, emerging as it has from humanities-oriented disciplines and academic homes, has tended over 
its history to take its authority from philosophical frameworks rather than empirical research find-
ings. Though composition as a field is now moving towards increased empirical activity, it has been 
relatively slow to do so (Haswell, 2005) and tends to favor qualitative over quantitative methodology, 
limiting the generalizability of the research base. 
 These differences between L1 composition and L2 writing studies in epistemological origins and 
research traditions can and do influence research, teacher preparation, and classroom pedagogy (see 
Atkinson & Ramanathan, 1995). However, this is not the only divide that L2 writing research must 
navigate. Even within the applied linguistics domain, there are divisions between SLA researchers and 
L2 writing researchers, as different questions or starting points motivate distinct approaches toward 
investigating outwardly similar phenomena (such as written errors and error feedback). As I have 
discussed elsewhere (Bitchener & Ferris, 2012; Ferris, 2010), SLA researchers prefer controlled exper-
imental or quasi-experimental designs to investigate questions such as “Does a certain type of cor-
rective feedback appear to facilitate learners’ acquisition of a target linguistic structure?” In contrast, 
L2 writing researchers are more interested in contextualized classroom research (with “ecologically 
valid” designs; Storch, 2010, p. 29) that examines how feedback helps to develop strategic writers, 
not merely their control over a particular point of grammar or morphology. It can be difficult for 
researchers in these different camps to review and appreciate each other’s work: One group dismisses 
the other as not methodologically sound enough because every variable is not strictly controlled, 
while the other questions what can really be learned from such tightly constructed studies that are so 
separate from actual classroom realities. 
 As a result of these philosophical and methodological differences, what should be a strength in 
L2 writing studies can sometimes be a disadvantage. L2 writing research and teaching can absolutely 
benefit from the theory, research, and practice of mainstream rhetoric and composition studies. 
Similarly, the carefully drawn quantitative designs of SLA researchers can not only inform research 
approaches that are useful for L2 writing research (see Ferris, 2010) but can also yield findings that 

330 • Dana R. Ferris
can complement qualitative and mixed-methods classroom research designs often preferred by L1 
and L2 writing scholars. Taken together, researchers can approach more integrated and holistic 
descriptions of L2 writing, an extremely complex phenomenon that cannot be oversimplified into 
a statistical model nor overgeneralized from a few case study participants or one classroom study in 
a single context. 
 Developments and Trends in L2 Writing Research and Pedagogy 
 Several authors over the years have reviewed the history of approaches to teaching L2 writers (Ferris, 
2009; Ferris & Hedgcock, 2014; Matsuda, 2003; Silva, 1990). These summaries have covered peda-
gogical models, definitions of L2 writers themselves, the contexts in which L2 writing was/is taught, 
and the professional status of L2 writing as a subdiscipline or a field in its own right. 
 L2 Writing Pedagogy: A Brief History 
 As to pedagogy, early approaches to teaching L2 writing (1940s–1960s) were heavily influenced by 
models of foreign/L2 language teaching derived from linguistics. Writing as a language skill was 
subordinated to other language subskills (listening, speaking, reading, grammar, vocabulary), and L2 
writing in the classroom typically consisted of rigidly structured practice to allow students oppor-
tunities to manipulate language forms they had learned. This practice, more commonly known as 
“controlled” composition, included activities such as rewriting an existing paragraph from present 
to past tense or from first to third person. It was assumed that learners needed to master discrete 
grammatical forms and sentence construction before they could possibly generate their own written 
content in the L2. 
 This “controlled” approach was later (1960s–1970s) extended beyond the sentence level to the 
paragraph and essay level. Influenced both by the contrastive rhetoric hypothesis (Kaplan, 1966), 
which posited that L2 writers needed exposure to and practice with dominant organizational pat-
terns in the L2 that might differ from their L1 experience, and the current-traditional method in L1 
composition, students were given top-down strategies (topic sentences, thesis statements, transitions, 
rigid “modes” such as narration, description, process) to compose texts on various topics. As with the 
earlier controlled composition method, the assumption was that learners would not be capable of 
generating effective texts of any length without the scaffolding of a prescribed structure. 
 The process movement in L1 composition (1970s), which changed the emphasis of writing instruc-
tion from the forms of final text products to the mental strategies used by writers as they composed, 
began to take hold in L2 composition in the 1980s, thanks to pioneering work by Zamel (1982), 
Krashen (1984), and Raimes (1985). L2 writing courses began to transition from tightly structured 
language practice in producing grammatically perfect sentences and formulaic paragraphs and essays 
to helping students discover and express their own ideas and develop transferable composing strate-
gies that would help them in future writing tasks. 
 The process approach came under almost immediate criticism from other L2 specialists (Eskey, 
1983; Horowitz, 1986), who argued that the philosophical tenets of the process approach—a focus 
on the writer’s own experiences, self-expression, and ideas, a hands-off stance by the instructor, de-
emphasizing any concern for form—would leave L2 students unprepared to face real-world demands 
in the university and in the workplace (see also Johns, 1995). In response, the English for academic 
purposes (EAP) approach to L2 writing instruction emerged; Johns (1999) also described this as a 
“socioliterate” approach to teaching academic writing. In this iteration, students are taught about 
the different genres and audiences in academic settings, how to understand and interpret academic 
literacy tasks, and even, under the Systemic Functional Linguistics model (see, e.g., Schleppegrell, 
www.ebook3000.com

Research on L2 Writing • 331
1998), specific language structures (grammar and vocabulary) that would help students write effec-
tively in school-based genres. 
 Interestingly, all four historical approaches—controlled/guided composition, current-traditional 
(also known as paragraph-pattern), process, and genre-based/EAP models—co-exist in L2 writing 
classes and materials (textbooks) today. One continuing practical problem in L2 literacy development 
is the disjunction (described well by Atkinson & Ramanathan in 1995 and still true today) that stu-
dents find between developmental L2 writing instruction and mainstream composition approaches, 
when they must abruptly move from tightly structured tasks to more complex and sophisticated 
writing of their own. 
 Understanding L2 Writers and Contexts 
 As a range of classroom approaches have emerged over time, our understanding of what we mean 
by the term “L2 writer” has also evolved. In the first edition of our co-authored text on teaching 
L2 composition (Ferris & Hedgcock, 1998), we did not find it necessary to define at length what 
we meant by “L2 writer”; it seemed obvious to us that “L2 writer” meant “newcomer”—either an 
international (visa) student or a recently arrived resident (immigrant) student. However, it quickly 
became apparent that there was a third group of student writers that also should be discussed under 
the rubric of “L2” or “multilingual”—the group known in the literature as “Generation 1.5” students 
(Harklau, Losey, & Siegal, 1999; Roberge, Losey, & Wald, 2015; Roberge, Siegal, & Harklau, 2009) or 
“early arrivals” (Ferris, 2009). These are students who either immigrated to the L2 setting at an early 
age with their first-generation immigrant parents or who may have even been born in their parents’ 
new home. Regardless of birthplace, they have in common that they were raised in homes where the 
primary language was not the L2, and this early background often influenced their educational path-
ways throughout their primary and secondary years. Despite long-term exposure to the L2, some of 
these students arrive in college or university with gaps in their language and/or L2 literacy develop-
ment that may impede their success. 
 In addition to these three groups (international, recent/late-arriving residents, early-arriving 
residents) living in an L2-dominant environment, L2 writers also operate in contexts more properly 
defined as  foreign language  (FL) settings, meaning that the L2 is taken as a subject in school and/or is 
used for specific instrumental purposes. These writers learn English (or another L2) in similar ways 
as US secondary students might study Spanish or French, but it is not a ubiquitous or essential part 
of their daily lives outside of school. Depending upon the context, L2 writing may be a big part of 
their education or a very small and inconsequential one (see Reichelt, 2011). International students 
coming from FL contexts to pursue degrees in an L2 context may have gaps in their language, culture, 
and literacy experiences that are different from those raised and educated in the L2 environment, 
and teachers who go to work in such FL settings may need to adjust their expectations about student 
motivations, institutional requirements, and effective classroom approaches. 
 Much of the preceding discussion about pedagogy, writers themselves, and contexts has focused 
on writing (or composition) classes or language classes that include writing. However, another devel-
opment in L2 writing research is an increased focus on L2 writers’ experiences across academic dis-
ciplines and in postgraduate settings (e.g., as doctoral students and/or researchers who must write 
in their fields). Writing across the curriculum (WAC) or writing in the disciplines (WID) has been 
a research and programmatic concern in composition studies for several decades (Russell, 2002; 
Thaiss & Porter, 2010; Zawacki & Rogers, 2011), but until recently, there has been little attempt to 
integrate L2 writing issues with other WAC/WID efforts. This division, however, has begun to change 
with the publication of a special issue on WAC and L2 writing in the journal  Across the Disciplines 
(2011) and especially a new edited collection on the topic (Zawacki & Cox, 2014) that attempts 

332 • Dana R. Ferris
both to synthesize L2 writing and WAC/WID research and to outline practical strategies for helping 
faculty in the disciplines work most effectively with an increasingly diverse student population. This 
new emphasis is consistent with a position statement from the Conference on College Composition 
and Communication (CCCC): “the acquisition of a second language and second-language literacy 
is a time-consuming process that will continue through students’ academic careers and beyond” 
(CCCC, 2001), reminding administrators and faculty that supporting diverse student writers is an 
institution-wide responsibility that cannot be completed by students simply spending a few months 
in an L2 developmental writing program. 
 As to postgraduate L2 writers, a growing body of work examines the experiences of master’s and 
doctoral-level L2 students as they learn to interact with their faculty supervisors, write their theses or 
dissertations, and write grant proposals or for publication (e.g., Bitchener & Basturkmen, 2006; East, 
Bitchener, & Basturkmen, 2012). There is also increasing interest in the classroom experiences of L2 
children writing in primary school settings and in adolescents in secondary settings and their transi-
tion from secondary to postsecondary education (de Oliveira & Silva, 2013; Ortmeier-Hooper, 2013; 
Ortmeier-Hooper & Enright, 2011). In sum, L2 writing researchers are increasingly looking beyond 
the experiences of undergraduates in developmental or first-year writing courses and examining their 
trajectories at all levels of education and in other disciplinary settings beyond language/writing courses. 
 The Development of L2 Writing as a Stand-Alone Scholarly Field 
 As already noted, L2 writing has been influenced by two parent disciplines—applied linguistics and 
composition. Because of these origins, a number of L2 writing scholars have voiced the feeling of not 
really “belonging” anywhere in a professional or disciplinary sense. Nonetheless, good arguments can 
be made that L2 writing has indeed emerged as a field or discipline: it has its own flagship journal (the 
 Journal of Second Language Writing ), its own annual meeting (the Symposium on Second Language 
Writing), books, articles, chapters, and dissertations on the topic that now number into the thousands, 
and scholars “reproducing” themselves in the form of new doctoral students who will carry on and 
extend the research traditions. Both Silva and Leki (2004) and Matsuda (2003) discuss the position 
of L2 writing at the intersection of writing and language studies, with Silva and Leki urging that L2 
writing specialists forge their own identity as a field to build confidence and credibility and Matsuda 
cautioning that the field’s interdisciplinary origins are important and should not be abandoned. 
 The in-between status of L2 writing—as a subset of another field(s) or with its own independent 
identity—has implications beyond narrower questions such as where scholars should submit their 
papers or present at conferences. Institutional structures and politics can also inhibit L2 writing spe-
cialists from achieving the same professional status or recognition as their peers who are linguists or 
compositionists. This might mean that they are marginalized in their employment status, but even 
when they are not, they may not obtain positions of power and influence in their own departments 
or institutions because they are viewed as too specialized and because their constituency, the L2 
students themselves, is seen by many as remedial and as a burden on financial and human resources. 
 The “Translingual” Movement and What It Means for L2 Writing 
 Matsuda (2003) chronicles the rise, fall, and re-emergence of L2 writing within the CCCC profes-
sional association, noting that as L2 writing became a more defined endeavor, with separate classes 
for international students, specially trained teachers, and the founding of the Teaching English to 
Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) association in 1966, members of CCCC began to lose interest 
in L2 writing issues. As already noted, this “disciplinary division of labor” (Matsuda, 2003, p. 18) has 
had many counterproductive unintended consequences, such as the disjuncture between curricular 
www.ebook3000.com

Research on L2 Writing • 333
approaches taken by writing programs in the same institution and the separation between instruc-
tors who should be collaborating to best meet students’ needs, not pointing fingers at each other and 
defending their own turf. 
 However, led by Matsuda and others, this trend in CCCC away from L2 writing concerns began 
to reverse itself in the 1990s, as the CCCC Committee on Second Language Writing was established 
and the CCCC published a position paper, also affirmed by TESOL, on “Second Language Writing 
and Writers” (2001, 2009). L2 writing specialists at CCCC once again had access to spots on the con-
ference program each year and a place to gather in annual preconference workshops on L2 writing 
issues, and in a parallel development, TESOL formed a second language writing interest section. In 
addition to these significant developments for L2 writing professionals, over the past decade, a sec-
ond group of scholars has formed within CCCC, one interested in “translingual” pedagogy in writing 
instruction (see Horner, Lu, Royster, & Trimbur, 2011). While one would think that increased atten-
tion to the needs of multilingual writers is welcome regardless of where it originates, this movement, 
still in its early stages, has led to some tension within the field and some division among L2 writing 
specialists, which is discussed further in the next section. 
 It can be a bit difficult to pin down a definition for translingual approaches, as they appear to express 
a broad and often abstract philosophy rather than a concrete set of pedagogical suggestions. Briefly, a 
translingual philosophy embraces multilingualism, rejects English-dominant monolingualism, prob-
lematizes the notion that there is a standard or static version of English (or any language) that can 
be taught or expected, and urges the empowerment of language users (students) to shuttle between 
languages and language varieties in their own writing (Canagarajah, 2013b; Horner et al., 2011; Mat-
suda, 2014). As Matsuda (2014) observes, most of these notions are neither new nor problematic for 
applied linguists or L2 writing scholars. However, it is not always clear in the still-new scholarship on 
translingual pedagogy exactly how these principles should be lived out in the classroom. 
 To summarize this section, L2 writing has developed and evolved as a field over the past 75 years 
or so, dating back to the founding of the University of Michigan’s English Language Institute in 1941 
(which provided language and writing support for international students at the university). Origi-
nally influenced by language teaching and applied linguistics, it soon was also taking cues from the 
composition and rhetoric world. As a result of these diverse origins, some widely distinct approaches 
to L2 writing pedagogy have co-existed over the years, and all still persist in various settings today. 
Meanwhile, as L2 writing pedagogy has evolved and changed, the status of L2 writing research and 
its practitioners has also gone through various phases—from marginalization to independence as a 
discipline to increased interest in the topic of L2 writing by a broader group of stakeholders. 
 Current Controversies in L2 Writing Research 
 As in any field, some scholarly and pedagogical conversations stir up disagreements in L2 writ-
ing (Casanave, 2004). In this section, I will discuss three. The first two (issues of placement and 
assessment and issues surrounding the translingual movement) have broad implications and are 
somewhat interrelated, while the third (written corrective feedback) is specific and ubiquitous in the 
research literature. 
 Placement and Assessment of L2 Writers 
 Entire books about L2 writing assessment (Crusan, 2010; Hamp-Lyons, 1991; Weigle, 2002) have explored 
a range of specific issues related to how L2 writers are placed into courses and how their writing is 
assessed, including in writing courses, for institution-wide graduation requirements, and in WAC/WID 
contexts. Recent scholarship on writing placement in general and L2 writing assessment in particular has 

334 • Dana R. Ferris
called into question whether traditional large-scale placement instruments (e.g., the English Placement 
Test used by the large California State University System) are truly the best indicators of student abili-
ties and needs. They have further begun to examine the effects on student motivation and confidence 
of being forced into developmental writing or language courses that do not count towards graduation. 
Alternate models, such as Directed Self-Placement (DSP) processes and stretch models (usually year-
long courses that combine developmental and first-year composition but without the attached stigma of 
being “remedial”), are being implemented and evaluated in various contexts around the US (Glau, 1996; 
Royer & Gilles, 1998; Toth & Auli, 2014). Though both DSP and stretch models have primarily been 
applied to mainstream programs and L1 students, L2 writing researchers and administrators have begun 
to investigate whether they would also work well with L2 populations (Crusan, 2006, 2011). 
 The related issue of whether L2 students should be placed/enrolled in writing courses with L1 
peers or provided their own specialized courses with teachers prepared to meet their needs is a con-
tinuing controversy. Matsuda (2006) referred to separate L2 writing courses as representing a policy 
of “linguistic containment” (p. 641), a phrase that has been seized upon by critics of separate instruc-
tion. However, later in the same article, Matsuda suggested that L2 writers should be able to choose 
either option, a view that other L2 scholars have also expressed (CCCC, 2009; Costino & Hyon, 2007; 
Ferris, 2009). Proponents of the translingual view would argue that multilingualism should be nor-
mative for all student writers and that L1/L2 distinctions are thus irrelevant, so they see no need for 
separate instruction models. However, it is unclear in the translingual literature whether their view 
would extend to L2 writers in earlier stages of L2 literacy/language acquisition; most of their peda-
gogical suggestions seem to apply primarily to highly proficient multilingual writers. 
 As to classroom and institutional writing assessment for L2 students, there are several ongoing con-
troversies. One question is whether it is fair or reasonable to expect L2 writers to produce “unaccented,” 
idiomatic prose that sounds exactly like what an L1 student would write (Matsuda, 2006, 2012). Assum-
ing that few L2 writers ever will produce such prose (especially as younger undergraduates), does it make 
sense to give them lower grades simply for being L2 writers, or worse, to prevent them from receiving 
their degrees if they cannot produce error-free texts (Johns, 1991; Leki, 2003)? Matsuda referred to this 
worldview as the “myth of linguistic homogeneity” (2006, p. 637), and this monolingual English-dominant 
perspective is the primary target of translingual approach scholars—and rightfully so. 
 A completely different L2 writing controversy related to assessment is the rapid development of 
automated assessment instruments (see Crusan, 2010; Ware, 2011). Publishers and testing companies 
tout such products as huge time savers that can be cost-effective for teachers and institutions—no need 
to write exams and pay human readers/scorers: the computer will do it! While L2 writing scholars object to 
machine scoring of student writing, administrators may be tempted by the lure of saving money and 
time to try it for large-scale assessments. It is important for L2 writing researchers interested in assess-
ment to pursue data-based responses to proposed implementations of automated writing assessment. 
 L2 Writing Scholars and Translingual Advocates 
 Problems between the L2 writing camp and the translingual camp arise over both philosophical 
and practical boundary lines. Several prominent translingual advocates have either pronounced the 
end of L2 writing as a scholarly concern (Canagarajah, 2013a)—in his view, there is no “L1” or “L2” 
writer, merely a translingual writer—or have suggested that “translingual” is the new umbrella term 
under which L2 writing should situate itself. Since some translingual scholars have little or no train-
ing or experience in working with L2 students and have not demonstrated familiarity with L2 writ-
ing research or sociolinguistic literature that should inform their perspective, L2 writing specialists 
have taken umbrage at these suggestions that their expertise is somehow subordinate to that of these 
newcomers who often appear to be simply rebranding concepts and terms that have existed in other 
disciplines for decades (see Matsuda, 2013, for a cogent discussion of this terminology issue). 
www.ebook3000.com

Research on L2 Writing • 335
 As a more practical matter, some scholars aligned with the translingual worldview have identi-
fied themselves as “L2 specialists” for the purposes of job applications but in some cases without the 
training or experience that would help them best teach in or administer specialized programs for 
L2 writers. Furthermore, some L2 scholars have had their work criticized by journal reviewers and 
editors for not giving adequate nods to the translingual camp, whether or not translingual world-
views were actually relevant to the work at hand. In response to these real-world issues, a number of 
L2 writing specialists co-authored and co-signed an open letter to the broader composition world 
that was published in  College English  (Atkinson et al., 2015), urging more careful attention to the 
distinctions between L2 writing and translingual approaches. It is still possible and even likely that 
the L2 and translingual camps will find common ground, but it is ironic that what should be seen 
as a positive development—increased interest in multilingual writers from mainstream composition 
researchers—has thus far caused more tension than cooperation. 
 Corrective Feedback in L2 Writing 
 The most enduring debate over the past 20 years has been whether L2 writing specialists should 
abandon error correction, now more commonly referred to as written corrective feedback (CF), as 
argued by Truscott (1996, 1999). Others (e.g., Ferris, 2004; Guénette, 2007) argued that the existing 
research base was too inadequate, inconsistent, and methodologically flawed to arrive at such a dras-
tic pedagogical conclusion, so a number of researchers have completed new studies on approaches 
to and the efficacy of various forms of written CF (see Bitchener & Ferris, 2012). The newer research 
not only addressed most of the methodological criticisms raised by Truscott and others but more 
clearly identified conditions under which CF is most likely to be successful. One particularly prom-
ising application of the newer research on CF is an approach known as Dynamic Written Correc-
tive Feedback, developed by professors at Brigham Young University in the US (Evans, Hartshorn, 
McCollum, & Wolfersberger, 2010; Hartshorn, Evans, Merrill, Sudweeks, Strong-Krause, & Ander-
son, 2010) and being implemented and studied elsewhere as well. 
 Currently, it is fair to say that L2 writing researchers have reached some consensus that written CF 
has the potential, when used properly, to build student writers’ awareness of language issues and facil-
itate SLA as well as to help students develop effective writing and self-editing strategies. Few scholars 
would continue to argue that the practice of CF should be completely abandoned, but there remain 
a number of specific questions as to how CF can/should most optimally be implemented. As Evans 
et al. (2010) noted, the question now appears to be not  if  CF should occur, but  how best  to provide it. 
 Future Directions for L2 Writing Research 
 Following the themes raised in this chapter, I see at least three distinct directions in which the next 
era of L2 writing research may go: (1) the role of language instruction and language-focused feed-
back (CF) in L2 writing instruction, (2) the influence of technology on the L2 writing pedagogy and 
research, and (3) increased interest in multilingual writers by researchers traditionally outside the 
L2 writing community, namely WAC/WID specialists and translingual proponents from the main-
stream composition world. 
 Language-Focused Instruction, Feedback, and Assessment 
 As already discussed, the debate over written CF has been spirited and extensive over the past 20 
years. However, even though L2 writing specialists have achieved some consensus on the issue of CF, 
discussions about the role of language instruction in L2 writing classes are far from over. Some L2 
writing scholars, drawing both from experience and research in SLA and in L1 composition, believe 

336 • Dana R. Ferris
that traditional grammar instruction in the writing class is ineffective and even counterproductive 
(see Frodesen & Holten, 2003). They argue instead for language-focused work that is carefully inte-
grated with other classroom activities (see Ferris, 2011; Ferris & Hedgcock, 2014; Matsuda, 2012). 
At the same time, they call for deemphasizing grammar/language control in assessment schemes or 
rubrics, arguing that it is unfair to punish students for still being in the process of SLA and that doing 
so further promotes the “myth of linguistic homogeneity” (Matsuda, 2006, 2012). However, other L2 
specialists are alarmed at what they view as an excessively hands-off approach to language instruc-
tion for L2 writers. They assert that language control in L2 writing matters because students may 
be judged harshly in their future academic and professional work for the lack of it, and specialized 
writing classes for L2 students are the right/only place for students to receive grammar instruction. 
They see a systematic, rigorous program of instruction and assessment of grammar as the best and 
perhaps only way to approach this problem. 
 Complicating this discussion even further are the views of L1 compositionists, especially those in 
the translingual camp, that really, none of this matters—variety in language produced by multilin-
gual students is to be expected, celebrated, and encouraged, not punished or eradicated. Because of 
rapid changes in the size and complexity of the multilingual student population at all levels of educa-
tion, the stakes—for writing/language teachers, for faculty in other disciplines, and for administra-
tors—are higher than ever before, so practical questions about how to look at language differences in 
student writing may be a major focus of L2 writing research in the years to come. 
 Future Directions and Applications of Technology 
 In addition to the issue discussed in the previous section (machine scoring of writing for assess-
ment), advances in technology will influence every aspect of L2 writing instruction and will be the 
focus of future research. In particular, the development of online applications and learning manage-
ment systems that more easily facilitate peer-response sessions and virtual teacher-student writing 
conferences should lead to new research projects on whether such affordances improve the amount 
and quality of feedback students receive on their evolving writing projects. Similarly, online tools that 
help students to self-edit their work and research language features (vocabulary, collocations, etc.) 
should be built thoughtfully into classroom pedagogy and their effects investigated by researchers. 
 The role of technology in both facilitating and policing student plagiarism (or textual borrowing 
or patch-writing) will also be an ongoing concern. While plagiarism issues are nothing new in the 
L2 writing world (or in the student world in general), the easy availability of texts online that can 
be appropriated or adapted for student assignments both increases the temptation to take shortcuts 
and confuses the larger issue of ownership of ideas. Plagiarism by L2 student writers has always been 
complicated by differing cultural values on intellectual property (Bloch, 2012), but the ease with 
which students can “borrow” digital texts and instructors or administrators can catch them doing so 
(using search tools or commercial products such as turnitin.com) raises the stakes around this issue. 
 Finally, the use of technology for L2 writing instruction and research will increasingly be facili-
tated by advances in corpus linguistics work that makes it more accessible to broader audiences. 
While in the past corpus linguistics research was too specialized and too complex for many teachers 
(see Conrad, 2008), over the last decade, large corpora have become freely available and easily search-
able, and corpus researchers have produced excellent resources to introduce teachers to the process 
of using such tools in their classrooms (e.g., Bennett, 2010; Reppen, 2010). Corpus linguistics tools 
can help students investigate (with teacher guidance) features in texts they are reading, in genres 
they are attempting to write in, and even in their own writing. They can also help researchers more 
systematically examine features of student writing and even of teacher and peer commentary on 
student writing. 
www.ebook3000.com

Research on L2 Writing • 337
 The Contexts of L2 Writing 
 As already discussed in this chapter, whereas L2 writing research in the past has been concentrated 
on a narrow range of contexts (college-level writing usually in the US), the scope of this field has 
changed and broadened dramatically in recent years. Researchers will also look more broadly at 
the experiences of L2 writers outside of language or writing classes, in their chosen disciplines and/
or professions. In the long run, it is healthy and beneficial for the field if more stakeholders are 
involved in the experiences of multilingual students. They will bring a broader range of disciplinary 
and methodological perspectives, increased institutional status and credibility, and possibly more 
resources for teaching and research. 
 Conclusion 
 L2 writing has come a long way in a short period of time. From a few pioneers writing articles in 
the 1970s and 1980s about how to teach ESL writers has come an entire field of scholarship and 
professional development. At various points, interest in the field and its questions has outpaced the 
research available. Now, however, the field is in a dynamic yet stable place and is ready to examine 
new questions and contexts and to use new technological affordances to do so. There will be growing 
pains, but the knowledge and insights achieved will be beneficial for researchers, teachers, and L2 
writers themselves. 
 References 
 Across the Disciplines.  (2011). Special issue on WAC and second language writing. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
atd/ell/index.cfm 
Atkinson,  D., Crusan, D., Matsuda, P. K., Ortmeier-Hooper, C., Ruecker, T., Simpson, S. & Tardy, C. (2015). Clarifying the 
relationship between L2 writing and translingual writing: An open letter to writing studies editors and organization 
leaders.  College English ,  77 , 383–386. 
 Atkinson, D. & Ramanathan, V. (1995). Cultures of writing: An ethnographic comparison of L1 and L2 university writing/
language programs.  TESOL Quarterly ,  29 , 539–568. 
 Bennett, G. (2010).  Using corpora in the language learning classroom . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Bitchener, J. & Basturkmen, H. (2006). Perceptions of the difficulties of postgraduate L2 thesis students writing the discussion 
section.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes ,  5 , 4–18. 
 Bitchener, J. & Ferris, D. (2012).  Written corrective feedback in second language acquisition and writing . New York: Routledge. 
 Bloch, J. (2012).  Plagiarism, intellectual property and the teaching of L2 writing . Bristol, England: Multilingual Matters. 
 Brown, S. C., Enos, T., Reamer, D. & Thompson, J. (2007).  2007 Rhetoric Review Survey of Doctoral Programs in Rhetoric and 
Composition.  Retrieved from http://www.u.arizona.edu/~enos/ 
 Canagarajah, A. S. (2013a). The end of second language writing?  Journal of Second Language Writing ,  22 , 440–441. 
 Canagarajah, A. S. (2013b).  Writing as translingual practice in academic contexts . New York, NY: Taylor & Francis. 
 Carlo, R. & Enos, T. J. (2011). Back-tracking and forward-gazing: Marking the dimensions of graduate core curricula in rheto-
ric and composition.  Rhetoric Review ,  30 (2), 208–227. 
 Casanave, C. M. (2004).  Controversies in second language writing: Dilemmas and decisions in research and instruction . Ann 
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Conference on College Composition and Communication (CCCC). (2001/2009).  Statement on Second Language Writing and 
Second Language Writers.  Retrieved from http://www.ncte.org/cccc/resources/positions/secondlangwriting 
 Conrad, S. M. (2008). Myth 6: Corpus-based research is too complicated to be useful for writing teachers. In J. Reid (Ed.), 
 Writing myths: Applying second language research to classroom teaching (pp. 115–139). Ann Arbor, MI: University of 
Michigan Press. 
 Costino, K. A. & Hyon, S. (2007). ‘‘A class for students like me’’: Reconsidering relationships among identity labels, residency sta-
tus, and students’ preferences for mainstream or multilingual composition.  Journal of Second Language Writing ,  16 , 63–81. 
 Crusan, D. (2006). The politics of implementing online directed self-placement for second language writers. In P. K. Mat-
suda, C. Ortmeier-Hooper & X. You (Eds.),  The politics of second language writing: In search of the Promised Land 
(pp. 205–221). West Lafayette, IN: Parlor Press. 

338 • Dana R. Ferris
 Crusan, D. (2010).  Assessment in the second language writing classroom . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Crusan, D. (2011). The promise of directed self-placement for second language writers.  TESOL Quarterly ,  45 , 774–780. 
 de Oliveira, C. & Silva, T. (Eds.). (2013).  L2 writing in secondary classrooms: Student experiences, academic issues, and teacher 
education . New York, NY: Routledge. 
 East, M., Bitchener, J. & Basturkmen, H. (2012). What constitutes effective feedback to postgraduate research students? The 
students’ perspective.  Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice ,  9 (2), Article 7. Retrieved from http://files.eric.
ed.gov/fulltext/EJ984908.pdf 
 Eskey, D. E. (1983). Meanwhile, back in the real world . . . Accuracy and fluency in second language teaching.  TESOL Quarterly , 
 17 , 315–323. 
 Evans, N., Hartshorn, J., McCollum, R. & Wolfersberger, M. (2010). Contextualizing corrective feedback in second language 
writing pedagogy.  Language Teaching Research ,  14 , 445–464. 
 Ferris, D. R. (2004). The “grammar correction” debate in L2 writing: Where are we, and where do we go from here? (and what 
do we do in the meantime. . . ?).  Journal of Second Language Writing ,  13 , 49–62. 
 Ferris, D. R. (2009).  Teaching college writing to diverse student populations . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Ferris, D. R. (2010). Second language writing research and written corrective feedback in SLA: Intersections and practical 
applications.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition ,  32 , 181–201. 
 Ferris, D.R. (2011).  Treatment of error in second language student writing  (2nd ed.). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan 
Press. 
 Ferris, D. R. & Hedgcock, J. S. (1998).  Teaching ESL composition: Purpose, process, and practice . Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Ferris, D. R. & Hedgcock, J. S. (2014).  Teaching L2 composition: Purpose, process, and practice (3rd Ed.). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
 Frodesen, J. & Holten, C. (2003). Grammar and the ESL writing class. In B. Kroll (Ed.),  Exploring the dynamics of second lan-
guage writing  (pp. 141–161). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
 Glau, G. R. (1996). The “stretch program”: Arizona State University’s new model of university-level basic writing instruction. 
 Writing Program Administration ,  20 (1–2), 79–91. 
 Guénette, D. (2007). Is feedback pedagogically correct? Research design issues in studies of feedback on writing.  Journal of 
Second Language Writing, 16 (1), 40–53. 
 Hamp-Lyons, L. (Ed.). (1991).  Assessing second language writing in academic contexts . Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
 Harklau, L., Losey, K. M. & Siegal, M. (Eds.). (1999).  Generation 1 . 5 meets college composition . Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Hartshorn, J. K., Evans, N. W., Merrill, P. F., Sudweeks, R. R., Strong-Krause, D. & Anderson, N. J. (2010). The effects of 
dynamic corrective feedback on ESL writing accuracy.  TESOL Quarterly ,  44 , 84–109. 
 Haswell, R. (2005). NCTE/CCCC’s recent war on scholarship.  Written Communication ,  22 , 198–223. 
 Hedgcock, J. S. (2005). Taking stock of research and pedagogy in L2 writing. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of research in second 
language learning and teaching (pp. 597–613). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Hinkel, E. (2011). What research on second language writing tells us and what it doesn’t. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of 
research in second language learning and teaching (Vol. II, pp. 523–528). New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Horner, B., Lu, M-Z., Royster, J. J. & Trimbur, J. (2011). Language difference in writing: Toward a translingual approach.  Col-
lege English ,  73 , 303–321. 
 Horowitz, D. (1986). Process, not product: Less than meets the eye.  TESOL Quarterly ,  20 , 141–144. 
 Institute of International Education. (2014).  Open Doors: Report on International Educational Exchange.  Retrieved from http://
www.iie.org/Research-and-Publications/Publications-and-Reports/Open-Doors-2014 
 Johns, A. M. (1991). Interpreting an English competency examination: The frustrations of an ESL science student.  Written 
Communication ,  8 , 379–401. 
 Johns, A. M. (1995). Genre and pedagogical purposes.  Journal of Second Language Writing ,  4 , 181–190. 
 Johns, A. M. (1999). Opening our doors: Applying socioliterate approaches to minority language classrooms. In L. Harklau, 
K. M. Losey, & M. Siegal (Eds.),  Generation 1.5 meets college composition (pp. 191–209). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Kaplan, R. B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education.  Language Learning ,  16 , 1–20. 
 Kessler, G., Oskoz, A. & Elola, I. (Eds.). (2012).  Technology across writing contexts and tasks . San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
 Krashen, S. D. (1984).  Writing: Research, theory, and application . Oxford, England: Pergamon Press. 
 Leki, I. (2003). A challenge to L2 writing professionals: Is writing overrated? In B. Kroll (Ed.),  Exploring the dynamics of second 
language writing  (pp. 315–332). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
 MacDonald, S. P. (2007). The erasure of language.  College Composition and Communication ,  58 , 585–625. 
 Matsuda, P. K. (2003). Second language writing in the twentieth century: A situated historical perspective. In B. Kroll (Ed.), 
 Exploring the dynamics of second language writing  (pp. 15–34). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
 Matsuda, P. K. (2006). The myth of linguistic homogeneity in U.S. college composition.  College English ,  68 , 637–651. 
 Matsuda, P. K. (2012). Let’s face it: Language issues and the writing program administrator.  Writing Program Administration , 
 36 , 141–163. 
www.ebook3000.com

Research on L2 Writing • 339
 Matsuda, P. K. (2013). It’s the Wild West out there: A new linguistic frontier in U.S. college composition. In A. S. Canagarajah 
(Ed.),  Literacy as translingual practice: Between communities and classrooms (pp. 128–38). New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Matsuda, P. K. (2014). The lure of translingual writing.  PMLA ,  129 , 478–483. 
 O’Neill, P., Crow, A. & Burton, L. W. (Eds.). (2002).  A field of dreams: Independent writing programs and the future of composi-
tion studies . Logan, UT: Utah State University Press. 
 Ortmeier-Hooper, C. (2013).  The ELL writer: Moving beyond basics in the secondary classroom . New York, NY: Teachers Col-
lege Press. 
 Ortmeier-Hooper, C. & Enright, K. A. (2011). Mapping new territory: Toward an understanding of adolescent L2 writers and 
writing in US contexts.  Journal of Second Language Writing ,  20 (3), 167–181. 
 Raimes, A. (1985). What unskilled ESL students do as they write: A classroom study of composing.  TESOL Quarterly ,  19 , 
229–258. 
 Reichelt, M. (2011). Foreign language writing: An overview. In T. Cimasko & M. Reichelt (Eds.),  Foreign language writing 
instruction: Principles & practices  (pp. 3–21). Anderson, SC: Parlor Press. 
 Reppen, R. (2010).  Using corpora in the language classroom . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
 Roberge, M., Losey, K. M. & Wald, M. (Eds.). (2015).  Teaching U.S.-educated multilingual writers . Ann Arbor, MI: University 
of Michigan Press. 
 Roberge, M., Siegal, M. & Harklau, L. (2009).  Generation 1.5 in college composition . New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Royer, D. & Gilles, R. (1998). Directed self-placement: An attitude of orientation.  College Composition and Communication , 
 50 , 54–70. 
 Russell, D. R. (2002).  Writing in the academic disciplines: A curricular history . Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press. 
 Schleppegrell, M. (1998). Grammar as resource: Writing a description.  Research in the Teaching of English ,  32 , 182–211. 
 Silva, T. (1990). Second language composition instruction: Developments, issues, and directions in ESL. In B. Kroll (Ed.),  Sec-
ond language writing: Research insights for the classroom  (pp. 11–23). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
 Silva, T. & Leki, I. (2004). Family matters: The influence of applied linguistics and composition studies on second language 
writing studies: Past, present, and future.  Modern Language Journal ,  88 , 1–13. 
 Storch, N. (2010). Critical feedback on written corrective feedback research.  International Journal of English Studies ,  10 , 29–46. 
 Thaiss, C., Bräuer, G., Carlino, P., Ganobcsik-Williams, L. & Sinha, A. (Eds.). (2012).  Writing programs worldwide: Profiles of 
academic writing in many places . Fort Collins, CO: The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press. 
 Thaiss, C. & Porter, T. (2010). The state of WAC/WID in 2010: Methods and results of the U.S. survey of the international 
WAC/WID mapping project.  College Composition and Communication ,  61 , 534–570. 
 Toth, C. & Auli, L. (2014). Directed self-placement questionnaire design: Practices, problems, possibilities.  Assessing Writing , 
 20 , 1–18. 
 Truscott, J. (1996). The case against grammar correction in L2 writing classes.  Language Learning ,  46 , 327–369. 
 Truscott, J. (1999). The case for “the case for grammar correction in L2 writing”: A response to Ferris.  Journal of Second Lan-
guage Writing ,  8 , 111–122. 
 Ware, P. (2011). Computer-generated feedback and assessment of student writing.  TESOL Quarterly ,  45 , 769–774. 
 Ware, P. & Warschauer, M. (2006). Electronic feedback and second language writing. In K. Hyland & F. Hyland (Eds.),  Feedback 
in second language writing: Contexts and issues (pp. 105–122). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
 Weigle, S. (2002).  Assessing writing . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
 Zamel, V. (1982). Writing: The process of discovering meaning.  TESOL Quarterly ,  19 , 79–102. 
 Zawacki, T. M. & Cox, M. (Eds.). (2014).  WAC and second language writers: Research toward linguistically and culturally inclu-
sive programs and practices . Fort Collins, CO: The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press. 
 Zawacki, T. M. & Rogers, P. M. (Eds.). (2011).  Writing across the curriculum: A critical sourcebook . Boston, MA: Bedford St. 
Martin’s. 

www.ebook3000.com

 V 
 Vocabulary and Grammar 

www.ebook3000.com

343
 25 
 The Three “I”s of Second Language 
Vocabulary Learning 
 Input, Instruction, Involvement 
 Batia Laufer 
 Introduction 
 How do we learn words and expand our vocabulary in a second language? By encountering new 
words repeatedly in the language input? By using them in original communicative activities? By 
practicing them in communicative tasks, or in decontextualized exercises devised by the teachers? 
By deliberately committing them to memory and rehearsing them time and again? Experienced 
practitioners would probably say that the answer to the question in the first sentence is “all of the 
above”. Vocabulary researchers would identify some central issues in vocabulary acquisition in the 
questions above, such as incidental and intentional learning, meaning-focused and word-focused 
instruction, the optimal amount of input, the necessary number of repeated encounters with words 
and task effect on learning. I will organize and discuss these issues under three headings, which, I 
believe, reflect the three major determinants of second language vocabulary learning: input, instruc-
tion and involvement. I will use the terms “words” and “vocabulary” to refer both to single words and 
to multi-word units (e.g. make up one’s mind, as soon as, to say the least, just as much, go on, abject 
poverty, etc.), as I believe that the three principles—input, instruction and involvement—determine 
the acquisition of both. 
 Input 
 Children learning their first language (L1) vocabulary do not need to compile word lists or practice 
words in exercises. Most L1 vocabulary is believed to be learnt from input to spoken and written 
language. This position is usually referred to as the ‘default hypothesis’ since it is justified in nega-
tive terms: the number of words that is learnt is too vast to be accounted for by instruction (Nagy, 
Herman, & Anderson, 1985; Sternberg, 1987). L1 vocabulary acquisition data seem to support the 
hypothesis. According to modest estimates, the number of words English-speaking high school grad-
uates know in English is about 20,000 word families (Nation, 2001), while other estimates suggest 
a larger number of about 50,000. Furthermore, the default hypothesis is also supported by research 
showing that the largest vocabulary growth occurs when children reach literacy, during the primary 
and particularly secondary school years, when they are estimated to read approximately a million 
words of text a year (Anderson, Wilson, & Fielding, 1988). But is reading the main source of L2 

344 • Batia Laufer
vocabulary learning as well? If it is, then the pedagogical implications, particularly for instructed L2 
learning, is that learners should be required to read as much as possible in the classroom and outside 
it, and vocabulary learning will take care of itself. 
 The basic assumptions that underlie the default hypothesis are that learners recognize unfamiliar 
words in the text as unfamiliar, that they can infer their meaning, that if inferred correctly, words 
will be remembered, and that quantity of input that learners receive allows for a sufficient number 
of recurrent exposures to the new words. In my discussion of the hypothesis (Laufer, 2005a, 2005b), 
I presented empirical evidence to show that none of these assumptions can be taken for granted. 
Learners do not necessarily notice unfamiliar words in the input. When they do, they do not neces-
sarily infer their meaning. When they do, they do not necessarily retain the guessed words. Finally, 
a necessary condition for ‘picking up’ words, massive exposure to the foreign language, cannot be 
expected to occur in classroom learning context. Hence, no wonder that many studies that examined 
the amount of word acquisition from reading showed that only a small number of L2 words can be 
‘picked up’ from exposure to texts without any subsequent vocabulary practice. For example, expo-
sure to relatively short texts (up to 7,000 words) resulted in low gains per text, 1–7 words that could 
be recognized on a multiple-choice test of meaning comprehension (Pitts, White, & Krashen, 1989; 
Day, Omura, & Hiramatsu, 1991; Dupuy & Krashen, 1993; Zahar, Cobb, & Spada, 2001). Knight’s 
(1994) results on a meaning recognition test were slightly higher, 8.75 words out of 24, but the score 
on the ‘supply-definition’ test (a test of meaning recall) was much lower—1.72. Studies that used 
both immediate and delayed tests of vocabulary ‘pickup’ from reading showed that even when some 
words were known immediately after reading, this knowledge was prone to decay. In Brown, War-
ing, and Donkaewbua (2008), overall 4.10 out of 28 word meanings were recalled immediately after 
reading, but only 0.97 three months later. Similarly, a loss of nearly 50% on the meaning-translation 
test was found after three months in Waring and Takaki (2003). 
 Advocates of the acquisition-through-reading position claim that the studies cited previously 
are not representative of the authentic reading activity since they investigate a small number of 
target words from short texts. Short texts do not allow for multiple occurrences of words, which are 
required for word learning. Each additional exposure to the same word may enrich and strengthen 
the learner’s initial knowledge of the word and reinforce its memory trace. However, the acquisition-
through-reading supporters have to answer several related questions: how many exposures to a word 
are needed before the learner can recall or recognize the meaning of a word; how much reading has 
to be done to ensure this number of repetitions of the new words; and how realistic is it to expect L2 
learners to read this amount of text? 
 The number of encounters in long texts that is necessary for a new word to be recognized for 
meaning remains unclear and ranges from 6 to 20+. For example, Brown et al. (2008) used a long 
text in the form of three books and found that learners needed to encounter the target words 15–20 
times to recognize 61% of their meaning. Waring and Takaki (2003) reported low gains even after 
15–18 encounters. Laufer and Rozovski-Roitblat (2015) found that 18–21 exposures to 10 target 
words in a course book yielded meaning recognition of four words. Most researchers nowadays seem 
to agree that 10–12 word occurrences could lead to some knowledge reflected in meaning recogni-
tion (Nation & Wang Ming-Tzu, 1999; Schmitt, 2010; Webb, Newton, & Chang, 2013; Nation, 2014). 
 How much would learners have to read to meet about 100 and 1,000 new words? Nation and Wang 
Ming-Tzu (1999) calculated that 108 new words in graded readers at level 5 would be met 10 times if 
learners read 200,000 words (i.e. nine graded readers). According to the authors, the cumulative effect 
of multiple encounters will take place after reading one to two books per week. Graded readers at 
level 5 assume knowledge of 1,487 word families and introduce 459 new word families. Because of 
the limited vocabulary, words in graded readers reappear more often than in non-simplified texts. 
Therefore, if learners expect to meet the same 108 words in authentic non-simplified texts, much 
www.ebook3000.com

The Three “I”s of Second Language Learning • 345
larger quantities of text would have to be read since the new words will not appear as often. Cobb 
(2007) challenged the idea that reading alone  can  provide sufficient opportunities for reoccurrence 
of vocabulary to be learnt. He analyzed a sample of the free reading that an ESL learner may be 
required to do over a year or two of language study on the assumption that six word occurrences were 
enough for learning. This sample was extracted from the 1-million-word Brown corpus 1  and repre-
sented three sub-corpora: Press, Academic and Fiction: 179,000 words, 163,000 words, and 175,000 
words, respectively. Cobb calculated the number of occurrences of each sample word family in each 
of the Brown sub-corpora and found that most post-2,000 words will not be encountered at all in a 
year or two of reading. He concluded that reading alone was not sufficient for building a functional 
lexicon in any typical time frame of L2 learning. 
 A more optimistic conclusion rests on another large corpus analysis study (Nation, 2014). Nation 
claims that to encounter words at the 5th 1,000 frequency level 12 times, learners need to read 1 mil-
lion words. To encounter words at the 9th 1,000 most frequency level, learners should read 3 million 
words. Table 25.1 is adapted from Nation (2014) and shows how much reading has to be done per 
day and per week to learn 1,000 words per year at different frequency levels. 
           Nation says that the condition for the success of this method is suitable reading material, where 
98% of vocabulary is familiar. 2  This means that non-simplified reading materials are unsuitable for 
vocabulary learning. The solution lies in graded readers that provide suitable reading material based 
on the knowledge of up to 3,000 word families and in mid-frequency readers that are suitable for 
learners whose vocabulary size is 4,000, 6,000, and 8,000 levels (see Paul Nation’s website http://www.
victoria.ac.nz/lals/staff/paul-nation.aspx). 
 Obviously, extensive reading is valuable for learning new words, reinforcing the knowledge of 
already familiar words, and preventing forgetting. However, two practical issues should be consid-
ered. The first one has been formulated by Coady (1997) as the ‘beginner’s paradox’. He asks how 
learners can learn words through extensive reading if their vocabulary is insufficient to read exten-
sively? He suggests that learners should first receive explicit instruction in 3,000 most common word 
families, and only then they should engage in enjoyable reading tasks. The second practical question 
is whether learners, particularly in non-L2-speaking countries, can be expected to read large quanti-
ties of graded readers. Classroom instruction in primary and secondary schools may consist of 2, 
3, or even 5 hours of instruction per week in which teachers have to teach language structure and 
develop all four skills (listening, writing, speaking and reading). Tertiary education students have to 
read authentic texts in the area of their studies. It is questionable, therefore, how free learners are to 
engage with masses of reading material, inside or outside the classroom. Furthermore, to my knowl-
edge, no studies have investigated the acquisition of thousands of words from reading millions of 
words. In the absence of such evidence, it is questionable whether input from extensive reading can 
be the most important source of L2 vocabulary learning. Not less important is word-focused instruc-
tion, which is discussed as follows. 
Table 25.1 Learning 1,000 Words per Year through Reading
1000 word
freq. level
Amount
to read
Time needed for reading
per week
Per day
5th 1000
1,000,000
2 hours 47 minutes
(33 minutes)
6th 1000
1,500,000
4 hours 10 minutes
(50 minutes)
7th 1000
2,000,000
5 hours 33 minutes
(1 hour 7 minutes)
8th 1000
2,500,000
6 hours 57 minutes
(1 hour 23 minutes)
9th 1000
3,000,000
8 hours 20 minutes
(1 hour 40 minutes)

346 • Batia Laufer
 Instruction 
 Word-Focused Instruction 
 Word-focused instruction refers to directing the learner’s attention to lexical items by means of 
a variety of techniques, such as glosses in texts, dictionary use, word use in sentences and larger 
stretches of language, computer-assisted learning devices (hypertexts, concordances, online diction-
aries) and so on. Word-focused instruction can occur while engaging in an authentic communicative 
task. For example, reading a text may require looking up unknown words in a dictionary, negotia-
tion of word meaning or attending to glosses in order to comprehend the text. Another example is a 
group/class discussion of a topic suggested by the teacher where students are asked to use particular 
words and expressions relevant to the topic. Even though the task is communicative, the teacher has 
planned to focus on particular vocabulary. A different type of word-focused instruction involves 
vocabulary practice of discrete lexical items in a non-communicative, non-authentic context. Filling 
new words in isolated sentences, matching words with their synonyms or definitions, and transla-
tions of word phrases are examples of decontextualized word practice. 
 The first type of word-focused instruction is a lexical correlate of the teaching approach known as 
Focus-on-Form (FonF), and the second type is Focus-on-Forms (FonFs) (Ellis, 2001; Laufer, 2005b). 
According to Ellis (2001), the FonF approach views learners as language users and the language as 
a tool for communication. In the FonFs approach, on the other hand, language itself is the object 
of study, and linguistics item are taught as discrete units. Both approaches are important as they 
require elaborative attention to words’ formal and semantic features and are, therefore, conducive 
to their retention. 
 Words can be learnt when learners intend to commit them to memory, or when they remember 
them after performing a certain task without a deliberate effort to memorize them. The first type of 
learning is intentional, the second—incidental. (For an extensive discussion of incidental and inten-
tional learning, see Hulstijn, 2001.) 3 
 Focus on Form (FonF)— Incidental Learning 
 There is a wealth of empirical evidence that demonstrates the value of word-focused instruction, 
be it FonF, or FonFs. When acquisition of new words was compared in two tasks, reading only and 
reading with some kind of attention-drawing technique to the new words, more vocabulary was 
acquired in the second condition (Luppescu & Day, 1993; Knight, 1994; Laufer & Hill, 2000; Laufer 
& Rozovski-Roitblat, 2015). Luppescu and Day (1993), for example, showed that the group that used 
bilingual dictionaries while reading remembered significantly more words than the students who did 
not. Similarly, the benefits of dictionary use were demonstrated in Knight’s (1994) study. Laufer and 
Rozovski-Roitblat (2015) found that dictionary use increased the number of ‘picked up’ words on 
average by almost twice. The study by Cho and Krashen (1994), which is often cited as evidence for 
vocabulary acquisition through reading only, shows, nevertheless, that attention to words is neces-
sary. There were four participants in the study. One participant did not use a dictionary at all, and 
she acquired seven words from a book. The second one used the dictionary initially and abandoned 
it at a later stage. She acquired eight words. The other two participants used the dictionary consis-
tently and wrote the looked-up words with example sentences in a booklet. They acquired 17 and 
34 words per book. Hence, the study shows that dictionary use, which required particular attention 
to the looked-up words, resulted in better vocabulary learning than reading without a focus on 
particular words. Laufer and Hill (2000) used a computer program which comprised a text, high-
lighted target words and multiple dictionary information about the target words. Log files revealed 
which words were looked up and which were not. Words that looked up were better retained. The 
www.ebook3000.com

The Three “I”s of Second Language Learning • 347
aforementioned studies illustrate the superiority of word-focused learning of the FonF type over 
meaning-based word learning. Dictionary use is a typical FonF task as it involves attention to words 
in order to complete a communicative task. 
 Whether learners choose to pay attention to a word by means of dictionary use will largely depend 
on whether they perceive the words as relevant to task completion. In the studies by Hulstijn, Hol-
lander, and Greidanus (1996), Laufer and Levitzky-Aviad (2003) and Peters (2007), some words in 
the texts that learners read were made relevant to task completion and some were not. Since learners 
used electronic dictionaries, researchers could see how many times each word was clicked on for 
translation or explanation. The log files showed that learners clicked more often on relevant words 
and consequently remembered them better on a post-learning unannounced test. 
 Focus-on-Forms (FonFs)—Incidental Learning 
 Focus-on-Forms activities, which involve decontextualized practice of linguistic items, do not 
leave the matter of attending to the language to learners’ choice. Even though these activities have 
been unpopular with many teachers and labeled as artificial, old-fashioned and downright bor-
ing, evidence has been accumulating to show that FonFs tasks that require learners to practice 
words in non-communicative contexts are quite useful and not less effective than FonF tasks and 
more effective than meaning-oriented tasks. This is certainly true in the case of learning new 
words or reinforcing already familiar vocabulary. For example, a reading activity followed by post-
reading word-focused activities was more effective than consulting a dictionary while reading 
(Peters, Hulstijn, Sercu, & Lutjeharms, 2009). Horst, Cobb, and Nicolae (2005) found that many 
words were learnt receptively and productively when practiced in a computer-assisted environ-
ment: word banks, online dictionaries, concordances, cloze exercises, hypertexts and self-quizzes. 
Activities that require practicing the words productively have been found particularly effective for 
subsequent retention. 
 Laufer (2003) compared the acquisition of unfamiliar words in two conditions: reading compre-
hension with marginal glosses for the target words and sentence writing. The ‘reading comprehen-
sion’ group had to understand the target words as they were relevant to the questions on the text they 
had to answer. The ‘sentence writing’ group was given a list of the 10 target words with explanation 
and translation of meaning, and was asked to write a sentence with each word. All learners were 
unexpectedly tested immediately after the task and two weeks later on the passive knowledge of the 
target words. The ‘sentence writing’ group outperformed the ‘comprehension’ group on the immedi-
ate and delayed tests of word meaning retention. They learnt more than three times as many words 
as the ‘comprehension group’. 
 Similar results are reported by Agustin Llach (2009), who compared word learning in three tasks: 
reading only, a reading + comprehension questions related to the target words and sentence writing 
without any texts. The latter condition yielded the best results and significantly so. 
 A particular productive activity is L1-L2 translation of simple sentences with the target words. 
Even though translation in general and simple word-focused translation in particular are not as a 
rule practiced by L2 teachers, the word-focused translation task was shown to be more effective than 
other word-focused activities (sentence fill-in and matching) for learning single words and colloca-
tions and by far more effective than text-based comprehension exercises (Laufer & Girsai, 2008). 
 The five studies cited above share the main characteristic of FonFs activities: the target item is 
decontextualized for practice. Even if it is initially encountered in a text, or a conversation, it is iso-
lated later and focused on in a non-communicative exercise. The results of the studies demonstrate 
that treating words as object of study rather than as tools for communication is quite effective as a 
teaching method. 

348 • Batia Laufer
 The studies discussed so far, whether FonF or FonFs, were conducted without telling the partici-
pants of an upcoming test. Hence, any learning that occurred from the activities in the studies can 
be considered incidental since it did not involve the learner’s intention to commit words to memory. 
 Focus-on-Forms—Intentional Learning 
 Intentional learning entails a deliberate memorization of decontextualized lists of words with their 
meanings, in L1 or L2, with or without examples. Hence, by definition, intentional learning is FonFs. 
Results of intentional learning research are not less encouraging than those of word-focused inci-
dental learning. 
 Qian (1996) compared teaching contextualized vocabulary with decontextualized word lists. The 
decontextualized condition resulted in superior retention. Mondria and Wiersma (2004) examined 
receptive (i.e. from L2 to L1) and productive (i.e. from L1 to L2) learning of decontextualized word 
pairs. They found that 41%–49% of the target words were retained as a result of 15 minutes of learn-
ing, which means that 56 seconds were required for learning a word. Similarly, Webb (2007) gave his 
participants eight minutes to learn 20 target words. One group learnt them in a list of L2-L1 word 
pairs, another group in glossed sentences, each target word in one sentence. He measured acquisition 
of five aspects of word knowledge receptively and productively. The results on almost all of the tests 
were above 50% of gain. For example, on the meaning recall test, the ‘isolation group’ remembered 
56% of words and the ‘sentence group’ 59%. This means that about 42 seconds were needed to learn 
the meaning of a new word. In Peters et al. (2009), learners read a text with or without a post-reading 
vocabulary practice. Half of them were told they would subsequently be tested on the text’s vocabu-
lary. Half were not told about the test. The +test announcement group looked up more words in an 
online dictionary and achieved better results on vocabulary post-tests than the –test announcement 
group. Apparently the former group devoted time during task performance, or after it, to committing 
words to memory for the upcoming test. 
 The results of the studies above demonstrate the effectiveness of intentional learning beyond all 
doubt. If words have to be learnt for a test, the test provides an instrumental motivation to attend to 
the material, which may not be attended to without the test. But even if people memorize vocabulary 
of their own will, without the threat of a test grade, deliberate memorization requires maximum 
attention to the words since there is no wider context to divert the focus of the learner, and this is 
beneficial for learning. 
 Type of Task and the Number of Encounters with Words 
 The preceding sections on input and instruction showed that vocabulary learning is determined 
by repeated encounters with the words and by quality of attention that learners pay to them dur-
ing a communicative or any other learning task. But which of these factors has a stronger impact 
on learning, and is there an optimal combination of the two? For example, is writing one original 
sentence with a word as effective as meeting it three or four times in the input? Even though this 
question has important practical implications for L2 teaching, to my knowledge, only a few studies 
have investigated it. 
 Webb (2005) examined five aspects of word learning after reading words in three glossed sen-
tences or using them in original sentences. With identical time on task, reading was more effective. 
With unlimited time, writing took longer but proved more effective. Since the latter case represented 
authentic learning, a strong argument could be made for the superiority of task type (a productive 
task) over number of encounters with words. In Folse (2006), however, three fill-in-the-blank exer-
cises yielded better results than one original-sentence-writing task. In other words, the number of 
www.ebook3000.com

The Three “I”s of Second Language Learning • 349
encounters was more influential than the task. Similarly, Lee and Hirsh (2012) found that three multiple-
choice exercises were more effective than one original-sentence-writing task on an immediate test, 
but the differences were not statistically significant two weeks later. Eckerth and Tavakoli (2012) 
investigated the differential effects of the number of exposures (one or five) and task-type (reading, 
reading a text with gaps to be filled in by the target words and reading followed by a writing piece 
with the target words). On the immediate test, results showed equal effects for both variables, but the 
delayed test showed that word retention was more contingent on task type than on word frequency. 
 The most extensive study so far on the combination of the number of encounters and task type 
was carried out by Laufer and Rozovski-Roitblat (2015). The study examined how learning new 
words was affected by three task type conditions (reading only, reading with a dictionary, reading 
and word-focused exercises), three number of encounters conditions and their combinations. Three 
groups of L2 learners ( n  = 185) were exposed to 30 target words (one group in each task condition) 
and to three number of encounters conditions (10 words in each condition) during 11 weeks of 
regular studies. In the reading + exercises condition, the words appeared once in a text and the rest 
of time in exercises. Delayed unexpected post-tests tested four degrees of meaning knowledge of the 
target words: recall of word form with its meaning, recall of meaning, recognition of word form, rec-
ognition of meaning. Reading with word-focused exercises yielded the best results, regardless of type 
of word knowledge and the number of encounters with the target words. The number of encounters 
had different effects in different task conditions. 
  Table 25.2 , which is adapted from Laufer and Rozovski-Roitblat (2015), shows the optimal combi-
nation of task type and number of encounters that are necessary to acquire at least one-third (33%)
of the target words. This figure was considered reasonable acquisition since learning in the study was 
incidental. We can see that to achieve a recall rate of 33% is impossible with a reading task or a reading + 
dictionary task. Only when learners practice words in post-reading exercises can they recall one-
third or more of them. In the study, these words appeared once in a text and five to six times in exer-
cises. However, achieving a recognition of rate of 33% is possible with reading only, or reading with 
a dictionary, but the number of necessary exposures to the words is higher and the gain is lower. This 
is particularly true when we compare the reading condition with the reading + exercises condition. 
      These results suggest that task type (i.e. what learners do with the word) may be more important 
than the number of times they encounter it, particularly for purposes of recalling the word or its 
meaning. 
 In this section I suggested that word-focused instruction can be of three kinds: incidental focus 
on form, incidental focus on forms and intentional focus on forms. In research and in teaching, 
intentional learning can follow an incidental learning stage or exist on its own. All word-focused 
tasks draw the learners’ attention to the word itself, whether in a larger communicative context, in 
Table 25.2 Rates of Learning (33% +), Task Type and Number of Encounters
Degree of knowledge
Type of task
The lowest number 
of encounters
Rate of 
learning
Word recall
Reading + exercises
6–7
33%
Meaning recall
Reading + exercises
6–7
43%
Word recognition
Reading + exercises
Reading + dictionary
Reading
2–3
6–7
12–15
59%
37%
38%
Meaning recognition
Reading + exercises
Reading + dictionary
Reading
2–3
2–3
6–9
75%
55%
38%

350 • Batia Laufer
an artificial minimal context or in isolation. I provided empirical evidence that demonstrated the 
effectiveness of word- focused instruction. Particularly noteworthy are the FonFs tasks since they are 
activities that cannot be considered authentic or communicative by the proponents of the commu-
nicative language teaching, and yet they yield quite good results. As for the question of what is more 
conducive to learning—task type or the number of encounters with the new words—most studies 
suggest that what people do with a word may be more important than how many times they meet it. 
 Involvement 
 How can we explain why some words are remembered better than other words, whether they are 
encountered in language input or in word-focused instruction? According to Schmidt (2000), the 
determining factor is the amount of attention learners pay to language features. Although there 
may be some forms of learning without attention (the evidence on unattended learning is highly 
contested in the psychological literature), intentionally focused attention may be a practical neces-
sity for successful language learning, particularly since many features of L2 input are likely to be 
infrequent, non-salient and communicatively redundant. In the case of vocabulary, this would mean 
that when learners attend to many details related to a particular word (e.g. pronunciation, meaning, 
relation with other words), they have a better chance of remembering it than without such attention. 
Schmidt’s claim is related to a well-known psychological position that retention of new information 
depends on the amount and the quality of attention that individuals pay to various aspects of this 
information (Eysenck, 1982; Anderson, 1995; Baddeley, 1997) and to an earlier ‘depth of processing’ 
hypothesis suggested by Craik and Lockhart (1972). They argued that the chance that some piece of 
new information will be stored into long-term memory is not determined by the length of time that 
it is held in short-term memory, but rather by the shallowness or depth with which it is initially pro-
cessed. They further postulated several levels of processing depth. For instance, processing the mean-
ing of a new lexical item takes places at a rather deep level, whereas processing the phonological form 
takes place at a rather shallow level. The problem with the depth of processing and similar notions 
like degree of elaboration or cognitive effort is operationalizing them in terms of task-specific con-
structs, which can be observed, manipulated and measured in research and teaching. 
 For example, it is hard to decide in advance whether one instructional task requires deeper process-
ing than another. Let us consider, for example, three tasks learners can do with the word ‘skinny’: 
(a) looking up its meaning in a dictionary and writing a sentence with the word; (b) looking up its meaning 
and explaining the difference between ‘skinny’, ‘thin’, and ‘slim’; and (c) receiving a sentence with the 
word and trying to infer its meaning from four alternatives presented by the teacher. There are no defi-
nite criteria which would help us grade the three tasks in terms of the depth of processing they require. 
 Laufer and Hulstijn (2001) made an attempt to resolve the operationalization problem described 
above by suggesting the Involvement Load Hypothesis. They perceived ‘involvement’ as a motivational-
cognitive construct which can explain and predict learners’ success in the retention of unfamiliar words. 
They proposed three components which constitute the construct of involvement:  need ,  search  and  eval-
uation . Each of these three components can be absent or present when processing a word in a natural 
or artificially designed task. 
 The  need  component is the motivational, non-cognitive dimension of involvement based on a 
wish to complete the task requirements. Two degrees of prominence were suggested for need:  moder-
ate  and  strong . Need is moderate when it is imposed by an external agent, as in the case of the need to 
use a word in a sentence that the teacher asked for. Need is strong when it is intrinsically motivated, 
for instance, by the decision to look up a word in an L1-L2 dictionary when writing a composition. 
 Search  and  evaluation  are the two cognitive dimensions of involvement, contingent upon allo-
cating attention to form-meaning relationships.  Search  is the attempt to find the meaning of an 
www.ebook3000.com

The Three “I”s of Second Language Learning • 351
unknown L2 word or trying to find the L2 word form expressing a concept, for example by consulting 
a dictionary or a teacher. Originally, no distinction was made between moderate or strong search. 
However, in later discussions of the construct, such a distinction was suggested, whereby a  moderate 
search would be a search for meaning of a given word and a  strong  search is a search for word form 
to express familiar meaning. 
 Evaluation  occurs when a given word is compared with other words. A specific meaning of a word 
is compared with its other meanings, or the given word is compared with other words in order to 
assess whether it does or does not fit its context. For example, when a word looked up in a diction-
ary has several meanings (e.g. bank of a river or a bank as a financial institution), a decision has to 
be made about its meaning by comparing all its meanings against the specific context and choos-
ing the one that fits best. Two degrees of prominence were suggested for evaluation:  moderate and 
 strong . Moderate evaluation entails recognizing differences between words (as in a fill-in task with 
words provided) or differences between several senses of a word in a given context. Strong evaluation 
requires a decision as to how additional words will combine with the new word in an original (as 
opposed to given) sentence or text. 
 A vocabulary learning experience in a real-life situation or a teacher-designed task can induce any 
one, two or all three of the components of involvement for each word: need, search and evaluation. 
The combination of components with their degrees of prominence constitutes  involvement load . For 
example, in one task the learner is asked to write original sentences with some new words, and these 
words are translated or explained by the teacher. The task induces a moderate need (imposed by the 
teacher), no search (the words are glossed) and strong evaluation because the new words are evalu-
ated against suitable collocations in learner-generated context. In terms of an  involvement index , 
where absence of a factor is marked as 0, a moderate presence of a factor as 1 and a strong presence 
as 2, the involvement index of the task is 3 (1 + 0 + 2). In another task, the student has to read a text 
and answer comprehension questions. New words, which are relevant to the questions, are glossed. 
The task will induce a moderate need to consult the glosses (moderate because it is imposed by the 
task), but it will induce neither search nor evaluation. Its involvement index is 1. Hence, the first task 
induces a greater involvement load than the second. 
 The Involvement Load Hypothesis (ILH) claims that vocabulary tasks that require a higher 
involvement load will be more effective than tasks that require a lower involvement load (when other 
word factors, such as phonological, morphological and semantic complexity of the word, learners’ L2 
proficiency and conceptual development are equal). The construct of Involvement Load was devel-
oped in the context of incidental L2 vocabulary learning. Even though careful attention can be paid 
to the properties of a certain word during intentional learning (e.g. preparation for a vocabulary test) 
just as well as during incidental learning (e.g. when the word occurs in a text and successful comple-
tion of the reading task requires such attention), it is impossible to know what strategies learners use 
when they commit words to memory (i.e. in intentional learning). Therefore, the Involvement Load 
of intentional learning cannot be determined. 
 The ILH has been investigated in a series of empirical studies. Most of them confirmed the predic-
tive value of the hypothesis. Hulstijn and Laufer (2001), Keating (2008) and Kim (2008) compared 
three tasks with different Involvement Loads: reading and comprehension exercise with glossed 
new words (need=1, search=0, evaluation=0), reading and a fill-in exercise with glossed new words 
(need=1, search=0, evaluation=1) and composition writing where the new words (glossed) had to 
be used (need=1, search=0, evaluation=2). The third task, which had the highest Involvement Load, 
resulted in highest target word retention rates, followed by the second task. The first task yielded the 
worst results. Kim (2008) also compared two tasks with an identical involvement load, composition 
writing and sentence writing, and found that the results were similar, in line with the prediction 
of the Involvement Load Hypothesis. Moreover, the results were the same for two L2 proficiencies. 

352 • Batia Laufer
Huang, Willson, and Eslami (2012) performed a meta-analysis of 12 studies on various vocabulary 
tasks and concluded that the analysis supported the Involvement Load Hypothesis since learners who 
performed a task with a higher degree of Involvement Load gained more vocabulary than those who 
performed a task with a lower Involvement Load. For additional studies that found full or partial 
support for the ILH, see Folse (2006), Nassaji and Hu (2012), Pichette, de Serres, and Lafontaine 
(2012) and Webb (2005). 
 In this section I explained how the construct of involvement can explain the acquisition of words 
that are encountered in language input or in teacher-devised tasks. Retention of words is associ-
ated with quality of attention or elaboration of the information. The Involvement Load Hypothesis 
attempts to operationalize the notions of attention, elaboration and depth of processing into task-
specific constructs, thereby enabling teachers to design effective tasks and researchers to observe, 
manipulate and measure tasks with different Involvement Loads. Most studies to date have provided 
partial or full support for the ILH. 
 Conclusion 
 In this chapter I argued that the acquisition of L2 vocabulary is determined by three main factors. 
One is language input, particularly reading input. For learners to benefit from input, they have to 
be exposed to large quantities of language, which would ensure sufficient and frequent encounters 
with new words. The input should also be at the right level. It should consist of about 98% of famil-
iar words to enable comprehension of new words. The second determinant of vocabulary learning 
is word-focused instruction, both in communicative authentic activities and in ‘artificial’ exercises 
where the decontextualized words are the object of study. Word-focused instruction can lead to inci-
dental learning, which happens without the learner’s intention to learn the words practiced in the 
various tasks, or to intentional learning, which is the deliberate memorization of words. Empirical 
studies suggest that all types of word-focused learning, communicative and non-communicative, 
incidental and intentional, are effective. What learners do with the words may be more effective 
than the number of times they encounter them in the input. The third factor in vocabulary learn-
ing is involvement, which is a motivational-cognitive construct that operationalizes the notions of 
attention, elaboration and depth of processing into task-specific constructs that can be designed 
and measured. Real-life situations or teacher-designed tasks with a higher Involvement Load induce 
better learning than situations and tasks with a lower Involvement Load. The Involvement Load 
Hypothesis has been investigated in a series of empirical studies, and most of them confirmed the 
predictive value of the hypothesis. 
 Notes 
 1. The Brown Corpus of Standard American English was the first of the modern, computer-readable, general corpora. It was 
compiled by Kucera, H. and Francis, W.N. (1967), Brown University, Providence, RI. 
 2. In order to read fluently and infer unknown vocabulary, learners should possess a lexical coverage of 98%, i.e. 98% of the 
text’s words should be familiar (Nation, 2006; Laufer & Ravenhorst-Kalovski, 2010) 
 3. ‘Incidental’ does not mean ‘unfocused’. Hence, learning that occurs after word-focused exercises like writing sentences with 
target words or filling them in given sentences is incidental if no conscious effort has been made to memorize the words. 
 References 
 Agustin Llach, M. P. (2009). The effect of reading only, reading and comprehension, and sentence writing in lexical learning 
in a foreign language: Some preliminary results.  RESLA ,  22 , 9–33. 
 Anderson, J. R. (1995).  Cognitive psychology and its implications (4th edition). New York: Freeman. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Three “I”s of Second Language Learning • 353
 Anderson, R. C., Wilson, P. & Fielding, L. (1988). Growth in reading and how children spend their time outside of school. 
 Reading Research Quarterly ,  23 , 285–303. 
 Baddeley, A. (1997).  Human memory: Theory and practice (revised edition). Hove, UK: Psychology Press. 
 Brown, R., Waring, R. & Donkaewbua, S. (2008). Incidental vocabulary acquisition from reading, reading-while-listening, and 
listening to stories.  Reading in a Foreign Language ,  20 (2), 136–163. 
 Cho, K.-S. & Krashen, S. (1994). Acquisition of vocabulary from the Sweet Valley Kids series: Adult ESL acquisition.  Journal 
of Reading ,  37 ,662–667. 
 Coady, J. (1997). L2 vocabulary acquisition through extensive reading. In J. Coady & T. Huckin (Eds.),  Second language vocabu-
lary acquisition: A rationale for pedagogy (pp. 225–237). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Cobb, T. (2007). Computing the vocabulary demands of L2 reading.  Language Learning & Technology ,  11 (3), 38–63. 
 Craik, F. I. M. & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research.  Journal of Verbal Learning 
and Verbal Behavior ,  11 , 671–684. 
 Day, R. R., Omura, K. & Hiramatsu, M. (1991). Incidental EFL vocabulary learning and reading.  Reading in a Foreign Language , 
 7 (2), 541–551. 
 Dupuy, B. & Krashen, S. (1993). Incidental vocabulary acquisition in French as a foreign language.  Applied Language Learning , 
 4 , 55–63. 
 Eckerth, J. & Tavakoli, P. (2012). The effects of word exposure frequency and elaboration of word processing on incidental L2 
vocabulary acquisition through reading.  Language Teaching Research ,  16 (2), 227–252. 
 Ellis, R. (Ed.) (2001). Form-focused instruction and second language learning. A supplement to  Language Learning, 51 , sup-
plement 1. 
 Eysenck, M. W. (1982). Incidental learning and orienting tasks. In C. R. Puff (Ed.),  Handbook of research methods in human 
memory and cognition ( pp. 197–228). New York: Academic Press. 
 Folse, S. K. (2006). The effect of type of written exercise on L2 vocabulary retention.  TESOL Quarterly ,  40 , 273–293. 
 Horst, M., Cobb, T. & Nicolae, H. (2005 ) . Expanding academic vocabulary with an interactive on-line database.  Language 
Learning and Technology ,  9 , 90–110. 
 Huang, S., Willson, V. & Eslami, Z. (2012). The effects of task involvement load on L2 incidental vocabulary learning: A meta-
analytic study.  The Modern Language Journal ,  96 (4), 544–557. 
 Hulstijn, J. H. (2001). Intentional and incidental second language vocabulary learning: A reappraisal of elaboration, rehearsal 
and automaticity. In: P. Robinson (Ed.),  Cognition and second language instruction  (pp. 258–286). Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
 Hulstijn, J. H., Hollander, M. & Greidanus, T. (1996). Incidental vocabulary learning by advanced foreign language students: 
The influence of marginal glosses, dictionary use, and reoccurrence of unknown words.  Modern Language Journal ,  80 , 
327–339. 
 Hulstijn, J. H. & Laufer, B. (2001). Some empirical evidence for the involvement load hypothesis in vocabulary acquisition. 
 Language Learning ,  51 , 539–558. 
 Keating, G. (2008). Task effectiveness and word learning in a second language: The involvement load hypothesis on trial. 
 Language Teaching Research ,  12 , 365–386. 
 Kim, Y. J. (2008). The role of task-induced involvement and learner proficiency in L2 vocabulary acquisition.  Language Learn-
ing ,  58 , 285–325. 
 Knight, S. (1994). Dictionary use while reading: The effects on comprehension and vocabulary acquisition for students of 
different verbal abilities.  The Modern Language Journal ,  78 (3), 285–299. 
 Kucera, H. & Francis, W.N. (1967).  Computational analysis of present-day American English . Providence, RI: Brown University 
Press. 
 Laufer, B. (2003). Vocabulary acquisition in a second language: Do learners really acquire most vocabulary by reading?  Cana-
dian Modern Language Review ,  59 , 565–585. 
 Laufer, B. (2005a). Instructed second language vocabulary learning: The fault in the ‘default hypothesis’. In A. Housen & 
M. Pierrard (Eds.),  Investigations in instructed second language acquisition  (pp. 311–329). Berlin and New York: Mouton 
de Gruyter. 
 Laufer, B. (2005b). Focus on form in second language vocabulary acquisition. In S. H. Foster-Cohen, M. P. Garcia-Mayo, & 
J. Cenoz (Eds.),  EUROSLA Yearbook 5 (pp. 223–250). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Laufer, B. & Girsai, N. (2008). Form-focused instruction in second language vocabulary learning: A case for contrastive analy-
sis and translation.  Applied Linguistics ,  29 , 694–716. 
 Laufer, B. & Hill, M. (2000). What lexical information do L2 learners select in a CALL dictionary and how does it affect word 
retention?  Language Learning & Technology ,  3 , 58–76. 
 Laufer, B. & Hulstijn, J. (2001). Incidental vocabulary acquisition in a second language: The construct of task-induced involve-
ment.  Applied Linguistics ,  22 , 1–26. 

354 • Batia Laufer
 Laufer, B. & Levitzky-Aviad, T. (2003). Look up behaviour and word retention as a function of task type and word relevance. 
 AsiaLEX Proceedings , Tokyo, Japan. 
 Laufer, B. & Ravenhorst- Kalovski, G. C. (2010). Lexical threshold revisited: Lexical text coverage, learners’ vocabulary size and 
reading comprehension.  Reading in a Foreign Language ,  22 (1),15–30. 
 Laufer, B. & Rozovski-Roitblat, B. (2015). Retention of new words: Quantity of encounters, quality of task, and degree of 
knowledge.  Language Teaching Research ,  19 (6), 687–711. 
 Lee, Y.-T. & Hirsh, D. (2012). Quality and quantity of exposure in L2 vocabulary learning. In D. Hirsh (Ed.),  Current perspec-
tives in second language vocabulary research (pp. 79–116). Bern: Peter Lang. 
 Luppescu, S. & Day, R. R. (1993). Reading, dictionaries and vocabulary learning.  Language Learning ,  43 , 263–287. 
 Mondria, J. & Wiersma, B. (2004). Receptive, productive and receptive + productive L2 vocabulary learning: What differ-
ence does it make? In P. Bogaards & B. Laufer (Eds.),  Vocabulary in a second language: Selection, acquisition and testing 
(pp. 79–100). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
 Nagy, W. E., Herman, P. A. & Anderson, P. C. (1985). Learning words from context.  Reading Research Quarterly ,  20 , 233–253. 
 Nassaji, H. & Hu, H. C. M. (2012). The relationship between task-induced involvement load and learning new words from 
context.  International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching ,  50 (1), 69–86. 
 Nation, I. S. P. (2001).  Learning vocabulary in another language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Nation, I. S. P. (2006). How large a vocabulary is needed for reading and listening?  The Canadian Modern Language Review , 
 63 , 59–82. 
 Nation, P. (2014). How much input do you need to learn the most frequent 9,000 words?  Reading in a Foreign Language ,  26 (2), 
1–16. 
 Nation, P. & Wang Ming-Tzu, K. (1999). Graded readers and vocabulary.  Reading in a Foreign Language ,  12 , 355–379. 
 Peters, E. (2007). Manipulating L2 learners’ online dictionary use and its effect on L2 word retention.  Language Learning and 
Technology ,  11 , 36–58. 
 Peters, E., Hulstijn, J. H., Sercu, L. & Lutjeharms, M. (2009). Learning L2 German vocabulary through reading: The effect of 
three enhancement techniques compared.  Language Learning ,  59 (1), 113–151. 
 Pichette, F., de Serres, L. & Lafontaine, M. (2012). Sentence reading and writing for second language vocabulary acquisition. 
 Applied Linguistics ,  33 (1), 66–82. 
 Pitts, M., White, H. & Krashen, S. (1989). Acquiring second language vocabulary through reading: A replication of the clock-
work orange study using second language acquirers.  Reading in a Foreign language ,  5 (2), 271–275. 
 Qian, D. D. (1996). ESL vocabulary acquisition: Contextualization and decontextualization.  Canadian Modern Language 
Review ,  53 (1), 120–142. 
 Schmidt, R. (2000). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.),  Cognition and second language instruction  (pp. 3–32). Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
 Schmitt, N. (2010).  Researching vocabulary: A vocabulary research manual . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Sternberg, R. J. (1987). Most vocabulary is learnt from context. In M. G. McKeown & M. E. Curtis (Eds.),  The nature of vocabu-
lary acquisition  (pp. 89–105). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Waring, R. & Takaki, M. (2003). At what rate do learners learn and retain new vocabulary from reading a graded reader?  Read-
ing in a Foreign Language ,  15 (2), 130–160. 
 Webb, S. (2005). Receptive and productive vocabulary learning.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition ,  27 , 33–52. 
 Webb, S. (2007). Learning word pairs and glossed sentences: The effects of a single sentence on vocabulary knowledge.  Lan-
guage Teaching Research ,  11 (1), 63–81. 
 Webb, S., Newton, J. & Chang, A. (2013). Incidental learning of collocation.  Language Learning ,  63 , 91–120. doi:10.1111/
j.1467–9922.2012.00729.x 
 Zahar, R., Cobb, T. & Spada, N. (2001). Acquiring vocabulary through reading: Effects of frequency and contextual richness. 
 The Canadian Modern Language Review ,  57 (4), 541–572. 
www.ebook3000.com

355
 26 
 Measuring Vocabulary Size 
 Paul Nation and Laurence Anthony 
 There are two kinds of vocabulary proficiency tests. One kind, of which the most well-known is the 
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (Dunn, 1965), measures knowledge of a selection of words that 
do not systematically represent a larger population of words. A learner’s score on such a test can be 
compared with another learner’s score, or the score of a group of learners can be compared with 
another group or with norms for various groups. The second kind of test can be called a vocabulary 
size measure because the words in the test are intended to be a representative sample of the vocabu-
lary as a whole or of a clearly defined section of it. Thus, a learner’s score on the test can be converted 
into the number of words known in the whole language or that section of the language, such as the 
most frequent 10,000 words. The best-known test of this type is the Vocabulary Size Test (Nation & 
Beglar, 2007). This chapter deals with this second kind of test and looks at the design and limitations 
of such tests for both native speakers and non-native speakers of English. 
 Why Measure Vocabulary Size? 
 The size of a person’s vocabulary (how many words he or she knows) directly affects what he or she 
can do with the language and how well he or she can do it. Certainly, the richness of a person’s vocab-
ulary affects how easily he or she will read certain kinds of texts, because knowledge of vocabulary is 
a reflection of knowledge of the world. In fact, a quick and easy way to check if a person is familiar 
with a particular subject area or topic is to see how much of the technical vocabulary of the topic 
he or she knows. If you are familiar with the words  punt, maul, scrum, try, ruck,  and  hooker , you are 
likely to be familiar with the sport of rugby. The cause-and-effect relationships between vocabulary 
size, skill in language use, and knowledge of the world are complicated (Anderson & Freebody, 1981), 
but they are all evidently related. 
 For native speakers, measures of vocabulary size can help determine the feasibility of directly 
teaching vocabulary. Nagy and Herman (1987), for example, argue that because young native speak-
ers have vocabulary sizes in the tens of thousands of words, teaching vocabulary can have only a very 
small effect on increasing their overall vocabulary size. On the other hand, if vocabulary sizes are not 
so large, as in the case of young learners, then teaching four or five words each school day (around 
1,000 words a year) could have a marked effect on vocabulary growth. 
 For learners of English as a second or foreign language, vocabulary size is critical in achieving rea-
sonable proficiency in the use of the language. Such learners need a vocabulary size of close to 9,000 

356 • Paul Nation and Laurence Anthony
word families to read unsimplified novels or newspapers without being overly burdened with large 
numbers of unknown words (Nation, 2006), and they need a vocabulary size of around 5,000 word 
families to follow movies and TV dramas without meeting lots of unknown words (Webb & Rodgers, 
2009a, 2009b). Measuring the vocabulary size of second or foreign language learners can help teach-
ers to determine the learners’ current level of English proficiency, evaluate and select appropriate 
teaching and reading materials, and provide focused vocabulary training at the correct level. 
 There has been considerable disagreement over the vocabulary size of native speakers of English, 
and it is not an exaggeration to say that vocabulary size is one of the most poorly researched areas of 
applied linguistics. This is not because of a lack of research but because the research has suffered from 
methodological problems of various kinds, which have severely distorted the findings. An important 
goal of research on vocabulary size has been to investigate these problems and offer solutions to 
them. The two most serious problems have been finding a way to choose a representative sample of 
words and deciding how to measure knowledge of those words. In the following sections, we will look 
at different ways that test designers have selected vocabulary items for vocabulary size tests, the types 
of knowledge these tests have attempted to measure, and the limitations of each measure. 
 Receptive Vocabulary Size Measures 
 A distinction can be made between receptive vocabulary size and productive vocabulary size. Recep-
tive vocabulary knowledge is useful for listening and reading, and it is typically measured by tests 
that require the test taker to demonstrate in some way or other that he or she can provide a meaning 
for a target word, for example, by translating it into his or her first language equivalent or by choos-
ing its correct definition from multiple choices. 
 One of the earliest published studies on receptive vocabulary size was by Kirkpatrick (1891), who 
estimated how many words he knew in a dictionary. His results suggested that he had a vocabulary 
size of approximately 70,000 words. However, after considering that different uses of the same form 
(e.g., as a noun and as a verb) had separate entries in his dictionary, and observing that many proper 
nouns occurred in the dictionary, he concluded that an average university-educated native speaker 
knew “from twenty thousand words upwards to perhaps one hundred thousand” (p. 108). 
 Kirkpatrick’s work and many of the other early studies of vocabulary size (e.g., Seashore & Ecker-
son, 1940) used roughly the same methodology. This involved choosing a dictionary, taking a sample 
of words from the dictionary, such as the first word on every tenth page, testing themselves or other 
people on their knowledge of this sample, and then calculating a vocabulary size by multiplying the 
score on the test by the ratio of the sample to the whole dictionary. This methodology is fraught 
with problems. Thorndike (1924) was aware of these problems and wrote an article about them. He 
also produced alternative measures of vocabulary size that addressed these issues by using sampled 
frequency lists from his Teacher’s Word Books. Unfortunately, Thorndike’s article was published in 
an edited book rather than a widely distributed journal, and thus, few researchers knew of the work. 
In addition, there are no published reports on the use of his frequency measures. As a result, for at 
least the next 50 years, dictionary-based vocabulary size research made the errors that Thorndike 
had warned against. 
 The first problem is that the dictionary used as a basis for the vocabulary size measure needs to be 
large enough to ensure that it contains all the words the test takers are likely to know. When the early 
studies were conducted, it was a difficult task to find such a large dictionary (Thorndike, 1924). Of 
course, this is easier now with the availability of very large online dictionaries. 
 Second, the sample taken from the dictionary needs to be truly representative of the whole popu-
lation of words in the dictionary without being biased towards better-known or lesser-known words. 
Again, prior to the digitisation of dictionaries, it was surprisingly difficult to take a representative 
www.ebook3000.com

Measuring Vocabulary Size • 357
sample of words from a dictionary. If a spaced sampling method was used, for example, high-frequency 
words, such as  sweet , would be more likely to be selected over low-frequency words, such as  epony-
mous,  because they took up more space on the pages. High-frequency words are more likely to be 
known, and this made the resulting tests much easier and the test takers’ scores much higher than 
they should have been. For example, Seashore and Eckerson (1940) reported that university under-
graduates knew from 112,100 to 192,575 words, based on a spaced sampling method. By comparing 
Seashore and Eckerson’s vocabulary test with the results from a study by Smith (1941), Lorge and 
Chall (1963) found that the test was likely to over-estimate vocabulary sizes by at least 50% to 75%. 
Better ways of taking a representative sample from a dictionary can be carried out (e.g., Thorndike, 
1924; Nation, 1993), but the resulting samples always need to be carefully checked against frequency 
lists to ensure that a bias towards high-frequency words has not crept in. 
 A third problem is that the number of words in the dictionary needs to be counted so that the con-
version of the test score to a vocabulary size can be accurately done. Early researchers did not directly 
count or calculate the number of words in the dictionary they used. Rather, they simply accepted 
the publisher’s statement on the cover of the dictionary or in the introduction. These statements 
are typically inflated to help sell the dictionary—the more words a dictionary contains, the better it 
appears. Such inflated figures inflated the vocabulary size estimates arrived at by multiplying a test 
taker’s score with the ratio of the sample to the whole dictionary. As a result, hugely over-estimated 
vocabulary sizes of native speakers were offered, and in some cases (e.g., Diller, 1978), the estimates 
were even larger than the actual number of words in the dictionary. 
 There are additional problems in using dictionaries to measure vocabulary size that were not dis-
cussed by Thorndike (1924). One is that the researcher largely has to accept the dictionary maker’s 
decision about what will be considered to be a word and what forms will be included in a word family. 
Another is that the researcher has to assume that the dictionary maker has applied the word family 
definition consistently to all entries throughout the dictionary. 
 One of the better set of dictionary-based studies is that of D’Anna, Zechmeister, and colleagues 
(D’Anna, Zechmeister, & Hall, 1991; Zechmeister, Chronis, Cull, D’Anna, & Healy, 1995). These 
researchers carefully dealt with the problems of dictionary-based sampling and also used two distinct 
measures of word knowledge of the same words: (1) multiple-choice measurements that were cor-
rected for guessing and (2) self-assessment on a five-point scale. According to their multiple-choice 
test measure, the group found that junior high school students knew on average 9,684 word families, 
college students knew on average 12,374 word families, and older adults of 67 years old and above 
knew on average 17,217 word families. Self-assessment, on the other hand, resulted in higher scores. 
 A more accurate method of measuring vocabulary size utilizes word frequency lists. This was 
the approach used by Thorndike in the first half of the 20th century. It is a quite laborious method 
(especially when computers are unavailable), but it avoids many of the problems inherent in the 
dictionary-based approaches. 
 The steps involved in the frequency-based method are as follows: 
 1. Decide on the kind of vocabulary knowledge that you want to measure and write a description 
of this kind of knowledge and why a measurement of it is important. 
 2. Choose or develop a corpus that captures the vocabulary knowledge that you want to mea-
sure. This corpus needs to be large enough and representative enough to make sure that all 
the words that are part of the test takers’ knowledge occur within the corpus. 
 3. Divide the corpus into sections so that it is possible to measure the range of occurrence, fre-
quency of occurrence, and dispersion of words in the corpus (Leech, Rayson, & Wilson, 2001). 
 4. Decide on the unit of counting, such as the word family, that you are going to use when mak-
ing a word list from the corpus. 

358 • Paul Nation and Laurence Anthony
 5. Make a ranked word list from the corpus. The ranking should take account of range, frequency, 
and dispersion. 
 6. Check the word list against other corpora to make sure that it does not contain serious omis-
sions or errors. 
 7. Divide the word list into levels based on range, frequency, and dispersion. 
 8. Randomly select a suitable number of words from each level, so that the total number of 
words in the test is large enough to obtain a good level of reliability and small enough to be 
able to be tested within a reasonable testing time. 
 9. Construct the test using one or more test-item types, such as multiple-choice, yes/no, transla-
tion, or interview. 
 A frequency-based approach largely avoids sampling problems and the problem of the accuracy of 
the ratio of the sample to the whole. The word lists used need to consistently reflect a set of criteria 
for deciding what is included in a word family. Computers have made the creation and processing of 
data from corpora much easier. In Step 5, for example, the freely available word-counting program 
 AntWordProfiler  (Anthony, 2015) can make a ranked word list for a very wide range of languages 
using Unicode-encoded files. However, the creation of word lists is still very time consuming. One 
such set of lists has been constructed by Nation (2015) using data from the British National Corpus 
(2007) and the Corpus of Contemporary American English (Davies, 2015). At present, the lists go 
up to the 25,000 word family level, with additional lists of proper names, transparent compounds, 
marginal words, and abbreviations. Although these lists create a limit on what can be tested, research 
using six 20,000 word family versions of the Vocabulary Size Test (Coxhead, Nation, & Sim, 2014) 
suggests that few native speakers have receptive vocabulary sizes much beyond the 20,000 word fami-
lies level. The likely exceptions will be specialists in narrow disciplines, such as doctors and botanists, 
who may have very large technical vocabularies. In contrast, research with young native speakers 
(Biemiller, 2005) supports the very rough rule of thumb that for native speakers receptive vocabulary 
grows at a rate of around 1,000 words a year, and the number of words known is on average calcu-
lated as follows: age – 2 × 1,000. So, an 8-year-old is likely to know around (8 – 2) × 1,000 words = 
6,000 words. However, a learner’s score on a vocabulary size test depends not only on his or her age 
but also on the test item format that is used and a variety of other factors related to socioeconomic 
status. When item format is controlled for, scores at a particular age can vary by 1,000 to 2,000 words 
on each side of the average (Coxhead, Sim & Nation, 2014). 
 Productive Vocabulary Size Measures 
 The earliest published report on productive vocabulary size was by Holden (1875). In this study, 
Holden used a dictionary to count the words he thought he could use or had used, arriving at a size of 
33,456 words. Holden did not look at his own written or spoken production, but there is a long history 
of using the language produced by a particular person to measure his or her productive vocabulary 
size. Probably the best known of these studies is Elliott and Valenza’s (2011) investigation of Shake-
speare’s works. A count of the different word forms (word types) used by Shakespeare produces an 
estimate of around 29,000 words. This kind of counting treats alternative spellings of the same words 
as different words and also considers inflected forms such as  leg and  legs as different words. 
 The biggest problem with counts such as Elliott and Valenza’s is that the words that a person 
actually uses do not necessarily include all the words that the person  could  use. Also, the estimated 
number will depend on how much text is counted. The greater the amount of text counted, the larger 
the number of different words. At best, such counts give minimum figures. That is, we can say that a 
person knows  at least this number of words. 
www.ebook3000.com

Measuring Vocabulary Size • 359
 In the early 20th century, several studies were published on the words produced by children that 
were recorded by their parents. Some of these were published in a journal with the impressive title 
of  The Pedagogical Seminary  (Gale & Gale, 1902; Alexander & Chamberlain, 1904; Mateer, 1908; 
Whipple & Whipple, 1909; Heilig, 1913; Rowe & Rowe, 1913; Bohn, 1914; Brandenburg, 1914; Bush, 
1914; Langenbeck, 1914; Pelsma, 1914; Brandenburg & Brandenburg, 1919). The children were typi-
cally part of single-child families where at least one of the parents was an academic. Mateer (1908) is 
an interesting exception, where the data gatherer was a clearly devoted older sister doing her graduate 
study using data gathered from her 4-year-old brother. The studies were longitudinal, and the data 
was usually gathered over a period of at least 10 weeks (following Whipple and Whipple’s [1909] 
example) with some intensive full-day data gathering sessions, although a few studies attempted to 
record all production over many months. 
 Many of these studies listed all the different words recorded. The unit of counting was usually 
the word type but with singular and plural forms being counted as the same item. Also, most of the 
studies were with children under the age of five, largely because the speed and amount of production 
by older native speaker children was just too great to keep pace with, and children went off to school 
at age five, where they could not be observed by the parents. The Uhrbrock (1935) study is interest-
ing because it used the new technology of a dictating machine, resulting in the recording of around 
24,000 tokens (running words) on 17 wax cylinders. 
 Some interesting lessons can be learned from these studies. First, as noted previously, the length 
of the data-gathering period affected the number of different words recorded. The longer the data-
gathering period, the more different words were recorded, or to put it another way, the number of 
tokens recorded directly affected the number of types recorded—a lesson unfortunately not noted 
by Hart and Risley (1995) in their much later study. It is clear that even a 10-week-long intensive 
study is not long enough to gather all the words that a child is capable of producing, and a single-day 
intensive gathering does not get near the number of different words that can be gathered over much 
longer periods. 
 These early studies also show that young native speakers’ vocabulary knowledge grows very 
quickly, soon outstripping the ability of a human recorder to keep pace with the new words that are 
produced. From around the age of two, a native speaker child increases his or her productive vocabu-
lary by around 100 words a month (Heilig, 1913), with the more long-term studies showing that a 
2-year-old can produce somewhere between 600–900 different words, a 3-year-old around 2,000 
words (Whipple & Whipple, 1909; Brandenburg & Brandenburg, 1919; Bush, 1914), and a 4-year-
old close to 4,000 different words (Langenbeck, 1914; Brandenburg & Brandenburg, 1919). They 
also show both a variety across different children in the early words that are produced, indicating the 
important role of particular experience and opportunity in vocabulary growth, as well as a common 
core of everyday words required for the typical needs of early life. 
 Despite its long history, the measurement of productive vocabulary size is still a largely 
unknown field of study. More recent attempts, such as the Hart and Risley (1995) study, have 
been even more methodologically flawed than the early productive size studies (see Nation 
& Webb, 2011: 197–201 for a critique). It seems apparent that without gathering very large 
amounts of output data, we are unlikely to get close to knowing how many words a young native 
speaker is capable of producing. The encouraging message of the very early studies, however, is 
that young native speakers have vocabulary sizes measured in thousands of words, not tens or 
hundreds of words. 
 Recent Tests of Receptive Vocabulary Size 
 In this section, we will review some of the more recent tests of receptive vocabulary size. 

360 • Paul Nation and Laurence Anthony
 The Eurocentres Vocabulary Size Test 
 The Eurocentres Vocabulary Size Test (Meara & Buxton, 1987; Meara & Jones, 1988) measures 
knowledge of the most frequent 10,000 words of English based on Thorndike and Lorge’s (1944) lists 
using a one in fifty sample with 20 words from each 1,000-word band. As the test draws on only the 
first 10,000 words, it cannot be used effectively with older native speakers of English, who generally 
have much larger vocabulary sizes. Also, the results of the test cannot be easily compared with the 
results of the other tests reviewed as follows because the word unit used in the Thorndike and Lorge 
count is not clearly defined. A description of the test suggests that a word unit includes a headword, 
its inflected forms, and the - ly  form. This is different from a family-based approach (Bauer & Nation, 
1993), where each word unit includes a headword and a range of closely related derived forms, or 
a lemma-based approach (e.g., Leech, Rayson, & Wilson, 2001), where each word unit comprises a 
canonical form of a word and its inflections. 
 The Eurocentres test uses a yes/no format (see Read, 2000: 128–132, for a detailed critique) with 
some non-words to ensure honest answering. A yes/no test simply involves learners hearing or seeing 
a word and then indicating whether they could provide a meaning for it (Eyckmans, 2004). A pro-
portion of the words presented in a yes/no test, usually around one-third, are not real words, which 
are there to see if and to what extent the test taker is over-stating his or her vocabulary knowledge. 
Test takers who say they know some of the non-words have their scores on the real words reduced 
by a corresponding proportion. Mochida and Harrington (2006) found that the raw hit rate (i.e., the 
score with no adjustment for false hits) most accurately estimated vocabulary size, but it should be 
noted that their learners already had low false hit rates. 
 Although yes/no tests are predominantly used with adults, they can be adapted for young learners 
by putting each word in a non-defining sentence and adding a question to each item, such as in the 
following sentence: 
 He has a kite. Do you know what  kite means? 
 Non-words can also be presented in the same format: 
 He has a  glom . Do you know what  glom means? 
 One of the advantages of a yes/no test is that learners can draw on a very wide span of knowledge to 
answer a test item correctly, from knowing the form but not knowing the meaning to knowing both 
the form and meaning well. It also prevents learners from using various test-taking strategies associ-
ated with a multiple-choice format, such as leaving difficult items for later, eliminating less-probable 
alternatives, and carefully considering all options. However, because it is a recall test rather than a 
recognition test, it is a more demanding test of knowledge than a multiple-choice test such as the 
Vocabulary Size Test and the Picture Vocabulary Size Test described later in this section. 
 The major problem with a yes/no test is its face validity. Learners’ vocabulary knowledge is being 
measured without them having to overtly recall or choose an appropriate word meaning. Research 
shows that such tests work well with adults, but teachers find it difficult to accept that they are true 
measures of learners’ vocabulary knowledge. 
 The Vocabulary Size Test 
 The Vocabulary Size Test (Nation & Beglar, 2007) measures written receptive vocabulary knowledge 
of word families. It exists in 14,000 and 20,000 word family versions based on word families cre-
ated from the British National Corpus (BNC) and the Corpus of Contemporary American English 
www.ebook3000.com

Measuring Vocabulary Size • 361
(COCA) (Davies, 2015). The lists used to create the test follow a consistent word family definition 
(Bauer & Nation, 1993), and they are freely available online in their full forms with headwords and 
family members, together with the test specifications (Nation, 2015). 
 The test uses a four-choice multiple-choice format and a minimal sentence context for the tested 
word, such as in the following: 
 1. whoop: The audience <whooped> 
 a. made happy loud cries 
 b. showed disappointment 
 c. clapped loudly 
 d. slowly got smaller 
 The 20,000 word family form of the Vocabulary Size Test has been used for testing both native and 
non-native speakers of English. There are also bilingual versions of the 14,000 word family test in 
a variety of languages, where the choices are in the learners’ first language. Research comparing 
the monolingual and bilingual versions suggests that for lower proficiency learners of English as a 
foreign language, the bilingual version gives higher scores, but with higher proficiency learners, few 
differences in scores are found (Elgort, 2013). 
 A few studies have examined the validity of the Vocabulary Size Test. Beglar (2010) examined a 
monolingual 14,000 word family version of the test using a Rasch analysis of data gathered in Japan 
and found that the test was measuring largely one factor, had good reliability, and could be shortened 
without loss in reliability. The test has also received some well-deserved criticism related to its use of 
a multiple-choice format and the sampling of items for the test (Stewart, 2014; Gyllstad, Vilkaite, & 
Schmitt, 2015). 
 The main criticism of the multiple-choice format is that it encourages the use of test-taking strate-
gies and random guessing. The use of multiple-choice items certainly allows the use of test-taking 
strategies, such as leaving difficult items for later and eliminating less-probable alternatives. Clearly, 
more research is needed to assess the impact of test-taking strategies on the final vocabulary size 
estimate. On the other hand, analysis of test results indicates that truly random guessing is rare if 
the test is properly administered to make sure that the learners are committed to doing the test well 
with their full attention. 
 There are several ways in which the administration of a test can affect some learners’ scores. In 
Coxhead, Nation, and Sim (2014), group administration of the test was compared with conducting 
the test separately for each test taker and having a personal test administrator keep them engaged 
and on task throughout, with the finding that for around 25% of the learners, scores were signifi-
cantly higher on the individually administered test. This difference was not affected by gender, age, 
school year, school, or school socio-economic level. The difference in scores between the group and 
individual administrations was most obvious in the 25% of test takers who had the lowest scores for 
their age group on the test. These test takers scored an average of 49.43 out of 100 for the individual 
administration compared to 41.83 for the group—a score increase of 7.60 (p < .000) for the indi-
vidual administration. The second and third quartiles had much smaller significant differences in 
scores of 2.74 (p < .017) and 2.26 (p < .011), respectively, with a non-significant difference (p < 0.86) 
for the highest-scoring quartile. Keeping lower-scoring learners motivated and on task can result in a 
more accurate indication of their knowledge. If a vocabulary size test is going to be used with learners 
who may be switched off at school, then it is essential to use an individual administration of the test. 
 Another important criticism of the test relates to the construct that it is attempting to measure. 
The Vocabulary Size Test (Nation & Beglar, 2007) is designed to measure written receptive vocabu-
lary knowledge of word families that is useful, for example, in reading. However, because the test 

362 • Paul Nation and Laurence Anthony
utilizes a multiple-choice format, test takers may be able to correctly answer questions with only 
minimal, partial knowledge of the target item. For example, in multiple-choice questions where the 
distractors are not closely related in meaning to the correct answer, test takers may be able to use a 
partial memory of the word form to eliminate the distractors and find the correct answer. As a result, 
the same item could be answered correctly by someone with very strong or very weak knowledge 
of the word. Of course, for some purposes there is value in allowing learners to draw on partial 
knowledge, particularly where the aim is to guide future learning that builds on present knowledge. 
However, there has been little research on the degree to which this partial knowledge is useful to 
learners hoping to read a text. 
 In contrast, a more demanding recall test, such as translation of the target word into the native 
language, requires a fairly high minimum level of knowledge to get an item correct. Such a test 
draws on a much narrower range of strengths of knowledge, and as a result, a correct answer 
strongly indicates that the learner knows the target word reasonably well. If the purpose of the test 
is to develop vocabulary size norms or determine the role of vocabulary knowledge in reading or 
listening, this kind of test may be more appropriate than multiple-choice tests that allow a wide 
range of strengths of knowledge to be drawn on when choosing an answer. Alternatively, it may be 
possible to use a multiple-choice test with more closely related choices which require more precise 
knowledge of the word. 
 Another criticism of the Vocabulary Size Test relates to its sampling method and item sample 
rate, particularly when it is used in a similar way to the Vocabulary Levels Test (Schmitt, Schmitt, & 
Clapham, 2001) to determine how well test takers know words at the first 1,000 level, second 1,000 
level, and so on. The Vocabulary Size Test was originally designed to measure total vocabulary size, 
and the frequency levels were used to ensure representative sampling. The sampling rate for the 
14,000 version is 1 in 100, which results in a test containing 140 items, and the sampling rate for 
the 20,000 version is 1 in 200, which results in a test containing 100 items. However, earlier versions 
of the test had the 1,000 frequency levels labelled (first 1,000, second 1,000, etc.), and this unfortu-
nately encouraged users to treat it like the vocabulary levels test. If used in this way, the test is highly 
problematic as each level of the test is represented by only 10 items, which is not enough to get an 
acceptable level of reliability. To adapt the test for this purpose, the number of items at each level 
would need to be increased to around 30 items per level (Beglar & Hunt, 1999; Schmitt, Schmitt, & 
Clapham, 2001), making it a very long test indeed. The sampling rate directly affects the calculation 
of vocabulary size when multiplying a learner’s score by the rate. With only 10 items per level, suc-
cessful guessing can affect the size calculation considerably, and this needs to be considered when 
interpreting the results. 
 A final criticism of the Vocabulary Size Test relates to the fact that the test not only measures 
the learning of English words but also measures how well learners can recognise loan words or 
cognates in English that exist in the first language. Cobb (2000) noted in relation to the Vocabulary 
Levels Test that cognates between French and English are more likely to be answered correctly than 
are non-cognates, artificially increasing the estimate of total vocabulary size. Researchers using 
bilingual versions of the Vocabulary Size Test have also noted the same phenomenon (Nguyen & 
Nation, 2011; Elgort, 2013). This is especially noticeable with lower-frequency items that learners 
would not be expected to know. The recommendation made by Elgort is that the proportion of 
cognates in the sample used in the test should reflect the proportion in the total population of 
words sampled from. Nevertheless, it is important that cognates (and loan words) are not removed 
from the test as they are a part of the vocabulary of the language. There is no doubt that the num-
ber of cognates and loan words affects the ease of learning, and that is one of the reasons why 
learners of English whose first language is related to English tend to have larger English vocabulary 
sizes (Coxhead, Nation, & Sim, 2014). 
www.ebook3000.com

Measuring Vocabulary Size • 363
 The Picture Vocabulary Size Test 
 The Picture Vocabulary Size Test is a new test designed by the authors to measure the receptive 
knowledge of word families in young, pre-literate first and second language learners of English. The 
test draws words sampled from twelve 500 word family lists made from a specially created corpus 
of writing for children and adult spoken language, and also checked against lists from a corpus of 
children’s writing (Banerji, Gupta, Kilgarriff, & Tugwell, 2012). As with the Vocabulary Size Test, the 
test uses lists that follow a consistent word family definition (Bauer & Nation, 1993). The test is 96 
items long (8 items for each of 12 levels) and takes about 15 minutes to complete. The sampling rate 
for the test is 8 items from 500 words or 1 in 62.5. 
 In order to accommodate pre-literate children, the Picture Vocabulary Size Test is a computer-
ized test that is administered on a one-to-one basis using a picture matching format. In the current 
(pilot) version of the test, each item in the test consists of a sentence definition prompt and four 
photographs (see  Figure 26.1 ). Learners can hear and read the sentence definition in a non-defining 
context and must choose the picture that matches the sentence by touching (or clicking on) the 
appropriate picture in the display. The picture distractors are selected from photographs illustrating 
words from the same frequency level. 
 The Picture Vocabulary Size Test uses a multiple-choice recognition format. As a result, it has 
similar weaknesses to the Vocabulary Size Test. Thus, random guessing and the use of test-taking 
strategies can play a significant role in a test taker’s final score, especially for those who do not know 
 Figure 26.1  Screenshot of a Picture Vocabulary Size Test Block 

364 • Paul Nation and Laurence Anthony
a lot of the words in the test. To reduce the effects of guessing and test-taking strategies, the test 
includes an “I don’t know” option signalled by a question mark. 
   Trialling of the test has shown that, for native speakers of English, the test is most suited to 
6- to 8-year-olds. Those older than 8 years old are likely to get full or close to full scores, whereas 
children younger than 6 years old will struggle to keep focused, wanting to touch the picture that 
attracts them rather than the one that corresponds to the sentence they just heard. The results 
also show that children seem to enjoy sitting the test. Unlike the Vocabulary Size Test, this test 
includes words that children are likely to know, such as the names of dinosaurs and animals, and 
the names of objects, such as kites and whips. It also appears a little like a video game, with one 
child test taker commenting that it “gets harder as you go on.” The children had no difficulty 
dealing with the computerised format and surprisingly little trouble with some of the mental 
gymnastics involved in matching a sentence to a picture. For example, matching  This is grass to 
a picture of grass, or  This is a table  to a picture of a table is straightforward, but matching  It’s 
an expedition  to a group trekking across a mountain slope, or  She agreed  to a thumbs-up gesture 
requires more interpretation. 
 In terms of applications, from an individual learner perspective, the Picture Vocabulary Size Test 
can potentially show whether a learner is above, below, or close to the average vocabulary size for 
his or her age. It can also help to diagnose if knowledge of word meanings is an issue for particular 
learners who have reading problems or other language use problems. For learners of English as a 
foreign language, the Picture Vocabulary Size Test can be used to see how many words they know 
even if they cannot yet read English. 
 The Interview Test 
 Biemiller and Slonim (2001) have designed a recall interview test to measure the written receptive 
knowledge of word families in young pre-literate first and second language learners of English. In 
the test, each learner is asked to say what he or she knows about a particular word. Each word is 
presented in a context that gives a little more information than the contexts used with the Picture 
Vocabulary Size Test. As an example, in the Picture Vocabulary Size Test, the word  spa  is tested with 
the prompt  This is a spa , whereas in the interview test,  fish  is tested in the sentence  Johnny caught a 
fish , and  listen  is tested with  You should listen to your mother . The advantage of this approach is that it 
tests the kind of knowledge that language users need to draw on when reading or listening. 
 When Biemiller and Slonim designed the test, they did not expect the very young test takers to 
get perfect definitions, and thus scored a word as known if the learner provided some relevant infor-
mation about the word.  Table 26.1  gives rounded figures for the average vocabulary sizes of young 
children according to the Biemiller and Slonim test. 
      Interview tests have received general criticism because they mix aspects of vocabulary knowledge 
(recognising the word form, knowing word meaning, and knowing how to use a word) and have 
Table 26.1 Average Native Speaker Vocabulary Sizes for Various Age Levels
Age
Average vocabulary size
6-year-olds
4,000 word families
7-year-olds
5,000 word families
8-year-olds
6,000 word families
9-year-olds
7,000 word families
10-year-olds
8,000 word families
11-year-olds
9,000 word families
www.ebook3000.com

Measuring Vocabulary Size • 365
different standards of proof at different steps on the scale (Waring, 2000; Nation & Webb, 2011: 
297–299). In addition, a difficulty with Biemiller and Slonim’s (2001) recall test format is gaining 
consistency in what is accepted as a correct response to knowing a word. Also, young children are 
typically not good at explaining the meanings of words, and this can become an even more influential 
factor affecting a learner’s score than multiple-choice test-taking strategies. In contrast, Nagy, Her-
man, and Anderson (1985) designed an interview procedure which they used with native speakers 
aged around 14 years old. This test and other similar tests, for example, the Vocabulary Knowledge 
Scale (Wesche & Paribakht, 1996), standardise the questions asked about the words being tested, 
which mitigates some of the problems with this testing approach. 
 How Many Words Do People Know? 
 Results from the more developed vocabulary size tests reviewed in the previous sections have consistently 
supported the rough rule of thumb mentioned earlier that the average vocabulary size of native speakers 
of English for each age level is (age – 2) × 1000. This rule of thumb requires an understanding that the 
vocabulary size of particular learners may be one or two thousand words on either side of this average. 
 The vocabulary size-level rule suggests that children about to go to school at the age of five are likely 
to have a receptive vocabulary size of around 3,000 to 4,000 word families (Biemiller & Slonim, 2001). 
After a few years of schooling, 8-year-olds are likely to know around 5,000 to 6,000 word families 
(Biemiller, 2005); 13-year-olds are likely to know close to 10,000 word families (Coxhead, Nation, & Sim, 
2015); and those nearing the end of secondary school study at the age of 17 have a receptive vocabulary 
size of around 13,000–14,000 word families (Coxhead, Nation, & Sim, 2015). Although vocabulary 
size continues to grow with age, after the teenage years or the early twenties, research has shown that 
the rate of increase drops to just several hundred word families a year (Coxhead, Nation, & Sim, 2014). 
This is probably due to a variety of factors, including the opportunity to meet repetitions of previously 
unknown words, the narrowing of interests, and the fact that by the age of around20, native speakers 
will already have a large, well-functioning vocabulary that meets their needs. 
 Learners of English as a foreign language should be capable of matching native speaker receptive 
vocabulary growth rates of close to 1,000 word families a year, but this would require sustained effort. 
Nation (2014) has calculated the amount of input a learner would need to achieve such a rate at vari-
ous vocabulary size levels, as shown in  Table 26.2 , where weekly time requirements and also daily 
(5 days a week) time requirements are given. 
      Table 26.2  shows that from the 4th 1,000 level on, the increase required in the amount of reading 
is 500,000 words per year. From the 7th 1,000 level on, over an hour a day 5 days a week, 40 weeks 
Table 26.2 Amount of Reading Input and Time Needed to Learn Each of the Most Frequent Nine 1,000 Word Families
1,000-word list level
Amount to read
Time needed for reading per week (per day) at 
a reading speed of 150 words per minute
2nd 1,000
3rd 1,000
4th 1,000
5th 1,000
6th 1,000
7th 1,000
8th 1,000
9th 1,000
200,000 tokens
300,000 tokens
500,000 tokens
1,000,000 tokens
1,500,000 tokens
2,000,000 tokens
2,500,000 tokens
3,000,000 tokens
33 minutes (7 minutes per day)
50 minutes (10 minutes per day)
1 hour 23 minutes (17 minutes per day)
2 hours 47 minutes (33 minutes per day)
4 hours 10 minutes (50 minutes per day)
5 hours 33 minutes (1 hour 7 minutes per day)
6 hours 57 minutes (1 hour 23 minutes per day)
8 hours 20 minutes (1 hour 40 minutes per day)
 Note: The per-week ﬁ gure is based on 40 weeks, and the daily rate is based on 5 days. 

366 • Paul Nation and Laurence Anthony
of the year would need to be devoted to reading. This is a lot, but it assumes that this quantity of 
input is coming only through reading. Spoken sources are, of course, possible, but these provide less-
intensive input. It takes around two hours to watch a typical 10,000-token movie (a rate of around 
83 words per minute, or just over half of a reading rate of 150 words per minute). Nonetheless, 1 hour 
to 1 hour 40 minutes five times a week is possible. Deliberate learning of vocabulary will strengthen 
and speed up learning but is a supplement, not a substitute, to learning from input. 
 Conclusion 
 Our knowledge of the vocabulary size of native speakers is now clearer, with young native speakers 
increasing their vocabulary size by around 1,000 word families a year. Most learners of English as 
a foreign language do not make anywhere near the same vocabulary gains as native speakers, and 
subsequently they do not have anywhere near the vocabulary size of native speakers. Nurweni and 
Read (1999), for example, found that Indonesian learners of English who were first-year university 
students knew just over 1,200 words, even though they studied English for six years prior to this. 
Similarly, Milton’s (2006) study of English speakers learning French suggests that the vocabulary size 
growth in the taught courses was very low. 
 In these contexts, measures of vocabulary size can provide us with information that can be used 
for a wide variety of purposes. For native speakers of English, the results of vocabulary size tests can 
help us appreciate the size of native speakers’ vocabularies and assess the feasibility of direct vocabu-
lary instruction. They can also help us identify learners with smaller than average vocabulary sizes 
who may need extra help with vocabulary growth. Where English is taught as a foreign language, 
vocabulary size tests can tell us how well our English courses are doing. They can identify learners 
who are falling behind, and they can help diagnose the causes of language use problems, such as poor 
reading or speaking skills. They can also tell us how close learners are to gaining independence in 
their control of the language. 
 Although there are many issues with vocabulary size measures, continued interest in the area will 
hopefully lead to a set of receptive and productive tests that we can use with full confidence across a 
wide range of age groups. 
 References 
 Alexander, F., & Chamberlain, I. C. (1904). Studies of a child.  Pedagogical Seminary ,  11 , 263–291. 
 Anderson, R. C., & Freebody, P. (1981). Vocabulary knowledge. In J. T. Guthrie (Ed.),  Comprehension and Teaching: Research 
Reviews (pp. 77–117). Newark: International Reading Association. 
 Anthony, L. (2015).  AntWordProfiler  (Version 1.4.0) [Computer Software]. Tokyo, Japan: Waseda University. Available at: 
http://www.laurenceanthony.net/software 
 Banerji, N., Gupta, V., Kilgarriff, A., & Tugwell, D. (2012).  Oxford Children’s Corpus: A Corpus of Children’s Writing, Reading, 
and Education . Available at: https://www.sketchengine.co.uk/documentation/raw. . . /Beebox_final.docx 
 Bauer, L. & Nation, P. (1993). Word families.  International Journal of Lexicography ,  6 (4), 253–279. 
 Beglar, D. (2010). A Rasch-based validation of the vocabulary size test.  Language Testing ,  27 (1), 101–118. 
 Beglar, D., & Hunt, A. (1999). Revising and validating the 2000 word level and the university word level vocabulary tests. 
 Language Testing ,  16 (2), 131–162. 
 Biemiller, A. (2005). Size and sequence in vocabulary development. In E. H. Hiebert & M. L. Kamil (Eds.),  Teaching and Learn-
ing Vocabulary: Bringing Research into Practice (pp. 223–242). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Biemiller, A., & Slonim, N. (2001). Estimating root word vocabulary growth in normative and advantaged populations: Evi-
dence for a common sequence of vocabulary acquisition.  Journal of Educational Psychology ,  93 (3), 498–520. 
 Bohn, W. E. (1914). First steps in verbal expression.  Pedagogical Seminary ,  21 , 579–595. 
 Brandenburg, G. C. (1914). The language of a three-year-old child.  Pedagogical Seminary ,  22 , 89–120. 
 Brandenburg, G. C., & Brandenburg, J. (1919). Language development during the fourth year: The conversation.  Pedagogical 
Seminary ,  26 (1), 27–40. 
www.ebook3000.com

Measuring Vocabulary Size • 367
 The British National Corpus. (2007). XML Edition (Version 3). Distributed by Oxford University Computing Services on 
behalf of the BNC Consortium. Available at: http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/ 
 Bush, A. (1914). The vocabulary of a three-year-old girl.  Pedagogical Seminary ,  21 , 125–142. 
 Cobb, T. (2000). One size fits all? Francophone learners and English vocabulary tests.  Canadian Modern Language Review , 
 57 (2), 295–324. 
 Coxhead, A., Nation, I. S. P., & Sim, D. (2014). Creating and trialling six forms of the vocabulary size test.  TESOLANZ Journal , 
 22 , 13–26. 
 Coxhead, A., Nation, I. S. P., & Sim, D. (2015). Measuring the vocabulary size of native speakers of English in New Zealand 
secondary schools.  New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies ,  50 (1), 121–135. 
 D’Anna, C. A., Zechmeister, E. B., & Hall, J. W. (1991). Toward a meaningful definition of vocabulary size.  Journal of Reading 
Behavior: A Journal of Literacy ,  23 (1), 109–122. 
 Davies, M. (2015). Corpus of Contemporary American English. Available at: http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/ 
 Diller, K. C. (1978).  The Language Teaching Controversy . Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Dunn, L. M. (1965).  Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test . Minnesota: American Guidance Service Inc. 
 Elgort, I. (2013). Effects of L1 definitions and cognate status of test items on the vocabulary size test.  Language Testing ,  30 (2), 
253–272. 
 Elliott, W. A. Y., & Valenza, R. J. (2011). Shakespeare’s vocabulary: Did it dwarf all others? Chapter two in M. Ravassat & J. Culpeper 
(Eds.),  Stylistics and Shakespeare’s Language—Transdisciplinary Approaches (pp. 46–82). London: Continuum Press. 
 Eyckmans, J. (2004).  Measuring Receptive Vocabulary Size . Utrecht: Netherlands Graduate School of Linguistics. 
 Gale, M. C., & Gale, H. (1902). The vocabularies of three children in one family at two and three years of age.  Pedagogical 
Seminary ,  9 , 422–435. 
 Gyllstad, H., Vilkaite, L., & Schmitt, N. (2015). Assessing vocabulary size through multiple-choice formats: Issues with guess-
ing and sampling rates.  ITL Review of Applied Linguistics ,  166 (2), 276–303. 
 Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995).  Meaningful Differences in the Everyday Experience of Young American Children . Baltimore: Paul 
H. Brookes Publishing Co. 
 Heilig, M. R. (1913). A child’s vocabulary.  Pedagogical Seminary ,  20 , 1–16. 
 Holden, E. S. (1875). On the number of words used in speaking and writing.  Bulletin of the Philosophical Society of Washington , 
 2 , 16–21, 28. 
 Kirkpatrick, E. A. (1891). Number of words in an ordinary vocabulary.  Science ,  18 (446), 107–108. 
 Langenbeck, M. (1914). A study of a five-year-old child.  Pedagogical Seminary ,  22 , 65–88. 
 Leech, G., Rayson, P., & Wilson, A. (2001).  Word Frequencies in Written and Spoken English . Harlow: Longman. 
 Lorge, I., & Chall, J. (1963). Estimating the size of vocabularies of children and adults: An analysis of methodological issues. 
 Journal of Experimental Education ,  32 (2), 147–157. 
 Mateer, F. (1908). The vocabulary of a four year old boy.  Pedagogical Seminary ,  15 , 63–74. 
 Meara, P., & Buxton, B. (1987). An alternative to multiple choice vocabulary tests.  Language Testing ,  4 (2), 142–151. 
 Meara, P., & Jones, G. (1988). Vocabulary size as a placement indicator. In P. Grunwell (Ed.),  Applied Linguistics in Society 
(pp. 80–87). London: CILT. 
 Milton, J. (2006). Language lite? Learning French vocabulary in school.  French Language Studies ,  16 , 187–205. 
 Mochida, A., & Harrington, M. (2006). The Yes/No test as a measure of receptive vocabulary knowledge.  Language Testing , 
 23 (1), 73–98. 
 Nagy, W. E., & Herman, P. A. (1987). Breadth and depth of vocabulary knowledge: Implications for acquisition and instruc-
tion. In M. McKeown & M. Curtis (Eds.),  The Nature of Vocabulary Acquisition  (pp. 19–35). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 
 Nagy, W. E., Herman, P., & Anderson, R. C. (1985). Learning words from context.  Reading Research Quarterly ,  20 (2), 233–253. 
 Nation, I. S. P. (1993). Using dictionaries to estimate vocabulary size: Essential, but rarely followed, procedures.  Language 
Testing ,  10 (1), 27–40. 
 Nation, I. S. P. (2006). How large a vocabulary is needed for reading and listening?  Canadian Modern Language Review ,  63 (1), 
59–82. 
 Nation, I. S. P. (2014). How much input do you need to learn the most frequent 9,000 words?  Reading in a Foreign Language , 
 26 (2), 1–16. 
 Nation, I. S. P. (2015). Homepage. Available at: http://www.victoria.ac.nz/lals/staff/paul-nation.aspx 
 Nation, I. S. P., & Beglar, D. (2007). A vocabulary size test.  The Language Teacher ,  31 (7), 9–13. 
 Nation, I. S. P., & Webb, S. (2011).  Researching and Analyzing Vocabulary . Boston: Heinle Cengage Learning. 
 Nguyen, L. T. C., & Nation, I. S. P. (2011). A bilingual vocabulary size test of English for Vietnamese learners.  RELC Journal , 
 42 (1), 86–99. 
 Nurweni, A., & Read, J. (1999). The English vocabulary knowledge of Indonesian university students.  English for Specific 
Purposes ,  18 (2), 161–175. 

368 • Paul Nation and Laurence Anthony
 Pelsma, J. R. (1914). A child’s vocabulary and its development.  Pedagogical Seminary ,  17 , 329–369. 
 Read, J. (2000).  Assessing Vocabulary . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Rowe, E. C., & Rowe, H. (1913). The vocabulary of a child at four and six years of age.  Pedagogical Seminary ,  20 , 187–208. 
 Schmitt, N., Schmitt, D., & Clapham, C. (2001). Developing and exploring the behaviour of two new versions of the vocabu-
lary levels test.  Language Testing ,  18 (1), 55–88. 
 Seashore, R. H., & Eckerson, L. D. (1940). The measurement of individual differences in general English vocabularies.  Journal 
of Educational Psychology ,  31 , 14–38. 
 Smith, M. K. (1941). Measurement of the size of general English vocabulary through the elementary grades and high school. 
 Genetic Psychology Monographs ,  24 , 311–345. 
 Stewart, J. (2014). Do multiple-choice options inflate estimates of vocabulary size on the VST?  Language Assessment Quarterly , 
 11 (3), 271–282. 
 Thorndike, E. L. (1924). The vocabularies of school pupils. In J. C. Bell (Ed.),  Contributions to Education  (pp. 69–76). New 
York: World Book Co. 
 Thorndike, E. L., & Lorge, I. (1944).  The Teacher’s Word Book of 30,000 Words . New York: Teachers College Columbia University. 
 Uhrbrock, R. S. (1935). The vocabulary of a five-year-old.  Educational Research Bulletin ,  14 (44), 85–97. 
 Waring, R. (2000). The ‘state rating task’—an alternative method of assessing receptive and productive vocabulary.  Studies in 
Foreign Languages and Literature (Notre Dame Seishin University) ,  24 (1), 125–154. 
 Webb, S., & Rodgers, M. P. H. (2009a). The lexical coverage of movies.  Applied Linguistics ,  30 (3), 407–427. 
 Webb, S., & Rodgers, M. P. H. (2009b). The vocabulary demands of television programs.  Language Learning ,  59 (2), 335–366. 
 Wesche, M., & Paribakht, T. S. (1996). Assessing second language vocabulary knowledge: Depth versus breadth.  Canadian 
Modern Language Review ,  53 (1), 13–40. 
 Whipple, G. M., & Whipple, M. (1909). The vocabulary of a three-year-old boy with some interpretive comments.  Pedagogical 
Seminary ,  16 (1), 1–22. 
 Zechmeister, E. B., Chronis, A. M., Cull, W. L., D’Anna, C. A., & Healy, N. A. (1995). Growth of a functionally important lexicon. 
 Journal of Reading Behavior ,  27 (2), 201–212. 
www.ebook3000.com

369
 Introduction: The Continuing Conundrum 
 A truly enormous amount of research has been published about the effectiveness (or a lack thereof) 
of methodologies, approaches, strategies, techniques, and activities for teaching L2 grammar. Hun-
dreds of reference grammars and course books are currently available. Some textbooks can be as 
extensive as a proficiency- and level-based series. 
 Grammar textbooks and much instruction usually cover the traditional range of structures that 
have been covered from time immemorial. The reasons for this lie in the historical criteria for gram-
mar books to include “complete” grammar curricula. Given that second language (L2) 1 instruction 
almost always takes place under great time constraints, it is important to maximize language learning 
gains and make grammar instruction as efficient as possible (Hinkel, 2013, 2015). 
 To this end, in L2 research and pedagogy, a great deal of work has been devoted to identifying 
principles that can permit prioritizing grammar instruction efficiently and most effectively for the 
best interests of the learners. Establishing the criteria for identifying grammar points that are useful 
in teaching and those that provide too low a return on the investment of precious time is one of the 
central topics in pedagogical grammar. One complaint often heard is that many grammar construc-
tions usually found in manuals and textbooks seem to be outmoded in contemporary English usage 
(e.g. the past perfect progressive, as in  The tree had been growing well before the drought  or the future 
perfect passive, as in  The letter will have been mailed by 5 o’clock ). Such constructions, as well as a 
good number of others that are similarly obsolete or rare, are hardly ever found in today’s English 
(Conrad, 2010; Folse, 2016; Hinkel, 2015). 
 The goal of grammar teaching and learning is to enable learners to communicate effectively and 
appropriately in context (Celce-Murcia, 2016; Richards & Reppen, 2016). For pedagogical purposes, 
grammar features can be divided into those that L2 learners need to be able to use reasonably accu-
rately and those that they do not. By and large, the criteria for selecting which grammar features to 
focus on and which to postpone or drop have differed considerably depending on evolving perspec-
tives on the effectiveness of grammar teaching in general, how grammar is learned, and how it should 
be taught—if taught at all. 2  Although numerous definitions and guidelines have been proposed for 
prioritizing grammar to teach or not to teach and in what contexts, the principles for such peda-
gogical choices are not necessarily clear-cut (Ur, 2011, 2012). For one thing, communicative contexts 
almost always determine the types of discourse and text that learners need to produce in real life 
 27 
 Prioritizing Grammar to Teach or Not to Teach 
 A Research Perspective 
 Eli Hinkel 

370 • Eli Hinkel
(e.g. spoken, written, or their variations). In turn, the types of discourse employed in context invari-
ably influence pedagogical decisions for prioritizing grammar constructions. 
 This chapter reviews research in four interrelated areas in which an array of discourse contexts 
and productive skills are emphasized and where L2 grammar abilities have traditionally been consid-
ered to be of utmost importance. These research areas are likely to be of relevance to most L2 users 
and in most world regions, and they include the following: 
 • discourse contexts and grammar uses on major international L2 tests 
 • principled guidelines proposed by leading L2 experts and based on a large body of research 
findings 
 • recommendations for grammar teaching on the strength of error studies 
 • directions offered in corpus analyses on grammar for speaking and writing 
 Taken together, an overview of these research areas presents a thorough and well-rounded picture 
of what grammar to teach (and learn), what priorities for teaching should be established, and in what 
communicative contexts. 
 Spoken and Written Grammars: The Caveats 
 The distinctions between common and everyday uses of grammar and those found in literary texts 
originally became the topic of contentious debates in the 1600s, when the issue at hand concerned 
the teaching of Latin grammar, as discussed in the book  Didactica Opera Omnia , published by John 
Amos Comenius in 1657. The heated disputes of the time dealt in part with such considerations as 
whether the grammar of ordinary Latin (Vulgar Latin or  Sermo Vulgaris , “common speech”) was 
applicable or even useful to the study of high literary prose. 
 In contemporary language research, the emergence of research on the distinctions between vari-
ous language genres and analyses of corpora have in a sense extended to similar deliberations of the 
differences between spoken and written grammars. In general terms, analyses of written language 
and grammar strongly dominate corpus and genre studies (Biber, Conrad, & Leech, 2002). Research-
ers of various corpora have long contended that spoken and written grammar are distinct. On the 
other hand, in his review and synthesis of numerous corpus analyses, Leech (2000) asserts that, in 
spoken and written English, the types of grammar features are the same, but they are employed with 
different frequencies. 
 In most pedagogical grammars, the variations between spoken and written forms have received 
uneven attention (Folse, 2016, Richards & Reppen, 2016, Leech & Svarvik, 2002). The reasons for 
the typical slighting of spoken grammar in language teaching are often practical and expeditious. As 
Leech (2000, p. 715) points out, “grammar plays a lesser role in the total communication process in 
speech than in writing. This is yet another reason why, for learners, new understandings of spoken 
grammar need to be integrated in a larger discourse framework, rather than treated as ‘another thing 
to be taught.’” 
 Testing Research: Discourse Contexts and Grammar 
 In the past several decades, a relatively large number of research reports and pedagogical grammars 
have been published to elucidate language features, including grammar, associated with particular 
types of discourse, contexts, and communicative purposes. Some of these investigations account for 
the characteristics of speech and writing in naturally occurring language to advance knowledge and 
linguistic theory. On the other hand, large organizations that design and develop language tests study 
www.ebook3000.com

Prioritizing Grammar to Teach or Not to Teach • 371
discourse contexts and language uses with the goal of validating their products. As a result, a great 
many empirical studies have been carried out to describe discourse contexts and language functions 
that can be typically expected of most L2 users. 
 Research on grammar attributes in spoken and written English has been conducted by major 
testing organizations, such as the Educational Testing Service (ETS) and the University of Cam-
bridge Local Examination Syndicate (UCLES), currently operating as Cambridge Michigan Lan-
guage Assessments (CaMLA). 3  Both language testing organizations are among the most prestigious 
in the world and have long traditions of research in the discourse and language required in different 
types of communication. 
 In dozens of studies, the findings clearly indicate that the importance of grammar among L2 
production skills cannot be underestimated. According to the criteria developed for the purposes of 
evaluating L2 communication, grammar range and accuracy are paramount (Biber & Gray, 2013; 
Buck, 2001; Powers et al., 2009). Practically all publications disseminated by ETS and CaLMA “make 
explicit the importance of grammatical ability when describing the criteria for rating the writing 
and speaking” skills (Purpura, 2004, p. 191). All in all, much testing research has provided detailed 
descriptions of L2 contexts and language skills needed to conduct communication, not the least of 
which centers on grammar. 
 As one of the most prolific and best-funded organizations to conduct linguistic studies, ETS 
designs and produces several major worldwide tests, such as the TOEFL (Test of English as a Foreign 
Language) and the TOEIC (the Test of English for International Communication). Dozens of ETS 
research reports and monographs have examined the communicative contexts of spoken and written 
discourse, and their findings serve as a foundation for the development of their test tasks. The TOEFL 
content is geared toward academic language uses, settings, and functions suitable for L2 learners in 
high schools, colleges, and universities. The TOEFL language production tasks entail both spoken 
and written texts, and the grammar features requisite for completing the test items are also likely to 
be academically oriented. 
 On the other hand, the TOEIC is intended for language proficiency testing in the workplace and 
for employment. The test is considered to be appropriate for employees in practically any category 
of businesses and organizations and for practically any work-related task, such as travel, banking, 
entertainment, meetings, and making various arrangements (e.g. ticket, restaurant, and hotel reser-
vations). The TOEIC also deals with spoken and written language, but the test’s discourse contexts 
are markedly different from those covered in the TOEFL (more on this later in this chapter) (Powers, 
et al., 2009). Interactional settings and language uses addressed on the TOEIC are designed to be far 
more conversational, interactional, and informal than those found on the TOEFL (Powers, 2010). 
The grammar attributes, discourse, and language on the two tests are also clearly distinct. 
 CaMLA similarly provides relatively detailed descriptions of spoken and written tasks, and the 
test is designed to be appropriate for a broad array of institutional functions, such as proficiency 
measures at college and university levels, language programs, K–12 schooling, as well as employment 
and the workplace. Because the test covers a wide diversity of discourse contexts, the range of gram-
mar on the test tasks would necessitate both formal and informal language uses. Recently, CaMLA 
tests have been aligned to the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR), 
adopted by the Council of Europe to establish common language requirements in 32 languages. 
CEFR provides comprehensive and detailed descriptions of the tasks that L2 learners have to accom-
plish and the productive language skills needed for effective communication in employment and 
educational settings at six proficiency levels. 
 To be sure, standardized language tests have almost always placed a high value on grammar skills. 
ETS publications state explicitly that grammar usage constitutes one of the main criteria for measur-
ing L2 proficiency as a broad construct. For instance, as Biber and Gray (2013) point out in their 

372 • Eli Hinkel
ETS-commissioned report: “Numerous empirical studies have directly documented the association 
of the[se] core lexico-grammatical features with language development and proficiency” and “stud-
ies indicate that any lexico-grammatical feature that distinguishes among spoken and written regis-
ters will probably also be an important indicator of language development and proficiency” (p. 10). 
 Overall, the three dominant proficiency tests probably identify and describe discourse types and 
productive language tasks that, in all likelihood, can be required of all language users on the planet 
at one time or another.  Table 27.1  summarizes discourse and language contexts outlined on the three 
tests: the TOEFL, the TOEIC, and CaMLA. The summary is concerned only with the productive L2 
skills and tasks (i.e. speaking and writing). 
 Table 27.1  Discourse Types and Language Production Tasks Required in the Three Dominant Language Tests 
 Speaking  
TOEFL*
Scoring Dimensions
Delivery—pace and clarity of speech: pronunciation, intonation, rate of speech, and degree of hesitancy
Language Use—vocabulary and grammar: range, complexity, precision, and automaticity, ability to 
select words and phrases and to produce structures that appropriately and effectively communicate ideas
Topic Development—response coherence and completeness: the progression of ideas, the degree of 
elaboration, the completeness and, in integrated tasks, the accuracy of the content
Test Tasks
• Express an opinion on a familiar topic
• Speak based on reading and listening tasks
• Participate in study groups and student interactions
• Participate in discussions and extracurricular activities
• Speak about: academic course content, campus situations, familiar topics
Settings and Situations (a few examples)
Academic topics, campus situations (e.g. dorms, off-campus apartments), travel (e.g. vacations, 
destinations), restaurants (food, likes, dislikes), laboratories (e.g. equipment, technology), computers, 
study groups (e.g. schedule, participants, arrangements), clubs, activities, tuition and fees 
TOEIC**
Evaluation Criteria
• pronunciation
• intonation and stress
• grammar
• vocabulary
• cohesion
• relevance of content
• completeness of content
Test Tasks
• Read a text aloud
• Describe a picture
• Respond to questions (survey type)
• Respond to questions using information provided (e.g. schedule or agenda)
• Solve a problem—propose a solution, show that you recognize the problem, propose a way of dealing 
with the problem
• Express an opinion
Settings and Situations (a few examples)
Dining out (business and informal lunches, receptions), entertainment (cinema, theatre, music), finance 
and budgeting (banking, investments, taxes), general business (contracts, negotiations, mergers), health 
(insurance, visiting doctors, dentists), housing/corporate property (construction, buying and renting), 
manufacturing (assembly lines, quality control), offices (board meetings, committees, letters, email) 
www.ebook3000.com

CaMLA
Key Areas of Spoken Language Performance
• fluency and intelligibility
• vocabulary range and relevance to task
• grammatical complexity and accuracy
• ability to successfully complete a specific task
Test Tasks
• Descriptions and presentations on complex subjects, integrating subthemes, developing particular 
points, and rounding off with an appropriate conclusion
• Systematically developed descriptions and presentations, with appropriate highlighting of significant 
points and relevant supporting detail
• Descriptions and presentations on a wide range of subjects related to his/her field of interest, 
expanding and supporting ideas with subsidiary points and relevant examples
• Sustained and straightforward description of one of a variety of subjects within his/her field of 
interest, presenting it as a linear sequence of points
Settings and Situations (a few examples)
Public—public spaces (streets, shops, restaurants, sports, or entertainment venues) and other social 
networks outside the home
Occupational—workplace settings (offices, workshops, conferences), etc.
Educational—schools, colleges, classrooms, residence halls, etc.
 Writing  
TOEFL*
The writing section is scored by
Integrated writing tasks—development, organization, grammar, vocabulary, accuracy and completeness
Independent writing essay—overall writing quality, including development, organization, grammar 
and vocabulary
Test Tasks
Integrated writing tasks:
• Write essay responses based on reading and listening texts
º read a passage
º then listen to a lecture that takes a position that is somehow different from the position presented in 
the reading passage
• Write a summary in connected English prose of important points made in the listening passage and 
explain how these relate to the key points of the reading passage. Suggested response length is 150–225 
words.
Independent writing essay:
• Write an essay that states, explains, and supports your opinion on an issue. An effective essay will 
usually contain a minimum of 300 words.
• Support your opinions or choices rather than simply list personal preferences or choices.
• Typical essay questions begin with statements such as:
° Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? Use reasons and specific details to support 
your answer.
° Some people believe [X]. Other people believe [Y]. Which of these two positions do you prefer/agree 
with? Give reasons and specific details. 
TOEIC**
Evaluation Criteria
• Grammar
• Relevance of the sentences to the pictures
• Quality and variety of sentences
• Vocabulary
• Organization
• Whether the opinion is supported with reasons and/or examples
(Continued)

374 • Eli Hinkel
Test Tasks
• Write a sentence based on a picture
• Respond to a written request (e.g. email)
• Write an opinion essay (e.g. in response to a question that asks you to state, explain and support your 
opinion on an issue). Typically, an effective essay will contain a minimum of 300 words.
CaMLA**
Key Areas of Written Language Performance:
• grammatical accuracy
• vocabulary range
• mechanics and spelling
• cohesion and organization
• task completion and relevance
Test Tasks
Produce written language at the sentence and paragraph levels and to produce a short essay.
• Task 1: short responses on a related theme
º relate a life experience
º express an opinion about it
º elaborate on the situation
• Task 2: compare and contrast essay with supporting details
 * (Wei & Llosa, 2015; Xi &Mollaun, 2009); retrieved from http://www.ets.org/toeﬂ /ibt/scores/understand; https://www.ets.
org/toeﬂ /ibt/about/content/; https://www.ets.org/s/toeﬂ /pdf/toeﬂ _writing_rubrics.pdf; https://www.ets.org/Media/Tests/
TOEFL/pdf/Writing_Rubrics.pdf 
 ** Retrieved from https://www.ets.org/toeic/speaking_writing/about/content/, https://www.ets.org/Media/Tests/TOEIC/
pdf/TOEIC_Speaking_and_Writing_Examinee_Handbook.pdf; https://www.etsglobal.org/Tests-Preparation/The-TOEIC-
Tests/TOEIC-Speaking-Writing-Tests/Scores-Overview; https://www.cambridgemichigan.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/
CaMLA-Speaking-Test-Dev-Report.pdf, http://www.cambridgemichigan.org/institutions/products-services/tests/
placement-progress/camla-writing-test/ 
 Table 27.1  (Continued)
 According to the criteria presented in  Table 27.1 , productive L2 uses in context and on the tasks 
on major proficiency instruments “strive to match the types of language-use tasks found in real-life 
or language-instructional domains” (Purpura, 2004, p. 126). The majority of testing research reports 
also demonstrate that L2 tests rely on findings on when, where, and how language is used by speakers 
and writers, as well as the overarching impact of grammar on the effectiveness of communication 
(Biber, 2006; Biber & Gray, 2013; Buck, 2001; Ellis, 2005, 2006; Hinkel, 2004, 2015). 
 On the three tests, L2 speaking contexts consist of the following: 
 • a mixture of formal and informal interactions in colleges, universities, workplace, offices, 
meetings, and casual gatherings 
 • formal spoken discourse mainly in classroom discussions, student interactions with faculty, 
presentations in higher education and on-the-job, and meetings 
 • informal conversational interactions that are likely to occur with greater frequencies and in 
diverse settings (e.g. hotels, restaurants, airport lounges, or picnics) 
 Similarly, formal writing takes place in specific and well-defined contexts, such as in university 
assignments and academic papers, as well as on-the-job reports, email messages, proposals, and 
memoranda. 
 Although the specific grammar features are not outlined in detail, in both speaking and writing, 
grammar accuracy and complexity occupy one of the highest priorities. On the writing tests in par-
ticular, grammar usage and accuracy are considered to be the top indicator of L2 proficiency overall. 
www.ebook3000.com

Prioritizing Grammar to Teach or Not to Teach • 375
Regrettably, however, based on the published L2 testing criteria, the main conundrum of how to 
prioritize grammar teaching remains unresolved. 
 Research-Based Guidelines for Prioritizing Grammar Teaching 
 Several world-class experts on English grammar for teaching and learning have proposed principled 
and research-based recommendations for prioritizing what grammar to teach. 
 Michael Swan states clearly that “grammar points in the course book may not all be equally impor-
tant for a particular class” (2002, p. 148). Swan (2002, 2006) elaborates on seven bad reasons that 
often serve as a basis for prioritizing grammar teaching. The bad reasons are as follows: grammar 
is taught because (1) it is there; (2) it is tidy unlike vocabulary or pronunciation; (3) it is testable; 
(4) it is a security blanket for both teachers and learners; (5) teachers studied grammar as students 
and, therefore, they teach it to their students; (6) grammar has to be taught as a whole system; and 
(7) it can represent power in the form of rules, examinations, and social control. 
 On the other hand, Swan’s two good reasons for prioritizing grammar teaching are: 
 • comprehensibility 
 • social acceptability 
 Because the purpose of learning grammar is to communicate successfully, the grammar structures 
necessary for communication should be identified and taught because “without structures, it is dif-
ficult to make comprehensible sentences” (Swan, 2002, p. 151). According to Swan, in social contexts, 
serious deviance from accepted grammar norms can weigh against the learner and lead to prejudice. 
Such situations are in fact commonly encountered in employment, examinations, or dealing with 
authorities. Swan further states: “what points of grammar we choose to teach will therefore depend 
on our circumstances and our learners’ aims” (p. 152). 
 Rod Ellis emphasizes that the entire range of canonical grammar features is probably not suitable 
or necessary for instruction (Ellis, 2002). Ellis recommends that selecting grammar for teaching be 
approached from the vantage point of “cognitive difficulty” (Ellis, 2006, p. 88): 
 1. Teach those forms that differ from the learners’ first language. 
 2. Teach marked rather than unmarked forms. 
 Ellis explains, however, that neither of these principles for grammar choices is without its prob-
lems, simply because “we do not yet know enough about” (p. 89) many essential cognitive variables 
that crucially impact L2 learning. Ellis points out that the first principle is the one adopted in the 
early structural school of thought, and it pivots on the transfer hypothesis that extends to the con-
trastive analysis of learners’ L1s and L2s. This approach does not constitute a sound basis for pri-
oritizing grammar structures. The second principle has also proved to be “somewhat opaque” (Ellis, 
2006): the concept of markedness (i.e. a grammatical structure that can be “infrequent, unnatural, 
and deviant from a regular pattern”) is often difficult to apply with precision. 
 Jan Hulstijn  presents research on the effectiveness of grammar instruction. He argues that dif-
ficult, complex, or lexicalized grammar rules should be taught. On the other hand, easily accessible 
grammar characteristics can be left to the learners to acquire without explicit instruction. Hulstijn 
(1995) specifies five principled criteria that determine whether grammar rules should be taught: 
 • the frequency of occurrence of language construction 
 • the reliability of the rule 

376 • Eli Hinkel
 • the scope of the rule (the number of items to which the rule applies) 
 • receptive or productive uses of the rules 
 • the ease and comprehensibility of the explanation 
 However, a degree of caution is needed when selecting grammar rules of instruction: there are prob-
ably very few linguistic phenomena that prove to be regular and reliable in every case (Hulstijn & De 
Graaff, 1994). Furthermore, form-meaning-context relationships invariably add to the complexity of 
rule applications. Hulstijn (1995) also points out that the effect of grammar teaching may not be notice-
able immediately in productive L2 uses, but it is likely to be helpful in language learning in the long run. 
 Keith Folse  proposes guidelines for instructional decisions regarding what grammar features to 
teach and in what settings. Folse’s (2016, p. 66) approach seems unambiguous: “in all teacher deci-
sions about what to teach, when to teach it, how to teach it, how to practice it, and even how to test it, 
we should always keep our focus clear: learner needs.” However, learners’ needs can vary substantially 
according to their long-term goals and teaching curricula. 
 As Folse indicates, teachers in various locations and educational settings around the world are 
the ones who need to determine “which grammar points merit more and less instructional time, but 
their informed decisions should be solidly based on learner needs” (2016, p. 80). For example, learn-
ers who have the goal of passing exams are likely to have different needs from students who would 
like to engage in L2 conversations or become proficient academic writers. According to Folse, the 
findings of corpus analyses can be fruitful for examining the saliency and usefulness of what is taught 
in L2 grammar classes (i.e. which grammar points to teach and which to omit). 
 Vocational and Academic Priorities for Grammar Teaching 
 Additional criteria for prioritizing grammar for teaching are geared toward specific types of L2 
learners whose needs are determined by their language experiences and educational goals. These 
individuals can be enrolled in, for instance, classes for adult immigrants, intensive pre-academic pro-
grams, or college and university writing courses. For broadly diverse learning needs, the contents and 
objectives of grammar instruction are usually determined by the curricula adopted in these insti-
tutions. The guidelines for prioritizing grammar teaching may be more narrowly identified when 
learners’ educational aims are relatively well-known and established. 
 A very brief synopsis summarizes recommendations for prioritizing grammar constructions for 
three types of L2 learners: 
 • adult learners preparing for employment and vocations 
 • school-age students 
 • academic university writers 
 In teaching  adult L2 learners in vocational education , Savage, Bitterlin, and Price (2010, p. 4) refer 
to grammar as “an enabling skill,” motivator, and “a means to self-sufficiency.” Grammar is essential 
in all language skills, for example, listening to ensure comprehension, speaking in job interviews, 
reading directions, and writing to fill out forms and applications. According to these authors, for such 
adults, two important factors govern grammar priorities: 
 (1) communicative purposes for speaking and writing on-the-job, as well as daily tasks outside 
the classroom (e.g. children’s teachers, friends, or neighbors) 
 (2) the contexts in which learners use English (e.g. “riding a bus, talking to a doctor,” or shop-
ping; p. 8) 
www.ebook3000.com

Prioritizing Grammar to Teach or Not to Teach • 377
 Savage, Bitterlin, and Price outline the principles for prioritizing grammar teaching, which include 
the following: 
 (a) the relationship between a grammar structure and its functions (e.g. “giving advice” or speak-
ing to “a subordinate or a supervisor”; p. 13) 
 (b) frequency of use 
 (c) necessity for conveying meaning (e.g. some grammar structures may be incorrect “but they 
are not crucial to meaning” (e.g.  *John live ; p. 14) 
 (d) actual use, that is, omitting constructions that are not “commonly used,” such as “ were  as used 
in the unreal conditional ( If I were married . . .  )” because “over time,  if I were  has been regular-
ized to  if I was ” (ibid) 4 
 The book emphasizes that selecting grammar to teach for teaching or omitting should be designed 
around the communicative needs of adult learners and the contexts of their daily activities. 
 For teaching grammar to  school-age students , Derewianka and Jones (2010) present systemic-
functional grammar as a social framework of interrelated choices required to build the text. While 
traditional and structural approaches envision grammar as a set of structures that can be “assessed 
as correct or incorrect” (p. 9), systemic-functional grammar sees language as a resource and a com-
plex semiotic for constructing meanings and genres. Thus, teaching grammar can enable learners 
to think grammatically about language and to understand grammar as a meaning-making resource 
that is essential for schooling. In their examination of what grammar to teach and how to teach it, 
Derewianka and Jones present a view of grammar that extends beyond the sentence; that is, grammar 
patterns within and across whole texts, be it spoken or written. In this case, selecting grammar for 
instruction is “more a matter of what we want the model to do for our students” (p. 7). 
 To meet grammar learning needs of  college and university L2 academic writers , Hinkel (2013) 
claims that teaching the whole range of English grammar is not particularly beneficial for learners. 
She states that grammar can be divided into two major areas: 
 • constructions that are essential in academic writing and that require intensive and persistent 
instruction 
 • constructions that are found in practically all L2 grammar teaching but are hardly ever used in 
written academic prose (e.g. outdated, rare, or conversational grammar structures, such as  to 
whom you are speaking or  like she is totally so cool ) 
 Hinkel points out that, based on a large body of research in L1 and L2 university writing, the funda-
mental grammar that requires instruction encompasses sentence- and phrase-boundaries, frequently 
occurring verb tenses (e.g. the simple present and the simple past), discourse functions and uses of 
the passive voice, possibility and ability modals, hedging devices, reporting verbs, nominalizations, 
and impersonal  it-  constructions (e.g.  it seems  or  it is interesting ). In addition to academic grammar 
structures, however, important distinctions between conversational and formal written grammar 
also need to be addressed to help learners develop register differentiation skills. 
 Analyses and Hierarchies of Grammar Errors 
 There are probably few topics in L2 grammar teaching and learning that have created as much 
debate and controversy as grammar errors and their studies. It would be hard to find many teach-
ers, researchers, or methodologists who do not have an opinion on learner errors and what to do 
about them. To further complicate matters and as an aside, it is important to mention that with the 

378 • Eli Hinkel
proliferation of the use of English as a lingua franca practically everywhere in the world, what is seen 
as an error, what is not, and in what contexts has become a matter of considerable deliberation. 
 Systematic collecting, documenting, and classifying L2 production errors emerged as an area of 
study in the late 1950s. In recent decades, the studies of L2 grammar errors have been far less focused 
on their definitions and typologies. Rather, research has attempted to shed light on effective means of 
dealing with errors to improve L2 quality. The amount of work and the number of research reports 
on grammar errors are truly astounding. For this reason, the super-brief overview in this section 
covers only a couple of influential and ongoing developments. 
 As has been mentioned,  in spoken discourse , it is not always easy to pinpoint the types and sources 
of L2 grammar errors when, for example, phonetic and phonological misrepresentations (e.g. in 
sound articulation, word stress, or intonation) may obscure accurate or inaccurate grammar usage. 
In particular, L2 speaking entails a broad array of converging subskills required for immediate 
deployment and without much leeway. For instance, some of the componential speaking abilities 
are, say, pragmatics (e.g. speech act formulations, politeness devices, or adherence to socio-linguistic 
norms), discourse flow and structuring, pausing, intonation, word stress, fluency, vocabulary, and 
overall comprehensibility (see the criteria for rating L2 speaking skills adopted on major standard-
ized tests earlier in this chapter). Many empirical studies show clearly that, in L2 speaking, grammar 
errors are treated as far less severe than other classes of errors (e.g. inaccurate sound articulation or 
word stress) (Isaacs & Trofimovich, 2012; Kasper, 2001; Trofimovich & Isaacs, 2012). In fact, Kasper’s 
thorough overview of the research on the impact of incremental L2 skills on spoken production qual-
ity concludes that grammar errors generally do not have a high priority, relative to potential shortfalls 
in the uses of other skills. As an outcome, assessing severity of errors that preclude the comprehen-
sion of speech cannot always be achieved consistently and reliably, and in some cases, can be close to 
impossible (Munro & Derwing, 1999; Rifkin & Roberts, 1995). 
 On the other hand, establishing hierarchies of  errors in L2 writing  seems to be a great deal easier 
to accomplish. In general terms, grammar errors occupy a much more prominent place by far in 
research on L2 writing than L2 speaking. For one thing, written errors can be more tangible and 
damaging than those in spoken discourse. It is well-known, however, that occurrences of errors can 
decline as learners attain greater L2 proficiencies and as their productive skills continue to improve 
(Ferris, 1999, 2011; Hinkel, 2011, 2015). Additionally, however, recent research has demonstrated 
that, for a majority of L2 writers, eliminating all grammar errors may be virtually impossible. Fur-
thermore, while some types of sentence- and phrase-level errors can be reduced with experience, 
other classes of errors are a lot more difficult to eliminate. 
 Typically, error analyses set out to gauge the severity and importance of L2 grammatical inaccu-
racies (also called error gravity studies). The objectives of such investigations are usually to design 
and refine L2 curricula, uncover which specific errors interfere with comprehension, and promote 
learners’ awareness of grammar uses. Numerous research reports have created hierarchies of errors 
that are considered to be more egregious than others because they can impede comprehension. The 
overarching purpose of error hierarchies is to enable L2 instruction and curricula to prioritize gram-
mar teaching. 
 At present, Ferris’s investigations (Ferris, 1999, 2003; Ferris & Roberts, 2001) of L2 grammar 
errors are widely considered to be the most comprehensive and well-regarded. Her findings and clas-
sification provide the following priorities for grammar teaching and learning: 
 • “most serious” (Ferris, 2011, p. 45) (also called grave errors) that can impede comprehension 
 • frequent and correctable errors that are patterned and rule-governed (Ferris, 1999) 
 • the effectiveness of error correction (i.e. error frequency reduction) and developing learners’ 
skills to self-correct 
www.ebook3000.com

Prioritizing Grammar to Teach or Not to Teach • 379
 On the whole, an impressive body of studies of L2 errors and their priorities portray a relatively 
detailed picture of grammar areas that require persistent instruction.  Table 27.2  consolidates the 
findings of several key large-scale studies. Predictably, these investigations vary in their aims, meth-
odologies, design, and findings. For example, Bates, Lane, and Lange (1993) provide extensive guide-
lines that are compiled in a manual for teaching error awareness and self-editing. Ferris (1999, 2003, 
2011) puts forth a meticulous and comprehensive program for teachers to deal with L2 grammar 
errors systematically and consistently. Ferris’s empirical results are derived from her longitudinal 
research on the severity and frequency of L2 errors in writing (Ferris, 2003, 2011; Ferris & Rob-
erts, 2001). Also, in a single-shot study, Raimes (1991) carried out a survey of composition faculty 
regarding their perceptions and evaluations of L2 grammar errors in university essays. The findings 
of Raimes’s inquiry are reflected in her textbooks and grammar manuals for students, all of which 
have been re-issued in multiple editions. Given their somewhat disparate nature, the hierarchies of 
important error types also differ from one study to the next. 
 To summarize, based on the studies of errors, the gist of high-priority grammar features to be 
addressed in teaching includes the following: 
 • sentence structure and boundaries, as well as complex sentences 
 • the verb phrase—tenses, the passive voice, and subject-verb agreement 
 • punctuation 
 Table 27.2 Types of Grammar Errors in Declining Order of Severity 
Bates, Lane, and Lange (1993)
Ferris (2003, 2011), Ferris 
and Roberts (2001)
Raimes (1991, 2004)
Most Egregious Errors
Verb
tense
form
modals
Sentence structure: 
boundaries, unnecessary/ 
missing elements; 
unidiomatic expression
Sentence structure
Conditional sentence/ clause
Word choice: meaning, 
prepositions, pronouns
Sentence transitions, 
coordinating conjunctions
Active/passive voice
Verb
tense
form
Punctuation
Dependent clauses
Noun endings, singular and 
plural
Verb
tense
Sentence structure
Punctuation
Subject-verb agreement
Word order
Articles/determiners
Active/passive voice
Sentence transitions
Word form: morphology
Modal verbs
Less Severe Errors
Subject-verb agreement
Spelling
Verb form
Articles
Run-on sentences
Nouns and quantifiers
Noun endings, singular and plural
Pronouns
Articles
Word choice: morphology, meaning
Subject-verb agreement
Pronoun reference
Prepositions
Sentence fragments
Adjective/adverb form
Miscellaneous: idioms, 
inappropriate register
Prepositions

380 • Eli Hinkel
 Overall, error studies typically adopt the view that L2 writers’ abilities are a work in progress 
and are developmental at least to some extent. Taken together, the findings of error analyses lay a 
foundation for prioritizing grammar instruction and curricula, with the ultimate goal of improving 
students’ grammar range and quality. 
 Corpus Analysis Findings: Grammar to Learn and Use 
 Analyses of large language corpora seek to identify all manner of patterns in naturally occurring 
spoken and written language. In this technological age, many corpora are available, and the results 
of their analyses are published widely. One of the important and stated purposes of corpus studies 
is to provide empirical foundations for prioritizing pedagogical grammars (Biber, Conrad, & Leech, 
2002). Usually, corpus analysts regard the descriptions of authentic and real language to be far supe-
rior to those found in language textbooks that reflect authors’ intuitions, traditions, and anecdotal 
evidence (Biber & Reppen, 2002). 
 Corpus researchers have long emphasized that, for teaching, the benefits of natural language 
analyses are hard to match. Such databases permit representations of transcribed spoken and writ-
ten texts in practically any genre available (e.g. conversations, formal speeches, university lectures, 
journalistic writing, fiction, or academic prose). Grammar investigations of corpora can describe 
constructions that occur (or do not) in a great variety of language contexts. 
 When it comes to grammar teaching and learning, corpus findings identify three strategic factors 
that should serve as guidelines for prioritizing grammar pedagogy (Biber, Conrad, & Leech, 2002; 
Biber & Reppen, 2002; McEnery & Hardie, 2012): 
 • frequencies of uses 
 • comparisons of constructions across different text types (e.g. the passive voice is far more char-
acteristic of written academic prose than of virtually any spoken genre, or the simple present 
tense dominates in conversations, compared to the present progressive) 
 • associations between grammar constructions and specific words (lexico-grammar); for exam-
ple, both in speech and writing, the most common verbs followed by infinitives ( to ) are  want, 
try, seem , and  like , but other verbs accompanied by infinitives are far less prevalent. 
 Corpus analysts have contended for decades that the decisions for prioritizing grammar teaching 
should reflect natural language as it occurs in real life. The three strategic factors mentioned previ-
ously are clearly relevant for selecting grammar for instruction. However, it is equally important to 
note that additional considerations can intervene in immensely varied and variable contexts of L2 
teaching and learning. 
 For instance, learners in English as a Foreign Language settings may not be particularly concerned 
with the frequencies of grammar features in native speaker corpora (Swan, 2006). Furthermore, 
the issues of difficulty, learnability, usefulness, relevance, and cultural access have to be taken into 
account in corpus-based L2 pedagogy and instructional materials (Widdowson, 2000). 
 Although many researchers and methodologists are confident that corpus findings can make 
grammar teaching far more effective and efficient, critical complications in corpus-based priori-
ties may simply hinge on the essential characteristics of how language is employed and learned in 
daily life. 
 A couple of examples are noted as follows. As Hulstijn (1995) notes (see the previous section on 
“Research-Based Guidelines”), highly frequent grammar constructions are often learned effortlessly 
and incidentally in the course of L2 exposure. According to frequency-driven recommendations, 
www.ebook3000.com

Prioritizing Grammar to Teach or Not to Teach • 381
the 12 most common English verbs (Biber, Conrad, & Leech, 2002; Biber & Reppen, 2002) are as 
follows: 
 say, get, go, know, think, see, make, come, take, want, give, mean 
 However, because these verbs are encountered ubiquitously, it seems that covering them in language 
lessons may not be the most efficient and fruitful use of instructional time (Hinkel, 2004, 2015). The 
same can be said about such constructions as  want/try/seem/like + to  infinitive in, say,  like to travel 
or  want to go . 
 Other high-frequency grammar constructions recommended for teaching may simply defy 
instruction (Hinkel, 2004, 2015). For instance, contextual uses of the definite article  the  are extremely 
common in both speech and writing (Biber & Conrad, 2010). However, its uses appear to be lexi-
calized and difficult to teach. For one thing, the definite article rules can be abstract and not easily 
applied in context. The following guidelines on the usage of  the are provided for instruction: 
 • The noun was introduced previously in the text. 
 • Shared situational context specifies the noun. 
 • Modifiers of the noun specify the noun. 
 • The specific noun can be inferred from earlier discourse. 
 Although such corpus-based rules and descriptions might be more authentic than those found in 
grammar textbooks, it may well be that accurate uses of the definite article do not easily lend them-
selves to instruction. 
 In sum, the findings of corpus analyses can serve as general and beneficial pointers for prioritiz-
ing grammar teaching. While highly frequent constructions are likely to be straightforward to learn 
without much teaching, the distinctions between the grammar of speaking and formal writing may 
warrant deliberate attention. Undoubtedly, though, in a great number of suitable contexts, prioritiz-
ing specific grammar features for instruction and textbook materials can profit from corpus analysis 
findings. 
 Conclusions and Future Research Directions 
 Relatively accurate grammar is an essential tool for producing comprehensible sentences that can 
become a part of coherent text. As has been demonstrated, debated, considered, examined, explained, 
attested, and argued, not all L2 grammar errors are created equal. They vary greatly in terms of 
their severity, frequency, type, context, or effects on spoken—but mostly written—text clarity and 
comprehensibility. An overview of research shows that, at present, much is known about the com-
mon and recurrent types of grammar constructions that can profit from prioritizing and thorough 
instruction. 
 Currently, research conclusions are somewhat mixed on which grammar features to teach, which 
to omit, as well as which errors to correct, how to correct them, when, and with what frequency. 
Countless (i.e., no one counted them) studies of grammar uses in speech and writing indicate that 
in practically all L2 learning contexts, the quality of productive skills can benefit from work on 
grammatical accuracy and range. Although in theory the value of prioritized grammar instruction 
has been debated by researchers and methodologists alike, the basic fact is that “without grammar 
very little can be conveyed” Wilkins (1972, p. 111). While numerous and raucous debates continue, 
some degree of accuracy in grammar takes a priority in producing spoken and written text. One 

382 • Eli Hinkel
consideration, however, is not subject to much debate: in grammar instruction, the first order of 
business is to identify learners’ grammar needs and objectives. Prioritizing grammar teaching can 
rely on two rather invariable factors in any context: what specific types of learners need to know and 
should be able to do. 
 Notes 
 1. In this chapter, the term  second language  (L2) refers to a language that a person learns in addition to his or her first lan-
guage (even when it is his or her third or fourth language), as well as a foreign and/or an additional language. 
 2. An extensive, raucous, and ongoing debate on whether grammar should or should not be taught is not addressed in this 
chapter because it was discussed in chapters on grammar teaching and learning in Volumes 1 and 2 of the handbook. 
 3. Cambridge Michigan Language Assessments is a joint venture of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndi-
cate that merged with the Michigan English Test office in 2010. 
 4. The accuracy of grammar and language descriptions that are found throughout Savage, Bitterlin, and Price (2010) is 
not addressed in this chapter. However, some of the language and grammar constructions advocated in that book may 
be of interest to sociolinguists. The language features recommended for instruction and curricula in adult education for 
immigrants—to help them secure and maintain employment—may appear to be specific and socially marked. 
 References 
 Bates, L., Lane, J. & Lange, E. (1993).  Writing clearly: Responding to ESL compositions . Boston: Heinle & Heinle. 
 Biber, D. (2006).  University language: A corpus-based study of spoken and written registers . Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Biber, D. & Conrad, S. (2010). Corpus linguistics and grammar teaching. Longman, USA. Retrieved from: http://www.
pearsonlongman.com/ae/emac/newsletters/may-2010-grammar.html 
 Biber, D., Conrad, S. & Leech, G. (2002).  Longman student grammar of spoken and written English . Harlow: Pearson. 
 Biber, D. & Gray, B. (2013).  Discourse characteristics of writing and speaking task types on the TOEFL iBT: A lexico-grammatical 
analysis . Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
 Biber, D. & Reppen, R. (2002). What does frequency have to do with grammar teaching?  Studies in Second Language Acquisi-
tion ,  24 , 199–208. 
 Buck, G. (2001).  Assessing listening . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Celce-Murcia, M. (2016). The importance of the discourse level in understanding and teaching English grammar. In E. Hinkel 
(Ed.),  Teaching English grammar to speakers of other languages (pp. 3–18). New York: Routledge. 
 Conrad, S. (2010). What can a corpus tell us about grammar? In M. McCarthy & A. O’Keeffe (Eds.),  Routledge handbook of 
corpus linguistics  (pp. 227–240). London: Routledge. 
 Derewianka, B. & Jones, P. (2010). From traditional grammar to functional grammar: Bridging the divide. In C. Coffin (Ed.), 
 Language support in EAL contexts: Why systemic functional linguistics? (pp. 6–17). Reading, UK: NALDIC. 
 Ellis, R. (2002). The place of grammar instruction in the second/foreign language curriculum. In E. Hinkel & S. Fotos (Eds.), 
 New perspectives on grammar teaching in second language classrooms  (pp. 17–35). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
 Ellis, R. (2005). Instructed learning and task-based teaching. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of research in second language teach-
ing and learning  (pp. 713–728). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Ellis, R. (2006). Current issues in the teaching of grammar: An SLA perspective.  TESOL Quarterly ,  40 (1), 83–107. 
 Ferris, D. (1999). The case for grammar correction in L2 writing classes: A response to Truscott (1996).  Journal of Second 
Language Writing ,  8 , 1–11. 
 Ferris, D. (2003).  Response to student writing . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Ferris, D. (2011).  Treatment of error in second language student writing  (2nd ed.). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
 Ferris, D. & Roberts, B. (2001). Error feedback in L2 writing classes: How explicit does it need to be?  Journal of Second Language 
Writing ,  10 , 161–184. 
 Folse, K. (2016). Grammar in student books vs. grammar that students need: Which grammar to include, which grammar 
to omit. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Teaching English grammar to speakers of other languages (pp. 63–83). New York: Routledge. 
 Hinkel, E. (2004).  Teaching academic ESL writing: Practical techniques in vocabulary and grammar . New York: Routledge. 
 Hinkel, E. (2011). What research on second language writing tells us and what it doesn’t. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of 
research in second language teaching and learning, volume 2 (pp. 523–538). New York: Routledge. 
 Hinkel, E. (2013). Research findings on teaching grammar for academic writing.  English Teaching ,  68 (4), 3–21. 
 Hinkel, E. (2015).  Effective curriculum for teaching L2 writing: Principles and techniques . New York: Routledge. 
www.ebook3000.com

Prioritizing Grammar to Teach or Not to Teach • 383
 Hulstijn, J. (1995). Not all grammar rules are equal: Giving grammar instruction its proper place in foreign language teach-
ing. In R. Schmidt (Ed.),  Attention and awareness in foreign language learning  (pp. 359–386). Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press. 
 Hulstijn, J. & De Graaff, R. (1994). Under what conditions does explicit knowledge of a second language facilitate the acquisi-
tion of implicit knowledge? A research proposal. In J. Hulstijn & R. Schmidt (Eds.),  Consciousness in second language 
learning  (pp. 97–109). AILA Review, 11. 
 Isaacs, T. & Trofimovich, P. (2012). ‘Deconstructing’ comprehensibility: Identifying the linguistic influences on listeners’ L2 
comprehensibility ratings.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition ,  34 , 475–505. 
 Kasper, G. (2001). Four perspectives on L2 pragmatic development.  Applied Linguistics ,  22 , 502–530. 
 Leech, G. (2000). Grammars of spoken English: New outcomes of corpus-oriented research.  Language Learning ,  50 (4), 675–724. 
 Leech, G. & Svartvik, J. (2002).  A communicative grammar of English (3rd ed.). Oxon, UK: Routledge. 
 McEnery, T. & Hardie, A. (2012).  Corpus linguistics: Method, theory and practice . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Munro, M. & Derwing, T. (1999). Foreign accent, comprehensibility, and intelligibility in the speech of second language learn-
ers.  Language Learning ,  49 (2), 285–310. 
 Powers, D. (2010).  Validity: What does it mean for TOEIC tests?  Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
 Powers, D., Kim, H., Yu, F., Weng, V. Z. & VanWinkle, W. (2009).  The TOEIC speaking and writing tests: Relations to test-taker 
perceptions of proficiency in English . Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
 Purpura, J. (2004).  Assessing grammar . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Raimes, A. (1991). Errors: Windows into the mind.  College ESL ,  1 , 55–64. 
 Raimes, A. (2004).  Grammar troublespots (3rd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Richards, J. & Reppen, R. (2016). Twelve principles of grammar instruction. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Teaching English grammar to 
speakers of other languages (pp. 151–170). New York: Routledge. 
 Rifkin, B. & Roberts, F. (1995). Error gravity: A critical review of research design.  Language Learning ,  45 , 511–537. 
 Savage, K., Bitterlin, G. & Price, D. (2010).  Grammar matters: Teaching grammar in adult ESL programs . New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Swan, M. (2002). Seven bad reasons for teaching grammar—and two good ones. In J. Richards & W. Renandya (Eds.),  Meth-
odology in language teaching (pp. 148–153). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Swan, M. (2006). Teaching grammar: Does grammar teaching work?  Modern English Teacher ,  15 (2). Retrieved from: http://
www.mikeswan.co.uk/elt-applied-linguistics/teaching-grammar.htm 
 Trofimovich, P. & Isaacs, T. (2012). Disentangling L2 comprehensibility from accentedness.  Bilingualism: Language and Cogni-
tion ,  15 , 905–916. 
 Ur, P. (2011). Grammar teaching: Research, theory and practice. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook of research in second language 
teaching and learning, volume 2 (pp. 507–522). New York: Routledge. 
 Ur, P. (2012).  A course in language teaching: Practice and theory (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Wei, J. & Llosa, L. (2015). Investigating differences between American and Indian raters in assessing TOEFL iBT speaking tasks. 
 Language Assessment Quarterly ,  12 (3), 283–304. 
 Widdowson, H. (2000). On the limitations of linguistics applied.  Applied Linguistics ,  21 , 3–25. 
 Wilkins, D. (1972).  Linguistics in language teaching . London: Edward Arnold. 
 Xi, X. & Mollaun, P. (2009).  How do raters from India perform in scoring the TOEFL iBT speaking section and what kind of train-
ing helps ? Princeton, NJ: ETS. 

384
 28 
 Systemic Functional Grammar in the K–12 Classroom 
 Mary J. Schleppegrell 
 Focus of the Chapter 
 Growing numbers of second language learners are in K–12 classrooms, where they are working to 
learn both language and content. In this context, research is increasingly calling for a more explicit 
focus on language across subject areas. At the same time, teachers often lack tools for focusing explic-
itly on language. This chapter describes an approach to bringing explicit attention to language in 
K–12 classrooms by focusing on grammar as a resource for meaning-making. This focus on language 
is different from what might typically be understood as grammar teaching, but it enables teachers to 
support learners by integrating a focus on language form with meaningful instruction toward con-
tent area goals. This chapter urges applied linguists to continue to contribute to this agenda so that 
all teachers can be better prepared to support L2 learners in learning language as they learn school 
subjects. 
 Grammar as a Resource for K–12 Teaching and Learning 
 The focus on grammar teaching developed here draws on Michael Halliday’s theory of grammar 
as articulated in systemic functional linguistics (SFL) (e.g., Halliday, 1978; Halliday & Matthiessen, 
2004). From the SFL perspective, language is a  social semiotic , a meaning-making resource through 
which speakers and writers create messages that construe experience and enact social relationships. 
That positions grammar as a resource that needs to be further developed in every new setting and 
context in which language is used, as we draw on different patterns of grammatical resources to do 
different things. In K–12 classrooms, L2 learners encounter new ways of using language as they move 
from grade to grade and subject to subject, and a focus on the way language varies in its forms and 
meanings can help them engage in the disciplinary discourses that enable them to learn both lan-
guage and content. 
 The chapter describes how content and language teachers in K–12 classrooms can support the 
ongoing language development of L2 students through a focus on patterns of language in their sub-
ject areas. L2 students in K–12 classrooms include recent immigrants as well as children born in the 
country who seldom encounter ‘school’ language outside the classroom. These children need ample 
and robust opportunities to engage in noticing and attending to the ways the language works. SFL 
theory and metalanguage (language about language) enables teachers to provide such opportunities, 
with the goal of broadening students’ linguistic repertoires for participation in learning. 
www.ebook3000.com

Systemic Functional Grammar • 385
 This chapter briefly reviews previous research on grammar in K–12 classrooms and then offers 
an extended perspective on the SFL approach to teaching grammar. It describes research that has 
responded to calls for supporting K–12 learners with a more explicit focus on language, as well as 
studies that use new tools from SFL to assess language development. Finally, the chapter suggests 
further directions for this research agenda. 
 Evolving Understanding of the Role of Grammar in K–12 Classrooms 
 SFL conceptualizes  grammar  as a resource for meaning-making with language rather than as a set 
of rules to be learned and applied in the service of greater accuracy. Accuracy in producing the new 
language is important in the long run for effective writing and academic speaking, but as a strategy 
for supporting learning, a focus on grammar as meaning-making has greater potential for raising 
awareness about the language and its features and supporting participation in classroom activities. 
Research in K–12 classrooms has evolved over the past decades from a focus on accuracy toward a 
focus on grammar as meaning-making. 
 Long-standing evidence from research on bilingual and immersion education in the 1980s and 
1990s demonstrated that L2 learners need a focus on form in order to develop a second language to 
the advanced levels needed in schooling contexts. Lightbown and Spada’s (2013: 195) review argued 
that the most successful approaches to instruction “include guided attention to language features” 
(See J. Williams, 2005 for a review of focus on form research; see Spada & Tomita, 2010 for a meta-
analysis). This research primarily studied the ways teachers help learners use the L2 with greater  accu-
racy  by providing feedback on errors. Subsequently, the main focus of research on L2 development 
has changed, as we recognize that learners inevitably make errors as they expand their meaning-
making repertoires. 
 A further advance in understanding of the role attention to language can play came from Cum-
mins’ (1981) suggestion that one of the challenges students face in K–12 classrooms is encountering 
 academic language.  He generated controversy with his distinction between informal conversational 
language and more formal academic language (see Cummins, 2000, for discussion), but this distinc-
tion pointed to a key issue that has to be taken into account for school-aged learners: that the  registers 
through which schooling is accomplished call for ways of using language that are not available to 
many children, particularly language learners, outside the classroom. Understanding that the forms 
learners encounter vary according to the contexts in which they use language is a key insight that can 
shape the ways teachers engage learners in attending to language forms. 
 New conceptions of the process of L2 learning also call for more meaningful approaches to gram-
mar instruction. Ellis and Larsen-Freeman (2006) described language as  emergent , “a multi-agent, 
complex, dynamic, adaptive system” (p. 558). They pointed out that learners do not begin produc-
ing language accurately once and for all, and noted that the terms used to describe the mechanisms 
for second language development are mental actions such as “selective attending, noticing the gap” 
(p. 569). They called for explicit attention to language as a support for learning but also noted that 
“[l]anguage use, social roles, language learning, and conscious experience are all socially situated, 
negotiated, scaffolded, and guided” (p. 572). Learners need multiple opportunities to engage with 
language in ways that help them focus on its forms, meaning, and use, all of which they encounter 
simultaneously (see also Larsen-Freeman, 2003). 
 The increasing numbers of students across the world who are learning through a language that is not 
their mother tongue has led to calls for more attention to language in all classrooms (e.g., Beacco, Flem-
ing, Goullier, Thürmann, & Vollmer, 2015; Lucas, Villegas, & Freedson-Gonzalez, 2008). Even children 
who are still learning the language need to engage in subject-area learning appropriate for their age-level 
cognitive development (Harper & deJong, 2004). To respond to this need, researchers are increasingly 

386 • Mary J. Schleppegrell
calling for explicit attention to the forms language takes to support L2 learners, describing the knowl-
edge that teachers need to support language development across disciplines in various ways: as  literacy 
pedagogical content knowledge  (Love, 2010),  pedagogical language knowledge  (Bunch, 2013), or  disciplin-
ary linguistic knowledge  (Turkan, de Oliveira, Lee, & Phelps, 2014). Bunch (2013: 307), for example, 
argued that teachers need “knowledge of language directly related to disciplinary teaching and learning 
and situated in the particular (and multiple) contexts in which teaching and learning take place.” In an 
L1 context, Myhill, Jones, Lines, and Watson (2011) reported that teachers found that explicitness, talk 
about language, and opportunities for playful experimentation with language through a meaningful 
focus on grammar was beneficial to their students. They reported that what is most important is the 
teacher’s  grammatical pedagogical content knowledge  (i.e., knowing how to use grammatical knowledge 
to teach), rather than just knowing a lot about grammar. Teachers with such knowledge were able to link 
grammar with purpose in writing, were able to respond effectively to students’ drafts, and were able to 
draw learners’ attention to relevant features of language in the texts they read. 
 The SFL approach to L2 grammar teaching presented here recognizes the emergent nature of L2 
learning, accepts that learners will continue to make errors as they learn, and situates grammar teaching 
in meaningful contexts of learning relevant to the learners’ goals at school. It recognizes that being error-
free should not be the key measure of language development and that grammar should not be separated 
from vocabulary and other aspects of language or taught and practiced as a set of exercises that focus 
only at the sentence level. SFL offers tools for situating grammar instruction in the context of learning 
school subjects, offering learners opportunities for the frequent exposure, focus on form and meaning, 
and conscious attention to language that research suggests are needed for success. This approach is also 
supported by theories of learning and language development more generally (e.g., Vygotsky, 1978; G. 
Williams, 2005). Language develops through interaction, and as students engage with the new concepts 
they learn at school, attention to patterns in grammar can provide insights into the linguistic choices 
they can make to help them achieve the goals of schooling. This perspective also means that learners 
don’t need to be restricted to simplified texts. Instead, teachers can help learners deconstruct challenging 
texts as they read and offer proactive support for making choices in writing. SFL metalanguage has been 
shown to support even young children in expanding their meaning-making resources (e.g., French, 2010; 
G. Williams, 2005, 2016), inspiring applications of the grammar in K–12 settings. 
 Functional Grammar: Focus on Grammar and Meaning 
 This section describes how the theory of language offered by SFL and its functional grammar sup-
ports a scaffolded and guided focus on language in contexts of learning school subjects. (For an 
introduction to SFL, see Eggins, 2004. For introductions that link functional and traditional gram-
mar, see Derewianka, 2011 and Gebhard & Martin, 2011. For pedagogical applications in K–12 edu-
cation, see de Oliveira & Schleppegrell, 2015 and Fang & Schleppegrell, 2008.) It discusses the role 
of  register and  metafunction in bringing meaning and form simultaneously into focus and argues 
for the important role of a metalanguage to support L2 development. It introduces some SFL meta-
language and then reports on research that has used the metalanguage in K–12 teacher professional 
development or in classroom activities with L2 learners. These studies use SFL to deconstruct text to 
explore language and meaning and to analyze and track L2 learners’ growth in writing. 
 SFL: Register and Metafunction 
 Register  and  metafunction  are two key constructs in SFL theory that bring together context and 
grammatical forms. From an SFL perspective,  register  refers to the constellation of linguistic features 
used in particular situational contexts, where three variables in the context put particular language 
www.ebook3000.com

Systemic Functional Grammar • 387
forms in play. These variables are the  field  (what’s going on), the  tenor  (the relationships and per-
spectives of the participants), and the  mode  (the ways language is used: whether spoken or written, 
accompanying action or constituting the action, face-to-face or distant). These context variables can 
be characterized at varying levels of abstraction. Schleppegrell (2001, 2004) described the  language 
of schooling  at a very general level as enabling information to be authoritatively presented in highly 
structured ways; the  fields  are specialized, the  tenor  tends to be formal, and the  mode  tends to favor 
monologic presentation of information in speech and writing. Of course, not all language used in 
the classroom is authoritative, formal, and highly structured; this is an abstraction that highlights 
the challenges of language use at school in comparison with the use of language in everyday life. The 
register features of particular subjects can be more specifically characterized (how language is used 
differently in science than in history, for example), and the register features of particular tasks can be 
described in ways that can make them available to learners (e.g., the language choices that are valued 
in expository essays; see Schleppegrell, 2004 for development of each of these levels of description). 
In contexts of K–12 schooling, each subject becomes more challenging as students move forward, 
and as the subject matter becomes more challenging, so does the language used to present, interact 
with, and assess new knowledge. The register varies as students engage in different subjects, interact 
in different ways, and use language in different modes. 
 The construct  metafunction  identifies the grammatical resources through which the context is 
realized in spoken and written language. Language choices from the ideational metafunction real-
ize  field , choices from the interpersonal metafunction realize  tenor , and choices from the textual 
metafunction realize  mode . Whenever we use language, we are always simultaneously presenting 
ideas (ideational meaning), enacting a relationship with a reader or listener (interpersonal meaning), 
and constructing a cohesive message (textual meaning). Grammar and vocabulary are considered 
together, not separately, as the  lexico-grammar.  The lexical and grammatical choices speakers and 
writers make are shaped by the  field ,  tenor , and  mode (the context variables), but the context also 
puts particular lexical and grammatical choices in play. In other words, the language choices both 
construe and shape the context. The tenor of a text or discursive exchange, for example, is partially 
shaped by the relationships of the participants in the discourse, as their positioning related to each 
other affects the language choices they make, and those language choices, construing interpersonal 
meanings, then in turn further shape the evolution of the text or discourse and the tenor that sub-
sequently develops. 
 The Role of a Metalanguage 
 The key tool for drawing attention to patterns of language is a  metalanguage , a language about lan-
guage. Meaning-based metalanguage supports educational practice by offering a means of being 
explicit about how language presents the knowledge to be learned (Schleppegrell, 2013). The SFL 
metalanguage offers terms for raising language awareness that can be linked to the purposes for 
which language is being used and the goals of the speaker/writer. It offers a means of abstracting 
from the actual wording to the meaning categories that the wording instantiates. This enables learn-
ers to recognize patterns in language and relate the patterns to the meanings they construe, helping 
them recognize linguistic choices they can make in different contexts, as well as supporting teachers 
in being explicit about the demands of the curriculum (e.g., in writing in valued ways). The meta-
language also enables students to explore the choices speakers and writers make, analyzing dense 
text to talk about meaning and recognizing patterns in language. This supports them in reading for 
comprehension as well as engaging in critical ways with the texts they read. 
 Traditional grammatical metalanguage offers ways of referring to word classes ( noun, verb, adjec-
tive ) and to some functions within the clause ( subject, object ). In contrast, the SFL meaning-based 

388 • Mary J. Schleppegrell
metalanguage offers a rich repertoire of terms for referring to different aspects of meanings in a text 
or discourse and for tracing meaning beyond the clause and across a text.  Table 28.1  shows how the 
SFL metalanguage connects with the context variables and provides examples of the kinds of activi-
ties supported by use of the metalanguage. The context variables are realized in language from one 
of the three metafunctions, as the context and language are simultaneously interacting to present the 
three kinds of meanings. Following examples from research are used to illustrate how the metalan-
guage supports teachers in making the meanings and functions of the grammatical forms a focus of 
attention for learners. 
 SFL metalanguage for exploring  ideational meaning  includes  participant ,  process , and  circum-
stance , metalanguage that can be used to deconstruct a clause/sentence into its meaningful constitu-
ents as students explore the  field  of the discourse.  Participants  are typically found in the nouns and 
noun groups,  processes  in the verbs and verb groups, and  circumstances  in prepositional phrases and 
adverbs that present the when, where, how, and why of the process. The meanings of particular pro-
cesses, participants, and circumstances can be further described as the clause is identified as  doing, 
saying, being, or  sensing in a specific text (Martin & Rose, 2003). 
 For example, Schleppegrell, Greer, and Taylor (2008) report on the third author’s work in a lin-
guistically diverse middle school classroom where students deconstructed a text to help them con-
sider the internal and external causes of the fall of Rome. One sentence in the text read: 
 To finance Rome’s huge armies, its citizens had to pay heavy taxes. 
 Students identified the  doing processes ( to finance; had to pay ) and the  participants that are  actor ( its 
citizens ) and  receiver ( Rome’s huge armies; heavy taxes ) of the actions in this sentence. This focused 
them on how the  actor in the first clause,  To finance Rome’s huge armies , is not stated. To understand 
who is financing the armies, readers need to look to the next clause and identify  its citizens  as the 
 Table 28.1 Register: Context, Metafunction, and Metalanguage 
Context 
variable
Metafunction
SFL metalanguage (examples)
Instructional activities supported 
by the metalanguage (examples)
Field
Ideational 
meaning
Process, participant, circumstance; 
types of processes and participants 
(e.g., action processes with actors 
and recipients)
Conjunctions and their meanings 
(e.g., time, cause)
Deconstructing clauses/sentences/ 
complex nominal groups to explore 
the meanings they present
Recognizing meaning in conjunctions 
and the clauses they link
Mode
Textual 
meaning
Theme/rheme, nominalization, 
information flow, clause structuring
Reference tracking
Tracing information flow across a 
text
Tracking the ways a referent is 
introduced and referred to across a text
Tenor
Interpersonal 
meaning
Mood (declarative, interrogative, 
imperative)
Modality (e.g., obligation/necessity, 
likelihood/possibility)
Resources for appraisal: Attitudes 
(e.g., positive/negative), Graduation 
(e.g., ‘turned up/down’), 
Engagement (e.g., ‘point of view’; 
dialogic expansion/contraction)
Exploring the speech functions of 
different mood choices
Recognizing the strength of modal 
meanings (e.g., how necessary? how 
likely?)
Recognizing kinds of attitudes, how 
attitudes are presented
Exploring how writers open up and 
contract dialogic space
www.ebook3000.com

Systemic Functional Grammar • 389
 actor  in both the process  finance  and the process  had to pay . As they do this, they also talk about what 
the sentence means and begin to understand how having a huge army affected the citizens of Rome. 
 Every clause can be deconstructed and analyzed using these terms, even clauses with embeddings 
and complex structure. This makes the metalanguage an especially useful resource for working with 
challenging content-area texts. The SFL metalanguage connects with meaning and form, and the 
focus is on function in context. The SFL notion of  nominalization  exemplifies this situation. Nomi-
nalization can refer to the trans-categorization of words into a new word class, where a verb can be 
turned into a noun; for example,  arrive → arrival; produce → production. But from an SFL perspec-
tive, nominalization is more than this; it has a function in a text to support the development of ideas. 
 We see the way a teacher focuses students on  textual meaning  in Gebhard, Chen, and Britton’s 
(2014: 118) report on the way a third-grade teacher in their study made this point to her students: 
 with guidance, students analyzed a model text and noted that the process  to melt  in the sen-
tence  Polar ice caps are melting  was followed by a sentence that further built on the idea of 
melting as the point of departure for the clause. Now in the theme position, melting was real-
ized as a participant in a clause that read,  This melting is causing the sea level to rise . In con-
tinuing to analyze this pattern, they noted that the next sentence read,  As a result of this rising, 
animals are losing their habitats. 
 The teacher drew students’ attention to the ways this pattern of nominalizing processes ( are 
melting → This melting; to rise → this rising ) helps the author develop the topic over several sentences. 
In analyzing textual meaning, students look at how word order structures information in ways that 
background what is already active in the discourse and foreground what is new. The teacher in Geb-
hard et al.’s study has engaged the children in analysis of clause  themes , an SFL tool that helps readers 
and writers analyze this development by focusing on what comes first in the clause. The nominalized 
 participants  still incorporate the meaning of the  processes , but the process is now participating in the 
discourse as a grammatical ‘thing’ that causes further impacts on the environment. So in addition 
to being a resource for ideational meaning as a  participant  in the clause, nominalizations also play a 
role in presenting textual meaning in the way they contribute to text structuring. As  Table 28.1 indi-
cates, other grammatical resources for textual meaning include  conjunctions  that build relationships 
between parts of a clause or text, and  reference constructed in cohesive ties presented in pronouns, 
demonstratives, and synonyms. A focus on textual meaning can help students learn how cohesion 
and logical development can be built across a text, as different choices in organization and reference 
vary in different  modes of language use. 
 In analyzing  interpersonal meaning , the focus is on the lexical and grammatical forms that real-
ize the  tenor  of the text or discourse. These include the  mood  and  modality  choices of a speaker/writer, 
so by identifying declarative, interrogative, and imperative mood and exploring the speech functions 
they present, learners can explore the grammar of interaction and recognize how different gram-
matical choices can be made in  stating, questioning, commanding,  and  offering  (Schleppegrell, 2013). 
Paugh and Moran (2013) reported on how third-grade students identified the ways authors use “ how 
to  verbs” (imperative mood) to tell them what to do as they read instructions for planting a garden. 
They also focused on interpersonal meaning in learning when it is appropriate to write about their 
feelings as they reported on their gardening experiences.  Table 28.1  shows that the  Appraisal frame-
work from SFL (Martin & White, 2005) offers tools for focus on the attitudes and judgments infused 
into a text through vocabulary choices that present affect and evaluation, intensify or downplay that 
affect and evaluation, and engage with the listener/reader in presenting a speaker/writer’s perspec-
tive. In addition, exploring modality helps reveal the ways  possibility, usuality, necessity, inclination, 
and other modal meanings present perspectives and commitment. 

390 • Mary J. Schleppegrell
 The functional metalanguage enables learners to focus on meaningful constituents rather than indi-
vidual words as they analyze and talk about text. The point is not just to label sentence constituents but 
to recognize how the grammatical choice presents meaning in a particular context. The SFL metalan-
guage supports talk that can help learners unpack meaning in dense texts, think about author’s craft 
and authorial perspective, and explore issues of agency, point of view, and structuring that are realized 
in the texts they read. As learners unpack dense texts and explore their meanings, they also learn that 
authors have points of view that influence the language choices they make, and that they, as readers, can 
recognize these meanings and how they are positioned by the language choices. This supports develop-
ment of critical language awareness. The SFL grammar is also helpful as a tool for being explicit with 
students about what is expected in the texts they  write  and how best to meet those expectations. 
 The studies reviewed here are limited to those that use the SFL grammar in teacher professional 
development or in classrooms with L2 learners. In teacher education the metalanguage is a resource 
for teachers’ better understanding of language and a resource for developing classroom activities. In 
classrooms with L2 learners, SFL metalanguage supports reading and writing in English Language 
Arts (ELA), history, and science and is used to analyze the development of L2 learners’ writing. 
 SFL theory has also inspired a robust  genre-based pedagogy  that has been extensively researched 
(see Martin, 2009), but only genre-oriented studies that report using the grammar in connection 
with genre descriptions are referenced here. Likewise, the SFL grammar has been used in L1 contexts, 
in tertiary contexts, and in discourse analysis of classroom teaching or curriculum materials. Those 
studies are also not in focus here. 
 Using SFL to Explore Language and Meaning 
 The studies reported on here illustrate the kind of grammar teaching that the functional grammar of 
SFL supports: a focus on how patterns of language work in a text. Applying the SFL tools and meta-
language, teachers can engage language learners in talk about  what  a text means as well as  how the 
text means what it does. In the following sections, I review studies that illustrate these ways of using 
the grammar to raise awareness and also describe studies in which the SFL grammar has been a tool 
for tracking L2 students’ writing development. 
 Deconstructing a Text to Explore What and/or How It Means 
 Use of SFL metalanguage can help students see how an author is making language choices of differ-
ent kinds and relate those language choices to what the text is about, how it is structured, and the 
voice it projects. This focus on grammar supports comprehension by offering teachers and learners 
tools for parsing language into meaningful constituents and recognizing what goes together to make 
meaning. It provides learners with experiences of noticing language use and developing understand-
ing about choices they can make from the new language systems, as well as providing practice nego-
tiating meaning in context. 
 For example, Spycher (2007) described the ways she used the SFL grammar in connection with 
traditional grammar to support immigrant secondary school learners in reading grade-appropriate 
expository texts in her English Language Development classroom. Motivated by students’ reports 
that their teachers thought they were slow learners, Spycher departed from the conventional wis-
dom that says students need to control foundational skills before engaging with more advanced 
language features. She engaged them in reading and deconstructing text, using theme/rheme analysis 
to explore text structure and identify process types and conjunctions to focus on meaning in the texts 
they read. Her study reported on how a focal student learned to write with a more authoritative voice 
through these analysis activities. 
www.ebook3000.com

Systemic Functional Grammar • 391
 SFL is also used to support children in recognizing differences between genres and the language 
resources used to speak and write in different contexts. Brisk (2015), for example, offered compre-
hensive descriptions of the language resources children can draw on in writing a range of genres 
and described pedagogical approaches that support talk about language structure and meaning. Her 
work demonstrated that even young children can reflect on the differences in the kinds of text they 
write when supported with meaningful metalanguage for talk about text. By investigating patterns 
of language in texts and recognizing the variation that makes a text the kind of text it is, learners 
can recognize the linguistic choices they can draw on as they write in different contexts, supporting 
disciplinary writing development. 
 Likewise, Daniello, Turgut, and Brisk (2014) reported on pre- and in-service teachers who learned 
to analyze language using SFL metalanguage in order to support children’s writing development. Like 
others who are doing this ground-breaking work, they identify challenges and acknowledge that it 
takes time and effort to learn these ways of talking about text, but they also found that teachers who 
engage with the work find that they are better able to support their students’ writing. They asked 
pre-service teachers to respond to a ‘mentor’ text (an example of a text similar to what their students 
would be writing) both before and after their engagement in the SFL professional development. 
One of the teacher candidates noted that response before the intervention “is very general and 
vague and there is not anything specific. . . . I just kind of generally mention characters, dialogue, 
and showing instead of telling” (p. 198). In contrast, after the sessions the candidate noted that her 
response “is broken down more according to the different aspects of SFL. . . . I actually talked about 
combining sentences, text connectives, . . . very specific aspects of language the student can pull from 
the text” (p. 199). 
 SFL has also been used to prepare ELA teachers to support middle-grade and secondary school 
writers in expanding their repertoires of clause types for writing about literature. Students learned 
to expand the nominal group as they describe characters and settings, to structure their texts effec-
tively for cohesion and coherence, to recognize the function of nominalization, to use conjunctions 
and transitional phrases effectively, and to draw on theme/rheme structuring options to create an 
effective flow of information in the texts they write (Aguirre-Munoz et al., 2008). Humphrey and 
MacNaught (2015) reported on the ways eighth- and ninth-grade English language learners were 
supported in writing persuasively through attention to conjunctions and clause structures and to 
appraisal resources for dialogic expansion and contraction. 
 Sometimes the SFL focus is on helping students recognize  how  a text means what it does, how 
an author infuses particular meanings by making particular choices from what the grammar offers. 
For example, Klingelhofer and Schleppegrell (2015) reported on a teacher using the metalanguage 
of  turning up  and  turning down  to focus L2 learners on the ways writers of literary texts present the 
intensity of positive and negative attitudes. This helped the fourth-grade learners use more effective 
language choices in writing character analyses in response to the story they were reading. Moore and 
Schleppegrell (2014) described how elementary grade L2 students analyzed process types in connec-
tion with  turned up  and  turned down  language to help them recognize when an author is  showing 
characters’ attitudes and when the author is  telling  what characters think and feel. This gave learners 
insights into how to achieve these effects themselves in their writing and connected the SFL metalan-
guage with common ways of talking about text in ELA. 
 Reports of teacher education as well as classroom instruction using SFL in history and science have 
shown how the metalanguage can support learning particular to disciplinary goals. In science, while 
sentence deconstruction to explore meaning has also been reported (de Oliveira, 2008), interpersonal 
meaning has been especially in focus in the use of SFL metalanguage. Perhaps this is because science 
is often projected through an impersonal voice that can be problematic for students to understand 
and to produce in their own writing. O’Hallaron, Palincsar, and Schleppegrell (2015) provided 

392 • Mary J. Schleppegrell
an inventory of resources that are used for interpersonal meaning in science, noting that although 
science texts do often project an impersonal voice, science writers infuse their perspectives and points 
of view through modality of obligation and likelihood, mood/speech function, pronouns, and other 
grammatical resources. O’Hallaron et al. described new insights elementary-grade teachers gained 
from thinking about the role of the author’s perspective in science texts, considering how an author 
can be cautious in making claims, and recognizing how an author positions the reader in particular 
ways through language choices. Teachers reported that the insight that authors of informational texts 
present attitudes and judgments led to lively discussion in their classrooms with English language 
learners. Buxton et al. (2013) reported on engaging teachers in focusing on nominalization and passive 
voice to help them recognize the authorial perspective presented in the ‘depersonalized’ voice typical 
of science. A common writing task in science is reporting on the results of a procedure, and de Oliveira 
and Lan (2014) and Paugh and Moran (2013) both described how features such as mood, past tense, 
personal pronouns, and time expressions can be in focus for learners as they write that genre. 
 Gebhard et al. (2014), introduced previously, was particularly informative about the multiple 
ways SFL metalanguage can support L2 learners. Embedded in units of study in history and sci-
ence that drew on genre pedagogy in writing, the metalanguage enabled the teacher and learners to 
recognize processes and participants in the texts they read and identify participants in texts to track 
how a referent is introduced and referred to as a text evolves. Students expanded nominal groups 
and learned to nominalize, use modality, and show causality in their writing. As they read and wrote 
biographies, students focused on temporal conjunctions and the verb tense choices that enabled 
authors to move from past tense in reporting events to timeless present for their evaluation of a 
character. This work enabled the children to write historical and scientific explanations that were 
“more structured, cohesive, and formal than the everyday oral discourse young emergent L2 writers 
tend to produce” (Gebhard et al., 2014: 117). Gebhard and her colleagues have also written about the 
ways the metalanguage is supporting teachers in offering more explicit guidance to their students in 
writing different genres; for example, in writing persuasive letters, where they focused on connectors 
and clause structures (Gebhard, Harman & Seger, 2007), and in writing blogs, where they focused 
on clause structuring, tense, and interpersonal functions of graphology such as punctuation and 
emphasis (Gebhard, Shin, & Seger, 2011). 
 In history, the use of sentence deconstruction has been a major contributor to helping students 
read dense texts (e.g., Achugar & Carpenter, 2012, 2014; Achugar, Schleppegrell, & Oteíza, 2007; 
Schleppegrell & de Oliveira, 2006). These studies also reported on tracking reference chains and 
unpacking meaning in nominalizations and complex noun groups and illustrated how time and 
cause can be analyzed, two motifs highly relevant for learning history. In addition, Schleppegrell, 
Achugar, and Oteíza (2004) illustrated how a focus on different process types and their participants 
can be used to engage students in analyzing agency, representation, and point of view in a history text. 
 Schall-Leckrone and McQuillan (2012) studied implementation of a focus on language for pre-
service history teachers over two cohorts. The teachers 
 practiced identifying key concepts in texts represented in noun groups and nominalizations, 
noted how different referents can signify the same or a similar concept, and then traced the 
chain of reference in a sample passage from a history textbook as a means to summarize and 
interpret the passage. 
 (p. 250) 
 The teachers reported that this work had improved their history teaching. They did not always 
use the metalanguage to teach students, but they commented that their own knowledge about the 
grammar made them more effective in supporting students’ writing. They also reported that using 
www.ebook3000.com

Systemic Functional Grammar • 393
SFL was a complex undertaking that would call for more experience, something that other research-
ers also report (e.g., Fang, Sun, Chiu, & Trutschel, 2014). 
 Gebhard, Chen, Graham, and Gunawan (2013) also acknowledged the challenges of this work, as 
the use of SFL metalanguage calls for “sustained support in learning how to use it to design curricu-
lum” (p. 123), but they urged that applied linguists continue to work to incorporate such an approach, 
arguing that even in a 14-week course, teachers were able to draw on the grammar to develop valuable 
activities for learners in different contexts. In their study of pre-service teacher development, Gebhard 
et al. (2013) described the kinds of activities students in a Master’s degree TESOL program designed as 
they learned how the SFL metalanguage could help them build a focus on grammar into their writing 
instruction in ways that support learners’ meaning-making. For example, they developed approaches 
to teaching students to argue more authoritatively by helping them use fewer sensing processes, more 
declarative clauses, present tense, and use of nominalizations to manage the flow of information as 
they made claims. These novice teachers also recognized that they could ask students to track and 
analyze the grammatical participants in their texts as a means of exploring cohesion. 
 SFL Grammar for Analyzing Writing Development 
 Another value of the SFL grammar is in its use to describe writing development in more meaningful 
ways than just analyzing complexity, accuracy, and fluency—metrics that are not sensitive to the dif-
ferences in purpose that shape different genres. As learners write texts in different subject areas (e.g., as 
they write reports in history or science, or as they analyze literary texts in ELA), they need to draw on 
different grammatical patterns. Christie (2012; see also Christie & Derewianka, 2008) used the func-
tional grammar to analyze thousands of texts written by students across the school years and subject 
areas and described a progression students follow in the development of their L1 grammar in contexts 
of schooling in SFL terms. These descriptions are also helpful for thinking about the challenges in L2 
learning over the school years, as students move toward control of increasingly dense and abstract 
language. Several L2 researchers have drawn on this work to track children’s writing development. 
In history, for example, Achugar and Carpenter (2012, 2014) showed growth in secondary students’ 
writing following talk about text that used SFL metalanguage, as they analyzed logico-semantic rela-
tions, lexical density, and presentation of self (see also de Oliveira, 2010 and Schleppegrell, 2006 for 
analysis of history writing). Brisk and her colleagues have written extensively about the elementary 
bilingual student writing they have analyzed (e.g., Brisk, 2012; Brisk & De Rosa, 2014; Brisk, Hodgson-
Drysdale, & O’Connor, 2011). Harman (2013) traced growth in the writing of a fifth-grade L2 writer, 
showing how he learned to establish cohesion through conjunctive relations, construct appropriate 
relationships between process and participant, and use a range of lexical relations as he drew on inter-
textual resources for meaning-making. Schleppegrell and Go (2007) described a process of analysis of 
newcomer L2 writing in grades 5–6, illustrating how particular features can be in focus when teach-
ing students to recount experience in writing. Llinares, Morton, and Whittaker (2012) showed how 
spoken and written classroom language can be analyzed from ideational, interpersonal, and textual 
perspectives to identify ways of supporting secondary school students’ language development in Con-
tent and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) contexts in four European countries. 
 Summary 
 This section has described a new kind of grammar teaching, focused on language and meaning. The 
SFL notion of register offers a way of thinking about the relationship between context and language 
choice, and the three metafunctional perspectives on the grammar identify metalanguage that can 
be used to explore meaning in text. The studies reviewed here show how the metalanguage offers 

394 • Mary J. Schleppegrell
L2 learners tools for exploring lexico-grammar and talking about how a text presents meanings of 
different kinds. Learners develop consciousness about language through focused attention on pat-
terns of process types, textual organization, and interpersonal meaning. When this explicit focus on 
language is done in the context of interaction and participation in meaningful activity, it provides 
the conditions under which both L2 development and success in school are supported. The mul-
tiple examples of ways of being explicit about grammar in contexts of authentic, age-appropriate 
classroom learning that have been presented here respond to the call for more talk about the lan-
guage to support L2 learning across subject areas. In addition, SFL constructs offer researchers new 
approaches to studying L2 writing development across grades and school subjects. 
 Conclusions and Future Directions 
 K–12 grammar teaching faces a number of constraints that grammar teaching more generally does 
not have to consider. These include the still-developing meta-awareness about language associated 
with the age of the learners and the limited role grammar teaching can play in the subject-area 
classroom due to other pedagogical goals. Applied linguists have much to contribute in this context. 
L2 learners in K–12 contexts need to be engaged with challenging content and complex texts and 
have opportunities to explore the ways language works in the subjects they are learning. This puts 
additional demands on subject-area teachers, many of whom are not yet well-positioned to support 
attention to language (Gilliland, 2015; Humphrey & MacNaught, 2015). Applied linguists can bring 
their knowledge about language to new kinds of collaboration with subject-area teachers. In these 
collaborations, the subject teacher brings specialized knowledge about the technical content and the 
processes of learning the subject, as well as knowledge about the goals for learning and what needs 
to be achieved. The applied linguist can bring knowledge about language development and ways of 
talking about language that support content goals. 
 This chapter has shown how SFL’s theory of language and functional grammar are well-suited 
to support this agenda. It offers ways of recognizing disciplinary differences in the registers used 
to present knowledge across school subjects as well as tools for guiding students toward effective 
engagement with text and for supporting writing development. The meaningful metalanguage for 
exploring what and how texts mean can be drawn on in any subject area to engage learners in recog-
nizing disciplinary meanings and learn what is valued in particular tasks. 
 More research will help us better understand how to be explicit about language and meaning. 
As language is learned in interaction, research that analyzes the ways metalanguage can be used in 
classroom discussion can help us understand the conditions under which talk about grammar is 
most fruitful in creating opportunities to explore meaning and support L2 development. The chal-
lenges of learning language and content in K–12 classrooms call for meaning-based approaches that 
support simultaneous learning of language and subject matter, and the theory and tools of SFL offer 
new ways of addressing those challenges. But we are early in the process of research to explore the 
affordances of SFL, a complex theory to apply in real learning contexts. The current reports suggest 
it has an important role to play. 
 References 
 Achugar, M., & Carpenter, B. (2012). Developing disciplinary literacy in a multilingual history classroom.  Linguistics and 
Education ,  23 , 262–276. 
 Achugar, M., & Carpenter, B. (2014). Tracking movement toward academic language in multilingual classrooms.  Journal of 
English for Academic Purposes ,  14 , 60–71. 
 Achugar, M., Schleppegrell, M. J., & Oteíza, T. (2007). Engaging teachers in language analysis: A functional linguistics approach 
to reflective literacy.  English Teaching Practice and Critique ,  6 (2), 8–24. 
www.ebook3000.com

Systemic Functional Grammar • 395
 Aguirre-Muñoz, Z., Park, J.-E., Amabisca, A., & Boscardin, C. K. (2008). Developing teacher capacity for serving ELLs’ writing 
instructional needs: A case for systemic functional linguistics.  Bilingual Research Journal, 31 , 1–28. 
 Beacco, J.-C., Fleming, M., Goullier, F., Thürmann, E., & Vollmer, H. (2015).  The language dimension in all subjects: A handbook 
for curriculum development and teacher training . Strasbourg, France: Council of Europe. 
 Brisk, M. E. (2012). Young bilingual writers’ control of grammatical person in different genres.  The Elementary School Journal , 
 112 (3), 445–468. doi:10.1086/663733 
 Brisk, M. E. (2015).  Engaging students in academic literacies: Genre-based pedagogy in K-5 classrooms . New York and London: 
Routledge. 
 Brisk, M. E., & De Rosa, M. (2014). Young writers’ attempts at making meaning through complex sentence structures while 
writing a variety of genres. In L. de Oliveira & J. Iddings (Eds.),  Genre pedagogy across the curriculum: Theory and applica-
tion in US classrooms and contexts (pp. 8–24). Sheffield, UK: Equinox. 
 Brisk, M. E., Hodgson-Drysdale, T., & O’Connor, S. (2011). A study of a collaborative instructional project informed by sys-
temic functional linguistic theory: Report writing in elementary grades.  Journal of Education ,  191 (1), 1–12. 
 Bunch, G. (2013). Pedagogical language knowledge: Preparing mainstream teachers for English learners in the new standards 
era.  Review of Research in Education ,  37 , 298–341. doi:10.3102/0091732X12461772 
 Buxton, C. A., Allexsaht-Snider, M., Suriel, R., Kayumova, S., Choi, Y.-J., Bouton, B., & Baker, M. (2013). Using educative 
assessments to support science teaching for middle school English-language learners.  Journal of Science Teacher Educa-
tion ,  24 , 347–366. doi:10.1007/s10972–012–9329–5 
 Christie, F. (2012).  Language education throughout the school years: A functional perspective . Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell 
 Christie, F., & Derewianka, B. (2008).  School discourse: Learning to write across the years of schooling . London: Continuum. 
 Cummins, J. (1981). Four misconceptions about language proficiency in bilingual education.  NABE Journal ,  5 (3), 31–45. 
 Cummins, J. (2000).  Language, power and pedagogy: Bilingual children in the crossfire . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Daniello, F., Turgut, G. L., & Brisk, M. E. (2014). Applying systemic functional linguistics to build educators’ knowledge of 
academic English for the teaching of writing. In A. Mahboob & L. Barratt (Eds.),  Englishes in multilingual contexts: Lan-
guage variation and education (pp. 183–203). Dordrecht: Springer. 
 de Oliveira, L. C. (2008). A linguistic approach in culturally and linguistically diverse classrooms: A focus on teacher education. 
 Linguistics and the Human Sciences ,  4 (2), 101–159. 
 de Oliveira, L. C. (2010).  Knowing and writing school history: The language of students’ expository writing and teachers’ expecta-
tions . Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing. 
 de Oliveira, L. C., & Lan, S.-W. (2014). Writing science in an upper elementary classroom: A genre-based approach to teaching 
English language learners.  Journal of Second Language Writing ,  25 , 23–39. 
 de Oliveira, L. C., & Schleppegrell, M. J. (2015).  Focus on grammar and meaning . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Derewianka, B. (2011).  A new grammar companion for teachers . Sydney: Primary English Teachers Association. 
 Eggins, S. (2004).  An introduction to systemic functional linguistics (2nd ed.). London: Continuum. 
 Ellis, N., & Larsen-Freeman, D. (2006). Language emergence: Implications for applied linguistics–Introduction to the special 
issue.  Applied Linguistics ,  27 (4), 558–589. 
 Fang, Z., & Schleppegrell, M. J. (2008).  Reading in secondary content areas: A language-based pedagogy . Ann Arbor, MI: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press. 
 Fang, Z., Sun, Y., Chiu, C.-C., & Trutschel, B. K. (2014). Inservice teachers’ perception of a language-based approach to content 
area reading.  Australian Journal of Language and Literacy ,  37 (1), 55–66. 
 French, R. (2010). Primary school children learning grammar: Rethinking the possibilities. In T. Locke (Ed.),  Beyond the 
grammar wars: A resource for teachers and students on developing language knowledge in the English/literacy classroom 
(pp. 206–229). New York: Routledge. 
 Gebhard, M., Chen, I.-A., & Britton, L. (2014). “Miss, nominalization is a nominalization:” English language learners’ use of 
SFL metalanguage and their literacy practices.  Linguistics and Education ,  26 , 106–125. 
 Gebhard, M., Chen, I.-A., Graham, H., & Gunawan, W. (2013). Teaching to mean, writing to mean: SFL, L2 literacy, and teacher 
education.  Journal of Second Language Writing ,  22 , 107–124. 
 Gebhard, M., Harman, R., & Seger, W. (2007). Reclaiming recess: Learning the language of persuasion.  Language Arts ,  84 (5), 
419–430. 
 Gebhard, M., & Martin, J. R. (2011). Grammar and literacy learning. In D. Fisher & D. Lapp (Eds.),  Handbook of research on 
teaching the English language arts (pp. 297–304). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum/Taylor & Francis. 
 Gebhard, M., Shin, D.-S., & Seger, W. (2011). Blogging and emergent L2 literacy development in an urban elementary school: 
A functional perspective.  CALICO Journal ,  28 (2), 278–307. 
 Gilliland, B. (2015). High school teacher perspectives and practices: Second language writing and language development. 
 Language and Education , 1–15. doi:10.1080/09500782.2014.1001398 
 Halliday, M. A. K. (1978).  Language as social semiotic . London: Edward Arnold. 
 Halliday, M. A. K., & Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2004).  An introduction to functional grammar (3rd ed.). London: Arnold. 

396 • Mary J. Schleppegrell
 Harper, C. A., & de Jong, E. (2004). Misconceptions about teaching English-language learners.  Journal of Adolescent & Adult 
Literacy, 48 (2), 152–162. 
 Harman, R. (2013). Literary intertextuality in genre-based pedagogies: Building lexical cohesion in fifth-grade L2 writing. 
 Journal of Second Language Writing, 22 , 125–140. 
 Humphrey, S., & MacNaught, L. (2015). Functional language instruction and the writing growth of English language learners 
in the middle years.  TESOL Quarterly , 49, 1–25. 
 Klingelhofer, R., & Schleppegrell, M. J. (2015). Functional grammar analysis in support of dialogic instruction with text: Scaf-
folding purposeful, cumulative dialogue with English learners.  Research Papers in Education , 31, 70–88. 
 Larsen-Freeman, D. (2003).  Teaching language: From grammar to grammaring . Boston: Heinle. 
 Lightbown, P., & Spada, N. (2013).  How languages are learned (4th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Llinares, A., Morton, T., & Whittaker, R. (2012).  The roles of language in CLIL . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Love, K. (2010). Literacy pedagogical content knowledge in the secondary curriculum.  Pedagogies: An International Journal , 
 5 (4), 338–355. doi:10.1080/1554480x.2010.521630 
 Lucas, T., Villegas, A. M., & Freedson-Gonzalez, M. (2008). Linguistically responsive teacher education: Preparing classroom 
teachers to teach English language learners.  Journal of Teacher Education ,  59 (4), 361–373. 
 Martin, J. R. (2009). Genre and language learning: A social semiotic perspective.  Linguistics and Education ,  20 , 10–21. 
 Martin, J. R., & Rose, D. (2003).  Working with discourse . London: Continuum. 
 Martin, J. R., & White, P. R. R. (2005).  The language of evaluation . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Moore, J., & Schleppegrell, M. J. (2014). Using a functional linguistics metalanguage to support academic language develop-
ment in the English language arts.  Linguistics and Education ,  26 , 92–105. 
 Myhill, D., Jones, S., Lines, H., & Watson, A. (2011). Re-thinking grammar: The impact of embedded grammar teaching on 
students’ writing and students’ metalinguistic understanding.  Research Papers in Education ,  2 (27), 1–28. 
 Paugh, P., & Moran, M. (2013). Growing language awareness in the classroom garden.  Language Arts ,  90 (4), 253–267. 
 O’Hallaron, C. L., Palincsar, A., & Schleppegrell, M. J. (2015). Reading science: Using systemic functional linguistics to support 
critical language awareness.  Linguistics and Education ,  32 , 55–67. 
 Schall-Leckrone, L., & McQuillan, P. J. (2012). Preparing history teachers to work with English learners through a focus on the 
academic language of historical analysis.  Journal of English for Academic Purposes ,  11 , 246–266. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J. (2001). Linguistic features of the language of schooling.  Linguistics and Education ,  12 (4), 431–459. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J. (2004).  The language of schooling: A functional linguistics perspective . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J. (2006). The linguistic features of advanced language use: The grammar of exposition. In H. Byrnes (Ed.), 
 Advanced language learning: The contribution of Halliday and Vygotsky (pp. 134–146). London: Continuum. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J. (2013). The role of metalanguage in supporting academic language development.  Language Learning, 63 
(Suppl 1), 153–170. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J., Achugar, M., & Oteíza, T. (2004). The grammar of history: Enhancing content-based instruction through 
a functional focus on language.  TESOL Quarterly ,  38 (1), 67–93. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J., & de Oliveira, L. C. (2006). An integrated language and content approach for history teachers.  Journal of 
English for Academic Purposes, 5 (4), 254–268. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J., & Go, A. (2007). Analyzing the writing of English learners: A functional approach.  Language Arts ,  84 (6), 
529–538. 
 Schleppegrell, M. J., Greer, S., & Taylor, S. (2008). Literacy in history: Language and meaning.  Australian Journal of Language 
and Literacy ,  31 (2), 174–187. 
 Spada, N., & Tomita, Y. (2010). Interactions between type of instruction and type of language feature: A meta-analysis.  Lan-
guage Learning ,  60 (2), 263–308. 
 Spycher, P. (2007). Academic writing of adolescent English learners: Learning to use “although”.  Journal of Second Language 
Writing, 16 , 238–254. 
 Turkan, S., de Oliveira, L. C., Lee, O., & Phelps, G. (2014). Proposing a knowledge base for teaching academic content to Eng-
lish language learners: Disciplinary linguistic knowledge.  Teachers College Record ,  116 , 1–30. 
 Vygotsky, L. S. (1978).  Mind in society . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Williams, G. (2005). Grammatics in schools. In R. Hasan, C. M. I. M. Matthiessen, & J. Webster (Eds.),  Continuing discourse 
on language (pp. 281–310). London: Equinox. 
 Williams, G. (2016). Reflection literacy in the first years of schooling: Questions of theory and practice. In W. Bowcher & J. Y. 
Liang (Eds.),  Society in language, language in society: Essays in honour of Ruqaiya Hasan  (pp. 333–356). Houndsmills, 
Basingstoke, Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Williams, J. (2005). Form-focused instruction. In E. Hinkel (Ed.),  Handbook on research in second language teaching and learn-
ing  (pp. 671–691). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
www.ebook3000.com

 VI 
 International Communication and Pragmatics 

www.ebook3000.com

399
 Introduction 
 Intercultural communication (IC) as a field applies research into practices related to communicating 
with people from dissimilar cultures. Teaching and learning IC can thus be firmly research based. 
Researching this teaching and learning in contexts of second or foreign languages can therefore be 
seen as completing a sandwich of (1) research-based IC, applied to (2) pedagogic IC practices, and 
(3) research into the teaching and learning of IC. 
 IC includes goals of competently creating or negotiating shared meanings. Language teaching 
can systematically raise IC awareness to develop creative and critical skills related to contexts and 
experience of target community cultures. Attending to IC may realign ideas and practices of teaching 
and learning languages in breadth, depth and focus. This realignment can be tracked and enhanced 
through researched themes. 
 The field of IC draws upon disciplines of psychology, anthropology, linguistics, sociology, and 
studies in communication, business and management, and recently applied linguistics and educa-
tion. This means a range of disciplinary approaches is available for teaching and learning IC with dif-
ferent theoretical perspectives. Specific IC theories focus on cultural variability in communication, 
interactional adaptation or adjustment and acculturation, communication effectiveness, decision-
making and identity (Gudykunst, 1988, 2005; Wiseman, 1995). 
 As in all language teaching, strategies and techniques for teaching IC will vary in each educational 
context. Key variables involve the learners’ learning levels and their language proficiency, their learn-
ing purposes, situation and institution, and their exposure and experience of target cultural contexts. 
These contextual variables include whether the language of communication is the first, second or 
another language of the learners  and  of those with whom they communicate, and whether accessible 
IC situations are within the immediate context of classrooms, local multicultural and multilingual 
communities, or in institutions with international students and staff. Researching IC is contextual-
ised by such variables but can employ established social science quantitative and qualitative research 
methods, besides more innovative ones (Zhu, 2016). 
 This chapter gives a brief rationale for IC and discusses six approaches to researching IC: three 
are salient in researched IC literature: (1) a  linguistic approach of examining ways of speaking, (2) a 
 culture comparison  approach of looking at dimensions of cultures, (3) a  competency based approach 
 29 
 Teaching and Learning Intercultural Communication 
 Research in Six Approaches 
 Lixian Jin and Martin Cortazzi 

400 • Lixian Jin and Martin Cortazzi
which focuses on developing knowledge and personal skills; three others have roots in researched 
educational theory and practice: (4) a  problem-solving  approach in which participants are encour-
aged to analyse situations and find solutions, (5) an  experiential  approach which develops evaluation 
and reflection on experience or training, and (6) a  praxis  approach in which participants take rel-
evant responsible action. This framework seeks to combine IC-based research with research oriented 
to education, the context of most IC teaching and learning. 
 The six approaches intertwine with each other in different contexts of learning. Research in IC 
might focus on one approach or on combinations. They underline the need for participants to 
develop mindfulness, particular personal qualities and dispositions, plus critical and creative think-
ing. A teaching challenge is that these qualities must apply to the personal and professional selves of 
teachers: researchers face similar challenges. 
 The Importance of IC for Research 
 Most language teachers and researchers recognise that learning a given language is a key to 
understanding cultures related to that language and the communities using it. Conversely, appre-
ciating salient features of those cultures and communities is part of learning the language for 
appropriate social interaction. But the major languages learned in educational contexts do not 
have a one-to-one relationship with a single cultural group. Thus language teaching inevitably 
relates to different  external  cultural communities: those of diverse native speakers globally, some 
in diasporas, plus lingua franca users. Significantly, similar diversity is often  within  urban class-
rooms where the participants represent many cultural communities. Thus teaching and learning 
languages is implicitly intercultural since it involves communication between people of two or 
more cultures, where features of those cultures are part of the communication contexts. This 
relates not only to ‘target’ cultural groups but also to the process and practices of learning within 
classrooms of diversity. 
 There are well-known globalizing reasons for developing IC practically, educationally and for 
humanitarian considerations. These include the multiplying transnational flows of people and ideas; 
the development of transport and communication technologies; the changing demographic trends 
with increases in linguistic, ethnic and other minorities and recognition of their voices and societal 
contributions; and the ever-expanding internationalising networks in trade and travel. Each of these 
involves uses of global languages: worldwide these are very often learned as foreign or second lan-
guages. IC is a key matter in relation to the complexities of receiving incoming migrants, sojourners 
and visitors. All this means IC is vital preparation for students’ potential life engagement in business 
and commerce; health, education and social services; tourism, hospitality and leisure industries; 
the military, police and security services; and diplomacy, international relations and peace-making. 
Within education, where most language teaching and learning takes place, IC is highly relevant not 
only in language classrooms but also institutionally for international students and teachers to achieve 
their educational goals, for students’ personal and interprofessional interactions with local people 
and for international collaborations. 
 Developing IC enhances communication skills. It brings recognised benefits for employabil-
ity internationally (British Council, 2013). Other benefits, which in principle need more research, 
include a practical awareness of linguistic, social and cultural diversity in context; the ability to inves-
tigate communal ways of meaning and to identify and solve problems in social and working life 
where IC is a significant element; the development of greater reflexive knowledge about one’s own 
cultural identity, values and home context; and a range of human qualities like curiosity, flexibility, 
resilience and compassion. 
www.ebook3000.com

Intercultural Communication • 401
 Some Key Terms 
 The term  intercultural communication  (IC) refers to how people from different cultural back-
grounds communicate with each other: at micro-levels it refers to the research of interaction 
between people of different cultures; at macro-levels it includes comparative studies of communi-
cation patterns across cultures. The term is sometimes interchanged with  cross-cultural communi-
cation , which more strictly denotes comparative research in multiple cultures without necessarily 
including their actual interaction. IC cultural distance is between speakers and possible effects of 
this, hence in intercultural situations the  cultural distance  between the participants is significant 
enough to have an effect on communicative interaction that is noticeable to at least one of the 
participants (Spencer-Oatey and Franklin, 2009: 3). The basic purpose of IC activity is to try to 
close this distance through language to negotiate shared meanings in an interactive situation (Ting-
Toomey and Chung, 2012: 26–29). 
 Some writers distinguish IC from  co-cultural communication : communication between members 
of cultural groups within a single society, typically within a multicultural community with consider-
able social and linguistic diversity. This signals equality rather than the dominance of one culture 
over others (Samovar et al., 2015; Jandt, 2016).  Transcultural communication  refers to communica-
tion across two or more cultures, typically in globalised media (Hepp, 2015).  Transcultural compe-
tence  or  interculturality  indicates how the language used in interaction between people from different 
cultural communities demonstrates knowledge and cultural understanding shown through interest 
or mindfulness, with critical appreciation of cultures and peoples, besides linguistic and interper-
sonal skills (Ting-Toomey, 1999; Dervin and Risager, 2015).  Intercultural competence  broadly means 
the knowledge, attitudes and skills needed to engage appropriately and effectively in intercultural 
situations (Wiseman and Koester, 1993; Witte and Harden, 2011). Teachers will obviously empha-
sise the language use applied in all these aspects to develop  intercultural communicative competence 
(Byram, 1997). IC competence has been specifically researched for teaching English as a lingua franca 
and teaching other languages, mainly in Europe, America or East Asia (Byram et al., 2001; Lochtman 
and Kappel, 2009; Witte and Harden, 2011; Dai and Chen, 2014; Baker, 2015). 
 Culture  itself is a key term often construed as ‘shared’ social meaning, but in IC these are likely 
‘negotiated’ meanings. ‘Culture’ in research embraces products, practices and perspectives, and dis-
courses and ideologies: for IC these relate to each other and to communication within situations. 
‘Culture’ also includes principles of expectations and interpretation of situations, interactions and 
relationships: often these are only articulated in contrast with other cultures. These features related 
to learning are among defining elements in  cultures of learning  (Jin and Cortazzi, 1993). Culture 
in this way frames the dynamic processes of teaching and learning, notably in contexts including 
diversity, e.g. international students (Cortazzi and Jin, 2013; Jin and Cortazzi, 2013). Therefore, 
cultures of learning influence the learning of IC. Arguably, a major purpose of including IC within 
language learning programmes is to promote a questioning awareness among participants of reflex-
ivity about language practices, intercultural dynamics, identity and learning (Turner, 2011; Dervin 
and Risager, 2015). 
 Theoretical Themes Related to Teaching IC 
 Research application in IC has a considerable history in communication studies, cross-cultural psy-
chology, applied linguistics and multidisciplinary studies, with specific attention to applying themes 
to a wide variety of contexts. An outline of these theoretical themes gives a picture of the domain of 
IC research: many themes are topics in language classrooms. 

402 • Lixian Jin and Martin Cortazzi
  Table 29.1  shows themes to give a sense of the significance and range of application of IC related 
to learning languages, especially for specific, professional and academic purposes. Some themes 
may relate particularly to international students and researchers: narrative research into the lives 
of IC researchers is attractive because these individuals are models of successful adaptation, social 
 Table 29.1 Examples of Researched IC Themes for Language Teaching and Learning 
Themes
Intercultural communication focus
Example research sources
International 
relations
Diplomacy, peace studies, international 
negotiations, international aid and development, 
global dialogues
Fry and Thurber, 1989; Korzenny 
and Ting-Toomey, 1990; Sadri and 
Flammia, 2011
Conflict 
management
Workplace and interpersonal conflict, conflict 
styles, identity, face, conflict resolution strategies, 
mindful listening and verbal reframing
Ting-Toomey and Oetzel, 2001; 
Scollon e al., 2012; Oetzel and Ting-
Toomey, 2013; Sorrells, 2015
Global media
Media production, importation, adaptation, 
transculturation, computer-mediated interaction
Newson, 2007; Sharifian and Jamarani, 
2013; Hepp, 2015
Globalization 
and social 
justice
Cultural, racial, ethnic, national, religious, social 
class, gender, generational differences; social 
and cultural diversity: exclusion and inclusion, 
migration, interculturality
Piller, 2011; Scollon et al., 2012; 
Mallows, 2014; Dervin and Risager, 
2015; Sorrells and Sekimoto, 2015; 
Sorrells, 2015
Intercultural 
citizenship
Becoming cosmopolitan, citizenship in 
multilingual contexts, political literacy, critical 
citizens and cultural awareness, community 
engagement
Guilherme, 2002; Aldred et al., 2006; 
Byram, 2008; Sobré-Denton and 
Bardhan, 2013
Management 
and business 
studies
Leadership and organizational styles, the 
conduct of meetings and negotiations, 
employer-valued IC skills
Gibson, 2002; Lewis, 2005, 2006; 
Varner and Beamer, 2010; British 
Council, 2013, Moran et al., 2014
Professional 
workplace 
communication
Multilingual and multicultural workgroups, 
miscommunication, intercultural discourse 
skills, presentations, meetings
Roberts et al., 1992; Clyne, 1994; 
Granrose and Ostkamp, 1997; Pan et al., 
2002; Glaser et al., 2007; Guilherme 
et al., 2010
Non-verbal 
communication
Cross-cultural uses of gestures, facial 
expressions, eye contact, body language
Morris et al., 1979; Harrison, 1983; 
Morris, 2002; Jackson, 2014; Samovar 
et al., 2015
Transcultural 
adaptation
Culture shock, immigration, marginalization, 
adaptation, adjustment, intercultural identity 
and transformation
Kim, 1988, 2001; Ward et al., 2001; 
Spencer-Oatey and Franklin, 2009; 
Jandt, 2016
International 
students’ 
learning
Study visits, international sojourns, new 
language and cultural environments, cultures of 
learning of students and teachers
Byram and Feng, 2006; Kinginger, 
2009; Jackson, 2010; Jin and Cortazzi, 
2011, 2013; Cortazzi and Jin, 2013
Personal 
relationships
Romantic relationships, expectations in 
relationships, intercultural marriages, 
relationships via the Internet
Gudykunst et al.,1996; Goodwin, 1999, 
2008; Constable, 2003; Ting-Toomey 
and Chung, 2012; Sorrells, 2015
Identity
Linguistic and cultural identities; social diversity, 
representation and belonging; managing bias 
and stereotypes; multilingual selves and IC 
experience, the intercultural speaker
Gudykunst, 2005; Kramsch, 2009; 
Martin and Nakayama, 2012; Scollon 
et al., 2012; Houghton et al., 2013; 
Dervin and Risager, 2015
Life stories of 
scholars
Narrative accounts of IC participants, 
researchers and scholars, IC encounters, 
transcultural transformations in working in IC
Bond, 1997; Belcher and Connor, 
2001; Byram et al., 2009; Komisarof & 
Zhu, 2016
Ethical issues
Respect for others and cultural differences, 
principles and guidelines for becoming ethical 
communicators, researching IC ethically
Sadri and Flammia, 2011; Ting-
Toomey and Chung, 2012; Samovar 
et al., 2015
www.ebook3000.com

Intercultural Communication • 403
survival and academic success. Other themes, like identity, relate to learners and researchers person-
ally: this is not just a matter of how people think of themselves as individuals or group members 
(which is itself a multiple identity) but because it evokes feelings of belonging, or not, and identity 
can be assumed, imposed or ascribed by others or negotiated in language interaction in different 
situations (Ting-Toomey and Chung, 2012; Jackson, 2014; Zhu, 2014; Baker, 2015). Further themes, 
like ethics, have triple significance: (1) the need to treat all IC participants with respect and dignity; 
(2) the recognised value of ethics within themes like workplace communication or social justice; 
and (3) the importance of ethics for conducting research in this area. Researchers need IC awareness 
for all topics in this field. 
  Table 29.1  shows how this field can relate closely to significant content and processes to assist 
development of linguistic knowledge and skills. A difficult point is that interaction in L2 requires 
a reasonable level of language development to develop IC competence. For many students this is 
ongoing language learning, which might be accelerated through IC engagement. For researchers, 
there may be a language choice regarding learners’ L1 or L2 (e.g. in conducting interviews). The ten-
sions between the developing L2 language proficiency of participants, the authenticity of personal 
divulgence and expression in data gathered in L1, an evolving IC competence in L2, and perceptions 
of the researcher as insider or outsider have been investigated in language research with Chinese 
participants (Cortazzi et al., 2011). 
 Six Approaches in Research of Teaching and Learning IC 
 The trajectory of changing perceptions of the role of IC in teaching and learning foreign and second 
languages can be seen in Byram’s research with colleagues in language education. They develop cul-
ture learning themes through case studies in European countries where foreign language teaching 
has progressively acquired broader educational aims, increasingly linked with cultures and later with 
IC (Byram, 1997; Byram and Risager, 1999; Byram and Fleming, 2001; Byram et al., 2001; Aldred 
et al., 2003). In turn, this IC trend has been directed towards critical IC awareness, cultural politics, 
‘being intercultural’ and developing intercultural citizenship (Guilherme, 2002; Aldred et al., 2006; 
Byram, 2008). The research is mainly on developing IC through languages at school or university 
level in Europe, but also on IC in management and business contexts (Feng et al., 2009) and in Asia 
(Lai and Byram, 2012). Related studies examine language teachers’ conceptions of IC competence 
(Sercu and Bandera, 2005). Drawing on these developments from educational perspectives and on 
thinking within IC concerned with challenges of global communities (e.g. Asante et al., 2014; Liu et 
al., 2015; Jandt, 2016; Sorrells, 2016), we outline six approaches in research of teaching and learning 
IC in the following sections. 
 1. A Linguistic Approach: Community Practices in Patterns of Communication 
 Ethnographic research in linguistic anthropology and sociolinguistics in the study of ‘ways of speak-
ing’ of different speech communities gives insights into IC situations. It provides useful frameworks 
of what to notice in speech events in which IC has a role (Saville-Troike, 2003; Scollon et al., 2012). 
Dell Hymes’ well-known acronym of SPEAKING is a mnemonic for many components of the frame-
work (Hymes, 1977: 56–62): the  speaker  (audience, addressee),  purposes  (goals),  ends (outcomes), 
 key (tone, manner, spirit),  instrumentalities (channel, form and style of speech, register),  norms of 
interaction and interpretation (social and community patterns of communication) and  genres (often 
coinciding with speech events). One research direction concerns application in the teaching of writ-
ing drawing on contrastive rhetoric, which recognises that different cultural communities may have 
different preferences in discourse organization (e.g. of argument, expository and narrative text), 

404 • Lixian Jin and Martin Cortazzi
which can influence configurations of L2 writing (e.g. use of cohesion markers, repetition and lexi-
cal variation, cultural ways of establishing common ground and of using sources). Such features of 
contrastive rhetoric have an impact on how we understand cultural differences in writing, including 
academic and professional writing (Connor, 1996). To maintain the ethnographic perspective that 
cultural values frame interaction and communication, and that L2 writing patterns are not just L1 
patterns transferred to L2 but may be interactively influenced by perceptions of L2 contexts and 
audiences, this is better termed ‘ intercultural  rhetoric’ (Connor et al., 2008). Teachers apply standards 
of correctness and convention to writing, but the IC criteria of  appropriateness  and  effectiveness of 
expression are relevant, so are current concepts of cultural diversity and encouragement of personal 
or cultural ‘voice’ through identity and cultural ‘ways of speaking’ as, arguably, part of a linguistic 
ecology. A third commonly recognised IC criterion of  adaptability  (e.g. Ting-Toomey and Chung, 
2012) does not necessarily simply mean that L2 writers are constrained to adapt to expected L2 con-
ventions, but might imply elements of reader adaptation, by L1 or L2 readers. IC arguably implies 
some reciprocal adaptation or ‘cultural synergy’, where teachers and learners learn from and accul-
turate to each other (Jin and Cortazzi, 1993). Research could focus on what learners notice about 
writing practices and patterns in L1 and L2, how specific cultural values construct IC communica-
tion patterns and teachers’ uses of IC criteria. 
 Ethnographic research shows how culturally distinct practices get woven into intercultural 
interactions in speaking. Classic studies of interethnic workplace communication by Gumperz 
and others (Gumperz, 1982a, b; Roberts et al., 1992) show how ‘contextualization cues’ as cultural 
conventions signal what an activity in talk is, how the content is to be understood, and how utter-
ances relate to preceding or following talk. In IC situations these may be manifested through pitch, 
intonation, uses of pauses or particular phrases and discourse markers. They may lead not only to 
misunderstanding of the message but also to misperception of the person through wrong attribu-
tion, which might engender or reinforce stereotypes of the group or community. Carbaugh (2010) 
presents analyses of IC interactions involving Americans and Finns to show how misattributions by 
Americans lead to ideas about ‘silent Finns’, while Finns may label Americans as ‘superficial’. A usual 
American effort to be sociable is to use small talk to express friendliness, even by making common-
place comments. The Finnish cultural conversation practices, in contrast, include that one should 
not state what is obvious; if speaking, one should say something worthy of everyone’s attention, 
and proper speaking should express something unobvious, socially worthwhile, non-contentious 
but personally involving: all this forms a basis for subsequent interactions to show friendliness 
(Carbaugh, 2010: 42). Without knowledge of such cultural discourse systems, some Americans, 
when they get minimal responses or silence from Finns, wrongly conclude that this quietude and 
consideration of the other person means Finns are ‘shy’, ‘untalkative’ and ‘unfriendly’. Meanwhile, 
some Finns conclude that the Americans talk far too much and have nothing meaningful to say: 
they are ‘superficial’. 
 We have similarly observed the differential value of silence and pauses in Finnish–Greek interac-
tions among international students in the UK. Conventional Finnish pauses between utterances seem 
relatively longer and are interpreted in Greek practices as silences, while the Greek conversational 
practices involve minimal pauses and rapid turn-taking. In their ‘home’ contexts both frame solidar-
ity, but in interaction  in English  using these ways of speaking can lead to frustrations. Finnish students 
reported how they felt constantly interrupted. It was difficult for them to get a turn. They concluded 
that these particular Greek participants were ‘loud and aggressive’. The Greeks reported how they 
felt they had been misunderstood because when they made a comment the Finns, apparently, had 
no reply. Since the Finns spoke excellent English, the Greeks thought they had made mistakes using 
less-proficient English, so they rephrased what they wanted to say and unwittingly dominated the 
interaction. This, in turn, led the Finns to conclude that the Greeks thought they were ‘stupid’ since 
www.ebook3000.com

Intercultural Communication • 405
they kept saying the same thing with loud repetitions. When these students were informed of relevant 
research in ways of speaking in different cultures, like the Apache uses of silence (Basso, 1990, 1996; 
Carbaugh and Wolf, 2000), and understood frameworks of how to approach an IC analysis (Scollon 
et al., 2012: 175–176), the students were able to take appropriate action to modify their communica-
tion through mindful ways of speaking, and they helped others to counter the stereotypes. 
 This ethnographic research approach becomes pedagogic by getting classroom learners to focus 
on observing and reflecting on cultural practices through specific orientation and training in eth-
nography (Roberts et al., 2001; Roberts, 2003). This informs research into study visits or residence 
abroad (Byram and Feng, 2006). Language students are taught to take the ethnographic view of a 
stranger and notice features of interaction and communication in order to understand underlying 
meanings and values from an inside perspective of what they mean to participants within a cultural 
community. In pre-departure activities, students conduct observations within their own or a local 
culture. They reflect on their own and others’ cultural perspectives while handling feelings of differ-
ence and otherness. While abroad, students conduct focussed observations and interviews to gather 
data for a project which might be about features of politeness, such as apologies or gift-giving formu-
lae. On their return, students write up a report which includes IC analyses and cultural comparisons, 
with reflections on their own cultural positioning. This approach inspires virtual ethnography using 
tele-conferencing with parallel groups of students in different countries (Byram et al., 2001; Tche-
repashenets, 2015). Other research can focus ethnographically on interactions with tourists from 
abroad or in culturally diverse local communities. The ethnographic sensitisation for students can 
draw upon many available IC training techniques, some well-established, others newly adapted for 
language classrooms (e.g. Berardo and Deardorff, 2012). 
 2. Cultural Comparisons and Dimensions of Cultures 
 Edward Hall (1966, 1985; Hall and Hall, 1990) proposed several influential dimensions of cultures. 
Hall’s researched examples are accessible and plausible. One dimension distinguishes how cultural 
communities use time: whether time is seen as linear, in a more results-oriented way to emphasise 
schedules and punctuality ( monochronic ), or more flexibly as doing several things at once, emphasiz-
ing relationships with people and contexts ( polychronic ). A second dimension focuses on patterns 
of communication, contrasting contexts where much common ground and shared knowledge is 
assumed so less is made explicit (‘ high context’ ) and other contexts where information is more likely 
to be made verbally clear: common ground is less assumed and more likely to be negotiated or ver-
bally outlined (‘ low context’ ). A third dimension is about the use of personal space between people 
as they interact (‘ proxemics ’): whether preferred distances are relatively close in social conversation 
(‘high contact’) or farther apart (low contact’). Hall’s discussions of these dimensions stress not only 
misunderstandings in interaction but also people’s feelings and reactions to unfamiliar uses across 
cultures. Critical points for researchers include the dated nature of Halls’ observations, how far they 
are supported by research evidence, and how far they help explain intercultural interaction. Similar 
points may be made about Lewis’ (2005, 2006) extensions and applications of these dimensions to 
IC business management and leadership. He proposes three scales with traits so that a given culture 
is located higher or lower on a scale. These are ‘linear-active’ cultures in which people schedule and 
organise one thing at a time in task-oriented ways and rely on data; ‘multi-active’ cultures in which 
people prefer a people orientation, do several things at once, and rely on face-to-face encounters; and 
‘reactive’ cultures in which people listen first to establish another person’s position and then react 
and formulate their own position, valuing monologue and harmony. 
 Geert Hofstede (2003; Hofstede et al., 2010) has elaborated on a widely cited set of six dimen-
sions to allow intercultural comparisons across national and regional groups. He insists that they 

406 • Lixian Jin and Martin Cortazzi
do not necessarily apply to individuals but represent strong group tendencies. The dimensions are 
designed to help make predictions among groups, for example by comparing business practices 
and IC encounters in different countries. On the basis of analysing an extended questionnaire 
given to a huge number of employees of a multinational company in over 70 countries, Hofst-
ede’s dimensions are scales of relative cultural values with reported numerical data exemplifying 
where national groups fall on each scale. National groups are given a profile on some or all of 
the scales, which can be contrasted with other profiles. Comparing these data and Hofstede’s 
charts of profiles in language classrooms is one way of promoting students’ thinking through 
a framework which can be related to their own observations. The six dimensions are  individ-
ualism-collectivism ; small-large  power distance; masculinity-femininity ; weak-strong  uncertainty 
avoidance ;  long-term/short-term orientation  (or Confucian dynamism); and  indulgence-restraint 
regarding well-being. These have been elaborated in detail with listed characteristics by Hofstede 
et al. (2010) with further applied research (Kim et al., 1994; Triandis, 1995) and widely dissemi-
nated extensions for business and management purposes (Lewis, 2005, 2006; Trompenaars and 
Hampden-Turner, 2012). 
 These much-disseminated dimensions are widely applied to teaching IC, but current directions 
in current IC emphasise students’ critical thinking. Hence, a research angle is how far classroom 
participants are aware of and react to critiques. Students in classrooms, and those researching IC, 
may consider some criticisms, Hofstede’s counter-arguments and the nature of IC research data 
(Hofstede, 2003; Hofstede et al., 2010). For example, the status of questionnaires: Hofstede claims 
using them is a valid method but not the only one. Regarding the point that data are gathered largely 
in the 1960s–1980s, Hofstede uses some data from the later 1990s–2000s and points out how cul-
tures change more slowly than technologies. A key question is whether ‘nations’ are relevant units 
for studying cultures: Hofstede maintains they are suitable for large-scale studies. Concerning the 
number and range of dimensions, Hofstede maintains these dimensions are not intended to describe 
everything but are key points for comparisons using profiles; they clearly allow for individual and 
group variation. 
 In all six approaches, both for teaching and researching IC, there are some caveats for partici-
pants to watch out for and avoid by moving away from their own cultural viewpoint to give equal 
weight to other cultural perspectives (Holliday et al., 2010; Holliday, 2011). This ‘ de-centering’ is 
crucial. It means relativizing one’s own and valuing others’ meanings and behaviour in commu-
nication (Byram, 1997; Spencer-Oatey and Franklin, 2009). A first caveat is not to treat cultures 
as objects ( reification ) but rather as processes or practices; thus people do not ‘have’ cultures but 
engage in particular practices (culture as doing). Second, cultures are rarely reducible to simple 
labels ( essentialism  or  reductionism ). As in all teaching, teaching IC involves simplification as peda-
gogically necessary, but teachers can alert learners to complexities without necessarily going into 
details. Third, cultures are not uniform ( homogenization ) but invariably include variation, so that 
the organisation of diversity in culture is a defining characteristic (Duranti, 1997: 23–50). Fourth, 
contemporary cultures are not isolated ( separation ), but cultures influence each other and may 
merge and blend. A research question is how far IC classroom teaching and materials make learners 
aware of these issues. 
 Hofstede’s dimensions are scales, but like Hall’s they may be misinterpreted as sets of binary cat-
egories. To avoid such dichotomous ‘either-or’ thinking about IC, Martin and Nakayama (2012) sug-
gest six ‘dialectics’, which illustrate ‘both-and’ thinking in combinations rather than binary choices. In 
a given IC situation, a useful question would be how each of these dialectics as processes is function-
ing in tension simultaneously: communication as  cultural-individual ;  personal-contextual ; IC as  dif-
ferences or similarities ; cultures as  static-dynamic ; influenced by  past/history or the present/future ; and 
influences of power in  privilege-disadvantage.  Applied to cultural dimensions, these dialectics help 
www.ebook3000.com

Intercultural Communication • 407
learners and researchers to hold several perspectives simultaneously. These are continual reminders 
to help avoid pitfalls in IC research and to ask critical and reflective questions: Is this personal or 
cultural? Does a problem-centred approach lead away from similarities and commonalities? Who is 
less privileged or disadvantaged in portrayals of IC? 
 Contextualising IC with examples and contexts is crucial. In Western settings, and in some oth-
ers, more critical engagement may be expected. For instance, IC teaching materials often develop 
case studies of particular cultural contrasts for classroom discussion or teachers draw examples 
from culture guides for sojourners, which provide material for critical student evaluation after 
investigating other sources (Piller, 2011). Specific critiques are developed (Holliday et al., 2010; 
Holliday, 2011, 2013; Jackson, 2014), regarding  ethnocentrism ,  stereotyping  and  ‘othering’ (nega-
tive labelling of others to define them culturally by imagined negative characteristics). Nakayama 
and Halualani (2010) challenge the uses of national labels in IC communication. Holliday (2011, 
2013) similarly critiques much IC research and training, arguing that there is Western ideological 
bias, defining ideology as systems of ideas which promote the interests of a particular group. Scol-
lon et al. (2012) consider ideology, power, generational discourse and discourses of gender and 
sexuality as themes for IC learning (see  Table 29.1 ). Helping students to be critically aware of how 
themes are realised would be part of developing a critical pedagogy (Phipps and Gonzalez, 2004; 
Phipps and Guilherme, 2004; Levine and Phipps, 2011; Houghton et al., 2013; Dasli and Diaz, 2016). 
Internationally, researchers should be aware of how the cultural values of terms like ‘critical’ vary 
and contrast with the ‘critical turn’ of examining IC to identify presuppositions, ideologies and 
making balanced judgements or evaluations. In many Asian contexts, for example, ‘critical’ may be 
understood as negative criticism; learners are often reluctant to engage in this criticism in formal 
classroom contexts because it is seen to challenge respect for teachers and involves issues of conflict, 
face and identity (see  Table 29.1 ). 
 Providing students are alert to the caveats and critiques above, many learners enjoy metaphor 
activities in which they see how far a particular metaphor for a cultural group might represent some 
underlying values (Gannon, 2001). This activity uses imagination and comparison. Extending this, 
teachers can elicit learners’ own metaphors, with reasons, for ‘language’ and ‘intercultural commu-
nication’. Cortazzi and Jin’s research (2014) reveals thought-provoking student orientations to IC as 
a utilitarian ‘tool’ or ‘a key’ to ‘open cultural doors’, or as reciprocal communication through ‘a two-
way bridge’, or more constructively as harmony in diversity with cultural participants ‘making music 
together’. Since some metaphors seem located socio-culturally (e.g. language as ‘a weapon’ is much 
elaborated in Lebanon where people have long experience of a conflict zone), this raises a critical 
question for research of whether, and how, teachers’ and researchers’ conceptions of IC are based on 
socio-cultural or ideological frames. 
 3. Competency-Based Approaches 
 To develop IC competence in language teaching, it is usually thought of as developing the knowl-
edge, skills and abilities which learners need to participate in IC interaction appropriately, effectively 
and adaptively. As a teachable schema for students, this is sometimes recast as the ABCs of IC:  affect 
(including emotions, attitudes, motivation),  behaviour  (skills in communication, interaction, rela-
tionships) and  cognition  (knowledge, beliefs) (Landis and Bhagat, 1996; Spencer-Oatey and Frank-
lin, 2009). Byram’s (1997: 34, 47–54) list of IC communicative competencies remains helpful: it 
includes linguistic, sociolinguistic, discourse and IC competencies, and critical cultural awareness 
developed in classrooms, fieldwork and independent learning. A key feature is to enhance students’ 
attitudes of curiosity and openness in relation to discovering knowledge of cultures and students’ 
skills of individual and societal interaction. Spencer-Oatey and her colleagues have elaborated a 

408 • Lixian Jin and Martin Cortazzi
competency framework applied in five stages of ‘a life cycle’ of IC contact and development:  prepara-
tion ,  initiation ,  experimentation ,  consolidation ,  transfer  (Reid et al., 2009; Spencer-Oatey and Stadler, 
2009; Global People, 2009–2015). This competency approach is researched through development 
with groups and teams of students and of staff, and for institutional collaboration. In principle, this 
model is intended for cohorts of language students, international students or any domestic students: 
the IC vision is that  all  students become ‘international’ students in internationalizing institutions. 
IC project activities are supported by a tool kit (Global People, 2009–2015) monitoring a range of 
planning, review and evaluation activities with IC partners. Each competency features details within 
categories of  knowledge and ideas ,  communication ,  relationships , and  personal qualities and disposi-
tions . Competencies of relationships include welcoming strangers, building rapport and sensitivity 
to social and professional contexts; personal qualities and dispositions include flexibility and resil-
ience (Spencer-Oatey, 2008). Jackson (2014) also discusses IC competencies with practical steps stu-
dents (or teachers) can take, including becoming more self-aware, observing and actively listening, 
displaying respect and being patient. 
 These lists of competencies and dispositions become extensive, almost open-ended. Like all 
worthwhile learning, this IC approach needs time, effort and feedback to develop well, signifying a 
need for longitudinal research. A particularly significant disposition for researchers is  mindfulness : 
the awareness of ourselves (our communication, behaviour, thinking and feeling), and with open-
ness extending this to shift perspectives and become attuned to understand others’ perspectives and 
practices, to interact with mindful communication (Ting-Toomey, 1999; Sadri and Flammia, 2011; 
Ting-Toomey and Chung, 2012). Some participants appreciate the deep resonances of ‘being mind-
ful’ in Eastern and Southeastern religious and philosophical traditions such as Buddhism or in cur-
rent Western psychology and psychotherapy. 
 A different sequence of competencies, which considers mindfulness writ large in terms of moving 
participants towards globalization and social justice, is delineated by Sorrells (2015) with six ‘points 
of entry’ to an Intercultural Praxis Model. These are (1)  inquiry , the desire to know, to understand 
the need for other perspectives, asking, finding out and learning with risk-taking to challenge one’s 
own views; (2)  framing , the self-awareness of how individual, cultural, ideological and other frames 
constrain views of experience, with the understanding that frames can be wide or narrow in focus 
and that frame-shifts or reframing demand flexibility (theorised in Goffman,1974, and applied in 
Tannen, 1993); (3)  positioning , regarding both one’s own and others’ standpoints and perspectives on 
social categories with the exercise of power and knowledge, which affects how we speak and act and 
entails self-questioning and attentive listening to others in context; (4)  dialogue , a creative engage-
ment with different viewpoints in tension, which demands empathy, respect and imagination, with 
the effort towards arriving at a common position or perhaps a transformation of meaning; (5)  reflec-
tion , the capacity to learn through introspection, considering multiple frames and critical analysis 
to inform (6)  action,  carried through in meaningful, responsible, socially effective ways, linked with 
‘praxis’ (see the sixth approach). Arguably, Sorrells’ sequence here (2016) is valuable both to research 
IC and for IC researchers themselves. 
 Most of the competencies considered previously are not confined to IC. They are desirable quali-
ties in education and life generally, but IC greatly enhances their development with the special focus 
on language. The British Council’s (2013) research shows how an international spread of employers 
values IC competencies. In rank order of perceived importance, examples include demonstrating 
respect for others, building trust, being open to new ideas and ways of thinking, using analytical think-
ing, showing flexibility and adapting easily to different cultural settings, showing creativity, under-
standing different cultural contexts and viewpoints and adjusting communication appropriately, and 
being aware of one’s own cultural influence. Some of these could be used as criteria for evaluating 
participant development in IC projects. Some are amenable to self-profiling using questionnaire 
www.ebook3000.com

Intercultural Communication • 409
formats, particularly before and after IC experiences (e.g. see Ting-Toomey and Chung, 2012), which 
is one avenue for further research. 
 4. Problem-solving Approaches and Techniques 
 Problem-based learning is a substantially research-based method developed in many educational 
areas (Savin-Baden and Wilkie, 2004). This approach is a training of users to research in IC, 
because research is a problem-based endeavour. This approach presents a series of problems in 
specific contexts to be solved in collaborative groups in steps of  exploring issues ,  considering rel-
evant knowledge  after research or staff support,  listing likely solutions  and assessing their feasibility, 
then  writing up a report (Boud and Feletti, 1997). Learners are expected to analyse and comment 
metacognitively on their own problem-solving strategies. In relation to IC situations and interac-
tions, aspects have been applied, recognising that learners need to acquire an attitude of inquiry to 
ascertain all relevant viewpoints and interpretations, especially those which differ from their own. 
This means problematising what might be taken for granted and engaging in critical thinking 
skills through activities. Flavours of this approach are exemplified in many IC activities: ‘research-
ing’, participating in ‘critical discussions’, ‘tasks or ‘investigations’ (Holliday et al., 2010; Holliday, 
2011, 2013; Scollon et al., 2012; Sorrells, 2016) and ‘do-ables’ (Ting-Toomey and Chung, 2012). 
Corbett (2010) and Berardo and Deardorff (2012) present further repertoires of problem-based 
IC activities. 
 This approach is spelled out in the steps of ethnographic investigations of IC interaction:  dis-
covering  and  describing  features of talk in context, then  interpretin g the communicative practices 
and cultural expressive systems, in consultation with cultural insiders, then to  inquire comparatively 
into two or more sets of contrasting cultural practices (e.g. Finnish and American conversations), 
and finally to  critically assess  the reasons for interactional outcomes, with participants’ feelings and 
analysed cultural premises (Carbaugh, 2010). However, this approach focuses on IC training through 
activities as a key part of IC pedagogy. 
 American traditions of IC training courses are designed to enhance problem-solving skills in 
specific cultural contexts through workshops designed for professionals, typically for pre-departure 
programmes related to working practices and social living in other countries (Kohls and Knight, 
1994; Landis and Bhagat, 1996). Some are used with college students. Many use critical incidents 
with a situation described as a problem accompanied by suggested ways of thinking about it inter-
culturally (Brislin and Yoshida, 1994a, b; Cushner and Brislin, 1996, 1997; Gibson, 2002). Learners 
are asked to discuss their own probable reactions to the vignette and how they would handle the 
situation professionally and emotionally. 
 A research project using metaphor analysis investigated IC problems in international companies 
(Jin, 2014). From metaphors given by international managers, different IC perceptions were analysed 
(e.g. Chinese managers tended to view IC as ‘barriers’ while Western managers showed curiosity, 
perceiving IC as having varied ‘buffet dishes’). Their metaphors were also used to measure their 
perceptual changes in pre- and post-training sessions. This suggests there may be cultural variations 
in perceiving problems. 
 ‘Culture assimilators’ or ‘intercultural sensitisers’ use a described critical incident with key ques-
tions to guide discussion, analysis and reflection on what happened and why. This is followed by 
several choices of actions, which might be taken from different cultural perspectives: participants 
should explain the problem from a viewpoint other than their own. Later explanations or conse-
quences related to each choice are given as feedback. Participants come to see views they may not 
have imagined and to get more information about the cultural values behind the choices. ‘Inter-
cultural dialogues’ are short conversations written to illustrate contrasting cultural views, attitudes, 

410 • Lixian Jin and Martin Cortazzi
values or behaviours which emerge through talk. Such dialogic critical incidents may be in social, 
academic or workplace contexts and are supported by contextual notes and interpretive guidance 
(Storti, 1994). 
 Storti (1999) develops a range of simple questionnaires and self-assessments, including some 
based on the Hall and Hofstede dimensions. Applications of at least four of Hofstede’s dimensions 
are especially highlighted in designing intercultural sensitisers (Brislin and Yoshida, 1994a) with such 
concepts as time or belonging. Some research claims positive benefits of using this technique: posi-
tive judgement by hosts receiving newcomers from other cultural groups, decreases in participants’ 
negative stereotypes, the development of their more complex thinking and enjoyment during work-
shops (Cushner and Landis, 1996), but this needs further research. 
 5. Experiential Approaches and Techniques 
 Experiential approaches seek to develop learning through personal discovery in cultural contacts 
and engagement in face-to-face interaction. Experiential approaches to IC have traditionally been 
developed vicariously through literature, film, drama and role-play, and more recently through vir-
tual environments or social media and in structured ways using tele-collaboration (Sharifian and 
Jamarani, 2013; Tcherepashenets, 2015). Theoretical support comes from Kolb’s (2014) well-known 
four-stage experiential cycle of (1)  experience  and active involvement in an activity; (2)  review and 
reflection  on the experience and any inconsistencies between experience and understanding; 
(3)  making sense and drawing conclusions  as abstract concepts; and (4)  applying and testing  concepts 
in new situations and planning further activities. This scheme is sometimes simplified to plan, do, 
apply, review or, alternatively, as design, conduct, learner evaluation, then teacher feedback. Actual 
IC experience is typically through institutional links and study visits, student exchanges and resi-
dence abroad, which has been well-researched (Byram and Feng, 2006; Kinginger, 2009; Jackson, 
2010). Any such experience may be the basis for students to record critical incidents, used as prob-
lems for other students or as research data. 
 As with other approaches, supporting students in three stages is useful, and this defines com-
mon research phases. Preparation includes study of IC topics with relevant language, cross-border 
themes and group project research on locations abroad (Fennes and Hapgood, 1997). As in-country 
activities (or during an IC course), teachers can encourage learners to maintain diaries of critical 
events, which perhaps focus on culture shock or cultural encounters which promoted learning, and 
sojourner journal entries with structured reflections on identity, feelings and illuminative incidents. 
Using ethnographic approaches, students may interview cultural members individually or in focus 
groups, analysing responses in transcribed recordings after preparatory practice before real face-to-
face or online interviews (Roberts et al., 1992, 2001; Corbett, 2003, 2010). The student interviewers 
are in control of topics and questions, but they need to appreciate the collaborative nature of inter-
view talk in which—as in IC itself—the assumptions and attitudes of all parties influence outcomes 
as joint productions. Post-visit debriefings likely include sharing experiences in groups with criti-
cal reflections and written reports. In all stages, self-assessments of features of IC may be used in 
questionnaire format to stimulate self-awareness, reflection and personal growth (Ting-Toomey and 
Chung, 2012). 
 In this approach, it is not just having IC experience which is stressed: according to Mezirow’s 
(1991) transformative educational theory, the element of  critical reflection  is considered crucial for 
validating experience and transforming perspectives on meaning towards greater knowledge through 
thinking about it deeply and transferring it to other situations, which is a vital reason for developing 
and researching this approach further. 
www.ebook3000.com

Intercultural Communication • 411
 6. Taking Action in Praxis 
 Praxis has been introduced in previous sections for IC development of global visions and creating 
greater social justice. This is not simply ‘practice’ of classroom learning but is the effort to attain social 
ideals through committed transformative action. Sorrells believes this social alignment develops 
through critical thinking, reflection, and acting responsibly and compassionately, e.g. through com-
munity engagement in volunteer community service projects (Sorrells and Sekimoto, 2015; Sorrells, 
2015). The term  praxis  has complex nuances in ancient Greek and modern European philosophy, 
but it also has American roots in educational philosophy. Linderman (1926) emphasised the situ-
ations of learners’ experience (a ‘living textbook’), arguing that all ‘genuine’ education keeps doing 
and thinking together; learning is a process by which learners become aware of and evaluate their 
own experience for future action and change by making explicit the preconceptions underlying their 
conduct (1926: 3–7). Dewey is an iconic figure among educators for advocating ‘ learning by doing ’ as 
a fundamental relation of knowledge and action: his five-phase schema for this combines reflective 
thought from scientific method: making suggestions for solutions, clarifying problems, hypothesiz-
ing, reasoning and choosing regarding about projected results, testing hypotheses by engaged or 
imaginative action (Archambault, 1964). This process of learning can be seen as praxis, as not just a 
social ideal but as enlightened action, which gives weight to modern praxis applicable to IC. Sorrells 
(2016) cites the influential Brazilian development of praxis by Freire (1973) for literacy, liberation 
and action based on critical reflection to create a more socially equitable and peaceful world. She 
links this with global citizenship, arguing that praxis in practical community projects with migrants 
and refugees or projects involving conflict resolution empowers participants ( Table 29.1 ). Such IC 
projects can develop mediators, which is among reasons why his approach needs further develop-
ment and research. 
 The last three approaches show a trend in IC: teaching and learning IC deeply involves research 
activities and action in order to deal with real-life problems. 
 Conclusions and Further Directions 
 The themes here show how language teachers and learners can engage IC researched perspectives to 
use these approaches. We have identified six approaches here, which can be powerfully combined in 
further research. The accomplishment of IC activities in different stages (shown variously in several 
approaches) allows for preparation and training, real or virtual engagement with cultural practices, 
perhaps using a problem-solving perspective, then a developing reflexivity about participants’ own 
and others’ experience and praxis cultural practices of communication. Evidently, IC teaching and 
learning—and therefore further research in this area—is not only in the classroom, but may be 
online, on campus or within institutions with diverse students and staff, and in the local community 
for daily living or perhaps in mini-projects and work placements, and during study sojourns and 
systematic engagement towards social change through praxis. 
 Researching IC is a critical and creative enterprise. To develop inquiry skills, informed appraisal 
thinking, mindfulness and creative imagination are IC goals, even ideals. For teachers and research-
ers, IC is inherently professional and personal development (a review of IC competency lists shows 
how we all have scope for progress). It takes imagination—and empathy—to envisage other view-
points and mediate between them with one’s own. In this perspective, language teachers are inter-
cultural mediators who help their learners become mediators in society. Research of IC teaching and 
learning can be seen to mediate between IC theories and practices in the first three approaches here 
and between educational theories and pedagogic practices in the last three approaches. To attain the 

412 • Lixian Jin and Martin Cortazzi
values, ethics and ideals in IC research and practice, and to balance stances of a researcher with those 
of researched participants, is a huge challenge both professionally and personally for researchers. 
 References 
 Aldred, G., Byram, M. & Fleming, M. (Eds.). (2003)  Intercultural experience and education , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
 Aldred, G., Byram, M. & Fleming, M. (Eds.). (2006)  Education for intercultural citizenship , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Archambault, R. D. (1964) Introduction. In R. D. Archambault (Ed.)  John Dewey on education, selected writings , Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press, pp. xiii–xxx. 
 Asante, M. K., Miik, Y. & Yin, J. (Eds.). (2014)  The global intercultural communication reader, 2nd edit., New York: Routledge. 
 Baker, W. (2015)  Culture and identity through English as a lingua franca, rethinking concepts and goals in intercultural commu-
nication , Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
 Basso, K. H. (1990)  Western Apache language and culture , Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
 Basso, K. H. (1996)  Wisdom sits in places, landscape and language among the Western Apache , Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press. 
 Belcher, D. & Connor, U. (Eds.). (2001)  Reflections on multiliterate lives , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Berardo, K. & Deardorff, D. K. (Eds.). (2012)  Building cultural competence, innovative activities and models , Dulles, VA: Stylus 
Publishing. 
 Bond, M. H. (Ed.). (1997)  Working at the Interface of cultures, eighteen lives in social science , London: Routledge. 
 Boud, D. & Feletti, G. (1997)  The challenge of problem-based learning , London: Kogan Page. 
 Brislin, R. W. & Yoshida, T. (1994a)  Intercultural communication training, an introduction , 2nd edit., Thousand Oaks: Sage 
Publications. 
 Brislin, R. W. & Yoshida, T. (Eds.). (1994b)  Improving intercultural interactions, modules for cross-cultural training programs , 
Vol. 1, Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 British Council. (2013)  Culture at work, the value of intercultural skills in the workplace , London: The British Council. 
 Byram, M. (1997)  Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Byram, M. (2008)  From foreign language education to education for intercultural citizenship: Essays and reflections , Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Byram, M., Barrett, M., Ipgrave, J., Jackson, R. & Méndez García, M. C. (2009)  Autobiography of intercultural encounters , 
Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing. 
 Byram, M. & Fleming, M. (Eds.). (2001)  Language learning in intercultural perspective, approaches through drama and ethnog-
raphy , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Byram, M. & Feng, A. (Eds.). (2006)  Living and studying abroad , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Byram, M., Nichols, A. & Stevens, D. (Eds.). (2001)  Developing intercultural competence in practice , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
 Byram, M. & Risager, K. (1999)  Language teachers, politics and cultures , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Carbaugh, D. (2010)  Cultures in conversation , New York: Routledge. 
 Carbaugh, D. & Wolf, K. (2000) Situating rhetoric in cultural discourses. In A. Gonzalez & D. V. Tanno (Eds.)  Rhetoric in 
intercultural contexts , Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, pp. 19–30. 
 Clyne, M. (1994)  Intercultural communication at work, cultural values in discourse , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Connor, U. (1996)  Contrastive rhetoric, cross-cultural aspects of second-language writing , Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Connor, U., Nagelhout, E. & Rozycki, W. (Eds.). (2008)  Contrastive rhetoric, reaching to intercultural rhetoric , Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 
 Constable, N. (2003)  Romance on a global stage: Pen pals, virtual ethnography, and ‘mail order’ marriages , Berkeley, CA: Uni-
versity of California Press. 
 Corbett, J. (2003)  An intercultural approach to English language teaching , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Corbett, J. (2010)  Intercultural language activities , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Cortazzi, M. & Jin, L. (Eds.). (2013)  Researching intercultural learning: Investigations in language and education , Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Cortazzi, M. & Jin. L. (2014) Building bridges, using weapons or making music together? Metaphoric (re)framing in intercul-
tural language learning. In X. Dai & G-M. Chen (Eds.)  Intercultural communication competence: Conceptualization and 
its development in cultural contexts and interactions , Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp. 239–260. 
 Cortazzi, M., Pilcher, N. & Jin, L. (2011) Language choices and ‘blind shadows’: Investigating interviews with Chinese partici-
pants.  Qualitative Research , 11(5), 505–535. 
www.ebook3000.com

Intercultural Communication • 413
 Cushner, K. & Brislin, R. (1996)  Intercultural interactions, a practical guide , Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Cushner, K. & Brislin, R. (Eds.). (1997)  Improving intercultural interactions, modules for cross-cultural training programs , Vol. 2, 
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Cushner, K. & Landis, D. (1996) The intercultural sensitizer. In D. Landis & R. S. Bhagat (Eds.)  Handbook of intercultural train-
ing , 2nd edit., Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, pp. 185–202. 
 Dai, X. & Chen, G-M. (Eds.). (2014)  Intercultural communication competence: Conceptualization and its development in cultural 
contexts and interactions , Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
 Dasli, M. & Diaz, A. R. (Eds.). (2016)  The critical turn and intercultural communication: Theory, research and practice , London: 
Routledge. 
 Dervin, F. & Risager, K. (Eds.). (2015)  Researching identity and interculturality , London: Routledge. 
 Duranti, A. (1997)  Linguistic anthropology , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Feng, A., Byram, M. & Fleming, M. (Eds.). (2009)  Becoming interculturally competent through education and training , Bristol: 
Multilingual Matters. 
 Fennes, H. & Hapgood, K. (1997)  Intercultural learning in the classroom, crossing borders , London: Cassell. 
 Freire. P. (1973)  Education for critical consciousness , New York: Continuum Books. 
 Fry, G. W. & Thurber, C. E. (1989)  The international education of the development consultant , Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
 Gannon, M. J. (2001)  Understanding global cultures, metaphorical journeys through 23 nations , Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications. 
 Gibson, R. (2002)  Intercultural business communication , Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Glaser, E., Guilherme, M., Méndez García, M. C. & Mughan, T. (2007)  Intercultural competence for professional mobility , Stras-
bourg: Council of Europe. 
 Global People. (2009–2015) [intercultural communication resources from the University of Warwick, UK] http://www.
globalpeople.org.uk 
 Goffman, E. (1974)  Frame analysis, an essay on the organization of experience , Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. 
 Goodwin, R. (1999)  Personal relationships across cultures , London: Routledge. 
 Goodwin, R. (2008)  Changing relations: Achieving intimacy in a time of social transition , Cambridge University Press. 
 Granrose, C. S. & Ostkamp, S. K. (Eds.). (1997)  Cross-cultural workgroups , Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Gudykunst, W. B. (1988)  Theories in intercultural communication , Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
 Gudykunst, W. B. (Ed.). (2005)  Theorizing about intercultural communication , Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
 Gudykunst, W. B., Ting-Toomey, S. & Nishida, T. (Eds.). (1996)  Communication in personal relationships across cultures , Thou-
sand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Guilherme, M. (2002)  Critical citizens for an intercultural world, foreign language education and cultural politics , Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
 Guilherme, M., Glaser, E. & Mendez-Garcia, M. del C. (Eds.). (2010)  The intercultural dynamics of multicultural working , 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Gumperz, J. J. (1982a)  Discourse strategies , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Gumperz, J. J. (Ed.). (1982b)  Language and social identity , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Hall, E. T. (1966)  The hidden dimension , New York: Doubleday. 
 Hall, E. T. (1985)  Hidden differences: Studies in international communication , New York: Doubleday. 
 Hall, E. T. & Hall, M. R. (1990)  Understanding cultural differences: Germans, French and Americans , Yarmouth, ME: Intercul-
tural Press. 
 Harrison, P. A. (1983)  Behaving Brazilian, a comparison of Brazilian and North American social behaviour , New York: Newbury 
House Publishers. 
 Hepp, A. (2015)  Transcultural communication , Chichester: Wiley Blackwell. 
 Hofstede, G. (2003)  Culture’s consequences: Comparing values, behaviours, institutions and organizations across countries , 
2nd edit., Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
 Hofstede, G., Hostede, G. J. & Minkov, M. (2010)  Cultures and organizations, software of the mind, intercultural cooperation and 
its importance for survival , 3rd edit., New York: McGraw-Hill. 
 Holliday, A. R. (2011)  Intercultural communication and ideology , Los Angeles: Sage. 
 Holliday, A. R. (2013)  Understanding intercultural communication: Negotiating a grammar of culture , London: Routledge. 
 Holliday, A. R., Hyde, M. & Kullman, J. (2010)  Intercultural communication, an advanced resource book , 2nd edit., London: 
Routledge. 
 Houghton, S. A., Furumura, Y., Lebedko, M. & Song, L. (2013)  Critical cultural awareness: Managing stereotypes through inter-
cultural (language) education , Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
 Hymes, D. (1977)  Foundations in sociolinguistics, an ethnographic approach , London: Tavistock Publications. 
 Jackson, J. (2010)  Intercultural journeys: From study to residence abroad , New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Jackson, J. (2014)  Introducing language and intercultural communication , London: Routledge. 

414 • Lixian Jin and Martin Cortazzi
 Jandt, F. E. (2016)  An introduction to intercultural communication: Identities in a global community , 8th edit., Thousand Oaks: 
Sage Publications. 
 Jin, L. (2014) Intercultural communication competence for leaders with a global vision.  China Leadership Science Review , 1, 
118–134. 
 Jin, L. & Cortazzi, M. (1993) Cultural orientation and academic language use. In D. Graddol; L. Thompson & M. Byram (Eds.) 
 Language and culture , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters, pp. 84–97. 
 Jin, L. & Cortazzi, M. (Eds.). (2011)  Researching Chinese learners: Skills, perceptions and intercultural adaptations , Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Jin, L. & Cortazzi, M. (Eds.). (2013)  Researching intercultural learning: Investigations in language and education , Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Kim, U., Triandis, H. C., Kagitҫibaşi, C., Choi, S-C. & Yoon, G. (Eds.). (1994)  Individualism and collectivism, theory, method, 
and applications , Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Kim, Y. Y. (1988)  Communication and cross-cultural adaptation: An integrative theory , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Kim, Y. Y. (2001)  Becoming intercultural ,  an integrative theory of communication and cross-cultural adaptation , Thousand Oaks: 
Sage Publications. 
 Kinginger, C. (2009)  Language learning and study abroad: A critical reading of research , Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Kohls, L. R. & Knight, J. M. (1994)  Developing intercultural awareness, a cross-cultural training handbook , Yarmouth, ME: 
Intercultural Press. 
 Kolb, D. A. (2014)  Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development , 2nd edit., Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson. 
 Komisarof, A. & Zhu, H. (Eds.). (2016)  Crossing boundaries and weaving intercultural work, life, and scholarship in globalizing 
universities , New York: Routledge. 
 Korzeny, F. & Ting-Toomey, S. (Eds.). (1990)  Communicating for peace, diplomacy, and negotiation , Thousand Oaks: Sage 
Publications. 
 Kramsch, C. (2009)  The multilingual subject, what foreign language learners say about their experience and why it matters , 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Lai, P.-S. & Byram, M. (2012)  Re-shaping education for citizenship: Democratic national citizenship in Hong Kong , Newcastle: 
Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
 Landis, D. & Bhagat, R. S. (Eds.). (1996)  Handbook of intercultural training , 2nd edit., Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Levine, H. & Phipps, A. (Eds.). (2011)  Critical and intercultural theory and language pedagogy: Issues in language program 
direction , Boston, MA: Cengage. 
 Lewis, R. D. (2005)  When cultures collide, managing successfully across cultures , 3rd edit., London: Nicholas Brealey. 
 Lewis, R. D. (2006)  When cultures collide, leading across cultures , London: Nicholas Brealey. 
 Linderman, E. C. (1926)  The meaning of adult education , New York: New Republic. 
 Liu, S., Volcic, Z. & Gallois, C. (2015)  Introducing intercultural communication: Global cultures and contexts , London: Sage 
Publications. 
 Lochtman, K. & Kappel, J. (2009)  The world as a global village: Intercultural competence in English foreign language teaching , 
Brussels: VUB University Press. 
 Mallows, D. (Ed.). (2014)  Language issues in migration and integration: Perspectives from teachers and learners , London: The 
British Council. 
 Martin, J. N. & Nakayama, T. K. (2012)  Intercultural communication in contexts , 6th edit., New York: McGraw-Hill. 
 Mezirow, J. (1991)  Transformative dimensions of adult learning , San Francisco: Jossey Bass. 
 Moran, R. T., Abramson, N. R. & Moran, S. V. (2014)  Managing cultural differences , 9th edit., New York: Routledge. 
 Morris, D. (2002)  People watching , London: Vintage. 
 Morris, D., Collett, P., Marsh, P. & O’Shaughnessy, M. (1979)  Gestures, their origin and distribution , London: Book Club 
Associates. 
 Nakayama, T. K. & Halualani, R. T. (Eds.). (2010)  The handbook of critical intercultural communication , Chichester: Wiley-
Blackwell. 
 Newson, D. (2007)  Bridging the gaps in global communication , Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 
 Oetzel, J. G. & Ting-Toomey, S. (Eds.). (2013) T he Sage handbook of conflict communication: Integrating theory, research, and 
practice , 2nd edit., Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Pan, Y., Scollon, S. W. & Scollon, R. (2002)  Professional communication in international settings , Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. 
 Phipps, A. & Gonzalez, M. (2004)  Modern languages: Teaching and learning in an intercultural field , London: Sage Publications. 
 Phipps, A. & Guilherme, M. (Eds.). (2004)  Critical pedagogy—Political approaches to language and intercultural communica-
tion , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Piller, I. (2011)  Intercultural communication, a critical introduction , Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

Intercultural Communication • 415
 Reid, S., Stadler, S. & Spencer-Oatey, H. (2009)  The global people landscaping studies, intercultural effectiveness in global educa-
tion partnerships , Coventry: Centre for Applied Linguistics, University of Warwick. 
 Roberts, C. (2003) Ethnography and cultural practice: Ways of learning during residence abroad. In G. Alred; M. Byram & 
M. Fleming (Eds.)  Intercultural experience and education , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters, pp. 101–113. 
 Roberts, C., Byram, M., Barro, A., Jordan, S. & Street, B. (2001)  Language learners as ethnographers , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
 Roberts, C., Davies, E. & Jupp, T. (1992)  Language and discrimination: A study of communication in multiethnic workplaces , 
Harlow: Longman. 
 Sadri, H. & Flammia, M. (2011)  Intercultural communication: A new approach to international relations and global challenges , 
London: Continuum. 
 Samovar, L., Porter, R. E., McDaniel, E. & Roy, C. S. (Eds.). (2015)  Intercultural communication, a reader , 14th edit., Boston, 
MA: Cengage Learning. 
 Saville-Troike, M. (2003)  The ethnography of communication, an introduction , 3rd edit., Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 
 Savin-Baden, M. & Wilkie, K. (Eds.). (2004)  Challenging research in problem based learning , Buckingham: Open University 
Press/SRHE. 
 Scollon, R., Scollon, S. W. & Jones, R. H. (2012)  Intercultural communication, a discourse approach , 3rd edit., Chichester: 
Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Sercu, L. & Bandera, E. (2005)  Foreign language teachers and intercultural competence: An international investigation , Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Sharifian, F. & Jamarani, M (Eds.). (2013)  Language and intercultural communication in the New Era , New York: Routledge. 
 Sobré-Denton, M. & Bardhan, N. (2013)  Cultivating cosmopolitanism for intercultural communication: Communication in a 
global world , New York: Routledge. 
 Sorrells, I. L. (2015)  Intercultural communication—Globalization and social justice , 2nd edit., Thousand Oaks: Sage Publica-
tions. 
 Sorrells, K. & Sekimoto, S. (Eds.). (2015)  Globalizing intercultural communication: A reader , Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Spencer-Oatey, H. (Ed.). (2008)  Culturally speaking, managing rapport through talk across cultures , 2nd edit., London: 
Continuum. 
 Spencer-Oatey, H. & Franklin, P. (2009)  Intercultural interaction, a multidisciplinary approach to intercultural communication , 
Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Spencer-Oatey, H. & Stadler, S. (2009)  The global people competency framework, competencies for effective intercultural interac-
tion , Coventry: Centre for Applied Linguistics, University of Warwick. 
 Storti, C. (1994)  Cross-cultural dialogues, 74 brief encounters with cultural differences , Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press. 
 Storti, C. (1999)  Figuring foreigners out, a practical guide , Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press. 
 Tannen, D. (Ed.). (1993)  Framing in discourse , New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Tcherepashenets, N. (Ed.). (2015)  Globalizing on-line: Telecollaboration, internationalization, and social justice , Peter Lang: 
Bern. 
 Ting-Toomey, S. (1999)  Communicating across cultures , New York: The Guilford Press. 
 Ting-Toomey, S. & Chung, L. C. (2012)  Understanding intercultural communication , Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Ting-Toomey, S. & Oetzel, J. G. (2001)  Managing intercultural conflict effectively , Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Triandis, H. C. (1995)  Individualism & collectivism , Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 
 Trompenaars, F. & Hampden-Turner, C. (2012)  Riding the waves of culture, understanding cultural diversity in business , 3rd 
edit., London: Nicolas Brealey. 
 Turner, J. (2011)  Language in the academy, cultural reflexivity and intercultural dynamics , Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Varner, I. & Beamer, L. (2010)  Intercultural communication in the global workplace , 5th edit., New York: McGraw Hill. 
 Ward, C., Bochner, S. & Furnham, A. (2001)  The psychology of culture shock , London: Routledge. 
 Wiseman, R. L. (1995)  Intercultural communication theory , Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
 Wiseman, R. L. & Koester, J. (Eds.). (1993)  Intercultural communication competence , Newbury Park: Sage Publications. 
 Witte, A. & Harden, T. (Eds.). (2011)  Intercultural competence: Concepts, challenges, evaluations , Berlin: Peter Lang. 
 Zhu, H. (2014)  Exploring intercultural communication, language in action , London: Routledge. 
 Zhu, H. (Ed.). (2016)  Research methods in intercultural communication, a practical guide , Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 

416
 The Origin of World Englishes 
 It is now accepted that English is not represented by a ‘single monochrome standard form’ (Quirk 
1985: 6), but rather comprises an increasingly diverse range of varieties which fulfil different func-
tions and roles for different peoples in different contexts. These varieties of English are often referred 
to as a field of study or discipline under the name of World Englishes. In this chapter, I shall give 
a brief review of how and why the field of World Englishes developed and then consider some of 
the developments the field has seen in recent years, along with an account of the debates and issues 
scholars are currently addressing. The chapter will conclude with a discussion of potential future 
directions for research in the field of World Englishes. 
 Although English has been spoken in disparate corners of the globe for several centuries, the 
recognition that the language was being adopted and adapted by its new speakers has only relatively 
recently been recognised. For example, Halliday, McIntosh and Strevens wrote in 1964 that ‘English 
is no longer the possession of the British or even of the Americans, but an international language 
which increasingly large numbers of people adopt for at least some of their purposes’ (Halliday, 
McIntosh, and Strevens 1964: 293). Yet this view would have been very much a minority view at the 
time. The orthodox view was that of Randolph Quirk, who argued (e.g., 1985) that there should be 
a single standard form of English, based on British English, and that this should serve as a model for 
all learners of English. Deviation from this single standard was to be avoided. 
 Quirk’s single standard monochrome position was challenged by Braj Kachru, who argued that, 
far from there being one standard, there were, in fact, many different varieties of English and, in a 
crucial distinction from the Quirk position, he further argued that these should be treated equally, as 
all were equally valid for their own contexts and roles. As early as 1976, he noted (1976: 236): 
 The strength of the English language is in presenting the  Americanness  in its American variety, 
and the  Englishness in its British variety. Let us therefore appreciate and encourage the Third 
World varieties of English too. The individuality of the Third World varieties, such as the  Indi-
anness  of its Indian variety, is contributing to the linguistic mosaic which the speakers of the 
English language have created in the English speaking world. 
 Larry Smith, a co-founder of the discipline of World Englishes, argued in similar vein in 1976 and 
proposed classifying English as an international auxiliary language (1976). By this he did not mean 
 30 
 Research in World Englishes and International 
Communication 
 Andy Kirkpatrick 
www.ebook3000.com

Englishes and International Communication • 417
that there was a single standard variety of English which could be used by all, but rather that each 
country which used English would give it its own flavour and character. Some 10 years later and in 
response to Quirk’s position, Kachru developed his famous ‘three circles’ model: 
 The current sociolinguistic profile of English may be viewed in terms of three concentric 
circles. . . . The Inner Circle refers to the traditional, cultural and linguistic bases of English. 
The Outer Circle represents the institutionalised non-native varieties (ESL) in the regions that 
have passed through extended periods of colonisation. . . . The Expanding Circle includes the 
regions where the performance varieties of the language are used essentially in EFL contexts. 
 (Kachru 1985: 366–67) 
 It is worth noting the use of the ESL and EFL acronyms in the Kachru quote. Here Kachru was 
referring to the traditional distinction between ENL (English as a native language), ESL (English 
as a second language) and EFL (English as a foreign language). In this traditional three-way clas-
sification, it was always understood that ENL represented the best model and standard. ESL and 
EFL varieties were, at best, learner varieties, characterised by deviations from the standard. A major 
contribution of Kachru was to illustrate that Outer Circle varieties could act as standards and had 
developed to reflect the linguistic and cultural backgrounds and needs of their speakers. They were 
thus to be treated as equal to ENL varieties. 
 The three-circles model has been the most popular and influential of several models of the devel-
opment of World Englishes (see McArthur 1998 for a useful review of other models), but, as will be 
illustrated later in the chapter, it has been criticised for now being somewhat out of date, in particular 
for its dependence upon geographical boundaries for determining specific varieties of English. 
 Developmental Stages of Englishes 
 Linked to the three-circles model has been the developmental stages of different varieties of Eng-
lish. Kachru suggested three phases through which ‘non-native institutionalised varieties of English 
seem to pass’ (1992: 56). At first, the local variety is not recognised by its users, who believe that an 
external native speaker variety is superior to the local one. They thus use a native speaker variety as 
a model and target for their own use. The second phase sees more recognition for the local variety 
as this is now used in more contexts, but still seen as inferior to an imported native speaker model. 
In the third phase, the local variety gains social and official acceptance. It can now become the 
classroom model, and speakers of the imported variety may be seen as outsiders who do not belong 
to local society. 
 Moag proposed a ‘life cycle of non-native Englishes’ based on his study of how Fijian English 
has developed (1992: 233). His life cycle involved five stages, namely: first, transportation—or the 
arrival of English; second, indigenisation—where the new variety adapts to the local culture; third, 
expansion in use—when the new variety becomes used in an increasing number of contexts; fourth, 
institutionalisation—where the local variety becomes accepted and used as the classroom model; 
and, fifth, a possible decline in use. He argues that in certain countries, Malaysia and the Philippines, 
for example, use of English has reduced. However, this is hard to justify today, as English remains 
important in both countries, although it is true that challenges to the uses of English are seen (e.g. 
see Gill 2012 for recent developments in Malaysia). 
 The most complete theory which accounts for the developmental stages of Englishes in post-
colonial contexts is Schneider’s ‘dynamic theory’ (2007). In this theory, Schneider proposes that 
“postcolonial Englishes follow a fundamentally uniform developmental process” (2003: 233), 
which comprises the following five stages: foundation; exonormative stabilisation; nativisation; 

418 • Andy Kirkpatrick
endonormative stabilisation; differentiation. Schneider describes each of these stages as follows 
(Schneider 2010: 381): 
 Foundation: during the ‘foundation’ phase English is brought to a new territory, which leads to 
incipient bilingualism, the borrowing of toponyms, and other minor processes. 
 ‘Exonormative stabilization’: during a stable colonial situation, the politically domi-
nant mother country determines the norms of linguistic behaviour, and elite bilingualism 
spreads amongst some representatives of the indigenous population, with lexical borrowing 
continuing. 
 ‘Nativization’ is the most vibrant and interesting of all the phases. With ties with the set-
tlers’ country of origin weakening, and interethnic contacts increasing, bilingual speakers forge 
a new variety of English, shaped strongly by phonological and structural transfer—though 
conservative speakers resent such innovative usage. 
 ‘Endonormative stabilization’ implies that, after independence and inspired by a process of 
nation-building, a new linguistic form is increasingly observed to exist (as remarkably homog-
enous in many cases). The new norms are beginning to be codified and to be accepted in 
society, and are employed culturally in literary representations. 
 ‘Differentiation’ may conclude the process. In a stable young nation, internal social group 
identities become more important and get reflected in increasing dialectal differences. 
 Schneider’s Dynamic Model has occasioned great interest and given rise to the question, How suit-
able is the Dynamic Model to varieties of English that are not postcolonial or inner circle? As 
Schneider points out, ‘one of the challenges . . . is the question of the extent to which there are simi-
larities to be observed in national developments in Expanding Circle countries, and between these 
and the Other Circle’ (Schneider 2014: 9). His own answer to this question is that the Dynamic 
Model cannot account for the way English is developing in Expanding Circle or other emerging 
contexts. He concludes: ‘In essence, the Dynamic Model is not really, or only to a rather limited 
extent, a suitable framework to describe this new kind of dynamism of global Englishes’ (2014: 28). 
I shall return to consider this ‘new kind of dynamism of global Englishes’ in the section below on 
‘World Englishes and English as a Lingua Franca,’ along with Schneider’s suggested conceptualisa-
tion of these. 
 The Influence of Language Contact 
 A scholar whose research into World Englishes has focussed on the role of language contact in the 
development of new varieties is Mufwene (e.g. 2001, 2015). The major research question that he has 
addressed is the extent to which the emergence of creoles and pidgins are related to the emergence 
of indigenized varieties of English and ‘whether these evolutions have occurred in fundamentally 
different ways from other colonial varieties of English considered native’ (Mufwene 2015: 6). He 
argues that language contact is not only a critical factor for pidgins and creoles but that ‘all contact, 
even between only two dialects of the same language, is an important actuator of change’ (2015: 7). 
Mufwene therefore argues that language contact is a crucial component in the development of all 
emergent varieties; a key difference between vernaculars classified as English—and he gives Ozark 
and Amish as examples—and creoles is that the English vernaculars evolved in settlement colonies 
where European migrants have become the majority of the population and where most speakers 
of the vernaculars are of European descent. Creoles, on the other hand, evolved in colonies where 
‘exogenous populations of non-European descent whose ancestors were either slaves or contract 
labourers have become the majority populations’ (2015: 11). This meant that ‘segregation favoured 
www.ebook3000.com

Englishes and International Communication • 419
substrate influence among the numerous non-Europeans but more input from metropolitan Eng-
lish dialects among the Europeans who lived in English settlements’ (2015: 12). Pidgin Englishes, in 
contrast, developed in trade colonies where most communication was between locals and the repre-
sentatives of traders, rather than directly with the traders themselves. Pidgins differ from indigenised 
varieties of English, as pidgins were learned ‘naturalistically’ while indigenised varieties were learned 
and taught in formal settings, such as schools (2015: 16) using standard models. 
 Another scholar who has researched the extent to which language contact is the cause of linguis-
tic differences—in particular, morphosyntactic variation—among different varieties of English is 
Kortmann (e.g. Kortmann 2010; Kortmann, Schneider, Burrdige, Mesthrie, and Upton 2004). He has 
addressed research questions such as: 
 Are the observable similarities and differences across varieties of English around the world 
best accounted for in terms of geography, i.e. where they are spoken, or in terms of the variety 
type they constitute, i.e. the sociohistorical conditions in which they developed and are cur-
rently used? 
 Is it possible to identify morphosynactic features found in all or at least a vast majority of 
the Englishes around the world? In other words: can we postulate something like universals in 
the realm of morphosyntax for all the non-standard varieties of English? 
 (2010: 400) 
 In an attempt to answer questions such as these, Kortmann and his colleagues analysed 76 morpho-
syntactic features across 46 spoken vernacular varieties of English, and they conclude, tentatively, 
that variety type—whether the variety is an L1, an L2 or a pidgin or creole—rather than geography is 
the main predictor of morphosyntactic form. In so doing, they question Chambers’ proposal (2004) 
that a certain number of vernacular universals occur in all non-standard varieties of English. For 
example, Chambers lists four morphosyntactic features which he considers to be universal, namely: 
 Conjugation regularization, or levelling of irregular verb forms: e.g.  John seen the eclipse, 
Mary heared the good news; 
 Default singulars, or subject-verb nonconcord: e.g.  They was the last ones ; 
 Multiple negation, or negative concord: e.g.  I don’t /ain’t know nothing ; 
 Copula absence or copula deletion: e.g.  She smart, We going as soon as possible . 
 (cited in Kortmann 2010: 406) 
 Kortmann concludes that none of these features can claim to be universals as they occur in ‘no more 
than 67–78 per cent of the varieties investigated’ (2010: 707). They do all occur, however, in North 
American varieties of English. 
 When Is a Feature a Feature? 
 This then raises the question of when we can classify a linguistic feature as being a characteristic 
feature of a variety of English. We must be careful not to claim that a particular feature is part of a 
specific variety on the basis of occurrence alone. For it to be classified as a characteristic feature of 
a particular variety, it would need to occur frequently, at least in more than 50% of potential cases. 
This is the point made by Van Rooy (2013) when he queries how can a feature which may occur in 
a speaker’s variety, but only infrequently, be classified as characteristic. In his study on Black South 
African English, he concludes that many features previously described as being characteristic fea-
tures of that variety are actually ‘occasional performance errors’ (2013: 14). 

420 • Andy Kirkpatrick
 It is frequency and consistency of use that is important (Lim and Gisbourne 2009). As Bamgbose 
(1998: 13) pointed out more than 20 years ago, we need to know: 
 How many people use it? 
 How widely is it used? 
 Who are the people who use it? 
 Where is the use sanctioned? 
 Is the use accepted? 
 This is where a corpus becomes so useful, as a corpus allows researchers to not only identify the 
frequency with which a linguistic feature occurs but also the environment in which it occurs. In 
a study investigating the influence of the substrate on Malay speakers use of tense forms in their 
variety of English, Kirkpatrick and Subhan (2014) used a subset of the Asian Corpus of English 
(ACE). ACE represents about 100 hours (or a million words) of naturally occurring English as 
spoken as a lingua franca by Asian multilinguals. 1  The hypothesis that Kirkpatrick and Subhan 
sought to test was that, given that Malay does not mark verb forms for tense, so the English of L1 
speakers of Malay would mark for tense less frequently than that of speakers of tensed languages. 
The subset of ACE used in the study comprised some 16 hours of talk featuring 11 speakers whose 
first language was Malay. In this subset the total number of occurrences where either the present 
simple or simple past tense could have been marked was 413. Of these possible instances of mark-
ing, 306 are marked and only 107 are not. It would therefore be difficult to say that non-marking 
of these tense forms is a characteristic feature of the spoken English of these L1 speakers of Malay. 
Indeed, when the relative formality of the interactions are taken into account, the results are 
even more striking, as there are only seven instances where the tenses remain unmarked but 152 
instances where they are marked. It is thus only very rarely that these speakers do not mark these 
tense forms in relatively formal situations. Even in more informal situations, the tenses are marked 
more frequently than not, with 101 instances of non-marking compared with 153 of marking. It 
would therefore also be difficult to argue that substrate influence was a critical factor upon the 
morphosyntactic forms of these speakers’ English in these contexts. The following is an excerpt 
from a more informal interaction: 
 S1: ah eh the men getting girls pregnant then about twenty five years below ah than I  ask  a lot of 
people  lah  then I  ask my friends so my first three of my friend when I first  ask ah they say oh I’ll 
ask her to abort the baby 
 S2: laugh 
 S1: ah number one number two then after that the I  met  erm you know who NAME  he’s forever 
action type 
 S2: one of the Malaysian guys 
 S1: he  he’s a Malaysian staying in Singapore ah he  stayed  underneath us then . . . 
  
then he  said  erm if the if I  was  younger  lah  and then I  would  think about leaving school  lah  I say 
why give it to your mother or father to take care  lah  I  might have done  that  lah  cos my parents then 
he  said  then he  said  no  lah  the most important time for a child  is  four years  mah  and I want to bond 
with my child. 
 (Kirkpatrick and Subhan 2014: 397) 
 In this extract there is only one instance of an unmarked past tense form, where  ask  occurs three 
times. However, I would argue that the non-marking of this particular form has phonological cause 
www.ebook3000.com

Englishes and International Communication • 421
and that no speaker of English would sound the past tense  /askt/  in this context. As Gut has observed 
in the context of Singaporean English, the omission of past tense marking can be caused by ‘phono-
logical processes’ (2009: 266). Interestingly, the evidence of substrate influence from Malay comes, 
not from morphosyntactic forms, but from the use of discourse particles. In the last example above, 
there are five instances of the Malay discourse particles ‘lah’ and one of ‘mah’. 
 Other scholars who have questioned the critical influence of the substrate include Hall, Schmidtke, 
and Vickers (2013). In a study which used a variety of data, including the Vienna Oxford Interna-
tional Corpus of English (VOICE) and a range of web sources, they investigated the countable use 
of mass nouns from speakers with different linguistic backgrounds, making sure to include speakers 
whose L1s use countable grammar (English, Sinhala and Swahili) and those whose L1s did not use 
countable grammar (Filipino, Japanese, Mandarin). They showed that, while the countable use of 
mass nouns occurred in the English of speakers with different L1s, their use was infrequent, with a 
maximum occurrence rate of only 3.5% (Hall et al. 2013: 15). They therefore concluded that sub-
strate influence was not high in this instance. 
 These results into the relative influence of language contact and substrate influence suggest that 
more research in this area needs to be undertaken. As Kortmann has noted, we need more ‘detailed 
studies of the grammars of individual varieties of English, not just of their forms and structures avail-
able, but also of their use’ (2010: 418). 
 Code-Mixing, Hybridity and Translanguaging 
 This leads us to an emergent area of research in World Englishes, which is the development of 
hybrid languages and translanguaging. First, we need to note key characteristics of outer circle Eng-
lishes. The overwhelming majority of speakers of outer circle Englishes are multilinguals who have 
learned English as an additional language. 2 As noted earlier, the developmental phases of outer circle 
Englishes include the stage of indigenisation or nativisation. As an integral part of this process is 
acculturation—that is to say that the new variety of English develops to reflect and represent the 
cultures and ways of living of its speakers. The most noticeable way in which this is achieved is 
through the borrowing of words from the speakers’ first (and possibly other) languages into the new 
variety of English. This linguistic borrowing can take a variety of forms. These include the simple 
borrowing of a word from the local language. Thus Malaysian English has borrowed words from 
Malay to express local phenomena. Examples include  sarong (a type of wrap-around skirt),  laksa (a 
spicy coconut-based noodle soup) and  kampong  (a Malay village). Many words borrowed from other 
languages can become part of the vocabulary of all Englishes, as these Japanese words for food items 
demonstrate:  sushi, sashimi, miso soup, sake . The point is that all varieties of world Englishes are, 
to a certain extent, code-mixed varieties. ‘World Englishes are, by definition, code-mixed varieties’ 
(McLellan 2010: 435). 
 As the dialogue example above illustrated, the varieties of English do not borrow only vocabu-
lary items from the local languages but also the use of discourse particles. In the excerpt above, the 
speaker uses the Malay discourse particle ‘lah’ on five occasions and ‘ma’ on one occasion. The use 
of these vocabulary items and discourse particles are all part of the indigenisation or nativisation 
of these varieties of English. Cultural norms and rhetorical patterns and styles can also be adopted. 
The next two examples come from literary and academic varieties of Indian English respectively (see 
Kirkpatrick 2007 for further examples). First, the literary text: 
 She bent her head to receive her mother-in-law’s blessing. “Sat Sri Akal.” 
 “Sat Sri Akal,” replied Sabhrai lightly touching Champak’s shoulder. 

422 • Andy Kirkpatrick
 “Sat Sri Akal,” said Sher Singh. 
 “Live in plenty, live a long age,” replied Sabhrai taking her son’s hand and kissing it. 
 “Sleep well.” 
 (From  I shall Not Hear the Nightingale , 
by Kushwant Singh, cited in Kachru 1991: 301) 
 Here the writer has adopted the formulaic Sikh greeting ‘ Sat Sri Akal ’ (God is truth). 
 The second example comes from an academic textbook: 
 Years ago, a slender sapling from a foreign field was grafted by ‘pale hands’ on the mighty and 
many-branched Indian banyan tree. It has kept growing vigorously and now an organic part of 
its parent tree, it has spread its own probing roots into the brown soil below. Its young leaves 
rustle energetically in the strong winds that blow from the western horizon, but the sunshine 
that warms it and the rains that cool it are from Indian skies, and it continues to draw its vital 
sap from ‘this earth, this realm, this India’. 
 (Naik and Narayan 2004: 253) 
 This use of extended metaphor is a characteristic feature of academic Indian English, and this is what 
gives this text its Indian ‘flavour’. 
 Contact between languages results in linguistic creativity in the development of hybrid forms and 
neologisms. We can see this happening even in contexts that were previously classified as belonging 
to the ‘expanding’ circle but where the roles and uses of English have increased markedly over time. 
These examples come from Chinese English. China has traditionally been classified as belonging to the 
expanding circle, as English was really only learned as a foreign language in classrooms, but recent years 
have seen an exponential use in English in China. It is hard to give a precise figure to the numbers of 
Chinese currently learning or using English, but as it has become a compulsory subject from Primary 
3, it has been estimated that there are more than 350 million learners of English in China (Xu 2010). 
 Here are some examples of how English has influenced Chinese in recent years. ‘3Q’ is used as a 
farewell in Chinese computer-mediated communication. It means ‘thank you’, as the pronunciation 
of three in  Putonghua  is  san , to give ‘san Q’, an approximation of ‘thank you’. Other hybrids (see Cook 
2013, 2014 for more examples) include  aolinpike feng  (Olympic fever, where Olympics has been 
transliterated following Chinese phonological rules) and  bai bai la  (‘bye bye’, where the bye sound 
has been produced by Chinese characters with a similar sound). A particularly inventive hybrid is 
the use of ‘Q’ to mean ‘chewy’ as in the sentence  hen Q-de baozi  (very chewy dumplings), where the 
borrowed Q conforms to Chinese grammatical norms by taking the marker - de (Kirkpatrick 2015). 
 This bi- or multilingual use of language has been termed ‘translanguaging’: ‘A translanguaging 
lens posits that bilinguals have one linguistic repertoire from which they select features strategically 
to communicate effectively’ (Garcia and Li Wei 2014: 22). Hence linguistically sophisticated bilin-
guals can creatively use new forms of language to express their multilingual identities. This mixed 
code variety of Chinese and English is becoming popular on social media in China. Indeed, there 
is even one online group who insists that every sentence posted on the site ‘should be mixed with 
English’ (Zhang 2012: 42). 
 Further examples of neologisms developed on computer-aided communication and social media 
include these innovative spellings of English words illustrating how Chinese users of English dem-
onstrate both creativity and criticality: ‘freedamn, harmany, democrazy, gunvernment, goveruption 
and departyment’ (Li Wei 2014 n.p.). Chinese, being a language that possesses a large number of 
homophones, has always used punning to express humour or indirect criticism. Here we see how this 
punning tradition has now been extended to English. 
www.ebook3000.com

Englishes and International Communication • 423
 Transcultural and Transnational Englishes 
 World Englishes have traditionally been defined in terms of nation or region. It has been customary, 
for example, to talk about British, American, Indian, Kenyan or Singaporean varieties of English. 
This is not to suggest that there is only one variety per nation. As Schneider’s final developmental 
stage—differentiation— indicates, dialectal differences develop. Thus we see many different varieties 
of English in many countries, from the many regional and vernacular varieties found in Britain and 
the United States and in countries which have had a long history of English presence such as India. 
Indeed, Martin has argued that the Philippines is home to all circles of English—inner, as spoken by 
the elite, outer, spoken by those who recognize it but do not have the influence to promote it, and the 
expanding circle users who realise that English is essential for upward mobility but for whom it is 
largely inaccessible (2014). Many outer circle varieties have traditionally been classified along a con-
tinuum from acrolectal to basilectal, with acrolectal representing the educated variety and basilectal 
the colloquial vernacular variety (Platt and Weber 1980). It is the classification of World Englishes 
according to national or regional boundaries that has recently drawn criticism: ‘The classification of 
Englishes into circles or along national boundaries oversimplifies the sociolinguistic realities’ (Sara-
ceni 2010: 55). This is certainly the case today, although as Kachru has pointed out, English ‘did travel 
with the colonisers into regions which had physical realities, with living people, who had names and 
social, cultural and linguistic realities. The colonies provided locations in which the Raj established 
its control and implanted the English language’ (2005: 213). But the world has changed and bound-
aries become increasingly porous, and the use of national boundaries to classify World Englishes 
has thus been criticised for remaining ‘stuck within twentieth century frameworks of languages and 
nations’ (Pennycook 2010: 681). Pennycook argues for a better understanding of the way different 
language ideologies construct English locally. We need to take into account current understandings 
of translingual practices across communities, other than those defined along national criteria. 
 This is particularly the case with those countries Kachru classified as ‘expanding circle’, where 
English was traditionally seen as a foreign language. Today, however, the roles of English are increas-
ing exponentially in many of these ‘expanding circle’ countries. Most importantly, English is being 
used transnationally, not simply within the country. For example, English is the sole official work-
ing language of the 10 nations of Southeast Asia which make up the Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (ASEAN). Some of these are postcolonial outer circle countries (Singapore and Malaysia), 
while others are expanding circle countries (Indonesia and Cambodia) (Kirkpatrick 2010). 
 World Englishes and English as a Lingua Franca 
 In the next section of the chapter, we look at this  inter national use of English and compare it with its 
 intra -national use. The international function will be distinguished from the intra-national function 
by calling the international function of English, English as a Lingua Franca (ELF) as opposed to the 
World Englishes term given to its intra-national use. 
 Unlike specific varieties of World English, the main function of ELF is not so much to reflect the 
cultures and identity of the speakers but to facilitate communication among speakers from different 
linguistic backgrounds but who share English as a common language. This is not to say that ELF 
cannot reflect the cultures of its speakers—it certainly can (Baker 2015; Sharifian 2015)—but rather 
to suggest that its main function is for communication across culturally and linguistically diverse 
contacts. In a study investigating the comparative use of code-switching and idioms in World Eng-
lishes and ELF, Kirkpatrick and McLellan (2012) argue that ‘a world English is primarily, though not 
exclusively, concerned with identity and membership of a speech community, while English as a lin-
gua franca is primarily, though not exclusively, concerned with cross-cultural communication’ (2012: 

424 • Andy Kirkpatrick
655). Their study, which used World Englishes data from Malaysia and Brunei and ELF data from the 
ACE, supported the proposal that World Englishes were code-mixed varieties which reflected iden-
tity being negotiated through language choices. In contrast, ACE data showed ‘a strong orientation 
towards communication rather than expression of or negotiation of identities’ (2012: 667). This is 
an area which needs further research, as other scholars (e.g. Pitzl 2012) have shown the rich use of 
idiom in the speech of ELF users. 
 ELF speakers may also transfer the cultural and pragmatic norms of their L1 to ELF, and this may 
cause misunderstandings among those who are not familiar with the ways people from different 
cultural backgrounds encode their cultures through their use of ELF. This is likely to be a particular 
issue for monolingual speakers of an inner circle variety of English who are unfamiliar with different 
varieties of English and different ways of speaking. 
 In the first extract from the ACE, we see how one speaker demonstrates her familiarity with a 
culture other than her own and in the second how the existence of an Asian way influences the 
behaviour of consular officials. In the first short excerpt, two L1 speakers of Cantonese (S1 and S7) 
are discussing issues connected with the rights and wrongs of earning financial interest in Muslim 
cultures. What is noteworthy here is how S7 refers to people. She refers to a female from her own 
cultural background as Miss + Family name, but to the Pakistani Muslim (S6) as Mr + first name. 
This shows that she is not only familiar with her own culture’s naming patterns but also with Muslim 
naming patterns. The notation (.) indicates a short pause. 
 S1: yeah i am just wondering because i i heard from some muslim friends that under islam they are 
not encouraged to (.) to save some money (.) life insurance life insurance (.) erm from their 
koran say what they say is that (.) i don’t know whether it’s true because i cannot validate 
 S7: yes this is also my concern just after right away i talked to this miss [family name] i talked to 
mister [first name] 
 S6: actually er it’s really a sometime very hard to say (.) even something (.) even something we are 
really not quite sure about it er in general market in general market erm 
 (see Kirkpatrick, Patkin, and Wu 2013 for a more detailed discussion) 
 The next extracts from ACE provide evidence that an Asian way is considered to exist and that this 
Asian way is held up in contrast to Western procedure (see Kirkpatrick, Walkinshaw and Subhan 
2016 for a detailed discussion). 
 The participants are consular staff from embassies across Southeast Asia. They are undertaking 
a professional development course at the University of Brunei. Here the discussion is on how they 
might handle complaints or problems connected with the issuing or non-issuing of visas. S4 is a 
Bruneian female, S5 a Malaysian male and S6 an Indonesian female. 
 In the first extract, the Bruneian female makes explicit reference to an Asian way. This is picked up 
by an Indonesian female who says, as an example of the Asian way, that she dislikes refusing requests. 
 S4: no problem so that was about visa as well you know 
 S6: yeah visa 
 S5: mhm: mhm 
 S6: but 
 S4: but is there is there particular asian way to say it (.) what they want us to say er (.) you go with 
 S6: the thing is i’ve never (.) like refuse any asian: (.) countries you know when they come to us to 
for visa(.) maybe other countries but not asians so far so (.) that’s why when in case of nigerian 
yes i (.) once 
 S4: mhm 
www.ebook3000.com

Englishes and International Communication • 425
 In the second extract, this idea of an Asian way is directly contrasted with Western culture, when the 
Malaysian male (S5) says ‘they will totally follow the procedure’ and that in Western culture, ‘tomor-
row means tomorrow’ and ‘cannot means cannot’. Note also the Bruneian female’s (S4) use of the 
Malaysian discourse markers, ‘lah’ and ‘ah’ (shown in italics): 
 S4: so that’s that’s asian  lah you know 
 S6: yeah yeah 
 S4:   ah 
 S5: but sometimes i suspect (.) yeah 
 S6: we don’t we don’t be like it’s it’s nice 
 S4 : ah 
 S6: to refuse (.) you know 
 S4: yeah 
 S6: people when they come and ask you for a favor or something like that 
 S4: and then 
 S5: th- 
 S4: especially (.) you know with phone calls like that 
 S6: yeah and 
 S6: yeah especially if you know them 
 S5: i think i think in the western i think in the western culture they will totally follow the 
 S6: yeah 
 S5: the procedure right if (.) tomorrow means tomorrow if you cannot means cannot 
 S4: yeah 
 S6: i don’t know 
 S5: but because we: you know being asian we want to: (.) we we don’t like to hurt others 
 S6: yeah 
 In these examples, communication appears to be the overarching priority rather than the estab-
lishment of identity, although the Malaysian discourse markers are probably being used as a 
symbol of solidarity, as all the participants in these two extracts are L1 speakers of Malay. It is also 
perhaps the more formal aspects of this interaction that motivates the speakers more towards 
ELF rather than varieties of Malaysian English. In any event, we do not see the rich translan-
guaging we noted above. This serves to show how complex human interactions and the use(s) 
of language(s) are. We see World Englishes being used to express identity within specific com-
munities and the creative use of code-mixing and translanguaging as people seek to develop and 
express new and fluid identities, often transcending geographical boundaries through the use of 
new technologies and social media. At the same time, but in different contexts, we see the increas-
ing use of ELF as the primary medium for international communication. And while this use of 
ELF has communication as its primary goal, the cultural and pragmatic norms of ELF users can 
be reflected in the ways they use English. The world’s boundaries have become porous—most 
strikingly evidenced by the current refugee crisis gripping most of the world. Classifications 
and uses of language based upon the notion of nation-states or defined regions are no longer 
enough. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that Schneider has concluded that his dynamic model 
cannot handle the uses of English in what were expanding circle and other emerging contexts. 
To account for this ‘new kind of dynamism’ in global Englishes, he has proposed the concept of 
‘transnational attraction’, defined as ‘the appropriation of (components of) English(es) for what-
ever communicative purposes at hand, unbounded by distinctions of norms, nations or varieties’ 
(2014: 28). 

426 • Andy Kirkpatrick
 Implications 
 What are the implications of this dynamism and changes in Englishes? Most immediately, they show 
that English is no longer only owned and used by monolingual speakers of inner circle varieties. 
English is now a diverse multilingual language capable of reflecting and representing the cultural 
and pragmatic norms of its new speakers. When used by multilingual speakers, World Englishes are 
characterised by code-mixing and translanguaging, as speakers negotiate their newly emerging iden-
tities both within specific speech communities and across transnational spaces provided by social 
media. At the same time, when used as a lingua franca as a shared language among people of differ-
ent linguistic and cultural backgrounds, its primary function is likely to be for mutually intelligible 
communication. Yet, users of ELF will also use English in ways that encode their specific cultural and 
pragmatic norms. In all these areas, further research is needed. 
 All this means is that training in World Englishes and ELF is crucial, especially for those engaged 
in transnational and intercultural communication. To rely on some concept of an English based on 
an inner circle model such as standard British or American English is to ignore the contemporary 
reality that such a variety of English is used only by a tiny minority of today’s users of English, the 
great majority of whom are multilinguals who have learned English as an additional language. 
Courses in ELF and world Englishes are thus vital for those engaged in international diplomacy, 
conflict resolution or any contexts where negotiations between multilinguals users of English take 
place. People will need lessons in how to focus on message and meaning rather than form; they will 
need to realise that English can encode different cultural and pragmatic norms and that English is 
no longer an Anglo-centric or Anglo-cultural language but a multi-centric and multicultural one. 
The task may well be harder for monolingual speakers of inner circle varieties of English, especially 
for those who feel that their status as monolingual speakers of a ‘standard’ variety gives them special 
status as users of English. The future of English as a multilingual, multicultural language and the 
successful use of this English will require training and emotional intelligence and sensitivity among 
its users. 
 Notes 
 1. ACE is freely accessible at http://corpus.ied.edu.hk/ace/, where more details about the corpus can be found. 
 2. In some contexts there may be those who feel that English is their first language. For example, more than 50% of primary 
children in Singapore report that English is their main home language. 
 References 
 Baker, W. (2015) Culture and complexity though English as a lingua franca.  Journal of English as a Lingua Franca  4(1): 191–198. 
 Bamgbose, A. (1998) Torn between the norms and innovations in World Englishes.  World Englishes 17(1): 1–14. 
 Chambers, J. K. (2004) Dynamic typology and vernacular universals. In B. Kortmann (ed.)  Dialectology Meets Typology . Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 124–145. 
 Cook, Angela. (2013)  Analysis of Selected Morpho-syntactic Features in Spoken Mandarin . Unpublished PhD thesis, Griffith 
University, Brisbane. 
 Cook, Angela. (2014) Lexical coinages in Mandarin Chinese and the problem of classification.  Linguistics and the Human 
Sciences 9(2): 141–175. 
 Garcia, Ofelia and Li, Wei. (2014)  Translanguaging: Language, Bilingualism and Education . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Gill, S. K. (2012) The complexities of re-reversal of language-in-education policy in Malaysia. In A. Kirkpatrick and R. Sussex 
(eds.)  English as an International Language in Asia . Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 45–62. 
 Gut, U. (2009) Past tense marking in Singapore English.  English World-Wide 30(2): 262–277. 
 Hall, C. J., Schmidtke, D., and Vickers, J. (2013) Countability in world Englishes.  World Englishes 32(1): 1–22. 
 Halliday, M. A. K., McIntosh, A., and Strevens, P. (1964)  The Linguistic Sciences and Language Teaching . London: Longman. 
 Kachru, B. B. (1976) Models of English for the third world: White man’s linguistic burden or language pragmatics?  TESOL 
Quarterly 10(2): 221–239. 
www.ebook3000.com

Englishes and International Communication • 427
 Kachru, B. B. (1985) Standard, codification and sociolinguistic realism: The English language in the outer circle. In R. Quirk 
and H. Widdowson (eds.)  English in the World: Teaching and Learning the Language and Literatures . Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, pp. 11–30. 
 Kachru, B. B. (ed). (1992)  The Other Tongue: English Across Cultures . Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press. 
 Kachru, B. B. (2005)  Asian Englishes: Beyond the Canon . Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. 
 Kachru, Y. (1991) Speech acts in world Englishes: Toward a framework for research.  World Englishes 10(3): 299–306. 
 Kirkpatrick, A. (2007)  World Englishes: Implications for International Communication and ELT . Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
 Kirkpatrick, A. (2010)  English as a Lingua Franca in ASEAN: A Multilingual Model . Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. 
 Kirkpatrick, A. (2015) Chinese English or English Chinese?  Global Chinese 1(1): 85–110. 
 Kirkpatrick, A., and McLellan, J. (2012) World Englishes, English as a lingua franca and discourse analysis. In M. Handford 
and J. P. Gee (eds.)  The Routledge Handbook of Discourse Analysis . London: Routledge, pp. 654–669. 
 Kirkpatrick, A., Patkin, J., and Wu, J. (2013) The multilingual teacher and the multilingual curriculum: An Asian example of 
intercultural communication in the new era. In F. Sharifian and M. Jamarani (eds.)  Intercultural Communication in the 
New Era . London: Routledge, pp. 263–285. 
 Kirkpatrick, A., and Subhan, S. (2014) Non-standard or new standards or errors? The use of inflectional marking for present 
and past tenses in English as an Asian lingua franca. In S. Buschfeld, T. Hoffman, M. Huber and A. Kautsch (eds.)  The 
Evolution of Englishes . Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 386–400. 
 Kirkpatrick, A., Walkinshaw, I., and Subhan, S. (2016) English as a lingua franca in East and Southeast Asia: Implications for 
diplomatic and intercultural communication. In P. Friedrich (ed.)  English for Diplomatic Purposes . Bristol: Multilingual 
Matters, pp. 137–166. 
 Kortmann, B. (2010) Variation across Englishes: Syntax. In A. Kirkpatrick (ed.)  The Routledge Handbook of World Englishes . 
London and New York: Routledge, pp. 400–424. 
 Kortmann, B., Schneider, E., Burrdige, K., Mesthrie, R., and Upton, G. (eds). (2004)  A Handbook of Varieties of English .  Volume 
2: Morphosyntax . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Li Wei. (2014). New Chinglish: translanguaging, creativity and criticality. Plenary presentation at the AILA Conference, Bris-
bane, August 11–15.
 Lim, L., and Gisbourne, N. (2009) The typology of Asian English.  English World-Wide 30(2): 123–132. 
 Martin, I. (2014) Philippine English revisited.  World Englishes 33(1): 50–59. 
 McArthur, T. (1998)  The English Languages . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 McLellan, J. (2010) Mixed codes or varieties of English? In A. Kirkpatrick (ed.)  The Routledge Handbook of World Englishes . 
London: Routledge, pp. 425–441. 
 Moag, R. F. (1992) The life-cycle of non-native Englishes. In B. Kachru (ed.)  The Other Tongue . pp. 233–244. Urbana: Univer-
sity of Illinois Press. 
 Mufwene, S. (2001)  The Ecology of Language Evolution . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Mufwene, S. (2015) Colonization, indigenization and the differential evolution of English: Some ecological perspectives. 
 World Englishes . doi:10.1111/weng.12120 
 Naik, M. K., and Narayan, S. A. (2004)  Indian English Literature 1980–2000: A Critical Survey . New Delhi: Pencraft International. 
 Pennycook, A. (2010) The future of Englishes: One, many, or none? In A. Kirkpatrick (ed.)  The Routledge Handbook of World 
Englishes . London: Routledge, pp. 673–688. 
 Pitzl, Marie-Luise. (2012) Creativity meets convention: Idiom variation and remetaphorozation in ELF.  Journal of English as 
a Lingua Franca 1(1): 27–55. 
 Platt, J., and Weber, H. (1980)  English in Singapore and Malaysia: Status, Features, Functions . Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press. 
 Quirk, R. (1985) The English language in a global context. In R. Quirk and H. Widdowson (eds.)  English in the World: Teaching 
and Learning the Language and Literatures . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–6. 
 Saraceni, M. (2010)  The Relocation of English: Shifting Paradigms in a Global Era . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Schneider, E. W. (2003) The dynamics of new English: From identity construction to dialect rebirth.  Language  79(2): 233–281. 
 Schneider, E. W. (2007)  Postcolonial Englishes: Varieties Around the World . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Schneider, E. W. (2010) Developmental patterns of English: Similar or different? In A. Kirkpatrick (ed.)  The Routledge Hand-
book of World Englishes . London: Routledge, pp. 372–384. 
 Schneider, E. W. (2014) New reflections on the evolutionary dynamics of world Englishes.  World Englishes 33(1): 9–31. 
 Sharifian, F. (ed). (2015)  The Routledge Handbook of Language and Culture . London: Routledge. 
 Smith, L. E. (1976) English as an international auxiliary language.  RELC Journal 7(2): 38–42. 
 Van Rooy, B. (2013) Corpus linguistic work on Black South African English.  English Today 29: 10–15. 
 Xu, Zhichang. (2010) Chinese English: A future power? In A. Kirkpatrick (ed.)  The Handbook of World Englishes . London: 
Routledge, pp. 282–298. 
 Zhang, Wei. (2012) Chinese-English code-mixing among China’s netizens.  English Today 28(3): 40–52. 

428
 Statement of Purpose/Focus 
 The purpose of this chapter is to give readers a sense as to the breadth of topics being investigated 
in L2 pragmatics research these days. The field is burgeoning as this chapter is being written, as 
research papers on L2 pragmatics are being given more frequently at a panoply of meetings. This 
chapter intends to describe a number of the studies so that readers can get a sense of what has been 
done recently in the field and what remains to be done. Researchers may find just the niche for them-
selves through reviewing what has been done. Teachers will hopefully get ideas as to what needs to 
be taught in the L2 classroom with regard to pragmatics, an often neglected area in L2 language 
studies—to the detriment of language users who wish to avoid the embarrassment of pragmatic 
failure due to a lack of knowledge as to how to be pragmatically appropriate. 
 Defining Terms 
 L2 pragmatics is seen as a subfield within general pragmatics, which in turn is seen as a subfield 
within sociolinguistics. The concern of pragmatics is with meaning as communicated by speakers 
(or writers) and interpreted by listeners (or readers), with a focus on intended meanings, assump-
tions, and actions performed when speaking (e.g., making a request) (based on Yule, 1996, pp. 3–4). 
Whether the reception or production in a given L2 is pragmatically successful depends on various 
factors, such as (1) the language users’ proficiency in that L2 and possibly in other (especially related) 
languages; (2) their age, gender, occupation, social status, and experience in the relevant L2-speaking 
communities; and (3) their previous experiences with native (and near native) speakers of the L2 
and their multilingual/multicultural experiences in general (for more on definitions of pragmatics, 
see Cohen, 2014a). 
 The ultimate goal of the chapter is to glean insights from research studies as to how learners can 
be more pragmatically appropriate in a host of L2 performance situations, whether in the perception 
and production of speech acts or in other areas.  Speech acts  are often, but not always, the patterned, 
routinized language that natives and pragmatically competent non-native speakers and writers in 
a given speech community (with its dialect variations) use to perform functions such as thanking, 
complimenting, requesting, refusing, apologizing, and complaining (see Olshtain & Cohen, 1983, pp. 
19–21; Cohen, 1996, pp. 384–385). Speech acts are a challenging area of pragmatic behavior because 
 31 
 Teaching and Learning Second Language Pragmatics 
 Andrew D. Cohen 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 429
of the possible misfit between what one does or does not say or write in a language in the given speech 
act and what is meant by it. Speech act theory, in fact, provides a reliable and valid basis for examin-
ing pragmatic patterns that are primarily focused on selected utterances from the discourse (Mey, 
1993). Beyond speech acts, there are numerous other areas of pragmatic focus. Thus, this coverage of 
L2 pragmatics issues will start by looking first at the notion of research altogether, then at politeness, 
and then at speech acts, the favorite focus of pragmatics research. Then, we will look at other areas 
of pragmatics: conversational overlap, backchanneling, humor, sarcasm, the pragmatic function of 
discourse markers, deixis, and conversational implicature. We will end by considering the teaching 
of L2 pragmatics and the learning and performing of pragmatics. 
 Important Developments/Trends/Traditions in L2 Pragmatics 
 The author of this chapter has studied 12 languages beyond the native language (English) over the 
course of a lifetime, and this has included two Asian languages, Japanese and Mandarin. 1 While 
achieving relative pragmatic control in, say, four of these languages (Hebrew and three Romance lan-
guages), there is still a sense that even with these languages, pragmatic failure may occur (see Cohen, 
1997, 2001). In fact, it is more the pragmatic failures than the pragmatic successes that have made for 
acute awareness that pragmatic performance benefits from explicit instruction—that learners do not 
just acquire pragmatic niceties through osmosis. A major source of this pragmatic failure has been 
inadequate knowledge as to how to perform speech acts. It is no accident that much of the L2 prag-
matics research literature focuses on speech acts. It is the inability of non-natives to perform speech 
acts appropriately which has captured so much of researchers’ attention. Such a focus has provoked 
at least two reactions from critics. The first is that it is myopic to look just at isolated speech acts 
rather than viewing them as part of a larger discourse, where in fact a series of different speech 
acts may interact (see Cohen & Ishihara, 2014). Second, there is the view that much of pragmatics 
deals with other issues. Consequently, this chapter makes an effort to be comprehensive in its cover-
age of topics that have been studied in L2 pragmatics. 
 The perspective taken in this chapter is that while L2 pragmatics is a fascinating area in its own 
right and worthy of extensive and robust study, it is equally valuable to fashion means to make this 
knowledge accessible to L2 learners so that they can learn to be more pragmatically appropriate. So, 
the chapter is meant to be speaking both to researchers and teachers, as well as to learners. 
 Themes in the Research Literature 
 Research Methods 
 Study Abroad 
 Study abroad (SA) is a popular context these days for conducting L2 pragmatics research. A creative 
study with the aim of describing pragmatic development of students while in SA focused on service 
encounters recorded in situ between L2 learners of Spanish and local Spanish service providers in 
Toledo, Spain (Shively, 2011). The participants in the study were seven U.S. students who studied 
abroad for one semester. What made the research design innovative was that the data consisted of 
naturalistic audio recordings that participants made of themselves while visiting local shops, banks, 
and other establishments. The study was longitudinal with recordings made at the beginning, mid-
dle, and end of the semester by each student, for a total of 113 recordings. Additional data included 
students’ weekly journals and interviews with participants. The analysis focused on openings and 
requests and examined the ways in which students’ pragmatic choices shifted over time, considering 

430 • Andrew D. Cohen
the role of language socialization and explicit instruction in pragmatics in that development. Over-
all, the changes in openings and requests suggested that the students learned and adopted some of 
the pragmatic norms of service encounters in the Toledo speech community. 
 Describing Variation in Interlanguage Pragmatics 
 Whereas in the Toledo study the innovation was in the way the data were collected, another line of 
research still in need of actualization would be to get at true variation in intercultural pragmatics. 
While  cross-cultural pragmatics  compares the pragmatics of one culture or subculture with that of 
another,  intercultural pragmatics  (at least as the author defines it) looks at cultures in contact and 
the hybrid forms of pragmatics that result from this interaction. So if we were to conduct genuinely 
intercultural pragmatics research, it would be important to include in the sample subjects who are 
likely to have elements of hybrid pragmatics in their data. 
 A hypothetical study was proposed in Cohen (2012a), focusing on doctor-patient interactions 
in the US Southwest in which intercultural pragmatics would be involved. The paper identified and 
discussed research design issues, types of data employed, the measures used, and concerns about 
data analysis. The proposed study was intended to highlight the number of variables that can lead to 
pragmatic variation in the research outcomes. When doctors use Spanish as a non-native language, 
the question is how their pragmatics is perceived by their Spanish-speaking Mexican immigrant 
patients and with what impact. The proposed study suggested comparing the pragmatics of this 
context with that of native Spanish-speaking doctors interacting with these same patients, English-
speaking doctors interacting with mainstream patients in English in the US Southwest, and doctors 
in Mexico interacting with their patients. The purpose of such research is to problematize just what 
intercultural pragmatics entails when it involves speech communities in flux, taking into account 
individual variation. 
 So, for example, when an Asian learner speaks English, whose pragmatics is being used? Is it Eng-
lish with a pragmatics overlay from the first-language (L1) language and culture? Even if there is an 
effort to reflect English-language pragmatics, which English-speaking country’s pragmatics are being 
adhered to, and if the speakers do not include any native English speakers, does it really matter if the 
pragmatics reflect approaches used by native speakers? In other words, in these cases would violation 
of native-speaker norms constitute pragmatic failure? More will be said about this topic below under 
“Teaching English as a  Lingua Franca .” 
 Rater Variation in the Assessment of Speech Acts 
 This study addressed variability among native-speaker raters who evaluated pragmatic performance 
of English-as-a-foreign-language (EFL) learners (Taguchi, 2011). Low- and high-imposition requests 
and opinions were produced by 48 EFL learners through a computerized oral discourse completion 
test (DCT). Four native English speakers of mixed cultural backgrounds (one African American, one 
Asian American, and two Australians) assessed the appropriateness of the speech acts. To explore 
norms and the reasoning behind the raters’ assessment practice, introspective verbal reports were 
collected and revealed similarities and differences in the use of pragmatic norms and social rules in 
evaluating appropriateness. Some raters were more focused on linguistic forms such as the directness 
level of expressions or the use of politeness markers, while others based their scoring decision on 
non-linguistic aspects such as the use of positive/negative politeness strategies and semantic moves 
as well as the content of speech. Still other raters incorporated additional, unique features that they 
felt were salient into the evaluation criteria (e.g., whether or not a student provided a useful sugges-
tion when criticizing his/her friend). Even when focused on the same dimension, the raters differed 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 431
in their degree of acceptance. For instance, all raters considered excessive verbosity as problematic in 
a small request, but they had different criteria for determining how much was too much. 
 The main finding was that English L1 raters do not form a unitary category. They can vary 
widely in their perceptions and interpretations of appropriateness, politeness, and formality in 
pragmatic performance if they come from subcultures that have very different community norms 
for social interaction and communicative events, as in Taguchi’s (2011) study. It is also possible 
that the raters in that study subconsciously tailored their comments to meet the perceived expec-
tations of the researcher and did not produce a report that reflected their response to the original 
performance. 
 Politeness and Impoliteness 
 A pervasive concern addressed in the pragmatics literature is that of politeness and impoliteness. 
Here let us sample just a few of the recent studies—first looking at cross-cultural variation in the 
perception of impoliteness and at ethnic variation in perceptions of politeness within a country, and 
then at teasing, jocular insults, and swearwords. 
 Cross-Cultural Variation in the Perception of Impoliteness 
 An investigation of cross-cultural variation in the perception of impoliteness was conducted based 
on 500 instances of impoliteness as reported by students in England, China, Finland, Germany, and 
Turkey (Culpeper, Marti, Mei, Nevala, & Schauer, 2010). The analytical framework looked at rapport 
management, covering various types of face and social equity. An analysis of differences between 
the geographically separated data sets revealed that the England-based data had a preponderance of 
impoliteness events in which quality face was violated, whereas the China-based data had a prepon-
derance of instances where equity rights were violated—where group values were prized more highly 
than individualistic ones. 
 Generally, research (Hickey, 2005) places Spanish-speaking cultures in the group of  rapproche-
ment cultures , which relate politeness to positively assessing the addressee and creating bonds of 
friendship and cooperation, and English-speaking cultures in the group of  distancing cultures , which 
primarily use politeness to generate respect and social differentiation. A study compared the under-
standings and use of politeness by native speakers of Spanish from Spain and non-native speakers 
of Spanish from the US (Garcia & Terkourafi, 2014). The respondents’ behavior as reported in writ-
ten questionnaires was related to these norms. The results confirmed these predictions and further 
showed that the more advanced learners were able to align themselves better with Spanish norms but 
still had some problems with the turn-taking system. 
 Another politeness study first compared the complaints of 10 local native-Malay speakers and 10 
expatriate native-English speakers in Brunei in terms of move structure and levels of directness, com-
bined with the frequency of modality markers (Ho, Henry, & Alkaff, 2012). In addition, it attempted 
to address the relationship between polite behavior and its effectiveness in eliciting the appropriate 
response from the hearer. Data from an oral DCT revealed similarities and differences in the com-
plaint move structure between Malay and English speakers. Both groups were rated as using fairly 
indirect language in two key moves of the complaint, but they used different strategies to mitigate 
the social effects of their complaints and requests for action. The results confirmed the commonly 
held belief that politeness does vary between cultures. Furthermore, responses from an acceptability 
judgment questionnaire indicated that being indirect, and therefore polite, may not be effective in 
eliciting the appropriate response to a request for action in a complaint speech act. Both groups, for 
example, considered direct requests to be more effective in getting a response in a situation with a car 

432 • Andrew D. Cohen
mechanic than that of indirect requests, although they also thought that an aggressive direct request 
might not be as effective. 
 Cross-Cultural Differences in Handling Rudeness 
 A study of impoliteness investigated the communicative practices in English and German online 
discussion fora as exemplified by two thematically related sample threads (Kleinke & Bös, 2015). Lin-
guistic rudeness was investigated from a first-order perspective, considering laypersons’ perceptions 
of token structures realized in specific contexts as rude, and a second-order perspective, focusing on 
strategies outlined in theoretical models of politeness. The paper considered the question of how 
participants used intergroup rudeness as a means of in- and out-group construction and examined 
how intergroup rudeness was metapragmatically negotiated as the discussions unfolded. The English 
thread, drawn from the BBC’s message board  Have Your Say (HYS), contained 880 postings, and the 
German one, from  Spiegel Online  (SPON), consisted of 754 postings. To ensure comparability, the 
two threads dealt with the same topic: the Pope’s 2008 visit to the US. In the English forum, the topic 
question was “Should the US give the Pope such a presidential welcome?” In the German forum, 
participants were asked “ Der Papst in den USA—Retter in der Not ?” (‘The Pope in the US—the sav-
ior?’). The German forum was clearly more interactive and showed a preference for rudeness and 
(a quite substantial amount of) meta-discourse on the interpersonal level. In contrast, postings in 
the English forum tended to retreat to group levels, avoiding personal attacks and metapragmatic 
comments. The results showed that intergroup rudeness as well as metapragmatic comments were 
handled differently in the two communities explored. 
 Politeness and Impoliteness in Ethnic Varieties 
 Building on earlier research describing pragmatic features of New Zealand English (NZE) and 
identifying ways in which politeness was expressed in NZ workplace talk, Holmes, Marra, and Vine 
(2012) extended the sociopragmatic analysis of NZE in several ways. Using the theoretical model 
that the researchers had developed to analyze workplace interaction, they focused on intercultural 
interactions between Māori and Pākehā (i.e., Kiwis of European descent) and utilized data from 
both Māori and Pākehā workplaces to shed light on distinctive features of politeness in NZE work-
place discourse. For example, they examined the value of egalitarianism in NZ society and explored 
its pervasive influence on the ways in which politeness was achieved in different NZ communi-
ties of practice, exemplifying some distinctively NZ ways in which formality and informality were 
indexed in workplace interaction. The analysis illustrated how these influences were manifest in 
small talk, humor, meeting protocols, and in the extension of the distinctive pragmatic particle  eh to 
new domains. The study suggested how Māori ways of doing things were subtly influencing Pākehā 
norms and thus contributing to the development of a distinctively New Zealand set of values and 
pragmatic norms. 
 Teasing 
 Teasing is a humorous speech genre in which a co-present participant is the target of joking—a 
behavior that while intended as playful could be viewed pragmatically as being somewhat impolite 
behavior. Research on teasing in everyday conversation has revealed a range of functions, includ-
ing socialization, identity negotiation, conflict resolution, bonding, and amusement. A recent study 
looked at six undergraduate students from the University of Minnesota who chose to spend a semes-
ter studying in Toledo, Spain (Shively, 2015). The participants were 20/21-year-old native-speaking 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 433
college sophomores or juniors, majoring or minoring in Spanish. A total of 24 recordings (12 hours) 
of conversations with their Spanish host families were collected. The results of the study revealed 
that in everyday conversations during SA, three of the subjects were teased fairly frequently by their 
Spanish host families, while the other three were teased infrequently. The topics of teasing included 
eating habits, study skills, drinking and partying too much, impractical footwear, romantic inter-
ests, and physical attributes. However, one particular topic appeared consistently: teases in which 
the topic was learners’ non-target-like L2 use, L2 misunderstanding, or L2 abilities. The researcher 
argued that teasing can potentially facilitate L2 learning by drawing learners’ attention to language 
use and form, which in turn helps reveal the social norms and practices of the host family and of the 
host culture in general. 
 Jocular Insults 
 A research project on leadership discourse and gender in Hong Kong workplaces looked at jocular 
insults occurring at a business meeting in a small factory outlet involving three male and three female 
staff members (Ladegaard, 2012). The two female leaders used jocular insults and other forms of ver-
bal abuse repeatedly, in what was interpreted as instrumental rudeness on the part of the two leaders. 
These discursive strategies were seen as having the purpose of attacking their interlocutors’ face and 
thereby enhancing the leaders’ power. The researcher pointed out that whereas jocular insults may 
function not only as a means by which superiors maintain their position in the workplace but also 
as a socially acceptable strategy by which the subordinates can challenge their leaders, in the present 
context these strategies were used predominantly by the two leaders. The researcher argued that a 
careful consideration of the sociopragmatic norms of the micro- and the macro-context may explain 
why the subordinates would accept these insults. 
 In this particular context, the power distance and hierarchical relationships would explain why 
these leaders’ demeaning discourses were not directly challenged. The researcher pointed out that 
normatively masculine and feminine management styles may be culturally specific. Apparently it 
is considered legitimate for Chinese leaders to adopt a paternalistic autocratic management style, 
and employees are expected to be deferential and obedient. In a culture that places great emphasis 
on power distance and filial piety, there is little to protect employees from exploitation. Bearing in 
mind that this study reported data from just one meeting in one workplace in Hong Kong, the study 
nonetheless lent support to more recent accounts in sociolinguistics arguing that women are not 
intrinsically more polite or considerate than men. 
 Swearwords 
 Knowing how to perform in a pragmatically appropriate way includes knowing when and how to 
swear. Unfortunately, language teachers are often reluctant to teach learners how to swear, especially 
when teaching Asian students, whose sensibilities may be easily offended by such instruction. A 
study in NZ, for example, found that knowing how to use the f-word was crucial in bonding with 
fellow workers and with the boss on the soap factory floor in New Zealand. Over 2,000 interactions 
were collected in English (mostly English L1) (Daly, Holmes, Newton, & Stubbe, 2004). Non-natives 
apparently can find themselves ostracized for  not  cursing like their peers. On the comprehension 
side, the learner may hear these invectives and be put off or even shocked, and certainly not eager to 
learn when and how to use them. 
 Another study published at the same time investigated the perception of the emotional force of 
swearwords and taboo words (S-T words) among 1,039 multilinguals (Dewaele, 2004). The study was 
based on data drawn from a large database collected through a web questionnaire on bilingualism 

434 • Andrew D. Cohen
and emotions. As to the findings,  t- tests revealed that the perceived emotional force of S-T words was 
highest in the L1 and gradually lower in languages learned subsequently. Self-reported L1 attriters 
were found to judge S-T words in their L1 to be less powerful than for those who were still dominant 
in their L1. Participants who learned their language(s) in a naturalistic or partly naturalistic/context 
gave higher ratings on emotional force of S-T words in that language than did instructed language 
learners. 
 Research on the Nature of Speech Acts 
 Compliments in English 
 A recent study offered a multimodal analysis of turns in everyday English interactions that are used 
for making compliments (Keisanen & Karkkainen, 2014). Based on 8 hours of video-recorded casual 
face-to-face conversations in English among mostly native speakers of American English from a cor-
pus at the University of Oulu and a video recording called “Farmhouse,” the researchers argued that 
gaze direction had a specific role in the production of both compliments and their responses. It was 
found that compliment producers sought mutual gaze in order to pursue a response, while recipients 
typically avoided mutual gaze by turning their head and gaze down towards their lap or some object 
at hand in order to display resistance towards self-praise. 
 Apologies in Japanese 
 Another study, just of L1 pragmatics, was undertaken to investigate the functions of apology expres-
sions in Japanese, given that their meanings are situated and negotiated during the interaction 
(Sandu, 2013). Data were collected from Japanese television dramas, where the ongoing develop-
ment of the relationships that protagonists were involved in was chronologically observed. The 
researcher found that shifts from  gomen  ‘sorry’ and  warui  ‘bad’ to  sumimasen  ‘sorry’ occurred mostly 
in confrontational discourses, where the protagonists engaged in some sort of arguments or in tense 
situations where conflict seemed imminent. Three realization patterns of these shifts surfaced from 
the data: avoiding conflict and displaying discontentment, staging and negotiating selves, and atti-
tudinal distance. Nevertheless, these patterns were not mutually exclusive; overlapping between the 
former two and the latter two was encountered in most of the examples, self-presentations remain-
ing the constant. Shifts from the use of  gomen  and  warui  to the use of  gomen nasai  ‘excuse me, I’m 
sorry’ occurred when the speakers attempted to distance themselves from the interlocutors (attitu-
dinal distance) or when the speakers offered a heartfelt apology. Shifts from  sumimasen to  gomen 
nasai  commonly occurred when the status of the relationship that the characters were involved in 
was undetermined, still undergoing negotiations, as a way of adjusting the attitudinal distance. So, 
 gomen nasai  was found to function as an attitudinal distance-gauging device and for expressing a 
heartfelt apology. 
 Requests in Vietnamese and Finnish 
 Another study of L1 pragmatics employed open role-plays in six scenarios with differing social power 
and perceived imposition levels to elicit requests from nine Vietnamese native speakers (Nguyen & 
Ho, 2013). Data were analyzed for level of directness, choice of request strategy, and use of modi-
fication. The findings suggested that unlike requests in some European languages reported in the 
literature, requests in L1 Vietnamese were realized predominantly by means of imperatives in equal 
power situations and the use of query preparatory strategies (e.g., the speaker checks the hearer’s 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 435
ability/willingness to perform the act or asks for permission to perform the act, with the utterance 
often taking the form of a question) in low-to-high power situations, regardless of imposition levels. 
Requests were modified preferably by means of supportive moves such as steers (i.e., phrases used 
to prepare the hearer for the request, such as by checking if the hearer was available to perform the 
request) and grounders (i.e., excuses, reasons, or explanations that speakers used to justify their 
request and thus to appear reasonable), and through lexical means such as the use of address terms, 
honorifics, modal particles, and appealers (i.e., particles or phrases the speaker used to call for the 
hearer’s understanding and sympathy). 
 Another request study used elicited request speech act data in Finnish to view variability of personal 
perspective in the use of formal or informal “you” forms across a variety of situations (Peterson, 2010). 
The data for the study were elicited through scripted, face-to-face oral DCT interviews with 68 speakers 
of Finnish who all lived in the greater Helsinki area. The speakers exhibited a great deal of congruency 
when they were scripted as addressing someone familiar, being in a position of equal or higher status 
than the interlocutor, and when the request was considered a low imposition. In such situations, speakers 
tended to use a second-person perspective, with informal “you” forms. For example, the combination 
of a low rate of imposition and familiarity resulted in the use of straightforward use of a second-person 
perspective and the informal “you” form in nearly all of the requests, such as a request to an assistant to 
take phone messages (“You work at a telecommunications company. You ask your assistant to take your 
phone messages while you are in a business meeting. Your assistant has worked in your department for 
five years. You say:”) and a request to a close relation for some salt (“You are cooking dinner at home, and 
your [close relation] is in the kitchen. You need salt, and your hands are oily. You say:”). 
 On the other hand, a situation that was highly face-threatening, such as asking special permis-
sion from a relatively new supervisor to leave early for a lunch break (“You are a secretary, and you 
have worked at the company for three weeks. Today you want to meet a friend for lunch, so you ask 
your supervisor if you can leave early. You say:”), resulted in no requests made in a second-person 
perspective. Rather, speakers opted for a request that preserved the addressee’s negative face, either 
a first-person or third-person perspective. Scenarios where the addressee was a stranger, combined 
with a high rate of imposition, such as in asking to use that person’s mobile phone (“You are on your 
way downtown on the bus, and your mobile phone’s battery is dead. You need to phone your friend 
to decide where you will meet for coffee. The person sitting next to you, who is about your same age, 
has a mobile phone. You say:”) elicited the most variation in terms of perspective. 
 Cross-Cultural Speech Act Research 
 Research on speech acts often uses the paradigm of comparing L1 performance across languages. It is 
a pleasure to see how robustly research on speech acts has developed in the last 40 years—especially 
with regard to English-as-a-second-language (ESL) and English-as-a-foreign-language (EFL) 
studies. Back in the late 1970s, little empirical data were available on how natives and non-natives 
performed pragmatics. Now there is a sizeable quantity of such data. Clearly, native speakers of cer-
tain languages have gotten greater focus, such as Spanish, Japanese, Chinese, and Korean speakers of 
English, but work has also been done in collecting ESL/EFL data from speakers of other languages, 
such as Persian, Arabic, and German. And every day there are new studies looking at pragmatics in 
languages other than English. 
 One area of development is an increase in the study of certain speech acts, with a focus on speech 
acts that had not been studied at all or only on a limited basis, such as the speech act of giving con-
dolences or that of criticizing someone (i.e., beyond academic or literary criticism, as encouraged 
by teachers). Another is to look at written speech acts, such as in email messages. The following are 
two such studies. 

436 • Andrew D. Cohen
 Complaints 
 One recent study looked at complaints across cultures (Chen, Chen, & Chang, 2011). In this study, 
a total of 20 Americans in the US and 20 Taiwanese university students were recruited and asked to 
respond to a DCT containing eight complaint-provoking scenarios: the waiter spilling a drink on 
a patron’s new shirt, discontent with the late shift at work, background noise while on the phone, 
someone cutting in line at a theater, a hole found in a new T-shirt, the tutee not paying attention, 
the chairperson forgetting an appointment with a member of staff, and a mother opening her child’s 
mail. The DCT was used in the study because it clearly elicited the complaints under study and 
allowed for cross-cultural comparisons. Five complaint strategies (opting out, interrogation, accusa-
tion, request for repair, and threat) were identified and analyzed in terms of their overall and com-
bined use across the eight scenarios. The quantitative results indicated that the American and the 
Chinese participants shared similar distributions in both overall and combined strategy use across 
the complaint situations. The qualitative findings, however, showed differences in choice of linguistic 
forms and expression of semantic content. The study revealed that compared to American com-
plaints, the Chinese complaints seemed to be more sensitive to social power. 
 Requests 
 Another cross-cultural speech act study examined 200 email requests written in English by Greek 
Cypriot university students at a major, English-medium university in Cyprus over a period of sev-
eral semesters (Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2011). The emails were sent to two English L1 faculty who 
had lived in Cyprus for more than 15 years and to nine EFL faculty who had lived in the UK or US 
for more than 10 years. The study examined forms of address (salutations), the degree of direct-
ness employed, and the degree and type of supportive moves and lexical/phrasal modifiers used by 
students in order to soften or aggravate their e-requests. The faculty members’ communication style 
with their students could be characterized as friendly but formal (e.g., they did not encourage first-
name use with students and had contact with students only during class and office hours). Six arche-
type responses drawn from the email data were evaluated by 24 British lecturers from 12 universities 
in the UK. The study found that the non-native-speaking (NNS) students’ emails were characterized 
by significant directness (particularly in relation to requests for information), an absence of lexi-
cal/phrasal downgraders, an omission of greetings and closings, and inappropriate or unacceptable 
forms of address. Consistent with previous email studies, the results revealed that the NNS students 
resorted largely to direct strategies (“please” + the imperative), rather than more appropriate con-
ventional indirectness, both in the case of requests for action and for information. The researcher 
argued that such emails could be perceived as impolite and discourteous and therefore capable of 
causing pragmatic failure, primarily because such messages appeared to give the faculty no choice as 
to whether to comply with the request and failed to acknowledge the imposition involved. 
 A study comparing ESL vs. EFL refusals investigated the effect of participating in an SA program 
on the pragmatic development of Chinese students’ employment of internal modifiers in their L2 
English refusals (Ren, 2013). Twenty Chinese students studying abroad in the UK and 20 Chinese 
students remaining at home participated in the study, and their L2 refusals were examined over the 
course of one academic year. Data were collected three times by an eight-situation Multimedia Elicita-
tion Task—a computer-based multimedia DCT in which participants were asked to sit at a computer, 
watch a series of slides, listen to instructions and to specifically recorded initiating utterances, and 
respond orally. The results revealed that the two groups showed similar development with regard to 
the range of internal modification types in their refusals. Analyses of the participants’ use of individual 
internal modifications revealed different developmental patterns in the utilization of address terms 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 437
and downtoners. The SA students employed more downtoners than their at-home (AH) counter-
parts in their refusals. The findings also revealed that only the SA students showed fine-tuning. The 
SA students rarely employed an address term in their refusals. When they did, they knew they could 
address the high-status interlocutors by their first names according to the L2 culture. In contrast, the 
AH students employed a title to address the high-status interlocutors much more frequently. 
 Apologies 
 There are some excellent examples of cross-cultural studies that rigorously triangulate to ensure that 
the findings are more robust in nature. An example is a study of 35 Greek native speakers and 35 
learners of Greek in Greece for study abroad from England (Bella, 2014). The study involved DCTs, 
questionnaires about the perceived power relationships and distance in vignettes, and verbal report to 
verify the rationale for the responses. The study revealed major differences in performance in Greek 
in four situations, with the non-natives diverging in significant ways from the natives. For example, 
in a situation about apologizing for missing an appointment with their professor, the vast majority of 
Greek native speakers avoided telling the truth—that they had forgotten about it. Instead, they opted 
for explanations that mainly involved family and health problems, which are generally considered 
legitimate and acceptable excuses for transgressions in Greek society. Their verbal reports revealed that 
telling the truth could be conceived by the professor as an insult, since it would be interpreted as a sign 
of indifference and disrespect. Moreover, it would damage their own image as responsible and reliable 
students. In contrast, the learners of Greek opted for telling the truth about missing the appointment. 
 A study of Canarian Spanish speakers demonstrated that there is variation in speech act perfor-
mance not just by culture but also by dialect (González-Cruz, 2012). This study provided insights 
into the most frequent apology strategies used by a group of 100 university students at a university 
in the Canary Islands, Spain, when apologizing in eight different situations. A DCT was constructed, 
which took into account the degree of familiarity between the participants, the severity of the offense, 
the age of the offended person, and gender. Canarian respondents used direct apologies with the 
typical apologetic formula  Lo siento  ‘I’m sorry’ as the strategy that seemed to be most frequently used. 
The strategy of expressing an apology obtained the highest percentage of use (42%), followed at great 
distance by the other strategies—giving an explanation (17%), offer of repair (13%), minimizing 
the offense (7%), acknowledging responsibility (4%), denying responsibility (3%), and promise of 
non-recurrence (0.8%). The study also considered humor as an apology strategy (used 15% of the 
time). The male respondents opted for humor as a strategy more often than women, who seemed 
to prefer giving explanations. Also, women tended to promise non-recurrence and to minimize the 
offense more often than men. 
 Thanking 
 Another cross-cultural speech act study had as its aim to ascertain the attitudes that British and 
American English native speakers had towards the speech act of thanking in Spanish (de Pablos-
Ortega, 2010). A corpus of 64 coursebooks, which included 250 situations representing the speech 
act of thanking orally, was used to construct a questionnaire to determine the attitudes of 300 par-
ticipants, divided equally among Spanish, British, and American respondents. The British and US 
respondents were enrolled in Spanish L2 or FL courses, and the Spaniards were enrolled either in 
Spanish or English degree programs in Spain. The questionnaire included 12 scenarios in which the 
thanking formula was omitted. Participants were prompted to answer questions based on their per-
ceptions and to include other responses whenever they considered them to be appropriate. The main 
finding was that both British and American speakers signaled the absence of thanks in the Spanish 

438 • Andrew D. Cohen
culture as an indicator that the Spaniards were being rude and inconsiderate. Spanish speakers, on 
the other hand, accepted the high probability of situations in which no thanks took place in Spain as 
an integral part of the way of interacting in the Spanish culture. Thanking in the British culture was 
seen as a necessary speech act in certain contexts and, if absent, the British would consider it a sign 
of rudeness, showing a lack of consideration, thus producing a negative attitude. The US students 
did not view the absence of thanks as negatively as the British students did. 
 Compliments Across Dialects 
 As an example of a cross-dialectal study of speech acts, a study was conducted which examined simi-
larities and differences in the realization of compliments (about a person’s skills) in Cameroonian 
and Canadian French (Farenkia, 2012). The data were collected by means of DCTs administered to 55 
participants in Yaoundé (Cameroon) and 39 respondents in Montréal (Canada). The Cameroonian 
participants showed a preference for double-head acts (i.e., two separate compliments, like “Your 
presentation was super. I really found it interesting.”), while the Canadians more frequently employed 
single-head acts. It was also found that indirect realizations of head acts occurred only in the Camer-
oonian data (e.g., complimenting a meal by saying “I’ll come back some day for a cooking lesson.”). 
 Expressing Emotions 
 As an example of a cross-cultural study investigating a lesser-investigated speech act area, research 
was conducted to examine how English L1 users expressed emotions in Mandarin and how this dif-
fered from the way that Mandarin L1 users expressed emotions (Jian, 2015). Scenarios were adopted 
to elicit joy, anger, sadness, fear, and neutrality. Both groups articulated anger, joy, and fear with a 
high pitch. Both groups also employed high intensity for anger and joy and low intensity for sadness 
and fear. Learners generally employed larger fundamental frequency ranges than native speakers, 
particularly for anger and fear. Learners of Mandarin articulated level tones with lengthened dura-
tion and contour tones with shortened duration, affecting the correctness of the portrayal of emo-
tions. Learners used a similar intensity range for all emotions, whereas native speakers tended to vary 
the intensity with different emotions. 
 Conversational Overlap 
 One area of real concern for Asian speakers of American English beyond speech acts is how to break 
into an ongoing conversation, especially given the preferred politeness patterns in their native lan-
guages and cultures. Typically, the non-native misjudges whether a given pause means it is okay to 
break in, especially since native speakers of different languages may have different ways of pausing 
and may also have different attitudes about someone cutting into the conversation during someone 
else’s turn. For example, research comparing conversational strategies in French and Australian Eng-
lish found that French speakers not only tolerate, but indeed expect, a variety of incursions into a 
current speaker’s turn, unlike speakers of Australian English, and that these incursions are generally 
treated as collaborative strategies (Beal, 2010). Apparently conversational overlap in French is con-
sidered a feature of involvement and liveliness, lending a sense of joint purpose to verbal exchanges. 
By contrast, it is regarded as aggressive and unacceptable by members of Anglo-Saxon speech com-
munities like English native speakers (Kerbrat-Orecchioni, 2005). 
 Against this research backdrop, a study was conducted focusing on overlapping talk as a feature of 
conversational management in multi-participant talk in advanced L2 French, in relation to L1 French 
and English (Guillot, 2014). The data collected consisted of multi-participant simulated television 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 439
discussions on the topic of anti-smoking campaigns. They represented the communicative behavior 
of two main groups of subjects: advanced learners of French (four groups, two of pre-year-abroad 
subjects, two of post-year-abroad subjects) and native speakers of French (two groups) (25 subjects 
in all, four to eight per group). All groups were recorded twice, first in their L2, then in their L1: the 12 
recordings thus encompassed L1 and L2 French, and L1 and L2 English. The findings confirmed the 
active propensity of French speakers to use overlapping talk as an interactional resource more than 
Australian English speakers. The frequency of use of overlaps in the L2 French post-year-abroad data, 
closer to L1 French than to L1 English, suggested that the greater interactional and strategic value of 
this type of overlap in L1 French may have been recognized and built on. 
 Backchanneling 
 Another area of concern in terms of conversational management is how listeners use backchanneling 
to signal that they are following a conversation. A recent study focused on backchannel feedback and 
its effect on intercultural communication in dyadic conversations in English between 30 Japanese 
EFL students based in the Nagasaki prefecture and three American exchange students (Cutrone, 
2014). The findings of this study demonstrated several differences in how members of each cul-
ture used backchannels in terms of frequency, variability, placement, and function. This study also 
found evidence supporting the hypothesis that backchannel conventions that are not shared between 
cultures contribute to mutual negative perceptions. The results of this study showed that, when 
compared to the American college students, the Japanese EFL students sent backchannels far more 
frequently overall, which most notably included a greater percentage of simultaneous speech back-
channels and minimal responses. The Americans spoke a great deal more, posed a far greater number 
of questions, and produced a greater percentage of extended responses. 
 This study demonstrated a tendency among the Japanese participants to produce unconventional 
backchannels in situations when they did not understand what their interlocutor was saying. The 
interpretation for this behavior was that Japanese EFL speakers may sometimes feign understanding 
and/or agreement in order to keep conversations pleasant. This belief was further strengthened by 
several of the Japanese EFL participants’ admission in the playback interviews that they had often 
used a continuer, a sign of understanding, agreement, and/or support, and empathy as backchannels 
in situations where they did not understand (71%) and/or when they disagreed (100%) with what 
their interlocutor was saying. 
 Humor and the Uses of Laughter 
 Getting humor in an L2 is a daunting task. Producing it appropriately is even more daunting. 
Attempts at it may end up with non-natives being laughed at more than being laughed with. One 
study of failed humor had as its goal to conduct a rigorous examination of just what is entailed in 
L2 learners’ attempts to understand humor (Bell & Attardo, 2010). Six advanced non-native speak-
ers (three Japanese, two Korean, and one Chinese graduate student) of English, all studying to get a 
degree in an MA TESOL program, kept diaries in which they recorded their experiences with humor 
in English over an eight-week period. Group meetings were held every two weeks to allow the par-
ticipants to elaborate on, interpret, and discuss their experiences. All instances of failed humor were 
extracted, coded, and used to construct a typology, which identified seven ways in which a speaker 
may fail to successfully engage in a humorous exchange: 
 1. failure to process language at the illocutionary level, 
 2. failure to understand the meaning of words (including connotations), 

440 • Andrew D. Cohen
 3. failure to understand the pragmatic force of utterances (including irony), 
 4. failure to recognize the humorous frame, 
 5. experiencing a false negative: missing the joke, 
 6. experiencing a false positive: seeing a joke where none was intended, and 
 7. failure to understand the incongruity of the joke. 
 A follow-up study by one of the same researchers focused on native English speakers’ handling of 
humor, as if to accentuate just how problematic responses to attempted humor can be, even for native 
speakers (Bell, 2013). The researcher looked at native-speaker responses to a joke that hinged on a 
rather subtle pun (“how’s” = “house”). The pun situation involved the mail carrier inquiring about 
a homeowner’s dog that had attacked him in the past but wasn’t outside the last few days. When 
the mail carrier asks, “How’s your dog?” the homeowner, hearing (or pretending to hear?) “House 
your dog,” responds “I did.” The joke was impossible for most hearers to comprehend without an 
explanation. A total of 278 L1-hearer responses were elicited by 22 undergraduates enrolled in a 
sociolinguistics course at a large, public university in the western US. The most common reactions 
included non-verbal responses, explicit expressions of non-understanding (e.g., “I don’t get it’’), 
laughter, silence, and repetition of the punch line. Significant differences were found when analyzing 
the responses by gender and social relationship, but not age. The joke was met with laughter 28% of 
the time. The numerous hearers who did not understand it tended to respond with uncomfortable 
or nervous laughter. 
 Focusing just on laughter, a study was conducted looking at the ways in which laughter—
specifically, what was termed  coping laughter— was utilized to manage the face-threatening relational 
aspects of disagreements rather than to deal with the actual content of disputes (Warner-Garcia, 
2014). The four specific functions of coping laughter that were analyzed were (1) mitigation of face-
threat, (2) concealment of face-loss, (3) serious-to-non-serious frame switch, and (4) facilitation of 
topic transition. The functions were seen to be dependent on who initiated the laughter, how other 
participants responded to the laughter, and the overarching context and participant roles at play in 
the interaction. The researcher argued that coping laughter was an effective strategy for dealing with 
the interactional friction caused by a disagreement without dealing with its content. 
 Sarcasm 
 Equally as daunting for L2 learners as perceiving humor is perceiving sarcasm. According to Kim 
(2014), successful understanding of sarcasm in L2 can be a substantial challenge for learners for at 
least two reasons: (1) the inherent incongruity of meaning that is frequently exhibited in instances of 
sarcasm and (2) the highly context-dependent nature of sarcasm. Native speakers of a language possess 
top-down knowledge (e.g., intuitions and experiences) through which they can (in many cases) suc-
cessfully interpret their interlocutors’ sarcastic intent, while non-native learners have to use a bottom-
up approach. As an example of recent research on this topic, a study examined how Korean adult EFL 
learners interpreted sarcasm in spoken English (Kim, 2014). Twenty-eight Korean adult employees of a 
trading company in Korea participated in the study. Participants were asked to identify instances of 
sarcasm in video clips taken from the US TV sitcom  Friends , and then to assess the possible intent of 
the speaker and the communicative goals associated with these sarcastic utterances. During individual 
interviews, participants reported the cues that they attended to while processing sarcasm. Analysis 
revealed that learners drew upon certain features of L1 schema during the L2 comprehension process. 
 According to the researcher, there were various explanations for why Korean participants did not 
perceive the use of sarcasm in  Friends , such as lack of knowledge about how sarcasm is generally used 
in the specific L2 context, lack of linguistic data about highly conventionalized sarcastic utterances, 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 441
and lack of knowledge about the types of cues used to convey sarcasm (Kim, 2014). For example, 
the majority of native-speaker participants saw the use of “Yeah, right” in  Friends  not only as an 
example of a conventionalized sarcastic remark but also as a way of disagreeing with or making fun 
of the interlocutor. For those 60% of the Korean participants who did perceive it as sarcasm, they all 
misperceived the intent as being that of simply trying to be funny. Many Korean participants also 
apparently lacked knowledge about how to interpret speakers’ facial expressions, especially the use of 
a “blank face,” which is one of the cues that sarcasm users in the US typically adopt. 
 The Pragmatic Function of Discourse Markers 
 Frequently used discourse markers, such as “I think,” “well,” “yes/yeah,” “you know,” and “please,” can 
play an important role in signaling pragmatic functions, both in speaking and in writing. The fol-
lowing are brief descriptions of two recent studies that highlight the issue. 
 The Frequency of Use of Discourse Markers 
 One study of college EFL learners in China looked at the frequency of use of discourse markers 2 by 
141 English majors from three Chinese universities (Wei, 2011). The data consisted of responses to 
interview questions such as “How might your life look ten years from now?”, descriptions of their 
home and of recent activities, and an apology to a friend for having missed a dinner engagement. 
While intermediate and advanced students used similar discourse markers and in the same order of 
magnitude, quantitative and qualitative analyses indicated that advanced students tended to better 
employ discourse markers than intermediate students in managing spoken interactions coherently 
and in performing social functions to cater to contextual needs. 
 The Cross-Cultural Misuse of Discourse Markers 
 Another study investigated the effect of native language (Mandarin) on the use of English discourse 
markers by L1 Chinese speakers of English (Liu, 2013). Ten graduate students originally from main-
land China and five American English native speakers at the University of Florida served as subjects. 
All students were interviewed for 15 minutes in English by native English speakers. Topics for the 
interviews included hobbies, weekend activities, sports, favorite teachers, favorite movies and TV 
programs, and their happiest experiences. The Chinese students were interviewed on the same topics 
in Chinese. Results showed that three Chinese discourse markers were found to influence their cor-
responding English expressions. The finding that the L1 Chinese speakers used the deliberative func-
tion of “I think” in medial or final position, while the native English speakers did not, would suggest 
that they transferred this use of “I think” from their L1 ( wǒ juéde ). Second, the L1 Chinese speakers 
used “yeah/yes” as a backchannel after the interlocutor’s reaction “uh-huh” or “okay,” while the native 
English speakers did not. This use was also interpreted as negative transfer from the corresponding 
Chinese expression  duì  because it has this function in Chinese. Finally, Chinese L1 speakers used “ah” 
to perform a clause-medial function (followed by self-correction) in the same way that  a  would be 
used in Chinese, while the native English speakers did not use “ah” in this way. 
 Deixis 
 Another concern of pragmatics researchers is that of  deixis , namely, the use of words and phrases 
that cannot be fully understood without additional contextual information. Words are deictic if 
their semantic meaning is fixed but their denotational meaning varies depending on time and/or 

442 • Andrew D. Cohen
place (e.g., words like “there,” “this,” and “that”). This would also apply to the use of personal pro-
nouns. When bilinguals do not use pragmatically normative forms in one of their languages, it is 
often assumed that they do so because of insufficient exposure. A study showed, however, that bilin-
guals who are familiar with pragmatic norms for the use of personal pronouns may choose to reject 
them and, by extension, the sociocultural worlds that they index (Koven, 2009). The study involved 
interviews and ethnographic observations of 22 bilingual women in their late teens to early twen-
ties, who were the daughters of Portuguese migrants to France. His findings were that they used 
second-person address forms with their parents in their two languages in ways that diverged from 
French and Portuguese monolingual usage. By examining participants’ metapragmatic discourse 
about French and Portuguese pragmatic paradigms of address and their different implications for 
relationship and identity, the researcher argued that these bilinguals chose forms of address that at 
times marked a rejection of the sociocultural norms. His conclusion was that their language use was 
partially mediated by their ideologically informed attitudes towards the socially indexical forms in 
and across each language. 
 Conversational Implicature 
 A further concern of pragmatics researchers is for  conversational implicature , namely, the implied 
meaning as interpreted by listeners based on the context of an utterance and their knowledge of 
how conversation works. Non-natives need to decode linguistic and contextual clues and then use 
them to make inferences about speakers’ implied intentions. As a sample of recent L2 research on 
implicature, Taguchi (2013) reported the results of two studies, in the first of which participants 
were 160 Japanese learners of English in a branch of an American university in Japan. The respon-
dents’ ability to comprehend implicature was measured with a computerized listening test consisting 
of 40 multiple-choice items: 16 conventional implicature items (i.e., where the interpretation was 
encoded in linguistic forms—e.g., “she has two daughters”), 16 non-conventional implicature items 
(i.e., where the meaning was derived from context—e.g., “A: Has Tim left for school yet? B: It’s after 
9”), and eight literal-meaning items. The conventional implicature included two indirect speech 
acts: requests and refusals. Ability to comprehend conventional implicature was found to precede 
comprehension of non-conventional implicature, both in terms of accuracy and speed of compre-
hension. The conventionality effect was found to be strong when the convention was shared between 
L1 and L2, as in the case of indirect refusals in Japanese and English where it is common to provide a 
reason or excuse when refusing. Indirect requests, on the other hand, did not have the same level of 
conventionality effect because the linguistic forms encoded as convention (e.g., “Do you mind if” + 
verb) were unique to English. Consequently, processing time was slower. 
 The second study examined comprehension of implicature among L2 learners of English (Tagu-
chi, 2013). The study traced development at two different levels: the accurate demonstration of prag-
matic knowledge (knowledge of how to interpret implied intentions) and the processing capacity of 
this knowledge (the speed with which learners access and process information). Participants were 
57 Japanese college ESL students in Hawaii and 60 Japanese college EFL students in Japan. All ESL 
students except one had a home-stay arrangement with local families who were native speakers of 
English, but all EFL students lived on campus and had another Japanese student as a roommate. A 
computerized listening test was developed to assess learners’ ability to comprehend conversational 
implicature. The test had 58 items: 24 conventional implicature, 24 non-conventional implicature, 
and 10 literal comprehension items. Conventional implicature included indirect refusals that took 
the form of giving an excuse to refuse someone’s invitation, request, or offer. Non-conventional items 
were written as expressions used to convey opinions in a non-literal manner and did not involve any 
discourse routines or conventions of language use. The study found that the degree of development 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 443
in accuracy and response speed was greater for conventional implicatures than for non-conventional 
implicatures. Conventional implicatures (indirect refusals) were easier and faster for the learners 
to comprehend and showed a robust development over a short period of time. Non-conventional 
implicatures were found to be both difficult to comprehend and late-developing. Although both 
ESL and EFL groups improved significantly in comprehension, when the degree of development was 
compared, the increase of speed was much smaller than that of accuracy for the ESL group, while 
the EFL group showed the opposite pattern: a greater gain in the accuracy score than in the response 
speed. 
 Teaching L2 Pragmatics 
 Having covered issues regarding the “what” of L2 pragmatics, the chapter will now consider how 
to teach the pragmatics of language behavior. There is a noticeable gap between what research in 
pragmatics has found and how language is generally taught today—thus, a rather weak link between 
theory and practice. The reason why this chapter has concentrated on pragmatics research in leading 
journals was precisely to underscore the importance of a research basis for choosing pragmatic mate-
rials to teach. Generally, explicit teaching about how language functions in discourse has been found 
to be more beneficial than leaving learners to figure out pragmatic behavior for themselves (Cohen, 
2012b). In this section on L2 pedagogy, we will discuss in turn the teaching of requests, criticism, 
refusals, phatic communication, English as a  lingua franca (ELF), materials development, digitally 
mediated contexts for learning pragmatics, and the assessment of pragmatics. 
 Teaching Requests in an L2 
 A study found that learners who had to discover implicitly the underlying rules for downgrading 
requests (i.e., figuring out how to link the sociopragmatic and pragmalinguistic features 3  in the 
information to various meanings conveyed by the downgrading of requests) had an advantage over 
those who just received explicit information about making requests (Takimoto, 2008). The learners 
who needed to induce the implicit rules were better able to process information about the target fea-
tures and store this information in working memory than those who were provided the rules explic-
itly. So this finding may suggest tempering a bit our unbridled enthusiasm for explicit instruction of 
L2 pragmatics, in part because learners differ as to their learning style preferences (see, for example, 
Cohen, 2012a). In addition, some rules of L2 pragmatics are more readily taught than others. 
 Teaching Criticism in an L2 
 Looking at the explicit teaching of a less-taught speech act, a study evaluated the relative effectiveness 
of two types of form-focused instruction on the acquisition of the speech act set of constructive criti-
cism of a peer’s essay writing by 69 Vietnamese learners of English (Nguyen, Pham, & Pham, 2012). 
Three high-intermediate EFL intact classes of pre-service EFL teachers (N = 69) were recruited. Over a 
10-week course, the explicit group (N = 28) participated in consciousness-raising activities and received 
explicit meta-pragmatic explanations and correction of their errors in form and meaning. The implicit 
group (N = 19), on the other hand, participated in pragmalinguistic input enhancement and recast 
activities. The two treatment groups were compared with a control group (N = 22) on pre-test and 
post-test performance, consisting of a DCT, a role-play, and an oral peer-feedback task. There was also 
a delayed post-test comprising the same production tasks to measure long-term retention. The results 
revealed that both of the treatment groups significantly improved in the immediate post-test over the 
pre-test, outperforming the control group. The treatment groups also maintained their improvement 

444 • Andrew D. Cohen
in the delayed post-test. Of note, the explicit instruction group performed significantly better than 
the implicit group on all measures. 
 Teaching Refusals in an L3 
 Another approach to pragmatics research regarding speech acts has been to look at the learning of 
pragmatics among multilinguals. One study examined the benefits that teaching the speech act of 
refusal from a discourse perspective had on L3 learners’ pragmatic knowledge (Alcón Soler, 2012). 
Retrospective verbal reports were used to examine the impact of instruction on attention and aware-
ness of refusals and to explore whether receptive and productive bilingual learners resorted to prag-
malinguistic, sociopragmatic, and linguistic information in different ways during the planning and 
execution of refusals. There were 92 university students learning English L3 pragmatics in the study, 
40 who had acquired Catalan as their L1 and Spanish as their L2 (referred to in the study as  produc-
tive bilinguals ) and 52 students who had acquired Spanish as their L1 and Catalan as an L2 (termed 
 receptive bilinguals ). Pragmatic input was provided using excerpts from the  Friends  sitcom series, 
with the focus on refusals to invitations in a situation of power and social distance. The findings 
showed that teaching refusals at the discourse level increased the learners’ pragmalinguistic aware-
ness of refusals in English L3, regardless of their degree of Catalan and Spanish bilingualism. In 
contrast, productive bilinguals outperformed receptive bilinguals in L3 metapragmatic awareness. 
The interpretation provided was that the productive bilinguals had greater communicative sensitiv-
ity, in large part because they were already making more contrasts between the Catalan and Spanish 
linguistic systems, and thus had a better sense of intended meanings and social variables affecting 
language use. 
 Teaching Phatic Communication 
 Phatic communication , or small talk, plays an important role in the pragmatics of social interactions. 
This non-referential use of language is enlisted in order to share feelings or establish a mood of 
sociability rather than to communicate information or ideas. Small talk can be used to create, main-
tain, and/or enhance friendly relationships. The problem for non-natives is that they may not know 
how to make small talk effectively, and didactic materials tend not to include it as an independent 
topic, nor do they neatly define it, distinguish its different manifestations, or address its sociocul-
tural peculiarities (Padilla Cruz, 2013). Effective phatic communication requires a meta-pragmatic 
awareness of a wide range of complex and subtle issues, such as when and with whom to engage in 
it, the underlying reasons to do so, the types of phatic tokens that may be exchanged, the topics that 
such tokens may address, and the potential effects achievable. Based on an approach to teaching the 
pragmatics of specific L2 aspects (Martínez-Flor & Usó-Juan, 2006), a proposal was made for teach-
ing phatic communication to non-natives (Padilla Cruz, 2013). More recently, interview data from 
145 immigrants to Australia simply reinforced the view that teaching learners how to engage in small 
talk is advisable (Yates & Major, 2015). 
 Teaching ELF 
 In an increasingly global world, more people are communicating with each other in English, although 
it is not the native language of either speaker, in a context where there are no native speakers of Eng-
lish around to evaluate their pragmatics. So, as already queried earlier in this chapter, whose prag-
matics do they use? A recent study performed qualitative analysis on a sample of data produced by a 
multicultural group of MA students for whom English was the  lingua franca  (Maíz-Arévalo, 2014). 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 445
The researcher investigated the extent to which learners stuck to their own culturally pragmatic rules 
and the extent to which they adhered to those of the target culture in a multicultural class where 
English was the medium of instruction and the language for students’ peer-to-peer communication. 
The focus was on the speech act of disagreement, given its face-threatening nature and its disruptive 
potential if carried out in what interlocutors might perceive as the “wrong” way. 
 Ten students from different cultural backgrounds, studying English Linguistics at the Universidad 
Complutense of Madrid, were asked to carry out a group assignment. The negotiation and discus-
sion process was computer-mediated via the use of forums within their university’s Moodle program 
rather than face-to-face. This allowed the researcher to collect 15,598 words of naturally occurring, 
spontaneous written data. By participating in an online asynchronous discussion, the students did 
not have to fight for conversational turns, but rather were able to contribute to the discussion at 
their own pace. The findings revealed that students on the whole showed a tendency to avoid strong 
disagreement and instead to favor mitigated disagreement, such as the use of hedges, asking for 
clarification, and giving explanations. Moreover, students with high linguistic proficiency displayed 
a wider range of strategies and tended to follow the pragmatic rules of British English, since most of 
them had lived in the UK for a while before coming to Spain. Students whose linguistic proficiency 
was lower also showed a tendency to avoid strong disagreement, but they were much more limited 
with regard to their mitigating strategies, favoring the non-native overuse of expressions of regret 
and hedges. 
 Materials Development for L2 Pragmatics 
 While textbooks are often authorized and treated as unproblematic, especially in foreign language 
contexts, many of them still fall short in terms of appropriate language use in context (Pulverness, 
2003; Ishihara, 2011). The goal of one recent study was to explore whether current discourse analytic 
research is reflected in the lessons and communication examples of five ESL textbooks used in Aus-
tralia, by using spoken requests as the subject of investigation (Petraki & Bayes, 2013). The textbooks 
were evaluated on five criteria deriving from research on politeness, speech act theory, and conversa-
tion analysis. The criteria included whether and the extent to which the textbooks: 
 1. raised students’ cross-cultural awareness of requests, 
 2. exposed students to different request forms: direct, conventionally indirect (“Would you 
mind . . .?), and nonconventionally indirect (i.e., a hint, e.g. “My computer screen is frozen 
again . . .”), 
 3. adequately explored the contextual factors that affect the degree of politeness, 
 4. emphasized preferred or dispreferred responses (i.e., face-threatening), 
 5. exposed students to multi-turn request forms: 
 • pre-sequences—e.g., “Excuse me. I’m sorry to bother you [PRESEQUENCE], but could you 
possibly get my case down for me? [REQUEST].” 
 • re-requests—e.g., “Can you change the date on it? [REQUEST]”, then re-requests with 
“Well, can’t you just turn a blind eye? [RE-REQUEST].” 
 The study found that none of the coursebooks covered all of the criteria and that some coursebooks 
actually had very inadequate lessons. The results of the textbook analysis demonstrated that teachers 
using these five coursebooks and designers of future coursebooks would be advised to enhance their 
teaching of requests by drawing on pragmatics research and on authentic examples. 
 Despite the general neglect of pragmatics materials in L2 coursebooks, there have been some efforts 
to address this lack, such as the appearance of volumes which do provide samples of instructional 

446 • Andrew D. Cohen
materials and lesson plans for L2 pragmatics (e.g. Bardovi-Harlig & Mahan-Taylor, 2003; Ishihara 
& Cohen, 2014; Martínez-Flor & Usó-Juan, 2010; Tatsuki & Houck, 2010; Houck & Tatsuki, 2011). 
Examples of more extensive curricular materials include Riddiford and Newton (2010) for teaching 
a range of business or workplace interactions in ESL contexts, Sykes and Cohen (2006) for teaching 
communicative acts in Spanish, and Ishihara and Maeda (2010) for teaching speech acts in Japanese. 
 In order to provide an updated treatment of this topic, Ishihara and the author looked at (a) what 
we know, (b) what we think we know, and (c) what we need to find out with respect to materials 
development in L2 pragmatics (Cohen & Ishihara, 2012). The conclusion was that pragmatics is 
often neglected or only marginally treated in existing L2 curricula and that further development of 
L2 pragmatics materials would support teachers in preparing learners to understand and use lan-
guage effectively in context, as well as to express their own voice as they wish in the target community. 
 Learning Pragmatics in Digitally Mediated Contexts 
 An area that has come into its own in research on L2 learning is that of language learner strategies 
and the application of strategies to the learning and performance of L2 pragmatics (Cohen & Sykes, 
2013). The underlying concern is with the potentially important role of strategies in heightening 
learners’ ability to make informed choices with regard to how they handle intercultural situations. 
The focus is on assisting learners in developing a more robust repertoire of strategies for their han-
dling of pragmatics within intercultural communication. The aim is to support learners in building 
a toolkit of common pragmatic options that can be used as they co-construct communication in a 
variety of intercultural interactions. 
 To begin addressing these issues, a strategic approach to L2 pragmatics was included in a general 
website launched by the Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition (CARLA) in 2001. 4 
Then a Japanese pragmatics website was launched in 2003, and a Spanish pragmatics website was 
launched in 2006. 5  Both the Japanese and the Spanish websites benefited from research in cross-
cultural pragmatics and from interventional studies investigating the effects of explicit pragmatics 
instruction on the development of pragmatic ability. Their goal was to employ web-based strat-
egy instruction: to enhance learners’ development and use of language learner strategies, to provide 
guidance in complex pragmatic language use that is difficult to “pick up,” and to facilitate learning 
through web-based materials. 
 A taxonomy of strategies for learning and performing L2 pragmatics was applied to the construc-
tion of the Spanish pragmatics website,  Dancing with Words , aimed at facilitating the learning of 
pragmatics appropriate for the Spanish-speaking world, with strategy material integrated into the 
website. Research was conducted by means of two studies, involving both this Spanish pragmatics 
website and a synthetic immersive environment (SIE),  Croquelandia , which was designed as a three-
dimensional immersive space for the learning of pragmatic behaviors in Spanish (Cohen & Sykes, 
2013). Results showed some reported differences in strategy use in the two different kinds of digital 
environments, with the finding of most relevance to the notion of intercultural education being that 
in the SIE, learners reported an increased use of metapragmatic strategies for dealing with L2 prag-
matics. This finding highlighted the role of strategies in making informed choices about pragmatics. 
 The next step was to set up a CARLA wiki, where pragmatics researchers and instructors world-
wide can contribute their insights and findings to promote L2 pragmatics. The main strategy will 
be to use  crowdsourcing , namely, soliciting contributions from a large group of people, and espe-
cially from the online community. The goal will be to make the CARLA collection of L2 pragmatics 
information more varied than it currently is, with more on language variation across users and 
dialect variation as well. The site could include simulations where learners have the opportunity 
to produce L2 pragmatics. It could also include information on additional speech acts and revised 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 447
content based on the 10 or so years since the Japanese and Spanish websites were constructed 
(Cohen, 2016). 
 Assessment of Pragmatics 
 Although researchers are beginning to take greater interest in the assessment of L2 pragmatics (see, 
e.g., the edited volume by Ross & Kasper, 2013), classroom teachers may still avoid the assessment 
of pragmatics, especially non-native teachers who feel that they are incapable of judging what con-
stitutes correct behavior. Nonetheless, there are sound reasons for assessing L2 pragmatics in the 
classroom (Cohen, 2014b): 
 • It sends a message to the students that their ability to be pragmatically appropriate in the com-
prehension and production of language in different sociocultural situations is a positive thing. 
 • Having such items on a test motivates students to study about the performance of speech acts. 
 • It gives teachers an opportunity to see the relative control their students have in what may at 
times be a significant area for L2 performance. 
 • It gives teachers an opportunity to see whether learners have learned the pragmatics that were 
included in the instruction. 
 A number of possible tasks have been suggested for assessing the comprehension of pragmatic 
performance. One approach is to have learners indicate how well they  think  someone else has per-
formed pragmatically. There are also various ways to collect students’ pragmatic production, such 
as through oral role-play, written discourse as if spoken, multiple-choice responses, or short-answer 
responses. It would appear that if speech act situations, for example, are made realistic and if guide-
lines are provided to teachers on how to rate key aspects of pragmatics, then assessment of pragmat-
ics would be more prevalent (Cohen, 2014b). 
 Bardovi-Harlig and Shin (2014) argued that testing in pragmatics has for too long relied on the 
same six measures of pragmatics assessment introduced by Hudson, Detmer, and Brown (1992, 1995). 
They demonstrated that a wealth of potential test formats in the L2 pragmatics acquisition literature 
are as yet untapped resources for pragmatics testing. They introduced tasks that were used in pragmatic 
research, which they considered innovative in the context of assessment, and addressed the potential of 
each task to enhance task authenticity, their practicality for testing, and their potential for broadening 
our construct representation. By format, the tasks that they presented for consideration included oral 
production (oral for oral), written production (written for written), and audio and/or audio-visual 
conversational excerpts with written/read interpretations. By area of pragmatics, the tasks covered 
conventional expressions, pragmatic routines, conversational implicature, pragmaticality judgments, 
sociopragmatic judgments, interaction of grammar and pragmatics, and speech act identification. The 
production tasks simulated turn taking by providing unanticipated turns through computer generation 
or audio presentation, requiring responses from the test takers. They started with the production tasks 
and then moved on to consider interpretation, judgment, and prediction tasks. 
 Learning and Performing Pragmatics 
 L2 Developmental Issues for Children 
 Research has been conducted to describe developmental patterns in the interlanguage pragmatic 
comprehension of young learners of English. One such study looked at the performance of 176 
seven-, nine-, and twelve-year-old Cantonese learners of English on a multiple-choice comprehension 

448 • Andrew D. Cohen
exercise consisting of five direct and indirect speech acts (requests, apologies, refusals, compliments, 
and complaints) in contextualized dialogues, supplemented with verbal report data on the process-
ing strategies from a subsample of 60 of these learners (Lee, 2010). The rationale for using more 
indirect speech act realizations was that children in early childhood (i.e., ages 6–9) gradually come 
to better understand and produce indirect speech acts as they become more aware of other ways to 
express intention and lose the default assumption that there is semantic congruence between a lit-
eral utterance and a speaker’s intended meaning. The overall mean comprehension scores increased 
steadily by age, with the difference in the scores across age groups only significant statistically between 
the seven- and nine-year-olds. All of the learners performed well in the comprehension of direct 
speech acts, but the seven- and nine-year-old learners encountered problems in comprehending 
indirect speech acts, particularly indirect refusals, compliments, and complaints. Their performance 
and processing strategies provide some evidence for the development of direct and indirect speech 
act comprehension in L2 learning—from relying on literal meaning or the semantic congruence 
between meaning and expression to other strategies, such as speaker intention and contextual clues, 
as they transit from early to middle childhood. 
 Adult Learning and Performance of L2 Pragmatics 
 While it is crucial to focus on teachers and their teaching of pragmatics, it is equally important to 
focus on learners and the strategies that they employ in an effort to ensure that the input that they 
process is pragmatically comprehensible to them. Likewise, attention needs to be given to the strate-
gies that learners can use so that their output is comprehensible pragmatically to their interlocutors 
(Cohen, 2011). This entails taking a close look at specific examples of what comprehensibility of 
language at the level of intercultural pragmatics actually means. In looking at both the comprehen-
sion and production of pragmatic material, the strategies that might be called on in order to avoid 
pragmatic failure need to be considered (Cohen, 2005). So this means looking at what it might take 
strategically in order to effectively comprehend input pragmatically, whether the input is through 
language, gestures, or silence. A strategy for understanding cursing at the workplace, for example, 
would be to pull over a working associate and ask to be briefed on the various ways to curse appro-
priately in that context (e.g., when in anger, when in jest, considering issues of age, status, and gender, 
and so forth). 
 In addition, it would be advisable for learners to consider using strategies for avoiding pragmatic 
failure in the production of language. Hence, they would need to know which strategies to use in 
order to avoid negative transfer of norms from the L1 or another language, overgeneralization of per-
ceived L2 pragmatic norms, and the effect of instruction or instructional materials. They would also 
need strategies for communicating appropriately even if they have only limited L2 grammar ability 
and strategies for dealing with their own resistance to abiding by the perceived L2 norms. Just with 
regard to avoiding negative transfer in dealing with speech acts, for example, learners may benefit 
from checking with local peers as to the most appropriate ways to respond to a compliment, as well 
as how to make requests that are likely to be responded to favorably in various situations in the given 
speech community. The ultimate concern is to identify strategies that might assist learners in their 
efforts to have their conversational partners correctly interpret the intended pragmatics in their com-
munications, all the while being mindful of the role that teachers can play in facilitating this process. 
 Conclusion and Future Directions 
 This review of research literature on L2 pragmatics has sought insights for the teaching and learning 
of L2 pragmatics by first looking at approaches to research methods, since we can learn a good deal 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 449
about how to gather and analyze data from such studies. The conclusion to draw here is that the field 
of pragmatics is open to innovative research in a variety of areas. 
 With regard to the issue of politeness and impoliteness, the review made the point that control of 
pragmatics includes knowing how to perceive impoliteness and how to actually be impolite at times 
when called for (e.g., knowing how to curse). The point to take away from this discussion is that 
sociocultural appropriateness comes in all shapes and sizes. 
 Next, we considered research dealing with the nature of speech acts and then looked at cross-
cultural speech act research. After that, the focus was on other areas of pragmatics of concern to 
L2 teachers: conversational overlap, backchanneling, humor and the use of laughter, sarcasm, the 
pragmatic function of discourse markers, deixis, and conversational implicature. This range of topics 
relating to L2 pragmatics research just underscores the challenges facing teachers as to what to teach 
and the commensurate challenges of learners in terms of what needs to be learned. 
 In an effort to move from theory to practice, the chapter also focused on pedagogy: teaching L2 
learners a more-commonly-taught speech act (requests) and a less-commonly-taught speech act 
(criticism), teaching L3 learners a commonly taught speech act (refusals), teaching phatic communi-
cation, teaching pragmatics to ELF learners, materials development for L2 pragmatics, the learning of 
pragmatics in digitally mediated contexts, and the assessment of pragmatics. Of these issues, perhaps 
the ELF issue is the most provocative. Whose pragmatics should speakers use if they are interacting 
with other non-native speakers of English, without intervention by any native speakers? This issue is 
just beginning to be explored. 
 Finally, we focused on learners and on strategies for the learning and performing of pragmatics. 
While teachers can do lots of things to promote L2 pragmatics in the language classroom and beyond, 
the enormity of the learning task—as witnessed by all the topics covered in this review—means that 
learners would benefit highly from being proactive about their own learning in this domain. The 
more strategic that learners can be in this process, the better. 
 Notes 
 1. Aside from numerous trips to Japan and China, the author has traveled repeatedly to other Asian countries like Thailand 
and South Korea, where cultural aspects of pragmatics are at times in noticeable contrast to those in English-language 
cultures. 
 2. Which the researcher referred to as  pragmatic markers . 
 3.  Pragmalinguistic  refers to what constitutes appropriate linguistic forms for expressing the intent of the speech act, taking 
into account the norms of behavior that apply in the given situation.  Sociopragmatic  refers to the norms of behavior for 
realizing the given speech act in a given context, taking into account the culture involved, the relative age and gender of the 
interlocutors, their social class and occupations, and their roles and status in the interaction (Thomas, 1983). 
 4. Retrieved June 9, 2015 from http://www.carla.umn.edu/speechacts/index.html. 
 5. Retrieved June 9, 2015 from http://www.carla.umn.edu/speechacts/japanese/introtospeechacts/index.htm, and http://
www.carla.umn.edu/speechacts/sp_pragmatics/home.html. 
 References 
 Alcón Soler, E. (2012). Teachability and bilingualism effects on third language learners’ pragmatic knowledge.  Intercultural 
Pragmatics ,  9 (4), 511–541. 
 Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Mahan-Taylor, R. (Eds.). (2003).  Teaching pragmatics . Washington, DC: Office of English Programs, US 
Department of State. Retrieved June 17, 2014 from: http://americanenglish.state.gov/files/ae/resource_files/intro.pdf. 
(Note: Some of the individual chapters are still available at the same website.) 
 Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Shin, S. (2014). Expanding traditional testing measures with tasks from L2 pragmatics research.  Iranian 
Journal of Language Testing ,  4 (1), 26–49. 
 Béal, C. (2010).  Les Interactions quotidiennes en français et en anglais . Berne: Peter Lang. 
 Bell, N. D. (2013). Responses to incomprehensible humor.  Journal of Pragmatics ,  57 , 176–189. 

450 • Andrew D. Cohen
 Bell, N. D., & Attardo, S. (2010). Failed humor: Issues in non-native speakers’ appreciation and understanding of humor. 
 Intercultural Pragmatics ,  7 (3), 423–447. 
 Bella, S. (2014). A contrastive study of apologies performed by Greek native speakers and English learners of Greek as a foreign 
language.  Pragmatics ,  24 (4), 679–713. 
 Chen, Y., Chen, C. D., & Chang, M.-H. (2011). American and Chinese complaints: Strategy use from a cross-cultural perspec-
tive.  Intercultural Pragmatics ,  8 (2), 253–275. 
 Cohen, A. D. (1996). Speech acts. In S. L. McKay & N. H. Hornberger (Eds.),  Sociolinguistics and language teaching  (pp. 383–420). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Cohen, A. D. (1997). Developing pragmatic ability: Insights from the accelerated study of Japanese. In H. M. Cook, K. Hijirida, 
& M. Tahara (Eds.),  New trends and issues in teaching Japanese language and culture  (pp. 137–163). (Technical Report 
#15). Honolulu, HI: Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center, University of Hawaii at Manoa. 
 Cohen, A. D. (2001). From L1 to L12: The confessions of a sometimes frustrated multiliterate. In D. Belcher & U. Connor 
(Eds.),  Reflections on multiliterate lives (pp. 79–95). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Cohen, A. D. (2005). Strategies for learning and performing L2 speech acts.  Intercultural Pragmatics ,  2 (3), 275–301. 
 Cohen, A. D. (2011). Learner strategies for performing intercultural pragmatics.  MinneWITESOL Journal ,  28 , 13–24. 
 Cohen, A. D. (2012a). Strategies: The interface of styles, strategies, and motivation on tasks. In S. Mercer, S. Ryan & M. Wil-
liams (Eds.),  Psychology for language learning: Insights from research, theory and practice (pp. 136–150). Basingstoke, 
England: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Cohen, A. D. (2012b). Teaching pragmatics in the second language classroom.  The European Journal of Applied Linguistics and 
TEFL ,  1 (1), 35–49. 
 Cohen, A. D. (2014a). Coming to terms with pragmatics. In N. Ishihara & A. D. Cohen (Eds.),  Teaching and learning pragmat-
ics: Where language and culture meet (pp. 3–20). Abingdon, England: Routledge. 
 Cohen, A. D. (2014b). Towards increased classroom assessment of pragmatic ability.  Iranian Journal of Language Testing ,  4 (1), 5–25. 
 Cohen, A. D. (2016). The design and construction of websites to promote L2 pragmatics. In K. Bardovi-Harlig & C. Félix-Bras-
defer (Eds.),  Pragmatics and language learning , Volume 14 (pp. 345–360). Manoa: National Foreign Language Resource 
Center, University of Hawai’i. 
 Cohen, A. D., & Ishihara, N. (2012). Pragmatics. In B. Tomlinson & H. Masuhara (Eds.),  Applied linguistics applied: Connecting 
practice to theory through materials development  (pp. 113–126). London: Continuum. 
 Cohen, A. D., & Ishihara, N. (2014). Discourse, interaction, and language corpora. In N. Ishihara & A. D. Cohen (Eds.),  Teach-
ing and learning pragmatics: Where language and culture meet (pp. 166–185). Abingdon, England: Routledge. 
 Cohen, A. D., & Sykes, J. M. (2013). Strategy-based learning of pragmatics for intercultural education. In F. Dervin & A. J. Lid-
dicoat (Eds.),  Linguistics for intercultural education (pp. 87–111). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
 Culpeper, J., Marti, L., Mei, M., Nevala, M., & Schauer, G. (2010). Cross-cultural variation in the perception of impoliteness: 
A study of impoliteness events reported by students in England, China, Finland, Germany, and Turkey.  Intercultural 
Pragmatics ,  7 (4), 597–624. 
 Cutrone, P. (2014). A cross-cultural examination of the backchannel behavior of Japanese and Americans: Considerations for 
Japanese EFL learners.  Intercultural Pragmatics ,  11 (1), 83–120. 
 Daly, N., Holmes, J., Newton, J., & Stubbe, M. (2004). Expletives as solidarity signals in FTAs on the factory floor.  Journal of 
Pragmatics ,  36 (5), 945–964. 
 De Pablos-Ortega, C. (2010). Attitudes of English speakers towards thanking in Spanish.  Pragmatics ,  20 (2), 149–170. 
 Dewaele, J.-M. (2004). The emotional force of swearwords and taboo words in the speech of multilinguals.  Journal of Multi-
lingual and Multicultural Development ,  25 (2 & 3), 204–222. 
 Economidou-Kogetsidis, M. (2011). ‘‘Please answer me as soon as possible’’: Pragmatic failure in non-native speakers’ e-mail 
requests to faculty.  Journal of Pragmatics ,  43 , 3193–3215. 
 Farenkia, B. M. (2012). Compliment strategies and regional variation in French: Evidence from Cameroon and Canadian 
French.  Pragmatics ,  22 (3), 447–476. 
 García, M. J. B., & Terkourafi, M. (2014). First-order politeness in rapprochement and distancing cultures: Understandings and uses 
of politeness by Spanish native speakers from Spain and Spanish nonnative speakers from the U.S.  Pragmatics ,  24 (1), 1–34. 
 Gonzalez-Cruz, M.-I. (2012). Apologizing in Spanish: A study of the strategies used by university students in Las Palmas De 
Gran Canaria.  Pragmatics ,  22 (4), 543–565. 
 Guillot, M.-N. (2014). Conversational management and pragmatic discrimination in foreign talk: Overlap in advanced L2 
French.  Intercultural Pragmatics ,  11 (1), 83–120. 
 Hickey, L. (2005). Politeness in Spain: Thanks but no ‘thanks.’ In L. Hickey & M. Stewart (Eds.),  Politeness in Europe  (pp. 317–330). 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Ho, D. G. E., Henry, A., & Alkaff, S. N. H. (2012). “You don’t seem to know how to work”: Malay and English spoken complaints 
in Brunei.  Pragmatics ,  22 (3), 391–416. 
www.ebook3000.com

Second Language Pragmatics • 451
 Holmes, J., Marra, M., & Vine, B. (2012). Politeness and impoliteness in ethnic varieties of New Zealand English.  Journal of 
Pragmatics ,  44 , 1063–1076. 
 Houck, N., & Tatsuki, D. (Eds.). (2011).  Pragmatics: Teaching natural conversation . Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to 
Speakers of Other Languages. 
 Hudson, T., Detmer, E., & Brown, J. D. (1992).  A framework for testing cross-cultural pragmatics  (Technical Report 2). Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i, Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center. 
 Hudson, T., Detmer, E., & Brown, J. D. (1995).  Developing prototypic measures of cross-cultural pragmatics  (Technical Report 
7). Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i, Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center. 
 Ishihara, N. (2011). Co-constructing pragmatic awareness: Instructional pragmatics in EFL teacher development in Japan. 
 TESOL-EJ ,  15 (2). Retrieved June 17, 2014 from www.tesl-ej.org/wordpress/Issues/volume15/ej58/ej58a2/ 
 Ishihara, N., & Cohen, A. D. (2014).  Teaching and learning pragmatics: Where language and culture meet . Abingdon, England: 
Routledge. 
 Ishihara, N., & Maeda, M. (2010).  Advanced Japanese: Communication in context [Kotobato bunkano kousaten: Bunkade yomi-
toku nihongo] . London: Routledge. 
 Jian, H.-L. (2015). On English speakers’ ability to communicate emotion in Mandarin.  The Canadian Modern Language 
Review , 71(2), 182–210. 
 Keisanen, T., & Kärkkäinen, E. (2014). A multimodal analysis of compliment sequences in everyday English interactions. 
 Pragmatics ,  24 (3), 649–672. 
 Kerbrat-Orecchioni, C. (2005). Politeness in France: How to buy bread politely. In L. Hickey & M. Stewart (Eds.),  Politeness in 
Europe  (pp. 29–44). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Kim, J. (2014). How Korean EFL learners understand sarcasm in L2 English.  Journal of Pragmatics ,  60 , 193–206. 
 Kleinke, S., & Bös, B. (2015). Intergroup rudeness and the metapragmatics of its negotiation in online discussion fora.  Prag-
matics ,  25 (1), 47–71. 
 Koven, M. (2009). Managing relationships and identities through forms of address: What French-Portuguese bilinguals call 
their parents in each language.  Language and Communication ,  29 (4), 343–365. 
 Ladegaard, H. J. (2012). Rudeness as a discursive strategy in leadership discourse: Culture, power and gender in a Hong Kong 
workplace.  Journal of Pragmatics ,  44 , 1661–1679. 
 Lee, C. (2010). An exploratory study of the interlanguage pragmatic comprehension of young learners of English.  Pragmatics , 
 20 (3), 343–373. 
 Liu, B. (2013). Effect of first language on the use of English discourse markers by L1 Chinese speakers of English.  Journal of 
Pragmatics ,  45 , 149–172. 
 Maíz-Arévalo, C. (2014). Expressing disagreement in English as a lingua franca: Whose pragmatic rules?  Intercultural Pragmat-
ics ,  11 (2), 199–224. 
 Martínez-Flor, A., & Usó-Juan, E. (2006). A comprehensive pedagogical framework to develop pragmatics in the foreign lan-
guage classroom: The 6R approach.  Applied Language Learning ,  16 (2), 39–64. 
 Martínez-Flor, A., & Usó-Juan, E. (Eds.). (2010).  Speech act performance: Theoretical, empirical and methodological issues . 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
 Mey, J. (1993).  Pragmatics: An introduction . Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Nguyen, T. T. M., & Ho, G. A. L. (2013). Requests and politeness in Vietnamese as a native language.  Pragmatics ,  23 (4), 685–714. 
 Nguyen, T. T. M., Pham, T. H., & Pham, M. T. (2012). The relative effects of explicit and implicit form-focused instruction on 
the development of L2 pragmatic competence.  Journal of Pragmatics ,  44 (4), 416–434. 
 Olshtain, E., & Cohen, A. D. (1983). Apology: A speech act set. In N. Wolfson & E. Judd (Eds.),  Sociolinguistics and language 
acquisition (pp. 18–35). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
 Padilla Cruz, M. (2013). An integrative proposal to teach the pragmatics of phatic communion in ESL classes.  Intercultural 
Pragmatics ,  10 (1), 131–160. 
 Peterson, E. (2010). Perspective and politeness in Finnish requests.  Pragmatics ,  20 (3), 401–423. 
 Petraki, E., & Bayes, S. (2013). Teaching oral requests: An evaluation of five English as a second language coursebooks.  Prag-
matics ,  23 (3), 499–517. 
 Pulverness, A. (2003). Materials for cultural awareness. In B. Tomlinson (Ed.),  Developing materials for language teaching 
(pp. 426–438). London: Continuum. 
 Ren, W. (2013). The effect of study abroad on the pragmatic development of the internal modification of refusals.  Pragmatics , 
 23 (4), 715–741. 
 Riddiford, N., & Newton, J. (2010).  Workplace talk in action: An ESOL resource . Wellington: School of Linguistics and Applied 
Language Studies, Victoria University of Wellington. 
 Ross, S. J., & Kasper, G. (Eds.). (2013).  Assessing second language pragmatics . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Sandu, R. (2013).  Su(m)imasen and g omen nasai : Beyond apologetic functions in Japanese.  Pragmatics ,  23 (4), 743–767. 

452 • Andrew D. Cohen
 Shively, R. L. (2011). L2 pragmatic development in study abroad: A longitudinal study of Spanish service encounters.  Journal 
of Pragmatics ,  43 ,1818–1835. 
 Shively, R. L. (2015). “ Tu no eres espaniola ”: Teasing of L2 learners in host family communities of practice. In D. A. Koike & 
C. S. Blyth (Eds.),  Dialogue in multilingual, multimodal, and multicompetent communities of practice  (pp. 107–137). 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Sykes, J., & Cohen, A. D. (2006).  Dancing with words: Strategies for learning pragmatics in Spanish.  Retrieved June 17, 2014 from 
http://www.carla.umn.edu/speechacts/sp_pragmatics/home.html. 
 Taguchi, N. (2011). Rater variation in the assessment of speech acts.  Pragmatics ,  21 (3), 453–471. 
 Taguchi, N. (2013). Comprehension of conversational implicature: What response times tell us. In N. Taguchi & J. M. Sykes 
(Eds.),  Technology in interlanguage pragmatics research and teaching  (pp. 19–41). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 
 Takimoto, M. (2008). The effects of deductive and inductive instruction on the development of language learners’ pragmatic 
competence.  The Modern Language Journal ,  92 (3), 369–386. 
 Tatsuki, D., & Houck, N. (Eds.). (2010).  Pragmatics: Teaching speech acts . Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of 
Other Languages. 
 Thomas, J. (1983). Cross-cultural pragmatic failure.  Applied Linguistics ,  4 (2), 91–112. 
 Warner-Garcia, S. (2014). Laughter when nothing’s funny: The pragmatic use of coping laughter in the negotiation of conver-
sational disagreement.  Pragmatics ,  24 (1),157–180. 
 Wei, M. (2011). Investigating the oral proficiency of English learners in China: A comparative study of the use of pragmatic 
markers.  Journal of Pragmatics ,  43 , 3455–3472. 
 Yates, L., & Major, G. (2015). “Quick-chatting,” “smart dogs,” and how to “say without saying”: Small talk and pragmatic learn-
ing in the community.  System ,  48 , 141–152. 
 Yule, G. (1996).  Pragmatics . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

 VII 
 Assessment and Testing 

www.ebook3000.com

455
 What is social about language assessment or testing? 1  While the word “social” derives from the Latin 
word for allies, in modern usage it usually refers to human (or similar animal) group interaction. 
In practice, however, in language assessment, it is much more limited in scope, referring usually to 
the responses of a test taker to the instructions of a test (or the test maker) to perform in a specified 
way, 2  or to the ethics of using a test result. In most assessment of the language proficiency of candi-
dates (whether for control of education, qualification for employment, or eligibility for immigration 
or citizenship), the central goal of the process is to produce and interpret a test score rather than to 
analyze the detailed responses, something that is relevant to diagnostic testing (Spolsky, 1992). To 
the extent that education, employment, and immigration all affect the life of the candidates, it has 
become increasingly recognized that, as Shohamy (2001) has dramatically asserted, tests including 
language tests are used to implement the power of the tester over the candidate. 
 This bring us to the realization that what we need to be talking about is the impact of a test, and in 
particular its social, political, and economic impact. The classic example of a language test with social 
impact is the  shibboleth  test in the Bible, where a dialectal variation was used to recognize members 
of an enemy tribe, who were then killed. The modern equivalent are the language tests used (often 
erroneously) to identify the country of origin of asylum seekers, a procedure that fails to recognize 
that the subjects tested may have picked up the specific linguistic feature from a teacher or from 
residence in a different area. 
 A more complex but equally powerful example of social impact was the early development of 
English language tests intended to close a loophole in the 1924 Immigration Act passed in the US as a 
result of the anti-foreigner feelings in the post-war period (Spolsky, 1995). The aim of the law was to 
set national immigration quotas that would exclude prospective immigrants from regions other than 
northern Europe, because the psychometrist Carl Brigham had given evidence in Congress about 
the deleterious result of allowing non-Nordic immigrants to “contaminate the American gene pool.” 
The loophole was an exception for applicants who were seeking admission to the US as students; a 
student visa was automatic for anyone admitted to a US school, college, or university approved by 
the Secretary of Labor. 3 On being shown a certificate of admission, local US consuls were empowered 
to issue a visa. Taking advantage, the number of foreign applicants to US institutions grew rapidly. 
Worried by this development, in 1926 the Commissioner General of Immigration wrote a memo-
randum in which he stated that “many non-quota immigrant students gain admission to the United 
States totally unfit, because of insufficient knowledge of the English language.” He went on to request 
 32 
 Social Dimensions of Assessment and Testing 
 Bernard Spolsky 

456 • Bernard Spolsky
that all schools “indicate in the certificate of admission the exact knowledge of English-language the 
student must have before he can be accepted.” As a result, requests were made to the College Entrance 
Examination Board to develop a test to measure knowledge of English; one such request for an 
examination was made by the American Association of Collegiate Registrars in 1929. 
 The College Board set up a commission of university admissions officers and English teachers, 
which agreed that such an examination was desirable and feasible but that candidates should pay the 
full cost. A smaller commission proposed a detailed outline of the examination. It should have five 
parts: true-false comprehension questions based on four one-paragraph passages, a longer passage 
with questions that would demonstrate the ability to deal with hypothetical and adversative state-
ments, a direct dictation, and a 250- to 300-word composition. Reports should be given for each 
part of the examination, and the examination papers should be sent to the colleges so they could 
determine the level of work of which the candidate was capable. Although the test was developed at 
the initiative of the US government, there was no government funding, but a grant of $5,000 from 
the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace helped pay for development. While there were 
problems in setting up the administration and supervision of the examination, some 30 candidates 
took the exam in 1930, and most appeared to have done well. In the second year, 1931, 139 candidates 
paid a fee of $10 to be examined in 17 countries, the largest number being 82 engineering students 
in Moscow. In 1932, only 30 candidates at 12 centers took the examination, a result of the worldwide 
depression. The following year, only 17 students took a revised version of the test, and in 1934, 20 
candidates. In 1935, the grant was exhausted and the test was discontinued. 4 
 A decade later, a US government agency, this time the Department of State, once again asked for 
a test of English proficiency for foreign students. College Board set up a committee, which included 
two linguists, J. Milton Cowan and Charles Fries, 5  to design a test. The first form of the English 
examination for foreign students was ready in 1947, but there were difficulties in administration. 
The single version of the test was passed on to Educational Testing Service in 1948 6  and available for 
purchase for a number of years, although there were no normative or validity studies. 
 For the next few years, English language testing for student visas was left to local consular offices, 
and many different tests were used. However, by 1960, American academic and governmental circles 
had all been persuaded of the insecurity and inadequacy of the available English language tests for 
foreigners. In one of a number of major initiatives in the field of language policy (Spolsky, 2011), 
Charles Ferguson of the Center for Applied Linguistics sponsored a meeting in Washington, DC, on 
the topic, which led to a call for the development of a secure and up-to-date test (Center for Applied 
Linguistics, 1961). The result of some years of effort backed by Ford Foundation funding was the 
creation and implementation of the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL; Spolsky, 1995). 7 
The process had been complex, but the product was a test that was able to exploit the growing rec-
ognition of the demand for an objective measure of English language proficiency; by the end of the 
20th century, this test competed with two other major industrial English language proficiency tests, 
one developed by the University of Cambridge and the second offered by Pearson Education, an 
international educational corporation that was aware of the huge profits to be made. 8  The growth 
of the testing industry changed the nature of the profession from cottage industry to consolidated 
enterprise (Clark & Davidson, 1993). What then, we may ask, was the social impact of these mass 
industrial tests? 
 My first suspicions arose when I thought about the use being made of English test results to deter-
mine admission to US universities. As someone responsible for such testing, I could see the purely 
academic arguments for such a criterion: without adequate English, a foreign student would not be 
able to follow lectures or read the required material. But which foreign students were likely to already 
know enough English before they came to the US? Knowing what I did about the state of English 
teaching in the world, it would be those who had attended the best schools, in other words those 
www.ebook3000.com

Social Dimensions of Assessment and Testing • 457
whose families were rich enough or well-established enough to send their children to a good school. 
The social effect of English language teaching, therefore, was to strengthen the power of the social, 
economic, or political elite (Spolsky, 1967). If, instead of using knowledge of English as a gatekeeping 
mechanism, we had concentrated on providing courses in the foreign language or adequate English 
language preparation, we could have helped many bright students obtain access to an American 
university education. It is true that this was an unintended consequence of English language testing, 
but it reveals the social impact of a test. 
 Following the argument of Searle that examination questions are probably better interpreted as 
requests for performance, Edelsky, Altwerger, Flores, Hudelson, and Jilbert (1983) argued that there 
are many social situations in which some students are not willing to perform. In a classic sociolin-
guistic study, Labov (1970) showed that an adult interviewer inhibited the speech performance of 
young black students, whose fluent proficiency only became obvious when he left the room. What 
this adds up to is the social effect of the testing situation, one in which minority students are likely to 
fail to perform at their level. Of course this refers not just to language tests but also to tests in general, 
in particular to the high-stakes tests that lead to so many suicides in Japan and that completely failed 
to raise the standards of education in the US when built into The No Child Left Behind Act of 2001. 9 
Language tests in particular have been used as a gatekeeping device, particularly in order to keep out 
unwanted immigrants, refugees, and asylum seekers (Spolsky, 1997). 
 For many years, most scholarship in language testing chose to ignore sociolinguistic issues, choos-
ing rather to follow the approach of psychometrics, a field that had been established as a method of 
overcoming the “unavoidable uncertainty” of examinations (Edgeworth, 1890) by doing everything 
possible to reduce unreliability. While there were earlier complaints about the effects of testing (such 
as Latham, 1877; Spolsky, 1981, 1984), the opening of the field to serious consideration of social 
impact only followed Lyle Bachman’s (2005) acceptance of the inclusion of impact in the definition 
of test validity by Messick (1980, 1989). This unlocked the doors of language testing conferences and 
journals to consideration of the growing concern about social impact and ethical issues in the use of 
language tests. The breakthrough, recognized in a number of papers, such as Davies (1997b), Farhady 
(1999), Fulcher (1999), Hamp-Lyons (1997), Lynch (1997), Shohamy (1997), Spolsky (1997), and 
Stansfield (1993), has now been usefully summarized in a  Language Learning Monograph by McNa-
mara and Roever (2006), which traces the social dimension in testing and language testing and then 
goes on to deal with the major trends in its development. 
 McNamara and Roever start by noting the recognition by Cronbach (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955) 
of the importance of including in construct validation the social dimensions of testing, and the sub-
sequent inclusion by Messick (1980, 1989) in his definition of validity the social impact of test score 
use. For language testing, the important breakthrough was the incorporation of notions of commu-
nicative language ability by Bachman (1990) into language testing theory. 10  Bachman (2005, 2015), 
by insisting on dealing with the impact of test use, makes the social dimension central to validation. 
 McNamara and Roever next consider two important aspects of the social dimension of lan-
guage testing, first the possibility of the testability of language proficiency as revealed by studies of 
the sociopragmatics of face-to-face oral testing, and second the issues of bias and fairness. Bias and 
fairness were tackled, they explain, by psychometrists who worked to demonstrate how to modify 
test items to avoid discrimination against populations defined by, for example, gender. But the 
language testing profession was starting to recognize wider social problems, and the result was the 
development of codes of ethics and practice modeled on those used by the American Educational 
Research Association and the American Psychological Association (APA). 11  Each of the language 
testing associations and some industrial testing agencies have developed their own guidelines for 
ethical testing (Fulcher, 1999; International Language Testing Association, 2000; Spolsky, 2014; 
Thrasher, 2004). 

458 • Bernard Spolsky
 The issue of fairness has been discussed in a number of recent papers, responding to a proposal 
by Xi (2010) that fairness is basic to validity, as the “social consequences, such as impartiality and 
justice of actions and comparability of test consequences, are at the core of fairness.” Davies (2010) 
disagrees: “I think the pursuit of fairness in language testing is vain: first because it is unattainable 
and second because it is unnecessary. Everything Xi claims for fairness is covered by validity.” 12 Her 
claim, Davies says, adds nothing to an understanding of validity. Kane (2010) rather sees the two con-
cepts as asking the same basic question: “Are the proposed interpretations and uses of the test scores 
appropriate for a population over some range of contexts?” Kunnan (2010) traces his own earlier 
plea for adding fairness to validity studies. In a recent study of the philosophical basis for language 
testing, Fulcher (2015) cites McNamara and Roever (2006) as providing a utilitarian argument for 
fairness in validation. 
 Having described the addition of a social dimension to language testing theory and the con-
sequent concern of language testers and agencies for ethical issues raised by social impact of test 
use, McNamara and Roever go on to deal with some specific issues. They start with the use of lan-
guage tests by governments for identification of group membership. Perhaps this question will now 
be swamped by the larger phenomenon of mass refugees fleeing murder and persecution in Arab 
countries, but as long as the numbers were more manageable, language tests were regularly used to 
control immigration and to determine who was entitled to status as asylum seekers. The first and 
best-known example was the Australian dictation test, when immigration officials were told to give 
a dictation test in a language that an undesirable immigrant did not know (Davies, 1997a). 13 Apart 
from the  shibboleth tests, more elaborate language or literacy tests have recently been used, they 
report, to weed out ethnic Germans from Soviet countries seeking residence in Germany, to keep 
down the number of Ingrian Finns trying to return to Finland from Russia, and in native title claims 
in Australia. Recent studies have looked at this use of language tests to determine the eligibility of 
refugees for status as asylum seekers (Eades, Fraser, Siegel, McNamara, & Baker, 2003), showing that 
apart from ethical concerns, these tests regularly lack evidence of validity and reliability. Language 
tests, McNamara and Roever (2006) point out, are also regularly used in deciding eligibility for citi-
zenship, with serious problems in setting criterial levels (Bessette, 2005). All of these official uses of 
usually inadequate language tests for decisions about identity and citizenship emphasize the power of 
tests as social instruments. In recent reviews, Hogan-Brun, Mar-Molinero, and Stevenson (2009) and 
Saville (2013) continue to discuss the use of language tests in immigration and asylum decisions. A 
recent paper by McNamara, Van Den Hazelkamp, and Verrips (2014) proposes a research agenda to 
consider the basis for language testing as a method of assessing the origin of asylum seekers. 
 In the next chapter, McNamara and Roever (2006) survey briefly the social, political, and cultural 
impact of school language testing, continuing a tradition which we noted earlier as beginning with 
Latham (1877) and that is still active today with the current controversy over testing used to establish 
centralized control of US education. 14  There have been a number of recent developments in the area 
of school language testing in which social arguments challenge the process. One has been the increas-
ing recognition of language diversity, bilingualism, and multilingualism. It is now widely accepted 
by sociolinguists that multilingualism is a positive phenomenon (Blommaert, Leppänen, & Spotti, 
2012), replacing some popular and earlier psychological assumptions that bilinguals were necessarily 
less proficient in both languages. 15  In a recent survey of European policies on language proficiency, 
Van Avermaet (2009) praises the emphasis on multilingualism in the Common European Frame-
work of Reference for Languages (Council of Europe, 2001). This idea is echoed in the arguments 
of Shohamy (2011) for bilingual and multilingual testing, presenting the notion that one result of 
growing linguistic diversity is that children commonly have proficiency in more than one language. 16 
At the same time, concern about the growing power of industrial testing is leading to a backlash and 
a growing resistance to testing. 17  But after a full recognition of the attention that social dimensions 
www.ebook3000.com

Social Dimensions of Assessment and Testing • 459
of language now receive since the expansion of linguistics beyond the constraints of Saussurean 
linguistics, Young (2012) ends with a somewhat pessimistic prediction about the isolation from the 
mainstream of supporters of ethical language testing. 
 It is true that many language testers no longer ignore the social dimension. Apart from papers 
dealing specifically with social issues, the insistence of Bachman (2005, 2015) on the centrality of the 
use of test scores to validation has been influential. There is a growing tendency to note the specific 
social context of language testing studies. Illustrating this, about half of the papers in the two most 
recent issues of  Language Testing  and of  Language Assessment Quarterly  show a concern about the 
social dimension. While Fulcher (2015) is mainly concerned with the philosophy of language testing, 
he does admit in the preface that “all testing has a social purpose” and that this purpose is commonly 
to support a meritocracy. At the same time, he presents in his concluding chapter the arguments for 
ethics and fairness that are now accepted by many language testers and finds in Robert Lado’s (1961) 
philosophy of testing an echo of the optimistic values of human potential presented by Enlighten-
ment philosophers. 
 A selection of papers from the 2005 Language Testing Research Colloquium (Fox, Wesche, & Bayl-
iss, 2007) concludes with two papers that emphasize social aspects, one by McNamara (2007), which 
calls for exploration of theories of the social context of language testing, and one by Shohamy (2007), 
which reiterates the non-neutrality of language tests and the need for language testers to understand 
the power of language tests in creating language policy and the need to acknowledge the positive 
aspects of language diversity. The influence of the social dimension on current language testing is 
also clear if one looks at the contents of a recent handbook (Fulcher & Davidson, 2013); it opens 
with three articles on validity; in  part three  it includes four articles on the social uses of language 
testing; and it concludes with four articles on ethics and language policy; thus, one-third of the book 
is directly focused on social aspects, which are not ignored in other chapters. 
 Thus, my perhaps premature (Spolsky, 1977) claim that language testing had moved to a psycho-
linguistic-sociolinguistic stage is now fully justified, at least in the work of many language testing 
theorists, if only weakly in implementation, hampered by the growth and profitability of industrial 
testing and in the testing illiteracy of the general public (Taylor, 2009). But I share Young’s (2012) 
pessimism: “Tests, like guns, can regularly appear to be misused. . . . I deplore the misuse of language 
tests for management as a superficially attractive but fundamentally flawed policy” (Spolsky, 2013: 
502–3). These dangers have become clearer as we look at the social aspects of language testing and 
of industrial testing in general. 
 Notes 
  1. The use of the term “assessment” alongside “testing” is perhaps a recognition that there is estimation rather than measure-
ment involved, a more skeptical approach to dealing with human abilities. 
  2. Test questions are unlike normal conversational questions, where there are some well-formedness conditions (Searle, 
1969): the person answering is assumed to know the answer, the person asking is assumed to want the answer, and the 
asker is assumed to have a right to ask for this answer from this person. For example, if I ask someone how old he or she 
is, it should be when I have a reason to ask and the right to ask, such as when I am trying to decide whether a young boy 
is old enough to be counted for a Jewish prayer quorum. But in a test question, we assume that the person asking knows 
the answer, and we want to find out if the test taker also knows it. Thus, tests are better considered as requests to perform. 
  3. This remains a serious problem: a story in the  New York Times  on 5 April 2016 reported the arrest in New Jersey of 21 
people involved in student visa fraud. 
  4. And, therefore, it was not available for the socially relevant task of certifying the English proficiency of Jewish profession-
als escaping from Nazi persecution. 
  5. Fries brought a student, Robert Lado, with him to the meeting. 
  6. Established by the College Board to handle test development and administration, Educational Testing Service received 
funding and tests from the Board. 

460 • Bernard Spolsky
  7. Originally run by an independent board, secret negotiations persuaded the Ford Foundation to delay further funding 
until the test was passed to the control of the College Board and the Educational Testing Service. Subsequently, the College 
Board was persuaded to drop out. 
  8. The two major competitors of Educational Testing Service are now Cambridge English and Pearson Education. 
  9. This has now been replaced by the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, which lowers the number of and emphasis on tests. 
 10. Bachman (1990) essentially follows Canale and Swain (1980), who accepted Campbell and Wales (1970) in treating 
sociolinguistic competence as distinct from linguistic competence, rather than as Hymes (1972, 1986) had seen it as an 
alternative to the Chomsky model. 
 11. Despite the elaboration of a 200-page statement of Standards, the receptiveness of the APA to political and professional 
rather than ethical considerations showed up in the involvement of psychologists in government-sponsored torture of 
suspected terrorists. 
 12. I am reminded of a comment by an earlier Secretary of the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate that 
it was enough if tests were “felt fair.” 
 13. McNamara and Roever (2006: 150) precede this with a fascinating selection of one-word  shibboleth  tests, including the 
14th-century recognition and slaughter of non-Egyptians, the 1923 Japanese weeding out of Koreans, the 1937 massacre 
of tens of thousands of Haitians by Dominicans, the Sri Lankan identification of Tamils, and the Lebanese using it to spot 
Palestinians, concluding with the case of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police using physiological reactions to selected 
lexicon (e.g. “fruit, trade, cruise”) to weed out homosexual recruits. 
 14. While the US Constitution leaves education to individual states, for a number of years the government has attempted to 
influence it, at first through funding of programs and approaches it favored and more recently through required annual 
testing in the Common Core of subjects. 
 15. A large number of research studies now support the claim of Ellen Bialystok about the cognitive advantages for chil-
dren and the elderly of bilingualism (Bialystok, 1991; Bialystok, Abutalebi, Bak, Burke, & Kroll, 2016; Thomas-Sunesson, 
Hakuta, & Bialystok, 2016). 
 16. While researchers have drawn attention to the super-diversity of modern cities, there is good reason to believe that this is 
not in fact new: many ancient and medieval cities were linguistically diverse. 
 17. See, for instance, reports of the National Center for Fair and Open Testing (http://www.fairtest.org/). 
 References 
 Bachman, Lyle F. (1990).  Fundamental considerations in language testing . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Bachman, Lyle F. (2005). Building and supporting a case for test use.  Language Assessment Quarterly: An International Journal , 
 2 (1), 1–34. 
 Bachman, Lyle F. (2015). Justifying the use of language assessment: Linking test performance with consequences.  JLTA Journal , 
 18 , 2–22. 
 Bessette, Josee. (2005).  Government French language training programs: Statutory civil servants’ experiences . Ottawa, ON: Uni-
versity of Ottowa. 
 Bialystok, Ellen. (1991).  Language processing in bilingual children . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Bialystok, Ellen, Abutalebi, Jubin, Bak, Thomas, H., Burke, Deborah, M., & Kroll, Judith F. (2016). Aging in two languages: 
Implications for public health.  Ageing Research Reviews ,  27 , 56–60. 
 Blommaert, Jan, Leppänen, Sirpa, & Spotti, Massimiliano. (2012).  Endangering multilingualism . New York: Springer. 
 Campbell, R., & Wales, R. (1970). The study of language acquisition. In J. Lyons (Ed.),  New Horizons in linguistics (pp. 241–260). 
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books. 
 Canale, Michael, & Swain, Merrill. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language teaching and 
testing.  Applied Linguistics ,  1 (1), 1–47. 
 Center for Applied Linguistics. (1961).  Testing the English proficiency of foreign students .  Report of a conference sponsored by 
the center for applied linguistics in cooperation with the institute of international education and the national association of 
foreign student advisers . Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics. 
 Clark, John L. D., & Davidson, Fred. (1993). Language-learning research: Cottage industry or consolidated enterprise. In A. O. 
Hadley (Ed.),  Research in language learning: Principles, process, and prospects  (pp. 254–278). Lincolnwood, IL: National 
Textbook Co. 
 Council of Europe. (2001).  Common European framework of reference for languages: Learning, teaching assessment . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Cronbach, Lee J., & Meehl, Paul E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests.  Psychological Bulletin ,  52 (4), 281–302. 
 Davies, Alan. (1997a). Australian immigrant gatekeeping through English language tests: How important is proficiency? In A. 
Huhta, V. Kohonon, L. Kurki-Suonio & S. Luoma (Eds.),  Current developments and alternatives in language assessment: 
Proceedings of LTRC 96  (pp. 71–84). Jyväskylä: Kopijyva Oy, University of Jyväskylä. 
www.ebook3000.com

Social Dimensions of Assessment and Testing • 461
 Davies, Alan. (1997b). Introduction: The limits of ethics in language testing.  Language Testing ,  14 (3), 235–241. 
 Davies, Alan. (2010). Test fairness: A response.  Language Testing ,  27 (2), 171–176. 
 Eades, Diana, Fraser, Helen, Siegel, Jeff, McNamara, Tim, & Baker, Brett. (2003). Linguistic identification in the determination 
of nationality: A preliminary report.  Language Policy ,  2 (2), 179–199. 
 Edelsky, Carole, Altwerger, B., Flores, B., Hudelson, S., & Jilbert, K. (1983). Semilingualism and language deficit.  Applied 
Linguistics ,  4 , 1–22. 
 Edgeworth, Francis Ysidro. (1890). The element of chance in competitive examinations.  Journal of the Royal Statistical Society , 
 53 , 644–663. 
 Farhady, Hossein. (1999). Ethics in language testing.  Modarres Quarterly Journal ,  3 (2 Special Issue: Languages), 19–42. 
 Fox, Janna, Wesche, Mari, & Bayliss, Doreen. (2007).  Language testing reconsidered . Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press/Les 
Presses de l’Université d’Ottawa. 
 Fulcher, Glenn. (1999). Ethics in language testing.  TAE SIG Newsletter ,  1 (1), 1–4. 
 Fulcher, Glenn. (2015).  Re-examining language testing: A philosophical and social inquiry . London: Routledge. 
 Fulcher, Glenn, & Davidson, Fred. (2013).  The Routledge handbook of language testing . London: Routledge. 
 Hamp-Lyons, Liz. (1997). Washback, impact and validity: Ethical concerns.  Language Testing ,  14 (3), 295–303. 
 Hogan-Brun, Gabrielle, Mar-Molinero, Clare, & Stevenson, Patrick. (2009).  Discourses on language and integration: Critical 
perspectives on language testing regimes in Europe (Vol. 33). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
 Hymes, Dell. (1972). On communicative competence. In J. Pride & J. Holmes (Eds.),  Sociolinguistics  (pp. 269–293). Harmon-
sworth, England: Penguin Books. 
 Hymes, Dell. (1986). Models of the interaction of language and social life. In D. Hymes & J. J. Gumperz (Eds.),  Directions in 
sociolinguistics: The ethnography of communication  (pp. 41–66). Oxford: Blackwell. 
 International Language Testing Association (Producer). (2000, February 2011). Code of ethics for ILTA. Retrieved from http://
www.iltaonline.com/code.pdf 
 Kane, Michael. (2010). Validity and fairness.  Language Testing ,  27 (2), 177–182. 
 Kunnan, Antony John. (2010). Test fairness and Toulmin’s argument structure.  Language Testing ,  27 (2), 183–189. 
 Labov, William. (1970). The logic of nonstandard English. In J. E. Alatis (Ed.),  Report of the twentieth annual georgetown round 
table meeting of languages and linguistics . Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
 Lado, Robert. (1961).  Language testing: The construction and use of foreign language tests: A teacher’s book . New York: McGraw 
Hill Book Company. 
 Latham, H. (1877).  On the action of examinations considered as a means of selection . Cambridge: Deighton, Bell and Company. 
 Lynch, Brian K. (1997). In search of the ethical test.  Language Testing ,  14 (3), 315–327. 
 McNamara, Tim. (2007). Language testing: A question of context. In J. Fox, M. Wesche, D. Bayliss, L. Cheng, C. Turner & 
C. Doe (Eds.),  Language testing reconsidered (pp. 131–137). Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press. 
 McNamara, Tim, & Roever, Carsten. (2006).  Language testing: The social dimension . Malden, MA & Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing. 
 McNamara, Tim, Van Den Hazelkamp, Carolien, & Verrips, Maaike. (2014). LADO as a language test: Issues of validity.  Applied 
Linguistics ,  37 (2), 262–283. 
 Messick, Samuel. (1980). Test validity and the ethics of assessment.  American Psychologist ,  35 , 1012–1027. 
 Messick, Samuel. (1989). Validity. In R. L. Linn (Ed.),  Educational measurement (3rd ed., pp. 13–103). New York: Macmillan. 
 Saville, Nick. (2013). Language testing and immigration. In C. A. Chapelle (Ed.),  The encyclopedia of applied linguistics . New 
York: John Wiley and Sons. 
 Searle, John R. (1969).  Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Shohamy, Elana. (1997). Testing methods, testing consequences: Are they ethical? Are they fair?  Language Testing ,  14 (3), 340–349. 
 Shohamy, Elana. (2001).  The power of tests: A critical perspective of the uses of language tests . London: Longman. 
 Shohamy, Elana. (2007). Tests as power tools: Looking back, looking forward. In J. Fox, M. Wesche, D. Bayliss, L. Cheng, 
C. Turner & C. Doe (Eds.),  Language testing reconsidered (pp. 141–152). Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press. 
 Shohamy, Elana. (2011). Assessing multilingual competencies: Adopting construct valid assessment policies.  The Modern 
Language Journal ,  95 (3), 418–429. doi:10.1111/j.1540–4781.2011.01210.x 
 Spolsky, Bernard. (1967). Do they know enough English? In D. Wigglesworth (Ed.),  ATESL selected conference papers . Wash-
ington, DC: NAFSA Studies and Papers, English Language Series. 
 Spolsky, Bernard. (1977). Language testing: Art or science. In G. Nickel (Ed.),  Proceedings of the fourth international congress 
of applied linguistics (Vol. 3, pp. 7–28). Stuttgart: Hochschulverlag. 
 Spolsky, Bernard. (1981). Some ethical questions about language testing. In C. Klein-Braley & D. K. Stevenson (Eds.),  Practice 
and problems in language testing (pp. 5–30). Frankfurt am Main: Verlag Peter D. Lang. 
 Spolsky, Bernard. (1984). The uses of language tests: An ethical envoi. In C. Rivera (Ed.),  Placement procedures in bilingual 
education: Education and policy issues (pp. 3–7). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 Spolsky, Bernard. (1992). The gentle art of diagnostic testing revisited. In E. Shohamy & R. Walton (Eds.),  Language assessment 
for feedback and other strategies (pp. 29–41). Washington, DC: National Foreign Language Center. 

462 • Bernard Spolsky
 Spolsky, Bernard. (1995).  Measured words: The development of objective language testing . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Spolsky, Bernard. (1997). The ethics of gatekeeping tests: What have we learnt in a hundred years?  Language Testing ,  14 (3), 
242–247. 
 Spolsky, Bernard. (2011). Ferguson and fishman: Sociolinguistics and the sociology of language. In R. Wodak, B. Johnstone & 
P. Kerswill (Eds.),  The Sage handbook of sociolinguistics (pp. 11–23). London, UK: Sage Publications Ltd. 
 Spolsky, Bernard. (2013). Language testing and language management. In G. Fulcher & F. Davidson (Eds.),  The Routledge 
handbook of language testing (pp. 495–505). London: Routledge. 
 Spolsky, Bernard. (2014). The influence of ethics in language assessment. In A. J. Kunnan (Ed.),  The companion to language 
assessment (Vol. 2, pp. 1571–1585). Malden and Oxford: John Wiley & Sons. 
 Stansfield, Charles W. (1993). Ethics, standards, and professionalism in language testing.  Issues in Applied Linguistics ,  4 (2), 
189–206. 
 Taylor, Lynda. (2009). Developing assessment literacy.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics ,  29 , 21–36. 
 Thomas-Sunesson, Danielle, Hakuta, Kenji, & Bialystok, Ellen. (2016). Degree of bilingualism modifies executive control in 
Hispanic children in the USA.  International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism ,  20, 1–10. 
 Thrasher, Randy. (2004). The role of a language testing code ethics in the establishment of a code of practice.  Language Assess-
ment Quarterly ,  1 (2&3), 151–160. 
 Van Avermaet, Piet. (2009). Fortress Europe: Language policy regimes for immigration and citizenship. In G. Hogan-Brun, 
C. Mar-Molinero & P. Stevenson (Eds.),  Discourses on language and integration: Critical perspectives on language testing 
regimes in Europe (pp. 15–43). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 Xi, Xiaoming. (2010). How do we go about investigating test fairness?  Language Testing ,  27 (2), 147–170. 
 Young, Richard F. (2012). Social dimensions of language testing. In G. Fulcher & F. Davidson (Eds.),  The Routledge handbook 
of language testing (pp. 178–193). London: Routledge. 
www.ebook3000.com

463
 Introduction 
 Language teachers and applied linguists are constantly engaged with language testing and assess-
ment. Whether informal or formal, assessment procedures are designed to collect evidence for deci-
sion making. In low-stakes classroom contexts, the evidence is used to provide formative feedback 
to learners (Rea-Dickins, 2006), scaffold learning (Lantolf, 2009), evaluate the quality and pace of 
learning, inform pedagogy, and feed into curriculum design (Shepard, 2000; Hill, 2012). In high-
stakes contexts, identifiable ‘test events’ produce scores that are used to make life-changing decisions 
about the future of learners (Kunnan, 2013). In research, tests are used to generate data that are used 
to address questions regarding second language acquisition (Chapelle, 1994). 
 When we use tests or assessments in each of these contexts, we make a number of generic assump-
tions. These are frequently subconscious, although they do occasionally become the focus of overt 
scrutiny. The four headline assumptions are: 
 1. The tasks undertaken are relevant to the decision to be made, or the research question to be 
addressed. 
 2. The responses elicited by the tasks are useful in making the decision or addressing the question. 
 3. The ‘score’ adequately summarizes the responses. 
 4. ‘Scores’ can be used as necessary but not always sufficient evidence for decisions. 
 (Fulcher, 2015, p. 2) 
 The word ‘score’ is placed within quotation marks because it is used to mean any reductive ren-
dering of a complex performance or set of responses to a number, letter, or verbal description 
of what we infer learners can do as a result of our observation of their performance. The ver-
bal summaries may be informal teacher comments or notes, or be phrased in terms of ‘can do 
statements’ or performance-level descriptors, as commonly found in standards or framework 
documents (Fulcher, 2016). 
 The assumptions we make in all contexts lead to the claim that testing and assessment practices 
need to be  deliberate . They require careful thought, planning, and documenting. This is true of even 
informal classroom assessment for learning, where the primary purpose is to provide formative feed-
back to learners that helps them to see the ‘gap’ between what they can currently do and their next 
 33 
 The Practice of Language Assessment 
 Glenn Fulcher 

464 • Glenn Fulcher
goal. Thus, Black et al. (2003) suggest that planning in assessment for learning should focus on the 
design of tasks that involve interaction between learners and feedback on performance from both 
peers and teachers that is timely and informative. In addition, classroom management should pro-
vide time for learners to reflect on feedback and respond to it. Being deliberate in planning requires 
a level of  assessment literacy  that includes the principles and concepts that guide practice, as well as 
the practical skills in assessment construction (Fulcher, 2012a). In this chapter we focus on the latter, 
as generic practices can improve the quality of testing and assessment among all professionals who 
need to use language tests (Coniam, 2009). For the sake of brevity, from now on I will use the term 
‘test’ to refer to any testing or assessment practice, formal or informal, as a superordinate. 
 The Language Test Design Cycle 
 The extent to which we can take the assumptions listed in the previous section for granted depends 
upon the deliberate care with which we construct a test or assessment instrument. We can think of 
this as the test design cycle, as illustrated in  Figure 33.1 .   
 Mislevy and Riconscente (2005) and Fulcher (2010; 2013) liken the process of building a test 
by following a design cycle to the work of an architect—a metaphor that has been widely adopted 
elsewhere (Green, 2014, pp. 26–29). The first thing an architect does is consider the purpose of the 
building. Once we know the purpose, it is possible to consider its likely uses. From there it is possible 
to start making other decisions, such as how large the building should be, what materials might be 
 Figure 33.1  The Test Design Cycle 
 (Fulcher, 2010, p. 94) 
www.ebook3000.com

The Practice of Language Assessment • 465
used in its construction, and the internal layout of the structure. This all has to be done within the 
resource and financial constraints that might apply. It must also meet any regulatory requirements of 
the industry or state. Planning and building a test is no different. In what follows, I break down the 
process represented in the test design cycle into four distinct types of activity. While these activities 
are conceptually distinct, they are not all temporally separate, as they overlap from the very start of 
the design process. 
 Activity 1: From Test Purpose to Test Tasks 
 The first questions we must ask ourselves are “What is this test/assessment for?” and “What decisions 
are to be made on the basis of the evidence generated?” As Ingram (1968, p. 70) reminds us: “All tests 
are for a purpose. A test that is made up without a clear idea of what it is for, is no good”. In other 
words, the last step in the test cycle determines the initial statement of purpose. 
 Second, we need to know what the  test criterion  is. That is, the ultimate ‘real-world’ activities that 
the test takers are expected to undertake. For example, a common criterion within an educational 
setting for English language learners (ELLs) is learning about mathematics in a second language set-
ting (Chapin et al., 2009). In this case, the criterion would be the domain of mathematical English 
required to gain access to school academic content. 
 Third, we may need to state what knowledge, skills, or abilities (KSAs) a learner would need 
to achieve the target goal. In language testing, KSAs are frequently referred to as  constructs : the 
abstract abilities that underlie successful performance. Normally labelled with abstract nouns, 
these might include specific levels of  fluency  in language use or performance with certain levels 
of  accuracy . When constructs are specified in standards documents, operational illustrations are 
frequently provided to give indications of the task types that might be used to evaluate constructs. 
Thus, the Common Core Standards for ELLs in the United States list one construct as the “inte-
gration of knowledge and ideas”. This is an abstract construct. One suggested task type at a very 
general descriptive level is: 
 Translate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text into visual infor-
mation (e.g., a table or chart) and translate information expressed visually or mathematically 
(e.g., in an equation) into words. 
 (Common Core State Standards, 2010, p. 62) 
 The example is an  operationalization  of the construct. It represents the claim that if learners are able 
to translate information between text and tables/charts/equations, they are providing evidence that 
they can “integrate knowledge and ideas”. 
 We can see from this example how the statement of purpose, the criterion, and the construct 
definition lead directly into suggested  operationalizations : the design of tasks that are directly 
related to the test purpose. The rationale for the use of tasks becomes part of a  validation nar-
rative  that underpins why we think the first two assumptions we make about our test are war-
ranted. More technically, Chapelle (2008, p. 320) refers to this as a “validity argument from 
test design”. Validity is the principal quality of a test which demonstrates that it meets industry 
standards for safe use. 
 Consider the following assessment task  School Trip  (Bowland Maths, 2010), which illustrates the 
first part of the test design cycle. 

466 • Glenn Fulcher
 The class votes on which place to visit. Here are the results: 
 Taking ﬁ rst and second choices into account, where do you think Mr. Richards should take 
them? Explain how you decided. 
 Figure 33.2  Options for a School Visit 
 Figure 33.3  Results of the Class Vote 
 In this task, learners are presented with data about options for a school trip in numerical and 
tabular format. The question requires the learners to manipulate the data in order to arrive at a judg-
ment about which trip is most appropriate for the class. This judgment and the reasoning by which 
it is made has to be explained in writing. The writing constitutes the evidence upon which we infer 
whether (and to what degree) the respondent is able to “integrate knowledge and ideas” within this 
domain. The testing process is valid to the extent that our inferences are sound and lead to correct 
judgments and decisions. This is the core meaning of  validity  in testing. 
 Mr. Richards, a teacher at Bosworth School, plans to take 30 pupils on a school trip. Here are 
the places they could visit.  
www.ebook3000.com

The Practice of Language Assessment • 467
 The requirement to be explicit about test purpose cannot be stressed enough. 
 Consider the following two statements of purpose: 
 1. Upon entry to the country, the immediate needs of migrant workers with limited language 
skills have been identified as (a) searching for suitable manual or semi-skilled work and 
(b) accessing local social services and healthcare. In order to assess their ability to carry out the 
necessary reading tasks to satisfy these needs, a reading test is required to screen new arrivals 
with the purpose of planning and providing suitable language programmes. 
 2. Students in the college business stream are required to attend a course on negotiating contracts 
and agreements for international companies. All communication should be interculturally 
sensitive and avoid loss of face but achieve the primary goals of the business requirements. 
Successful students (on this and content courses) will graduate with a certificate in intercul-
tural business management. 
 These statements are short and succinct, but they give a clear sense of the purpose of the assessment. 
The statements are also indicative of the kind of content that we expect to find in a test, because they 
specify the  test criterion . Real-world activities may include reading job postings, reading social ser-
vice information leaflets (purpose 1), or taking part in business meetings and negotiating contracts/
agreements (purpose 2). The language that is required for each purpose is likely to be very different, 
and it is unlikely that a validation narrative created to justify the tasks created for one purpose could 
be easily translated into another. 
 Activity 2: Specification Writing and Iteration 
 We will return to the architecture metaphor. The first thing that an architect works on is a blueprint of 
the building. In testing and assessment, the blueprint is called a  test specification  (Popham, 1978). The 
test specification (often shortened to “test spec”) is the design document for a test and consists of an over-
all plan, together with specifications for each of the task types that may appear in the test (Davidson & 
Lynch, 2002). We can think of this as the ‘structure’ and the ‘stuff’ that we are going to put into the space 
created by the structure. Writing an explicit test spec forces the  deliberateness  of the design and develop-
ment process. Furthermore, without test and item specs, it is impossible to produce other  forms  of a test. 
In fact, “the test” is actually the test spec—the blueprint. From the spec it is possible to create a number 
of forms. The forms are generated by the same spec, and so are supposed to be parallel in the sense that 
they test the same things, to the same level of difficulty, but have different content. This is often necessary 
when test takers are taking a test at different times (for security purposes), or when a test is being given 
to assess learning in pre- and post-test research settings. A sample specification for example 1 (migrant 
workers) is provided in Fulcher (2010, pp. 139–146) as an example of how this might be done. 
 Apart from the task specs, the specifications also contain information that pertains to the overall 
“look and feel” of the test—what we have referred to as the structure, and also the façade. Following 
Mislevy et al. (2003), the other parts of a specification should include the following: 
 Evidence specification : The way in which the test takers are expected to respond to the tasks. This 
may be closed response (such as multiple choice) or open response (such as writing, in the  School Trip 
task). It also includes information on how the response is to be scored and what the score means. This 
part of the spec explicitly addresses headline assumptions 3 and 4. With reference to the construct 
“Integration of Knowledge and Ideas” for use with the task  School Trip , the following rubric for “clar-
ity and clearness of description” has been suggested: 
 Level 1: Describes the decision or calculations made, but this is incomplete and/or contains errors 
 Level 2: Describes the decision made and cost of the trip but with some errors 

468 • Glenn Fulcher
 Level 3: Describes their decision-making process and methods but lacks clarity 
 Level 4: Clearly describes their decision-making process and their methods 
 There are problems with producing evidence models. The first is deciding how many levels (scores) 
can be identified by human raters. The second is establishing the criteria that make one level differ-
ent from another. The third is putting these criteria into verbal descriptors that make sense to judges 
and others who may see and use the scores. In the example above, the only real distinction between 
levels 3 and 4 is the movement from “lacks clarity” in description to “clearly” describing. This begs 
the question of what constitutes “clarity”. This is another construct that requires operationalization. 
 In practice,  benchmark samples  are frequently used to solve problems caused by vagueness and 
imprecision in rubrics. These are selected from responses to tasks and used to illustrate typical per-
formances at each level. Judges are then expected to match future performances to a given level by 
comparing it with the benchmark sample. This common strategy, should it work, is placed into the 
validation narrative to support the inferences that may be drawn from the scores by linking the 
meaning of each number to its benchmark. The following sample response to the  School Trip  task is 
provided as a typical level 4 response because of its “clarity”. 
 Figure 33.4  Typical Level 4 Response 
 (Bowland Maths, 2010) 
 Assembly specification : Tests do not normally contain one task or even one task type. The assembly 
spec tells the test producer how many items of each type are required to construct a complete form. 
The purpose of the spec is to ensure that each form of the test (a) covers the same range of constructs 
and domains of interest, (b) has enough tasks to collect reliable evidence regarding performance, and 
(c) will take the same amount of time to complete. 
 Delivery specification : This spec states how the test will be delivered. This may include paper-based 
or computer-mediated versions, but it also includes the administrative details that are so important 
www.ebook3000.com

The Practice of Language Assessment • 469
for test security. For example, how much space is to be left between desks, how many invigilators are 
to be used relative to the number of candidates, instructions to test takers, or restrictions on addi-
tional help that might be available (e.g., dictionaries, Internet access, and so on). 
 Presentation specification : The presentation spec provides the small details about precisely what 
a test taker will see when presented with the test tasks. This might include the font size, whether or 
not the font size may be altered if the test is delivered by computer, where icons appear, or what col-
ors are used. These are actually very important details, because presentation decisions often impact 
upon test takers with disabilities (e.g., visual impairment and font/color choices). Inappropriate use 
of icons or navigation may slow down learners who take more time trying to find their way through 
the test than responding to the tasks. 
 The process of spec writing begins as soon as the test purpose is being established. The purpose is 
part of the specification, and so is the description of the test criterion, domains of interest, and con-
structs. These are all part of the  general description  of the test rationale. Each task type must also have 
a spec, together with its associated evidence spec. These specs go through iterations and are revised 
each time there is a change to a task type as the test designers refine their understanding of constructs 
and how best to get useful evidence through test procedures. This happens most noticeably during 
the process of prototyping, to which we turn next. 
 Activity 3: Prototyping and Piloting 
 Prototyping  is the process of “trying out” prototype tasks to see if they work. Prototyping typically 
involves asking small numbers of test takers (typically around five) to try out new tasks. As they are 
doing the tasks, or immediately upon completion, they are asked to verbalize how they arrived at the 
response they did and to describe any problems they faced in doing the task. Prototyping generates 
two types of data for analysis: the responses to the task and the verbalization of how the participants 
responded to the task. The data is studied to discover primarily if the way they respond to the task is 
relevant to the construct that the designer intended to assess and whether the item type and format 
is of suitable difficulty for the intended population (Nissan & Schedl, 2012, p. 283). Surprisingly, 
most problems with tasks are discovered with no more than two or three iterations of this process, 
with changes to the task (and the specification) at each iteration to remove the identified problems. 
In contexts where learners with disabilities are expected to undertake tasks, it is essential that accom-
modations to mitigate the effects of a disability are designed and prototyped simultaneously (Abedi, 
2012). Typical accommodations might include the provision of additional time, audio, amanuensis, 
braille or large-print alternatives, screen magnification, or single-person test administration. 
 The fact that prototyping can be undertaken with so few participants means that it is feasible not 
only for formal tests but also as a preliminary for the use of assessment tasks in schools. It should also 
be stressed that prototyping is fundamental research. The test designer or teacher is asking a critical 
validity question about the use of tasks and the meaning of the responses: do these tasks genuinely 
generate useful  construct-relevant evidence that allows successful inferencing and decision making? 
When prototyping is undertaken in schools, in a context where teachers collaboratively write and 
refine task specifications, this research enables the creation and evolution of a common understand-
ing of learning goals and the practical meaning of constructs. 
 Piloting  is only undertaken when it is necessary to generate statistical data for a test by giving it to 
a much larger sample of participants who are representative of the test-taking population. For this 
an assembly model is required, and the pilot test is produced according to the delivery and presenta-
tion specification. The designers are asking the question: does this all work? (Kenyon & MacGregor, 
2012). The data allows researchers to identify any task types that are too difficult or too easy and to 
check that the timing of sections has been adequately estimated. Timing studies ensure that the test 

470 • Glenn Fulcher
administration is not “speeded”, as it is well-known that if learners do not have sufficient time to 
complete a test in the time allocated, then they begin to guess, and guessing introduces score varia-
tion that is not related to the constructs of interest. 
 Activity 4: The Field Test and the Go/No-Go Decision 
 In high-stakes testing, when all iterations of the design process are complete, at least two full forms 
of the test are given to a large sample of participants drawn from the test-taking population. At this 
stage, the norms for the test are established. The administrative procedures and security features 
are tested to ensure that all works well. At the end of the field test, the test developer can make an 
informed “go/no-go” decision, which determines whether the test can now be used in live assessment 
for its intended purpose. 
 The test  roll-out  is not the end of the process. Constant monitoring of test results is essential, 
because the test population may change over time. As applied linguistic research improves the def-
inition of constructs and our understanding of communication, it becomes possible to generate 
new operationalizations of constructs, which leads to new task types. Over time the test undergoes 
 upgrade retrofits  as some task types are retired and new ones are introduced to better represent the 
construct (Fulcher & Davidson, 2009). 
 Trends and Controversies 
 In recent years, the most significant trend in high-stakes testing has been the use of tests for second-
ary purposes for which they were not originally designed, sometimes referred to as “repurposing” 
(Wendler & Powers, 2009). 
 I have claimed that without statements of purpose, none of our four headline assumptions regarding 
score meaning make any sense at all. If I were to take a test designed to assess the readiness of well-edu-
cated high school students for university entry and use it for any of the three purposes used as examples 
above, all four of my assumptions cease to be meaningful. This has been a given in test design for 100 
years. As Rulon (1946, pp. 290–291) put it, “a test cannot be labeled as valid or not valid except for some 
purpose.” Furthermore, the primary requirement of validation has been enshrined in testing standards 
such as AERA Standard 1.1: “A rationale should be presented for each recommended interpretation and 
use of test scores, together with a comprehensive summary of the evidence and theory bearing on the 
intended use or interpretation” (AERA et al., 1999, p. 17). Within this view, any repurposing requires 
the production of evidence and rationale to support the new use of the test, as made clear by Standard 
1.4: “If a test is used in a way that has not been validated, it is incumbent on the user to justify the new 
use, collecting new evidence if necessary” (AERA et al., 1999, p. 18). To the extent that there is a mis-
match between the old and new purpose, the test providers are required to undertake a  change retrofit 
and develop a new validation narrative/argument to support the new use (Fulcher & Davidson, 2009). 
 However, the trend to use language testing in policy contexts has led to uncontrolled repurposing, 
fueled by the commercialization of education and the growth of the migration industry. The use of 
language tests to implement immigration policies has now become commonplace around the world 
(Kunnan, 2012), but with very few exceptions (such as the Occupational English Test for health 
professionals, see McNamara, 1996), tests for these new purposes have not been developed. Most 
governments have gone for “off the peg” solutions. For example, Read (2001, pp. 193–194) makes it 
clear that while the International English Language Testing System (IELTS) test “should have been 
properly re-validated to establish its appropriateness for the new purpose”, its selection for migra-
tion purposes in New Zealand was taken primarily on the basis of lack of cost to the government, 
compared with designing a local test for this particular purpose. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Practice of Language Assessment • 471
 In recent years, the use of the Common European Framework (CEFR) to set “standards” for 
policy implementation has compounded the problem. The policy makers decide which CEFR level is 
appropriate for a particular decision (Van Avermaet & Rocco, 2013, p. 15), and through the process of 
‘mapping’ an existing test to CEFR levels, any test can claim to be relevant to policy implementation. 
Similarly, it is possible to state a “level” that is appropriate for entry to a health profession and use a 
test of academic English to make that decision based upon a standard-setting exercise (O’Neil et al., 
2007), or to use a test of general business English to make judgments about the readiness of military 
personnel for operational deployment (Tannenbaum & Baron, 2010). 
 This has set the scene for the most profound controversy in modern language testing practice. 
The IELTS was “design[ed] specifically to measure the English language skills of candidates intend-
ing to study in academic or training contexts in English-speaking countries” (Ingram, 2004, p. 18), 
not to migrate and work in specific domains. The Test of English for International Communication 
(TOEIC) was designed as a test of general workplace English (Schmitt, 2005), not to make decisions 
about communicative readiness in the armed forces. For Ahern (2009), it is the commoditization of 
testing and education. Shohamy and McNamara (2009) see it as the politicization of test use. For 
Fulcher (2016), it is the subversion of validation theory, in which “validation” is reinterpreted as 
“recognition” by political institutions. Research funded by the test owners, on the other hand, merely 
recommends sensitivity to the needs of policy makers in order to maintain market share (Merrifield, 
2012). 
 The issues at stake could not be greater for the practice of test design. The test design cycle 
described in this chapter rests upon the assumption that sound inferences are built into tests at the 
design and development stage: validity through design, told through a validation narrative that tells 
the story of the decisions made, illustrated with the research and theory that led to design decisions. 
The process is guided by a vision of the intended use and consequences of the test. Fulcher and 
Davidson (2007, p. 51) call this “effect-driven testing”, in which “the ultimate test design decisions are 
driven by the impacts that the test will have on stakeholders.” This is the meaning of the unbroken 
cycle: test purpose and design provide the meaning to scores and justification to decision making. 
Whereas, in a great deal of modern global practice, meaning is provided post-hoc once tests are 
co-opted to serve the purposes of new social policy. 
 Perspectives 
 Validation Processes 
 The perspective adopted in this chapter is derived from the tradition that limits score meaning and 
inference to the primary purpose for which a testing procedure is designed. This requires a statement 
of purpose and the construction of a validation narrative around the design cycle. The narrative 
may then be used in a validation argument (Kane, 2013) to justify the claimed meaning of the score. 
For some tests, like the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL iBT), this is set out explicitly 
(Chapelle, 2008) and contains two components. 
 The first component is the  confirmatory research . That is, all the research focuses on investigating 
and presenting the elements of the validation narrative that support the intended score meaning. 
During the early stages of the test design cycle, the function of research is to support design deci-
sions and confirm those decisions as being useful for the test purpose. The second component is 
 non-confirmatory research . Usually carried out during piloting and field testing and later during live 
testing, the function is to question the weakest parts of the validity argument (Haertel, 1999). Weak-
nesses lie in any claim that the score is affected by any factor that is not relevant to the purpose of the 
test and its intended construct of assessment. This is summarized using the term  construct-irrelevant 

472 • Glenn Fulcher
variance  (Messick, 1989). For example, if it is suspected that the content of the test has little relevance 
to the domain in which the test takers are expected to use language, a comparative study of test tasks, 
topics, language use, and processes with those of the criterion could be undertaken. If it is found that 
the test content as set out in the specifications is not sufficiently representative of the criterion, then 
there are grounds for questioning the validity of the test. 
 This perspective reinforces the view that test design is a research activity, rather than a mundane 
task that practitioners are expected to undertake with little time or resources. 
 Substantive Validation 
 Test designers usually assume that test takers arrive at a correct answer, or perform in particular ways, 
for the reasons the designer had in mind when a task was created. We often take it for granted that we 
have the ability to “see into the mind” of the test taker. The rationale for prototyping is to check with 
real test takers whether or not this is the case. The fundamental question of substantive validation is: 
do the test takers respond to the task in the way that the task designer thinks they will respond? The 
methodology of choice is concurrent or retrospective protocol analysis, or PA for short (Bowles, 2010). 
 The purpose of these studies during the design process is to build in non-confirmatory research 
that challenges the assumptions of the task designers. In the published literature, one of the most 
informative PA studies is that of Buck (1991), in which he presented a series of listening texts and 
tasks to learners to discover how they responded. When analyzing the verbal protocols, Buck discov-
ered that there were radically different interpretations of questions depending upon cultural back-
ground and personal knowledge. Construct-irrelevant factors could lead to “incorrect” responses for 
perfectly good reasons. One illustrative example will suffice. 
 Text Extract 
 My friend Susan was living in West Africa and while she was living there she had a problem with 
burglars. For a period of about two months every Sunday night someone was breaking into her 
house through her bedroom window and was stealing something very small from her house 
and she tried many things to prevent this from happening like putting bars over the windows 
and hiring a guard to watch the window. And still, every Sunday night, somehow someone came 
through the window and stole something. 
 Question 
 What did Susan do about the problem? 
 One student responded: “she employed a guardman and jammed the window closed with a bar” 
(Buck, 1991, p. 74). The second part of this response would have been considered “incorrect”, but 
the protocol revealed that the Japanese participant was only familiar with sliding windows and had 
imagined that Susan had used something to stop them from opening. If this problem is present with 
young adults, it is exacerbated when attempting to assess young learners, as in the following example: 
 Which is the odd one out? 
 (a) Eggs 
 (b) Flowers 
 (c) Vegetables 
 (d) Trees 
www.ebook3000.com

The Practice of Language Assessment • 473
 Pupil: 
Trees. 
 Teacher: Why do you say that? 
 Pupil: 
They’re the only ones I can’t put in a fridge. 
 Social Responsibility and Accountability 
 The statistical evidence in piloting also allows researchers to check that no tasks discriminate against 
an identifiable (or protected) sub-group of the population. All test designers and users should be 
aware of the fact that if scores are sensitive to age, gender, disability, race, religion, and a number of 
other protected characteristics, litigation is a potential consequence of the use of non-valid scores 
(Fulcher, 2014). The practical lesson is that as the stakes become higher, the amount of effort put into 
deliberate design, research, and validation becomes more onerous. 
 Conclusion and Future Directions 
 Much of our current practice draws directly on innovations that took place during World War I 
(Fulcher, 2012b). These practices have evolved slowly over the 20th century and have been docu-
mented in guidelines and textbooks for each generation. These practices are reflected in the test 
design cycle discussed in this chapter. Two issues are of particular importance at the present time and 
will occupy researchers for some time to come. 
 The first is the ecological sensitivity of a test or assessment process to the communities that are 
impacted by its use. One question we must ask is whether tests are better developed locally by edu-
cational practitioners or provided by large testing agencies that may not be aware of local contexts 
within which their tests are used. Part of the question is political and involves asking whether local 
or external mandates best serve the assessment needs of particular communities (Fulcher, 2012a, pp. 
2–3). Of course, stakeholder views may always be sought, and local involvement in large-scale testing 
studies of washback and impact may influence future revisions of a test (e.g. Green, 2007). This is 
a matter of research, and perhaps consultation, but not democratic involvement (Shohamy, 2001). 
Next is an epistemic question that requires research. To what extent might locally designed tests 
prove more or less useful for institutions, regions, or countries, compared with international tests, for 
their own particular decision-making contexts? This key validity question (Messick, 1989, pp. 14–15) 
must be investigated for each context of use. Nevertheless, generalized models of investigation may 
emerge, but these do not as yet exist. 
 The second under-researched area is the role of test design in the continuing professional develop-
ment (CPD) of teachers. Davidson and Lynch (2002, pp. 98–120) were the first to consider the group 
dynamics of teachers in test design contexts, looking particularly at the decision-making processes 
involved in constructing test specifications. They showed that spec development workshops gener-
ated an environment in which individuals negotiated their understanding of constructs and learn-
ing objectives in order to converge at a common understanding. Within language programmes at 
particular institutions, the professional development benefits of local test design may be immense, 
through agreeing upon constructs, to designing tasks that can be shared for teaching and assessment, 
and constructing common assessment criteria. One example of how such collaboration fosters pro-
fessional development is provided by Fulcher (2010, pp. 159–171). The transcript of a group discus-
sion on the value of a particular task shows how a common understanding of its suitability is arrived 
at. The group actually decides that the task, which was at first considered innovative, in fact does not 
appropriately assess the listening construct in which they are interested. The task is discarded. The 
field does not currently have sufficient studies of the dynamics of test design, how designers arrive at 
decisions, and how the process supports improved pedagogy. 

474 • Glenn Fulcher
 Practical test design requires human decisions informed by empirical research and theoretical 
understanding. The narrative of the decisions backed up by the research and rationales constitutes a 
validity argument by design. The narrative makes clear the claims we wish to make for score mean-
ing and the use to which scores are put. The process of test design is one of discovery. It is a research 
enterprise, but one that requires group cohesion and interaction which may, in and of itself, be 
extremely valuable in professional development and team building. The end product is ideally a test 
that is sensitive to the constructs of interest, relevant to the learners and the domains in which they 
will use language, and useful for decision making. 
 Acknowledgements 
 I would like to thank Dr. Daniel Pead of the University of Nottingham and Bowland Maths for per-
mission to reproduce the  School Trip task. 
 References 
 Abedi, J. (2012). Validity issues in designing accommodations for English language learners. In G. Fulcher & F. Davidson 
(Eds.),  The Routledge Handbook of Language Testing (pp. 48–61). London and New York: Routledge. 
 Ahern, S. (2009). ‘Like cars or breakfast cereal’: IELTS and the trade in education and immigration.  TESOL in Context 19(1), 
39–51. 
 American Educational Research Association (AERA), American Psychological Association (APA) and National Council on 
Measurement in Education (NCME). (1999).  Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing . Washington, DC: AERA. 
 Black, P., Harrison, C., Lee, C., Marshall, B. and William, D. (2003).  Assessment for Learning: Putting It into Practice . Bucking-
ham, UK: Open University Press. 
 Bowland Maths. (2010).  School Trip . UK: Bowland Maths. Available online: http://www.bowlandmaths.org.uk/index.html 
 Bowles, M. A. (2010).  The Think-aloud Controversy in Second Language Research . London and New York: Routledge. 
 Buck, G. (1991). The testing of listening comprehension: An introspective study.  Language Testing 8(1), 67–91. 
 Chapelle, C. A. (1994). Are C-tests valid measures for L2 vocabulary research?  Second Language Research 10(2), 157–187. 
 Chapelle, C. A. (2008). The TOEFL validity argument. In C. A. Chapelle, M. K. Enright & J. M. Jamieson (Eds.),  Building a 
Validity Argument for the Test of English as a Foreign Language (pp. 319–352). London, England: Routledge. 
 Chapin, S. H., O’Coner, C. and Anderson, N. C. (2009).  Classroom Discussions: Using Math Talk to Help Students Learning, 
Grades K-6 . Sausalito, CA: Math Solutions Publications. 
 Common Core State Standards for English Language Arts. (2010). Washington, DC: US Government. Available online: http://
www.corestandards.org/ELA-Literacy/ 
 Coniam, D. (2009). Investigating the quality of teacher-produced tests for EFL students and the effects of training in test 
development principles and practices on improving test quality.  System 37(2), 226–242. 
 Davidson, F. and Lynch, B. K. (2002).  Testcraft: A Teacher’s Guide to Writing and Using Language Test Specifications . New Haven 
and London: Yale University Press. 
 Fulcher, G. (2010).  Practical Language Testing . London: Hodder Education. 
 Fulcher, G. (2012a). Assessment literacy for the language classroom.  Language Assessment Quarterly 9(2), 113–132. 
 Fulcher, G. (2012b). Scoring performance tests. In G. Fulcher & F. Davidson (Eds.),  The Routledge Handbook of Language Test-
ing (pp. 378–392). London and New York: Routledge. 
 Fulcher, G. (2013). Test design and retrofit. In C. A. Chapelle (Ed.),  The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics  (pp. 5809–5817). 
Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell. 
 Fulcher, G. (2014). Language testing in the dock. In A. J. Kunnan (Ed.),  The Companion to Language Testing  (pp. 1553–1570). 
London: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Fulcher, G. (2015).  Re-examining Language Testing: A Philosophical and Social Inquiry . London and New York: Routledge. 
 Fulcher, G. (2016). Standards and frameworks. In J. Banerjee & D. Tsagari (Eds.),  Handbook of Second Language Assessment 
(pp. 29–44). Berlin: De Gruyter. 
 Fulcher, G. and Davidson, F. (2007).  Language Testing and Assessment: An Advanced Resource Book . London and New York: 
Routledge. 
 Fulcher, G. and Davidson, F. (2009). Test architecture, test retrofit.  Language Testing 26(1), 123–144. 
 Green, A. (2007 ) .  IELTS Washback in Context: Preparation for Academic Writing in Higher Education . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Practice of Language Assessment • 475
 Green, A. (2014).  Exploring Language Assessment and Testing . London and New York: Routledge. 
 Haertel, E. H. (1999). Validity arguments for high-stakes testing: In search of evidence.  Educational Measurement: Issues and 
Practice 18(4), 5–9. 
 Hill, K. (2012).  Classroom-Based Assessment in the School Foreign Language Classroom . Bern: Peter Lang. 
 Ingram, E. (1968). Attainment and diagnostic testing. In A. Davies (Ed.),  Language Testing Symposium: A Psycholinguistic 
Approach  (pp. 70–97). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Ingram, D. (2004). Towards language.  Babel ,  39 (2), 16–24. 
 Kane, M. (2013). Validating the interpretations and uses of test scores.  Journal of Educational Measurement 50(1), 1–73. 
 Kenyon, D. and MacGregor, D. (2012). Pre-operational testing. In G. Fulcher & F. Davidson (Eds.),  The Routledge Handbook 
of Language Testing  (pp. 295–306). London and New York: Routledge. 
 Kunnan, A. (2012). Language assessment for immigration and citizenship. In G. Fulcher & F. Davidson (Eds.),  The Routledge 
Handbook of Language Testing  (pp. 162–177). London and New York: Routledge. 
 Kunnan, A. (2013). High stakes language testing. In C. A. Chapelle (Ed.),  The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics . Malden, MA: 
Wiley Blackwell. 
 Lantolf, J. P. (2009). Dynamic assessment: The dialectic integration of instruction and assessment.  Language Teaching , 42(3), 
355–368. 
 McNamara, T. F. (1996).  Measuring Second Language Performance . London: Longman. 
 Merrifield, G. (2012). The use of IELTS for assessing immigration eligibility in Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the United 
Kingdom.  IELTS Research Reports 13 (pp. 1–32). Australia: IDP and the British Council. 
 Messick, S. (1989). Validity. In R. L. Linn (Ed.),  Educational Measurement  (pp. 13–103). New York: American Council on 
Education/Macmillan. 
 Mislevy, R. J., Almond, R. G. and Lukas, J. F. (2003).  A Brief Introduction to Evidence-centered Design . Research Report RR-03–
16. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
 Mislevy, R. J. and Riconscente, M. M. (2005).  Evidence-Centered Assessment Design: Layers, Structures, and Terminology . Menlo 
Park, CA: SRI International. 
 Nissan, S. and Schedl, M. (2012). Prototyping new item types. In G. Fulcher & F. Davidson (Eds.),  The Routledge Handbook of 
Language Testing (pp. 281–294). London and New York: Routledge. 
 O’Neil, T. R., Buckendahl, C. W., Plake, B. S. and Taylor, L. (2007). Recommending a nursing specific passing standard for the 
IELTS examination.  Language Assessment Quarterly , 4(4), 295–317. 
 Popham, J. (1978).  Criterion-referenced Measurement . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
 Read, J. (2001). The policy context of English testing for immigrants. In C. Elder, A. Brown, E. Grove, K. Hill, N. Iwashita, 
T. Lumley, T. McNamara, & K. O’Loughlin (Eds.),  Experimenting with Uncertainty: Essays in Honour of Alan Davies 
(pp. 191–199). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Rea-Dickins, P. (2006). Currents and eddies in the discourse of assessment: A learning-focused interpretation.  International 
Journal of Applied Linguistics 16(2), 163–188. 
 Rulon, P. J. (1946). On the validity of educational tests.  Harvard Educational Review 16, 290–296. 
 Schmitt, D. (2005). Test of English for International Communication (TOEIC). In S. Stoynoff & C. A. Chapelle (Eds.),  ESOL 
Tests and Testing  (pp. 100–102). Washington, DC: TESOL. 
 Shepard, L. (2000). The role of assessment in a learning culture.  Educational Researcher 29(7), 4–14. 
 Shohamy, E. (2001). Democratic assessment as alternative.  Language Testing 18(4), 373–391. 
 Shohamy, E. and McNamara, T. (2009). Language tests for citizenship, immigration, and asylum.  Language Assessment Quar-
terly 6(1), 1–5. 
 Tannenbaum, R. J. and Baron, P. A. (2010).  Mapping TOEIC Test Scores to the STANAG 6001 Language Proficiency Levels . 
Research Monograph 10–11. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
 Van Avermaet, P. and Rocco, L. (2013). Language testing and access. In E. Galaczi & C. J. Weir (Eds.),  Exploring Language 
Frameworks (pp. 11–44). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Wendler, C. and Powers, D. (2009).  What Does It mean to Repurpose a Test? R&D Connections No .  9 . Princeton, NJ: Educational 
Testing Service. Available online: http://www.ets.org/Media/Research/pdf/RD_Connections9.pdf 

476
 Introduction 
 Large-scale language assessments, as described by Kunnan and Grabowski (2013, p. 305), are used 
for multiple purposes in multiple contexts. The multiple purposes include monitoring student prog-
ress, diagnosing student capabilities and weaknesses, selecting test takers for entrance to college and 
university programs, admitting applicants to careers and for advancement of careers, and admitting 
applicants for immigration and citizenship. The multiple contexts include school, college, university, 
workplace, immigration, and citizenship. Such a range of purposes and contexts therefore requires 
the development of language assessments at various proficiency levels (from beginning or novice 
to advanced or expert level) and content appropriate to a range of test takers (from young learners 
to adults). While all this complexity may not be involved in any one assessment, understanding the 
specific purpose, context, proficiency level, and age range would be critical in the development of an 
assessment and the research that would be required to support the claims of an assessment. 
 At the school level, these assessments could be used to provide diagnostic information to all 
stakeholders (e.g., teachers, students, parents, and school administrators), to offer information 
regarding admissibility of test takers to colleges and universities, and to ensure accountability to 
stakeholders. For instance, the  California Standards Test , which was developed by a private contrac-
tor for the Department of Education in California, was administered to students from grades 3 to 
8 to monitor student progress and provide diagnostic feedback to students, parents, and school 
administrators until 2014.1 School exit examinations include language examinations along with 
science, mathematics, and social studies. In India, the  Indian Certificate for School Examinations 
taken at the end of grades 10 and 12 include English and many Indian, Asian, and European lan-
guages. In California, the  California High School Exit Exam  was used as certification of schooling 
until 2016. The German  Abitur  and the French  la Baccalaureate  are used as screening and selection 
instruments for college and university entrance. In China, the  National Matriculation English Test 
serves as the university entrance test of English that makes inferences about test takers’ English 
proficiency, along with scores from university entrance examinations in other secondary school 
subjects (Cheng & Qi, 2006). Other well-known tests include the  Test of English as a Foreign Lan-
guage internet-Based  (iBT), the  International English Language Testing System  (IELTS), and the 
 Pearson Test of Englis h (PTE). They are administered to international students whose first language 
is not English and who are seeking admission to English-medium colleges and universities in 
 34 
 Large-Scale Language Assessment 
 Empirical Studies 
 Antony John Kunnan 
www.ebook3000.com

Large-Scale Language Assessment • 477
the US, Canada, and the UK. China’s  College English Test  (CET) is administered to all non-English-
major undergraduates to ensure that these students reach the required English levels specified in the 
National College English Teaching Syllabuses. 
 As varied as their purposes are, large-scale assessments are typically standardized (similar tasks, 
administration, scoring, and reporting), generally norm-referenced (NRT) in school, college, and 
university contexts (test takers are rank-ordered based on the performance of test taker cohort), 
predominantly selected response type (such as multiple-choice, true-false, fill-in-the-blank type 
response formats), with high volume (the test is administered to hundreds or thousands or more), 
and high stakes (decision making is based on test scores, and the resulting career or life paths are 
not easily reversed). These defining characteristics mean that the validity, reliability, and fairness of 
such large-scale assessment are critical. Therefore, rigorous and thorough studies in these areas are 
needed on an ongoing basis to ensure test quality. Moreover, because large-scale assessments are used 
for making important decisions, it is essential that such assessments lead to beneficial consequences 
for all stakeholders. 
 Standards for Educational Assessments 
 The  Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing  (AERA, APA, & NCME, 2014 and previous 
editions;  Standards  hereafter) have argued that test developers, test publishers, and test score users 
of large-scale assessments particularly, in addition to policy makers, need to understand and adhere 
to  Standards that have been jointly articulated by assessment and measurement experts from three 
sponsoring agencies in the US—the American Educational Research Association, the American Psy-
chological Association, and the National Council for Measurement in Education. Over the decades, 
the  Standards  have been extremely influential among assessment agencies in the US, Canada, the 
UK, and overseas. In many cases, the  Standards  have been adopted or adapted every time they have 
been published. 
 The 2014  Standards  have three parts:  Foundations ,  Operations , and  Testing Applications . In   Part 1 , 
the chapters and associated standards are “Validity,” “Reliability/Precision and Errors in Measure-
ment,” and “Fairness in Testing”; in   Part 2 , the chapters and associated standards are “Test Design 
and Development,” “Scores, Scales, Norms, Score Linking, and Cut Scores,” “Test Administration, 
Scoring, Reporting, and Interpretation,” “Supporting Documentation for Tests,” “The Rights and 
Responsibilities of Test Takers,” and “The Rights and Responsibilities of Test Users”; and in   Part 3  , the 
chapters and associated standards are “Psychological Testing and Assessment,” “Workplace Testing 
and Credentialing,” “Educational Testing and Assessment,” and “Uses of Tests for Program Evalua-
tion, Policy Studies, and Accountability.” Here is a listing of  Standards and Clusters associated with 
the three foundational chapters. 
 Validity 
 Standard 1.0 Clear articulation of each intended test score interpretation for a speciﬁ ed use 
should be set forth, and appropriate validity evidence in support of each intended interpreta-
tions should be provided. 
 Cluster 1: Establishing intended uses and interpretations, 
 Cluster 2: Issues regarding samples and settings used in validation, 
 Cluster 3: Validity evidence (content-oriented evidence, evidence regarding cognitive processes, 
evidence regarding internal structure, evidence regarding relationships with conceptually 
related constructs, and evidence regarding relationships with criteria, and evidence based on 
consequences of tests. 

478 • Antony John Kunnan
 Reliability/Precision and Errors in Measurement 
 Standard 2.0 Appropriate evidence of reliability/precision should be provided for the interpreta-
tion for each intended score use. 
 Cluster 1: Speciﬁ cation for replications of the testing procedure, 
 Cluster 2: Evaluating reliability/precision, 
 Cluster 3: Reliability/Generalizability coefﬁ cients, 
 Cluster 4: Factors affecting reliability/precision, 
 Cluster 5: Standard errors of measurement, 
 Cluster 6: Decision consistency, 
 Cluster 7: Reliability/Precision of group means, 
 Cluster 8: Documenting reliability/precision. 
 Fairness in Testing 
 Standard 3.0 All steps in the testing process, including test design, validation, development, 
administration, and scoring procedures, should be designed in such a manner as to minimize 
construct-irrelevant variance and to promote valid score interpretations for the intended uses 
for all examinees in the intended population. 
 Cluster 1: Test design, development, administration, and scoring procedures that minimize bar-
riers to valid score interpretations for the widest possible range of individuals and relevant 
subgroups, 
 Cluster 2: Validity of test score interpretations for intended users for the intended examinee 
population, 
 Cluster 3: Accommodations to remove construct-irrelevant barriers and support valid interpreta-
tions of scores for their intended uses, 
 Cluster 4: When testing requires the use of an interpreter, the interpreter should follow standard-
ized procedures and, to the extent feasible, be sufﬁ ciently ﬂ uent in the language and content of 
the test and the examinee’s native language and culture to translate the test and related testing 
materials and to explain the examinee’s test responses as necessary. 
 Based on the  Standards , what obligations do large-scale assessment developers have to their 
stakeholders? The first is to conduct systematic and comprehensive studies on an ongoing basis 
on validation, reliability, and fairness; and the second is to assess whether an assessment’s decision 
making has beneficial consequences in terms of washback for teaching and learning and to the 
community. The next section examines some important studies that have addressed these mat-
ters under the headings (1) validity, (2) reliability, and (3) fairness, and (4) decision making and 
consequences. 
 Empirical Studies 
 Validity 
There  has long been a recognition that rigorous validation processes and practices are needed to 
safeguard score interpretation and use. As Kunnan (2013) argued: 
 necessary systematic validation research studies ought to be conducted by test development 
agencies to show to the test users (test takers, test score users, and other consumers of test 
www.ebook3000.com

Large-Scale Language Assessment • 479
information) that the tests, their score interpretations, decision and related claims can be 
defended [and such] comprehensive test evaluations need to be conducted on a regular basis 
for the particular purpose for which the tests are being used. 
 (p. 5) 
 The concepts of validity and that of validation (the process of addressing validity) have changed 
dramatically over the decades: (1) in the 1950s and 1960s validation was conceptualized as a trinitarian 
approach of providing evidence of an assessment in terms of content validity, criterion validity, and 
construct validity; (2) in the 1990s, Messick (1989) proposed a unitarian approach to construct valid-
ity with criterion validity and consequential validity evidence contributing to construct validity; 
(3) in the 2000s, Kane, Mislevy, and Bachman variously proposed an argument-based validity approach. 
However, statistical procedures used for validation studies have not changed as correlations, regres-
sion, and exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses have remained the most proven ones. 
 But for systematic and comprehensive validation studies to be carried out, first there needs to be 
a practical validation framework to guide test developers and researchers in conducting their work. 
Chapelle, Enright, and Jamieson (2008) suggested that such a framework would offer guidance in 
terms of how to prioritize and integrate both theoretical and empirical evidence into a coherent 
validity argument, and how much and what types of evidence are needed to support such an argu-
ment. Inspired by the development of an argument-based approach to test validation in educational 
measurement (Kane, 1992; Kane, Crooks, & Cohen, 1999), major advancements in validation frame-
works in language assessment were made in the 2000s (Bachman, 2005; Bachman & Palmer, 2010). 
The principal characteristics of an argument-based approach were summed up by Chapelle and Voss 
(2014, p. 1085) as follows: 
 (1) the interpretative argument that the test developer specifies in order to identify the various 
components of meaning that the test score is intended to have and its uses; 
 (2) the concepts of claims and inferences that are used as the basic building blocks in an interpre-
tative argument; and 
 (3) the use of the interpretative argument as a frame for gathering validity evidence. 
 One example of this approach is the argument-based validity research conducted for iBT mainly prior 
to the launch of the assessment. The findings of these studies were synthesized into a single book titled 
 Building a Validity Argument for the Test of English as a Foreign Language , edited by Chapelle et al. (2008). 
It describes and illustrates an approach to synthesizing multiple types of evidence into an integrated 
validity argument for the proposed interpretation and use of test scores. Chapelle et al. (2008) presented 
the validity argument by first stating an interpretive argument containing the following six claims: 
 (1) that the  tasks on the test were appropriate  for providing relevant observations of performance 
from the examinees on relevant tasks in academic domain; 
 (2) that the evaluation of  examinee’s performance resulted in accurate and relevant summaries (test 
score) of the important characteristics of the performance; 
 (3) that the observed  scores were sufficiently consistent  to generalize to a universe of expected 
scores; the generalization inference is critical for standardized assessments because it needs to 
be established that students’ test scores are comparable no matter which test form they take, 
where they take the test, or who scores their responses; 
 (4) that the consistency of the  expected scores can be explained by the construct  of academic lan-
guage proficiency; 

480 • Antony John Kunnan
 (5) that the  construct of academic language ability predicts a target score  indicating performance in 
the academic context; and 
 (6) that the  meaning of the scores is interpretable by test users , who therefore use it appropriately; 
and that the test will have a positive influence on how English is taught. (p. 16) 
 This was the first illustration of the argument-based validation approach. Though the argument 
presented did not include any rebuttals or counter-arguments, the explicitly stated warrants and 
assumptions underlying the iBT validity argument made it possible for other researchers to critically 
evaluate the argument’s coherence and the quality and sufficiency of its evidence. 
 A more recent study by Kunnan and Carr (2015), using a more traditional validation approach, 
investigated the comparability of two English language proficiency tests—the General English Pro-
ficiency Test—A (GEPT-A) and iBT. The GEPT-A is a standardized assessment used in Taiwan for 
assessing a test taker’s English language ability. Data was collected from 184 test takers in both Taiwan 
and the United States. The instruments used were item-level participant test performance response 
data from the GEPT-A reading section, scores on GEPT-A Writing Task 1, iBT reading, writing, 
speaking, and listening scaled scores, and participant responses to a background information survey 
and five questions involving their perceptions of the GEPT-A. Two specific analyses were conducted: 
First, a content analysis was performed on the passages in the GEPT-A form and on the sample iBT 
reading passages published by Educational Testing Services, Princeton, for test preparation purposes. 
This analysis included using Coh-Metrix (McNamara, Graesser, McCarthy, & Cai, 2014) to analyze 
the cohesion, syntax, and vocabulary used in the reading passages. Furthermore, a task analysis of the 
construct coverage, scope, and task formats used in the reading comprehension questions on the 
two tests was also conducted. Second, an analysis of the participant responses on the tests from 
the two tests was also conducted. 
 The results of the text analysis showed the reading passages on the two tests are comparable in 
many ways but differ in several key regards. The task analysis revealed that the construct coverage, 
item scope, and task formats of the two tests are clearly distinct. Analysis of participant responses 
indicated that the GEPT-A has good reliability and that reading comprehension items tend to func-
tion quite well. Scores on the GEPT-A and iBT are highly intercorrelated with each other. Exploratory 
and confirmatory factor analyses of the test score data indicated that the two tests appeared to both 
be measuring reading and writing ability but emphasized different aspects of the reading construct—
that is, the different construct definitions for the two tests are reflected in the results of the factor 
analyses. The constructs of the two assessments are, therefore, not entirely similar. 
 Reliability 
 Reliability or consistency (for norm-referenced tests) and dependability (for criterion-referenced 
tests) of performance and scoring are well-known markers of a high-quality assessment. Reliability 
or dependability procedures could be used to check the internal consistency of all test items in a 
section of a test assessing the same construct, or to examine the inter-rater reliability among raters 
assessing extended writing or speaking, or, in more contemporary contexts, to investigate the reli-
ability of human raters with automated ratings. 
 Reliability estimates for norm-referenced tests can be generated using Classical True Score Theory 
(e.g., correlations, Cronbach’s alpha, etc.), Item Response Theory, and Generalizability Theory. Com-
monly used estimates include inter-rater consistency, which is typically reported as a correlation but 
should be adjusted with the Spearman-Brown prophecy formula to be used as a reliability index, 
and if there are more than two ratings, Fisher Z-transformation should be applied to each correla-
tion, then averaged together, and the result should be retransformed to a correlation coefficient. 
www.ebook3000.com

Large-Scale Language Assessment • 481
Another approach is to use Cronbach’s alpha as an estimate of internal consistency with multiple 
scores for multiple raters, multiple tasks or items, or for subscales in an analytical scoring scale. 
A more informative approach is to use generalizability theory to estimate the consistency of scor-
ing. This approach offers the advantage of identifying facets of the measurement process contribut-
ing most to reliability or unreliability, such as items or tasks, raters, and occasions particularly for 
extended writing or speaking tasks. Many-faceted Rasch theory can also provide similar information; 
in addition, it can provide ability estimates for test takers and difficulty or severity estimates for each 
rater or rubric scale. 
 For criterion-referenced estimates of score dependability of scores and decision consistency, 
Hambelton, Swaminathan, Algina, and Coulson (1978) using generalizability theory identified three 
different concepts: (1) agreement of placement classification decisions, (2) agreement of decisions at 
cut scores, and (3) dependability of domain scores (see Kunnan, 1992, for more details). 
 Kunnan (1992) investigated placement decisions made by the ESL program in four class levels 
(33A, 33B, 33C, and 35) at the University of California, Los Angeles based on the New ESL place-
ment examination. He found that agreement indices (p o  and K) differed across cut scores; they were 
highest for the lowest cut score group (p o  at .98 for the 33A level group) and lowest for the highest 
cut score group (p o  at .86 for the 35 level group). Agreement indices at the cut scores was generally 
acceptable across groups (p o  at .98 to .94). The dependability estimates for the four ESL class groups 
were different: lowest for the 33C and 35 groups (Brennan’s Φ .30 and .48, respectively). Thus, the 
ESL placement test was not dependable to the same extent for all groups, possibly because there were 
not enough test items at all levels; if specifications and items were carefully laddered, there would have 
been a better chance of assessing student ability at the different levels. In terms of actual classification of 
individual students, there were problems as well. Using students’ total scores instead of specific section 
scores for listening, grammar, reading, and writing resulted in misclassification of many students. 
Specifically, if section scores were used, 9 students (out of 390; 2.30%) in the listening class would 
have been placed differently into higher or lower levels, 41 students in the reading class (10.51%) 
would have been placed differently, and 58 students in the grammar class (14.87%) would have been 
placed differently. Thus, a total of 108 cases of misclassification occurred due to total cut scores. 
 But two recent studies conducted by in-house researchers at Educational Testing Services, Princeton, 
found positive results. Wang, Eignor, and Enright (2008) reported the significant effect of academic 
placement for the total iBT scores as well as for the four skills of listening, reading, speaking, and 
writing. Similarly, Papageorgiou and Cho (2014) conducted a study to test the claim that scores were 
able to place “students in English-language programs so that they are matched with level-appropriate 
instruction” (www.ets.org/toefl_junior). Data collected included TOEFL Junior Standard total scores 
of 92 ESL students in two secondary schools in the US and Europe, as well as their ESL teachers’ sug-
gestions on their placement levels, which were made within four weeks after the TOEFL administra-
tion. Teacher-suggested ESL placement levels were used as a dependable variable and regressed on 
TOEFL Junior total scores using an ordinal logistic regression model. Statistical analyses revealed a 
strong correlation between test scores and the teacher-assigned ESL levels. Moreover, the results from 
the logistic regression analysis indicated a great deal of overlap between the teacher-assigned ESL 
levels and the levels predicted from the TOEFL Junior Standard scores. The findings thus provided 
some preliminary evidence to support the use of TOEFL Junior Standard as an initial screening tool 
for ESL placement. 
 Fairness 
 As fairness has become an increasingly important concern, and is well documented in the 2014  Stan-
dards , assessment developers are obligated to provide comparable and equitable treatment during 

482 • Antony John Kunnan
all phases of the assessment process to all test takers. Anticipating the 2014  Standards , Holland and 
Wainer (1993) outlined three relevant aspects that are routinely used to ensure test fairness: 
 (1) Detailed reviews of test items by subject matter experts and members of the major sub-
groups in society (gender, ethnic, and linguistic) that, in prospect, will be represented in the 
examinee population; (2) Comparisons of the predictive validity of the test done separately for 
each of the major subgroups of examinees; and (3) Extensive statistical analyses of the relative 
performance of major subgroups of examinees on individual test items. 
 (pp. xiii) 
 Sensitivity Review 
 Holland and Wainer’s (1993) first aspect suggested that assessment developers ought to be respon-
sible for developing tests that measure the intended constructs and to eliminate or minimize con-
struct-irrelevant characteristics in the tests in the form of linguistic, cognitive, cultural, physical, or 
other characteristics. This would require them to identify and eliminate language, symbols, words 
and phrases, content, and stereotyping of characters that are offensive or insulting to test takers of 
different racial, ethnic, gender, or other groups. 
 A well-documented sensitivity review process of all assessment materials was in place at Educa-
tional Testing Service, Princeton, as early as the 1980s based on the  ETS Test Sensitivity Review Process 
(1980) and the  ETS Standards for Quality and Fairness  (1987). When these standards were translated 
into practice, Ramsey (1993) documented that it required (1) ETS documents to be balanced, not 
foster stereotypes, and not contain ethnocentric or gender-based assumptions; and (2) ETS tests not 
to be offensive when viewed from a test taker’s perspective, not contain controversial material, and 
not be elitist and ethnocentric. Sensitivity reviews of tests used in most US school and college dis-
tricts include additional aspects such as cultures, religions, socio-economic groups, and disabilities. 
 Hambelton and Rogers (1995) identified five areas in their review form: fairness, content bias, 
language bias, item structure and format bias, and stereotyping. The way the review form works is 
as follows: each reviewer would receive a reading passage and related items (testlet) or other types 
(such as individual items or prompts). This testlet would then be examined in terms of the checklist 
items. The checklist information from all of the reviewers would then be collated and organized into 
a spreadsheet for further descriptive statistical analyses. If a testlet received checks indicating bias on 
more than 25% of the checklist items, then such items were flagged for modification, revision, or 
deletion. 
 Test Performance 
 Holland and Wainer’s second and third aspects suggested that scores of different subgroups should 
ideally have similar predictive validity with an external criterion (such as workplace or university 
performance) for these subgroups. When comparisons of subgroups is conducted and there is a sig-
nificant difference, then the assessment developer has to be sure that the difference is not due to the 
assessment itself. Specifically, if scores among subgroups are significantly different, then assessment 
developers and score users are responsible for examining the evidence for validity of score interpre-
tations for intended uses for test takers from subgroups. 
 Zumbo (2007) also makes this point succinctly: 
 If the average test scores for such groups (e.g., men vs. women, Blacks vs. Whites) were found 
to be different, then the question arose as to whether the difference reflected bias in the test. 
www.ebook3000.com

Large-Scale Language Assessment • 483
Given that a test comprises items, questions soon emerged about which specific items might 
be the source of such bias. 
 (p. 224) 
 To put it another way, when a test is fair, the expectation is that test takers in all subgroups will 
fare equally well. However, when test score differences occur among test taker subgroups (say, by 
gender, race/ethnicity, native language), of similar ability (as determined and matched by the total 
score), then the question is why did the differences occur? Were the differences due to differences in 
ability of interest or were the differences due to test items? Specifically, were the differences due to 
test content (reading passage, listening script), test format (multiple-choice, constructed responses), 
or some other irrelevant variable (say, typing skills) that were unfair to some groups? 
 The 2014  Standards articulated Standard 3.6, which is relevant here: 
 Where credible evidence indicates that test scores may differ in meaning for relevant sub-
groups in the intended examinee population, test developers and/or users are responsible for 
examining the evidence for validity of score interpretations for intended uses for individuals 
from those subgroups. What constitutes a significant difference in subgroup score and what 
actions are taken in response to such differences may be defined by applicable laws. 
 (p. 85) 
 An examination of such evidence to determine whether the score interpretations are the same or 
not for different subgroups is called Differential Item Functioning (DIF) or Differential Testlet Func-
tioning (DTF) analysis. Once an item or testlet is identified as a DIF item or a DTF testlet, content 
experts need to identify the source of the DIF/DTF, whether it is content, test format, or any form 
of bias. 
 DIF and DTF are psychometric procedures involving statistical methods (such as regression, Item 
Response Theory, and non-parametric SIB test, etc.) that detect statistical bias at the test item or 
testlet level for two comparable subgroups of test takers, matched with respect to the construct being 
measured by the test. As many subgroups can be formed, conducting DIF/DTF analyses in an explor-
atory mode may not yield useful results, especially in answering questions regarding the source of the 
DIF/DTF. Thus, many researchers (Roussos & Stout, 2004; Zumbo, 2007) have recently argued that 
a purposeful hypothesis-driven approach to identifying subgroups for DIF/DTF analyses will most 
likely yield answers to questions regarding the source of the DIF/DTF. In other words, when DIF 
research is exploratory and not based on hypotheses and some items are flagged for DIF, the source 
of the DIF is often unclear. This leaves open the question of whether such DIF items with no clear 
source of explanation are really biased items. 
 Relevant hypotheses for an assessment might be subgroups of test takers in terms of their native 
languages, such as Indo-European (IE) and Non-Indian European (NIE) language subgroups rel-
evant for international assessments. Thus, hypotheses could be stated as a null hypothesis, “There is 
no DIF or DTF in the IE or NIE subgroups,” or as a directional hypothesis, “There is DIF/DTF for 
the IE group (or NIE group).” A popular line of investigation is to examine DIF by gender subgroups. 
Another hypothesis that may be relevant could be subgroups formed by age groupings (e.g., ages 
16–25, 26–40, 41–60, 61 and above). These hypotheses may be based on previous research, theo-
retical foundation, anecdotal evidence, or a researcher’s or test developer’s hunches. The subsequent 
DIF/DTF analysis would reveal whether test performance of the two subgroups at the item or testlet 
level is affected by their grouping even when bands of test takers who have similar overall scores are 
matched and analyzed. As mentioned earlier, items and testlets that display DIF/DTF will then need 
to be examined by content experts for the source of the DIF/DTF, whether it is content, test format, 

484 • Antony John Kunnan
or any form of bias. If the source of the DIF/DTF is determined to be construct-irrelevant variance, 
then the item or testlet will need to be revised or removed.  In terms of empirical studies, Ferne and 
Rupp (2007) provided an excellent synthesis of 15 years (1990–2005) of research on DIF in language 
testing. They reviewed 27 articles in terms of the tests and learner groups used in the studies, along 
with DIF detection methods applied, the reporting of DIF effects, and explanations for and conse-
quences drawn from DIF results.
 There have been recent debates on what constitutes fairness and how and whether fairness is 
related to bias. As the debates are too numerous to list, here is a sample of the debates: “What does 
test bias have to do with fairness?” (Elder, 1997), the relationship between test fairness, test bias, and 
DIF (Kunnan, 2007), “How do we go about investigating test fairness?” (Xi, 2010), fairness and the 
Toulmin argument structure (Kunnan, 2010), and fairness and justice (Kunnan, 2014; McNamara & 
Ryan, 2011).  
 Decision Making and Consequences 
 As Kunnan (2013) argued, it is both important and necessary to examine whether the consequences 
of assessment scores and decisions made based on them are beneficial to test takers, the community, 
and society in general. In school, college, and university contexts, the immediate consequence is to 
the test taker (the learner) and then to the teacher, and then further to the teaching-learning process. 
This effect on the teaching-learning process is called washback (i.e., the effect of language assess-
ments on several micro-levels of language teaching and learning inside the classroom) (McNamara, 
2000). A number of empirical studies conducted in a variety of contexts have helped reveal the 
complex relationship between washback, specifically, assessment, and teaching and learning (Cheng 
& Watanabe, 2004; Wall, 2005). For example, Qi (2005) examined why the National Matriculation 
English Test (NMET) in China failed to bring about the intended washback effects of promoting 
changes in English language teaching in schools. Qualitative data were collected from interviews and 
questionnaires from four groups of stakeholders: eight NMET developers, six English inspectors, 
388 teachers, and 986 students. Qi found that NMET’s failure to achieve its intended washback was 
mainly due to the conflicting functions that the test serves, namely, the selection function and the 
function of promoting change. This conflict makes the NMET “a powerful trigger for teaching to the 
test, but an ineffective agent for changing teaching and learning in the way intended by its construc-
tors and the policymakers” (p. 142). 
 Besides washback effects, empirical studies are also necessary to check whether the use of large-
scale language assessment scores actually serve their intended or sometimes unintended purposes 
and whether decisions made on the basis of assessment scores have a positive impact on stakehold-
ers. Even when an assessment is shown to be serving its intended purpose, empirical studies still 
need to be conducted to see if scores used as the sole criterion in decision making are adequate and 
appropriate. 
 More recently, O’Loughlin (2011), in his investigation into the interpretation and use of IELTS 
scores for admission purposes at an Australian university, found that IELTS scores were not used to 
guide English language learning except for undergraduate students, who were sometimes admitted 
with an overall band score of less than 6.5. This finding suggested that there had been very few benefi-
cial educational consequences of the test. He explored how the IELTS score was used in the selection 
of international ESL students within one faculty in an Australian university, and the knowledge and 
beliefs that administrative and academic staff had about the test. Data gathered included relevant 
university policy and procedures documents as well as statistics related to English entry, a question-
naire administered to 20 staff, and follow-up interviews with 12 selected staff. With regard to the way 
IELTS scores were used in admission, the study found that (1) there was neither a principled basis 
www.ebook3000.com

Large-Scale Language Assessment • 485
for originally establishing IELTS minimum entry scores nor further tracking of student success to 
validate entry requirements; and (2) applicants’ IELTS scores were not considered in relation to other 
relevant individual factors as recommended in the guidelines listed in the  IELTS Handbook (2007), 
including age, motivation, educational and cultural background, first language, and language learn-
ing history. Both findings indicated that the interpretation and use of IELTS test scores in this context 
were invalid. O’Loughlin thus proposes that a major change needs to be made in admission policy 
and procedure in Australian universities, which would allow test scores to be interpreted in relation 
to other relevant information about applicants. Meanwhile, all university stakeholders, including 
university policy makers, admission staff, as well as academic staff, need to be better educated in score 
interpretation and use and the other accepted measures of proficiency. 
 One particular type of large-scale assessment that is heavily influenced by legislation and thus car-
ries implicit political values is immigration and citizenship tests. In 2009, a collection of 12 case stud-
ies edited by Extra and Spotti (2009) on language testing and citizenship was published under the 
title  Language Testing, Migration and Citizenship: Cross-National Perspectives on Integration Regimes. 
One particularly critical case within the European context concerned the Netherlands, where there 
is a demand for “cultural and linguistic homogenization at the national level” (Extra & Spotti, 2009, 
p. 125). It is not surprising that against such an ideological background, newcomers to the Nether-
lands have to pass three stages of testing regimes (i.e., admission to the country, civic integration after 
arrival, and naturalization to citizenship). Extra and Spotti (2009) outlined, analyzed, and evaluated 
these testing regimes by taking into account both the historical and phenomenology of these regimes. 
For example, their evaluation of the first part of the admission test, which is supposed to measure 
test takers’ knowledge of Dutch society, reveals that it is actually a hidden language test, because all 
questions are in Dutch and all answers also have to be provided in Dutch. With regard to the second 
part of the admission test, which is a computerized phone test of listening and speaking skills at the 
CEFR A1 minus level, external judgments, offered by a group of four experts in linguistics, testing, 
and speech technology, were cited. Concerning the quality of the test, the experts concluded that 
“there was not enough evidence that the proposed phone test would be valid and reliable” (p. 132). 
 Outside of the European context, Kunnan (2009) took a critical look at the US Naturalization Test, 
which millions of citizenship applicants have been subjected to over the past two decades. Applying 
the “Test Context Framework” (Kunnan, 2008), which expands the scope of the examination of tests 
to include the political, economic, and legal contexts, Kunnan investigated whether the language 
requirement and the test, including its purpose, content, administration, and consequence, provide 
the impetus for citizenship applicants to integrate or develop a civic nationalism. A detailed analysis 
of the test, including its development, content, as well as problems, led Kunnan to argue that (a) nei-
ther the test requirement nor its purpose is meaningful; (b) the test fails in its attempt to assess Eng-
lish language ability and knowledge of US history and government; and (c) the test may not have the 
intended positive consequence of bringing about civic nationalism and social integration. He thus 
concluded that the Naturalization Test is an undue burden on non-English-speaking immigrants and 
only creates a barrier for them to acquire citizenship, and calls for a replacement of the test with an 
educational program in English language and US history and government. 
 Australia is another country where immigration has always been a central issue. In 2007, a new 
formal testing regime for people wishing to gain citizenship was launched in Australia. This new citizen-
ship is administered in English by computer and takes the form of 20 multiple-choice questions on 
Australian institutions, customs, history, and values (Piller & McNamara, 2007). As the test also aims 
to satisfy the legislative requirement that the applicant must demonstrate a ‘basic knowledge’ of 
English, the language and literacy demand of the test becomes a crucial issue. Piller and McNamara 
(2007) carried out a number of analyses to assess the linguistic difficulty of the resource booklet. 
First, a comparison between the language of the booklet with some widely used definitions of ‘basic 

486 • Antony John Kunnan
English’, such as the first two levels of the CEFR, revealed that the booklet’s language is well above the 
so-called basic level. Second, a lexical analysis using the web-based lexical profiler Web VP showed 
that about two-thirds of the content words in the booklet are beyond the level of the top 1,000 most 
frequent words in English, and that only 16.23% of the words in the booklet are of Anglo-Saxon ori-
gin. Both findings suggested the relatively abstract and complex nature of the material. Furthermore, 
the lexical density of the booklet language reaches 57%, which is at the very upper end of the range 
for written texts. These findings led the researchers to conclude that “the resource booklet  Becoming 
an Australian Citizen  is certainly out of the reach of a basic user of English and would present dif-
ficulties for many native speakers of English with limited education and/or limited familiarity with 
texts of this type” (p. 1). 
 Recommendations 
 These recommendation ideas are written for assessment developers and to all the stakeholders 
involved in large-scale assessments. Although these recommendations are listed under different 
headings, there is some overlap among them. 
 Public Justification and Reasoning 
 The most important recommendation that can be made for large-scale assessment is the area of 
public justification and reasoning. For fairness and justice to work in an assessment context, public 
justification or public reasoning should be part of the process of engaging all stakeholders. Philoso-
pher John Rawls (1960) argued that it was necessary to justify policy judgments to fellow citizens so 
that public consensus could be reached. He also suggested the use of the methodology of “reflective 
equilibrium” to help in the public justification process. In this methodology, initial ideas, beliefs, or 
theories are subjected to reason, reflection, and revision until the ideas, beliefs, or theories reach a 
state of equilibrium in public justification. Economist Amartya Sen (2012) went a step further and 
argued that public reasoning of a government’s policy was essential to convince the public of a new 
policy. This obviously should also apply to assessment policy as well, where the relevant assessment 
bodies and assessment developers will offer a full account of the issues related to an assessment, such 
as purpose (selection, placement, etc.), development (item specifications, trialling, revisions, etc.), 
operations (item test banking, assembly of test, etc.), research findings (validity, reliability, fairness, 
and decision making), and consequences (beneficial or not) of the assessment. These issues need to 
be brought to the attention of the community through descriptions, research, and findings in public 
forums in a variety of venues that could include conferences, seminars, open town hall meetings, and 
regular newsletters, to name a few. Of course, in both cases of public justification and public reason-
ing, it is assumed that the governments and bodies that have put assessments in place through public 
policy (in school, college, university, workplace, immigration, and citizenship) are not authoritarian 
and unwilling to hear community members’ concerns, if any. 
 Framework and Agenda for Research 
 It is imperative that agencies that develop and administer large-scale assessments develop a frame-
work and agenda for ongoing research, not an ad hoc plan to satisfy a particular client or customer 
or satisfy an assessment standard required by funding bodies. Generally, assessment agencies are 
willing to spend the time and resources to develop and launch an assessment, but they allocate fewer 
resources for research and development after the assessment has been launched. Specific plans, pro-
cedures, and steps need to be in place for research on validity, reliability, and fairness. In addition, if 
www.ebook3000.com

Large-Scale Language Assessment • 487
accommodations (such as extended time) are necessary for test takers with disabilities, research in 
this area has to be conducted in order to provide the appropriate type of accommodation. 
 Assessment Development and Research 
 It may be unnecessary to make this recommendation, but given the proliferation of assessments 
and organizations who are entering this business, it may be salutary. Assessment development and 
research staff need to be qualified in language assessment issues, preferably through a university 
program, and then trained in systematic ways of developing assessments and researching the validity, 
reliability, and fairness of assessments, and relating all of them to the consequences of assessments. 
In addition, staff should have the ability to go to public forums to offer public justification and rea-
soning of the assessments they have developed and researched. 
 Score Users and Community Members 
 Assessment score users are members of the larger community who make decisions about test takers. 
Such score users could be school, college, or university teachers who are responsible for placing stu-
dents into programs, workplace officials who make decisions regarding careers and promotion, and 
immigration and citizenship officials who decide on applicants’ mobility and residence. They need 
to understand how to read and interpret scores (scores, grades, descriptors, etc.) and understand the 
limitations of scores (standard errors, cut scores, reliability of scores, etc.). In addition, they need to 
be able to translate score reports that are often technical to administrators, parents, and community 
members in public forums and town hall meetings. On occasion, they should also be prepared to 
provide depositions in courts related to the strengths of their assessments and contest challenges 
regarding any weaknesses of their assessments. 
 Oversight Bodies 
 As of now, assessments and assessment agencies are not governed by the rules and regulations of a 
state regulatory board or oversight body. This means that assessments do not have to be certified to 
be valid, reliable, or fair, but they can enter the marketplace and determine the lives of test takers. 
The burden therefore is on assessment agencies to self-monitor and self-review their assessments. 
Although we are not advocating setting up a regulatory authority within a particular country or 
internationally, meeting the  Standards  (AERA, APA, & NCME, 2014) in a phased manner could be 
one way of assuring stakeholders of the quality of assessments. Additionally, national or interna-
tional organizations like ALTE, EALTA, ILTA, and the like can be given a role in certifying the quality 
of assessments through their elected officials. A totally unregulated marketplace with assessments 
developed by unqualified and untrained staff, in some cases, with only a business model in mind, is 
a very scary situation for all stakeholders. 
 Conclusion 
 As we have shown through discussions and empirical studies of validity, reliability, and fairness of 
large-scale assessments, large-scale language assessments are not the ideal way to assess language 
ability. This is because in many cases the intended purposes may not be well served, and unintended 
consequences may play a bigger role than anticipated. But in this age where several hundred or 
thousand test takers have to be assessed in a short period of time and results and decisions have to 
be made quickly, there is probably no better way than what we have. Therefore, our goal has to be to 

488 • Antony John Kunnan
make better large-scale assessments. In this regard, we have suggested some recommendations that 
can build the base for quality large-scale assessments even with its present limitations. 
 The most important recommendation of all those made is the one regarding public justifica-
tion or public reasoning. We argue that this should be a fundamental requirement of all assessment 
agencies that develop, administer, and use large-scale assessments. As we have seen, many large-scale 
assessments have the power to alter the careers and lives of test takers, and if this is done with poor-
quality assessments, the detrimental effects of such action will be long-lasting and irreversible. By 
requiring assessment agencies to publicly account for their assessments, we feel this will ensure the 
road to quality assessments. 
 Acknowledgment 
 I would like to thank Hang Li from Shanghai Jiatong University for her reference work for this 
chapter. 
Note
1. Starting in 2016, the state will administer Smarter Balanced Assessments, computer-based tests aligned with the state’s new 
standards for English language arts/literacy and math called California Assessment of Student Performance and Progress 
(CAASPP).
 References 
 American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Association, and National Center for Measurement in 
Education. (2014).  Standards for educational and psychological testing . Washington, DC: Author. 
 Bachman, L. F. (2005). Building and supporting a case for test use.  Language Assessment Quarterly ,  19 , 453–476. 
 Bachman, L. F., & Palmer, A. (2010).  Language assessment in practice . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 Chapelle, C. A., Enright, M. K., & Jamieson, J. M. (Eds.). (2008).  Building a validity argument for the test of English as a foreign 
language . New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Chapelle, C. A., & Voss, E. (2014). Evaluation of language tests through validation research. In A. J. Kunnan (Ed.),  The com-
panion to language assessment  (pp. 1081–1097). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
 Cheng, L., & Qi, L. (2006). Description and examination of the national matriculation English test.  Language Assessment 
Quarterly ,  3 , 53–70. 
 Cheng, L., & Watanabe, Y. (Ed.). (2004).  Washback in language testing . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Educational testing service test sensitivity review process. (1980). Princeton, NJ: Author. 
 Educational testing service standards for quality and fairness. (1987). Princeton, NJ: Author. 
 Elder, C. (1997). What does test bias have to do with fairness?  Language Testing ,  14 , 261–277. 
 Extra, G., & Spotti, M. (2009). Testing regimes for newcomers in the Netherlands. In G. Extra, M. Spotti, & P. van Avermaet 
(Eds.),  Language testing, migration and citizenship: Cross-national perspectives on integration regimes  (pp. 1–33). London: 
Continuum. 
 Ferne, T., & Rupp, T. (2007). A synthesis of 15 years of research on DIF in language testing.  Language Assessment Quarterly , 
 4 , 113–148. 
 Hambelton, R., & Rogers, J. (1995).  Test bias . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Hambelton, R.K., Swaminathan, H., Algina, J., & Coulson, D.B. (1978). Criterion-referenced testing and measurement: A 
review of technical issues and developments.  Review of Educational Research, 48 , 1–47. 
 Holland, P., & Wainer, H. (Ed.). (1993).  Differential item functioning . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 International English Language System Handbook. (2007). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Language Assessment. 
 Kane, M. (1992). An argument-based approach to validity.  Psychological Bulletin ,  112 , 527–535. 
 Kane, M., Crooks, T., & Cohen, A. (1999). Validating measures of performance.  Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice , 
 18 , 5–17. 
 Kunnan, A. J. (1992). An investigation of a criterion-referenced test using G-theory, and factor and cluster analyses.  Language 
Testing ,  18 , 30–49. 
 Kunnan, A. J. (2007). Test fairness, test bias, and DIF.  Language Assessment Quarterly ,  4 , 109–112. 
www.ebook3000.com

Large-Scale Language Assessment • 489
 Kunnan, A. J. (2008). Towards a model of test evaluation: Using the Test Fairness and Wider Context frameworks. In L. Taylor & 
C. Weir (Eds.),  Multilingualism and assessment: Achieving transparency, assuring quality, sustaining diversity. Papers from 
the ALTE Conference in Berlin, Germany (pp. 229–251). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Kunnan, A. J. (2009). Testing for citizenship: The U.S. naturalization test.  Language Assessment Quarterly ,  6 , 80–97. 
 Kunnan, A. J. (2010). Fairness and the Toulmin argument structure.  Language Testing ,  27 , 183–189. 
 Kunnan, A. J. (2013). High-stakes language testing. In C. Chapelle (Ed.),  The encyclopedia of applied linguistics  (pp. 1–6). 
Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
 Kunnan, A. J. (2014). Fairness and justice in language assessment. In A. J. Kunnan (Ed.),  The companion to language assessment 
(pp. 1098–1114). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
 Kunnan, A. J., & Carr, N. (2015). A comparability study between the general English proficiency test—advanced and the 
internet-based test of English as a foreign language. Research Report No. 6. Taipei: Language Training and Testing Center. 
 Kunnan, A. J., & Grabowski, K. (2013). Large-scale second language assessment. In M. Celce-Murcia, D. M. Brinton, & M. A. 
Snow (Eds.),  Teaching English as a second or foreign language  (4th ed., pp. 304–319). Boston, MA: National Geographic 
Learning/Cengage Learning. 
 McNamara, T. (2000).  Language testing . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 McNamara, D. S., Graesser, A. C., McCarthy, P. M., & Cai, Z. (2014).  Automated evaluation of text and discourse with Coh-
Metrix . Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 
 McNamara, T., & Ryan, K. (2011). Fairness versus justice in language testing: The place of English literacy in the Australian 
citizenship test.  Language Assessment Quarterly ,  8 , 161–178. 
 Messick, S. (1989). Validity. In R. Linn (Ed.),  Educational measurement (3rd ed., pp. 13–103). New York, NY: Macmillan. 
 O’Loughlin, K. (2011). The interpretation and use of proficiency test scores in university selection: How valid and ethical are 
they?  Language Assessment Quarterly ,  8 , 146–160. 
 Papageorgiou, S., & Cho, Y. (2014). An investigation of the use of TOEFL® Junior™ Standard scores for ESL placement deci-
sions in secondary education.  Language Testing ,  31 , 223–239. 
 Piller, I., & McNamara, T. (2007).  Assessment of the language level of the August 2007 draft of the resource booklet “Becoming an 
Australian citizen”.  Report prepared for the Federation of Ethnic Communities. Councils of Australia (FECCA). Curtin, 
ACT: FECCA. 
 Qi, L. (2005). Stakeholders’ conflicting aims undermine the washback function of a high-stakes test.  Language Testing ,  22 , 
142–173. 
 Ramsey, D. (1993). Sensitivity review. In P. Holland & H. Wainer (Ed.),  Differential item functioning  (pp. 367–388). Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Rawls, J. (1960).  Fairness as just ice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Roussos, L., & Stout, W. (2004). Differential item functioning analysis. In R. Kaplan (Ed.),  The Sage Handbook of quantitative 
methodology for the social sciences (pp. 107–116 ) . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Sen, A. (2012).  The idea of justice . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Wall, D. (2005).  The impact of high-stakes examinations on classroom teaching . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Wang, L., Eignor, D., & Enright, M. K. (2008). A final analysis. In C. A. Chapelle, M. K. Enright, & J. M. Jamieson (Eds.),  Build-
ing a validity argument for the test of English as a foreign language (pp. 259–318). New York, NY: Routledge. 
 Xi, X. (2010). How do we go about investigating test fairness?  Language Testing ,  27 , 147–170. 
 Zumbo, B. (2007). Three generations of DIF analyses.  Language Assessment Quarterly ,  4 , 223–233. 

490
 35 
 Fifteen Ways to Improve Classroom Assessment 
 James Dean Brown and Jonathan Trace 
 Introduction 
 Assessment is just as essential to the language classroom as any teaching activity or task, yet much of the 
literature on second language classroom assessment tends to limit itself to definitions of assessment, 
differentiating between planned and informal measures, and discussing the issues involved in carry-
ing out assessment. While we draw on many of these concepts and findings, our primary goal in this 
chapter is to help language teachers plan, design, and carry out assessment with their students from 
a practical standpoint. Hence, the title of this chapter, fifteen ways to improve classroom assessment. 
 Classroom assessment  has been defined as “any reflection by teachers (and/or learners) on the 
qualities of a learner’s (or group of learners’) work and the use of that information by teachers (and/
or learners) for teaching, learning (feedback), reporting, management or socialization purposes” 
(Hill & McNamara, 2012, p. 396). While some authors have focused on these concepts in terms of 
planned assessments (e.g., Leung & Mohan, 2004; McNamara, 2001), others have associated class-
room assessment with more reflective or formative measures that blend assessment and instruction 
(e.g., Rea-Dickins, 2006; Torrance & Pryor, 1998). Our approach, like Hill and McNamara (2012), 
includes facets of both of these notions, taking the position that all classroom assessment should be 
based on careful planning and carried out systematically regardless of the particular approach being 
used (e.g., Popham, 2008). [For a wide variety of examples of classroom tests developed by language 
teachers, see Brown, 1998, 2013a.] 
 Hill and McNamara (2012) outline four steps that teachers engage in when using classroom assess-
ment: (a) planning, (b) framing (or awareness-raising), (c) conducting, and (d) using assessment. 
Brown (2013b) divides classroom testing into three different steps: (a) test writing, (b) development, 
and (c) validation. Inspired by both articles and what we have learned from the literature, we will 
organize this chapter around the five major steps shown in  Figure 35.1 , each of which has three parts.   
 Planning Assessment 
 Know Your Options 
 We believe that teachers who want their assessments to be effective and useful for student learning 
should make every effort to plan and integrate assessment activities directly into their curriculum 
from the very beginning by first knowing their options. Many language teachers are not aware that 
www.ebook3000.com

Fifteen Ways to Improve Classroom Assessment • 491
they have far more assessment options than instructors in other fields (see Brookhart, 1999; Brown, 
2013b, in press). For example, math teachers typically present their students solely with numerical 
problems to solve. Granted, they use different types of problems, but that is really only one type of 
test item. 1  In contrast, language teachers can use at least a dozen different types of items across four 
categories: (a) selected-response items, (b) productive-response items, (c) personalized-response 
items, and (d) individualized-response items. Each of these provides a different kind of “assessment 
opportunity” (Rea-Dickins, 2001, p. 433) for teachers to gather information about their students’ 
learning. 
 Selected-Response Items 
 Selected-response items require learners to choose from a set of responses rather than produce one 
of their own. These include multiple-choice, true-false, and matching tasks, all of which tend to be 
used to measure knowledge related to knowledge (e.g., grammar, vocabulary) or to receptive skills 
(listening or reading). When properly constructed, such items can be useful for gathering informa-
tion in a quick, reliable, and objective way, which makes them ideal for classroom contexts when 
teachers need a quick but broad measure of student learning (e.g., daily quizzes, diagnostic tests). 
Because they are primarily limited to passive knowledge of the language (e.g., comprehension, rec-
ognition), they are less effective for assessing complex, productive forms of language (e.g., speaking, 
pragmatics), and thus are best paired with other response categories when teachers want a more 
complete picture of their learners’ abilities. 
 While they are relatively easy to administer and score, selected-response items tend to be difficult 
to construct. Because they are typically scored right/wrong, they need to be designed so that multiple 
possible correct answers are avoided, which limits what these sorts of items can do. For example, 
they may not work well for potentially subjective material like inferences, which can lead to multiple, 
arguably correct responses to the same question (e.g., Buck, 2001). Other issues, such as limiting the 
guessing factor and choosing a correct number of fittingly appropriate distractors (Rodriguez, 2005), 
also make these items challenging to write. 
 Figure 35.1  Five Steps in Classroom Assessment 
Improving the Test
Analyze the Items
Check Reliability
Check Validity
Using the Test
Plan the Test Administration
Give Students Feedback
Use the Feedback Yourself
Compiling the Test
Organize the Items
Create Scoring Tools
Proofread the Complete Test
Writing Items
Create the Best Possible Items
Write Enough Items
Check the Items Again
Planning Assessment
Know Your Options
Match Assessment to Learning
Promote Learning with Assessment

492 • James Dean Brown and Jonathan Trace
 Productive-Response Items 
 Productive-response items have the advantage of requiring students to actually produce a response 
in the target language. These items include fill-in or cloze-type items (which usually require exam-
inees to supply words or phrases in blanks), short-answer items (that involve longer, constructed 
responses), and performance items (that can range from relatively short essays to more elaborate 
tasks in the language, e.g., making reservations on the phone, giving a presentation, role-plays). 
 Unlike fill-in or short-answer items, performance items require longer responses and can simu-
late genuine language use specifically related to what learners are doing in the classroom (Shohamy, 
1995) and take into account language abilities related to target language uses that learners will most 
likely need in real life (Bachman & Palmer, 1996, 2010). That said, not all performance assessments 
are necessarily authentic (see Kane, Crooks, & Cohen, 1999; Wiggins, 1993, 1998), but they certainly 
come closer than selected-response item types. 
 However, performance assessments can be challenging to design because (a) appropriately difficult 
and complex tasks that also elicit the kinds of real-world language performances needed are difficult 
to create (see Brown, Hudson, Norris, & Bonk, 2002; Norris, Brown, Hudson, & Yoshioka, 1998); 
(b) administering and scoring is difficult for large classes, though using a rubric or checklist may help 
(Davis & Kondo-Brown, 2012); and (c) careful planning is needed to ensure that performance assess-
ments produce reliable and valid scores (Kane et al., 1999). However, the advantages they offer in 
terms of flexibility and matching assessment to instruction may make performance assessments ideal 
for classroom uses. (For much more on performance items, see Brown, 2004b; Norris et al., 1998.) 
 Personalized-Response Items 
 Personalized-response items involve teachers setting broad guidelines for the task(s) involved, but 
leaving the learners to determine the actual content. Common examples include portfolios (e.g., 
see Cresswell, 2000; Graves, 1992; Hirvel & Pierson, 2000), teacher-student conferences and inter-
views (e.g., Jang, Dunlop, Park, & van der Boom, 2015), and self/peer assessment (e.g., Butler & Lee, 
2010; Dippold, 2009; Matsuno, 2009; Ross, 2006). This category of assessment often involves stu-
dents reflecting on their learning, and as such, it tends to be paired with other forms of assessment, 
particularly performance items. In most cases, rather than focusing on teacher-oriented assessment 
(e.g., making determinations about the mastery of content), personalized-response items focus on 
the students’ development and their awareness and understanding of that development process. 
 Because personalized-response items tend to be learner-centered, teachers need to ensure beforehand 
that their learners (a) are aware of the purpose or function of these assessments in the classroom (Rea-
Dickins, 2006; Torrance & Pryor, 1998) and (b) have sufficient language ability (or can draw on a shared 
L1) to profit from them. Putting assessment into the hands of the students without clear directions 
and goals can lead to learners misunderstanding or devaluing the process, which may in turn affect the 
reliability of the scores and undermine the assessment altogether. Fox and Hartwick (2011) report that, 
when using portfolios in the classroom, learners are often unaware of how these are used to track and 
reflect on their own development and that, without a clear purpose, students may only be going through 
the motions (of, say, gathering samples of their work) without being aware of why they are doing so. 
 Additionally, one major challenge for teachers using these assessments is maintaining clear stan-
dards of reliability and validity as personalized-response items are often mistaken for informal 
approaches to measuring student learning (Brown & Hudson, 1998). Similar to productive-response 
items, the use of rubrics or checklists can help both teachers and learners by establishing clear assess-
ment guidelines (Davis & Kondo-Brown, 2012). 
www.ebook3000.com

Fifteen Ways to Improve Classroom Assessment • 493
 Individualized-Response Items 
 Individualized-response assessment is not so much a category of items as three approaches to assess-
ment (Heritage, 2010). Like personalized-response items, these tend to focus on measuring learning 
processes rather than products, and they are ideal for using assessment to affect teaching and learn-
ing as it is happening. Individualized assessments are often contrasted with summative assessments 
(e.g., achievement tests), which are aimed at identifying how well the students have mastered a par-
ticular skill or outcome. The three main individualized-response approaches to date are continuous 
(or formative) assessment, dynamic assessment, and differential assessment. 
 As the name implies,  continuous assessment  is the ongoing process of checking in with learn-
ers during instruction, typically through the use of probing questions or comprehension checks 
(e.g., calling on students individually in the class), and it resembles what teachers naturally do 
in class. Such questions are designed not to score learners but rather to provide feedback and 
reinforce learning, as well as to help the teacher gauge the effectiveness of instruction and adjust 
the speed or content of the class if needed. Continuous assessment has been discussed in terms of its 
usefulness in classrooms (Black & William, 2009; Colby-Kelly & Turner, 2007; Leung & Mohan, 
2004), as well as its reliability and validity (Clapham, 2000; Leung, 2004) and its relationship 
with summative forms of assessment (Carless, 2005; Davison & Leung, 2009; Popham, 2008; 
Stiggins, 2002). 
 Dynamic assessment  is another option for teachers looking to provide rich, individualized 
feedback to students about their learning processes and development. Rooted in sociocultural 
models of language learning and drawing on Vygotsky’s (1978) Zone of Proximal Development, 
dynamic assessment uses interaction and negotiation to measure a learner’s language ability in 
linguistic terms, as well as foster learner autonomy and development through internalizing feed-
back (Poehner, 2007). Learners typically work individually with a mediator who provides ongoing 
feedback, usually in the form of leading questions or recasts (e.g., see Anton, 2009; Hamp-Lyons 
& Tavares, 2011; and Poehner & Lantolf, 2005). Unlike most forms of assessment, which are car-
ried out in relative isolation, dynamic assessment acknowledges that language is a social process 
(McNamara, 2001). 
 Differential assessment takes into account that learners may prefer different learning styles. Rich-
ards and Schmidt (2010) define a  learning style as: 
 a particular way of learning preferred by a learner. Learners approach learning in different 
ways, and an activity that words with a learner whose learning style favours a visual mode of 
learning, may not be as successful with a learner who prefers auditory or kinesthetic modes of 
learning. 
 (p. 331) 
 Differential assessment recognizes such differences and requires teachers to begin by determining 
their students’ learning preferences, which can be done with a tool like the questionnaire available 
at http://www.businessballs.com/freepdfmaterials/vak_learning_styles_questionnaire.pdf. Teachers 
can then provide assessment options to students that suit their preferences (see Stefanakis & Meier, 
2010). Clearly, differential assessment involves the extra steps of determining students’ learning pref-
erences and developing multiple forms of assessment for each preference. Additionally, questions of 
the comparability of the different forms may arise. However, tailoring assessment to the visual, audi-
tory, or kinesthetic learning styles of individual students is seen by supporters as a more equitable 
and accurate reflection of what students can do. 

494 • James Dean Brown and Jonathan Trace
 Using Multiple Options 
 In short, teachers should consider the many options available to them in terms of what form their 
assessments can take in the classroom and how these response types differ in the ways they can be 
used and interpreted to foster student learning. It might help to think of these response types as 
points along a single continuum of student learning. At one end of the continuum are the product-
oriented measures like multiple-choice items or cloze tests. In the middle of the continuum are tasks, 
portfolios, and interviews, and at the other end are continuous, differential, and dynamic forms 
of assessment. Thus, the continuum gradually shifts from narrow product-oriented measures to 
broader process-based measures intended to affect the actual learning processes as they are hap-
pening. In more direct terms, are you interested in  what  your students are learning or  how  they are 
learning, or both? 
 Match Assessment to Learning 
 Another way to increase the effectiveness of your classroom assessments is to make sure that they 
are firmly linked directly to your students’ learning material and experiences. If you have clear and 
detailed student learning outcomes (SLOs) for your course, matching assessments with student 
learning will probably be much easier. If not, then laying out the course syllabus, textbook, and les-
son plans directly related to each assessment can help you match your assessments to your students’ 
learning (Hall, Webber, Varley, Young, & Dorman, 1997). 
 The bottom line is that you should carefully examine what you are assessing each time you do it 
and compare what you are measuring to what you are teaching. If there is one single rule that will 
help you match assessment to learning it is: test what you teach. There is no reason to assess the stu-
dents differently from the way they learned the material. For example, if the students learned to use 
functions like  greetings ,  seeking information , and  giving information  in pair work, then it would make 
most sense and be fairer to test them similarly in pairs rather than in some multiple-choice format. 
Brown (2013a) makes the point that classroom assessments are really just a special case of classroom 
activity or materials development. By  special case , he was suggesting that assessment was distinct 
from classroom activities and materials only in that assessment furnishes  purposeful feedback , or: 
 a way of observing or scoring the students’ performances and giving feedback in the form of 
a score or other information (e.g., notes in the margin, written prose reactions, oral critiques, 
teacher conferences) that can enlighten the students and teachers about the effectiveness of the 
language learning and teaching involved. 
 (p. x) 
 Aligning tests with student learning can help you justify your classroom assessment practices, 
especially as they relate to program-level or externally mandated outcomes. Most teachers are well 
aware of the standards for student learning that exist beyond their classrooms (e.g., state or nation-
wide outcomes, evidence for accreditation), and while there is typically a large degree of freedom in 
how they do classroom assessment, teachers sometimes need to be able to defend their individual 
practices for accountability purposes (Brindley, 1998, 2001; Norris, 2006). For example, the benefits 
of continuous assessment in terms of flexibility and focus on learning can be difficult to reconcile 
when program-level outcomes are expected to be judged primarily by summative measures. Teasdale 
and Leung (2000) note that such approaches to assessment may reflect what is happening in the 
classroom, but this does not necessarily mean that learners have mastered the more generalized skills 
required by influences outside of the classroom. Teachers therefore need to pay attention to how their 
www.ebook3000.com

Fifteen Ways to Improve Classroom Assessment • 495
assessments reflect what is happening in their classroom, but also to how their assessments generalize 
to broader requirements. 
 Promote Learning with Assessment 
 Assessment is often an afterthought in a teacher’s busy schedule, and as a result, it may get short 
shrift. The attitude that  the course is ending, so I should write a final exam  serves nobody well, least of 
all the students and their learning. Instead, assessment should be viewed as an ongoing and planned 
process within the curriculum rather than something relegated to the end. Assessment is just as 
important as any other aspect of a teacher’s job, largely because the feedback provided by assessment 
is such an integral part of gaining language knowledge and skills. 
 The term  assessment for learning  has been used by several authors (e.g., Black & William, 1998; 
Klenowski, 2009), most often in the context of informal assessments, particularly formative assess-
ment (Rea-Dickins, 2001, p. 453). Rea-Dickins and others (e.g., Clarke, 1998; Sadler, 1989) note that 
one of the benefits of promoting learning through assessment is that it can raise student awareness of 
the purposes and uses of assessment. Teachers need to inform learners about not only how they will 
be tested but also how their scores will be used, what kinds of feedback they will receive, and what 
they can do with that feedback. Making learners part of the assessment process is essential to making 
this happen (Brown, S., 2004), and this can occur only through careful planning. 
 Finally, teachers often overlook the fact that they can use assessment feedback to create  positive 
washback  (i.e., the positive effects of assessment on any learning associated with it) by shaping the 
students’ expectations and behaviors (Brown, 2004a; Clarke, 1998; Rea-Dickins, 2001, 2006). For 
example, when the first author of this chapter was teaching in China in the 1980s, he found that 
the students largely believed in grammar-translation methods because that was what they had been 
exposed to. As a result, the students’ had excellent knowledge  about  English grammar and vocabulary, 
but they could not do anything with the language. In response, he and his colleagues used assessment 
(e.g., role-play and group assessments, classroom student presentations) and its washback effect to 
help shift the students’ views on language learning toward communicative approaches—and for the 
most part it worked. 
 Writing Items 
 Create the Best Possible Items 
 Creating assessment items is not an ability that people are born with. It takes time and practice, and 
yet it is an important skill to learn because no classroom assessment can be any better than the items 
upon which it is based. The first step in creating the best possible items is to start reading up on how 
to write good-quality items, and much has been written about this process in the form of  item writ-
ing guidelines (see Brown, 2005; Haladyna, Downing, & Rodriguez, 2002; Kline, 1986). 
 Another sound approach is through the use of item specifications (Brown & Hudson, 2002; 
Davidson & Lynch, 2002).  Item specifications  are a way of defining each part of an item by describing 
the specific attributes of the prompt (i.e., what the student is given, what the items look like) and the 
response (i.e., how the items are scored, how performance indicators are described, categorized, and 
organized). They might also include a general description or sample items (Davidson & Lynch, 2002; 
Popham, 1981) or more detailed information like timing and definitions for what is being measured 
(Bachman & Palmer, 1996). When several types of items or performances are used within a single 
assessment, it may be necessary to also create  test specifications  (Brown & Hudson, 2002; Norris et al., 
1998), which specify the broader test organization, item types, etc. Both of these processes work best 

496 • James Dean Brown and Jonathan Trace
when they are produced by a team of teachers working together (Davidson & Lynch, 2002) or when 
involving a peer review process (Brown & Hudson, 2002). 
 Write Enough Items 
 When it comes to actually writing the items, you should make sure you allot plenty of time, not only 
so you can write good-quality items but also so you will have time to write a sufficient number of 
items. It has long been recognized by measurement specialists that more items provide better infor-
mation than fewer items. As a rule, then, using more items to test a single concept or skill is a better 
idea than using fewer items. Indeed, if you write too few items, you may not get a good assessment 
of how your students can perform. 
 In addition, experienced test writers know to always write more items than they will ultimately 
need so they can later get rid of those items that do not function well. This is certainly the case in 
standardized tests (as described in Purpura, Brown, & Schoonen, 2015, pp. 61–62), but it holds true 
in classroom tests as well (Brown & Hudson, 1998). 
 But, how many items are enough? To answer this question for any particular assessment, teachers 
should consider the following context-specific factors: (a) the number of SLOs to be assessed, (b) the 
number of students in the class (especially, in performance assessment contexts, where students need 
to be tested individually), (c) the time allotted for the test, (d) the resources available (e.g., technol-
ogy, authentic materials), and (e) the item types used. 
 Check the Items Again 
 As important as it is to write good items, it is just as crucial to check that those items ended up the 
way you intended them to be in terms of their function, format, and appearance. This means that 
you need to do some very careful item proofreading. If you find problems, you can then eliminate 
particularly bad items or rewrite those that can be saved. As with any proofreading step, it is good 
practice to allow some time to pass (whether that be a few days or a weekend), and then proofread 
the items again. Doing so may help you to see the items with fresh eyes. It can even change your 
frame of reference from that of a teacher to a test taker, which is very useful indeed. 
 Compiling the Test 
 Organize the Items 
 A collection of items does not a test make; that is, creating a test is much more than simply 
putting the items together. Among other things, the items must be organized logically so that 
students will not get confused. For example, when different item formats are used in the same 
test (e.g., true/false, short-answer), the simplest approach may be to group items with the same 
format together, say true/false with true/false, short-answer with short-answer, etc. Alternatively, 
it may make more sense to group items that are testing the same language point (e.g., preposi-
tion items, greetings) or skill (e.g., listening, grammar) together. Additionally, teachers want to 
be careful to group items related to a particular listening or reading passage together. The trick is 
to make all of these organizational ideas happen at the same time, which is where the art of test 
development comes in. 
 Item independence is also a consideration when organizing items and tasks into a test. While 
writing items with different formats or tapping into different topics, language points, or skills, unin-
tentional clues may surface in the wording of one item that helps students answer another item (e.g., 
www.ebook3000.com

Fifteen Ways to Improve Classroom Assessment • 497
Yen, 1993). Another potential problem is that the ability to answer one item can provide some stu-
dents with a clue in their answer to that item that will help them to answer another item. 
 Organizing performance items is generally simpler, especially when there are only one or two 
items or tasks for the entire test. Nonetheless, item independence remains an issue. In a situation 
where scoring is based on a rubric with multiple categories, it is important that each of the rubric 
categories be independent from the others. For example, Janssen, Meier, and Trace (2015) found 
that two of the categories on their writing rubric, language use and vocabulary, were difficult to 
distinguish when assigning scores. This created potential fairness and validity problems for their test 
because some students were potentially being rewarded (or penalized) twice for the same kinds of 
performance. 
 Create Scoring Tools 
 In many situations, teachers will need to rely on some kind of scoring tool like a rubric or checklist. 
Having such a tool and knowing how to use it are quite different things, and there is an extensive 
body of research on the importance of training raters to use rubrics in large-scale assessment (e.g., 
Lumley & McNamara, 1995; Weigle, 1994). While classroom teachers should be more familiar with 
what they are assessing and with the performance indicators on their rubrics, it is still important to 
familiarize or re-familiarize yourself with the procedures, recording equipment, and rubric before 
you begin testing. If sample performances are available (e.g., essay or video recorded samples from 
a previous class or another teacher, or even alternatives like TED.com video presentations, textbook 
scripted dialogues, or performances by willing colleagues or former students), then you might want 
to sit down ahead of time and practice scoring some of those performances. 
 Proofread the Complete Test 
 Once a complete quiz or test is assembled, proofreading the entire document is essential. All items, 
rubrics, materials, and anything else that is presented to students need to be carefully checked for 
misspellings, formatting errors, formatting inconsistencies, inadvertent clues, etc. As with proof-
reading items, putting some time between when the test is first compiled and when it is reviewed 
can help in detecting subtle errors or typos. One other useful strategy is to put the test on the floor 
and literally stand above it and look down at it. Since you will probably not be able to read the text, 
you will tend to address more global formatting questions: Are any items split across pages? Is each 
reading passage visible while answering the items related to it? Are there directions at the beginning 
of each set of items? 
 Another sound practice is to sit down and take the test yourself, because this can provide you with 
insights into what your students will encounter, give you a sense of how long the test will take, and 
show you how the items flow from one to the next. 
 Using the Test 
 Plan the Test Administration 
 As mentioned earlier, one important component of classroom assessment is making sure that learn-
ers are aware that they are being assessed (Clarke, 1998; Hill & McNamara, 2012; Rea-Dickins, 2001). 
In most formal assessment situations, this issue is explicitly included by scheduling a special time 
for the test and announcing it ahead of time. However, awareness raising can also be related to how 
teachers approach the actual administration of a test. 

498 • James Dean Brown and Jonathan Trace
 One important consideration is the atmosphere of the room. Students are often anxious before 
and during assessment, so the teacher should take care to set a calm and professional tone for the 
entire process. Classroom teachers can also take advantage of being in familiar surroundings during 
their assessments, and, since assessments should probably reflect what regularly happens in the class-
room anyway, teachers should aim to make them as much like regular classroom activities as possible. 
 During the class before a test, you might ask students if they have any questions about it. Dis-
tributing a study guide—or even more effective, the actual scoring rubric—is an excellent way to 
establish students’ expectations and to clarify any areas that might be ambiguous—either within the 
rubric/study guide itself or in the students’ understanding of the material that you taught. 
 During the administration, be careful to treat everyone exactly the same (to promote fairness). 
This may mean thinking about issues that do not ordinarily cross your mind like answering all ques-
tions that students have (no matter how odd they may seem at the time), answering them in the 
order that students raised their hands, collecting the papers at the end of the test in the same order 
they were passed out, and not giving any students extra help or extra time during the test. All in all, 
students should feel that they have been respected and that they were all treated fairly. 
 After the test, it may also be helpful to spend some time in class giving students feedback and dis-
cussing how the test went. This session can be used to help learners reflect on their own experiences 
but also to provide the teacher with valuable feedback about the administration, item quality, or scor-
ing issues that may otherwise be missed. While such sessions can descend into student complaining, 
ideally with the amount of planning that has gone into the assessment, complaints will be few and 
far between, or at least, if complaints do arise, you will be prepared with the information that you 
need to justify the effectiveness of the test (Popham, 2010). If used properly, talking with students 
about the test can be used in a democratic approach (Shohamy, 2001), which will make assessment 
less one-sided and more of a collective and collaborative effort. 
 Give Students Feedback 
 Clearly then, feedback to the learners about their performances is one of the most important func-
tions of assessment. Whether in the form of numerical scores, oral comments in student-teacher 
conferences, or corrective recasts, feedback is crucial for effective learning as a way of showing learn-
ers where they stand in their language abilities, informing them of their strengths and weaknesses 
vis-à-vis specific learning points, or giving them a sense of what steps they (and their teacher) can 
take to reinforce and promote their language development. 
 Feedback in assessment is most often associated with scores of some kind (e.g., percentages, rat-
ings on a scale), which indicate a particular level of performance or amount learned in a set of lan-
guage materials or classroom activities. Handing back a test with nothing more than a score on it is 
certainly efficient, but it assumes that the students understand what their scores mean. While it may 
(or may not) be self-evident to teachers what a particular score or rating indicates, it may be neces-
sary to explain to students what their scores mean and why they received the score they did. 
 While reporting percentage scores does show students the proportion of material they learned, it 
remains a very limited approach—one that seems to waste the potential for rich, detailed, and con-
structive feedback that the classroom context provides. Hill and McNamara (2012) explain a number 
of different types of written or oral feedback that can be used by classroom teachers in three catego-
ries: (a)  confirmatory , (b)  explanatory , and (c)  corrective  feedback (pp. 406–408). Numerical scores 
generally provide only the first type because the feedback is designed to either confirm or reject the 
correctness of the answers or performances. The other two categories—explanatory and corrective—
are more forward-looking approaches tied to student development. The explanatory approach uses 
positive feedback as a way of highlighting specific examples of success, while the corrective approach 
www.ebook3000.com

Fifteen Ways to Improve Classroom Assessment • 499
tends to be directed at where learners fell short of expectations. (For more on the uses, implications, 
and outcomes of feedback in classroom contexts, see Hyland & Hyland, 2006; Lightbown & Spada, 
1990; Lyster & Ranta, 1997.) 
 More qualitative approaches to feedback that incorporate explanatory or corrective functions can 
evolve into a form of personalized, supplementary instruction given on a student-by-student basis. 
Conferences, written feedback (e.g., corrections, leading questions), and other forms of interactive 
feedback can be used to identify difficulties, gauge and adjust learning strategies, and identify miscon-
ceptions that students may have about their particular strengths or weaknesses (Doe, 2011; Fox & Hart-
wick, 2011). Rubrics can be useful for these purposes (e.g., Stevens & Levi, 2005), as well as to clearly 
define the specific kinds of performances that are expected of students and match numerical scores to 
feedback in the form of qualitative descriptions (in words) of performances (e.g., Crusan, 2010). 
 Note that feedback is not necessarily limited to something that happens after the test. The simple 
process of distributing rubrics prior to an assessment can have the benefit of providing learners with 
expectations of performance (Torrance & Pryor, 1998; Tunstall & Gipps, 1996). Combined with 
feedback after the assessment, learners can then evaluate how well their particular learning strategies 
worked in preparing them for the test, which in turn can help them determine whether or not to 
continue using those strategies. 
 Use the Feedback Yourself 
 Teachers should also consider using the feedback gained from assessment for their own purposes in 
making decisions, refining curriculum, and promoting learning within their classes. Most teachers 
already keep track of scores for record-keeping and grading purposes, and they ideally have some 
sense of how those scores match up with the specific SLOs of the course. Assessment can also be used 
to help teachers adjust their instruction and learning goals based on how students are progressing 
through a course—especially if diagnostic or continuous assessments are being used. Treating learn-
ers like individuals means recognizing that they will have different starting points when they enter 
the class and will likewise progress differently through the material, sometimes contrary to expecta-
tions. Teachers should therefore consider adjusting their teaching to reflect the changing needs of 
the learners based on their performances on assessments. For example, in the case of diagnostic tests 
given at the beginning of the term, the results can show you (and the students) what they already 
know or can do (and so do not need to be taught) as well as any potential and unexpected gaps 
in their language abilities that do need to be addressed. However, effective use of such diagnostic 
information requires that the curriculum be structured flexibly in a way that allows for changes to be 
quickly implemented (Rea-Dickins, 2006; Xu & Liu, 2009). 
 Three other feedback strategies may prove useful as well: 
 1. Sharing descriptive statistics, like the average and the range of scores for the class’s overall 
performance can help students understand their performances (see Brown, 2009). However, 
you should emphasize that scores on classroom tests need to be interpreted on an individual 
basis (i.e., that you are not interested in ranking student performances, see Popham, 1978). 
Nonetheless, showing students how all the scores fit together can be a useful way of framing 
discussions of performance, fairness, and values in assessment. 
 2. Reviewing any sections of the test that seemed to be consistently problematic for a majority 
of students. 
 3. Providing students with a longitudinal sense of their learning by having them record and 
track their scores over time such that each student (and the teacher) can refer to them when-
ever needed. 

500 • James Dean Brown and Jonathan Trace
 Improving the Test 
 Analyze the Items 
 Even after a test is administered and the grades or feedback are given to the students, the assessment 
process should not be considered finished. It should instead be viewed as an iterative process, because 
the information made available from using an assessment can reveal: (a) how well it functioned, 
(b) ways to improve the test, (c) how score interpretations can be used to better promote learning, 
(d) how well the individual items functioned, (e) how well the test met expectations (e.g., were the 
items or tasks more or less challenging than expected; did the tasks elicit the kinds of language skills 
they were intended to), (f) how useful and reliable the feedback was, and (g) what problems arose 
during the administration (e.g., was the audio recording too soft; was the test rushed?). 
 While different assessment types require different methods of improvement, some strategies 
are common to almost any classroom assessment. The first step is to simply reflect on the process, 
perhaps even putting into writing your thoughts (especially on the issues raised in (a) to (g) in 
the previous paragraph) immediately after administering, scoring, and returning the tests to the 
students. A second useful step is to have your learners also reflect on their experiences with the 
assessment procedure overall and with specific items, as well as on what their own expectations and 
experiences were before and after the test. Third, keeping a written list of the questions students had 
during or after the test can help identify places of apparent confusion. And finally, formal methods 
also exist for analyzing classroom assessment items statistically (e.g., checking descriptive statistics, 
checking item statistics like the  difference index  and  B index ; for more on these statistics, see Brown, 
2003, 2005). We recognize that such quantitative analyses are often impractical for busy teachers, 
even though such analyses would provide useful information. However, making revisions to the 
test items, to the administration procedures, and to the scoring methods while all of this informa-
tion is still fresh in your mind  is  possible and will prove well worth the effort. Sadly, if you do not 
revise until the next time you need to use the test, you may find yourself making exactly the same 
mistakes again. 
 Check Reliability 
 Regardless of the type(s) of tests involved, you need to ensure that your assessments are produc-
ing scores that are reliable and valid for your purposes (Brown & Hudson, 1998).  Reliability is the 
degree to which scores on a test are consistent, which in classroom contexts typically means how 
well a test consistently identifies learners who have mastered (or not mastered) the content or skills 
being assessed. Formal approaches to checking reliability can be done by calculating a K-R21 reli-
ability coefficient for any items that are scored right or wrong and thereby produce a value indicat-
ing the proportion of reliable variation in your scores (see Brown, 2005, 2012). However, again, we 
recognize that mathematically determining test reliability may seem challenging and unreasonably 
time-consuming for some. 
 In addition, Kane et al. (1999) note that there is often a conflict between authenticity and stan-
dardization in performance assessment. Following Fitzpatrick and Morrison (1971), they refer to the 
problem that real-life language use contains a high degree of variability, yet for reliability purposes 
teachers often want to set limits on how a performance should be carried out. The authors argue that 
when too many restrictions are placed on a task in the name of reliability, it becomes more difficult 
to equate performance under these reduced conditions to performance in real life. In most forms 
of assessment other than selected-response items, reliability and authenticity seem to be at odds 
because of the need to measure students individually, but according to standards that can be judged 
as fair and consistent for the entire class (Brown, H. D., 2003). 
www.ebook3000.com

Fifteen Ways to Improve Classroom Assessment • 501
 Teachers can take several paths to achieve a good balance between authenticity and reliability in 
the classroom, many of which will come very naturally to teachers. Kane et al. (1999) first suggested 
that one of the keys to creating consistency in assessment is to start with how the test is adminis-
tered and presented to the learners. Are the instructions clear and error-free? Is the language of the 
instructions appropriate for the level of the learners so that there is no confusion about what they 
are required to do? Are the directions or components of the task similar to what the students have 
already experienced in their regular classroom activities? Several strategies may help teachers accom-
plish these goals. 
 First, good directions will help in establishing consistency: make sure that the directions stand 
out (i.e., are in bold type or italicized), are clearly written, and are delivered to all of the students in 
the same way. 
 Second, planning or scripting interactions ahead of time can also be an effective way to approach 
assessments that involve spontaneous language use between a teacher and a student (e.g., confer-
ences, role-plays). In these cases, while teachers may have a rubric prepared for scoring purposes, 
when teachers are part of the assessment process itself, it can be challenging to keep track of every-
thing that is going on and at the same time ensure consistency and fairness (Rea-Dickins, 2001), but 
every practical effort must be made to do so. 
 Third, in less formalized assessments, teachers often need to establish a protocol for keeping track 
of student performances. By its very definition, formative assessment should be “a planned process” 
(Popham, 2008, p. 6). Thus, teachers should consider establishing protocols for gathering informa-
tion about how well students are following and applying their classroom experiences in a way that 
assesses all students consistently. 
 Fourth, as mentioned above, rubrics are a useful way of scoring productive language tasks and 
for providing feedback, and both of these uses are actually ways of increasing the consistency of 
measurement and ensuring that all learners are graded in the same way based on the same criteria. 
However, even the best rubrics are subject to potential bias on the part of whoever is using them, so 
it may be useful to employ multiple raters as a way of improving (or at least checking) the reliability 
of the resulting scores (Trace, Janssen, & Meier, 2015). Since convincing another teacher to help 
assess your students may prove impossible, having students do peer assessments (e.g., during class 
presentations) may be a valuable way of checking the reliability of their scoring and yours. While you 
would be wise not to rely completely on student scoring, checking the consistency of students’ scores 
with each other and on average with your scores can be very enlightening. 
 Check Validity 
 Unlike reliability, the  validity  of your scores has to do with the degree to which you are measuring 
what you think you are measuring and, especially in classroom assessment, the degree to which what 
you are measuring is related to what the students are learning. This brings our chapter full circle: 
recall that, early on, we argued that you should plan your assessments so that they will match and 
promote learning. Those issues are clearly still important when thinking about the validity of the 
scores you derive from assessments and the decisions you base on those scores. 
 It is also crucial to examine the degree to which you are testing specifically what you think you are 
testing. For example, if you are testing listening with a video-recorded lecture that the students use to 
answer written multiple-choice questions, you must realize that you are assessing not only  listening 
but also  reading  (and probably also their  testwiseness , their  ability to guess , etc.). If you want to test 
listening ability pure and simple, then perhaps you should think about how you are teaching it. If in 
fact you are teaching listening through a series of lecture listening/multiple-choice activities, then 
at least your assessments should match what students are learning. However, if you are teaching the 

502 • James Dean Brown and Jonathan Trace
students to listen to sets of directions in order to draw routes on a map, then you should probably 
test the students in that same way. 
 To address the overarching concerns of validity, teachers can try answering eight relatively straight-
forward questions (expanded here from Brown, 2012, p. 106): 
 1. How much does the content and format of my items match the SLOs of the class? 
 2. To what degree do the content and format of my items match the material I covered in class? 
 3. Will my students think my test items match the SLOs and material I am teaching them? 
 4. How well do my course SLOs meet the students’ needs? 
 5. To what degree do my test scores show that my students are learning something in my course? 
 6. How well are my assessments promoting learning in my course? 
 7. How do the values that underlie my test scores match my values? My students’ values? Their 
parents’ values? My employer’s values? 
 8. What are the consequences of the decisions I base on my test scores for my students, their 
parents, me, my employer? 
 Your responses to these questions are unlikely to be black-and-white, yes-or-no answers because 
such issues are often matters of degree, and even a more-or-less positive answer to any one of these 
questions does not indicate that your uses of the scores are valid. However, taken together, if you can 
answer more positively than negatively to those questions that are most germane to your teaching sit-
uation, then you can argue to yourself, to your students, to their parents, and even to your employer 
that the scores, feedback, and decisions that you derive from your assessments are likely valid. 
 Conclusions 
 By now, it should be obvious that we feel that sound classroom assessment is much more than just 
scores and grades, but rather is a tool that teachers can use to support and promote their students’ 
learning. Thus, while it is relatively simple to measure someone’s use of language in a purely static 
assessment, we think that teachers should seriously consider ways to use their assessment items and 
tasks to affect their students’ future performances and displays of language ability (Poehner, 2007). 
To extend the difference between authenticity and performance pointed out by Kane et al. (1999), it 
is fine to give learners a task that is very true to real life and matches actual language use perfectly, but 
if this same task cannot inform you as a teacher and, more importantly, inform your learners about 
how they used the language, where their particular strengths and weaknesses lie, and what the next 
step is in their development, then authenticity means very little when it comes to learning. Instead, 
we believe that assessments should provide teachers with the connections they need among their 
SLOs, materials, and instruction to maximize not only their students’ assessment performances but 
also their learning and development. We believe that this is true of all classroom assessments, not just 
those labeled as personalized- and individualized-response assessments. 
 We also believe that learning through assessment can only happen when the learners are treated 
as part of the process, and not just the object of assessment (Popham, 2008). As Rea-Dickins (2006) 
points out, this happens through building awareness with your students about the purposes, uses, and 
outcomes of your tests. Building such awareness can take the forms of negotiating and consulting with 
students about how they are assessed, acknowledging and reflecting their language needs and values in 
assessment, and making assessment about them rather than about a score that perhaps has little or no 
direct meaning otherwise. Without involving the learners, assessment risks becoming a meaningless, 
isolated, and going-through-the-motions kind of process—for students and teachers alike. 
www.ebook3000.com

Fifteen Ways to Improve Classroom Assessment • 503
 Note 
 1. Here an  item  will be defined as the smallest unit of a classroom assessment procedure that produces information in the 
form of a score or other feedback. 
 References 
 Anton, M. (2009). Dynamic assessment of advanced second language learners.  Foreign Language Annals ,  42 (3), 576–598. 
 Bachman, L., & Palmer, A. (1996).  Language testing in practice . New York: Oxford University. 
 Bachman, L., & Palmer, A. (2010).  Language assessment in practice . New York: Oxford University. 
 Black, P., & William, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning.  Assessment in Education ,  5 (1), 7–74. 
 Black, P., & William, D. (2009). Developing the theory of formative assessment.  Educational Assessment ,  Evaluation and 
Accountability ,  21 (1), 5–31. 
 Brindley, G. (1998). Outcomes-based assessment and reporting in language learning programmes: A review of the issues. 
 Language Testing ,  15 (1), 45–85. 
 Brindley, G. (2001). Outcomes-based assessment in practice: Some examples and emerging insights.  Language Testing ,  18 (4), 
393–407. doi:10.1177/026553220101800405 
 Brookhart, S. M. (1999). The art and science of classroom assessment: The missing part of pedagogy.  ASHE-ERIC Higher 
education report  (Vo. 27, No. 1). Washington, DC: The George Washington University, Graduate School of Education 
and Human Development. 
 Brown, H. D. (2003).  Language assessment: Principles and classroom practices . White Plains, NY: Pearson Longman. 
 Brown, J. D. (Ed.). (1998).  New ways of classroom assessment . Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Lan-
guages. 
 Brown, J. D. (2003). Questions and answers about language testing statistics: Criterion-referenced item analysis (The dif-
ference index and B-index).  SHIKEN: The JALT Testing & Evaluation SIG Newsletter ,  7 (3), 18–24). Accessed online 
September 29, 2013 at http://jalt.org/test/bro_18.htm 
 Brown, J. D. (2004a). Grade inflation, standardized tests, and the case for on-campus language testing. In D. Douglas (Ed.), 
 English language testing in U . S .  colleges and universities  (2nd ed., completely new) (pp. 37–56). Washington, DC: NAFSA. 
 Brown, J. D. (2004b). Performance assessment: Existing literature and directions for research.  Second Language Studies ,  22 (2), 
91–139. 
 Brown, J. D. (2005).  Testing in language programs: A comprehensive guide to English language assessment  (New edition). New 
York: McGraw-Hill. 
 Brown, J. D. (2009). Using a spreadsheet program to record, organize, analyze, and understand your classroom assessments. In 
C. Coombe, P. Davidson, & D. Lloyd (Eds.),  The fundamentals of language assessment: A practical guide for teachers 
(2nd edition) (pp. 59–70). Dubai, UAE: TESOL Arabia. 
 Brown, J. D. (2012). What teachers need to know about test analysis. In C. Coombe, S. J. Stoynoff, P. Davidson, & B. O’Sullivan 
(Eds.),  The Cambridge guide to language assessment (pp. 105–112). Cambridge: Cambridge University. 
 Brown, J. D. (Ed.). (2013a).  New ways of classroom assessment, revised . Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other 
Languages. 
 Brown, J. D. (2013b). Statistics corner. Questions and answers about language testing statistics: Solutions to problems teachers 
have with classroom testing.  Shiken Research Bulletin ,  17 (2), 27–33. Available at http://teval.jalt.org/sites/teval.jalt.org/
files/SRB-17–2-Full.pdf 
 Brown, J. D. (In press). Assessments in ELT: Teacher options and making pedagogically sound choices. In W. A. Renandya & H. 
P. Widodo (Eds.),  English language teaching today: Building a closer link between theory and practice . New York: Springer 
International. 
 Brown, J. D., & Hudson, T. (1998). Alternatives in language assessment.  TESOL Quarterly ,  32 (4), 653–675. 
 Brown, J. D., & Hudson, T. (2002).  Criterion-referenced language testing . Cambridge: Cambridge University. 
 Brown, J. D., Hudson, T., Norris, J. M., & Bonk, W. J. (2002).  An investigation of second language task-based performance assess-
ments . Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii at Manoa National Foreign Language Resource Center. 
 Brown, S. (2004). Assessment for learning.  Learning and Teaching in Higher Education ,  1 (1), 81–89. 
 Buck, G. (2001).  Assessing listening . Cambridge: Cambridge University. 
 Butler, Y. G., & Lee, J. (2010). The effects of self-assessment among young learners of English.  Language Testing ,  27 (1), 5–31. 
 Carless, D. (2005). Prospects for the implementation of assessment for learning.  Assessment in Education: Principles, Policy & 
Practice ,  12 (1), 39–54. 
 Clapham, C. (2000). Assessment and testing.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics ,  20 , 147–161. 
 Clarke, S. (1998).  Targeting assessment in the primary classroom . Bristol, UK: Hodder & Stoughton. 

504 • James Dean Brown and Jonathan Trace
 Colby-Kelly, C., & Turner, C. E. (2007). AFL research in the L2 classroom and evidence of usefulness: Taking formative assess-
ment to the next level 1.  Canadian Modern Language Review ,  64 (1), 9–37. 
 Cresswell, A. (2000). The role of portfolios in the assessment of student writing on an EAP course. In G. Blue, J. Milton, & 
J. Saville (Eds.),  Assessing English for academic purposes (pp. 205–220). Oxford, UK: Peter Lang. 
 Crusan, D. (2010).  Assessment in the second language writing classroom . Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan. 
 Davidson, F., & Lynch, B. K. (2002).  Testcraft: A teacher’s guide to writing and using language test specifications . New Haven, 
CT: Yale University. 
 Davis, L., & Kondo-Brown, K. (2012). Assessing student performance: Types and uses of rubrics. In J. D. Brown (Ed.),  Develop-
ing, using, and analyzing rubrics in language assessment with case studies in Asian-Pacific languages  (pp. 33–56). Honolulu, 
HI: University of Hawaii at Manoa National Foreign Language Resource Center. 
 Davison, C., & Leung, C. (2009). Current issues in English language teacher-based assessment.  TESOL quarterly ,  43 (3), 393–415. 
 Dippold, D. (2009). Peer feedback through blogs: Student and teacher perceptions in an advanced German class.  ReCALL , 
 21 (1), 18–36. 
 Doe, C. (2011). The integrations of diagnostic assessment into classroom instruction. In D. Tsagari & I. Csepes (Eds.), 
 Classroom-based language assessment (pp. 63–76). Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang. 
 Fitzpatrick, R., & Morrison, E. J. (1971). Performance and product evaluation. In R. L. Thorndike (Ed.),  Educational measure-
ment  (2nd ed.) (pp. 237–270). Washington, DC: American Council on Education. 
 Fox, J., & Hartwick, P. (2011). Taking a diagnostic turn: Reinventing the portfolio in EAP instruction. In D. Tsagari & I. Csepes 
(Eds.),  Classroom-based language assessment (pp. 47–62). Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang. 
 Graves, D. (1992). Portfolios: Keep a good idea growing. In D. Graves & B. Sunstein (Eds.),  Portfolio portraits  (pp. 1–12). 
Portsmouth, NJ: Heinemann. 
 Haladyna, T. M., Downing, S. M., & Rodriguez, M. C. (2002). A review of multiple-choice item-writing guidelines for class-
room assessment.  Applied measurement in education ,  15 (3), 309–333. 
 Hall, K., Webber, B., Varley, S., Young, V., & Dorman, P. (1997). A study of teacher assessment at key stage 1.  Cambridge Journal 
of Education ,  27 (1), 107–122. 
 Hamp-Lyons, L., & Tavares, N. (2011). Interactive assessment: A dialogic and collaborative approach to assessing learners’ 
oral language. In D. Tsagari & I. Csepes (Eds.),  Classroom-based language assessment  (pp. 29–46). Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany: Peter Lang. 
 Heritage, M. (Ed.). (2010).  Formative assessment: Making it happen in the classroom . Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin. 
 Hill, K., & McNamara, T. (2012). Developing a comprehensive, empirically based research framework for classroom-based 
assessment.  Language Testing ,  29 (3), 395–420. doi:10.1177/0265532211428317 
 Hirvel, A., & Pierson, H. (2000). Portfolios: Vehicles for authentic self-assessment. In G. Ekbatani & H. Pierson (Eds.),  Learner-
directed assessment in ESL (pp. 105–126). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Hyland, K., & Hyland, F. (2006). Feedback on second language students’ writing.  Language Teaching ,  39 (2), 83–101. 
 Jang, E. E., Dunlop, M., Park, G., & van der Boom, E. H. (2015). How do young students with different profiles of reading 
skill mastery, perceived ability, and goal orientation respond to holistic diagnostic feedback?  Language Testing ,  32 (3), 
359–383. doi:10.1177/0265532215570924 
 Janssen, G., Meier, V., & Trace, J. (2015). Building a better rubric: Towards a more robust description of academic writing 
proficiency.  Assessing Writing . Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2015.07.002 
 Kane, M., Crooks, T., & Cohen, A. (1999). Validating measures of performance.  Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice , 
 18 (2), 5–17. 
 Klenowski, V. (2009). Assessment for learning revisited: An Asian-Pacific perspective.  Assessment in Education: Principles, 
Policy, and Practice ,  16 (3), 263–268. 
 Kline, P. (1986).  A handbook of test construction: Introduction to psychometric design . London: Methuen. 
 Leung, C. (2004). Developing formative teacher assessment: Knowledge, practice, and change.  Language Assessment Quarterly , 
 1 (1), 19–41. doi:10.1207/s15434311laq0101_3 
 Leung, C., & Mohan, B. (2004). Teacher formative assessment and talk in classroom contexts: Assessment as discourse and 
assessment of discourse.  Language Testing ,  21 (3), 335–359. doi:10.1191/0265532204lt287oa 
 Lightbown, P. M., & Spada, N. (1990). Focus-on-form and corrective feedback in communicative language teaching.  Studies 
in Second Language Acquisition ,  12 (4), 429–448. 
 Lumley, T., & McNamara, T. F. (1995). Rater characteristics and rater bias: Implications for training.  Language Testing ,  12 (1), 
54–71. 
 Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition ,  19 (1), 37–66. 
 Matsuno, S. (2009). Self-, peer-, and teacher-assessments in Japanese university EFL writing classrooms.  Language Testing , 
 26 (1), 75–100. 
 McNamara, T. (2001). Language assessment as social practice: Challenges for research.  Language Testing ,  18 (4), 333–349. 
doi:10.1177/026553220101800402 
www.ebook3000.com

Fifteen Ways to Improve Classroom Assessment • 505
 Norris, J. M. (2006). The why (and how) of assessing student learning outcomes in college foreign language programs.  Modern 
Language Journal ,  90 (4), 576–583. 
 Norris, J. M., Brown, J. D., Hudson, T., & Yoshioka, J. (1998).  Designing second language performance assessments . Honolulu, 
HI: University of Hawaii at Manoa National Foreign Language Resource Center. 
 Poehner, M. E. (2007). Beyond the test: L2 dynamic assessment and the transcendence of mediated learning.  Modern Language 
Journal ,  9 (3), 323–340. 
 Poehner, M. E., & Lantolf, J. P. (2005). Dynamic assessment in the language classroom.  Language Teaching Research ,  9 (3), 
233–265. doi:10.1191/1362168805lr166oa 
 Popham, W. J. (1978).  Criterion-referenced measurement . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
 Popham, W. J. (1981).  Modern educational measurement . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
 Popham, W. J. (2008).  Transformative assessment . Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
 Popham, W. J. (2010).  Classroom assessment: What teachers need to know (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson. 
 Purpura, J. E., Brown, J. D., & Schoonen, R. (2015). Improving the validity of quantitative measures in applied linguistics 
research.  Language Learning ,  65 (S1), 37–75. 
 Rea-Dickins, P. (2001). Mirror, mirror on the wall: Identifying processes of classroom assessment.  Language Testing ,  18 (4), 
429–462. doi:10.1177/026553220101800407 
 Rea-Dickins, P. (2006). Currents and eddies in the discourse of assessment: A learning-focused interpretation1.  International 
Journal of Applied Linguistics ,  16 (2), 163–188. 
 Richards, J. C., & Schmidt, R. W. (2010).  Longman dictionary of language teaching and applied linguistics  (4th ed.). London: 
Longman Pearson. 
 Rodriguez, M. C. (2005). Three options are optimal for multiple-choice items: A meta-analysis of 80 years of research.  Educa-
tional Measurement: Issues and Practice ,  24 (2), 3–13. 
 Ross, J. A. (2006). The reliability, validity, and utility of self-assessment.  Practical Assessment Research & Evaluation ,  11 (10). 
Available at http://pareonline.net/getvn.asp?v=11&n=10 
 Sadler, D. R. (1989). Formative assessment and the design of instructional systems.  Instructional Science ,  18 (2), 119–144. 
 Shohamy, E. (1995). Performance assessment in language testing.  Annual Review of Applied Linguistics ,  15 , 188–211. 
 Shohamy, E. (2001). Democratic assessment as an alternative.  Language Testing ,  18 (4), 373–391. doi:10.1177/0265532201
01800404 
 Stefanakis, E. H., & Meier, D. (2010).  Differentiated assessment: How to assess the learning potential of every student (Grades 
6–12) . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
 Stevens, D., & Levi, A. J. (2005).  Introduction to rubrics: An assessment tool to save grading time, convey effective feedback, and 
promote student learning . Sterling, VA: Stylus. 
 Stiggins, R. J. (2002). Assessment crisis: The absence of assessment for learning.  Phi Delta Kappan ,  83 (10), 758–765. 
 Teasdale, A., & Leung, C. (2000). Teacher assessment and psychometric theory: A case of paradigm crossing?  Language Testing , 
 17 (2), 163–184. 
 Torrance, H., & Pryor, J. (1998).  Investigating formative assessment: Teaching, learning and assessment in the classroom . Buck-
ingham, UK: Open University. 
 Trace, J., Janssen, G., & Meier, V. (2015). Measuring the impact of rater negotiation in writing performance assessment.  Lan-
guage Testing . doi:10.1177/0265532215594830 
 Tunstall, P., & Gipps, C. (1996). ‘How does your teacher help you to make your work better?’ Children’s understanding of 
formative assessment.  The Curriculum Journal ,  7 (2), 185–203. 
 Vygotsky, L. S. (1978).  Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University. 
 Weigle, S. C. (1994). Effects of training on raters of ESL compositions.  Language Testing ,  11 (2), 197–223. 
 Wiggins, G. (1993).  Assessing student performance: Exploring the purpose and limits of testing . San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
 Wiggins, G. (1998). Letter to editor.  Educational Researcher ,  27 (6), 20–22. 
 Xu, Y., & Liu, Y. (2009). Teacher assessment knowledge and practice: A narrative inquiry of Chinese college EFL teacher’s 
experiences.  TESOL Quarterly ,  43 (3), 493–513. 
 Yen, W. M. (1993). Scaling performance assessments: Strategies for managing local item dependence.  Journal of Educational 
Measurement ,  30 (3), 187–213. 

506
 Contributors 
Laurence Anthony
Waseda University, Japan 
Donna M. Brinton
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
Maria Estela Brisk
Boston College, USA
James Dean Brown
University of Hawaii, Manoa, USA
Steven Brown
Youngstown State University, USA
Anne Burns
University of New South Wales, Australia
Marianne Celce-Murcia
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
Thomas Cobb
University of Minnesota, USA
Andrew D. Cohen
Professor Emeritus 
University of Minnesota, USA
Martin Cortazzi
University of Warwick, UK
Reginald Arthur D’Silva
University of British Columbia, Canada
John Edwards
St. Francis Xavier University/Dalhousie 
University, Canada
Dana R. Ferris
University of California, Davis, USA
Glenn Fulcher
University of Leicester, UK
Christine C. M. Goh
National Institute of Education, Singapore
William Grabe
Northern Arizona University, USA
Lee Gunderson
University of British Columbia, Canada
Eli Hinkel
Seattle Pacific University, USA
Lixian Jin
The University of Nottingham, Ningbo, 
China
Rodney H. Jones
University of Reading, UK
Robert B. Kaplan
University of Southern California, USA
Greg Kessler
Ohio University, USA
Andy Kirkpatrick
Anaheim University, USA
Antony John Kunnan
University of Macau, SAR China
Batia Laufer
University of Haifa, Israel
Patsy Lightbown
Concordia University, Canada
www.ebook3000.com

Contributors • 507
Michael McCarthy
University of Nottingham, UK
Sandra Lee McKay
San Francisco State University, USA
Paul Nation
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
Jonathan Newton
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
David Nunan
Anaheim University, USA and Emeritus 
Professor, University of Hong Kong
Elite Olshtain
Hebrew University, Israel
Brian Paltridge
University of Sydney, Australia
Carmen Pérez-Llantada
University of Zaragoza, Spain
Jack C. Richards
Regional English Language Center, Singapore
Mary J. Schleppegrell
University of Michigan, USA
Marguerite Ann Snow
California State University, Los Angeles, USA
Bernard Spolsky
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
Sue Starfield
University of New South Wales, Australia
John M. Swales
University of Michigan, USA
Jonathan Trace
Keio University, Japan
Penny Ur
Oranim Academic College of Education, 
Israel 
Elaine Vaughan
University of Limerick, Ireland
Qianqian Zhang-Wu
Boston College, USA 

www.ebook3000.com

509
Index
Note: Italicized page numbers indicate a figure on the corresponding page. Page numbers in bold indicate a table on the 
corresponding page.
academic language (AL): assessment 94–5; conceptualizations 
162–7; contextual perspective 95–6; controversies 
84–5; definitions 83–4; development 85–6; how to 
teach 91–3; introduction 82–3; rationale of need 84; 
school policies 93–5; systemic functional grammar 
385; what to teach 86–91, 87, 88, 90–1
Academic Word List 120
advanced academic literacies 61–2
affect and L2 listening 205–6
affective factors in speaking 246–7
age in foreign language teaching and learning 70–2
apologies, cross-cultural 437
apologies, in Japanese 434
assessment: academic language 94–5; literacy in 464; 
purposeful feedback in 494; rater variation in 430–1; 
self-assessment in vocabulary size 357; testing and 
455–9; writing assessment 328; see also classroom 
assessment; language assessment; large-scale 
language assessment
attitudes in language and learning 4–9
audiolingualism 110, 257 
Audio-lingual Method 229
backward design 121–3
basic interpersonal communicative skills (BICS) 82, 162
bilingual education 160, 385
bilingualism: coordinate bilingualism 109–10; emergent 
bilinguals 85; increasing recognition of 458; 
language death and 18; teaching young learners 73
Black English 11
Black South African English 419–20
brain lateralization 71
British Academic Spoken English corpus 57
British Academic Written English corpus 57–8
British National Corpus (BNC) 175, 360
Cambridge Learner Corpus 176
Cambridge Michigan Language Assessments (CaMLA) 371
CANCODE corpus 174
China, language policy/planning 16–18
clarification requests 235
classroom assessment: compiling the test 496–7; improving 
test 500–2; individualized-response items 493; 
introduction 490; personalized-response items 
492; planning assessment 490–5, 491; productive-
response items 492; promotion of learning with 
495; reliability 500–1; scoring tools 497; selected-
response items 491; student learning outcomes 
494–5; using test 497–9; validity 501–2; writing 
items 495–6
closed captioning 206–7
COCA Academic 52
co-cultural communication 401
code-mixing 421–2
code switching 39
Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA) 
82, 159
cognitive academic language proficiency (CALP) 82, 162, 322
cognitive overload 206–7
cognitive processes 216
cognitive processing 245, 245–6
College English Test (CET) 477
College Entrance Examination Board 456
Collins COBUILD Essential English Dictionary 
(COBUILD) 174, 175, 178
Common Core State Standards 82, 465
Common European Framework for Reference for 
Languages (CEFR) 124, 174, 371, 458, 471
communicative language teaching (CLT) 112, 121, 230, 232
Competency-Based Instruction (CpBI) 123
complaints, cross-cultural 436
computer assisted language learning (CALL) 286; 
automation 193; collaboration 189; conclusions 
194–5, 295; controversies over 192–4; corpora 
189–90; introduction 186; learner behavior and 
training 190–1; mobility 187–8; privacy, tracking, 
and student rights 193; reading and 312, 317; 
telecollaboration 191; traditions in 186–7; trends 
187–91
computer-mediated communication (CMC) 188, 192, 237
Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) 106, 121, 
159, 161–2, 393

510 • Index
content-based instruction (CBI) 74, 121
content-based language teaching (CBLT): academic 
language 162–7; challenges 164–6; conclusion 
167–8; introduction 159–62; models of 160–2; SLA 
research 106, 111, 112; teacher preparedness 166–7
controlled speaking practice 230–2
conversational implicature 442–3
conversation analysis (CA) 249–50
cooperative principle 250
corpora texts: computer assisted language learning 189–90; 
conclusion 181–2; course books and skills teaching 
177–8; grammar reference works 175; grammar 
teaching and learning 380–1; introduction 173; 
learners’ dictionaries 174–5; L2 pragmatics 178–9; 
overview 51–2; second-language acquisition 179–80; 
teaching and learning materials 176–8; vocabulary 
and grammar 176–8
Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) 141, 
358, 360–1
corrective feedback 112–13
critical discourse analysis (CDA) 250–1
cross-cultural speech act research 435–8
cultures of learning 401
culture-specific writing styles 50
curriculum approaches in language teaching: backward 
design 121–3; conclusions 129–30; development and 
implementation 119–24; Dogme curriculum 126; 
ecological classroom 127; exploratory practice 129; 
forward design 119–20, 121; general curriculum 
119; institutional curriculum 118; introduction 117; 
overview 117–19; post-method teaching 127; as 
process 125–6; process-based issues 127–9; product-
based issues 124–5, 127; reflective teaching 128–9; 
syllabus and 120–1; teacher’s curriculum 118–19
deixis use 441–2
differential assessment 493
Differential Item Functioning (DIF) 483–4
Differential Testlet Functioning (DTF) analysis 483–4
digital literacies: agency 289–90; conclusion 295–6; 
convergence 294; defined 286–7; digicality 
294–5; gaming 293; identity 289; interaction 
288–9; language learning and 290–3; mediation 288; 
mobility 294; orienting research 287–90; practice 
287–8; prosuming 292–3; re-orienting research 
293–5; social networking 290–1; surveillance 295
discipline-specific writing 51
discourse markers 441
discourse perspective on teaching language skills: 
communication importance 145; communicative 
interaction 153; conclusion 157; introduction 
144–6; language skills 146–9; learner role in 144–5; 
production/expression process 149–51; scaffolding 
151–3; skills-based approach to grammar 155–6; 
skills-based approach to vocabulary 153–5; usage-
based approach 145
discourse strategies 39, 247–51
Educational Testing Service (ETS) 371–2, 456
English as global language: English as a lingua franca 30; 
future directions/research needs 40–1; hybridity in 
language 31–2; linguistic imperialism 30–1; native 
speakerism 33–5; paradigms, defined 29; pedagogy, 
localization 39–40; plurality of norms 35–7; 
pragmatics 37–9; sociolinguistics of globalization 
32–3; World English paradigm 30
English as lingua franca (ELF): classroom and 264–5; 
introduction 30, 59–60; teaching and 262, 443, 
444–5; World Englishes and 423–5
English for Academic Purposes (EAP): CBI model and 160; 
corpora and teaching 51–2; global teaching and 
learning 43–4; introduction 42–3; L2 learning 44–51, 
45–9; materials design 132; student diversity 52–3
English for Specific Purposes (ESP): advanced academic 
literacies 61–2; corpus studies 57–8; English as 
lingua franca 59–60; ethnographically oriented 
research 58–9; future directions 64; genre and 57; 
identity and learner needs 63–4; introduction 56; 
L2 listening 222; occluded genres 62–3; spoken 
discourse and 60; undergraduate academic 
literacies 60–1
English Language Arts (ELA) 84, 89–90, 90–1, 390
English only language model 22
ethnocentrism 407
European Parliament 19
European Union (EU) 18–19, 161
eye-movement processes 302
Focus-on-Form (FonF) 346–7
Focus-on-Forms (FonFs) 346, 347–8
form-focused instruction 112–13, 443
formulaic “prefabricated” expressions 243
frequency-based method for vocabulary size 357–8
frequency lists 140–1
General English Proficiency Test-A (GEPT-A) 480
General Service List (West) 120
genre theory 70
grammar teaching and learning: analysis/hierarchies 
of errors 377–80, 379; caveats 370; conclusions 
381–2; corpora findings 380–1; corpora texts 
176–8; introduction 369–70; priorities in 376–7; 
prioritization of 375–6; reference works 175; testing 
research 370–5, 373–5; see also systemic functional 
linguistics
Hall, Edward 405
heritage language immersion programs 74
human computer interaction (HCI) 190
hypertext literacy 323
immersion education 74, 385
India, second language literacy 277–8
individualism-collectivism 406
Inner Circle Countries 30
‘integrative’ motivation 5
intelligibility construct 259
intercultural communication (IC): competency-based 
approaches 407–9; conclusions 411–12; cultural 
comparisons 405–7; experiential approaches/
techniques 410; importance of 400; introduction 
399–400; key terms 401; linguistic approach 403–5; 
overview 70; problem-solving approaches 409–10; 
six approaches to 403–11; taking action in praxis 
411; theoretical themes 401–3, 402
intercultural communicative competence (ICC) 191
interlanguage pragmatics 430
International Association of Teachers of English as a 
Foreign Language (IATEFL) 258
International Corpus of English (ICE) 181
International English Language Testing System (IELTS) 
470–1, 476, 484–5
www.ebook3000.com

Index • 511
international-phonetic alphabet 275
interpersonal communication 39
Involvement Load Hypothesis (ILH) 350–2
Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science 
and Technology (MEXT) 242
Kachru, Braj 416
language assessment: conclusion 473–4; field test and 
go/no-go decisions 470; introduction 463–4; 
perspectives 471–3; protyping and piloting 469–70; 
purpose of 465–7, 466; specification writing 
and iteration 467–9, 468; substantive validation 
472–3; test design cycle 464, 464–71; trends and 
controversies 470–1; validation processes 471–2
language curriculum approaches in language teaching, 
discourse perspective on teaching language skills: 
acquisition period 71; bottom-up decoding 
processes 148; contact with 24, 24–5, 25; content 
and 94; death vs. multiculturalism 18–19; diversity 
categories 3–4; of ELA 89–90, 90–1; English 
language 15, 21; first languages 274, 274–5; 
German language learning 4–5; Han language 16; 
Hawaiian language 23; heritage language immersion 
programs 74; home language 93; hybrid languages 
31–2, 421–2; ideologically associated resources 33; 
immersion programs 23; immigrant languages 22–3; 
Indo-European (IE) language 483; instruction in 
335–6; knowledge about language 251; knowledge 
of 151; of mathematics 88, 88; metalanguage role in 
grammar 387–90, 388; minority languages 22, 104; 
mobile assisted language learning 187–8; mobile 
enabled language use 192; motivation in learning 
4–9; native-like language use 108; natural language 
processing 193; Non-Indian European 483; official 
language status 73; of other disciplines 91; pedagogy 
and 39–40, 386; Polynesian language 23; Putonghua 
language 17; Russian language 22; same language 
subtitling 278; of science 89; of social studies 89; 
spoken language 150; standard language 35; strategic 
language users 144; syllabus in language teaching 
120; understanding categories 236–7; validity 
concept 471–2, 477, 478–9; written language 150–2; 
see also academic language; computer assisted 
language learning; content-based language teaching; 
second-language acquisition
language policy/planning: China 16–18; conclusion 25–7; 
European Union 18–19; language contact 24, 24–5, 
25; language teachers 15–16; Myanmar 15–16; 
United States 23–4
language teaching and learning: attitudes, motivation, 
necessity 4–9; classroom dynamics 9–12; conclusion 
12; digital literacies 290–3; as discovery process 20; 
examples of 20–3; introduction 3–4; skills 146–9, 
151–3; social media 292
large-scale language assessment: conclusion 487–8; decision 
making and consequences 482–4; empirical studies 
478–86; fairness in 478, 481–2; introduction 
476–7; oversight bodies 487; recommendations 
486–7; reliability/precision and errors in 478, 
480–1; sensitivity review 482; standards for 477; test 
performance 482–4; validity in 477, 478–9
learner: autonomy of 52; dictionaries 174–5; English for 
specific purposes 63–4; role in L2 144–5; styles and 
strategies 76–7, 493; variables of 75–7
linguistic ‘absolutism’ 4
linguistic imperialism 30–1
localization of education standards 37
low-context knowledge 405
Malaysian English 421–2
massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs) 293
materials design: conclusion 142; corpus research and 
frequency lists 140–1; current trends 136–7; 
defined 132–4; introduction 132; lexical sets 140; 
research as source knowledge 134–6; research 
relevant to 139–41; suggested criteria 137–8; 
writers 135–6
Metacognitive Awareness Listening Questionnaire (MALQ) 
207, 221
metalinguistic awareness 109, 235
Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE) 
43, 57
mobile assisted language learning (MALL) 187–8
motivation in language and learning 4–9
multiculturalism 18–19, 26
multilingualism 74, 335, 444, 458
Native American Languages Act (1990) 23
New London Group 273
No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) 94, 457
North American COCA corpus 177
Outer Circle Countries 30
patchwriting 50
pedagogy discourse perspective on teaching language skills: 
applications of 77–9; English, as global language 
39–40; genre-based pedagogy 390; grammatical 
pedagogical content knowledge 386; language 
knowledge 386; literacy pedagogical content 
knowledge 386; localization of 39–40; possibility in 
40; practicality in 40; writing research and 330–3; see 
also teachers/teaching
phatic communication 444
Piaget, Jean 69
Picture Vocabulary Size Test 363–5, 364
planning assessment 490–5, 491
plurilingualism 74, 79, 161
post-method teaching 127
power distance 406
pragmalinguistic features 443
pragmatics see second language (L2) pragmatics
Presentation, Practice and Production (PPP) 232
pre-teaching of vocabulary 205
productive-response items 492
productive vocabulary size 358–9
Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) 148
pronunciation teaching and learning: the classroom 
263–5; conclusions and future directions 265–6; 
as construct 259–60; introduction 257; the learner 
260–2; research foci 258–9; resurgence of interest in 
258; the teacher 262–3
protyping in language assessment 469–70
proxemics 405
question-answer sequences 165
Quirk, Randolf 416–17
reading and technology: challenges 312–21, 315–16, 319–20; 
conclusion 326; continuities in 321–3; introduction 

512 • Index
312; opportunities 323, 323–5, 324–5; research 
questions 325
reading skills: higher-level processing 303–4; lower-level 
processing 302–3; overview 148–9, 301–2; processes 
301–4; purposes for 304
reading while listening (RWL) 208
recall interview test 364–5
receptive vocabulary size 359–65, 363, 364
reflective teaching 128–9
register role in grammar 386–7
requests, cross-cultural 436–7
rudeness, cross-cultural differences 432
same language subtitling (SLS) 278
second-language acquisition (SLA): age and 108–9; 
applied linguistics 329; becoming a teacher 
103–4, 236; conclusion 113; corpora texts 179–80; 
developmental stages 107–8; form-focused 
instruction and corrective feedback 112–13; 
interaction 289–90; previously learned languages 
109–11; research on 104–6; social context of 72–5; 
student-student interaction 111–12; time and 
timing 106–7
second language (L2) learning: acquisition period 71; 
content area instruction 93; corpora texts 178–9; 
English for Academic Purposes and 44–51, 45–9, 
53; experiences of 63, 72–3; grammatical errors 
156; growth and elaboration of 110; introduction 
21; production/expression skills 149–50; time 
constraints with 369; variables in 261
second language (L2) listening: affect and 205–6; classroom 
interventions 208; cognitive processes 216; 
conclusion and future directions 224–5; controversy 
and developments 222–4; decoding issues 202–3; 
decoding skills 215–16; developments and trends 
in 218–22; discourse and vocabulary knowledge 
219–20; enabling communication skills 215; ESP 
and 222; factors in 201–2; future directions 208–9; 
introduction 201, 214; listening comprehension 
model 216–17; metacognitive awareness 220; 
methods of investigating 221–2; multimedia and 
206–7; nature of 214–17; phonological knowledge 
218–19; prior and linguistic knowledge 218; prior 
knowledge and 204–5; strategies 220–2; strategies 
for 207–8; vocabulary and 203–4; vocabulary 
knowledge 219
second language (L2) literacy: Africa 278–9; Chinese 275–6; 
conclusion 283; English 276–7; Europe 279; first 
languages 274, 274–5; India 277–8; instruction 
282–3; introduction 273; literacy, defined 273–4; 
multiliteracies 281–2; overview 275; programming 
code 279–80, 280; second languages 275; Spanish 
276
second language (L2) pragmatics: adult learning 
448; backchanneling 439; conclusion 448–9; 
conversational implicature 442–3; conversational 
overlap 438–9; corpora texts 178–9; cross-cultural 
speech act research 435–8; deixis use 441–2; 
developments/trends/traditions in 429; digitally 
mediated contexts 446–7; discourse markers 
441; humor and laughter 439–40; interlanguage 
pragmatics 430; knowledge 146, 219–20; learning 
and performing 447–8; materials developed for 445–6; 
nature of speech acts 434–5; overview 37–9, 250; 
politeness and impoliteness 431–4; pragmalinguistic 
features 443; research methods 429–31; sarcasm 
perception 440–1; statement of purpose/focus 428; 
teaching of 443–7; terms defined 428–9
second language (L2) reading comprehension: coaching 
301; conclusion 308–9; curriculum development 
principles 307; development of 308; differences 
in 305–6; fluency and extended exposure 304–5; 
implications for instruction 306; introduction 
299; language and content learning 308; reading 
ability and 301; reading processes 301–4; reading 
purposes 304; teaching 306–7; workings of 
299–301
second language (L2) speaking: affective factors in speaking 
246–7; cognitive processing in speaking 245, 
245–6; complexity of speaking 243–5; conclusions 
251–2; core speaking skills 244; demand for English 
speakers 242–3; discourses in speech 247–51; 
errors in 378; fluency, accuracy, complexity 247; 
introduction 242; linguistic knowledge 243–4
second language (L2) vocabulary: aspects of 348–50, 349; 
conclusion 352; incidental learning 346–8; input 
343–5, 345; instruction 346–50, 349; intentional 
learning 348; introduction 343; involvement 350–2; 
word-focused instruction 346
second language (L2) writing: applications of technology 
336; conclusion 337; contexts of 337; corrective 
feedback 335; current controversies 333–5; errors in 
378; future directions 335–7; introduction 328–9; 
language-focused instruction 335–6; placement 
and assessment 333–4; research traditions 329–30; 
as stand-alone scholarly field 332; translingual 
movement 332–3; understanding writers context 
331–2; writing research and pedagogy 330–3
Sheltered English immersion (SEI) 93
Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) 82, 
159, 167
Skill Learning Theory (SAT) 231
social semiotic 384
sociocultural theory 70
speaking skills: conclusions and future directions 237–8; 
feedback category 235–6; interaction category 232–4; 
introduction 229–30; language understanding 
category 236–7; learning opportunity categories 
230–7; output category 234–5; rehearsal category 
230–2
student learning outcomes (SLOs) 494–5
study abroad (SA) 429–30, 436–7
suprasegmental pronunciation 243
swearwords 433–4
Sydney School in Australia 84
systemic functional linguistics (SFL): conclusions 394; 
content-based language teaching 165; contextual 
perspective 95–6; functional grammar 386–94; 
grammar 377; introduction 384; language and 
meaning 390–4; metalanguage role in 387–90, 388; 
register and metafunction 386–7; as resource for 
teaching/learning 384–5; speaking and discourse 
analysis 249; understanding role of 385–6; in 
younger learners 70; see also grammar teaching 
and learning
Task-Based Language Teaching (TBLT) 43, 123, 229, 
234–5, 237
Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages 
(TESOL) 56, 68, 257, 258; contention and 
pronunciation 262, 263; implementation of 456; 
translingual movement 332–3, 334–5
www.ebook3000.com

Index • 513
teachers/teaching: academic language 86–91, 87, 88, 
90–1; acquisition in foreign language teaching 
and learning 70–2; age in foreign language 
teaching and learning 70–2; bilingualism 73; 
content-based language teaching 165; corpora and 
51–2; digital reading challenges 318–21, 319–20; 
English as lingua franca 262, 443, 444–5; English 
for Academic Purposes 51–2; English language 
teaching 132–3, 139, 142, 262; global teaching and 
learning 43–4; language teachers 15–16; outcomes-
based teaching 124; peer teaching 78; post-method 
teaching 127; pragmatics 443–7; pre-teaching 
of vocabulary 205; reading comprehension 
306–7; reflective teaching 128–9; research as source 
knowledge 134–5; second language (L2) pragmatics 
443–7; sentence level features of 87, 87; syllabus 
in language teaching 120; systemic functional 
linguistics 165, 384–5; Task-Based Language 
Teaching 43, 123, 229, 234–5, 237; word level 
features of 87–8; see also content-based language 
teaching; curriculum approaches in language 
teaching; discourse perspective on teaching 
language skills; grammar teaching and learning; 
language teaching and learning; pronunciation 
teaching and learning
Teaching of English to Young Learners (TEYL): age and 
acquisition 70–2; conclusion 79; defining young 
learners 69–70; introduction 68–9; learner variables 
75–7; pedagogical applications 77–9; second-
language acquisition 72–5
test design cycle 464, 464–71
Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) 
371, 471
Test of English as a Foreign Language Internet-Based 
(TOEFL iBT) 476, 480
Test of English for International Communication (TOEIC) 
371, 471
thanking, cross-cultural 437–8
two-way immersion programs 74
University of Cambridge Local Examination Syndicate 
(UCLES) 371
validity concept: argument for test design 465–7; classroom 
assessment 501–2; conclusions 502; in language 
assessment 471–2; large-scale language assessment 
477, 478–9
vocabulary: acquisition of 71; corpora texts 176–8; 
knowledge of 219; L2 listening and 203–4; 
skills-based approach to 153–5
vocabulary size, measurement: of average population 365, 
365–6; conclusion 366; Eurocentres Vocabulary Size 
Test 360; importance of 355–6; introduction 355; 
Picture Vocabulary Size Test 363–5, 364; productive 
size 358–9; receptive size 359–65, 363, 364; receptive 
vs. productive size 356–8; Vocabulary Size Test 358, 
360–2
Vocabulary Size Test 358, 360–2
Vygotsky, Lev 70
working-class language ‘codes’ 7–8
World Englishes and international communication: 
developmental stages 417–18; English as lingua 
franca 423–5; hybrid languages and translanguaging 
421–2; implications 426; introduction 30; language 
contact, influence of 418–19; linguistic feature 
of 419–21; origin of 416–17; transcultural/
transnational Englishes 423
writing: alphabetic writing 275; assessment of 328, 495–6; 
culture-specific writing styles 50; development 
analysis 393–4; discipline-specific writing 51; 
Introduction-Methods-Results-Discussions 
macro-structure 50; morphemic writing 275; 
patchwriting 50; pedagogy and 330–3; planning process 
of 151; process approach to 330–1; purpose of 151; 
specification writing and iteration 467–9, 468; syllabic 
writing 275; see also second language (L2) writing
writing across the curriculum (WAC) 44, 331–2, 335
writing in the disciplines (WID) 331–2, 335

