CONTACT AND 
FRICTIONAL 
ELECTRIFICATION 
BY 
W.R.HARPER 
OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
1967

Ozford University Press, Ely House, London W. 1 
GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON 
CAPE TOWN SALISBURY IBADAN NAIROBI LUSAKA ADDIS ABABA 
BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHI LAHORE DACCA 
KUALA LUMPUR HONG KONG TOKYO 
© Ozford University Press 1964 
PRINTED 
IN GREAT BRITAIN

PREFACKE 
A crUcCIAL question for the explanation of the production of 
static charge is whether the charging of insulators comes from 
a transfer of electrons, of ions, or of both. Montgomery would 
say that the carriers of charge are always electrons and Loeb 
that they are generally electrons; Henry feels that the question 
is still an open one. 
I am of the opinion that a definite answer 
can now be given which is that the carriers are never electrons— 
when the material being charged is strictly an insulator. 
The purpose of this monograph is to present the arguments 
which lead to that conclusion,and to examine the subject from the 
new point of view. Itinvolves abandoning much that is widely 
accepted, and frequently calls for a reinterpretation of published 
work. The subject matter covered has been selected largely to 
this end ; the book does not attempt a comprehensive survey. To 
broaden the view, the reader should consult the works listed in 
the general bibliography at the end of this preface. By doing so 
no reference to important original papers will be overlooked. 
Regrettably little use has been made of the modern theory of 
the solid state when attempting to interpret experimental results. 
Moreover, the few attempts that have been made are open to 
serious criticism. 
I have therefore thought it appropriate to 
include a briefintroduction to such aspectsof quantum mechanics 
as lead directly to the problems discussed in the book; in any case 
a reader who wished to collect together the directly relevant 
information would find it dispersed through many books and 
geared to various other aspects of the subject. 
Part II of the 
present book is devoted to this basic theory and to its immediate 
consequences for static electrification. 
Readers who are suffi- 
ciently familiar with the derivations given in this part and wish 
to omit them, may do so without interfering with the continuity 
of the argument, provided that due attention is paid to cross- 
references. To facilitate reference to the more important state- 
ments regarding polarity of charging, the symbols @ and 
© are 
used.

vi 
PREFACE 
Part I deals mainly with a formulation of the problems of the 
subject; Part I11is particularly concerned with the interpretation 
of experimental results in the light of Parts 
I and 1I. 
The 
development of the main thesis sometimes calls for 
a strict 
presentation of the evidence; on other occasions circumstances 
do not justify more than a rough treatment. Such variation in 
style cannot be avoided when trying to establish a viewpoint 
that is not generally accepted, in a subject where there is still 
only a slender basis for a consensus of opinion. Order of magni- 
tude considerations often point the way; the author’s discoveries 
that some insulators charge very little, some charge very much, 
and that the different faces of a crystal can be as different 
as different materials, are the clues to such progress as is made 
in the book. 
It is not always the most recent experimental investigations 
that are the most revealing; one cannot afford to ignore the 
earlier work. Modern experimental techniques can be helpful, 
but it must not be forgotten that the technologist may be more 
concerned, in the field of static charging, with the behaviour of 
dog food, for example, than with that of super-pure germanium. 
The following publications, selected from the bibliography, 
give general accounts 
of their subject-matter which, taken 
together, cover a broader field than the present book. 
BowbDEN, F. P. and TABoR, D. (1954, 1964). 
The Friction and Lubrica- 
tion of Solids, Parts I and II. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
HeNrY, P. 
S. H. (1957). 
‘Generation of static on solid insulators 
, 
J. Text. Inst. 48, P5. 
LoEs, L. B. (1958). Static Electrification. Springer, Berlin. 
MoNTGOMERY, D. J. (1959). 
‘Static electrification of solids’, Advances 
in Solid State Physics, vol. 9. Academic Press, New York. 
When reading published accounts of experimental work it 
often proves difficult to disentangle the experimental findings 
from some preconceived explanation of them. 
I have tried to 
escape from the confusion that follows from this, and would 
make a plea for others to avoid, in the future, what can be an 
insidious pitfall. 
W. R. H. 
November 1965

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Bowden and Tabor, Friction and Lubrication of Solids, Part I, Claren- 
don Press for Pl. I11a, b, and ¢ ; Bowden and Thomas, Proc. R. Soc. A223, 
29 (1954) for Fig. 4.6 ; Cunningham, J. appl. Phys. 35, 2332 (1964) for 
Figs. 
17.4 and 17.5; Deaglio, Z. Phys. 51, 279 (1928) for Fig. 
13.1; 
Donald, Research 11, 19 (1958) for Figs. 12.1 and 12.2; Dyson and Hirst, 
Proc. phys. Soc. B 67, 309 (1954) for Pl. ITa and b ; Haefer, Z. Phys. 116, 
604 (1940) for Fig. 6.10; Harper, Proc. B. Soc. A205, 83 (1951) for Figs. 
11.1 and 11.2; Harper, Proc. R. Soc. A218, 111 (1953) for Figs. 10.4 and 
10.5 ; Harper, Proc. R. Soc. A231, 388 (1955) for Figs. 5.6, 14.3, and 14.4; 
Hast, Ark. 
Fys. 4, 
37 (1952) for Pl. IVa and b; Henisch, Rectifying 
Semiconductor Contacts, Clarendon Press, 1957 for Fig. 7.7; Henry, Br. 
J. appl. Phys. Supplement2, 31 (1953) for P1. Va; Hersh and Montgomery, 
Text. Res. J. 25, 279 (1955) for Fig. 17.10; Kimball, J. chem. Soc. 3, 560 
(1935) for Fig. 7.8 ; Kluge, Annin Phys.1, 1 (1929) for Figs.17.6,17.7,17.8, 
and 17.9; Kunkel, J. appl. Phys. 21, 820 (1950) for Figs. 14.1 and 14.2; 
Latham, Br.J.appl. Phys.14,488 (1963) for Fig. 12.4 
; Levy etal., Text. Res. 
J.28, 897 (1958) for Figs. 17.11, 17.12, 17.13 and Pl. Vb ; McClelland and 
Power, Proc. R. Ir. Acad. 34, 40 (1917) for Figs. 17.2 and 17.3 ; Peterson, 
J. appl. Phys. 25, 907 (1954) for Fig. 14.5; Rabinowicz, Proc. phys. Soc. 
B 65, 630 (1962) for Pl. I1c; Rose and Ward, Br. J. appl. Phys. 8, 121 
(1957) for Fig. 9.5; Sereda and Feldman, J. Text. Inst. 55, T288 (1964) 
for Fig. 17.1 ; Shaw and Hanstock, Proc. B. Soc. A128, 485 (1930) for Fig. 
5.1 ; Sproull, Modern Physics. 2nd edn, Wiley for Figs. 7.4, 7.5, and 7.6 ; 
Wagner, J. appl. Phys. 27, 1301 (1956) for Figs. 14.6, 14.7, and 14.8; 
Williamson et al., Proc. R. Soc. A237, 560 (1956) for Fig. 2.1; Professor 
P. E. Wagner for Fig. 5.5. 
The author is indebted to the Director of the Laboratory on the Physics 
and Chemistry of Rubbing Solids, Cambridge, where the photographs 
for Plate I were taken for him in 1955.


CONTENTS 
PART 
I 
I. SURFACE CHARGES 
STATIC CHARGES 
FIELD DUE TO 
A CHARGED SURFACE 
DISCHARGE FROM SURFACES 
MAXIMUM CHARGE DENSITIES 
Thin lamina 
Sphere 
Initial high charge density 
Localized areas 
ORDERS OF MAGNITUDE 
DOUBLE LAYERS 
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY CHARGING PROCESSES 
II. CONTACT OF SURFACES 
PARTICULATE CONTAMINATION OF SURFACES 
Contact impeded by particles 
Significance 
of 
particulate 
contamination 
for 
tribo- 
electrification 
CONTACT TOPOGRAPHY 
Contact of asperities 
Contact of undulations 
TERMINOLOGY 
IITI. SLIDING 
TANGENTIAL MOVEMENT 
ROLLING 
THE NATURE 
OF SLIDING 
VIBRATION 
IV. TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
CONTACT CHARGING 
The Volta—Helmholtz hypothesis 
FRICTIONAL CHARGING 
Hot spots 
ALTERNATIVE TRIBOELECTRIC PROCESSES 
CHARGING BY MATERIAL TRANSFER 
PARTICULATE CHARGING

X 
CONTENTS 
V. THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
ADSORPTION 
OF WATER 
TYPES 
OF CONTAMINATION 
PREPARATION 
OF SURFACES 
CRYSTAL ANISOTROPY 
INHOMOGENEITY 
OF SURFACES 
INTERPRETATION 
OF EXPERIMENTS 
PART I1 
VI. POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VII. INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VIII. 
IX. SPACE CHARGES IN SEMICONDUCTORS AND 
TUNNEL EFFECT 
ENERGY WELLS 
THE FREE-ELECTRON GAS 
FIELD EMISSION 
GAP BETWEEN TWO METALS 
NON-CONDUCTING SOLIDS 
ASSEMBLIES 
OF ATOMS 
CRITERIA 
OF CONDUCTIVITY 
ELECTRONIC SEMICONDUCTORS 
INTERIOR ELECTRON TRAPS 
SURFACE STATES 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES AT INTER- 
FACES 
THE FERMI-DIRAC DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION 
THE FERMI LEVEL 
THE FERMI LEVEL 
IN METALS 
METALS 
IN EQUILIBRIUM 
SEEBECK EFFECT 
FERMI LEVEL 
IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
DIFFERENT PARTSOFASURFACE HAVING DIFFERENT 
INNER POTENTIALS 
OXIDE LAYERS 
INSULATORS 
SEMICONDUCTORS 
IN CONTACT WITH 
A METAL 
INSULATORS 
IN CONTACT WITH 
A METAL 
76 
77 
83 
84 
86 
91 
94 
97 
101 
105 
110 
119 
127 
135 
135 
140 
146 
150 
153 
155 
161 
161 
168 
171 
172 
174 
175 
179 
184 
187 
187 
199

CONTENTS 
PART III 
X. ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
APPARATUS 
FOR 
THE 
INVESTIGATION 
OF 
ELEC- 
TRIFICATION AFTER LIGHT CONTACT 
CONTRASTING TYPES 
OF INSULATOR 
ELECTROPHOBIC COMBINATIONS 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF ELECTROPHOBIC BEHAVIOUR 
XI. SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
THE CHARGING OF METALS 
APPARATUS 
EXPERIMENTAL CHECKS 
DETAILED 
THEORY 
OF 
THE 
CHARGING MEASURE- 
MENT 
CORRELATION OF CHARGE WITH CONTACT POTENTIAL 
THEORY OF THE SEPARATION CHARGING OF METAL 
SPHERES 
THE FUNCTION 
([ 
APPROXIMATE 
FORMULAE 
FOR 
THE 
SEPARATION 
CHARGE 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALLIC POWDERS 
XII. THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
THE CHARGING OF RUTILE 
SEMICONDUCTOR POWDERS 
THE CHARGING OF ICE 
FRENKEL’S THEORY 
XIII. ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
ELECTROLYTIC 
POTENTIAL 
DIFFERENCES 
AT 
CONTACTS 
EXPERIMENTS 
WHICH 
SUGGEST 
ELECTROLYTIC 
CHARGING 
1 
XIV. QUARTZ AND SILICA 
THE PIEZOELECTRIC PROPERTIES OF QUARTZ 
PIEZO-TRIBOELECTRIC EXPERIMENTS ON QUARTZ 
ADHESIONAL CHARGING 
CHARGING AND THE FORCE 
OF FRICTION 
CHARGING BY ROLLING 
X1 
209 
210 
215 
218 
222 
223 
223 
225 
228 
230 
233 
235 
241 
244 
245 
247 
253 
260 
261 
268 
269 
271 
274 
279 
279 
280 
282 
293 
294

xii 
CONTENTS 
XV. THE 
CHARGING 
OF 
ELECTROPHILIC 
INSULATORS 
REDISTRIBUTION 
OF IONS 
EFFECT 
OF AN EXTERNAL FIELD 
TRIBOELECTRIC 
SERIES 
XVI. MERCURY 
XVII. TEXTILES 
SERIES FOR TEXTILES 
REDUCTION AND ELIMINATION OF STATIC CHARGE 
APPENDIX 
TABLE OF CONSTANTS 
REFERENCES 
AUTHOR INDEX 
SUBJECT INDEX 
301 
303 
307 
310 
318 
329 
351 
352 
354 
357 
3:58 
365 
368

PART 
1 
  
CHAPTER 
I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
Static charges 
WHEN a material surface is found electrified, this must be due 
to an excess of protons or electrons in or near the surface; other 
elementary charged particles have too fleeting an existence to 
contribute to static charges and, furthermore, cannot be pro- 
duced by the low energy processes involved. 
If the charge is 
negative, the excess electrons may be free and mobile as in a 
metal, in which case the stable configuration of charge is that 
in which the electrostatic field due to the configuration (together 
with any imposed field) is everywhere normal to the surface. 
Alternatively, the excess electrons may be bound to molecules 
at the surface or to the lattice, in which case they are restrained 
from moving by localized fields belonging to the molecular or 
lattice structure, and these fields are typically much larger than 
the field due to the surface charge or imposed fields. The second 
alternative refers to an insulator, for which the electrostatic field 
due to the surface charge (together with any imposed field) need 
not be normal to the surface. 
If, now, the charge is positive, which 
implies that there is an excess of protons, this may be thought 
of as a deficit of electrons, some atoms having become positive 
ions. When the material is an insulator, these ions will not be 
mobile ; nor will they be in a metal, but the charge will be mobile, 
because electrons can move so as to neutralize positive charges 
somewhere else, leaving a positive charge behind in the place 
from which they came. A negative charge on an insulator is not 
mobile because the extra electrons become attached to molecules 
to form negative ions. 
Finally, if water has been adsorbed at 
851323 
B

2 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
the surface, charge may be present in the form of pseudo- 
electrolytic ions. 
Static charges on a metal must be confined effectively to the 
surface, and there can be no electrostatic field inside the metal. 
Volume charges can survive in insulators, but we shall not be 
interested in them because contact and frictional phenomena 
cannot transfer charge deep into the body of a piece of insulating 
material. 
Frictional processes do, however, penetrate a short 
distance below the surface, so we must contemplate ‘surface’ 
charges that are not quite in the surface. 
Furthermore, the 
charge density in semiconductors is restricted, which means that 
‘surface’ charges must extend some way into the body of the 
material. 
We see that surface charges will reside in different kinds of 
energy level according to circumstances, and that some levels 
will permit the charge to move about easily, whereas others will 
not. 
In no case will the charge be just there on the surface: if 
there is no ready-made level for it to occupy, then it will make 
one for itself by falling into the potential hole formed by its own 
dielectric image in the surface. 
In order to understand how it comes about that a surface has 
acquired an electric charge, we need to know whether electrons 
or ions were transferred to it, why they moved and why the 
transfer came to an end, what energy levels the ions or electrons 
came from, and to what energy levels they went. A full under- 
standing of the process will clearly be dependent on an appro- 
priate background of quantum theory of the solid state, though 
there may, of course, be some short cuts through classical elec- 
trical theory. We may anticipate that classical theory will be 
sufficient for the experimental investigation of what charging 
occurs, but that quantum theory will probably be involved in 
any explanation of why it occurs. 
It should be realized that there are two opposed reasons why 
ions and electrons may be transferred from one surface to 
another: they may move, or they may be moved. They may 
move because they find themselves in an electric field; they may 
be moved in spite of an opposing electric field. When an electro-

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
3 
lytic e.m.f. exists between two surfaces in juxtaposition, 
a 
current may flow and the moving charge will, throughout its 
transfer, move in the direction of the electric field. This remains 
true even when a back e.m.f, is being built up. When there is 
no potential difference between the surfaces, but there 
is 
a 
difference in abundance of some particular kind of charged 
particle on the two surfaces, and these particles are mobile, 
then the thermal agitation of the particles will give rise to 
diffusion and this will carry them, on the whole, down the 
concentration gradient. 
At the outset there 
is no electrical 
potential difference present, but the transfer of particles carries 
charge from one surface to the other, so giving rise to an electric 
field which opposes further transfer; the field will ultimately 
torminate the transfer if this 
is 
a consequence of diffusion. 
Under these circumstances charged particles are transferred 
against the electric field. 
The charges left on surfaces following contact with or without 
rubbing may have been limited by something inherent in the 
charging mechanism, or it may happen that some of the charge 
transferred by this mechanism is subsequently lost because of 
discharge consequent on electrical breakdown of the materials 
concerned or of the ambient medium, whether this is liquid, 
gas, or vacuum. The loss of charge will be specially important 
when the surfaces are separated, after contact, with an accom- 
panying change in effective capacitance leading to an increased 
potential difference at constant charge, thus favouring electrical 
broakdown. It may be difficult to decide whether, in a particular 
oxperiment, all the charge generated has been retained, or some 
lost in this way. 
Surfaces in contact usually touch at only a few points. When 
the surfaces slide across each other, a point that is proud of one 
surface may remain in contact with the other surface for a while, 
the opposing contact point being drawn out into a line; after 
n short displacement, however, the original point of contact will 
give way to a new one, and so on; in the course of time a multi- 
plicity of contact points will have been involved. 
This con- 
sidoration has given rise to two competing hypotheses. On the

4 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
one hand it is supposed that the virtue of rubbing in giving rise 
to triboelectrificationt lies in the multiplication of contact points, 
charge being generated merely as a result of the surfaces having 
been in contact; on the other hand the charging is attributed 
to work being expended in the rubbing. The former view goes 
back to Volta and was formulated in more definite terms by 
Helmholtz; it will be referred to as the Volta—Helmholtz hypo- 
thesis. 
It seems a priors likely that this hypothesis will account 
for at least part of the charging and it has become fashionable 
to suppose that it is much the most important process involved, 
but we shall see that it cannot explain anything like all the 
phenomena. Nevertheless, there is a simple argument indicating 
its importance. Friction itself may be erratic, but triboelectri- 
fication is temperamental even to the extent of reversing sign 
without obvious cause. Now whereas the force of friction comes, 
typically, from protuberances of sufficient size to involve the 
bulk properties of the materials concerned, contact electrification 
may well be generated by surface layers only a few molecules 
thick and these may easily vary from specimen to specimen or 
between different places on the same specimen. Contact electri- 
fication, in which the deformed surfaces return to their original 
condition after separation and in which the generation of charge 
is a truly surface effect involving only the topmost few mono- 
molecular layers, should be more unpredictable than frictional 
electrification which supposes the generation of charge toinvolve 
the forming and breaking of adherent bridges between the sur- 
faces. 
It is well known that triboelectrification is so unpre- 
dictable that different experimenters in different parts of the 
world find it difficult to agree on what are the experimental 
facts. 
Apart from the difficulty of reproducing experimental con- 
ditions there are three additional reasons why it is easy to 
misinterpret observational results, and these reasons will ap- 
pear in due course. 
Before considering them, however, 
it is 
necessary first to discuss the electric field due to a charged 
surface. 
T From the Greek word 7p{Bos meaning rubbing.

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
5 
Field due to a charged surface 
When a static charge of electricity is uniformly distributed 
over a mathematical surface that is spherical, symmetry requires 
the field just outside the surface to be normal to it. 
If the radius 
of the sphere is R, and the surface density of charge is o,T the 
total charge is 47 R%0, and this is the charge included within a 
concentric spherical surface of radius R-+6R. 
The theorem of 
(Gauss requires 4 times the included charge to be equal to the 
outward flux through the surface. 
If the field at the charged 
surface is &, and E-}6F at the enclosing surface, the outward 
flux is dn(E+0E)(R+6R)%. We thus have 
E-+8E = 4nocR*/(R+-SR). 
By letting 
6 
R — 0, we find £ = 4no. 
The foregoing reasoning has been formulated strictly, because, 
when the argument is presented in this way, it is clear that the 
conclusion still holds for a charge resident on a material surface, 
whether conductor or insulator: no confusion can have crept in 
because of the charged surface being, physically, a surface of 
discontinuity. That the field is the same irrespective of whether 
the sphere is a conductor or an insulator, and independent of the 
dielectric constant of the insulator, is, perhaps, a little surprising. 
Any point charge has an image in a dielectric whose strength 
depends on the dielectric constant: why, then, does this not 
matter in the case of the charged sphere? Before answering the 
(question, let us consider a charged plane. 
In Fig. 1.1, = is the distance of the point P from an infinite 
mathematical plane charged with uniform surface density o. 
Cones with vertex at P divide the plane into circular zones; the 
figure is a section showing the two cones of semi-vertical angles 
0 and 0-+60. 
The distance of P from the zone defined by these 
cones is x sec 0, the width of the zone is x sec?0 80, and the charge 
on the zone is 27?0 tan 0sec?0d0. 
This charge gives rise to a 
component, of field at P perpendicular to the charged plane of 
amount 27osin060. 
The field at P due to the charge on the 
T Mathematical arguments in this book are based on electrostatic units.

6 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
plane is therefore 
i 
2mo [ sin6 df = 2mo. 
0 
It is not immediately apparent why we may not say that the 
argument is applicable when the charge resides on a material 
x sec 688 
xsec? 080 
xsecf 
80 
  
X 
  
Fia. 1.1 
plane, whether insulating or conducting, but we know that the 
field just outside a conductor is always 4o and cannot, therefore, 
be 27re. Furthermore, there is no reason why the formula found 
from a consideration of a charged sphere should not still hold if 
we let R — oo, and the result, which was 4ng, ought, it would 
seem, to be correct for an infinite plane, since, as far as points 
close to the sphere are concerned, the surface becomes flatter as 
the radius increases. So let us look at the matter more carefully. 
The integral for a plane distribution of charge converges to its 
limit as the extent of the plane becomes large with respect to x. 
Since we are interested in the field close to the surface, let x now 
be taken as being of the first order of small quantities, and let 
the surface of a sphere S be divided into two parts S; and S, as 
shown in Fig. 
1.2. 
As 
R — o0, let S, remain finite; we have 
proved that the field at P due to S, is 2nr6. We have also proved 
that the field at P due to S is 4wo, whence it follows that the 
field at P due to S, is 2mc. The field due to S, at P’, just inside 
the surface, will also be 2#o, since PP’ is of the first order of 
small quantities. The field at P’ due to S;, however, is —270, 
so the field at P’ due to S is zero; this can also be proved to 
be true for a sphere by integration. We may note that the fore- 
going argument may be used the other way round to prove

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
7 
that the field just outside a finite conducting surface—of any 
shape—is 47o: P’ then being within a conductor, the field there 
must be zero (in the absence of currents in a resistive medium), 
hence the field due to S,, whatever its shape, must be equal and 
  
Fia. 1.2 
opposite to the field due to S;. The latter is —2n0, so the former 
must be 27o. 
The field at P due to S is therefore 47o. 
The 
distribution of charge on the surface of a conductor adjusts 
itself so that this is so; in the case of a sphere the distribution 
in uniform, and a uniform distribution on any kind of sphere 
gives the same field. 
It now appears that the result calculated for an infinite plane 
gives only part of the field due to the charge on a large plane 
conductor because it refers to the near side of the conductor only, 
and the contribution from the distant side cannot be neglected. 
When applying the formula for an infinite plane to points close 
o a finite surface, we must remember that material objects are 
enclosed by their surfaces: the formula may be applicable to the 
near part of the surface, but this part is closed by a cap which 
includes the further side of the surface, and the contribution 
from the cap must be added. This contribution may, as we have 
#ocn, be important, but, on the other hand, it can be negligible. 
(Jompare the two cases (@) and (b) in Fig. 
1.3, to which the 
infinite plane approximation may be applied. 
The surfaces 
onclose conductors: (@) is a thin lamina, (b) is a capacitor. The 
lnmina will be similarly charged on both sides. The field at P

8 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
due to 8§, is 270, but there is the contribution from S, of amount 
270 to be added, giving 47o in all. A capacitor with equally and 
oppositely charged plates has those charges mutually bound to 
the parts of the surfaces of the plates which are in juxtaposition, 
  
  
  
  
(a) 
(b) 
Fi1c. 1.3 
the distant parts of the plates being uncharged. The contribu- 
tions to the field at P from S, and S, are therefore nil. 
The 
contribution from S, is 27¢, and from S; —(—27n0); the field at 
P is therefore, once again, 4no, in spite of P being close to two 
charged conductors. 
This is because the further sides of these 
conductors make no contribution in the case of this particular 
geometry. 
A uniformly charged dielectric sphere has no field inside it; 
there is therefore no polarization, and the field outside the sphere 
is unaffected by the presence of the dielectric, as we have already 
seen by applying the theorem of Gauss. Suppose, now, we have 
a uniform lamina, as in Fig. 1.3 (@), but the lamina now of di- 
electric and charged on one side only. There will be a field inside 
it, so the dielectric will be polarized. If the charge placed on S, is 
positive, the polarization will result in a positive charge forming 
on S, and a negative charge on 8, which will partially cancel 
the positive charge already there. 
The new charges will be 
equal and opposite. They will therefore produce no effect at P, 
and the field just outside the lamina will be unaffected by the 
presence of the dielectric. 
Inside the lamina, however, the new 
contributions will add, making the resultant field just inside the

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
9 
lamina less than the field just outside. On the far side, the field 
will be the same as on the near side, but reversed. 
There are, however, circumstances in which the presence of 
the dielectric modifies the field just outside a charge on the 
surface of the dielectric body. 
In 
Fig. 
1.4, 
a uniform surface density 
of positive charge is supposed applied 
to a previously uncharged dielectric 
surface S, but only to part of it, S,. 
Polarization 
of 
the 
dielectric 
will 
give 
rise 
to 
chains 
of 
molecular 
doublets along the lines of force, an 
example of which is shown. The near 
onds of the doublet chains terminate 
with negative charges which partially 
cancel the applied positive charge; 
the distant ends terminate with positive charges distributed over 
8S,. Inside the dielectric the positive end of one doublet is cancelled 
by the negative end of its neighbour: there is no resultant charge 
here. The positive and negative charges, formed on the sur- 
face, by polarization, are equal in magnitude and less than the 
applied charge, though they may be comparable with it. They 
contribute to the field at P, increasing and decreasing respec- 
tively the field due to the applied charge. In general, the effects 
of the charges formed by polarization will not be equal and 
opposite: the charge distributed over S, is, on the average, at a 
greater distance than that on S;, so the combined effect of both 
wigns of charge will be to reduce the field at P. 
Consider now the case in which S is small compared with S,, 
ideally an order of magnitude smaller. 
The contribution from 
the surface density o', due to polarization, on S,, to the field at 
I’ takes the form 
  
  
Fic. 1.4 
  
o’ cos 8 dS, 
2 
Ss 
where 7 is the distance of the surface element dS, from P, and 
() is the angle between the line joining P to dS, and the direction

10 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
of the resultant field at P. 
The integral behaves like ¢’ (i.e. 
like 1/r2) as r increases to large values, and therefore vanishes 
when S, > 8,. The field at P may therefore be calculated using 
the approximation for an infinite plane, ignoring the distant 
parts of the surface S. 
Both the field at P and the field at P’ are due to the charge 
distribution on §; alone; the field at P’ just inside the dielectric 
is therefore equal and opposite to the field at P just outside. 
This does not conflict with the usual boundary condition at the 
surface of a dielectric when allowance is made for the surface 
being charged with charge density o in addition to the charge 
density ¢’ formed by polarization. The magnitude of the field 
is 27(c—oa’), and the polarization it causes in the dielectric is 
(K—1)/4m times the field, where K is the dielectric constant. 
If the polarization is P and the field is £, we have 
P = EK-—-1)/4nr = 3(c—0')(K—1), 
and, since ¢’ = P, we find 
2 
1+ K 
The effect of the dielectric in reducing the field just outside 
the charged surface is given by the factor 2/(14 K). This factor 
is plotted in Fig. 1.5, with some values for well-known materials 
indicated. 
It is seen that a material of high dielectric constant 
such as rutile almost nullifies the field due to a small patch of 
charge on its surface. This is to be contrasted with the case of 
a homogeneous sphere with the dielectric constant of rutile 
uniformly charged all over, for which the field just outside is 
unaffected by the dielectric and is 47mo. The two extremes for 
a dielectric, no effect at all from polarization and a reduction 
of field almost to zero (for a large dielectric constant), do occur 
in practice, as well as intermediate cases for which the field can 
be anything between 4nc and 4w¢/(1-+K), depending on the 
extent of the charged area, the shape of the body, and its 
dielectric constant. 
It should be noted that the field just outside a localized charge 
on the surface of an insulator tends to zero as K 
— oo, not to 
= 27¢  

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
11 
the value for a metal, which is 47¢. This is because the charge 
distribution for the insulator is an impossible one for a conductor. 
What happens in the case of a semiconductor will depend on 
how long the charge has been established. 
If it has only been 
there for a time which is short compared with the relaxation 
  
2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
I?l 
J 
& 
4 
| 
o 
| § 
| 
> 
I'E 
—~ 
| 
2.8 
~ 
2 
| 
|5 
S 
oo 
(s 
: 
T 
o 
ol b 
= 
N 
= 
= 
O 
v 
o 
Ul 1 
| 
{2 
- 
«»n 
Q 
- 
o— 
— 
v o— 
L 
< 
wn 
Q 
o, 
7] 
e 
S| 
] 
E| 
3 
= 
= 
3 
< 
v 
5 
<| 
O 
O 
N 
&) 
&) 
= 
( 
r 
O 
1 
{ 
1 
) 
Ll 
V 
‘L 
l 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
K 
Fia. 1.5. Field just outside charged dielectrics. 
time for redistribution of charge, then the semiconductor will 
behave like an insulator; if long enough for a stable configura- 
tion of charge to have formed, then it will behave like a metal, 
with the proviso that complications may arise if the size of the 
body is comparable with the thickness of the ‘surface’ layer 
within which the charge has to be accommodated. 
Discharge from surfaces 
It is a commonplace fact that triboelectrification can give rise 
to charge densities so high that the resulting fields lead to 
olectrical breakdown in the atmosphere; 
in the presence of 
inflammable materials, explosions can be caused in this way. 
Experimental results on the electrical breakdown of gases have 
always been obtained by using conducting electrodes, but we 
are more interested in discharges from insulators. We saw in

12 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
the last section that the field just outside a charged insulator 
depends on the geometry of the situation; we also know that the 
field required to initiate electrical breakdown with conducting 
electrodes depends on the geometry. 
Then, apart from field 
emission, discharge into a gas involves a cumulative build-up 
of lonization in the gap between the electrodes; the extent to 
which this will occur depends on the size of the gap. 
In con- 
sequence, the narrower the gap, the higher the field required 
to cause breakdown. 
Experimental data on the variation of 
sparking potential with gap width for a wide range of gaps have 
been reviewed by Schumann (1923); the general trend of the 
experimental results is shown in Fig. 1.6. 
For a plane parallel 
gap of 2 cm, the breakdown field is 30 kV/cm; for a gap of i mm 
it is about three times as great. A similar increase in breakdown 
field is to be expected whenever the high field is confined to a 
small volume; this will happen if the charge is limited to a small 
area on the surface of a large insulator, or if it is resident on 
a small body such as one particle of a powder. 
Measurements of breakdown potentials are only consistent if 
carried out in the presence of ionizing radiation: the cumulative 
build-up of ionization which is necessary for a significant dis- 
charge to occur requires the presence of at least one stray ion to 
initiate the process of ionization by collision. 
If the high field 
is confined to a small enough volume, stray ions will appear in 
it so infrequently that any discharge into the gas will be delayed 
until the localized charge has spread over the surface to an 
extent which reduces the field to below the breakdown value. 
In this way anomalous high charge densities can survive if they 
are formed on very small areas. Moreover, when a discharge is 
initiated, reference to Fig. 1.6 suggests that the field required 
to produce the build-up of ionization could be several times that 
required for a large patch of charge. For two reasons, there- 
fore, 
charges 
are much more stable when they are highly 
localized. 
In general, when an insulator discharges into the surrounding 
gas, an extremely small current will complete the discharge in 
a small time, and it will often happen that the discharge has a

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
13 
long way to go to reach any neighbouring electrode. 
In conse- 
quence, the appropriate breakdown field will usually be that 
for corona discharge. 
  
{40 
2o\ 
100 
\ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
o 
\ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
0 
\\ 
[ —— \ 
20 
1073 
1072 
107! 
| 
10 
cm 
Fia. 
1.6. 
Breakdown field for sparking between plane parallel electrodes in 
air at 760 mm and 20°C, as a function of width of gap. Data from Schumann 
(1923). 
Maximum charge densities 
The factors which determine the maximum density of charge 
that can remain on 
a surface without discharging into the 
surrounding medium are complicated, and only very limited 
quantitative information is available for them to be assessed. 
They are nevertheless important, because discharge into the 
surrounding medium, as already mentioned, can set a limit to 
the 
charge obtained 
in experiments 
on triboelectrification. 
Though this was recognized by Helmholtz it has frequently been 
forgotten since, making the interpretation of many experiments

14 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
difficult. 
In view of the complexity of the problem only three 
particular cases will be considered here. 
Thin lamina 
We have seen that an extended charge of uniform density o 
on the surface of a dielectric lamina of thickness small compared 
with the extent of the charge gives a field just outside the 
charged surface that is independent of the dielectric constant of 
the lamina and equal to 2mo. 
If the area charged amounts to 
the order of square centimetres, the breakdown field will be 
similar to that for large spherical electrodes and moderate gaps, 
for which it is not much dependent on size of electrode or on 
width of gap and is about 30 kV/ecm for normal atmospheric 
conditions. 
There will always be stray ions present to initiate 
the discharge and the onset of corona is hardly distinguishable 
from spark breakdown. Itshould therefore be a good approxima- 
tion to equate 27o,,, to the above breakdown field which, in 
electrostatic units, is 100 (there being 300 V in an electrostatic 
unit of potential). This gives ¢, = 16 e.s.u./cm?, a value that 
can be used with some confidence for, say, thin polystyrene film, 
but must not be taken as generally applicable. 
Sphere 
The breakdown field of 100 e.s.u./cm will be applicable to a 
sphere of moderate size such as a charged balloon, but the field 
just outside is now 4wo, 80 o, = 8 e.s.u./cm2, 
If, however, the 
sphere is small, for example a particle of dust, the region of high 
field will be sufficiently limited in extent to permit a higher 
charge density. 
The variation of o,,, with radius B can be 
estimated from an empirical formula of Schaffer quoted by 
Schumann (1923), interpreted in the light of his own theory of 
corona breakdown. Schumann showed that the breakdown for 
an isolated sphere is the equivalent of the breakdown for 
an 
isolated (infinite) cylinder of half the radius; Schaffer’s formula 
refers to cylinders of small radius. 
Reinterpreted to apply to 
spheres, it gives a surface field at breakdown of 37R-%3 kV/ecm

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
15 
with R in cm. 
Converting this to e.s.u. and equating to 4w 
.., 
we obtain o, =~ 10B-93 es.u./cm?. 
The dependence on E is 
shown graphically in Fig. 1.7. 
3001 
N 
S 
R 
S 
S 
o 
O 
O max (e.s.u./cmz) 
  0% 
10+ 
107 
102 
107 
| 
R(cm) 
F1a. 1.7. Maximum permanently stable charge 
density on spheres of radius R. 
  
Initial high charge density 
What has just been said about the limiting charge on a sphere 
was based on the breakdown field for corona, but no form of gas 
discharge can startt until at least one ion is present in the region 
of high field. There may well happen to be one, but it seems not 
unlikely that the process which generates the triboelectric charge 
will sometimes sweep the surrounding gas clear of ions in doing 
so. In this event the discharge will have to await the formation 
of an ion pair by ionizing radiation; if the region of high field is 
small the delay may be considerable. We shall therefore consider 
this contingency for the case of a sphere, assuming conditions 
appropriate to an illustrative example. 
A relatively uncontaminated piece of laboratory apparatus 
containing air at s.t.p. is likely to exhibit residual ionization of 
1t A discharge started by a single ion or ion pair may, however, only dis- 
charge 
a limited area of insulator, since the surrounding surface charge will 
be unable to flow in to replenish the charge that has disappeared.

16 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
about 15 ion pairs per cm3/sec at sea-level, of which about 2 ion 
pairs per cm3/sec will be due to cosmic rays. The remainder of 
the ionization will normally be due to very occasional alpha 
particles from traces of radioactive material inevitably present. 
A single alpha particle produces the order of 105 pairs of ions; 
1t follows that the chance of an alpha particle producing ioniza- 
tion in the region of high field near a small area of charge is 
negligible unless the time is very great, so we may neglect the 
alpha particles as being too infrequent to be significant. 
The 
2 ion pairs per cm3/sec from cosmic rays will be assumed to 
appear at random. 
It is unnecessary for an ion to be found in 
the region of high field for the discharge to be initiated; the 
charged sphere can collect ions from a larger volume, and when 
one of them has reached the sensitive region discharge will be 
initiated. 
Let us therefore consider the motion of ions formed between 
the surface of the charged sphere whose radius we shall now call 
R,, and a larger sphere of radius R,. The charge on the sphere 
is 4mo R, and the field at radius r is 47o R}/r2. 
If the mobility 
of the ion is u, its speed will be 4mouR%/r?, and the time taken 
to move from r to r—&r will be 723r/4mouRi. We are interested 
in the average time it takes an ion formed somewhere in the 
sphere of radius R, to reach the sensitive volume, and we shall 
make this time such that during its elapse just one ion of the 
appropriate sign will, on the average, appear in the sphere of 
radius R,. The time so derived will be equal to half the average 
delay 7 before discharge is initiated; 17 comes from waiting for 
the ion to appear, and another 17 from waiting for it to reach 
the sensitive volume. The sensitive volume is comparable with 
the sphere of radius R,, and it is easy to show that in general R, 
will be much greater than R;. As an approximation, therefore, 
we may calculate = from the condition that the ion must move 
to the surface of the sphere R,; to initiate discharge. The time 
from r to R, (where R, > r > R,) is 
r 
r2dr 
 r*—R} 
drouR?  12mouR3 
Ry

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
17 
Since the probability of an ion starting in an element of volume 
4772 8r depends only on the volume, the weighted average time 
  
  
%T 18 
R, 
7-3_ R3 
2 d 
1 
14; 
( 
l)r 
r B 
.Rg—.R% 
127ou RS 
Tzrz ar 
24nop 
RS 
R’ 
If ion pairs appear at a rate of J per cm3/sec, the number 
appearing between R, and R, in time 17 is ¢nJr(R:— R3), which 
we put equal to unity. By eliminating R, we find 
1 
e 27 R1\/(2opd) 
  
The significance of this formula will be apparent if we calculate 
what we shall call 7, 
., as follows. Take u = 1-7 cm/sec per V/cm, 
a mean value for normal atmospheric conditions, and multiply 
by 300 to convert to e.s.u.; assume J = 2 pairs of ions per 
cm3/sec. 
Consider the limit at which charge retention is just 
possible even in the presence of stray ions: this is the condition 
derived in the last section, viz. 
¢ = 10R;%% e.s.u./cm? We find 
Tmax = 1'1 X103 R-98_ dropping the subscript on R. 
Fig. 1.8 
illustrates the result. For any (average) duration after charging 
that is less than = ,., surface densities of charge greater than 
those that are permanently stable are permitted temporarily, 
and the shorter the duration the larger the surface density that 
is permitted. For sufficiently short times, i.e. until a stray ion 
starts corona, the surface density is only limited by field emission, 
which occurs in the region of 10 to 107 V/em. 
Converting to 
e.s.u. we find, for the smaller field, 470, ,,, = 10%/300 e.s.u./cm?, 
whence o, = 270 e.s.u./cm?. 
This is more than thirty times 
the surface density that is stable on a large sphere. For 107 V/em, 
we 
find o, = 27X 103 e.s.u./cm? 
These figures refer 
to 
uniformly charged spheres. 
Localized areas 
We have seen that the field just outside a localized area of 
charge of size much smaller than the dielectric body on which

18 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
it resides is 4wo/(1+ K). 
If the body is so large that the much 
smaller area of charge is still of the order of 1 em?, say, then we 
may take the breakdown field to be 100 e.s.u./em and so obtain 
max =~ 8(1+K) e.s.u./cm?2. 
o 
100 
( 
10 } 
7. . (s€C) 
    
107 
-5 
' -t 
; 
-3 
%2 
l 
-1 
; 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
I 
R (cm) 
F1c. 1.8, Lifetime of temporarily stable high charge densities on 
spheres of radius E. 
The influence of the dielectric constant in determining the 
residual charge density, when the magnitude of a localized charge 
has been limited by discharge into the ambient gas, is clearly 
shown in some experiments of Rose and Ward (1957) on the 
contact charging of metals and insulators under high pres- 
sure with sphere/plane geometry. 
They plotted the residual 
charge density against the dielectric constant of the insulator 
for metal/insulator contact, and the residual charge density 
against the lower of the two dielectric constants for insulator/ 
insulator contact. 
For insulator/insulator contact, they found 
an approximately linear relationship. We would expect propor- 
tionality with 14+ K, not with K, but the difference is unimpor- 
tant. There were some observations that did not conform with 
the rule; they were for materials which charged less than the

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
19 
others. 
For these materials the charging process presumably 
failed to provide the full charge permitted by gas discharge, or 
some of the charge leaked away because of the materials being 
inferior insulators. 
The charge densities for metal/insulator 
charging were somewhat higher than for insulator/insulator 
charging, but also gave a linear relationship with K. The charge 
densities being higher than for insulator/insulator contact is 
surprising, since the presence of the metal doubles the field. 
If a localized patch of charge is smaller than 
1 mm?2, the 
limitation of the region of high field in which cumulative ioniza- 
tion can occur will increase the breakdown field, and higher 
charge densities will be stable. 
Moreover, as in the case of a 
sphere considered in the last section, still higher charge densities 
will be permitted for a short time, until a stray ion appears and 
initiates discharge; these charge densities will again be limited 
only by field emission. 
If, now, localized charge densities of so 
great a magnitude are generated (by a triboelectric process) that 
the field normal to the surface is sufficient to cause field emission, 
then at the edges of the patch of charge there will also be fields 
parallel to the surface of comparable magnitude. Itseems certain 
that such fields would give rise to enhanced surface conductivity, 
permitting the charge to spread rapidly. A very small patch of 
charge, such as would be formed at a contact ‘point’, might 
rapidly spread to ten times its diameter and so bring it into the 
region of stability against corona discharge before the arrival 
of the first stray ion. 
In this way it would be possible for a 
gsurface to become charged all over to the normal breakdown 
limit by a triboelectric process which had only involved contact 
over, say, a hundredth of its area, at a number of contact ‘points’. 
An explanation of this kind seems necessary to account for the 
oase with which some surfaces are found to acquire large charges 
by gentle rubbing. On the other hand, a triboelectric process in 
which the patches of charge formed at contact ‘points’ have 
their 
surface density limited by corona 
will, 
after surface 
conduction has evened out the charge, leave an overall surface 
density that is smaller than the value for corona breakdown by 
a factor equal to the ratio of the contact area to the total area,

20 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
increased 
a little because the charges could, when localized, 
benefit from the region of high field being small. 
It should be 
noted that when a surface has been charged at a multitude of 
‘points’, the field close to the surface varies between a high 
value near the charging ‘points’ and a low value between them, 
but further from the surface, at a distance of a few times the 
average 
distance between 
the 
‘points’, 
the 
wvariations 
are 
smoothed out and the field is the same as if the charge had 
already been evened out by conduction. 
The fact that a localized area of charge on an insulator is more 
stable than a larger area having the same surface density, is to 
be contrasted with a charged conductor. In this case, the ‘points’ 
which gave rise to the patches of high charge density on the 
insulator are just the places from which charge is preferentially 
lost from a conductor as its potential is raised. This is because, 
for the field to be normal to the surface of a conductor every- 
where, the charge density must be highest where there are 
protuberances; the field must therefore be high there, and dis- 
charge is favoured. 
Orders of magnitude 
With many qualifications, surface charges in typical cases of 
triboelectrification may be said to be limited to the order of 
magnitude of 10 e.s.u./cm? by discharge into the atmosphere. 
Such charge densities do arise in practice. 
Charge densities of 
an order of magnitude smaller, however, are quite noticeable. 
Consider, for example, polystyrene film charged to an extent 
which just enables it to stick to a plane conducting surface, 
supporting its own weight. 
If the thickness of the film is b, its 
density p, and g is the acceleration due to gravity, the surface 
density of charge which just enables the film to adhere to a 
conducting surface follows at once from the consideration that 
the charge on the film induces an equal and opposite charge 
on the conductor, and no other charges are required to complete 
the system, the situation being like that in Fig. 
1.3 (b). 
The 
charge on the film is attracted to the induced charge on the 
conductor; the field due to this induced charge is 27o. 
The

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
21 
attractive force on the film per unit area is therefore 2702, since 
an element of charge on the film experiences no normal force 
due to the rest of the charge on the film. We therefore have 
276® = bpg. 
For polystyrene 
p = 1-06 g/cm3, 
g = 981 cm/sec?; 
if we take 
b = 137 mm, we find 
¢ = 0-4 e.s.u./em2 
Charge 
densities of the order of 1 e.s.u./cm? can therefore give rise to 
very noticeable effects. We may say that simple triboelectric 
experiments often give rise to charge densities between 
1 and 
10 e.s.u./cm?2. 
+0 
- 
  
E =4mno 
  
  
  
Potential 
    
  
Fic. 1.9. Change of potential through double layer. 
Double layers 
A double layer consists of two sheets of charge having the same 
charge density but opposite polarities, with a small gap between 
them. Reference to Fig. 1.9 will make it clear that the field & 
18 zero outside the double layer, but 47¢ within it. 
This gives 
rise to a potential step of amount 4nco on passing through the 
double layer, where c is the thickness of the layer. Double layers 
may be formed at surfaces separating two materials, and their 
importance 
for triboelectrification was 
first appreciated by 
Helmholtz (1879). The potential discontinuity between the two 
materials, to which the double layer gives rise, is the contact 
potential. 
If, now, 
a contact potential is set up when two 
surfaces are brought into contact, and the two sheets of charge 
remain with their respective surfaces when these are again 
separated, then the process is a simple mechanism for generating

22 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
static charge by contact followed by separation. This mechanism 
of charging will, in due course, be examined in detail; meanwhile 
we will inquire what is the order of magnitude of such charges 
as it might generate. 
The sodium and chlorine atoms in a rock-salt crystal are all 
ionized, and are packed together in sheets of ions 2-81 A apart, 
each sheet containing ions of both signs staggered with respect 
to neighbouring sheets. This makes it reasonable to assume 3 A 
as the order of magnitude of thickness of a double layer on the 
molecular scale. 
Contact potentials are of the order of volts; 
let us assume a value of 1 V which is 515 e.s.u. We find ¢ =~ 104 
e.s.u./cm?2. 
Primary and secondary charging processes 
A mechanism which contrived to peel off one-half of a double 
layer might produce surface densities of the order of 10¢ e.s.u./ 
cm?, which is a very large effect, but so simple a splitting of the 
double layer is at the same time too crude and too delicate a 
process to be easy to visualize. 
If one-half of the double layer 
consists of electrons, then some of these will leak across to the 
other surface during the separation of the two sheets of charge, 
because electrons can freely penetrate quite considerable poten- 
tial barriers by tunnelling through them; the resulting charge 
would be reduced on that account. 
This essentially quantum- 
mechanical effect will be considered in detail later; meanwhile 
let us reduce the anticipated charge density by an order of 
magnitude, giving us 103 e.s.u./cm?2. 
Charging may also come about, not by splitting a double layer, 
but by charges of one sign only migrating from a layer situated 
on one surface to another surface when in contact with the first. 
If the sheet of charge from which migration occurs consists 
of ions, they are likely to be quite strongly bound to the surface, 
in which case only a proportion will migrate to the other sur- 
face during contact. 
It is probably out of the question for one 
ion per lattice square to cross from one surface to the other 
during contact, but there is no reason immediately apparent 
why one in ten should not do so. Taking 3:18 X 10-1% cm?, the

I 
SURFACE CHARGES 
23 
lattice square for rock-salt, as typical, and remembering that the 
electronic charge is 4:8 X 1010 e.s.u., a transfer of one ion per 
ten lattice squares would give o = 1-5X 10% e.s.u./em?. 
This is 
of the same order of magnitude as the uncorrected estimate for 
the splitting of a double layer. 
The foregoing estimates are neither quantitatively precise nor 
based on clearly specified processes, but they serve to show that 
straightforward mechanisms can be postulated whereby charge 
densities of the order of 102 to 10% e.s.u./cm? might be generated, 
at any rate in the first instance. 
Such processes will be called 
primary charging processes. 
Charge densities within this range 
have been obtained experimentally, but only once (Harper, 
1955). The question now arises of why most experiments give 
charging which is not merely less, but usually two or more orders 
of magnitude less, than that estimated for primary charging 
processes. 
A possibility that must be borne in mind is that primary 
processes generating large charge densities do not, for some 
reason, occur, and that triboelectrification is due to secondary 
processes generating much smaller charge densities. 
If, 
for 
example, contact potentials were unable to give rise to charging 
with insulators, whereas much smaller thermoelectric potentials 
produced by frictional heating could do so, then the charge 
densities generated could easily be orders of magnitude smaller, 
and the process responsible 
for them could well be 
called 
secondary. 
On the other hand 
it has already been pointed out that 
surface densities of the order of 103 to 10* e.s.u./cm? cannot 
remain on extended surfaces 
in the atmosphere because 
of 
corona discharge. 
They can, however, exist for short times as 
very small localized patches, though probably spreading quickly 
because of an enhancement of surface conductivity which must 
occur when fields are so high as to be in the range associated 
with field emission, which is the ultimate limiting factor on 
high charge density. 
It could therefore well be, that when two 
surfaces are rubbed together, primary charging processes operate 
at the contact ‘points’, so generating very high charge densities

24 
SURFACE CHARGES 
I 
in localized patches whose total area is several orders of magni- 
tude smaller than the full area, and that the patches of charge 
immediately spread over a much greater proportion of the full 
area. 
The average charge density, which is what is usually 
observed, would then be of the order of magnitude familiar in 
the laboratory. 
The interpretation 
of many experiments 
is 
rendered difficult through not knowing, even approximately, 
what charge densities were generated, initially, over the areas 
of real contact.

CHAPTER 
11 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
Particulate contamination of surfaces 
ExPERIMENTERS who have needed to work with surfaces com- 
pletely free from dust are all agreed that it is extremely difficult 
to achieve such cleanliness. Precautions that one might suppose 
sufficient 
are 
quite inadequate. 
Dust 
is all-pervading; 
the 
atmosphere and cylinder gases are both highly contaminated. 
In order to remove the finer particles, passage through a bacterio- 
logical filter or thermal precipitator is necessary. 
Dust that 
settles on a surface is often firmly attached, so that it cannot 
be removed by a flowing liquid. Liquids that may be used for 
washing, moreover, almost invariably contain suspended par- 
ticles which may settle on the surface being washed. 
Conduc- 
tivity water usually contains motes; Dorsey (1940, p. 318) gives 
a list of references dealing with them. A method of eliminating 
motes is distillation in vacuo with avoidance of bumping and 
bubbling, but, when the receiver containing the dust-free water 
is shaken, it is almost certain that the water will again become 
contaminated with motes from the receiver, and it is no easy 
matter to avoid this trouble. 
It is virtually certain that any 
surface intended for experiment will be contaminated with 
particulate matter, and extremely likely that some will remain 
even after cleaning. 
The particles can be seen in the electron microscope, the 
reflecting type of instrument being best for this purpose. 
In 
this instrument the electron beam is reflected at a small glancing 
angle from the surface, with the result that long shadows are 
cast. 
The irregularities on the surface are seen rather like the 
bumps on a road at night illuminated by the headlights of an 
oncoming vehicle. 
The effect 
is 
greatly to 
exaggerate 
the 
irregularities; 
a shallow depression looks like a deep pit. 
In 
Plate I(a) 
the foreshortening 
is about 
6:1, 
the transverse 
magnification 1500 
X 
. 
The particles in the picture are around

26 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
IT 
1 © in diameter. They had survived a rigorous cleaning of the 
quartz surface being examined. 
This cleaning started with 
rubbing 
on chamois leather and well-washed cotton 
cloth, 
followed by dusting under the microscope with a camel-hair 
brush to remove visible detritus. 
Washing in 
a sequence of 
organic solvents came next, then treatment in a mixture of 
concentrated nitric and sulphurie acids to oxidize all remaining 
organic material. Finally, conductivity water was dribbled over 
the surface, for twelve hours, in a reflux apparatus. Even after 
all this, there remain the order of a million particles per square 
centimetre of surface. Itisevident from the electron micrograph 
that the dust particles tend to be associated with faults in the 
surface. This effect can be very marked, and was, incidentally, 
responsible for Frank being able to make the first observations 
of growth spirals with the optical microscope, the spirals being 
too shallow to be seen without being ‘developed’ by the dirt. 
When attempts are made to bring two clean optical flats into 
intimate contact, it is found that when the separation is about 
4 u, a seeming repulsion between the flats prevents much closer 
approach: the upper plate appears to ‘float’ on the lower. The 
cause of this remained a mystery until Bastow and Bowden 
(1931) showed that when stringent precautions 
to exclude 
particulate contamination are taken, a ten times closer approach 
becomes possible, the remaining gap 
of about 
0-4 
p being 
accountable to surface irregularities. They concluded that the 
‘floating’ was due to dust particles, but it remains a mystery 
why these particles were so often about 4 p in diameter. 
Kitchener and Prosser (1957), when measuring the van der 
Waals force between two optical flats, encountered the difficulty 
of particulate contamination. The best method of cleaning that 
they could find was to wipe the surface with 
a lens tissue 
moistened with alcohol, followed by a dry lens tissue; the two 
surfaces were then placed together with a fresh sheet of dry 
tissue in between, after which the tissue was withdrawn with 
slight pressure between the plates. Remaining fibres of tissue 
were gently worked out by moving the plates across one another 
under the weight of the upper one. 
It was necessary to keep


I1 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
27 
the plates in contact during insertion into their apparatus and 
its evacuation, 
in order to prevent dust particles from the 
atmosphere from getting on to the cleaned surfaces. Even this 
procedure did not prevent a force of repulsion from appearing 
at about 0-6 u; the upper plate ‘floated’ at about 0-2 u. 
The 
plates were optically flat to within 0-03 u. 
It is not known 
whether the upper plate was ‘floating’ on a few remaining dust 
particles or on protuberances too small to appear during the 
checking of the surfaces by interferometry. 
It would, however, 
seem likely that particulate contamination can be removed, if 
sufficient trouble is taken, with lens tissue, preferably moistened 
with aleohol or ether. 
This supposition 
is confirmed by the 
absence of particulate contamination on the quartz shown in 
Plate I (). Most unfortunately, the use of the method is un- 
acceptable as a final stage in the preparation of surfaces for 
most experiments on triboelectrification, because it leaves them 
contaminated with organic material. When the contaminant 
i1s greasy, it changes profoundly the charging of the surfaces, 
as will appear on p. 211. 
Contact ympeded by particles 
It only requires three particles to prevent two perfectly flat 
surfaces from coming into intimate contact under a very light 
load; 
if, however, 
the surfaces 
are rough, 
the particles 
are 
unlikely to be situated where protuberances will make contact, 
unless there are a lot of particles, and in any case the protuber- 
ances may sweep the particles aside, thus facilitating intimate 
contact. Particulate contamination is clearly less important for 
rougher surfaces. 
If, now, the load is increased, a particle that 
is impeding the contact of a protuberance on one surface with 
the other surface will be more heavily stressed; ultimately, 
either the particle will collapse, or, if it is sufficiently hard, the 
protuberance supporting it will give way. 
In either event, the 
hindrance is likely to be removed and intimate contact will 
ensue. 
These considerations have been followed up quantitatively 
by Williamson, Greenwood, and Harris (1956) in an investigation

28 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
IT 
that was in part theoretical, in part experimental. 
Their work 
concerns 
a special case that is seldom found in triboelectric 
situations, but the general conclusions are of interest. A metal 
probe was lowered into contact with a metal surface on which 
insulating particles had been scattered; when the particles 
impeded intimate contact between the probe and the surface 
this was recognizable because the contact was electrically non- 
conducting. 
The surface was explored by the probe and the 
probability of intimate contact being impeded by the particles 
measured. The probe was an inverted cone of 30° semi-vertical 
angle with 
a hemispherical tip of radius 
2 mm. 
The lower 
surface was plane and could be either smooth or rough. 
If the 
probe had been 
a mathematical cone with no rounded tip, 
contact would have been impeded whenever the axis of the 
cone lay within the projected area of a particle on the surface. 
In reality the tip was not perfectly smooth, and some protuber- 
ance on it made contact either with the plane or with a particle, 
and the particle could prevent intimate contact even though only 
the shoulder of the protuberance rested on the particle. 
The 
area of the plane ‘protected’ by the particle is therefore larger 
than the projected area of the particle. Let the ‘protected’ area 
be s. 
If the area explored is S and the number of particles on 
this area is N, Williamson et al. calculated the probability that 
intimate contact would be prevented for a smooth plane and a 
lightly loaded probe, the area of intimate contact between probe 
and plane required to support the load being small compared 
with s. They compared the result with experiment and found 
a difference which they could explain by allowing for the 
possibility that the approaching probe was not quite steady and 
could sometimes push 
a particle aside. 
The chance of this 
occurring when otherwise the probe would have fouled the 
particle was determined from the width of the swath swept by 
the probe when moved across the surface after scattering a lot 
of particles on it. 
This chance was called L, and it was found 
that L = 0-2 gave a good fit of experimental results with theory. 
The conditions were next broadened to include the case of a 
rough lower plane with protuberances of effective height # above

11 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
29 
the mean plane, the height of the particles being H. The prob- 
ability of intimate contact being prevented for light loads being 
defined as F,, theory and experiment agreed on the formula 
By = (1— L)[1—exp{(1—k/H)(—Ns/S)}]. 
If the load is increased, there is little change from the value P, 
04 
  
    
1-0 
O-8 
O-6} 
O -4} 
0-2L 
OO 
{ 
L 
1 
J 
1073 
102 
107! 
1 
10 
B 
F1c. 2.1 
until the protuberance supporting the load yields to an extent 
which increases the area of direct contact to a size comparable 
with s. Further increase of load then rapidly reduces the value 
of the probability which shortly becomes zero. An example of 
this behaviour, taken from data in the paper of Williamson et al., 
is given in Fig. 2.1. The probability of intimate contact being 
prevented under load is defined as «f. «is plotted as a function 
of B, which is the ratio of the area of true contact to the area 
‘protected’ by the particle. 
In this example the protuberance 
collapsed before the particle could be crushed. 
It is clear, how- 
ever, that if the particle gives way first, the sudden fall of « from 
1 to zero must still occur. 
Signaficance of particulate confamination for triboelectrification 
A wide range of conditions is of interest in examples of tribo- 
electrification that are of practical importance. 
Loading of 
surfaces varies from the light pressure involved in dusting a

30 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
II 
gramophone record to the high pressures required to enable a 
belt on a pulley to transmit many horse-power. Somelaboratory 
experiments have been performed on optically polished surfaces, 
but, at the other extreme, in the electrostatic sorting of minerals, 
charging of the rough surface of crushed ore can be of importance. 
Crushed ore may be heavily contaminated with dust, but the 
conclusions of the last section make it unlikely that the presence 
of the dust will be significant, in view of the roughness of the 
surface of the ore. Nor will dust on a belt transmitting power 
affect the charging, in this case because of the high loading of 
the surface. On the other hand, it is an open question how far 
the charging of a gramophone record when it is dusted is affected 
by the dust one is attempting to remove. 
The effect of dust in preventing the intimate contact of 
optical flats could well explain an observation of Richards (1923) 
which is otherwise quite mysterious. Richards investigated the 
charging of optical flats which were capable of wringing together. 
He found that just bringing the surfaces into contact was 
ineffective; it was necessary then to give one of them a quarter- 
turn. This brought about both wringing and charging. Richards 
was of the opinion that friction was not involved in the tribo- 
electric process, the charging being due to contact. His opinion 
is perfectly reasonable if a few dust particles prevented the 
surfaces from coming into true contact until these particles were 
got rid of by giving one plate the quarter-turn, in a manner 
similar to that found effective by Kitchener and Prosser (p. 26). 
In the case of Richards’s experiment, dust would seem to have 
been supremely important. 
It is instructive to consider the possible implications of the 
particulate contamination 
revealed 
on 
a 
supposedly 
well- 
cleaned surface such as that shown in Plate I (¢). The particles 
appear to be spherical, but airborne dust is often crystalline, in 
which case crystal facets tend to encourage the particles to stick 
to the surfaces. When this happens, the area of true contact, 
though 
a good deal smaller than the projected area of the 
particles, will nevertheless be comparable with it. We have seen 
that primary charging processes can give rise to charge densities

IT 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
31 
of up to 
10? e.s.u./cm? over these areas of contact. 
It was 
estimated that the particles in Plate I (a#) were around } p in 
diameter, and that there were something like 10¢ particles/cm?2. 
Accepting these figures for a similar polyhedral particle with 
a facet one-fifth the particle’s projected area would imply con- 
tact charging amounting to 1 e.s.u./cm? when averaged over the 
surface. 
This is as much as has been recorded in some experi- 
ments on the charging of surfaces. 
It follows that particulate 
contamination is much to be feared in triboelectric experiments. 
It may also play an important part in some instances of industrial 
charging. 
It will appear in Chapter X that certain insulators—the 
electrophobic insulators—are very reluctant to charge, though, 
if they become charged, they generally retain their charge for 
a long time, because of high surface and volume resistivity. 
Particulate contamination may be of special importance for the 
charging of these insulators, permitting it to occur when other- 
wise it would not. The possibility is rendered additionally likely 
because, when good insulators 
do become charged, 
dust 
is 
copiously collected on their surfaces. 
Shaw (1917) found that gentle and vigorous rubbing could give 
rise to opposite signs of charging. This probably seldom has any- 
thing to do with particulate contamination, but it is worth re- 
membering that any significance dust may have when rubbing is 
light will almost certainly disappear when the rubbing is vigorous. 
Unless two surfaces are extremely smooth, asperities on them 
can be knocked off, or adhere to the opposing surface and then 
be torn off, when the surfaces are rubbed hard together. 
The 
process of wear can give rise to particulate contamination of the 
surfaces. 
It does not seem likely, however, that this will be 
important for triboelectric charging, though it should be men- 
tioned that, in some very early work in 1902, Héséhust claimed 
that when rubbing causes extensive abrasion the fragments 
detached from the surface are always negatively charged with 
respect to the surface from which they have come. 
Such a 
generalization, one would think, can hardly be universally valid. 
1 H. A. I'esexycs.

32 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
11 
Contact topography 
In the absence of particulate contamination, two surfaces 
brought together will make first contact at points which are 
above the mean plane of one or other surface. The protuberances 
which touch the opposing surface may be the crests of relatively 
shallow undulations of considerable extent, or may be sharp 
asperities. In the latter case, it is quite possible that the asperi- 
ties will not be typical of the surface as a whole. 
The only way in which it is feasible to obtain a surface which 
is molecularly smooth is by cleaving a crystal. Tolansky (1948), 
using the method of multiple-beam interferometry, found that 
certain varieties of muscovite (mica) when skilfully cleaved, gave 
surfaces which were smooth to 10 A over areas of the order of 
square centimetres. Where not smooth the surface was stepped 
in multiples of 10 A, this being half the lattice spacing perpen- 
dicular to the (001) cleavage plane. It appears (Courtney-Pratt, 
1950) that there are two cleavage planes through each unit cell. 
It is to be expected that any unit cell will cleave precisely along 
the appropriate plane, in which case the mica must have been 
smooth, not merely to 10 A, but absolutely smooth apart from 
the corrugations due to molecular structure. The surface would 
not, 
of course, be flai: some elastic distortion from external 
stresses, and probably also from internal locked-up stresses, is 
inevitable. 
Freshly cleaved mica surfaces, unfortunately, are 
not of much use for triboelectric experiments, for two reasons. 
The first is the difficulty of finding a similarly smooth opposing 
surface that will not adhere so strongly to the mica that, on 
separating them, some of the mica is torn off; the second is the 
freedom with which such surfaces become contaminated (see 
p. 82). 
According to Tolansky (loc. cit.), the best optical flats of glass 
are certainly both smooth and flat to at least 20 A over appre- 
ciable areas and are probably even better than that; they are at 
any rate free from asperities. 
Optical flats (though not of this 
quality) have been used in charging experiments which will be 
described later (p. 56). 
Highly polished surfaces, free from asperities, are probably

II 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
33 
not so very uncommon among plastics, and Tolansky has found 
that fire-polished glass 
is free from surface structure. 
Any 
surface on which the protuberances are mere undulations will 
make contact with another similar surface in such a way that 
smoothly rounded contours come together. 
Slight deformation 
of these contours, such as can come about elastically, is sufficient 
to provide load-bearing areas of considerable extent. 
The two 
surfaces can then support an appreciable normal load by deform- 
ing elastically, and return to their original state after removal 
of the load. 
If, on the other hand, asperities are scattered over 
the surfaces, then groups of these asperities, situated on the 
crests of the undulations, will make contact with the opposing 
surface, the asperities being crushed or flattened by plastic 
deformation as the surface takes the load. When the load is 
removed, the surface does not return to its original state. 
This view of the contact of surfaces was first shown to be 
correct by Dyson and Hirst (1954). They used a phase-contrast 
optical microscope to make the areas of true contact visible to 
the eye. The specimen under investigation was placed against 
the metallized surface of a glass flat, and the microscope focused 
on the glass/metal boundary, observing through the glass. 
On 
applying pressure between the surfaces, the protuberances on 
the test specimen distorted the metallized glass at the areas of 
true contact (strictly over a slightly greater area). By suitably 
adjusting the microscope, these areas showed up light on a dark 
field, thus enabling their disposition to be photographed. 
True contact with a lapped specimen of silver steel was con- 
fined to small areas a few p in size. There was a great number 
of these, scattered at random over the surface. 
A similar ground specimen made true contact along the grind- 
ing ridges, within isolated areas of general contact. Increasing 
the load for not too large loads resulted in an increase in size of 
the general areas, and decreasing the load gave 
a reversible 
decrease in size: the general areas were suffering elastic deforma- 
tion. 
Beyond a certain load, however, the number of contact 
‘points’ within the general areas also increased, and this was not 
reversible: asperities were being deformed plastically.

34 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
1T 
The appearance of a polished specimen is shown in Plate I1(a). 
Again there are general areas of considerable size within which 
very small areas of true contact are clustered ; the contact ‘points’ 
are small and scattered throughout the areas of general contact. 
Plate 
I1I (b) shows another polished specimen with 
an even 
higher polish. The areas of true contact tend to be fused together 
and fill up a large proportion of the general area. Dyson and 
Hirst found that with a sufficiently high degree of polish the 
load spread out over the areas of general contact which thus 
became areas of true contact; these were difficult to see because 
the strain was small in consequence of the spread of the load. 
As far as could be estimated, when the load was supported 
on asperities, as in the case of the ground specimens, their total 
area agreed with the assumption that they were all at the point 
of yielding under compressive stress. When the load was carried 
by general areas stressed over most of the area, their size agreed 
with what would be expected from elastic theory. 
Contact of asperities 
We have seen that two surfaces which are neither very smooth 
nor very rough will make contact within regions where the crests 
of undulations come together, but that true contact will actually 
be between asperities within these regions on the one surface and 
(most probably) a relatively smooth part of the opposing surface. 
At first contact an asperity might well be represented mathe- 
matically by the approximation of a cone with its tip in contact 
with a plane, but as soon as there is any appreciable pressure 
between the contacting surfaces we expect the asperitiesinvolved 
to give way by plastic deformation, forming small areas of true 
contact. Molecular forces will then give rise to some degree of 
adhesion. 
If the surfaces are covered with a film of contamina- 
tion, so that direct contact between them is prevented, then 
after separation they may regain their original condition apart 
from the flattening of the tips of some of the asperities. 
If, 
however, the surfaces are clean, or the contaminant is swept 
away from the contacting asperities during plastic flow, then 
direct contact may follow and lead to sticking; in the case of

PLATE II 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
        
  
      
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
    
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
        
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
    
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
         
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
        
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
       
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
    
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
      
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1Croscopy. 
contrast 
m 
ible by phase- 
18 
of true contact rendered 
v 
Areas 
a and b 
s 
N 
N B9 
3m.cw 
__.Am“.m 
N 
8 
G 
. o8 
o 
2 
~— 
eug 
5<% 
g 
Pa..m 
g. 
g 
<10 .9 
Ao 
L 
g % 
ﬁ.r...,S 
~ &5 
S.l.l 
oM g 
57T & 
© 5T 
ek 
omuw 
Q, 
MDP 
h(w 
mg/: 
o~ 
K 
20N 
S 
m__w 
o 
1. 
3 8% 
= 
o 
@ 
& o 
$ 2 
5 
. 
@ & 
28~ 
x.m.m 
g3 % 
s Ag 
S 
by 
cmg 
FH 
S 
=N 
1952)


B 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
35 
otal/metal contact this will be due to localized cold welding. 
It can, however, happen that the adhesion of asperities is not 
mnnifest during the separation of the surfaces because during 
their separation the release of elastic stresses associated with the 
tloformation of the general region to which the asperities belong 
results in forces appearing which break the localized welds one 
by one, so that sticking does not occur. When the welds break, 
this may not be at the original interface; with dissimilar metals 
ite will generally be in the weaker metal. 
We must therefore 
oxpect that, when contact is made by asperities, minute quanti- 
Lios of material will be transferred from one surface to the other. 
'The occurrence of this transference was demonstrated by 
Rabinowicz 
(1952), by making one surface radioactive and 
showing up the radioactivity transferred to the other surface, 
by autoradiography. The surfaces were lapped and cleaned with 
fine carborundum paper and a sphere pressed normally against 
n plane with sufficient force to leave an indentation. The loading 
wis therefore very large by triboelectric standards. There was 
moro transfer of material with softer metals than with harder 
ones, and the amount transferred was proportional to the load 
applied in the lower region of the range of loads used. 
It is 
pormissible to extrapolate this linear relationship down to the 
origin, if it remains true down to the lightest loads that the load 
is supported by asperities at the point of yielding, which 
is 
likoly from what has already been said. 
Plate 11 (¢) shows the 
transfer obtained when a copper sphere was pressed normally 
against a copper plane with a force of 10 kg weight, leaving an 
indontation 31 mm in diameter. About 20 fragments have been 
transferred, the total weight of material, estimated from its 
radioactivity, being 6 X 10-1° g. This implies that the individual 
fragments, if spherical, were about 2 u in diameter. They must 
have been copper because there was insufficient oxide available 
for them to have been copper oxide. 
Assuming linearity of 
transfer with load, the transfer amounted to 6 X 10-17 g/dyn for 
copper/copper. There was not a lot of influence on the magnitude 
of the transfer by the degree of roughness of the surfaces, and, 
though somewhat more material was transferred at the first

36 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
II 
contact than at subsequent ones, the difference did not amount 
to much. 
Contact of undulations 
We have seen that with sufficiently light contact between 
polished surfaces, the load is carried by the elastic deformation 
of undulations, and thisis likely to be important for triboelectrifi- 
cation. An undulation has a smoothly rounded contour; when 
contact is just being made, there will be reasonably well-defined 
radii of curvature of the two surfaces at the point of contact. 
In general the two principal radii of curvature will be different; 
if they were the same, it would be justifiable to treat the elastic 
deformation for sufficiently light loads as being equivalent to 
the deformation of elastic spheres in contact, since the elastic 
stresses are mainly confined to a region just round the contact 
point. The same treatment should be a tolerably good approxi- 
mation when the principal radii of curvature are different; in 
any case it is the best available. The contact of undulations will 
therefore be represented mathematically by the elastic contact 
of spheres. 
The problem of the deformation of elastic spheres under a 
force acting along the line of centres was first solved by Hertz 
(1882); the solution for the general case of spheres with different 
elastic constants and different radii of curvature is to be found 
in Prescott (1924), but there is a superfluous = in his formula 
which is presumably a misprint. 
Correcting this, and changing 
the notation, the formula becomes: 
3F( 
_V1 
]. 
]. 
V2 
o 
+ Y, ) 2R1+2R2° 
R, and R, are the radii of the spheres, Y, and ¥, their Young’s 
moduli, and v, and v, the values of Poisson’s ratio; r is the radius 
of the circle of contact under a force F. All the quantities must 
be measured in the same system of compatible units, for example, 
c.g.s. units. 
Poisson’s ratio does not vary much among a wide range of 
materials; it is therefore customary to simplify the formula by 
 

IX 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
37 
taking v = 0-3, which gives 
0-341F(1 
1 
1 
1 
S 
n R e 
0-683 
R, R, F( 1 
1) 
= 
— 
4. 
2.1 
RtR 
LT, 
- 
For the case of a sphere in contact with a plane, 
O-341F(1 
1) 1 
or 
73   
s 
\7. 
Y~ 
3m’ 
L 
LFR(L 
13 
or 
r=1 1{—2-—(1—,14—?2)} 
: 
(2.2) 
These formulae will be required later. 
Terminology 
We have seen that the contact of surfaces is a rather complex 
affair; the word confact has needed to be qualified by such 
adjectives as true, tmpeded, and intimate. 
In order to prevent 
confusion, 
it seems desirable to attach a precise meaning to 
common words such as these when used in the context of sur- 
faces in contact. 
The implications and distinctions intended 
throughout this book will therefore now be summarized. 
When considering surface topography, it is unnecessary to 
give explicit recognition to the fact that real surfaces have a 
molecular structure; this can be assigned to the physics of the 
phenomena that occur during contact. 
For the same reason, 
the existence of dislocations in a crystal lattice can be ignored 
in the present context. With this justification a real solid can 
be presumed to have 
a sharp boundary—mathematically 
a 
discontinuity. Hence one may speak of a perfect cleavage face 
as a mathematical plane if it is flat, as a curved mathematical 
surface if it is not. 
Since, however, imperfections of structure 
are normally accompanied by imperfections of shape, the per- 
fection of material surfaces 
is nearly always marred by the 
existence of protuberances and depressions. 
It is convenient to 
extend the meaning of flat to include the case in which the 
protuberances and depressions average out to give 
a mean

38 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
11 
surface which is a mathematical plane, and similarly for curved 
surfaces. 
Protuberances may be either gently undulating at the one 
extreme, or steep and jagged at the other; they are referred to 
as crests 
of undulations 
or asperilies, respectively. 
When 
a 
surface is characterized by undulations it may appropriately 
be called smooth, when characterized by asperities, then rough. 
This permits one to speak of a flat surface that is nevertheless 
rough and a curved surface that is smooth. 
Surfaces are said to be in apparent contact when some relatively 
crude method of observation leads to the conclusion that they 
are in contact but a more refined method proves that they are 
rnot. Parts of the surface that are in apparent contact will have 
mechanical actions and reactions between the surfaces associated 
with them: these parts are said to be in real contact. 
If, however, 
the mechanical forces are transferred from the one surface to the 
other through the intermediary of an extraneous body because 
of the presence of particulate contamination, then we may speak 
of impeded contact, in contradistinction to intemate contact. 
1t is 
also worth distinguishing between two kinds of intimate contact. 
Close contact occurs when the mechanical force is transmitted by 
long-range molecular forces, so that there is a finite gap between 
the surfaces. Van der Waals forces are appreciable with a gap 
as great as 
1 u. 
Much smaller gaps are of interest in tribo- 
electrification, the transfer of electrons by quantum-mechanical 
tunnel effect becoming significant for gaps less than the order 
of 10 A. When the mechanical force between the surfaces is 
considerable, and transmitted by short-range molecular forces, 
the intimate contact is {rue contact. 
A final distinction is to be made between two forms of true 
contact. 
True contact involves molecular proximity to the 
extent that short-range repulsive forces are involved; these 
will often be between surface films of composition different 
from the substrate. The contact is nevertheless molecular contact 
and we shall call it such in this case. 
If the surface films are 
non-existent, or swept aside, we shall speak of direct contact. 
As mentioned on p. 33, ‘points’ of true contact tend to be

II 
CONTACT OF SURFACES 
39 
concentrated in areas of general contact. 
In the case of polished 
surfaces, for which areas of general contact tend to be well filled 
with areas of true contact, it should be remembered that these 
are likely to be accompanied by considerable areas of close 
contact.

CHAPTER 111 
SLIDING 
Tangential movement 
Pursvuing the ideas of the last chapter on the nature of the 
areas of real contact between surfaces pressed together under 
normal loading, to the case of tangential loading under pressure, 
increasing until the tangential force causes sliding, it becomes 
essential to allow for the behaviour of surface films. These may 
be unimportant if contact is with tips of asperities deformed 
by plastic flow so that surface films are broken up and pushed 
aside giving direct contact between the materials underlying 
the surfaces, but when contact is between undulations, surface 
films may survive tangential movement and charging effects 
be modified accordingly. 
Surface films tend to reduce friction, 
to prevent localized cold welding (of metal surfaces), and to 
reduce the transfer of material from one surface to the other: 
they behave, in short, as lubricants. These statements require 
substantiating. 
The direct contact of metals leads to cold welding; the evident 
fact that this does not occur under workshop conditions must be 
attributed to the presence of contaminating surface films, usually 
mainly oxide. When the oxide film is removed by heating in 
vacuo, Bowden and Young (1949) have shown that, with nickel, 
iron, and platinum, contact leads to seizure. Welds are formed 
over the areas of true contact which have the bulk strength of 
the metal. 
A monomolecular layer of adsorbed gas does not 
prevent the welding. Under these conditions, enormous values 
of the coefficient of friction, of as much as 100 or more, are found 
when the geometry of the contact permits something less than 
complete seizure. Without degassing, the coefficients of friction 
would be between 1 and 3. Since Bowden and Tabor (1954, 1964) 
have shown that the tangential force of friction between metals 
is usually to be accounted for by the shearing of microwelds, it 
follows that the degassed surfaces must have been in direct

I1I 
SLIDING 
41 
contact over an area of the order of fifty times as great as when 
contaminated. Even if the load is carried entirely by asperities 
at the point of yielding when the surfaces are contaminated, all 
but a fiftieth of it must have been supported elastically when 
they were not. 
It follows that welding occurs under elastic 
loading when the surfaces are absolutely clean. Conversely, the 
presence of an oxide film must prevent welding, unless the film 
is broken up and pushed aside. 
The breakdown of the oxide film under tangential loading has 
been followed in detail by Cocks (1952) with an electrical method 
first used by Holm (1958) in 1938, and Bowden and Tabor (1939); 
also by Courtney-Pratt and Eisner (1957). Two cylinders of the 
same radius and identical elastic constants when pressed nor- 
mally together with their axes at right angles have a contact 
area which is circular and whose diameter is the same as for 
spheres of the same material and the same radius. If the crossed 
rods are of metal and the surfaces are oxidized, then an electric 
current passing between the rods will be constricted at the 
junction and largely confined to the spots within the area of 
true contact where the oxide is missing and the junction entirely 
metallic. Owing to the constriction of the current, the resistance 
of the junction is considerable and not difficult to measure. 
From its value one can calculate the area of cross-section of the 
constriction. Cocks found that with silver and gold the constric- 
tion resistances agreed with the assumption that the current 
was carried over the entire area of contact predicted by elastic 
theory: any surface film of oxide formed on these metals is so 
thin 
as 
to be electrically conducting. 
With electropolished 
cylinders of other metals resistances of the order of 100 times 
as great were found, and the films causing the high resistances 
were stable under normal loading if all vibration was carefully 
excluded. The effect of a slowly increasing tangential force was 
then investigated, the resistance of the junction and the displace- 
ment of one rod relative to the other being simultaneously 
observed, the latter with an optical lever. At first the resistance 
was unaffected, but at a certain critical value of the tangential 
force, much less than the usual force of static friction, the rod

42 
SLIDING 
I1I 
began to slip and the resistance decreased by more than a factor 
of 10. After a tangential movement of the order of a few microns 
the resistance became still lower but the force of friction increased 
greatly. 
The initial slip was assumed to be oxide sliding on 
oxide, with a low coefficient of friction, but with the oxide layer 
rapidly breaking up. The final slip would then be controlled by 
the shearing of microwelds formed where the metal had been 
laid bare of oxide, the coefficient of friction being that usually 
measured. This explanation was confirmed by the observation 
that such surface damage as could be seen under the microscope 
was slight during the initial slip but much larger when the 
coefficient of friction had increased. These experiments, carried 
out on copper and stainless steel, show clearly that normal 
loading of a surface is insufficient to break up the protective 
oxide layer, some sliding being necessary for this to occur, though 
only very slight. 
In the experiment just described the normal component of 
loading was considerable, high enough to break up the oxide 
film under sliding conditions. 
With sufficiently small loading 
this may not occur. What happens depends on the nature of the 
metals, as was shown by Whitehead (1950) in experiments on 
continuoussliding. Hisresults for copper/copper and aluminium/ 
steel are plotted in Fig. 3.1, the measured coefficient of friction 
being plotted against normal load (on a logarithmic scale). The 
way the curve for copper/copper should be interpreted is indi- 
cated by comparing the micrograph of surface damage shown 
in Plate I1I (a) for heavy loading (16 g), with that in Plate III (b) 
for light loading (0-15 g). 
In each case the slider traversed the 
surface once. 
The coefficient of friction in the case of heavy 
loading was 1-5, in the other case 0-5. 
It is seen that the high 
coefficient of friction is associated with extensive surface damage : 
it is evident that the oxide layer has been broken up and metal 
plucked out from underneath. 
This does not occur with light 
loading: the slight damage visible is characteristic of the oxide. 
Whitehead therefore interpreted the curve for copper/copper in 
Fig. 3.1 as showing a progressive reduction in the number of 
metallic microwelds formed as the load decreases, the lowest

PLATE III 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
        
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
        
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
        
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
              
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
        
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
          
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
            
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                        
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
            
        
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                
  
  
                        
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
          
    
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
Photomicrographs of damage due to copper sliding on copper. Magnification x 820. 
@. Under heavy loading. 
b. With light loading (Bowden and Tabor, 1954). 
c¢. Electron 
micrograph 
of damage due 
to 
steel sliding on aluminium under 
light 
loading. 
Shadowed oxide replica. Magnification X 8500 (Bowden and Tabor, 1954)


III 
SLIDING 
43 
coefficient of friction being that for oxide sliding on oxide, with 
higher values caused by exposure of metal and consequent 
formation and subsequent shearing of microwelds. 
The curve 
for steel/aluminium continues the high value of the coefficient 
  
  
    
2:0r 
g -5 
E 
- 
X__ X 
:: 
X 
X 
°1-0r 
o 
(D] 
k3 = 
Gt 80.5.- 
O 
@) 
00 
1 
1 
| 
! 
1 
R 
1072 
10! 
I 
10 
10? 
103 
104 
Load (g) 
Fi1c. 3.1. 
Friction as a function of load (on a logarithmic scale). 
copper/copper —O—QO— 
aluminium/steel — X — X — 
of friction characteristic of metallic contact down to the lightest 
loads; it follows that, in this case, the oxide layer is so easily 
broken up that it occurs throughout the range of observations. 
The plucking out of metal from a track formed under light load- 
ing (0-34 g) of steel on aluminium is evident from the electron 
micrograph shown in Plate III (¢). The reasons for the difference 
in behaviour between copper and aluminium are discussed by 
Bowden and Tabor (1954). 
We see that an oxide layer acts like a lubricant, unless it is 
broken uwp. When it is broken up, more powerful adhesive forces 
come into play, between the metal substrates, and direct contact 
of exposed metal gives rise to microwelding. 
The shearing of 
these microwelds accounts for the magnitude of the coefficient 
of friction (Bowden and Tabor, 1954), and the fact that rupture 
is more likely to occur in the weaker metal results in some of this 
metal being transferred to the other surface. 
It may be recalled

44 
SLIDING 
IIX 
that, in the experiments 
of Rabinowicz 
(p. 
35) on metallic 
transfer during normal loading, the material transferred was not 
oxide, but metal: he must have been observing the first step in 
the birth of metallic friction under heavy loading—the formation 
of microwelds. 
In conformity with the idea that sliding breaks 
up an oxide layer, so exposing more substrate and permitting 
increased weld formation, he found that sliding can give rise to 
as much as 5000 times the material transfer (per unit area of 
track) as the same purely static loading. 
The phenomenon of material transfer between surfaces when 
these are brought into contact and separated, or slid over each 
other, is a possible basis for charge transfer, since the particles 
of matter that are transported will be charged with respect to 
the rest of the surface if they come from asperities that are not 
typical of the surface as a whole. 
The extent to which this 
phenomenon may contribute to contact and frictional electrifica- 
tion will be discussed in the next chapter. 
Rolling 
When rolling occurs, there would be no slip between the 
surfaces if these were undeformed. But even in free rolling, such 
as takes place in a ball-race, the surfaces are loaded normally at 
the ‘point’ of contact and deformation does occur. In principle 
this deformation always involves finite slip somewhere within 
the area of contact, but Bowden and Tabor (1964) have shown 
that the extent of the slip is negligible and its consequences for 
friction trivial. 
The conclusion still holds when the rolling is 
associated with tractive effort and the loading is partly normal 
and partly tangential, such as between the driving wheel of a 
railway engine and the rail—unless, of course, the pure rolling 
motion gives way to one involving some sliding. 
As rolling progresses the contact area moves, so that material 
along the track suffers deformation followed by relaxation, new 
material being deformed as the old is relaxed. 
KEnergy that is 
stored during the deformation is released during the relaxation, 
except for elastic hysteresis. The energy that is lost in hysteresis 
accounts for the work of rolling friction, as shown by Bowden

I11 
SLIDING 
45 
and Tabor. The force of rolling friction is, typically, three orders 
of magnitude smaller than the force of sliding friction with the 
same loading. 
In the case of metals, the energy consumed in sliding friction 
is in general dissipated in the breaking of microwelds. The welds 
are broken in shear, but the tensile strength is of the same order 
of magnitude as the shear strength, so welds broken in tension 
during rolling would require comparable forces. 
These forces 
would have to be supplied from the energy of the rolling body, 
either by directly impeding its motion or indirectly from the 
elastic recovery of the deformed contact area, which would be 
a kind of elastic hysteresis. In either event, microweld formation 
comparable with that found during sliding would imply 
a 
coefficient of friction comparable with that for sliding. Since the 
coefficient of rolling friction is several orders of magnitude less 
than that for sliding friction, microweld formation during rolling 
must be very small indeed. 
This means that such slip as may 
occur during rolling must be so small that break-up of the oxide 
layer does not occur, break-up that Cocks found associated with 
the earliest beginning of slip. Rolling is therefore nothing more 
than a continuous process in which the contact surfaces are 
brought together under normal pressure 
(this refers to free 
rolling) and then separated, with the contact area steadily 
changing. 
An observation of Rabinowicz leads one to expect 
less transfer of material than would be obtained by applying the 
corresponding static load. He found that impact was less effec- 
tive in giving rise to transfer than continued static loading, and 
attributed the greater transfer in the latter case to the longer 
duration of contact allowing time for the microwelds to grow. 
One may presume that this creep in growth extends the weld 
from the area of direct contact into the surrounding area of close 
contact. Since rolling resembles impact in that contact is imme- 
diately broken after being made, 
it 
is to be expected that 
material transfer from rolling will be less than from continuing 
contact. 
Rolling contact has been used in an important series of experi- 
ments which will be described in Chapter XIV.

46 
SLIDING 
I1I 
The nature of sliding 
Typical sliding of metal surfaces involves the breaking up of 
the oxide 
(more generally tarnish) layer 
at 
‘points’ where 
metallic welds form, are broken, and give way to the same 
process elsewhere. The coefficient of friction in the typical case 
can be explained on the assumption that the normal load on the 
surfaces is supported by the material of the microwelds, though 
the oxide layer must presumably support some of the load in 
the neighbourhood of the microwelds, since it is steadily being 
broken up in these areas. 
In Fig. 3.1 the coefficient of friction 
for aluminium/steel conforms with this picture throughout the 
full range of loading. The curve for copper/copper conforms for 
high loads. 
As the load is reduced, proportionally less is sup- 
ported by the metallic contacts and therefore more by the oxide 
layer; also proportionally less oxide is broken up. We know this, 
because where 
it does break up, metallic welds are formed. 
Where the contact is between oxide and oxide the junction 
cannot have a strength comparable with that of a metallic weld, 
because the coefficient of friction for oxide/oxide sliding is much 
less and the surface damage is slight. 
It is doubtful if such 
junctions should be thought of as being in any way like welds. 
The fact that such junctions can be quite easily separated again 
is demonstrated by an observation of Holm (loc. cit., p. 35) to 
the effect that the contact area that is deformed elastically may 
be up to fifty times the area that could support the load at the 
point of yielding. 
A contact as extensive as this cannot have 
formed a strong junction because this would lead to near seizure, 
which it did not do. 
Thus we come to visualize a form of sliding in which one 
surface slips over the other without there being any essential 
damage, in contrast with the other form in which the contact 
‘points’ 
are 
so adherent that sliding cannot occur without 
damage over a large part of the area of true contact. 
Sliding 
in which relative movement with 
elastic deformation 
and 
recovery takes place over nearly the whole of the contact area 
closely resembles rolling, and from the standpoint of tribo- 
electrification is equivalent to bringing a succession of small

III 
SLIDING 
47 
areas into contact and then separating them, at any rate to a 
first approximation. 
This is one extreme form of sliding. The 
other extreme is when the small areas of contact are successively 
joined together but immediately ruptured. 
The first extreme 
may be called smooth sliding, the second adherent sliding. 
It is 
unlikely that either extreme can be attained in practice, but the 
curve for copper/copper in Fig. 3.1 almost certainly represents 
a change from predominantly smooth sliding to predominantly 
adherent sliding. 
We have followed a line of argument which leads to a distinc- 
tion between two kinds of sliding—smooth sliding and adherent 
sliding. 
It is clear that adherent sliding will be promoted by 
relatively heavy pressure between rough surfaces, particularly 
if these are but little contaminated; contact will be at asperities 
which can yield plastically to form adherent junctions, so giving 
rise to considerable damage and transfer of material. The con- 
trary circumstances will favour smooth sliding. Smooth surfaces 
with undulating contours, especially if polished, will, as shown 
by Dyson and Hirst (1954), deform elastically if the loading is 
not too great; they will slide over each other without appreciable 
damage or transfer of material, particularly if contaminated by 
surface layers which can act like a lubricant. 
The mechanism of adherent sliding presents quite different 
possibilities for electric charge transference from those presented 
by smooth sliding. We shall consider these possibilities in the 
next chapter. 
Vibration 
When thinking of triboelectrification, it is natural to think of 
insulators, but there are circumstances, as we shall see later, in 
which metal to metal contact gives rise to comparable, or even 
greater, 
charging, 
in particular with powders. 
When both 
sliding surfaces are metallic, even though they are tarnished, 
the high electrical conductivity continually erases the effect of 
past charging, and the charge finally acquired is that associated 
with the last moment of separation of the surfaces. 
It will turn 
out that this consideration is crucial for an understanding of the

48 
SLIDING 
111 
triboelectric charging 
of conductors. 
The 
charging 
will 
be 
called separation charging. 
It does matter, however, whether the 
preceding sliding has been adherent sliding or smooth sliding, 
since this will determine the nature of the contact that is broken. 
Sliding eliminated 
  
  
0] 
Q = 
:1-) 
L 
{ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
| 
J 
=25 
-20 
IS 
-10 
- 
O 
+5 
+10 
<15 
o 
S 
G 
S 
> 
Sliding encouraged 
g 
=) o 
2 
o8 A 
L 
7] 
17.753 HIVZ Vl.l777£}1 
A4 
| 
-25 
=20 
-I5 
-10 
-5 
0 
+5 
+10 
 +I5 
Observed charge (arbitrary units) 
Fic. 3.2 
That this is so 
is demonstrated by the experimental results 
shown in Fig. 3.2 (Harper, 1951). The measurements were made 
with a piece of apparatus which could be arranged either to 
encourage sliding at the breaking of contact, or to minimize it, 
the contact being between metal spheres. The frequency of 
occurrence of a charge of given magnitude is plotted against 
its magnitude, as a histogram, for both cases. 
With sliding 
encouraged, haphazard charging was obtained, even the sign of 
the charge being uncertain. This agrees with the magnitude of 
the charge depending on precisely what is happening at the 
contact ‘point’ when contact is finally broken. 
The fact that 
the measurements in the other set all lie close to the mean value 
shows that whatever was leading to scatter in the first set of 
observations had about been eliminated in the second. 
The 
breaking of contact then led to consistent charging; either there 
was no sliding, or what little there was must have been smooth 
sliding, as in the first few microns of lateral displacement in 
Cocks’s experiments. 
Significant sliding was absent. 
Fig. 3.2 
makes it clear that it is of major importance whether or not

I1I 
SLIDING 
49 
sliding has occurred in a given experiment, and the problem of 
what constitutes significant sliding is more than just an academic 
question. 
In so far as it is possible to generalize from Cocks’s 
experiments, we may say that sliding may amount to the order 
of a micron before it becomes significant for triboelectrification. 
This is a quite considerable relative movement. 
The question of when sliding is large enough to be significant 
is bound up with the problem of vibration. Itiswell known that 
the electrical resistance of a metal/metal contact may be greatly 
reduced when the contact is subjected to vibration. Itis possible 
that the effect of vibration is to enable the surface to move into 
a position which permits closer mating with true contact over 
a larger area, but with a sufficiently high normal loading both 
the elimination of particulate contamination which may have 
been impeding contact, and the breaking up of oxide layers, 
must play an important part. 
Rabinowicz (1952) found that 
material transfer could be greater by two orders of magnitude 
when vibration was present. 
The author is not aware of any experiments in which the effect 
of vibration on contact charging has been investigated.

CHAPTER IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
THE supposition reached in the last chapter that there are two 
basic forms of rubbing suggests that there will be two kinds of 
triboelectric process to correspond, though, admittedly, 
the 
supporting evidence for two kinds of rubbing derives mainly 
from experiments on metal/metal contact. 
The reality of two 
very different charging processes is, however, confirmed by two 
simple observations. 
The first observation is that an insulator 
can be charged by mere contact with liquid mercury : in this case 
there is no possibility of friction having been involved. 
The 
second observation 
is that two similar pieces 
of insulating 
material will charge each other when rubbed together, if the 
rubbing process is asymmetric, the sign of charge being corre- 
lated with the nature of the rubbing experienced by the piece 
of material in question. 
The only asymmetry present here 
which can account for positive and negative charging is the 
difference between the effects of friction on the two surfaces. 
The second case must be an example of frictional charging; the 
first case cannot be—it must be an example of contact charging. 
Shaw, who, more than any other experimenter, succeeded in 
obtaining consistent results from intractable materials, found 
(1917) that when quartz is lightly brushed with silk the quartz 
becomes Ove, but when rubbed hard with the silk it becomes 
@ve. 
This observation would be explained 
if hard rubbing 
involved adherent sliding with frictional charging, but brushing 
involved smooth sliding with contact charging, and if frictional 
and contact charging gave opposite polarities. 
However this 
may be, it is certain from Shaw’s work that triboelectric charging 
is greatly influenced by the manner of rubbing. 
In this con- 
nexion it may be important to distinguish between rubbing two 
materials together hard and rubbing them hard together, the 
former implying more movement than pressure, the latter high 
pressure without necessarily much movement. The effort may

IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
51 
go either mainly into keeping the surfaces moving over each 
other rapidly, or mainly into keeping them tightly squeezed 
together. 
Charging may be due simply to the movement of electrons or 
ions (positive or negative) from one surface to the other, or it 
may be due to a transfer of material which is already electrically 
charged. What has been said about material transfer during 
sliding makes it unlikely that it will be significant for contact 
charging associated with smooth sliding, but leaves it an open 
question whether frictional charging is caused by material trans- 
fer or by the movement of electrons or ions. If particulate con- 
tamination is present, this may be transferred from one surface 
to the other even during smooth sliding. If the contaminating 
particles have been charged by contact with the first surface, 
charge will move with them and contribute to the apparent 
contact charging of the two surfaces by smooth sliding. 
The evidence for the existence of different kinds of tribo- 
electric charging will now be discussed in some detail. 
Contact charging 
Intimate contact between an insulator and a metal can be 
achieved by using a liquid metal, and in this case there is no 
possibility of friction as ordinarily understood contributing to 
the charging. 
It is well known that insulators are usually found 
charged after immersion in mercury, and that flowing a drop of 
mercury over an insulating surface has a similar effect. Experi- 
mental results using mercury and its amalgams are complex, 
and a detailed discussion of them must be deferred until Chapter 
XVI. For the present it is the order of magnitude of the charging 
that is relevant. 
Medley (1953) has shown that the final charge 
is usually 
limited by electrical breakdown, and that the mechanism of 
charge generation will provide increased charging when this 
limitation isremoved. The method used by Medley for achieving 
this is illustrated diagrammatically in Fig. 4.1. 
The earthed 
mercury in the lower reservoir can be raised and lowered so as 
to make and break contact with the lower surface of the thin

52 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
polymer film of thickness b which closes the bottom end of the 
upper reservoir. 
The upper surface of the film is permanently 
covered by mercury in the upper reservoir which is connected 
to an electrometer whose potential always stays close to that 
To electrometer 
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
N 
2% 
[ 
4 
AT 
R 
S0 
8 
u 
-f 
1'. 
T 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Fic. 4.1 
of earth. 
By removing the mercury in the lower reservoir to 
a distance from the film large compared with b, the charge that 
has been given to the lower surface of the film is made to induce 
an equal and opposite charge in the mercury on the upper 
surface of the film, and a compensating charge, equal to that 
on the lower surface of the film, is measured by the electrometer. 
Consider, now, the situation when the mercury in the lower 
reservoir has been moved down a distance z. 
If a free charge 
of surface density o was left on the lower surface of the film 
following contact with the mercury, then there will be free 
charge densities, which we shall call o; and o¢,, on the upper 
surface of the film and the surface of the mercury in the lower 
reservoir respectively, but polarization 
in the medium will 
contribute additional bound charge densities + ¢’ to the charged 
surface of the film and the upper surface of the film in contact 
with the mercury in the upper reservoir, respectively. 
We are interested in b and z small compared with the extent

IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
53 
of the mercury surface, so the charged surfaces may be approxi- 
mated to infinite planes. 
All lines of force from 
o will then 
terminate on either the upper or the lower mercury surfaces, so 
o+ 0,+0 = 0, which 
of course implies that 
o, and 
o, are 
opposite in sign to 
¢. 
The polarization charge density o' 
is 
(K—1)/4m times the electric field, where K is the dielectric 
constant, and the sign of ¢’ must be appropriate to the direction 
of the electric field. The sign of ¢’ in Fig. 4.1 is consistent with 
o = K—1 {2n(0y—0'—0—0'—0y,)} 
47 
= (K—1)(oy—0"). 
Since, both mercury surfaces are nearly at earth potential, we 
also have 
2m(0y—0'—0—0'—0,)b+27(0y—0'+o+0"—0,)2 = 0, 
  
or 
(6,—3a" 
)b+ (0,+0)2 = 0. 
It follows that the field in the dielectric is 
"o 
4oz 
4:77'(0'1—0') = 
'—'—b—m, 
and the field in the gap is 
470b 
4 
_ —, 
77(01-[_0) 
b+Kz 
Consider now what happens as z is progressively increased, 
that is as the mercury surface is lowered from contact with the 
film. When 
2z is small, the field in the film is small, but is 4no 
in the gap. 
When 
z = b/K, the field in the film is —2n0¢/K, 
and 27¢ in the gap. When z is large compared with b/K, the 
field is —4mo/K in the film, but small in the gap. The manner 
in which these fields vary as z/b is increased is shown in Fig. 4.2 
for 
K = 2-3 (polyethylene). 
It is seen that the field in the gap 
is greatly reduced by the presence of the film when the gap has 
increased to a few times b/K, but is only slightly affected when 
the gap is much less than b/K. 
The smallest value of /K in Medley’s experiment was 1-5 wu. 
This is much larger than the sort of distance at which we suppose 
triboelectric charging to take place. We would not, therefore,

54 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
expect the presence of the polymer film to affect the amount 
of charge generated initially. 
Nor will its presence affect any 
dissipation of charge by field emission of electrons, since this 
will be completed immediately after charging has occurred, 
  
  
  
+1-0 
+O.5 
- 
Cap 
g 
_Z 
Luti‘ 
00 
b/K 
i 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Dielectric (K=2.3) 
-0-5 
- 
Fi1c. 4.2 
when the surface field is a maximum. As the surfaces separate, 
however, the potential difference 4webz/(b+ Kz) across the gap 
increases. 
This increase, and the longer gap 
in which the 
potential difference can take effect, favours some types 
of 
discharge. 
If such a discharge occurs when the gap is com- 
parable with b/K, then the presence of the film will affect the 
field in the gap and consequently the amount of charge left 
when part of the initial charge has been dissipated, because the 
dissipation will occur when some of the lines of force from 
the charge that has been formed on the polymer film go to the 
mercury on the other side of the film, instead of through the gap 
to the mercury which is receding from the polymer surface. 
Thus, for given discharge conditions, more charge will be left 
on the polymer film: the presence of the earthed conductor on 
the other side of the film enables a larger proportion of the 
triboelectric charge to be retained and measured. 
It should be 
noted that any leakage of charge through the film only results 
in self-neutralization of the double layer on the two sides of the

v 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
55 
film: the charge that was induced on-the electrometer is un- 
affected. 
It was, in fact, found that greatly increased charges were 
observed for very thin polymer films. For the present, it is the 
order of magnitude of the maximum charge that is significant. 
More will be said about the experiment itself later (pp. 309, 322). 
The measured charge increased as the thickness of the film 
decreased, and had not reached saturation for the thinnest films. 
From this it appears that even the highest charge densities 
observed were still limited by charge dissipation. The mechanism 
of charge generation could have provided more charge than was 
observed, that is, more than 500 e.s.u./cm2. 
This is two orders 
of magnitude greater than what is obtained in a typical tribo- 
electric experiment, though still an order of magnitude less than 
the full charging to be expected from a primary charging process. 
Nevertheless, it is clear that contact charging is demonstrably 
fully capable of providing charge densities in the triboelectric 
range. The existence of contact charging as one of the tribo- 
electric mechanisms is therefore established. 
Whether, in the 
case of mercury, the charge is transferred as electrons, ions, 
or by material transfer, will be discussed later (p. 318). 
If a surface that has been charged by rubbing is discharged, 
further rubbing will renew the charge—or most of it. 
Thus, 
continued rubbing permits a current to be drawn from a suitably 
designed frictional machine. 
If, however, no current is taken 
from the machine, the voltage it generates when started up rises 
to some value which then remains steady. 
Already in 1834 
Péclet had found that the output voltage, and therefore the 
surface density of charge in the machine, reached a limiting 
value which was independent of the speed of rubbing, the 
pressure on the rubber, and the amount of rubbing when this 
was not too small. The limitation on charge density seems not 
to be governed by the mechanism of charge generation, but by 
dissipation of charge setting in when electrical stresses get too 
high (with a rapid increase in current for increasing voltage). 
This conclusion has been confirmed by later workers and holds 
for an experiment of Macky (1928) in which a metal disc and

56 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
an insulating disc were pressed together and rotated, then 
separated and the charge acquired by the metal disc measured. 
The charge reached its final value after a couple of revolutions 
or thereabouts, and the charge density was less at reduced gas 
pressures. 
The form of the curve suggested that the charge 
density would have been greater at pressures above atmospheric. 
The final charge density did not depend much on the nature of 
the rubbing surfaces, nor on the nature of the gas, provided the 
gas had been well dried. Tests on discharging the discs indicated 
that the breakdown that was limiting the charge occurred during 
the separation of the discs when they were still almost in contact. 
It will be recalled that discharge under similar conditions was 
postulated to explain Medley’s observations on the charging of 
mercury. 
The maximum charge density in Macky’s apparatus was about 
20 e.s.u./cm?, and this implies a field of 75 kV/cm just outside 
a metal surface. 
It is of interest to note that Fig. 1.6 makes this 
the breakdown field for an air gap of 0-175 mm—however, too 
much should not be read into this. 
Lapped specimens, such as those used by Macky, come into 
intimate contact at a large number of ‘points’, but there is no 
real contact over most of the area. We would therefore expect, 
as Macky found, that considerable sliding would be needed to 
develop the final charge. 
This is true irrespective of whether 
frictional or contact electrification is involved. 
The charging 
of mercury, however, 
leads one 
to anticipate that contact 
charging 
will occur with 
solids, 
and hence 
that, provided 
intimate contact can be achieved over a sufficient proportion 
of the area of apparent contact, the surface density of charge 
will be limited by charge dissipation. 
Intimate contact over large areas can be obtained by using 
optical flats which wring together (see Rayleigh, 
1936). 
As 
already mentioned, Richards (1923) has performed experiments 
using such optical flats, correct to half a wavelength. 
His 
procedure was not quite the same as that of Macky. The flats 
were discharged with X-rays, then slid across each other, given 
a quarter-turn, left a while, and separated. 
Charge densities of

IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
57 
up to 20 e.s.u./cm? were obtained, as in Macky’s experiments, 
but Richards gives an ingenious argument to show that, in his 
case at least, the charging was due to contact, not frictional 
electrification. We have already attributed the need to give the 
flats a quarter-turn to the necessity of getting rid of particulate 
contamination from between the opposing surfaces. 
Richards 
took two similar glass flats and charged them with opposite 
polarities using fur and silk. 
They were then brought into 
contact and it was found that they discharged themselves to 
5 or 10 per cent in 5 minutes, because of surface leakage. 
Dis- 
similar flats, however, showed the full charge after separation, 
even after being left in contact for several hours and even after 
being X-rayed. Any frictional charge generated when bringing 
the flats together would have been dissipated before separating 
them; only a contact charge could have survived. Not all pairs 
of discs gave charge densities as large as 20 e.s.u./cm?2, but even 
those that did presumably suffered some loss of charge by 
dissipation, as in Macky’s experiments. 
We now. have good 
experimental support for the supposition that contact charging 
due to a primary process occurs with solids, but that its extent 
is normally limited by partial dissipation of the charge initially 
generated, or by there being too sparse a distribution of points 
of intimate contact. 
The Volta—Helmholtz hypothestis 
Points of intimate contact may be multiplied by sliding the 
surfaces over one another. 
Let us look at this quantitatively. 
Surfaces that are not too smooth, when pressed together with 
pressure p, are prevented from coming into intimate contact all 
over by being supported on asperities which are at the point of 
collapse, whether by brittle fracture or plastic flow. If the yield 
strength of the softer material is #, and there are n ‘points’ of 
contact per unit area, then p = na%, where a is the mean area 
of cross-section of the asperities where they are at the point of 
yielding.T We note that for a given material and given pressure 
1 For an order of magnitude calculation, complications to do with the shape 
of the asperity and the three-dimensional nature of the stress will be ignored. 
See, however, Bowden and Tabor (1954), p. 101.

58 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
the mean area of cross-section of the asperities 
is inversely 
proportional to their number, and—of course—this area would 
be greater if the ‘points’ of support were not yielding but only 
deformed elastically. 
The fraction of the area 
of apparent 
103 - 
o(e.s.u./cm?) 
  
    
10'4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
ot 
103 
102 
10! 
I 
p (kg/cm?) 
Fia. 4.3. 
Order of magnitude of contact charging 
of different materials by a primary process as 
a 
function of pressure between the surfaces. 
contact that is in intimate contact is na = p/%. 
If contact 
charging occurs, and this is due to a primary process giving a 
localized charge density of 104 e.s.u./cm? (see p. 23), the average 
charge density is 10%p/% e.s.u./em?. 
For 
a large number of 
materials % lies in the range 107 to 10!% dyn/ecm?. 
The corre- 
sponding values of charge density are shown in Fig. 4.3. 
It is 
seen that easily observable charge densities of 1 to 10 e.s.u./cm? 
can be developed on soft materials under light pressure, but 
that quite high pressures are required for this to happen with 
hard materials. 
If, however, the hard material is smooth and 
polished so that the areas of intimate contact are one or two

IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
59 
orders of magnitude larger than what 
is required for rough 
surfaces, then moderate pressures suffice to generate moderate 
charges. 
We next observe that sliding one surface over the other is 
more effective if the surfaces are rough: » ‘points’ of contact, 
10 
  
  
10‘4 
1 
1 
> 
{ 
: 
1 
] 
1 
10 
10 
103 
10* 
10° 
  
Fi1c. 4.4. Amount of smooth sliding required to generate 10 
e.s.u./cm? by rubbing with a pressure of the weight of 1 g/cm? 
between the surfaces as a function of the number of operative 
asperities per cm?, assuming charging to be a primary process. 
each of area a, become 7 ‘lines’ of contact, each of area of order 
of magnitude nX+va, where X 
is the displacement, and the gain 
is a factor of X/va. 
This assumes that there are not so many 
‘lines’ of contact that they overlap to any marked extent. The 
gain from sliding may be written Xvn./(%[p). % [p is indepen- 
dent of the surface finish, but % is an indication of the roughness. 
The charge density without sliding was 10%p/%/; with sliding the 
charge density becomes 104X vn,/(p/%). The amount of sliding 
under a light pressure of the weight of 
1 g/em? required to 
produce a charge density of 10 e.s.u./cm? is shown graphically 
as a function of » in Fig. 4.4, for % = 107 and 10!° dyn/cm?. 
The value of » cannot be less than 1; it can easily be as much 
as 103 (Dyson and Hirst, 1954). 
It now appears from Fig. 4.4

60 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
that very little sliding is required to generate a considerable 
charge—a millimetre, or even 10 u can suffice. 
It is to be concluded that the Volta—Helmholtz hypothesis, 
that multiplication of the points of contact by sliding can give 
ample charging by a mechanism dependent on contact, survives 
a detailed examination regarding order of magnitude. 
In fact, 
it looks like being a very strong candidate to account for much 
of triboelectrification. 
Frictional charging 
When considering contact charging with sliding, we have 
spoken of smooth and of rough surfaces, and 
to make the 
calculations definite have supposed the rough surfaces to give 
rise to adherent sliding. 
This assumption really sets a limit to 
the conditions under which contact charging would be expected 
to occur; strictly, it is over the limit. Contact charging is to be 
expected with smoother surfaces and such surfaces will give 
more charging. 
It is unlikely that sliding will ever be entirely 
smooth sliding or entirely adherent sliding. 
Adherent sliding 
of rough surfaces will usually involve some smooth sliding, and 
to this part of the sliding the considerations of the last section 
apply. 
There are, however, circumstances in which contact 
charging may be small or absent; this brings us to the question 
of whether secondary processes 
arising out 
of friction can 
generate significant charges. 
It is easy to see that they can. 
Let us apply the formula 104X vn./(p/%) for the charge density 
due to contact charging with sliding to an average case. We put 
p = 10° dyn/cm? (approximately the weight of 100 g/cm?), and 
take % = 10° dyn/cm?. 
For this case n = 10* is reasonable. 
We find that a charge of 10 e.s.u./cm? requires X = 10—2 cm, 
and, of course, only 102 of the total area has been in contact 
with the other surface for this average charge density to have 
been generated, since the ‘points’ or ‘lines’ of actual charging 
have received a charge density of 10% e.s.u./cm?. Spreading of 
charge over the surface evens out the initial spottiness. 
It is 
clear that there is ample surface left still to make contact with 
the other surface if X is increased by further rubbing to, say,

IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
61 
1 mm. 
This 
is 
a hundred times what X was before, and 
a 
secondary effect that is only capable of giving a hundredth of 
the charge density given by a primary process would still give 
the same average charge density after the more extended rub- 
bing. We must conclude that secondary processes a hundredth 
  
  
Fia. 4.5. Symmetric and asymmetric rubbing of crossed rods. 
or even a thousandth as effective as primary processes may 
nevertheless play a significant, even a dominant, part in tribo- 
electrification. 
If both primary and secondary processes occur 
together, 
it 
is obvious that the charging may be critically 
dependent 
on the precise manner 
of rubbing, 
as 
it some- 
times is. 
The evidence that secondary processes do give rise to frictional 
charging comes from observations on the charging of like surfaces. 
If two surfaces are identical but become oppositely charged when 
rubbed together, some asymmetry must be involved. Ifit cannot 
be asymmetry of surface then the rubbing itself must be asym- 
metrical. 
The way in which the rubbing is asymmetrical may 
be obvious; 
if this is so, then the roles played by the two surfaces 
can be reversed, and doing this should reverse the polarity of 
charging. 
In this way any hidden asymmetry of surface can be 
excluded. 
An experiment of this nature was first performed by Shaw 
(1927). Two rods of insulating material were held crossed, and 
the one rubbed back and forth over the other with a sawing 
motion as shown in Fig. 4.5. The rod rubbed as if it were being

62 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
sawn is rubbed all the time in the neighbourhood of a single spot; 
the rod moved like a saw has its rubbed area drawn out to the 
length of the rub so that the rubbing is distributed along a 
narrow ribbon. The rubbing is obviously markedly asymmetric. 
Shaw found plenty of charging with like materials, and the 
polarity changed when the rubbing rod was made the rubbed. 
Characteristically, Shaw interprets the experiment in terms of 
an asymmetry of strain, but it is never made clear in his writings 
(e.g. 1930 a, 1930 D) just what he means by his frequent references 
to the state of strain of a surface. 
In all probability, this was 
something different from what comes to mind today. Shaw was 
well aware that there was an asymmetry of heating in the 
experiment with crossed rods, the rubbed surface developing a 
hot spot, the rubber suffering a relatively small rise in tempera- 
ture. Henry (1953) has emphasized the importance of this aspect 
of the asymmetry and, surely, it must be the really important 
one. Apropos of strain, in the case of textile fibres, Hersh and 
Montgomery (1955) found the charging to be independent of the 
tension in the fibres. 
Conditions such as those described will favour material trans- 
fer, and this may be a source of charging, but the rise in tempera- 
ture is likely to render some electrons mobile, in which case they 
will tend to accumulate in the less hot material by a process 
analogous to the Thomson effect in metals, so charging the 
rubbing surface negatively. Onthe other hand,if mobile positive 
ions are present, they will accumulate in the less hot material, 
by a process analogous to thermal diffusion in a gas, so charging 
it positively. 
If mobile ions of both signs are present, as in ice, 
the sign of charging will depend on the relative mobilities; in 
the case of ice it is the protons which determine the sign of the 
effect, as we shall see on p. 261. Apart from complications, the 
sign of the significant charge carrier is the same as the sign of 
the charge on the rubbing surface (that with the extended 
contact area). One would expect a rise in temperature to release 
electrons before releasing positive ions, in most materials, hence 
the 
typical insulator should 
give rubber/rubbed Sve/Pve. 
Shaw (1927) and Shaw and Hanstock (1930 6) found this true of

IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
63 
silk, but not of ebonite, celluloid, and other materials.T Henry 
(1957) states that most materials he investigated gave rubber/ 
rubbed ®ve/Ove. His finding agrees with that of Griiner (1953) 
though not with that of Hersh (quoted by Montgomery, 1959). 
It would seem that it is usually positive ions that move, but 
not always. 
If, however, specks of hot material are transferred 
to the less hot surface and these hot specks have lost electrons 
to the less hot parts of the surface from which they came, then 
we would have rubber/rubbed @ve/Ove, as is usual, but now 
explained in terms of mobile electrons. 
It should be mentioned 
that Shaw and Hanstock (1930 a) found that continued rubbing 
sometimes changed the polarity; this can be attributed to a 
change in the nature of one of the surfaces caused by the rubbing, 
which would affect the two surfaces differently. 
There must 
have been a physical change in one of the surfaces: Shaw says 
that, after continued rubbing, the rods felt gritty. 
It is the 
polarity at the beginning of the experiment that is significant. 
Although the precise mechanism of charge transfer in these 
experiments has not been identified, the experiments make it 
certain that frictional charging does occur. Furthermore, in the 
case of ice, as we shall see on p. 261, the mechanism of charging 
has been identified. 
It would be quite wrong to call all tribo- 
electrification contact electrification, as suggested by Peterson 
(1954 a). 
Opinions differ about the extent to which frictional charging 
plays a significant part in triboelectrification. Loeb (1958) is of 
the opinion that the generation of heat by friction is seldom 
involved in the transfer of charge. 
Frenkel (1941), however, 
would explain the charging of insulators as being always due to 
them becoming intrinsic semiconductors where hot spots are 
formed. Unfortunately, the importance of hot spots has been 
exaggerated because of a numerical mistake in Frenkel’s paper. 
Nevertheless, what has been said so far about contact and 
frictional electrification leads one to expect that although the 
former will be the more important, the latter will appear when 
the rubbing is sufficiently vigorous. 
In this connexion, Henry 
1t Note that, in their terminology, rubber and rubbed are interchanged.

64 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
(1953) reports that, in the textile process known as warping, in 
which yarns from a large number of bobbins are brought together 
to form a warp for weaving cloth, it is 
a common but not in- 
variable occurrence 
for the charge on acetate rayon yarns 
running through glass guides to reverse sign when the speed of 
motion is increased. The explanation of this observation could 
well be that contact charging occurs at all speeds, but that 
frictional charging appears at high speeds giving the opposite 
sign of charge, and that, when circumstances favour frictional 
charging, it may be sufficient to reverse the sign associated with 
contact charging. This explanation is supported by the experi- 
ments of Cunningham described in Chapter 
X VII. 
Hot spots 
The formation of hot spots during sliding is important for an 
understanding of frictional forces and has been dealt with at 
length by Bowden and Tabor (1954) in that context. 
Since it 
would appear to be of only secondary importance in the genera- 
tion of static electrification, a simple treatment will suffice for 
the purposes 
of this book. 
Frenkel’s mechanism 
of tribo- 
electrification will be discussed later (p. 268); for the present it is 
only necessary to inquire under what circumstances sufficient 
heating could arise to make it applicable. 
Local temperature 
rises of the order of 100° C or more in the hot spots would be 
required to make an insulating material semiconducting. 
Frenkel (1941) estimates the temperature rise in the hot spots 
from the amount of heat generated during the lifetime 7 of the 
hot spot and the volume of material that will have been heated 
during its life. 
The basic law of heat conduction is equivalent 
to Fick’s law of diffusion 
(if the specific heat and thermal 
conductivity are constants) apart from the significance of the 
symbols. The diffusion coefficient is replaced by k/s, where s is 
the specific heat per unit volume and & the thermal conductivity. 
Frenkel assumes (rather questionably) that the depth to which 
the heat liberated during the lifetime of the hot spot diffuses 
is considerably smaller than the size of the spot, so that the 
diffusion problem is one-dimensional. At the end of the life of

IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
65 
the hot spot, heat has been diffusing for a time 7; what may be 
called the root mean square depth to which it has diffused will 
be /(27k/s), by analogy with ,/(2D7). 
The volume heated 
is 
a,/(27k/s), where a is the area of the hot spot, and the rise in 
temperature is @/,/(2ks7), if @ is the amount of heat liberated 
during the life of the hot spot per unit area of hot spot. 
As 
reasonable values for an insulator, Frenkel assumes £ = 10-3 
cal cm-1s-1°C-1 and s = 10-1 cal em—3, with 7 = 10-%s. 
This 
makes the temperature rise 104Q/v2 °C. 
If the coefficient of friction is 0-42, and the surfaces have a 
relative velocity of 10 cm/s under a normal loading of 10 g 
weight per cm?, then the rate of liberation of heat is 10—3 cal 
cm~ 28”1, but the value is an average over the area of apparent 
contact. This is the value that Frenkel takes, though misprints 
in his paper make it uncertain what assumptions led to it. The 
assumptions, however, are irrelevant. He takes the area of real 
contact as 10~2 of the area of apparent contact (an overestimate) 
which makes the rate of liberation of heat in the hot spot 10! cal 
cm~2 71, Frenkel now makes the mistake of identifying the 
rate of liberation of heat with @ which was actually defined as 
the amount of heat liberated during the lifetime of the spot. 
By doing so he deduces a temperature rise of the order of 1000° C 
(a ¥2has been dropped). Since, however,+ = 10-%s, the deduced 
temperature rise should be {;° C. Even if we assume the area 
of real contact to be 10— of the area of apparent contact (a more 
realistic value), the temperature rise in the hot spot is only 10° C. 
The hot spot is not hot at all. Although Frenkel’s numerical 
example fails to demonstrate the great prevalence of hot spot 
formation which was needed to give his theory of triboelectrifica- 
tion universal validity, 
hot spots nevertheless do occur 
in 
rubbing; their importance will therefore now be considered from 
a slightly different viewpoint. 
The model used by Frenkel is that of the semi-infinite solid 
with heat supplied uniformly over the boundary surface. With 
these boundary conditions there is no steady state (Carslaw and 
Jaeger, 
1959, 
p. 
75). 
Frenkel therefore considers the rise in 
temperature due to a pulse of heat and, moreover, he calculates

66 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
the mean temperature in a thin surface layer. 
In his numerical 
example the thickness of this surface layer proves to be 10-2 em, 
and the mean temperature in such a layer will be considerably 
less than the temperature in a surface layer a few molecules thick, 
which is what is probably of interest. It is better, therefore, to 
calculate the true surface temperature. 
Furthermore, 
if we 
assume the heating to be limited to a finite (actually small) area on 
the surface of the semi-infinite solid, then a steady state becomes 
possible, and the question arises of whether or not it is attained 
during the life of the hot spot. 
If we have a point source on the 
surface of the semi-infinite solid, the root mean square distance 
to which the heat has diffused after time = is no longer /(27%/s) 
(the one-dimensional case) but ,/(67%/s) (the three-dimensional 
case). 
The formula applies to each element of area of a finite 
heat source. 
It is apparent that when the distance ,/(67k/s) is 
equal to the radius r of a hot spot, heat has diffused sufficiently 
far for the temperature distribution to be comparable with what 
it would be when it is half-way to the final distribution. 
If 7, is 
the time required for the half-way distribution to be reached, 
then r = ,/(67; k/s) will give an approximate value for r;. This 
makes 7, = r%s/6k, a value which is close to that derived by 
Jaeger (1942) from an exact solution of the equation of conduc- 
tion of heat for this case. Jaeger also gives values for , when 
two surfaces in relative motion make contact at a protuberance 
which is fixed relative to one surface and slides over the other. 
As a result of the motion of the surface which slides past the 
protuberance, additional heat is carried away from the pro- 
tuberance by a process analogous to convection; the result is the 
heat fails to penetrate as far and the final temperature distribu- 
tion 
is approached more 
quickly. 
Returning 
to Frenkel’s 
numerical example and taking 
r =1 u (cf. p. 33), we find 
73 =~ 2% 10-7 s. 
This is very much shorter than the assumed 
lifetime of the spot, 10—% s. 
It would appear from this example 
that the surface temperature may be estimated from steady 
state conditions. 
The conclusion just reached enables one to make use of the 
equivalence between steady state problems in thermal conduc-

1V 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
67 
tion and 
the corresponding 
cases 
in 
electrical conduction. 
Temperature differences correspond to potential differences. 
The heat flow d@/dt through a rectangular block of thickness b 
with opposing faces of area A maintained at temperatures 7} 
and 7, is given by dQ/dt = kA(T}—1T,)/b. The current I through 
a similar rectangular block, with opposing faces maintained at 
potentials V; and V,, is given by I = yA(V,—V,)/b, where y is the 
electrical conductivity. The electrical resistance of the block is 
b/Ay. We may call b/ Ak the thermal resistance of the block, and 
say that the heat flow is equal to the temperature difference 
divided by the thermal resistance. This analogy with Ohm’s law 
can be extended to a thermal ‘circuit’ consisting of a number 
of thermal resistances in series or parallel, because heat flow, 
like electrical current, 
is constant round the circuit, except 
where 
it divides into components at 
a junction. 
The total 
temperature drop is therefore given, for 
a number of components 
in a heat dissipating system, by combining the thermal resis- 
tances for the components and multiplying by the heat flow. 
This analogy enables us to make use of a well-known result 
in electrical conduction: the resistance due to the constriction 
of current when it is fed into a semi-infinite conducting block 
: 
.1 
: 
through a circular electrode of radius r is v The corresponding 
Y 
i 
) 
1 
) 
thermal resistance will therefore be — . 
Frenkel’s numerical 
drk 
example lies in the range in which, according to Jaeger’s results, 
the motion is not fast enough to have much effect on r,. We 
shall therefore assume static conditions, which means that heat 
is conducted away from the hot spot through two resistances 
1 
. 
: 
M—Iki and Ik, in parallel, k, and k, referring to the two surfaces. 
  
The 
combined 
resistance 
is 
Since temperature 
1 
dr(ky+ky)” 
difference = heat flow X resistance, we obtain, for the tempera- 
ture rise,   
g 
. 
: 
, where 
¢ 
is the rate of 
generation of heat 
&Iy o) 
. 
S 
per unit area per unit time. We have assumed the hot spot to

68 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
be circular; Jaeger proves that the temperature rise depends 
very little on the shape of the hot spot for a fixed area. 
The rate of generation of heat per unit area of apparent 
contact when two surfaces pressed together with a force per 
unit area p slide over one another with relative speed v, the 
coefficient of friction being u, is puv/J, where J is the mechanical 
equivalent of heat. For conditions most favourable to hot spot 
formation the fraction of the area of apparent contact which 
is true contact is a minimum and is p/%, where 
% 
is the appro- 
priate yield strength. 
The rate of generation of heat per unit 
area of true contact is therefore Zuv/J, and the temperature 
vy 
4J (ky+-k,) 
and does not contain p explicitly. It follows that, for any chosen 
incidence of hot spots, 1/r, which is a function of p, should vary 
as v. Bowden and Thomas (1954) have investigated what steady 
speed is just sufficient to produce hot spots of a fixed temperature 
as a function of load on the surfaces. Their results for steel/glass 
and tungsten/glass are plotted in Fig. 4.6. They agree with the 
relation 
voc 1/4p which implies 
r oc Vp. 
Since 7nr2% = p, 
where n is the number of ‘points’ of true contact per unit area 
of apparent contact, we find that » is independent of p, at any 
rate within the range of observations. At first sight this does 
not seem likely; however, it must be borne in mind that, since 
the larger spots become the hotter, the experiment selects the 
larger ‘points’ of contact, and this makes the interpretation 
less straightforward. More generally, it must be admitted that 
the arguments presented here are too highly idealized, but they 
will be pursued to give an indication of when frictional electri- 
fication is likely to be important. 
| 
Frictional electrification can only be important when the rise 
wruv?® 
&I (o) 
in electrical properties, such as an insulator becoming an intrinsic 
semiconductor. Excluding ice, which is a rather special case, the 
order of magnitude is a few hundred degrees Centigrade. Let us, 
then, arbitrarily equate the rise in temperature to 200° C and 
rise 18 
. For a given pair of materials this varies as rv 
  
in temperature 
is sufficient to cause a marked change 
 

Load (g) 
  
  
  
  
5000 
1000 
500 
200 
b 
1 
T 
1 
T 
300 
- 
o) 
a 
g 
Nl 
> 
2001 
- 
<] 
o 
’ 
/*/ 
100 
| 
T 
_ 
T 
+ 
1 
1 
] 
| 
0 
0:-02 
O°O4-L 
0-06 
. 
0:-08 
Load 2 
F1ia. 4.6. (The circles refer to tungsten/glass, the crosses 
to steel/glass.) 
v (cm/sec) 
  
    
107 
1073 
1072 
107! 
r 
(cm) 
Fia. 4.7. Dependence of rubbing velocity required to give a 
temperature rise of 200° C on radius of hot spot for different 
values of u#/(k,+k,). Load entirely supported by yielding 
asperities.

70 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
plot the mutual dependence of r and v for different values of 
u% [(ki+k,). The result is shown in Fig. 4.7. 
The general implications of the formula for temperature rise, 
which, it must be remembered, assumes that none of the load is 
borne elastically, may be seen from three illustrative cases, 
taking the rise to be 200° C. 
Case (). 
A poorly conducting medium-hard metal, rubbing against 
a hard insulator : soft iron/glass. 
The conductivity of the glass 
may be neglected in comparison with that of the soft iron which 
is 0-176 cal em—1 s °C-1. 
% 
(for soft iron) is 1-5Xx 10° dyn/cm? 
and p = 0-6. This makes u%/k = 5-11 x 10° in the correspond- 
ing units. 
Hence we find rv = 2-08; 
r = 10 u would require 
v = 2080 cm/s, a very high rubbing speed. 
Doubtless, how- 
ever, this speed has been overestimated through taking the 
value of k for metallic iron when the rubbing surface will almost 
certainly be tarnished so that the proper value to take is inter- 
mediate between that for the metal and that for the oxide. 
Case (ii). 
Two insulators, both soft: polyethylene/polystyrene. 
% (for polyethylene) is about 107 dyn/cm? and u will be about 0-3. 
The conductivities are 
8 
X 10—*and 2 X 104 cal em—1 s~* °C-* for 
polyethylene and polystyrene respectively. 
This makes 
1% [(by+ky) = 3-0 X 10° 
in the corresponding units. Hence we find v = 3-55. Again a 
high rubbing speed is required for » = 10 u; however, with these 
materials 
considerably greater values 
of 
r 
are 
likely, 
and 
r = 
1 mm would require v = 35 cm/s, a more moderate rubbing 
speed. 
Case (ii1). Two wnsulators, both hard : silica/mica. % (for mica) 
will be taken as 10° dyn/cm?2, and w = 0-3. The conductivities 
in the same units as before are 6 x 10-3 and 1-4 X 10-2 for mica 
and silica respectively. 
This makes u%/(k;+k,) = 1-5x 1010, 
and rv = 0-71. 
r = 10 p requires a rubbing speed of 710 em/s, 
quite a high value. 
Alternative triboelectric processes 
A few comments can now be made about the conditions that 
favour different triboelectric processes.

IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
71 
We have just seen that thermoelectric processes dependent 
on hot spot formation, and therefore frictional in origin, are 
favoured by a combination of high yield strength of the softer 
material, low thermal conductivity of both materials, and large 
‘points’ of true contact when the load is carried by asperities 
which are just yielding, and rubbing takes the form of adherent 
sliding. 
If these conditions are all favourable hot spots will be 
formed at fairly moderate rubbing speeds, 
if not, very high 
speeds will be necessary, as shown by the representative calcula- 
tions 
just made. 
High rubbing pressures only favour 
the 
appearance of hot spots in so far as greater pressures increase 
the size of the ‘points’ of true contact; however, if they are 
formed and give rise to triboelectric charging, these greater 
pressures will increase the charging because more ‘points’ of 
contact are required to carry the load, and so more hot spots 
will be formed. Nevertheless, broadly speaking, triboelectrifica- 
tion due to hot spot formation is associated with high rubbing 
speeds rather than high rubbing pressures; that is with hard 
rubbing (the effort being applied to give a lot of movement), 
rather than with rubbing hard (the effort being applied to 
squeeze the surfaces together). 
Hot spot formation also favours material transfer, but, as 
Rabinowicz has shown, it is not a prerequisite. Material transfer 
is, in fact, large when pressures are large, even when sliding is 
minimal. Itisrubbing hard, then, which will favour the transfer 
of material from one surface to the other, and any charge that 
may accompany the material. 
4 priori one would expect this 
form of charging to be encouraged when the surfaces are very 
clean, so favouring adherent sliding, and perhaps also when the 
surfaces are very dirty, so favouring the transfer of contaminant 
material—the dirtying of one surface by the other. 
It will 
appear later, however, that things are not so simple. 
Bowden and Tabor (1954) emphasize that neither hot spot 
formation nor surface wear due to material being rubbed off is 
directly correlated with high values of the coefficient of friction. 
Friction being high by no means necessarily leads to the pheno- 
mena which give rise to frictional charging. The work expended

72 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
in friction acts indirectly, hence there is no reason to expect a 
correlation between the work done and the charge generated. 
Attempts that have been made to find such a correlation have 
failed, with the exception of Cunningham’s investigation of a 
slipping belt (p. 336). 
Contrasting with the conditions that favour frictional charg- 
ing, are those that favour smooth sliding: light pressure giving 
contact between undulations on smooth surfaces with the load 
carried by elastic deformation, and low speeds. True contact 
will then be made over greater areas than when the load is 
carried on yielding asperities, and contact charging will be 
favoured at the expense of frictional charging. 
Visualizing a 
change in rubbing conditions from adherent to smooth sliding, 
it is clear that the change in the nature of the rubbing ‘points’ 
of contact will lead to frictional charging being replaced by 
contact charging. Briefly, contact charging is favoured by light 
rubbing of smooth surfaces. 
If, however, there is particulate contamination of the surfaces, 
any charging due to the transfer of particulate contamination 
will also be favoured by the conditions that favour contact 
charging. Furthermore, if the particles impede intimate contact 
to any extent, then contact charging will be reduced correspond- 
ingly. 
Under 
these 
circumstances, 
an increase 
in rubbing 
pressure will, as discussed on p. 29, rather suddenly, at some 
critical value of the pressure, eliminate the effect of the particles 
on the nature of the contact ‘points’, and any charging due to 
TABLE 
4.1 
Conditions favouring electrification 
  
  
Process 
Clean or dirty 
 Rough or smooth 
 Pressure 
Speed 
Frictional 
Hot spot formation 
Either 
Rough 
Any 
Hight 
Material transfer 
Very clean or 
Rough 
High 
 Any 
very dirty 
Contact 
Particle transfer 
Either 
Not too rough 
Low 
Low 
Volta—Helmholtz 
See p. 83 
Smooth 
Low 
Low 
  
T Unless hard surfaces of low thermal conductivity.

IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
73 
the transfer of the contaminant will disappear. 
The sort of 
rubbing that favours charging by the transfer of particulate 
contamination can best be described as dusting. 
The 
conditions favouring 
the 
four kinds 
of triboelectric 
charging are summarized in Table 4.1. 
Charging by material transfer 
When material is transferred selectively from one surface to 
the other, 
it will be removed from asperities on the surface 
from which it comes, or at any rate from sites which are proud 
of the mean surface. 
These sites may not be typical of the 
surface as a whole; in particular, if the surface is metallic, they 
may have 
a different contact potential from the rest of the 
surface. 
If, furthermore, the removal of material from the sur- 
face is due to metallic welding and an oxide layer has to be broken 
up for this to occur, then the metal fragments removed will 
certainly be at a different potential from the average for the 
surface from which they come. 
They will therefore carry an 
electric charge with them when transferred to the other surface. 
If the material transferred comes from a hot spot on an insulator 
and it is the hottest material in the hot spot that is transferred, 
then it may have lost electrons to the less hot material left 
behind, as has already been mentioned on p. 62, and so carry 
an electric charge with it to the other surface. 
It is, indeed, 
almost certain that the specks of material transferred from one 
surface to another during rubbing will be electrically charged; 
the question is—how much charge can be transferred in this 
way ? 
Fig. 4.8 shows a simple model of the process. 
A slab-shaped 
speck of material belonging to the lower surface is being trans- 
ferred to the upper, taking with it part of the charge of the 
upper half of the double layer which has formed at the interface 
of the slab with the lower surface to which it has belonged but 
from the rest of which it differs electrically. 
On p. 22 it was 
concluded that the density of charge it is reasonable to assume 
could be transferred in this way is of the order of 10% e.s.u./cm?— 
possibly more. Information is scanty regarding the amount of

74 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
IV 
material transfer caused by sliding; it would seem best to use 
the experimental value found by Rabinowicz for copper/copper, 
even though we have different materials in mind. 
The figure 
of 610717 g/dyn quoted on p. 35 refers to contact with no 
vibration and no lateral movement; a little sliding (see p. 44) 
can increase this by 5000 times, bringing the figure up 
to 
3%x 10713 g/dyn. Arubbing pressure of 1 kg/ecm?2, which is approxi- 
mately 10¢ dyn/em?, implies a transfer of 3 x 10-7 g/cm? which 
e 
//%//E;f// 5 
F1c. 4.8. Charging by material transfer. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
is 10-7 cm3/cm? if we assume a density of 3 g/em3. A reasonable 
value for the thickness of the slab is 
1 u, from which it follows 
that the summed areas of the transferred slab-shaped specks of 
material transferred per cm? of surface is 10-3 cm?/em?2. 
If the 
charge transferred is 102 e.s.u./em? for the slabs, it is 1 e.s.u./cm? 
for the surface as a whole. This is an appreciable, but not large, 
charge density. 
In making this exploratory calculation, figures have been 
chosen that are quite favourable to the process. 
It would seem, 
therefore, that charging by material transfer should be kept in 
mind as a possible mechanism, but not a very likely one. The 
author is not aware of any clear evidence that the process has 
been observed experimentally; on the contrary, experiments on 
the charging of quartz and silica, discussed in Chapter XIV, 
showed it to be absent under circumstances in which it was 
expected to be found. 
Nevertheless there is some reason for 
supposing that it occurs with textiles (see p. 349). 
Particulate charging 
Rudge, who has investigated electrification resulting from the 
movement of dust, remarks in one of his papers (1914), that

IV 
TRIBOELECTRIFICATION 
75 
‘an unweighable amount of dust can produce an easily measur- 
able charge’. We have already had occasion to comment on the 
extreme 
difficulty 
of eliminating particulate contamination 
from surfaces (p. 25), and have calculated that the residual 
particles on a supposedly well-cleaned surface can carry a charge, 
averaged over the surface, of the order of 1 e.s.u./cm? (p. 31). 
Particles lying on a surface will almost inevitably be charged for 
one reason or another, and when transferred to another surface 
will therefore charge that surface; it is surely safe to predict that 
there will be actual circumstances in which this form of charging 
will occur to a significant extent. Indeed, some experiments of 
Knoblauch (1902) come very close to it. 
He investigated the 
charging of acidic, basic, and other powders, one method of 
generating the charge being merely to allow the powder to fall 
off a surface. 
More will be said about these investigations in 
later chapters.

CHAPTER V 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
S0 FAR, when speaking of the nature of surfaces, we have been 
thinking mainly 
of topographical features 
and mechanical 
properties, and we have seen that real surfaces depart greatly 
from what they appear to be at first sight. 
This is also true 
when thinking of their chemical constitution and of contamina- 
tion, and we have already seen the importance of tarnish layers 
on metals for the genesis of frictional forces. 
Surfaces giving triboelectric charging in practice are always, 
in some sense, dirty. To give certainty in the interpretation of 
experiments in the laboratory, however, one would like to use 
clean surfaces, investigating the effect of dirt afterwards. One 
must not, however, make the mistake of supposing that a surface 
that has been baked out in a high vacuum will be clean: the 
procedure removes such contamination as is volatile or easily 
decomposed by heat, and the baking process is deemed to be 
complete when the vacuum is ‘clean’, whereas it is the heated 
surface that is required to be clean and a surface is quite likely 
to remain contaminated after heating. 
For example, a silica 
surface originally contaminated by a metallic salt can acquire 
patches of baked-on silicate as a result of attempting to clean 
the surface by heating *n vacuo. Triboelectrically, this would be 
dirt. 
When two experimenters obtain incompatible results, 
it is 
tempting for each to accuse the other of having worked with 
dirty surfaces. 
Both would probably be right: strictly clean 
surfaces are virtually unobtainable for triboelectric experiments. 
Metals can only be obtained free from the last adsorbed mono- 
molecular layer by maintaining them at a high temperature for 
a long time in a good vacuum. 
After such treatment, as has 
already been explained, contact usually leads to seizure, and 
that means the end of the experiment. Really clean insulators 
do not necessarily stick together on contact, though they may

v 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
77 
do so (Harper, 1955), but it is seldom possible to clean a surface 
without changing its chemical constitution in the process. Shaw 
and Jex (1928) found that glass cleaned with alkalis became tribo- 
electrically @ve with respect to metals, though it was Ove after 
cleaning with acids; extensive washing sometimesleftit Sve and 
sometimes Ove. Itisclear that glass retains evidence of its past 
history in the chemical nature of its surface, and that this is 
crucial for triboelectrification, since even the sign of the charge 
depends on the past history of the surface. Shaw and Hanstock 
(1930 a) found that very slight traces of organic contamination 
can alter the sign of charging. In an experiment in which glass was 
rubbed with silk, both stated to have been ‘cleansed carefully’, 
it was found that the silk was @ve for the first four rubs but that, 
after the fifth, the silk became ©ve. Heating the glass to 340° C 
brought it back to charging like the first rub, whereas heating it 
to only 200° C or 250° C had no such effect, though heating to 
300° C resulted in a reduction of the negative charging. 
The 
rubbing altered the surface in some way, but reversibly, and it 
could be brought back to its former condition by heating above 
a critical temperature that was between 300° C and 350° C. 
Suspecting this behaviour to be due to the deposition and 
subsequent evaporation of an organic contaminant film, Shaw 
and Hanstock carried out experiments in which the surface 
was deliberately contaminated with 
a minimum 
of organic 
material which was wiped on and then ‘wiped off’ again; they 
found the same behaviour. 
Their experiments with ‘cleaned’ 
but not clean surfaces are summarized in Fig. 5.1. 
Adsorption of water 
The notorious difficulty of performing triboelectric experi- 
ments in damp weather proclaims the importance of adsorbed 
water. 
Indeed, Freundlich (1926) expressed himself in favour 
of the view that the tearing apart of a diffuse double layer of 
ions in adsorbed water is fundamental to the understanding of 
frictional electrification. There is no shortage of experimental 
results which support this view and they will be described in 
Chapter XIII. For the present it will be sufficient to note that

78 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
v 
already in 1902 Knoblauch had discovered that the sign of the 
contact charge acquired by dusts of various chemical composi- 
tions found a natural explanation in terms of the movement of 
hydrogen and hydroxyl ions. The presence of water is, however, 
+10 
  
| 
| 
| 
l 
| 
59 
Rubs 
I 
| 
I 
[ 
  
  
7 
T 
340°C 
200°C 250°C 
300°C 
Fi1c. 5.1. 
Effect of organic contaminant on silk/glass charging. 
not necessary for triboelectric charging to occur; neither is the 
presence of electrolyte. 
Either, or both, can be eliminated but 
the charging remains. In Harper’s experiments on quartz (1955) 
the cleaning procedure was as follows. The quartz ball was first 
given a preliminary wash in several solvents so that visible dirt 
could be removed without difficulty by rubbing hard on chamois 
leather, rubbing lightly on clean cotton cloth, and then dusting 
under the microscope with a stereoscopic magnification of 25 X, 
using a camel-hair brush. 
The ball was then washed for a few 
minutes in each liquid of the following sequence: anhydrous 
ether, absolute alcohol; a mixture of ether, alcohol, and concen- 
trated ammonia; conductivity water, alecohol, and anhydrous 
ether. 
The ball so cleaned was stored in 
a dessicator until 
required, when it was cleaned further as follows. After 20 min 
in a mixture of 50 per cent conc. A.R. nitric acid and 50 per cent 
conc. A.R. sulphuric acid, it was rinsed for a few minutes in four 
changes of conductivity water. 
It was then refluxed for several 
days with conductivity water in an apparatus so designed that 
the condensate dripping on the ball had only been in contact

v 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
79 
with well-refluxed Hysil glass and no spray could reach it. 
It is 
unlikely that 
a more effective washing procedure could be 
devised; simpler procedures that were tried always came under 
suspicion. 
Special methods 
of handling 
the 
cleaned 
ball, 
described in the original paper, were used to prevent it from 
becoming contaminated after cleaning. 
It seems hardly credible 
that electrolytic ions should appear during the course of a short 
experiment on a surface which had been washed by exposure to 
water at 100° C for several days; 
it is virtually certain, therefore, 
that two surfaces prepared in this way cannot provide free 
electrolytic ions to give rise to triboelectric charging. The very 
large charging actually observed must have been due to some- 
thing -other than the movement of electrolytic ions in an ad- 
sorbed water layer. 
The continued existence of triboelectric 
charging after adsorbed water has been rigorously 
expelled 
from the materials used was demonstrated by Coehn and Lotz 
(1921). 
They investigated the charging of refractory powders 
when slid down a hard-glass tube, and found that consistent 
charging remained with quartz, emery, tourmaline, and car- 
borundum after the powders had been baked out in the glass 
tube at a bright red heat in a diffusion pump vacuum. 
It is 
virtually certain in this case that the charging could not have 
been due to anything dissolved in water. 
These experiments dispose of the theory, 
so attractive to 
physical chemists, that triboelectric charging is always due to 
electrolytic effects, but do not exclude the possibility that it is 
to be explained in this way on occasion. 
The existence of 
electrolytic charging is rendered probable by experiments on the 
adsorption of water on surfaces and the variation of surface 
electrical conductivity with humidity. 
Surfaces are apt to be 
contaminated with traces of hygroscopic material, and unless 
special precautions are taken to eliminate such contamination, 
adsorption is greatly increased by it, and surface conductivity 
correspondingly. 
A common way of cleaning metal surfaces is 
by degassing; Bowden and Throssel (1951) found that gold and 
platinum foils cleaned in this way sometimes exhibit heavy 
adsorption of water vapour and sometimes do not, as shown by

80 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
Vv 
curves A and B in Fig. 5.2. 
The heavy adsorption shown in 
curve A could be eliminated, and curve B obtained, by drastic 
heating of the (platinum) 
foil. 
The water adsorbed by the 
preheated foil was never much greater than a monomolecular 
60T 
50 
401 
  
Molecular layers 
s 
B 
” 
- 
I 
  
| 
| 
| 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Relative humidity 
    
F1a. 5.2. Adsorption of water on different materials. 
layer; without preheating the adsorption was likely to be at 
least an order of magnitude greater. The nature of the contami- 
nant removed by heating was not identified, but 10-7 g/cm? of 
a hygroscopic salt would have been sufficient, and it must be 
remembered that the atmosphere always contains some sodium 
chloride particles derived from the sea. McHaffie and Lenher 
(1925) found heavy adsorption on platinum which had been 
cleaned with nitric acid and washed with distilled water: such 
treatment, it would seem, fails to remove hygroscopic contami- 
nation. 
Glass, which shows heavy adsorption, is very difficult 
to clean—perhaps impossible. Curve C, Fig. 5.2, refers to glass 
cleaned by McHaffie and Lenher by washing with organic

v 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
81 
solvents, treating with chromic acid cleaning solution for a day, 
then with fuming nitric acid, and finally washing with dis- 
tilled water. 
10" 'ohm !for mica 
1078 ohm'for glass 
  
    
Surface conductivity in units of { 
1 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Relative humidity 
F16. 5.3. 
Surface conductivity of glass and of freshly cleaved 
mica in moist air. 
It is clear that the surface conductivity of materials that are 
not hydrophobic will depend very much on chance contamination 
as well as on humidity. 
Curve 4, Fig. 5.3, shows the variation 
of surface conductivity with humidity obtained by Curtis (1914) 
for a supposedly clean piece of glass. The resemblance to curve C 
of Fig. 5.2 instead of to curve B, indicates that the glass could 
not have been clean. 
Curve B, Fig. 5.3, shows a similar result 
from Macaulay and Carson (1930) for freshly cleaved mica. The 
new surface formed by cleaning 
a crystal or fracturing an 
amorphous solid should be perfectly clean, and there is every 
reason to believe that this is so when the new surface is formed

82 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
A" 
in a high vacuum. When formed in atmospheric air, however, 
the surface immediately becomes contaminated and, 
if the 
relative humidity is high enough, adsorbs a thick water layer. 
Macaulay and Carson showed that this accounts for the high 
surface conductivity of mica freshly cleaved in air. 
The con- 
ductivity does not appear ¢n vacuo, nor in dry air that has 
been adequately filtered. 
In water vapour it only appears if 
the vapour pressure is greater than the saturation pressure. 
It does appear at lower partial pressures of water vapour than 
the saturation pressure, however, 
if the cleaved surface 
is 
exposed, even for a short time, to room air. 
It is very difficult 
to maintain the mica so clean that the high conductivity only 
appears above 
80 per cent relative humidity; 
if no special 
precautions are taken it may appear as low as 15 per cent relative 
humidity. 
The speed with which the freshly cleaved surface 
becomes contaminated is probably associated with the strong 
electric charging brought about by cleaving; if the cleaving is 
done slowly, the charge is dissipated, supposedly by conduction 
through the water layer that 
is beginning to be deposited. 
The conductivity shown in Fig. 5.3 refers to mica cleaved in 
room air and then transferred to clean water vapour for the 
measurements. 
The conductivity could not have been due to 
pure water: a layer of conductivity water 1 u thick would have 
been required and this was certainly not present. 
At the other 
extreme, the equivalent of 5 X 10-1° cm of saturated salt solution 
would have accounted for the observed conductivity. 
One 
presumes, therefore, that the actual layer was dilute electrolyte 
and Fig. 5.2 suggests that it would be of the order of 10 to 100 
molecules 
thick. 
The 
high 
surface conductivity 
of freshly 
cleaved mica is short-lived, disappearing after several hours’ 
exposure to the atmosphere. Strachan (1935) showed that this 
is due to the deposition of further contamination of a greasy 
nature. Freshly cleaved, uncontaminated, mica surfaces adhere 
strongly when brought into contact (Macaulay, 1935). Geddes 
(1936) found that freshly fractured glass behaved very much as 
freshly cleaved mica and that the water layer formed had about 
the same thickness in the two cases.


PLATE IV 
(ZG6T “aseH) (podewrep JBYMOUIOS) 90T PAYSNIO UIOIJ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
STIOA °Q 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
(2861 ‘aser) sre1sLIo oprio[yo 
  
WINIPOS WIOIJ S[IOA ‘D 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
      
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
      
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
    
  
        
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
          
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
      
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
      
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
    
  
        
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

Types of contamination 
The experiments just described suggest that there will be two 
opposing kinds of contamination on surfaces, that which gives 
rise to electrical conductivity and that which prevents it. 
The 
first type will be hydrophilic, probably dissolving in adsorbed 
water to give a conducting solution; the second type will be 
hydrophobic. 
Both kinds are freely available from the atmo- 
sphere: sodium chloride nuclei provide the hydrophilic con- 
tamination 
and hydrocarbon 
droplets 
the hydrophobic, 
to 
mention but two examples. 
There are also molecules that are 
hydrophilic at one end and hydrophobic at the other. We should 
expect the two types of contamination to have different effects 
on triboelectrification, and this will prove to be the case. 
In principle, contamination may be either particulate 
or 
disseminated. There is a type of contamination, discovered by 
Hast (1952), which must be prevalent but which seldom receives 
mention. Hast found, for instance, that sodium chloride crystals 
formed from a saturated solution do not redissolve in entirety 
when placed in water, but leave behind 
a tenuous veil-like 
membrane which retains the shape of the original crystal when 
undistorted by preparing it for examination, which he carried 
out in an electron microscope. 
The amount of material in the 
veil is extremely small and the veil is consequently very fragile, 
It can be stabilized by adding a little glycerol to the water but 
a better procedure is progressive replacement of the water by 
acetone, followed by a progressive replacement of the acetone 
by ether. The surface tension of ether being only a fifth of that 
of water, the forces tending to distort the veil during drying are 
so much reduced that the veils from small crystals can retain 
their original shape. 
This was demonstrated by combining a 
photograph of the crystal with a photograph of its veil in a 
stereoscopic viewer and obtaining 
a clear three-dimensional 
picture. 
Veils from sodium chloride are shown in Plate IV (a) 
and from crushed 
ice (somewhat damaged) 
in Plate IV (d). 
Similar veils are formed when marble grains are dissolved in 
acid; those from melted ice are found even when the ice has been

84 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
v 
formed by deposition from the vapour phase. The veils have a 
fibrous mat-like structure and are porous, the material around 
which they are formed thus being able to diffuse out during the 
preparation of the veil. Their chemical nature is unknown. 
Preparation of surfaces 
The foregoing remarks make it evident that one can frequently 
say that a surface is dirty, meaning that there is superfluous 
matter on it that could, at any rate in principle, be removed. 
Practical difficulties in removing the dirt, however, make 
it 
necessary to distinguish between a surface that has been ‘cleaned’, 
in the sense that an attempt has been made to clean it, and one 
that is clean, in the sense that the attempt has been successful. 
Furthermore, we must not take the term clean at its face value. 
A clean surface of a pure metal is one on which there are no 
atoms other than atoms of the metal itself, but what is a clean 
surface of mica? 
Mica cleaves through a plane of potassium 
atoms and it is supposed that a statistical distribution of these 
atoms remains on each of the two newly formed surfaces. 
In 
dividing the crystal, chemical bonds have been broken. 
It 
follows that the surface n statu nascendr will have unsatisfied 
bonds exposed and so be chemically very reactive; they will not 
remain in this condition if there is any opportunity for the loose 
bonds to become satisfied. 
This consideration applies not only 
to mica but to any surface formed by the cleavage of a crystal, 
and doubtless also to the case of amorphous fracture. 
The 
prevalence of oxygen and the ease with which it enters into 
chemical combination suggest that a common way in which 
surfaces 1n statu mascend: will stabilize themselves is by the 
chemisorption of oxygen. 
The adsorption of water is another 
likely process and we have seen that it is important in the case 
of freshly cleaved mica. 
The stabilization of newly formed 
surfaces involves considerable energy changes, as is proved by 
the emission of ‘Exo-electrons’ (Kramer, 
1949) during their 
ageing.t The question now arises of whether the virgin surface, 
T Too few ‘Exo-electrons’ are emitted to be significant for the mechanism 
of charge transfer in triboelectrification.

v 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
85 
or the stabilized surface, is to be regarded as 
‘clean’. 
This 
question is rendered more difficult by a further consideration. 
One would expect that many freshly cleaved surfaces would be 
charged, and this is confirmed by the generation of quite high 
potentials, of the order of 10 to 100 kV, when crystalline sub- 
stances are cleaved wn vacuo (Krotova and Karasev, 
1953). 
Amorphous substances that were tried did not give any observ- 
able charges. A sequel to the charging, when it occurs, is made 
evident by observations on pyroelectric materials. 
A pyro- 
electric crystal, such as tourmaline, fractures with opposing 
faces oppositely charged (Handbuch der Experimentalphysik, 
1930). In the course of time, however, ions from the surroundings 
neutralize the charges on the surfaces, which were initially 
polarization charges. 
If, now, the crystal is heated in a flame, 
the polarization alters with increase in temperature, but the new 
polarization charges are at once compensated by ions from the 
flame. 
On removing the crystal from the flame and allowing it 
to cool, the polarization reverts to its former value, but the ionic 
charges remain, for the time being, the same, so the crystal 
appears to develop a charge on cooling, whereas it did not appear 
to do so on heating. Surfaces which are charged in statu nascends 
must, if they remain insulating, discharge themselves by attract- 
ing ions of opposite sign from the surroundings, and these ions 
will be any ions that happen to be present. 
It is therefore to be 
expected that many surfaces that one might suppose to be clean 
will actually be covered with loosely bound positive or negative 
ions of some irrelevant substance which have got there to com- 
pensate for deeply bound ions of opposite sign which are part 
of the chemical structure of the substrate. 
The loosely bound 
ions are available to diffuse to another surface brought into 
contact with the one under consideration, and might be impor- 
tant, therefore, for triboelectrification. They are necessary for 
the stability of the surface, but the manner in which they get 
there makes them almost a contaminant. Whether such a surface 
is to be regarded as clean or not is hardly worth arguing. What 
is important is the nature of the ions that are present, and this 
will depend on the precise details of how it was prepared. It may

86 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
AY 
be misleading, when thinking of triboelectric surfaces, to speak 
of how they were ‘cleaned’; it is better to speak of how they 
were prepared. 
Crystal anisotropy 
Harper (1955) discovered that two dissimilar crystal faces of 
well-cleaned quartz charged each other at least as strongly as 
one of them was charged by a completely different material. 
Wagner (1956) found that different crystal faces of sapphire 
were charged quite differently by nickel, but that this did not 
occur with quartz. Thus it appears that different crystal faces 
must be regarded as being triboelectrically different, but that 
this difference may be obscured on occasion. The experimental 
methods and results of Harper and of Wagner will be described 
in detail in Chapter X1V ; for the present attention will be con- 
fined to the evidence for an effect of crystal anisotropy. 
The existence of some triboelectric difference between differ- 
ent crystal faces, sufficient to assign them to different, though 
neighbouring, places in a triboelectric series, was first announced 
by Vieweg (1926). 
The absence of large differences between 
different faces in his experiments is presumably due to the lack 
of stringent cleaning of his specimens. Nevertheless, he found 
a definite difference between different faces of five minerals. 
The order that he found was as follows: 
@ve end of series 
Topaz (001) 
(00T) 
Calcite (1100) 
| 
(1101) 
Barytes (110) 
(001) 
Quartz (1100) 
(1101) 
Gypsum (010) 
(010) 
Ove end of series

Vv 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
87 
The method of preparing the quartz surfaces used by Harper 
was described on p. 78. The cumulative charge after a succession 
of light contacts between one sphere and a small flat on another 
+25} 
. 
Charge in 1073e.s.u. 
  
  
_5 
1 
L 
1 
L 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
  
0O 
I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Number of contacts 
F1e. 5.4. 
Contact charging of piezoelectric quartz. 
Upper plots: X/Z. 
Lower plots: Z/Z. 
sphere was measured for pairs of surfaces differently orientated 
with respect to the crystal axes. 
The quartz used was piezo- 
electric quartz of the best quality, and the optically polished

88 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
V 
surfaces were parallel to the piezoelectric X or Z planes. The 
X plane is a natural crystal face, but the Z is not. Fig. 5.4 shows 
the charging observed. 
The upper curves are for an X face 
against a Z face; the lower curves are for pairs of Z faces, taken 
as a control. They show negligible charging by comparison with 
the X/Z combinations. The X/Z charging was very large. 
Wagner measured the progressive accumulation of charge on 
a sapphire ellipsoid as it rolled inside a rotating nickel cylinder; 
the charge was measured by induction on a probe inside the 
cylinder 
in proximity with 
the 
ellipsoid, 
connected 
to 
an 
electrometer valve and amplifier with recorded output. 
Some 
recordings are shown in Fig. 5.5. The resolution of the recording 
system was insufficient to show just how the charge varied 
during one revolution of the ellipsoid but the existence of a large 
variation during a revolution is clearly indicated. The periodicity 
of about ten revolutions corresponds to that of the rotating 
drum; a slight eccentricity of the drum gave rise to this instru- 
mental error. The slight change corresponding to one revolution 
of a quartz ellipsoid was not large enough to be significant. 
In 
the case of the sapphire, two differently cut ellipsoids were used ; 
in the one the axis of rotation was along the optic axis, in the other 
at right angles to it. 
The larger effect is with the optic axis 
tumbling: a face at right angles to the optic axis charges very 
differently from faces containing the optic axis. Unfortunately, 
Wagner was unable to specify the charging in greater detail, 
though there was some evidence from other records that there 
were two fluctuations per revolution in the case of the optic axis 
tumbling; this would indicate that the two faces at opposite ends 
of the axis were charging similarly, not oppositely, and would 
agree with Harper’s findings on quartz. 
These experiments clearly establish the existence of tribo- 
electric crystal anisotropy, from which follows an important 
corollary. 
It is only strictly in the surface that different crysta] 
faces are different; once inside the crystal its properties are 
identical irrespective of the nature of the overlying face. Hence 
one may deduce that, when different faces charge differently, 
the charging mechanism must be a truly surface phenomenon,

*zyrenb [eangeu 
: qySir wogjog 
‘six®e 013do qnoqge uonrjox ‘earyddes :qje] woljog 
*@o1[1s 
: 9ySix dog, 
‘Fuipquuing sixe o13do ‘exryddes 
: g301 dog, 
*BOI[IS pue zirenb Jo oseo oy] Ul JUBOUIUIIS o( 
09 [reuwts 003 oxe g ‘earyddes Jo eseo oyj ur ArjeurwiAse [@)sAI9 07 enp ese suorjenjonyg pides oyl ‘UISHIO [BJUSUWINIISUL JO 
exe suonenjony porred xeSuo] oyJ, 
"A[[eIU0zII0y Pej3jo[d SUOIIN[0ASI JO JoqUINU oy} pue ‘A[[eonies peyord Suidieys eyl 
MOUS spI0ooex oyJ, 
"Suifjol uo syuswrrodxe s Joudep) ul ‘[exotu Aq zjrenb pue esryddes jo sprosdifje jo Suidiey) 
°g'g *OIF 
6 
e 
e 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
SR 
o 
oA 
% 
TN 
S 
2 
AR 
s 
R 
SR 
  
  
  
  
  
o R 
  
  
  
  
 

90 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
Vv 
and not depend on the bulk properties of the materials, as does 
friction in most cases. 
There remains the question of why Harper found crystal 
anisotropy with quartz, whereas Wagner did not. 
The possi- 
bility that quartz/quartz charging is a truly surface effect but 
that nickel/quartz charging is dependent on bulk properties is 
rendered improbable by the observation that nickel/sapphire 
charging showed crystal anisotropy. A more likely explanation 
of the difference lies in the different methods of preparation 
used by Harper and by Wagner. Wagner cleaned his nickel by 
polishing it with abrasive particles in a water jet, washing it 
with a detergent, steaming, boiling, and rinsing with distilled 
water. 
It was outgassed n vacuo at 700° C, but, even after this 
treatment, it could not have been clean, since contact potential 
measurements indicated that the surface was not bare metal but 
oxide or similar. Wagner’s quartz was cleaned with nitric acid, 
chromic acid, and nitric acid again, then rinsed in tap water and 
distilled water. 
1t also was outgassed in vacuo at 700° C. Com- 
paring this with Harper’s procedure, described on p. 78, the 
outstanding difference is that Wagner, after the initial cleaning 
and rinsing in water, baked the quartz at a high temperature 
wn vacuo, whereas Harper completed the preparation of his quartz 
spheres by refluxing them in conductivity water for several days. 
Wagner investigated the charging with the quartz still sn vacuo; 
Harper did this in dry argon. 
Apart from cerium oxide from 
the optical polishing, and possibly slight vanadium contamina- 
tion from the sulphuric 
acid, 
impurities only soluble with 
difficulty should have been removed before the spheres were 
refluxed. 
After refluxing and drying no easily soluble, and 
particularly no hygroscopic contamination would be left, though 
the 
quartz would probably 
still 
retain 
an approximately 
monomolecular 
layer 
of water. 
Treating 
the 
surface with 
sulphuric acid and water would leave it covered with hydroxyl 
groups, 
their bonding depending 
on the 
detailed structure 
of the surface. 
In the face perpendicular to the optic axis 
(the X plane) there would be two hydroxyl groups for each 
silicon atom (Dunning, 1961); on a prism face there would be

v 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
91 
one hydroxyl group for each silicon atom. The situation is more 
complicated for a Z face, since it is not a natural one, but it 
would be different from an X face. 
The X and Z faces should 
therefore be quite different triboelectrically if the charging is 
associated with the presence of hydroxyl groups, but the same 
if it is dependent on the internal characteristics of the crystal. 
Thus there is nothing really surprising about the crystal aniso- 
tropy found by Harper. Wagner’s preparation of quartz, how- 
ever, involved heating at a high temperature, and this would 
drive off the hydroxyl groups. 
After such preparation, appar- 
ently, different crystal faces are triboelectrically similar. Wagner 
does not say whether the sapphire was heated in the same way 
as the quartz or not. 
If it was, the surface chemistry must be 
quite different from that for quartz. 
Inhomogeneity of surfaces 
The existence of crystal anisotropy in quartz leads one to 
expect that amorphous silica will be different triboelectrically 
from any face of quartz. It was, indeed, found by Harper (1955), 
that not only does silica/quartz give strong contact charging 
but also silica/silica. The latter charging was quite haphazard, 
with frequently occurring surface densities estimated as being 
of the order of 100 e.s.u./ecm?2. This is intermediate between the 
very large surface densities obtained with the different crystal 
faces 
of well-cleaned quartz and those found when special 
cleaning precautions are not taken. 
The haphazard charging 
of silica was found both with polished spheres cleaned by the 
washing procedure described on p. 78 for the crystal anisotropy 
experiments, and with silica which had just been melted in an 
oxygen-rich oxy-hydrogen flame. 
The technique devised for 
making it possible to work with recently melted silica is described 
in the original paper. After such treatment, there is no question 
of the silica surfaces having been contaminated, except by a 
monomolecular film of water, and there is at first sight no reason 
why the two silica spheres should have charged each other at 
all. The experiment was, in fact, undertaken in the hope of pre- 
paring surfaces which would give zero charging. What actually

92 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
Vv 
happened is shown in Fig. 5.6. Positive and negative charging of 
either surface of a pair is equally probable, and the magnitude 
of the charge follows 
a roughly Gaussian distribution. 
The 
surface inhomogeneity can be accounted for as being due to 
p— 
20 
  
  
  
  
  
Observations 
T 
L 
  
0 
’ 
1 
1 
1 
I 
-15 
! 
[ 
f 
o 
+5 
Charge (107%e.s.u.) 
F1a. 5.6. Charging of recently fused silica. 
patches of devitrification; the charging would then be that of 
amorphous silica against some crystal face of quartz, or that of 
one crystal face against another. The absence of separate peaks 
in the histogram of Fig. 5.6 corresponding to the different alter- 
natives suggests that the devitrification had not proceeded so 
far as to give well-formed crystallites, and this is supported 
by the charging being much less than in the crystal anisotropy 
experiments. 
The haphazard charging with the washed silica 
may be due to 
a similar devitrification of the Beilby layer 
formed during the polishing of the spheres, but it remains a 
little surprising that two so different preparations of the surfaces 
should lead to similar charging. 
The kind of charging found with silica/silica is, of course, to 
be expected with any two surfaces of the same polycrystalline 
material, and a polycrystalline surface will appear triboelectric- 
ally inhomogeneous to another surface, provided the charging 
is of such a nature as to depend on the crystal face, which is 
likely to be the case for those crystals which have a different 
arrangement of constituent atoms in different crystal planes. 
Consider, for example, fluorite, CaF,. A (100) face, in which the 
outermost layer of atoms are all fluorine, has an underlying 
layer containing an equal number of calcium atoms, and these

v 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
93 
calcium atoms are staggered with respect to the fluorine atoms 
above. 
A (111) face, however, has alternate layers of fluorine 
and calcium, differently spaced, and with the fluorine atoms 
directly in front of the calcium atoms. 
In the first case the 
calcium atoms are looking out, as it were, between the fluorine 
atoms; in the second case they are obscured by the fluorine 
atoms. 
As pointed out by Vieweg 
(1926), 
this geometrical 
difference must imply an important difference 
in physical 
properties between the (100) and (111) crystal faces. 
The nature of the constituent atoms in a plane of atoms 
having a definite crystallographic orientation will depend on 
where the plane in question passes through the unit cell. 
In 
rocksalt, 
for example, neighbouring 
(111) planes consist 
of 
alternate layers of entirely sodium or entirely chlorine ions. 
In 
principle, therefore, a surface cut parallel to the (111) plane will 
be covered either with positive alkali metal ions or with negative 
halogen ions; in practice it will be inhomogeneous and consist 
of patches of positive and patches of negative ions. The positive 
and negative charges will not survive for long; they will attract 
to themselves electronegative and electropositive contamination 
from the surroundings. The surface will then be inhomogeneous 
because of patchy contamination. This argument has assumed 
that there is no preferential cleavage parallel to the (111) plane. 
In many crystals there will be preferential cleavage through a 
particular part of the unit cell; in such crystals different prepared 
crystal faces can expose quite different proportions of the con- 
stituent atoms of the molecule and give rise to quite different 
surface layers of stabilizing contamination. 
It seems likely that inhomogeneity of contamination will, for 
one reason or another, be quite common. 
It was found with 
polyethylene/polyethylene charging 
in some experiments 
of 
Bowles (1961) on charging by impact. 
After conditioning the 
contact ‘point’ on one polyethylene sphere by continued impact, 
the contact ‘point’ on the other sphere was changed, and the 
charge measured for a succession of positions. Successive charges, 
in arbitrary units, were: +4-3, —8-3, —77, —21, —112, 
— 254, 
+8, 
—30, 
—15. 
After 
this 
sequence 
of observations, 
the

94 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
v 
conditioned contact ‘point’ had not changed its characteristics. 
We have here a clear example of surface inhomogeneity in an 
amorphous material. 
Since polyethylene 
is just 
a tangle of 
molecules, the inhomogeneity must have been due to patchy 
contamination. 
An experiment which made evident the consequences 
of 
patchy contamination and in which the effect of asymmetric 
rubbing doubtless also played a part, was performed by Henry 
(1953). 
He rubbed two similar pieces of polyethylene sheet 
together and showed up the resulting distribution of positive 
and negative charge by the mixed powder technique. 
The 
surface is sprinkled with a mixture of coloured powders which 
charge each other oppositely when scattered from the sprinkler. 
The two powders are attracted to the positive and negative 
charged areas on the surface respectively and delineate their 
distribution. 
The result of such an experiment 
is shown in 
Plate V (a). 
The dark spots were positively charged and the 
grey areas negatively, whilst the light areas did not collect any 
powder and presumably carried little charge of either sign. 
Inhomogeneity of charging with supposedly homogeneous sur- 
faces was found by Bredov and Kshemianskaia (1951) for metal/ 
semiconductor contacts. 
Interpretation of experiments 
Plate V (a) epitomizes three major difficulties in carrying out 
experiments 
on 
triboelectrification 
and 
in interpreting 
the 
observations, particularly when results obtained in different 
laboratories are to be compared. 
In the first place, the mere existence of patches of charge of 
different sign on a supposedly uniform piece of material, which, 
in view of the work of Bowles, must in part be ascribed to surface 
inhomogeneity, draws attention to the difficulty of so preparing 
a surface that it will behave in a characteristic way. 
Slight 
differences in technique in different laboratories, or even as 
used by one experimenter, can lead to important differences in 
triboelectric behaviour. The best example of this is the complete 
disappearance of charging described on p. 301, thought to be

PLATE V 
  
a. Inhomogeneous charging of polyethylene (Henry, 1953) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
          
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
      
  
  
      
    
    
    
    
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
    
  
    
  
  
  
    
        
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
      
      
  
  
  
      
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
    
  
    
      
    
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
b. Microphotograph of nylon fibre after 17000 rubs against polyethylene 
(Levy et al., 1958)


Vv 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
95 
caused by a monomolecular film of finger grease. 
The author 
has collected very extensive measurements which have not been 
published because attempts to obtain consistency when exploring 
the surface in detail proved elusive. 
In the second place, the existence of patches of charge of 
opposite sign on a surface which must, taking an average over 
a sufficiently large area, be uncharged, shows that any measure- 
ment which fails to discriminate between one contact ‘point’ 
and its neighbour, by taking an average, may obscure essential 
features of the electrification process. 
Consistency obtained in 
this way may be only statistical and therefore misleading: 
Harper (1955) found that neighbouring contact 
‘points’ 
on 
quartz -and silica, particularly when scrupulously cleaned, did 
not give really consistent charging. 
The reason in the case of 
silica has been discussed; in the case of the X/Z charging of 
quartz, it must be remembered that the Z face is not a natural 
one, s0 the polishing process may break the surface up into a 
step-like structure of natural faces filled in with crystallites 
having different orientations. 
This would make the 
Z face 
inhomogeneous because of crystal anisotropy. 
The interpretation of experiments in which the surface 
is 
explored in detail calls for high accuracy in the individual charge 
measurements in order to distinguish between real variations of 
charging among the contact ‘points’ and errors of measurement. 
It is, for example, difficult to be sure that a 10 per cent incon- 
sistency is real unless the measurement can be guaranteed to 
1 per cent. 
In the third place, since averages are misleading, we are led to 
inquire how small a contact area must be to be truly representa- 
tive of the charging mechanism. Some of the positive areas in 
Plate V (a) are fairly small, but even they may be larger than 
the original contact ‘points’, the charge having spread. 
The 
question is equivalent to asking what the charge density was 
when and where the charge was originally transferred. 
It is 
apparent that one could easily go wrong by orders of magnitude 
here, and we have seen that the order of magnitude of the charge 
density is very important when considering whether primary

96 
THE NATURE OF SURFACES 
v 
or secondary processes have been responsible for the charge 
transfer. 
Looking back on what has been said about the factors which 
are significant for triboelectric mechanisms, it is apparent that 
very detailed information about experimental conditions 
is 
required for a sure and unambiguous assessment of the observa- 
tions, and for adequate control of these conditions during the 
measurements. 
One would like to know about any gross con- 
tamination there may be, about the presence or absence of some 
monomolecular layer on the surface and about any modification 
of the surface such as the existence of a Beilby layer due to 
polishing, or if there is a film of tarnish. 
If such modifications 
are not so thick as to prevent the underlying material from 
influencing the charging, then the crystal orientation of this 
material is relevant. The presence of particulate contamination 
is important, and the degree of smoothness or roughness. This 
brings one to the question of whether or not the pressure between 
the surfaces is sufficient to cause plastic flow or only elastic 
deformation, and whether or not the rubbing causes the surface 
structure to break up. 
A question 
of major importance 
is 
whether the charging 
is consequent on contact followed by 
separation, any tangential motion being less than, say, 
1 u, or 
caused by friction. 
If friction is the cause, then the extent to 
which local temperatures can rise, and surface damage result, 
must be evaluated. 
Nor is this all: vibration could have an 
effect, and so on. 
. 
. 
. 
No experiments have been performed 
which take care of all these things and any such experiment 
would be extremely formidable, though not, perhaps, impossible. 
In this situation, it would seem best to proceed by asking what 
is to be expected on the basis of well established theory in 
idealized circumstances, and then to inquire whether or not the 
anticipated behaviour is actually found under conditions which 
approximate reasonably 
to those postulated. 
This we now 
proceed to do.

PART 
11 
  
CHAPTER VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
A N insulator is essentially a solid in which electric charges cannot 
move about, but it is also the kind of material that is most liable 
to be found electrically charged. 
This is almost a paradox: if 
the charges cannot move, how do they get to their destination? 
To answer the question one must inquire more closely into what 
happens when charges do move about and why, in other cir- 
cumstances, they remain where they are. In triboelectric experi- 
ments we are only concerned with slowly moving charges and 
need not, therefore, consider forces due to magnetic fields. The 
electrons or ions forming the charge on a body share the thermal 
agitation of its constituent molecules, and may diffuse elsewhere 
because of it. They will also possess kinetic energy appropriate 
to the state in which they find themselves bound to the body. 
Ions with a tendency to diffuse elsewhere may be restrained from 
doing so because they are hedged in by neighbouring molecules: 
large forces come into play to prevent the interpenetration of 
the electronic systems of atoms. Both ions and electrons can be 
constrained by electric fields: they may be prevented from 
moving off in some direction because they have insufficient 
energy to pass through a region in which their potential energy 
would be higher—they are then constrained by 
a potential 
barrier. Alternatively, they may be urged into a region where 
their potential energy is lower. 
Suppose a particle of mass m and total energy W is moving 
with speed v to the right in Fig. 6.1, and that its potential energy 
is zero on the left of the diagram.T When it enters the region 
+ In Fig. 6.1 and similar diagrams, it is energy that is plotted. 
If potential 
is plotted a similar picture 
is obtained, but inverted when 
it refers to 
a 
particle carrying a negative charge.

98 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
in which the potential energy is U, its kinetic energy is reduced 
from W to W—Uj, and its speed to /{2(W —U,;)/m}. 
Its momen- 
tum is ,/{2m(W —U;)}. When the particle encounters the second 
potential step 
it cannot proceed further without its kinetic 
energy becoming negative, since we have made U, < W < U, 
A particle obeying classical mechanics would be absolutely 
forbidden to cross the second potential barrier and would be 
reflected from it. This is no longer quite true when the motion 
  
  
  
3@ 
  
  
  
  
F1a. 6.1. Energy diagram. 
of the particle is described by quantum mechanics, unless m is 
large, when the correspondence principle requires the quantum- 
mechanical solution to approach the classical solution asymp- 
totically, because m being large makes Planck’s constant s look 
small. 
It will appear that in the context of triboelectrification 
m is large forions but not for electrons, whose wave-like character 
must be allowed for. 
It has been demonstrated by experiments 
on electron diffraction that the wavelength that determines the 
manner in which electrons are propagated is equal to ~ divided 
by the momentum, 
so that 
A = A/\/{2m(W —U)},t and 
this 
equation holds quite generally for every kind of particle. A beam 
of particles travelling to the right in the direction of x positive 
may be represented by 
f = Vn exp{2mi(x/A—vt)}. 
‘Represented by’ is to be understood in accordance with the 
conventions 
of wave-mechanics; these may be explained as 
follows. 
In addition to the wavelength A being related to the 
momentum, the frequency v is related to the energy, in this case 
through the familiar equation W = hv. The wave-function i 
is 
the exponential of a complex number and is therefore of the 
T For a full account of these matters see Klemperer (1961).

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
99 
form cos f+4zsinf. 
It cannot represent an observable quantity. 
Moreover it fluctuates with the time ¢ and has a phase, whereas 
experiments always fail to provide information about the actual 
phase of an electron beam, although its wavelength can be 
measured. The wave-function correctly describes the potentiali- 
ties for diffraction possessed by the beam but contains super- 
fluous information. 
In order to obtain an observable quantity, 
one multiplies i by its complex conjugate ¢*. Since the complex 
conjugate of e is e=0 Yuh* = n. Jab* is interpreted as being the 
particle density in real space, making the probability of finding 
a particle in an element of volume dxdydz equal to Jn* dxdydz. 
nv is the number of particles crossing unit area of cross-section 
of the beam per unit time, where v is their speed. When con- 
sidering a problem in diffraction, 
it 
is necessary to combine 
wave-functions of different relative phase, and this involves a 
term depending on the coordinates which multiplies the exponen- 
tial. The term comes from the x/A part of the exponential, not 
from the vt part. In fact, exp(—2=ivit) is a factor which remains 
a constant multiplier throughout any stationary state problem. 
We might have written s in the equivalent form of 
vV exp(— 2mivt)exp(2mix/A) 
and we know that (J; ,)(; ¥,)* = (Y 
) (e 43). 1t follows that 
exp(—2mivt) may be dropped from iy when considering stationary 
state problems without altering the values that are obtained 
finally for Ji*. 
We shall be concerned only with stationary 
states 
or with quasi-stationary states 
in which parameters 
change so slowly that it will be permissible to drop the term 
in v£. We therefore represent the electron beam by 
= vnexp(2amiz/A). 
It is customary to write 2/27 = #. After substituting for A we 
obtain 
b = Vnexpliz|{2m(W —TU)/#)]. 
If this is always a correct representation of the beam of electrons, 
it tells us what happens to the right of the second potential 
energy step in Fig. 6.1. In this region W—U becomes negative, 
but 
= Vnexp[—zy{2m(U,— W)k},

100 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
and is real. 
Yyf* is replaced by ¢? which is 
n exp[ — 2z {2m(Up— W)/A2}]. 
The wave-function has lost its periodicity, but particles are still 
to be found beyond the barrier. 
The probability of finding a 
particle falls off exponentially with an attenuation coefficient 
JBm(Uy— W), 
The exponential attenuation of the particle density beyond 
the barrier, combined with 
the conservation 
of number 
of 
particles, implies that all particles are ultimately reflected from 
the barrier, though some penetrate it temporarily for a short 
distance. Wave-mechanics calls for some reflection of particles 
even at the first potential energy step, though classical mechanics 
requires all particles to continue beyond it. The reflection of 
particles according to wave-mechanics comes about because the 
change in speed beyond the step corresponds to a change of 
refractive index, and, as with light, there is some reflection at a 
surface of discontinuity of refractive index. The penetration of 
particles into the ‘forbidden’ region to the right of U, is often 
compared with the penetration of light waves for a short distance 
into the second medium when light is being totally reflected. 
Although, in both cases, reflection is complete, the analogy is not 
quite correct. The reason why light does not continue right into 
the second medium at total reflection is that boundary conditions 
could not then be satisfied: light cannot cross the boundary. 
Light can be propagated just as well in the second medium as 
in the first if it is already in the second medium. 
This is not 
true of the particle problem; in this case it is propagation within 
the region of negative kinetic energy that is the difficulty. For 
light a better analogy is propagation in a medium in which the 
imaginary part of the complex refractive index, that is the 
absorption coefficient, 
is large. 
This happens with 
a highly 
conducting metal in which electromagnetic waves are strongly 
damped. 
There is, however, still the difference that whereas 
with light it is a sinusoidal motion that is attenuated, in the case 
of the wave-function there is no sinusoidal component at all. 
The complete solution 
of the wave-mechanical problem of

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
101 
Fig. 
6.1 can be obtained by writing down the Schrodinger 
equation for the three regions, and solving for the appropriate 
boundary conditions which are continuity of 
 and of dis/dx. 
We shall, however, continue with simplified methods, keeping 
the fundamentals of the problem to the forefront. 
  
  
  
  
F1a. 6.2. Energy diagram. 
Tunnel effect 
If the region where U > W is limited in breadth, we have the 
possibility of particles which enter it getting out at the other 
side and so passing through the barrier, though it will clearly 
have to be thin for this to occur to an appreciable extent. 
Consider now the barrier of Fig. 6.2 in which U is a function 
of x which is zero on the two sides of the barrier. 
If U is slowly 
varying (with respect to the wavelength), we may say that 
between x and xz-+6x i is being exponentially attenuated with 
an attenuation coefficient \/{2m(U— W)/}, so that 
J(x+3x) = P(x)exp[—dx\/{2m(U—W)/A%}]. 
The attenuation of ¢ due to the whole barrier is then 
exp [ — fzdx J2m(U—W) /ﬁ"*}] 
which makes the probability of a particle passing the barrier 
exp[— fzdx J(8m(U— W)/ﬁ2}], 
gince the ratio of the number of particles leaving the barrier to 
those entering it is equal to the ratio of 4 just inside the barrier

102 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
on the right to ® just inside on the left, providing that the 
particles are moving with the same speed on leaving as on 
entering, since 2 is the particle density, whereas the flow of 
particles is ¢?v. 
It is reasonable to assume that this is so since 
particles just trickle into and out of the barrier, but it is question- 
able since their speed is strictly zero where they are said to cross 
the barrier walls, and dv/dx is not necessarily the same in the 
two regions. However, if the barrier had vertical walls, there 
being discontinuities in U, then the speeds would be the same 
right up to and away from the barrier assuming U to be the 
same on the two sides, but the speeds would be different if U 
changed to a different value on the far side. 
In these circum- 
stances we would anticipate a factor of \{(W 
— U,,)/(W —Uy)}, 
multiplying the exponential, in the more general formula for 
transparency. 
The transparency would then depend, not only 
on that part of the barrier between x; and z, for which U > W 
and which the particle has to surmount or tunnel through, but 
also on the rest of the barrier which the particle could surmount 
classically. 
If this seems unlikely, it must be remembered that 
a difference in 
IV on the two sides of the barrier corresponds 
to a difference in refractive index in the case of light waves; 
the analogous problem is that of a thin film of metal between 
two transparent media of different refractive indices, when 
the transmission would depend on these refractive indices. 
In 
the wave-mechanical case also, the penetrability depends on the 
values of U on the two sides of the barrier when this has vertical 
sides. When, however, the barrier is slowly varying, the trans- 
parency depends only on that part of the barrier which the 
particle must surmount or tunnel through. 
The problem can 
be worked out mathematically by solving 
the Schrédinger 
equation using what isknown as the W.K.B. (Wentzel-Kramers— 
Brillouin) approximation. A particularly satisfactory formula- 
tion is that of Jeffreys (1942). Mott and Sneddon (1948) point 
out that the transparency obtained by the W.K.B. approxima- 
tion for 
a triangular potential barrier is identical with that 
obtained from a rigid treatment, which can be carried through 
in this case. 
The W.K.B. solution for the general case gives

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
103 
exactly the same formula for the transparency as the one we 
have derived from quite simple considerations. 
Summing up, the transmission coefficient or transparency of 
a potential barrier (the probability of a particle passing through 
the barrier), for the case in which the potential energy varies 
slowly with respect to the wavelength of the incident particles, 
depends on that part of the barrier which the particles cannot 
surmount classically, and is (cf. Fig. 6.2) 
exp [—— fzdx J{8m(U—W) /ﬁz}] : 
(6.1) 
The restriction on the nature of the barrier implies that the 
formula will only be a good approximation if the transmission 
coefficient is small. This is fortunately true for the applications 
in which we shall be interested. The transmission coefficient for 
thin barriers is greater than that given by the simple exponential 
formula. 
The way in which the mass m occurs in the formula makes 
a given barrier much less penetrable by protons than by electrons. 
The predictions of the formula for the sort of breadths and 
heights of barrier with which we shall be concerned are plotted 
in Fig. 6.3. The great difference between protons and electrons 
for the size of barrier one expects to encounter on the atomic 
scale 
is 
at once apparent. 
A one-electron-volt barrier one 
angstrom unit thick stops all but 10-1? of incident protons, but 
allows 36 per cent of incident electrons to pass through, according 
to the formula—it would be more in fact. Even a tenth of an 
electron-volt barrier one dngstrom unit wide stops all but one 
proton in a million, whereas it requires the barrier to be 14 A 
wide to have the same effect on electrons, even for a barrier 
height of one electron-volt. The penetration of potential barriers 
is even less for heavy ions than it is for protons. Two familiar 
facts are direct consequences of these conclusions. An ionic solid 
such as an alkali halide has an interior electrostatic potential that 
is periodic and therefore presents a succession of obstacles, in 
the form of potential barriers, to any ion which might otherwise 
move through the lattice. 
Order of magnitude considerations

104 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
are sufficient to show that these obstacles will be effective. 
Incidentally, if this were not the case, an ionic lattice would be 
a sort of plasma, behaving as a fluid, not as a solid. Electrons, 
however, can, in principle, pass through a lattice if the potential 
Width of barrier () 
0 
5   
  
  
  
  
  
  
10 
15 
20 
' 
7100 
eV 
\ 
A 
L\& 1/10 e 
W\ 
R 
o\ 
\ 
IO_§|¥ 
S 
. 
TR 
“& 
9 
‘ 
| 
\ 
\ 
L 
310710 L 
I\ 
§ 
l 
\ 
L. 
= 
| 
\ 
i 
\—= 
< 
Vo 
10715 
1l 
\,% 
\ 
\ 
|\ 
\ 
|\ 
\ 
. 
\ 
10720 
\ 
\\ 
\\ 
  
  
  
  
  
F1c. 6.3. Transparency of energy barriers of different square mean root 
heights in eV for electrons (full lines) and protons (dotted lines). 
barriers in the interior are not too high—for electrons the order 
of magnitude of the transparency is favourable. 
In a metal 
some of the electrons do just this—the conduction electrons 
behave like a fluid. 
The transference of charge in triboelectrification may involve 
the movement of electrons or of ions. 
In the former case the 
theory of potential barriers shows that it will be necessary to 
allow for the ability of electrons to tunnel through barriers: 
a wave-mechanical treatment is essential. 
In the latter case, 
the classical viewpoint may prove adequate.

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
105 
Energy wells 
If there were a potential barrier to the left of the particle in 
Fig. 6.2, as well as to the right, and both barriers were sufficiently 
thick to be impenetrable, then the particle would be reflected 
back and forth and confined to the region between the barriers. 
An extra electron or ion inside an otherwise neutral solid is 
restrained from crossing the surface and leaving the solid in just 
such a way. 
This may be seen from a consideration of what 
happens when a charged particle approaches the surface from 
infinity. Until the particle comes to within a couple of dngstrom 
units or so from the surface, the solid will appear as a continuous 
medium to the particle and classical considerations may be 
applied. Whether the solid is an insulator or a conductor, the 
charged particle will be attracted to the surface because of 
polarization of the medium. 
The resulting image force is ?:I—; 
—1 ¢ . 
K142 
of dielectric constant K, when the particle with charge ¢ is at 
a distance x from the surface. The decrease in potential energy 
as the particle approaches the surface from infinity is obtained 
. 
q° 
—1¢? 
y integration as -~ and 
K14x 
curves for 
K = 2 3 (polyethylene), K = 7 (glass), and for a 
conductor are plotted to within 11 A of the surface, for particles 
carrying unit elementary charge, in Fig. 
6.4. 
At about this 
distance from the surface the classical formula begins to fail and 
wave-mechanics takes over. What happens then depends on the 
nature of the particle. 
If this is an atomic system, whether 
charged or not, there will exist a long-range attractive force 
between it and the atoms of the solid, the van der Waals force, 
varying in this instance as the inverse fifth power of the distance, 
but it will always be small in comparison with the image force 
because it is due to the induction of a dipole moment in one 
molecule by the dipole moment of another, whereas the image 
force is due to induction of simple charges. The curvesin Fig. 6.4 
will not, therefore, be much affected by the van der Waals force. 
in the case of a conductor, and ——— 
in the case of an insulator 
respectively. Potential energy

106 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
V1 
When the atomic system 
‘touches’ the surface, short-range 
quantum-mechanical exchange forces come into play to resist 
interpenetration of the approaching atomic system and atomic 
systems in the solid, giving rise to a steeply increasing repulsion 
Distance from surface (R) 
10 
  
  
  
  
  
\ 
0 
4 
L 
=9.7 
| 
— 
t 
|15 
K=2-3 
— 
' 
| 
1= 
! 
| 
! 
IS 
! 
=1 
! 
l'8 
= 
-2eV[ |2 
2 
:_8_ 
/ 
3 
£/ 
e, 
lﬁl 
/ 
1 
Ol 
/ 
z 
by 
c 
-4evi 
| 
/ 
— 
ll 
3 
','t’c 
o 
! 
yls 
) 
13 
' 
Pty 
j 
: 
~6eV| 
| 
: 
/ 
] 
/ 
-8eV -   
Fia. 6.4. Energy of charged particle approaching surface. 
and a sharp turn upwards of the energy curve 
as shown for 
K = 2-3 in Fig. 6.4. Thus an approaching positive or negative 
ion finds itself confined in a potential well near the surface, and 
reference to Fig. 6.3 shows that it will have a negligible chance 
of penetrating the barrier walls. 
It will only be able to get 
inside the solid if the lattice is sufficiently loosely packed for 
there to be gaps between the atoms of the lattice, if there are 
lattice vacancies, or if dislocations of the lattice leave room for it. 
In general, however, positive and negative charges will reside 
on the surface, when these consist of charged atomic systems. 
Expressed more simply, ions will usually stay on the surface 
because diffusion into the interior is slow or impossible. 
If no 
other forces restricted the movement of adsorbed ions, there 
would be nothing to prevent them from moving freely over the

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
107 
surface. 
In most 
cases, however, some 
degree 
of chemical 
bonding will be present, so that an adsorbed ion will be attached 
specifically to a particular atom in the surface, thus restraining 
its movement. 
If the ion is firmly attached in this way, it is 
said to be chemisorbed. 
This case is shown in the curve for 
K = 7in Fig. 6.4. The potential energy well is deeper because 
of the chemical binding forces. 
It is a familiar fact that the 
surface conductivity of insulators depends markedly on the 
nature and extent of any adsorbed layers, as we should expect 
if it were due to the movement of ions. 
Consider now the case of an approaching electron, at first an 
electron arriving at the surface with sufficient energy to get 
inside. 
It can only be prevented from doing so by electrostatic 
fields, 
unlike 
an ion which will be stopped 
at the surface 
unless it possesses a very high energy indeed. The image force 
due to polarization will continue to act on the electron as it 
passes through the surface, and even inside, though it will not 
become infinite on reaching the surface 
as classical theory 
predicts, because the solid no longer looks like a continuum; 
there is a limit to the amount of polarization that can surround 
the electron because the polarized molecules have a finite size. 
Let 2¢ be the effective mean distance apart of two neighbouring 
molecular dipoles, so that ¢ is approximately the radius of the 
molecule. When the electron is inside the solid and far from the 
surface, it is surrounded by polarized dielectric extending from 
a sphere of radius ¢ to infinity (continuing to think classically 
for a moment). 
The field at a distance r from the electron is 
E = q/Kr? where 
¢ 
is now the charge on an electron. 
The 
electrostatic energy density in the dielectric medium is K £2/8x 
or ¢?/8wKrt. The total energy in the medium outside the sphere 
of radius c is 
o0 
q2 
q2 
d?' 
q2 
doridr 
= = | =& = —=—. 
f ¢ 
Y 
¢ f r2 
 2Kc 
c 
c 
  
In a vacuum, thatisin the absence of the solid, the corresponding 
energy would be ¢2/2c. 
The electron therefore loses energy of

108 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
(K1) 
2Kc 
inside. This is just over twice the amount it loses in approaching 
¢*(K—1) 
4c(K41) 
These considerations suggest that the curve of potential energy 
ought to continue into the solid in some manner like the dotted 
curve in Fig. 6.4, flattening out in the neighbourhood of —7 eV 
for a high dielectric constant. 
Polarization will, indeed, ensure 
that the curve continues through the surface to a lower level 
inside the solid, but the above calculation is only tentative and 
two other considerations must be allowed for. 
Inside the solid, assuming it to have a regular lattice structure, 
the electron finds a periodic electrostatic potential due to the 
positively charged atomic nuclei and their surrounding electron 
clouds. Thinking of averages, the electron is quite likely to be 
inside an atom. Here the electrostatic field due to that part of 
the electron cloud which is further from the nucleus will be 
unimportant, and zero if the electron cloud is spherically sym- 
metrical; the nucleus and the rest of the electron cloud will form 
a positive core which will attract the electron. On the average, 
therefore, the electron loses energy as a result of being inside the 
lattice structure. Thislowers the potential energy of the electron 
inside the solid. 
In a metal there are electrons which are relatively free to move 
about. When these electrons come up to the surface from the 
inside they meet a potential barrier such as we have drawn in 
Fig. 6.4. Being electrons, they can to some extent penetrate it. 
We should therefore expect the electron cloud in a metal to 
extend for some distance beyond the physical surface (the surface 
that feels hard to a probe, the surface at which approaching 
atomic systems experience 
a rapidly increasing repulsion). 
Detailed quantum-mechanical calculations confirm this. Mrowka, 
and Recknagel (1937) found that the electron density at rather 
under 1 A outside the metal has fallen to a tenth of the value it 
has inside the metal, for the alkali metals. The negative charge 
density outside the metal leaves a compensating positive charge 
  
amount 
in going from right outside the solid to right 
to a distance ¢ from the surface, which we found to be  

V1 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
109 
inside, thus forming a double layer which pulls the electron 
down to a still lower energy when it enters the metal. 
This is 
a true surface effect, but a little reflection will show that even 
if the electron charge density has the same distribution as in 
the interior right up to the surface, there will also be a double 
layer at the surface negative outwards. 
This double layer was 
allowed for in the argument of the last paragraph, where it was 
considered as a volume effect, but the distinction between the 
two contributions to the double layer is only a formal one. The 
contribution of the surface double layer has been computed by 
Bardeen (1936) for sodium and is not very large. Using a simple 
model of the metal the result was 1-0 eV; allowing for correla- 
tion forces reduced it to 0-4 eV. 
The combined effects of polarization, surface double layer, 
and averaging the interior periodic potential, lower the potential 
energy of the electron as it enters a solid to some value different 
from that calculated from polarization alone. The amount by 
which it is lowered is called the inner potential of the solid. 
Since the strength of the surface double layer will depend on 
the crystal face involved, the inner potential would appear not 
to be uniquely defined. The electrostatic potential, however, is 
single-valued. The paradox comes about because we have been 
thinking of one crystal face at a time; when we consider together 
all the crystal faces that enclose a solid, surface charges are 
found to be necessarily present and this puts the matter right. 
Exactly the same trouble arises over contact potentials and in 
this case it is significant for experimental measurements. 
It 
will therefore be convenient to defer further discussion of the 
problem until dealing with contact potentials on p. 179. 
Inner potentials can be calculated from theory, but not very 
accurately. They can be measured by electron diffraction tech- 
niques. The change in potential on crossing the surface implies 
a change of wavelength which gives rise to refraction of the 
beam which is different in different orders, thus enabling the 
inner potential to be determined. 
In principle the measured 
value might depend on the energy of the exploring electrons, 
because electrons of different energy will follow different paths

110 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
through the lattice and so take different space averages of 
potential. The effect is, however, small, and the inner potential 
is usually assumed to be a straight average. 
So far we have been speaking of an unbound electron extra- 
neous to the lattice structure. An electron bound to its nucleus 
does not sample the potential, as it were, in the same way. 
If 
closely bound, it resides in a much deeper potential energy well 
than that given by the average electrostatic potential. 
A con- 
duction electron, even though it is free to move throughout the 
metal, will also not sample the potential in the same way as the 
electron from outside. 
It follows that the potential in which 
the conduction electrons find themselves is not necessarily iden- 
tical with the inner potential, though it will be about the same. 
We now ask what happens if an electron has sufficient kinetic 
energy to get some distance into a metal, but loses this energy 
in inelastic collisions before it has the chance of escaping again. 
Classically, it would settle down with energy at the depth of the 
inner potential if the temperature were absolute zero, and just 
above this level at higher temperatures, allowing for its kinetic 
energy of thermal agitation—small at ordinary temperatures on 
the scale of Fig. 6.4. We might suppose that quantum-mechanic- 
ally it would settle down similarly into the somewhat different 
level appropriate to conduction electrons. 
It does not do so, 
because this level, and higher ones too, are already occupied, 
and the exclusion principle forbids any more electrons from 
joining the ones already there. We cannot say just what it will 
do, nor what it would do in an insulator or semiconductor, until 
we know what systems of energy levels are associated with these 
different materials. 
In the meantime, there is more to be said 
about the surface barrier, though not until a quick look has been 
given at the conduction electrons in a metal. 
The free-electron gas 
Many of the properties of the metallic state can be described 
with surprising accuracy in terms of a model of the metal in 
which the periodic potential due to the lattice structure 
is 
smeared out into an average, so that the conduction electrons

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
111 
are confined in a simple potential energy well like that in Fig. 6.5. 
Its containing walls are provided by the surface barrier that we 
have just described; its depth will be called U, (not the inner 
potential). 
Apart from the containing walls, the electrons are 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
F1c. 6.5. Energy levels in a metal. 
supposed to be unrestrained, having no significant interaction 
with each other, nor with the lattice. The lattice ions together 
with the electrons form an electrically neutral assembly, so it 
is not altogether outrageous to ignore interactions. By doing so, 
we can proceed by considering a single electron confined in the 
energy well. We note in passing that there is no logical objection 
to drawing the curve showing electrostatic potential as a function 
of position, and hence 
of electron energy against position, 
precisely. 
Although the uncertainty principle does not allow 
an electron to be used to explore the potential with sufficient 
precision, it can be explored by using a heavy particle such as 
a proton. 
We have seen that a J-wave representing a stream of electrons 
will be reflected from the potential walls in Fig. 6.5; 
it will 
nevertheless penetrate them for a short distance. 
The wave- 
function will be wave-like within the energy well, but decrease 
exponentially beyond the barrier after this has attained its full 
height. We must now inquire what is the proper way of joining 
the two wave-functions at the boundary. 
The walls of the 
barrier may be steep; in the limit it may have vertical sides, in 
which case some property of the wave-function must be dis- 
continuous, and the question arises as to what thisis. As before, 
let electrons travelling to the right in the well in Fig. 6.5 be 
represented by 
b = Vnexpliz/(2m(W—U)/#}].

112 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
Observe that this is the solution of the differential equation 
" 
2m 
- = ﬁ' (W— U)Sb, 
which is Schrodinger’s equation for this case. 
AN 
VAV 
F1c. 6.6 
  
  
We have made W—U discontinuous at the boundary, and 
this implies a discontinuity in " /i, though a finite one. ' must, 
however, be continuous, since if it were not ¢ would go to infinity 
at the discontinuity. 
It follows that ¢ also must be continuous. 
The wave-functions must be joined in such a way as to make 
both i and ' continuous. This will apply to real and imaginary 
components separately. 
Suppose now that a periodic wave-function has to be joined 
to an exponentially decreasing one at x = 0 as in Fig. 6.6. 
To 
the right of the origin the wave-function is all real; continuity 
in ¢ implies that this must be so for the periodic wave-function 
on the left as well. 
This is in order because the wave incident 
at 
x = 0 must have been totally reflected if the wave-function 
on the right falls off to zero. 
The wave-function on the left 
then has the form vn exp{i(k, x+&)}-+vVn exp{—i(k, x+ ¢)} where 
ky = \J{2m(W—U;)/%?}, and this reduces 
to 2+vncos(k,z-+¢). 
This wave-function represents standing waves and ¢ is the phase 
shift at the origin. To the right of the origin the wave-function 
is a exp(—k, ), where k, = /{2m(U,— W )/#?*} and a, as well as ¢, 
has to be chosen so that the wave-functions fit together. 
Con- 
tinuity in ¢ and ¢’ at x = 0 requires that 2vncosé = a and 
—2k, ¥nsind = —ak,, whence tan ¢ = k,/k,. 
If the barrier is 
high, k, is large and ¢ is nearly 1#. This means that the periodic 
wave-function is joined to the exponential function where the

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
113 
former is small, so requiring only a short tail to complete the 
picture, as drawn in Fig. 6.7. 
If we follow a i)-wave inwards 
from one barrier, it starts near zero at that barrier, and will not, 
in general, meet the corresponding wave starting at the other 
A\ A 
VARV 
  
X ——— 
  
  
Fic. 6.7 
barrier, in the middle, without any discontinuities in ¢ and ’. 
For nearly all wavelengths the waves will not join properly in 
the middle. They do not, in fact, represent electron states that 
are permitted by wave mechanics. 
Only those states will be 
permitted which are represented by wave-functions for which 
the distance between the barriers is equal to an integral number 
of half wavelengths, approximately when the wave-function 
has a tail extending into the barrier, exactly when the tail is 
negligible in extent. From now on we shall simplify our descrip- 
tion of the metal by neglecting the tail. 
It must not be supposed 
that the foregoing discussion gives a physical reason for some 
electron states being permitted and others disallowed; ¢ itself 
is not a physical entity. The discussion is equivalent to saying 
that if the permitted states are given by solutions of Schré- 
dinger’s equation then they will be the standing waves that we 
have 
found. 
The evidence 
that Schrédinger’s equation 
s 
applicable to such problems is overwhelming, though rather 
indirect in this instance. 
It may seem at first sight to be self- 
evident that disallowing certain wavelengths, which is equiva- 
lent to disallowing certain energies, must be wrong. What, in 
principle, 
is to prevent one from putting an electron with a 
disallowed energy into a box with perfectly reflecting walls and 
then suddenly shutting the lid ? The answer is—nothing, but the 
result will not be as simple as one would expect. Shutting the

114 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
box does not alter the form of the wave-function at that moment, 
but it does alter the way in which it must be interpreted. When 
the box is shut the wave-function must be considered to be 
broken up into its appropriate Fourier components, each com- 
ponent corresponding to a permitted state. The Fourier coeffi- 
cients of the individual waves determine the probability of the 
electron being found in the corresponding state if its energy is 
checked. On carrying out such a check the electron may happen 
to be found in any permitted state, with a high probability that 
its energy will be near the value it had when the box was shut, 
but it will never be found in any disallowed state. The kind of 
quantization that has just been described for a box, disallowing 
all but certain ‘stationary’ states, is an inevitable consequence 
of wave mechanics whenever a particle is confined within 
a 
limited region of space. 
If we reckon energies in Fig. 6.5 above the floor of the energy 
well, the total energy of an electron in the well is equal to its 
kinetic energy and we have W = 1mov?2. 
This gives 
A = hjmv = h/\/(2mW). 
If L is the distance between the barrier walls, and W, the energy 
of the state which has n half wavelengths fitting between the 
walls, then 
nh 
  
SEmi) — 
n2h? 
or 
Mo = g 
If we now introduce a number of electrons into the potential 
energy well, assume there is no interaction between them and 
none with the lattice that has been left out of the picture, except 
that they can lose energy to the lattice and so settle down in the 
lowest permissible energy states, then the levels W, will be filled 
progressively, two electrons of opposite spin going into the levels 
Wy, W,, W,... until the electrons are all accommodated. Higher 
levels than these will be unoccupied at the absolute zero of 
temperature, since there is no thermal agitation to lift electrons 
into higher unoccupied levels, though thermal agitation would, 
if present, blur the top of the occupied set of levels. 
In a metal

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
115 
there is the order of one conduction electron for each unit cell 
of the lattice; in the one-dimensional model there will be the 
order of one electron for each atomic spacing d. Hence, by sub- 
stituting 
n = L/2d in the formula for W, we obtain W, the height 
of the filled set of levels above the bottom of the energy well. 
We find W, = h?/32md?. This is independent of L, so the height 
of the top of the electron distribution is the same for all sizes of 
box. The levels are closely spaced. At the top, the separation 
between two levels is easily seen to be A2/8mLd. For L =~ 1 cm 
and d =~ 1 A, this gives an energy difference of 4 X 107 eV. For 
most purposes the level system may be treated as a continuum 
but the levels are in fact discrete. 
The level system of the one-dimensional model must be revised 
for three dimensions before applying it quantitatively to a metal. 
This can be done by following a similar argument through for 
waves in a rectangular parallelepiped; it can moreover be shown 
that the same level system holds for a body of irregular shape. 
It will, however, be more convenient here to look at the problem 
from a completely different point of view, that of statistical 
mechanics. 
A particle confined in a rectangular box, but otherwise subject 
to no forces, can be specified by three space coordinates z, v, 
and z, and three more coordinates giving its velocity—or, if we 
prefer, three coordinates giving its momentum, p,, p,, and p,. 
The six coordinates p,, p,, p,, %, ¥, 2 specify a point in the six- 
dimensional space known as phase-space. Now a plane s-wave 
in unlimited real space representing 
a beam of particles of 
definite energy provides no information about the position of 
the particles. When, however, the particles are in a box, their 
position is known to the extent that they are in the box and not 
outside it. 
If the box is a cube of side L, the uncertainty in the 
particle’s « coordinate is L, and similarly for ¥ and z. 
If there 
are several particles in the box, the uncertainty in the position 
of any one of them must be less than L, since otherwise they could 
not be counted. 
If we started counting, but did not know at all 
where in the box the first particle counted had been, then we 
would not know when trying 
to count the second particle

116 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
whether or not it had been counted already as the first particle. 
It is apparent that if we are sure that there are n particles in the 
box, then we must be able to locate an individual particle to 
within a volume L3/n in order to be certain of being able to 
count all the particles. 
The product of the uncertainties Az, 
Ay, and Az in the space coordinates of any particle must there- 
fore be L3/n. We can have any number of particles we please 
in the box provided their position can be sufficiently accurately 
specified. 
Accurate specification of position, however, is only 
allowed by the uncertainty principle if there is an appropriate 
doubt about the momentum coordinates. 
Thus the particles 
may only be packed closely in real space if they are sufficiently 
loosely packed in momentum space. We could, of course, count 
the particles by the alternative procedure of measuring their 
momenta, in which case the individual particles would need to 
have momenta sufficiently far apart to be recognizably different. 
They would need to differ by at least the uncertainty in one of 
them. The uncertainty principle then tells us that they can 
only be closely packed in momentum space if they are loosely 
packed in real space. 
If they are to have nearly the same 
momentum, the box must be large in order to contain them. 
If a finite number of particles is packed into a finite box, the 
particles cannot under any circumstances have zero momentum 
and must therefore possess some energy. If they are able to lose 
excess energy by some dissipative process such as the radiation 
of electromagnetic waves, they cannot lose all their energy. 
Unlike particles obeying classical mechanics, which settle down 
in a state of rest at the absolute zero of temperature, particles 
obeying quantum mechanics still retain some energy at the 
absolute zero. This is the zero-point energy. The restriction on 
closeness of packing is reciprocal in real and momentum spaces; 
it may be expressed more simply as a restriction in phase-space. 
Since Ap,, Ax ~ h, and similarly for y and 2, the restriction may 
be obtained quite simply by multiplication as 
Ap, Ap, Ap, AxAyAz ~ k3. 
(6.2) 
A formal treatment gives the same result with ~ replaced by

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
117 
the sign of equality. The result means that quantum-mechanical 
particles require at least a volume %2 in phase-space per particle. 
When they have settled down in equilibrium at the absolute 
zero, this is the amount of phase-space each will occupy. We 
have spoken of particles, but the argument really applies to 
states which may or may not be occupied at a given time by 
a particle. At absolute zero the states of lowest energy will be 
filled from the bottom up until all particles have been assigned 
to a state; at higher temperatures thermal agitation will lift 
some of the particles into higher unoccupied states, leaving 
some of the lower states empty. 
Returning to the model of a metal in which the conduction 
electrons are treated as behaving like a free-electron gas, let 
the number of electrons be n, per unit volume, and let them be 
confined in a box of volume L3 as before, though now of any 
shape. The total number of electrons is n, L3. For this number 
to be specified, the electrons may be counted either by localiza- 
tion in real space or by distinguishing between their different 
momenta. 
The former requires a relatively small uncertainty 
in space coordinates but involves 
a relatively large one in 
momentum 
coordinates 
which 
calls 
for 
enough 
difference 
between the individual momenta for the corresponding states 
to be distinguishable. 
It follows that the average momentum 
must 
be considerable. 
If, however, 
the electrons 
are only 
localized to the extent that they are known to be in the box, 
then the individual momenta can be relatively closely spaced. 
This makes the average momentum and also the average energy 
much less. 
It is apparent that the second alternative is the 
one that will apply to the case of conduction electrons which 
are free to move throughout the metal, and will give the lowest 
state of energy corresponding to equilibrium. 
To each state, 
therefore, we must assign 
a volume L3 in real space, which 
leaves us with a volume 43 (the necessary volume in phase-space) 
divided by 
L3, 
in momentum space. 
Kach state therefore 
requires a volume A3/L2? in momentum space, and successively 
higher states will have representative points in momentum 
space successively further from the origin. The position of the

118 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
representative points in momentum space will indicate the mag- 
nitude of the corresponding momentum and also its direction. In 
three dimensions the representative points will fill a sphere of 
radius equal to the absolute value of the momentum correspond- 
ing to the maximum energy, that is to the energy of the highest 
filled level. The volume of the sphere will be equal to the number 
of the states multiplied by A3/ L3, assuming, as we have done so 
far, that electrons are of their nature indistinguishable. Allowing 
for being able to distinguish between electrons of opposite spin, 
the volume will be 23/2 L3 multiplied by the number of electrons. 
For a total number n, L3 the volumeis 3n,43. Thisisindependent 
of the volume of the metal because the larger the block of material 
the closer spaced are the levels which have to accommodate 
the greater number of electrons, and the two effects cancel. 
If 
P = J(Pi+pi-+p?), then p = ,/(2mW) and the volume of the 
sphere in momentum space which contains all the electron states 
which will be filled at absolute zero is $7w(2mW,)!. This must be 
equal to in, A3, whence 
W, = ﬁi(?’_".?)% 
(6.3) 
T 8m\ 
7 
This value for W, for the three-dimensional case differs from 
the result we found for the one-dimensional case in that the 
electron density now occurs as the § power instead of the square, 
as well as in the multiplying constant. 
If the number of levels, each of which may be occupied by two 
electrons of opposite spin, in the energy range dW, is Ny, dW, 
then N, 
= 1L3 dn,/dW,. This gives 
N, = 22 L3(2m)h-3 
W, 
(6.4) 
We see that the distribution of energy levels in the energy well 
of Fig. 6.5 is non-uniform: the levels become more closely spaced 
at high energies. The density of levels is zero at the bottom of 
the well. Above a certain energy the levels are unoccupied; the 
cut-off is sharp at the absolute zero. 
Diagrams such as Fig. 6.5, even in simplified form, are indis- 
pensable for an understanding of contact electrification. Fig. 6.5 
also makes clear the most important difference between the

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
119 
quantum theory of metals and the classical theory. 
In the 
classical theory all the non-localized electrons are available for 
the conduction of electricity; in the quantum theory this is not 
so. 
For an electron to contribute to an electrical current, 
it 
must be accelerated by the applied electric field so as to acquire 
a drift velocity, and it will therefore make no contribution to 
the current unless it gains some energy from the field. The only 
way in which it can gain energy is to be lifted into a level above 
the cut-off. The applied field will be able to lift electrons from 
near the top of the distribution into unoccupied levels, but will 
not be able to provide the necessary energy to lift up electrons 
from lower down since, as may easily be calculated, W is of the 
order of several electron-volts. Thus only a few of what we have 
called conduction electrons are actually available for conduction. 
Field emission 
When 
a metal 
is heated, electrons are raised by thermal 
excitation into levels above the top of the distribution with a 
cut-off at W, shown in Fig. 6.5 ; at a sufficiently high temperature 
some will be excited above the top of the surface barrier and so 
be able to escape freely from the metal, thus giving rise to the 
phenomenon 
of thermionic emission. 
If an electric 
field 
is 
applied to the surface of the metal, in the direction which assists 
the electrons to escape, the surface barrier will be changed as 
shown in Fig. 6.8. 
It is no longer necessary for an electron to 
surmount a barrier of the full height U, for it to escape freely 
from the metal: the barrier now has a maximum height which 
ig less than U,. 
For moderate applied fields this has the effect 
of increasing thermionic emission—the Schottky effect. 
For 
much larger fields the surface barrier is not only lower, it is also 
significantly narrower, and electrons can go through it, so escaping 
without needing to be thermally excited. 
This effect is known 
as cold emission, autoelectronic emission, or field emission. Field 
emission will now be considered because it has enabled a decision 
to be made about 
the 
form 
of the surface barrier. 
This 
justifies 
assumptions 
that will 
be made when 
considering 
the 
similar problem 
of 
the passage 
of electrons between

120 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
two metals when there is a gap of molecular dimensions between 
them. The problem of the gap is of crucial importance for the 
contact electrification of metals, and indirectly for all contact 
electrification. 
  
  
  
  
  
F1e. 6.8. INustrating Schottky effect and field emission. 
The energy of an electron, not too close to a metal surface, is 
the sum of its energy in the applied field and its energy due to 
the attraction of its image in the surface. Assuming that the 
surface barrier 
is determined in this way, Sommerfeld and 
Bethe (1933) have derived 
a formula for field emission. 
In 
order to avoid cumbersome mathematics, however, the simpler 
assumption of a triangular barrier will be first made, following 
the original treatment of Fowler and Nordheim (1928), and the 
formula of Sommerfeld and Bethe then merely quoted. 
The 
formulae will be compared with the experimental results of 
Haefer (1940). 
In the absence of an applied field, the surface barrier 
is 
assumed to be a step function; in the presence of the field it is 
as shown in Fig. 6.9. 
One must be careful of units; it will be 
convenient to use electrostatic units for electrical quantities 
and c.g.s. units otherwise. 
Fig. 
6.9 refers to an electron of 
charge 
¢; energies are measured vertically in ergs, distances 
from the surface horizontally in centimetres. 
The component 
of velocity of an electron normal to the surface is v,. 
¢ is the

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
121 
work function in ergs; the work function in eV is 300 ¢/e. The 
slope of the outside barrier is eF ergs/cm, F being the applied 
field in e.s.u. 
  
  
  
  
F1c. 6.9. 
Field emission. 
For typical emission currents only a very small proportion 
of electrons hitting the surface barrier will get through; the 
barrier may therefore be regarded as slowly varying and the 
probability of an electron passing the barrier is, from equation 
(6.1) and remembering that # = h/2m, 
(1—R)exp{—éﬁ\%7z—-) f JU—W) dx}, 
R being the proportion of electrons reflected by the potential 
discontinuity at the surface. 
U is the height of the barrier as 
a function of x and W the kinetic energy imv? (cf. Fig. 6.2). 
This formula for the transmission coefficient of the barrier was, 
however, derived from a consideration of the one-dimensional 
case which is equivalent to taking the electron to be moving 
normal to the barrier. 
We now require the formula for the 
three-dimensional case in which the electron may be moving 
obliquely. Physical intuition, which is really based on a classical 
point of view, would suggest retaining W = 1mw? butintegrating 
obliquely through the barrier. 
Actually, this is quite wrong: 
the proper thing to do is to put W = ime2 and integrate as 
before. That thisis so follows from a mathematical consideration 
of what solutions of Schriodinger’s equation are permissible for 
a rectangular block. Permissible wave-functions are always the 
product of functions of x only with functions of ¥ only and of 
z only. 
It is the function of x only that has, so to speak, to get 
through a y, z face. The extent to which it does so depends on A,

122 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
i.e. on the 
 component of the momentum and therefore on v, 
In consequence, 
the formula for the 
‘oblique’ transmission 
coefficient becomes 
(I—R)exp{ — 47“/22m) f J(U—3me2) dx}. 
For the barrier of Fig. 6.9, \(U—1imv2)is \(p+ Wy—eFx—Lmv2). 
The integration is to be carried out for v, constant, and the 
limits for z are 0 and (1/eF)(¢-+W,—Lmo2). After writing 
  
mvz = pi/2m, 
the exponent becomes 
(1/eF) 
¢+ Wo—p3/2m) 
  
S 
[ 
W eFa—pij2m) do 
0 
Let W, = p3/2m. 
The transmission coefficient for an electron 
whose velocity normal to the surface is v, is then seen to be 
(I—R)exp{ 8’;‘/}&2;7’ (¢+ P 
“’)2} 
Consider now the distribution of electrons with respect to v,. 
It is convenient to do this from first principles, and we shall 
assume a sharp cut-off at the top of the distribution. We have 
seen on p. 118 that each electron in a cube of side L requires 
a volume A3/2L3 in momentum space. 
Hence the number of 
electrons in an element of volume of momentum space is inde- 
pendent of v, and equal to (2L3/h%) dp,dp, dp,. The proportion 
of such electrons hitting unit area of the y, z face in unit time is 
(vy/L)(1/L?), so the number is 
v, 
1 
213 
2 
TI2 13 dp,dp, dp, = h3pxdpmdpyd@z' 
  
The representative points in momentum space are uniformly 
distributed in a sphere of radius p,. 
A section of this sphere 
normal to the p, axis has area =(pi—pZ). 
Integrating the

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
123 
expression for the number of electrons hitting unit area in unit 
time with respect to py and p, therefore gives 
mh3 
(po 
pi)px dpx' 
The field emission current density, which is € times the total 
number of electrons escaping per cm?/sec, can now be written 
down as 
Do 
27e(1— R 
8ma/(2 
3 
0 
  
  
2m 
The substitution p3—p2 = p gives 
faiCeel fpexp{ e ¢§(1+2 
sb) }dp 
; 
The transparency of the barrier is small and therefore decreases 
rapidly for increasing height and width. 
p, cannot be much 
less than p, without the transmission coefficient of the barrier 
becoming negligible. {14 (p/2m¢)}* may therefore be expanded 
by the binomial theorem, accepting only the first term in p. 
Furthermore the upper limit of the integral may be taken as co. 
This gives 
T o S o1 )5 
_ SFY1—R) 
8m(2m) 2\ [ 
= T 8mhg 
¥ {— 
3eh T 
9{’%} f Be b, 
  
  
  
  
  
  
and 
f fe—0do = 
1. 
¢ 
The current density in e.s.u.,for the barrier of Fig. 6.9,is therefore 
SF2(1—R) 
8my/(2m) 
Sl 
eXp{_ 
3eh T 9{’%} 
(6.5) 
This is the equation obtained by Fowler and Nordheim, except 
 

124 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
that they found 1—R = 4¢iW}/(¢+W,), obtaining, 
for the 
current density in e.s.u., 
e 
Wi F? 
ox {_877\/2?7% ¢%} 
Sl (BT T 
3T 
It is easily shown that allowance for the blurring of the top of 
the electron distribution by thermal agitation does not alter the 
formula for moderate temperatures. 
In more convenient units, the formula of Fowler and Nordheim 
gives, for the current density in amp/cm?, 
  
6:2x10-6   
WoE 
 p(—685x 10744/ ) 
(6.6) 
(Wot+)t 
| 
| 
W, and ¢ are in electron-volts and ¥ in V/cm. 
A surface barrier which is determined well outside the surface 
by classical electrical forces, in the present case by the applied 
field and image force, such as shown in Figs. 6.4 and 6.8, does 
not present any discontinuity to electrons approaching from 
inside. 
For a well-rounded barrier of this type, one does not 
expect significant reflection of electrons. Nordheim (1928) has 
shown that the reflection is only a few per cent; it is therefore 
customary to take 1— R = 1. 
Sommerfeld and Bethe have carried out a calculation of the 
current density for field emission through a barrier given by 
classical electrostatics, obtaining 
  
1-5 % IO—GEEexp{ _ 685X 107‘}5?;(3'62 X 10_4F%)} , 
(6.7) 
¢ 
F 
¢ 
the units being the same as for the corresponding Fowler and 
Nordheim formula. The v of the formula is a function tabulated 
by Nordheim (1928). 
The classical barrier must be right at a sufficient distance 
from the surface, but it is questionable whether it is a sufficient 
approximation down to the top of the electron distribution, 
from the neighbourhood of which the field emission comes. 
Sachs and Dexter (1950), however, have shown that the classical 
barrier should be 
a good approximation down to 
a distance 
outside the surface equal to about the lattice spacing. 
The

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
125 
adequacy of the classical approximation for that part of the 
barrier which is involved in field emission has been demonstrated 
unequivocally by Haefer (1940) 
in 
a paper which was the 
culmination of extensive experimental work carried out in the 
Siemens Research Laboratory, Berlin. 
In earlier work the onset of field emission had appeared for 
apparent field strengths an order of magnitude less than required 
by theory, with a dependence on work-function corresponding 
to ¢3 in the exponential rather than ¢:. 
Schottky (1923) had 
suggested that the emission for what appeared to be too low 
fields was due to surface irregularities increasing the local field 
above the average value, and showed that this could amount to 
an order of magnitude in an extreme case. Localization of the 
emission also meant that the actual emitting area could be much 
less than that supposedly subject to the high field. 
Haefer 
eliminated these uncertainties by developing a technique for 
preparing smooth tungsten needles with a radius of curvature 
at the tip in the range 10— to 10-6 cm. A tip of about the right 
size was obtained by etching, and then shaped by heating or by 
sputtering. 
Its size could be reduced by sputtering, making use 
of field emission from the tungsten itself in argon gas; it could 
be increased by heating, by thermal conduction from the loop 
of wire supporting it and carrying a current. The tip could be 
smoothed by melting as a result of taking a large field current 
from it #» vacuo. These procedures were controlled by examin- 
ing the tip with an electron microscope. 
The tips used for the 
measurements were seen to be smooth to within 100 A and were 
thought to be smooth down to atomic dimensions. The effective 
radius of curvature was found from measurements with an 
electron microscope, and the distribution of emission over the 
surface investigated using the tip in a field emission microscope. 
The final preparation of the tip involved heating it to 2400° K 
for half an hour in a vacuum better than 10-8 torr, so eliminating 
oxygen from the surface. From such tips Haefer could take as 
much as 10-2 amp with a field of 3 X 107 V/cm, the current being 
steady to 
1 per cent. The variation of emission with field was 
checked by varying the radius of curvature of the tip; the

126 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
variation with ¢? by depositing barium, potassium, and caesium 
on the tungsten by distillation ¢n vacuo. 
It was found that the 
spurious results giving a variation with ¢2 had been due to the 
formation of crystallites instead 
of a uniform layer. 
With 
uniform layers the variation was in accordance with expectation. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
~ 
~. 
..6 
‘\ 
~ 
= ~ \\Ojg 
(& 
\isur 
\ef))e 
\ 
“~ [~ 
~ 
N 
~ 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
  
% (108volt™'cm) 
F1c. 6.10. Current/field characteristics for pure tungsten. 
Haefer’s measurements can be compared with theory without 
there being any adjustable constants. This is done in Fig. 6.10, 
taken from Haefer’s paper. 
In making such comparisons it is 
customary to divide the current by the square of the field and 
plot the logarithm of this against the inverse of the field. The 
result should be 
a straight line, 
at any rate approximately. 
The experimental points lie accurately on the theoretical curve 
calculated from Bethe and Sommerfeld’s formula; they do not 
agree with Fowler and Nordheim’s formula. Older measurements 
would require enormous corrections to bring them into line with 
either theory. 
It should, perhaps, be mentioned that the excel-

V1 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
127 
lence of fit between the experimental points and the theoretical 
curve is better than would be anticipated from the experimental 
errors as estimated by Haefer. Nevertheless, his work makes 
it quite clear that 
the 
classical form of surface barrier 
is 
correct for the case of field emission, and verifies the quantum 
mechanical tunnelling of electrons through such 
a potential 
barrier. Haefer furthermore concluded, from his measurements 
on coated cathodes, that the proper formula to use in these 
circumstances is once more that of Sommerfeld and Bethe, with 
the appropriate work-function, and not the more complicated 
formula of Stern, Gossling, and Fowler (1929). 
Gap between two metals 
Haefer’s experiments were carried out with considerable gaps 
and potentials up to 20 kV. With smaller gaps lower voltages 
suffice to give field emission; early workers used 200 to 300 V 
and a gap of about 1 u. There is an important paper by Rother 
(1926) dealing with field emission under such conditions. Since 
Haefer found that the field necessary to give appreciable emission 
was several tens of millions of volts per centimetre, and since 
work-functions are usually several electron-volts, it follows that 
the barriers just permitting field emission have a width of the 
order of 10 A. 
A gap between two metals smaller than this 
should not present a very great resistance to a current flowing 
across it; a sufficient potential could be developed across the gap 
to carry the current by field emission. 
In fact, the voltage is 
less than we would suppose from this argument, because for 
very small gaps it is not necessary to have an applied field in 
order to provide the downhill slope on the far side of the barrier 
—the surface barrier of the other metal brings the potential 
down on the other side and, if the gap is small, the current can 
flow by tunnelling without any application of a voltage com- 
parable with that required for field emission. 
The first theoretical treatment of this effect was given by 
Frenkel (1930); Ehrenberg and Honl (1931) have given detailed 
calculations of the current that passes between two plane metal 
surfaces separated by a small (unvarying) gap when a fraction

128 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
of a volt is applied across the gap. Ehrenberg and Honl assumed 
a barrier bounded by straight lines but, as we have seen, the 
proper form is the one given by a classical consideration of image 
forces. The theory appropriate to this form of barrier was given 
by Sommerfeld and Bethe (1933). 
Again, we shall give the 
mathematical treatment for the simple case and quote the result 
obtained by Sommerfeld and Bethe. 
If a current is flowing in an electrical circuit and a plane 
parallel gap is introduced into one of the conductors carrying 
the current, then some current can continue to flow if the gap 
is narrow enough. Suppose a current to be already flowing when 
the gap is progressively opened up, so that there is an excess of 
electrons flowing in the direction of positive 
x above those 
flowing in the direction of negative x, the gap being in the y, 2 
plane and of width a. 
The gap introduces a potential barrier 
that some electrons may surmount and some penetrate; the 
result is that a proportion of the current initially flowing can 
continue to flow, and this without any potential difference across 
the barrier being required to ensure that this part of the current 
continues to flow. 
Since, however, more current flows towards 
the gap than away from it, a space charge of electrons will build 
up on the near side and this will be matched by a positive space 
charge (electron deficit) on the other side, so forming a double 
layer. 
It will be seen from Fig. 6.11 that the resulting potential 
difference is in a direction to increase the current by raising the 
electron distribution on the near side of the gap above that on 
the far side, so allowing electrons to spill over through the 
barrier. 
The situation is shown in Fig. 6.12. 
Obviously, the 
potential difference will continue to rise until the spilling over 
just supplies the difference between the arrival of electrons at 
the near side of the gap and the continued progress of that 
proportion of them that gets through. The current that comes 
from the spilling- over does require 
a potential difference 
to 
drive it through the gap. 
For the large gaps in which we shall 
be interested the transparency of the gap 
is 
so small that 
the spilling over contributes effectively the whole current. The 
calculation 
of this contribution follows similar lines 
to the

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
129 
calculation of field emission given in the last section; Fig. 6.12 
should therefore be compared with Fig. 6.9. Symbols have the 
same significance as before and the units are the same; V is the 
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
| 
| 
I 
A 
(ﬁ: 
WO- M Vy 
v 
A 
| 
' 
+ 
| 
}¢ 
-V 
I 
+ 
| 
€v 
| 
i 
+ 
| 
1 
EEa> 
| 
+ - 
* 
| 
E]ectronsl 
+ 
:WO 
"l 
+ 
] 
[ 
+ 
Y 
I 
+ 
~--a— 
" 
Fia. 6.11 
Fia. 6.12. Passage of electrons across gap. 
potential difference across the gap. The formula for the trans- 
mission coefficient is again 
(l—R)exp{ — Lﬂi(b—z@ f (U —3ima2) dx} 
but \(U—3me2) is now \[{¢+Wy—eV 
(z/a) —imo?Z}. The limits of 
integration become 0 and a. 
After writing imv2 = p2/2m the 
exponent is S 
_ 87Ta"\/ 2m)¢% 
1 _I__ O_Z)x § 
3eVh 
2md 
ng{) g{) 
in which p2 = 2mW,. We again expand by the binomial theorem, 
but it is now necessary to go as far as the second order to retain 
a term in p,. We obtain 
_47Ta~/(hzm)¢%(1+ Zm¢2 %S)' 
The second term, though small, is significant when we come to 
the final integration, but ¢V /4¢ would, if retained, appear in 
  
  
  
 

130 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
the 
final result 
as exp(eV/4¢) multiplying the current and 
may be dropped because we are only interested in the case of 
V small. 
The transmission coefficient for an electron whose 
velocity normal to the surface is v, will be 
(1—R)exp{—-—~/(2m)¢”"(l+ 
img 
)} 
The number of electrons in an element of volume of momentum 
space hitting unit area of the y, 2 
) 
face in unit time is 
2 
/ 
mpa: dpa: dpy dpz' 
The 
representative 
points 
from 
which electrons can spill over are 
uniformly distributed between two 
spheres in momentum space, the 
outer one of radius p, and the inner 
one of radius p’ = \/{2m(Wy—eV)}. 
From Fig. 6.13 we see that we can at 
once integrate the expression for the number of electrons hitting 
unit area in unit time with respect to p, and p, and obtain 
F1a. 6.13 
%,, (P2—p2)P, dp, 
for p, > p’, and 
Qm 
dmelV 
3 (p8—p"?)p, dp, = —5 Pz dp, 
for p, < p’. 
The current density through the barrier is € times the total 
number 
of electrons escaping per cm?/sec and can now be 
written as 
  
2’”6(1 R) f (po—pz)pzexp{——«/(2 )¢>‘1’(1+ 
)}dpfv+ 
dme 
  
  
T ot

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
131 
_ 2me(1—R) 
4ma 
3 
= 
exp{——h— 
(2m)d }X 
  
Do 
X { f (P3—p3)p, eXp{—o( 
g —p3)} dp,+ 
pl 
’ 
D 
+2meV f P exp{—a(pi—p3)} dpax}’ 
0 
y 
N2ma 
hy(me) 
Referring to Fig. 6.13, the first integral comes from the spherical 
cap for p, > p’, and the second integral from the spherical shell. 
When V — 0, p’ 
- p, and it would seem likely that the first 
integral would become unimportant relative to the second. This 
is the case: if the integrals are evaluated, the first proves to be 
of order V2, whereas the second has a term in V. 
The second 
integral is easily seen to be 
in which 
QIE {exp(——2ameV) —exp(— 2“m¢)}’ 
in which the second term is negligible compared with the first. 
Expanding the first term gives 
1 (1 —2amel), 
2a 
which 
is 
1/2a to 
a sufficient order. 
The current density 
is 
therefore 
  
(1—R) */(2;”')6295 Vexp{—%‘zJ(2m)¢%}, 
(6.8) 
the units being electrostatic electrical and c.g.s. The formula is 
applicable when the gap is sufficiently large for the transmission 
coefficient to be small but the current not so large as to prevent 
the potential drop from being small. Under these conditions, 
which are the ones in which we shall be interested, Ohm’s law 
is obeyed, since the current is proportional to the potential 
difference V. Formula (6.8) has been derived for a sharp cut-off 
in the electron distribution, i.e. for the absolute zero of tempera- 
ture, but Ehrenberg and Hoénl showed that allowing for moderate 
temperatures makes no difference.

132 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
An electron in the gap is attracted by image forces to both 
surfaces. 
The result is that each half of the barrier resembles 
a barrier for a single surface like that shown in Fig. 6.8, but 
pulled down so as to make the symmetrical double-sided barrier 
more rounded. For the image force barrier we have 
1 
— R = 
1, 
because of the rounding. 
If the gap is very small indeed, the 
peak of the barrier can be pulled down below the top of the 
electron distribution in the metal—the 
‘barrier’ 
is then no 
obstacle in the way of electron flow. Mathematically, the barrier 
may be described in terms of an infinite series of images in both 
surfaces. The solution of the problem is well known, and comes 
out in terms of the gamma-function. The shape of the barrier 
  
is given by 
¢’ 
1P 
gy % 
=5 
=)= 
: 
: 
1 
dT'(w) 
in which 
Y(u) = T(w) 
~du 
Using 
a 
quadratic approximation 
to 
this form 
of barrier, 
Sommerfeld and Bethe found the current density to be 
4\/(7272'2:295% v eXP{ — %J(zm)qS%A/(l _%ln 2) (1 — 2_;2?,5)}’ 
  
(6.9) 
the units being electrostatic electrical and c.g.s., as in (6.8). 
Sommerfeld and Bethe consider that 3:6m would be a better 
approximation in the exponential than #2, and this improvement 
will be accepted henceforward. 
The formula implies a sudden increase in the resistance of the 
gap as it is widened, around 
a critical value. 
The effect is 
illustrated in Fig. 6.14, which shows current as a function of gap 
width for the circuit alongside, which includes an e.m.f. of 1V 
and a stabilizing resistance of 1 ohm as well as the gap of area 
of cross-section 10—2 cm?, ¢ being assumed to be 5 V. 
The theory has been given for the same metal on both sides 
of the gap; if the metals are different it is clear that the proper 
mean value of ¢, and ¢, for use in the formulae is the square

VI 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
133 
mean root. 
This mean is 
5 _ Aot ditdy? 
9(pi+¢3)? 
Formula (6.9) for the image force barrier will be used in the 
theory of contact charging in the form of an expression for the 
  
  
  
  
    
['0 
I ohm 
lvoltl 
~ 
—_— 
g 
ALY 5} 
‘—‘“——‘ 
= 
0-Olcm? 
o 
5 
O 
. 
1 
| 
1 
_ 1 
0 
00 
5 
15 
20 
10 
Width of gap (R) 
F1¢, 6.14. Passage of current across gap. 
specific conductivity of the gap. 
Expressed in this way 
it 
becomes 
4-0 X 101°(§exp{—0-92a¢%J(1— 10/ag)(1—7-2/ad)}. 
 (6.10) 
Numerical values of physical constants have been inserted and 
the units altered to0 be convenient, though unorthodox. 
¢ is 
in eV, a in A, and the formula gives the specific conductivity 
in ohm-! em—2, 
Experimental confirmation of the existence of a tunnel effect 
resistance at a contact in which the metals are in close proximity 
was first obtained by Holm and Meissner and is discussed in 
Holm (1958). 
It has now become of technological importance 
in the Esaki diode and other semiconductor devices. Holm and 
Meissner investigated the contact resistance with crossed rods, 
eliminating the constriction resistance (cf. p. 67) by using pure 
metals which were made superconducting by performing the

134 
POTENTIAL BARRIERS 
VI 
experiment at liquid helium temperature. 
With sufficiently 
well-cleaned and degassed platinum the 
contact resistance 
disappeared when 
the metal became superconducting; 
this 
indicated that there was no surface film preventing direct 
contact between the two metal surfaces. With gold, copper, tin, 
lead, and nickel, a surface film did keep the surfaces apart, and 
there remained a contact resistance which was independent of 
temperature (in the superconducting range) and the order of 
107 times less than what would have been expected on the basis 
of Ohm’s law from the anticipated thickness of the adsorbed or 
oxide film on the metal and its bulk resistivity. It was, however, 
of the right magnitude to have been due to tunnel effect.

CHAPTER VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
Non-conducting solids 
WHEN treating the conduction electrons in 
a metal 
as an 
electron gas, the freedom of the electrons to move throughout 
the metal was taken as an experimental fact. 
It was assumed 
that, in the metal, the valence electrons were less tightly bound 
to their own atoms, being attracted to their neighbours, so that 
atoms became ionized and electrons detached. The result was 
a dissolution of the valence electrons from their parent atoms. 
The effect of the positive cores was supposed smeared out to 
provide the energy well confining the otherwise free electrons. 
Now it is a further experimental fact that valence electrons in 
other solids either remain attached to their parent atoms, or, if 
they become detached from them, cannot, for some reason, 
convey an electric current, since such solids are insulators. The 
conductivity of an insulator is in general less than 10-20 of the 
conductivity of a metal and semiconductors are relatively rare; 
it appears that there must be some fundamental theoretical 
obstacle in the way of the valence electrons in an insulating 
solid carrying a current, since it seems unlikely that nearly all 
substances other than metals will have their valence electrons 
so tightly bound to their parent atoms that they remain localized 
there. A theoretical obstacle in the way of free electrons carrying 
a current can be found, but it depends on the periodicity of a 
lattice structure and is not relevant to amorphous solids and 
liquids. Since insulators do not change into metallic conductors 
on melting, it would seem that localization of electrons must 
play a part. 
If, in a solid, none of the electrons are freed by 
ionization, then the solid will be an insulator for that simple 
reason. 
Absence 
of metallic conductivity, however, 
cannot 
always be explained in this way.t 
It is necessary to find an 
t Grey 
tin, 
for 
example, 
would 
be 
a 
metal, 
not 
an 
intrinsic 
semi- 
conductor.

136 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII 
alternative explanation which permits the electrons to be free 
to move about but nevertheless unable to carry a current. This 
would happen if the exclusion principle prevented an electron 
from moving in a given direction unless another electron moved 
in the opposite direction to take its place. Precisely this situation 
can come about as a consequence of the periodic structure of 
a crystal lattice. 
If the free-electron gas model of a metal is 
modified by removing the simplifying assumption of a smeared- 
out positive. charge belonging to the atomic cores, and the 
periodic potential due to the cores allowed for as a perturbation, 
new consequences follow; whether a substance is a conductor or 
an insulator depends on the number of valence electrons. The 
model is still an oversimplification which fails to predict just 
which solids are conductors and which insulators, but the nature 
of the difference between them is important for an understanding 
of insulators and also for an explanation of why there are 
different types of semiconductor. From the theoretical stand- 
point, 
semiconductors 
are 
rather exceptional materials; 
in 
principle it is natural for a solid to be either an insulator or a 
good (metallic) conductor. The tendency towards one extreme 
or the other results from an interaction between the electrons 
which have been freed from their atoms, and the remaining cores. 
When the number of free electrons has become appreciable, the 
attraction of the positive cores will tend to form a concentration 
of electrons round each core. 
The field of the positive charge 
will be reduced by the presence of these electrons outside the 
region in which they constitute a negative space charge. 
The 
attractive effect of a positive core tends, therefore, to belocalized, 
and this reduces the ionization potential of the atom in the solid 
when there 
is incipient conductivity. 
In consequence more 
atoms become ionized, the ionization potential isreduced further, 
and the process of ionization can become cumulative until all 
the valence electrons are free. 
It would appear that this process 
operates in nature to make most materials either good insulators 
or metallic conductors. 
It must now be explained how the introduction of a periodic 
perturbation into the free-electron gas model can prevent the

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
137 
electrons from being able to carry an electric current. 
The 
explanation is related to the phenomenon of electron diffraction. 
A beam 
of electrons 
of wavelength 
A = h,/(2mW) incident 
normally on a crystal lattice of spacing d, with inner potential U, 
has wavelength X' = h./{2m(W 
+ U)} immediately after entering 
the lattice, and will be reflected from it after penetrating only 
a few lattice spacings if 
’ = 2d. Let usinquire what this implies 
for the periodically perturbed electron gas. 
A travelling wave 
e?mizlA representing an electron moving to the right will, if the 
above condition for Bragg reflection holds, be scattered by the 
periodic potential in such a way as to generate a diffracted wave 
which represents some chance of an electron moving to the left. 
This diffracted wave will at once be partially reflected back 
again. Considering an extended lattice, it is clear that the back 
and forth reflection will build up so that a travelling wave 
representing electrons moving in one direction cannot exist 
unless it is accompanied by another travelling wave representing 
an equal number of electrons moving in the opposite direction. 
For this particular wavelength, therefore, .the representative 
wave must have the form e2m#Ae¢—2m@ 
 This is equivalent to 
saying that the only permitted waves are standing waves of the 
form sin 272/A and cos 2zx/A.T Standing waves cannot represent 
a flow of electrons. Electrons of this wavelength cannot, there- 
fore, carry a current. Further theoretical consideration shows 
that they behave towards an accelerating electric field as if they 
had infinite mass, acquiring this mass, as it were, from the lattice, 
with which they interact so strongly. The free-electron gas model 
leads to the expectation that some solids may contain electrons 
having this critical wavelength. 
Recalling 
(p. 
114) that the 
T Squaring these expressions to get the probability of finding an electron 
at a given point gives a result which fluctuates between zero and a maximum. 
In the present context the fluctuations are correlated with the lattice structure, 
as is reasonable, but standing waves were also obtained for the unperturbed 
free-electron gas confined between perfectly reflecting walls (see p. 113), in 
which context the occurrence of fluctuations is surprising. 
It has been said 
to be unobservable because 
of the uncertainty principle, the fluctuations 
occurring within a wavelength. 
This, however, is incorrect ; such fluctuations 
can be detected in principle by X-ray scattering. 
In the case of an atomic 
lattice they appear as one of the origins of a difference between the f-factors 
for a free atom and for the atom in a lattice.

138 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
 VII 
energy of the nth state (for the one-dimensional model) is 
n2h? 
"~ 8mL? 
and that each state can accommodate two electrons, we find that 
a solid with two free electrons per atom, thus requiring L/d states, 
will fill its states up to a level 
h2 
° ™ Bmd?’ 
The momentum of an electron at the top of the filled states is 
therefore h/2d and its wavelength 2d. This is exactly the wave- 
length for Bragg reflection. Comparing this situation with that 
in a metal, where a current is carried entirely by electrons near 
the top of the distribution getting into empty states just above 
the top, it would appear that the electrons at the top of the 
distribution just considered are poor candidates for carrying a 
current, even if they can get into slightly higher states in which 
their effective mass is finite. 
It can be shown, however, that 
these states do not exist, whence it follows that such a solid 
must be truly an insulator. The absence of states comes about 
as a result of there being two possible solutions of the wave 
equation at the critical wavelength, these two solutions corre- 
sponding to different energies, and there is no solution at all 
corresponding to energies between these two. 
For an electron 
to get into a state higher than the top of the filled band it would 
have to jump across a finite energy gap, and this it cannot do 
unless the gap is so small as to be comparable with the thermal 
energy. 
The two solutions of the wave equation correspond to the sine 
and cosine stationary waves associated with the condition of 
Bragg reflection. 
These differ in phase—phase with respect to 
the periodic perturbation which represents the crystal lattice. 
The two alternative solutions are shown in Fig. 7.1, from which, 
remembering that the square of the value of ¢ at any point gives 
the probability of an electron being found there, it is seen that 
an electron is much more likely to be near a positive core for 
the cosine solution than for the sine. On the average, therefore,

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
139 
the electron is more deeply bound in the former case; the energy 
is less, and also less than for an unperturbed travelling wave. 
Symmetry considerations exclude solutions with phasing be- 
tween that of sine and cosine, so there is an energy gap in which 
(b)   
F1e. 7.1. 
(a) sine solution, 
(b) cosine solution. 
electron states are forbidden, between the two permitted values of 
energy at the critical wavelength. A formal mathematical treat- 
ment shows that solutions of the wave equation for permitted 
states in which the electron wavelength does not correspond to 
Bragg reflection nevertheless are influenced by proximity to it 
in such 
a way that energies for the perturbed system are 
less than for the free electron gas when the wavelength 
is 
greater than the critical wavelength, and greater when 
it is 
less. The result of this is shown in Fig. 7.2. We can now draw 
a diagram of energy levels for an insulator, corresponding to 
Fig. 6.5 for a metal. 
This has been done in Fig. 7.3. 
For the 
simple model which we have discussed there are three regions. 
At the bottom there is a band of occupied levels. Above this 
there is the forbidden region and higher still a band of levels 
which are unoccupied because the width of the energy gap is too 
great for thermal agitation to excite a significant number of 
electrons from the lower band into the upper. Electrons in the 
lower band, the valence band, cannot carry a current because

140 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII 
all the levels are occupied, and electrons in the upper band, the 
so-called conduction band, do not carry a current because the 
band is empty. 
If it did contain electrons they could carry a 
Bragg reflection 
      
I 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
I 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
Free 
| 
| 
{ 
| 
————————————— 
/ 
> 
//electron 
50 o 
/ 
gas 
| ) 
(4] 
5 % 
/ 
/ 
____________ - 
- 
/ 
£y 
    
  
Forbidden region 
  
  
  
  
  
Occupied levels 
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
F1a. 7.3. Energy levels in an insulator. 
current, in the way they do in a metal. Thisis what comes about 
in a semiconductor, as will be described later. 
In the meantime 
we must ask why it is that in so many actual solids the levels 
are filled up to precisely the beginning of the forbidden region. 
Assemblies of atoms 
We have seen that a simple modification of the free-electron 
gas model of a solid can endow it with insulating properties, but 
have yet to inquire what actually happens when the constituent

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
141 
atoms of a solid are brought together to form the solid. 
This 
problem also can be approached from the standpoint of an 
electron in an energy well. 
The attractive coulomb field sur- 
rounding the proton in a hydrogen atom forms an energy well 
for the electron, and the lowest state of energy the electron can 
occupy is the one which corresponds, in the one-dimensional 
model, to a single half-wavelength fitted into the width of the 
energy well. This is the ground state of the hydrogen atom, the 
one that is normally occupied. Higher states exist corresponding 
to shorter wavelengths and may be occupied if the electron is 
excited from the ground state. 
In order to consider the problem of building an assembly of 
atoms in the simplest possible way, we ask what happens when 
two square energy wells, each containing its own electron, are 
brought closer together, so that the electronic wave functions 
can no longer be treated as independent. The new ground state 
will resemble the old at the distant sides of the wells; in the 
middle region the original wave-functions will be modified so 
that they can be joined up in a way that makes ¢ and diy/dx 
continuous. 
The 
wave-function 
can 
be 
found 
by 
solving 
Schrodinger’s equation for the appropriate boundary conditions. 
There are two solutions, depending on whether the original 
wave-functions are taken to have the same or opposite phases. 
These are shown schematically in Fig. 7.4. 
One is symmetric 
and the other antisymmetric. 
The symmetric wave-function 
gives a greater probability that the electrons will be found inside 
one of the wells, which makes them on the average more deeply 
bound, so the symmetric state has the lower energy and is the 
ground state. The difference in energy will obviously increase as 
the two wells are brought closer together. When the energies are 
calculated it is found that bringing together the two wells results 
in an increase of energy of the antisymmetricstate and a decrease 
for the symmetric state, as shown in Fig. 7.5.f 
The square 
well model makes no allowance for the mutual repulsive energy 
of the positive charges which the wells represent. 
Allowing 
T A more detailed discussion will be found in Modern Physics, 2nd ed. by 
Robert L. Sproull; Wiley (1963).

142 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII 
for this modifies the way in which the energy varies with dis- 
tance apart. 
If calculations are carried out for two hydrogen 
/N 
N M 
N 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
/\ 
(b) 
  
  
  
  
_/ 
  
  
  
Fia, 7.4. Wave-functions for a pair of rectangular energy wells: 
(@) symmetric wave-function, 
(b) antisymmetric wave-function. 
.\ 
‘ 
E———— . 
  
  
antisymmetric state 
Energy 
symmetric state 
  
  
    
Distance apart 
Fia. 7.5. 
Dependence of energy on distance apart of a pair of rectangular 
energy wells. 
The curves are discontinued at the separation for which the 
two wells coalesce. 
atoms, the result shown in Fig. 7.6 is obtained. 
It is seen that 
the antisymmetric state does not lead to binding, on the other 
hand the symmetric state has an energy minimum which belongs

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
143 
to the actual ground state of the hydrogen molecule. This state 
can, of course, accommodate two electrons of opposite spin, and 
two are provided by the original atoms. 
Kach of these atoms 
contained a ground state localized within its own atom; altogether 
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
8 
— 
6 
‘Repulsive’ or‘antibonding’ state; 
antisymmetric wave-function 
4l 
~ 
2F 
> 
v 
N’ 
X 
) 
i 
O 
3 
4 
R (R)— 
-2 
— 
‘Attractive’ 
or ‘bonding’state; 
I 
S 
symmetric wave-function 
| E, 
Fi1a. 7.6. Total energy of the H, molecule as a function of the inter- 
nuclear separation R. 
there were two states which could accommodate four electrons. 
On bringing the atoms together, the states split into two; the 
formation of the molecule provided two states shared by the two 
atoms within it and so still able to accommodate four electrons. 
Bringing the atoms together does not change the total number 
of states available for the electrons. 
When several atoms are brought together, a formal solution 
of Schrodinger’s equation cannot be obtained. 
It is, however, 
evident (see, for example, Coulson, 1961) that when NN atoms 
each containing » levels are brought together, the levels split in 
such a way that when they are shared by the assembly, there are 
still Nn levels in all. 
If, for example, there are nine atoms, the 
result is as shown schematically in Fig. 7.7. 
A single level in 
the isolated atom splits into a band of nine discrete levels in the 
group of nine interacting atoms. The levels for a nine-atom solid 
are given by the intersection of the curves with a vertical line 
at a distance from the origin equal to the average distance apart 
of the atoms in the solid. As the number of atoms in the assembly

144 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII 
18 increased, the number of levels in the energy band increases 
correspondingly. When the number is already large, a further 
increase has only a slight effect in widening the band, the extra 
levels being accommodated by reduced spacing within the band. 
  
   
  
Quasi-continuum of 
allowed 
levels 
2s 
T 
Atomic 
? 
levels 
Forbidden 
l 
energy interval 
v 
- 
-+—— (Observed lattice constant 
  
7 
q 
  
Electron energy 
  
— 
D aswm e 
S—— 
—— 
    
Interatomic distance 
Fia. 7.7. 
Splitting of atomic energy levels to form bands in a solid, 
Schematic representation for an idealized system of nine atoms. 
Any piece of material large enough for experiment, even of 
microscopic size, will contain so many atoms that the band of 
energy levels may be regarded as a continuum, unless one is 
concerned with counting the levels. 
Actual solids, containing complex atoms, will have compli- 
cated band structures, each level in any constituent atom giving 
rise to a band in the solid. Looked at from the present viewpoint, 
it is apparent that a band structure is to be expected irrespective 
of whether the solid is crystalline or amorphous. The deep-lying 
levels will be slightly broadened, but the valence levels funda-.

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
145 
mentally changed in the solid. 
If the valence electrons are 
virtually freed in the solid, then forbidden regions may occur 
because of Bragg reflection at the crystallographic planes, as we 
have already seen. In a simple case, if the uppermost filled level 
  
  
  
  
% 
/ 
4 
2 
% % 
_05 
L 
? 
7 % 
4 % 
g 
N 
4 
2-1-0r 
[P 
= 
% 
> 
z 
o0 
% 
e 
% 
8 
% 
o 
-1-5 
| 
i‘, 
> 
4 
- 
.'. 
S 
\ 
S8} 
\ 
_2.0_ 
—25 
|- 
    
I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
R (atomic units) 
F1g. 7.8. 
Energy bands in diamond as a function of R (one half the inter- 
nuclear distance). Besides the four shaded bands, there are four bands of zero 
width, two following curve 1V, and two following curve VI. 
in the atom contains two electrons then the corresponding band 
in the solid will be filled to the top and the solid will be an 
insulator; if the uppermost level contains one electron the band 
will be half full and the solid will be a metal. 
This statement, 
however, ignores the possibility of bands from different levels 
overlapping in the solid, which in fact often occurs. 
It is very 
difficult to calculate what the bands in a particular solid will 
be like unless they are determined primarily by the crystal 
structure. It hasbeen done quasi-quantitatively for some solids; 
Fig. 7.8 shows Kimball’s results (1935) for diamond. 
It is very

146 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII 
difficult to predict a prior: whether a given solid will be an 
insulator, metal, or semiconductor. Nothing, however, is easier 
to settle experimentally, and methods are also available for 
investigating the band structure. 
If an electron is ejected from 
an X-ray level of an atom in a solid, the atom can emit radiation 
by another electron falling into that level from a filled band in 
the solid. Different electrons from the band will carry slightly 
different amounts of energy, hence the emission line will be 
broadened and the contour of the hne will give the electron 
distribution in the filled band. 
Similarly, the distribution of 
empty states in an empty band can be investigated from the 
fine structure of an X-ray absorption edge. An electron ejected 
from an X-ray level does not have to be thrown right outside 
the solid if there is an empty band near the energy continuum 
to which it can go. 
It can be excited into such a band with 
slightly less energy than is required to take it into the continuum; 
there is therefore a fine structure just outside the absorption 
edge which provides information on the empty band. Work in 
this field has been reviewed by Parrat (1959). The energy gap 
between the filled band and the empty band in an insulator can 
be determined from the wavelength of ultra-violet light which 
just excites an electron from the top of the full band into the 
empty band. At this wavelength there is an absorption edge. 
Criteria of conductivity 
So far, in discussing whether a solid is 
a conductor or an 
insulator, we have inquired what happens when there is an 
electric field applied within the solid, and we have assumed the 
solid to be uncharged. 
This assumption has been a strict one: 
when considering atoms as perturbed by their neighbours we 
have laid insistence on the fact that the number of levels coming 
from a single level is identically equal to the number of atoms 
present. 
It is therefore relevant to ask whether there is some- 
thing special about a solid in which the negative charge exactly 
balances the positive. May it be, that when there is one electron 
added to the system, or one taken away, our assumptions require 
modification in some rather fundamental way ? The question has

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
147 
been considered by Blount (1962) for an insulator to which an 
electron has been added, and it was found that conclusions drawn 
from the model for the uncharged insulator would still hold. 
We shall assume that this can be generalized to both a metal 
and an insulator with a moderate number of electrons in either 
excess 
or deficit. 
We must, however, 
be careful about the 
interpretation of the theory. 
We said that the level system of Fig. 7.3 provided no oppor- 
tunity for an electron to move in an electric field without another 
electron moving in the other direction to take its place, and 
deduced that the material represented by this diagram was an 
insulator. Suppose now that a piece of such a material is in a 
field-free vacuum and an electron arrives at very low speed on 
its surface. 
It must be assumed that the electron is capable of 
transferring kinetic energy to the lattice; if it crosses the surface 
(as it can do) it will acquire considerable kinetic energy because 
of the lower potential inside, and it will proceed to lose this 
energy. It will continue to lose energy until (at the absolute zero) 
it has reached the bottom level in the band of unoccupied levels. 
It cannot go lower. The level is at the edge of a band, and in it, 
as we have seen, the electron behaves as if its mass were infinite. 
For this reason it cannot move through the material which it 
therefore finds to be an insulator. 
If, however, the temperature 
is above absolute zero, and if not one but several electrons are 
introduced into the material, then levels not quite at the bottom 
of the band will be occupied and there is the possibility of 
electrons moving about in the material and transferring charge. 
If there is an applied electric field inside the material, electrons 
can move in the direction of the field and carry a current. 
In 
principle, therefore, the material is no longer an insulator, and 
the change has come about by providing a few electrons from 
the outside—charge the insulator and it ceases to be an insulator! 
The extent to which it can conduct depends not only on the 
temperature but also on the amount of charge introduced and 
on whether or not the electrons in this charge have (temporarily) 
kinetic energy in excess of thermal energy. There is no reason 
apparent why electrons not too near the bottom of the band of

148 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII 
normally unoccupied levels in an insulator should find it any 
more difficult to move about than do the electrons in a metal, 
though there will always be far fewer of them. Experimental 
evidence confirms this to be correct. Methods are available for 
measuring the mobility of the electrons which are responsible 
for conduction in solids; these methods are discussed in books 
on the solid state. The drift velocity v of the electrons is propor- 
tional to the applied field E, the proportionality factor being 
defined as the mobihty p: v = p&. Electrons can be raised into 
the conduction band of an insulator by illuminating it with 
ultra-violet light. 
The mobility of such electrons in diamond 
was found by Redfield (1954) to be 1800 ecm2? V-1 s-1 (values 
of mobility now quoted are at room temperature). This is higher 
than the mobility in copper which is given by Kittel (1962, p. 205) 
as 35 cm2 V-1 g-1, The lower value in copper is to be attributed 
to 
a less perfect crystal structure; the mobility 
is inversely 
proportional to the extent to which the electron waves are 
scattered and the scattering is due to imperfectzons in the lattice, 
whether imperfections of structure or irregular spacing due to 
thermal vibrations. 
In rock-salt containing f-centres due to a 
slight excess of sodium a value of 12-5 cm? V-1 s~! was found 
by MacDonald (1953). 
If the energy gap in a material which would otherwise be an 
insulator is so small that some electrons are thermally excited 
into the upper band, 
it becomes an intrinsic semiconductor. 
The mobility of electrons in the conduction band of intrinsically 
semiconducting 
silicon has been measured by Ludwig and 
Watters (1956); they found 1350 cm? V-1 g~1. 
There 
is no 
doubt, then, about electrons in 
a nearly empty band being 
capable of carrying a current. Hence the upper band is usually 
referred to as the conduction band. 
It is, then, quite in order to say that if Fig. 7.3 is an adequate 
representation of the properties of an insulator, electrons which 
trickle into a piece of such material from the outside can move 
about inside it in much the same way as do the electrons in a 
metal. This would have devastating consequences when attempts 
were made to insulate electrodes in vacuum equipment. An

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
149 
extensive insulator exposed to the space charge from an emitting 
filament would not only acquire a surface charge in proximity 
with the filament, charge would also run right through the 
insulator and quickly spread over its surface. 
It is common 
experience that this does not occur with real insulators. 
The 
representationin Fig. 7.3 must therefore be an oversimplification. 
The matter will be put right when we come to consider surface 
states and localized levels. We must first consider explicitly just 
what is meant when a solid is said to be a conductor or an 
insulator. 
There are four theoretically distinct ways in which a solid can 
be tested for electrical conductivity. 
(1) In the case of relatively good conductors, eddy currents 
can be induced in the specimen and their magnitude measured 
and compared with the induced e.m.f. 
In the case of relatively 
poor conductors a radio-frequency electric field penetrates the 
interior and the resulting currents give rise to a dissipation of 
energy which alters the phase of the inducing current and so 
permits a determination of the conductivity of a semiconductor. 
Volkl (1932) and Guillery (1932) have described the method as 
applied to powders. The condition of the material is not altered 
by the test and no electrons are supplied from the outside. 
(i1) Electrons from 
a space-charge can be supplied to the 
surface of a specimen and their spread through the interior 
measured. The condition of the specimen is not altered except 
by the presence of charge carriers in excess of those normally 
present. 
The method has not been used quantitatively, but 
qualitatively it is being carried out every day—as has just been 
remarked. 
(11i) A specimen may be placed between metallic electrodes 
with an e.m.f. across them and the current measured. Electrons 
are supplied from outside the specimen. Under some circum- 
stances this can alter the condition of the specimen, at any rate 
in the neighbourhood of the electrodes, e.g. in the case of the 
copper/copper oxide rectifying contacts. Itisbelieved, however, 
that the usual situation when an insulator is in contact with a 
metal is like that shown in Fig. 7.9 which is drawn to scale for

150 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII 
copper/potassium bromide.t The top of the filled levels in the 
metal is shown by the wavy line in the diagram, to indicate that 
around this level travelling electron waves are possible. 
It is 
apparent that electrons in the metal cannot, according to this 
Copper 
Potassium bromide 
Conduction band —— 
l 
  
Forbidden region 
  
Valencegbancl 
  
N Valence band 
  
  
  
  
Fic. 7.9 
simple model, get into the insulator because they are opposite 
either the forbidden region or already filled levels. We shall ask, 
in the next chapter, how far this represents the truth. Ifit does, 
then the conclusion follows that, tested between metal elec- 
trodes, an insulator which is correctly represented by Fig. 7.3 
will not conduct. 
(iv) In photoconductivity measurements the condition of the 
specimen is changed by illumination, electrons being transferred 
from one interior level to another, after which the specimen may 
be tested by any of the three foregoing methods. 
The description of an insulator embodied in Fig. 7.3 makes it 
a non-conductor when tested by methods 
(i) and (iii), highly 
conducting by method (ii), and photoconducting when illumi- 
nated by light of sufficiently short wavelength. 
Electronic semiconductors 
There are no semiconductors at the absolute zero of tempera- 
ture: they cease to conduct. 
In principle semiconductors are 
insulators which have been endowed with slight conductivity 
by thermal agitation. 
It 
is 
clear that 
a sufficiently narrow 
T On the assumption that this is not so, Ostenburg and Montgomery (1958) 
present a theory of the charging of insulators which is incompatible with the 
views expressed in this book.

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
151 
forbidden region in Fig. 
7.3 will not prevent electrons from 
being raised from the valence band into the upper band by 
thermal agitation if the temperature is sufficiently high. There 
is nothing to prevent these electrons from carrying an electric 
current. 
Each electron in the upper band, moreover, has left 
behind a vacant level in the valence band, and these ‘holes’ can 
also carry a current by an electron moving into the hole, hence 
leaving a hole where it was, and so moving the hole in the 
opposite direction to the electrons. 
The hole behaves like an 
electron with a positive charge (but must not be confused with 
a positron). 
It is in this way that an insulator becomes an 
intrinsic semiconductor. 
Its conductivity increases with m- 
creasing temperature. 
As with a metal, the electron mobility 
decreases with increasing temperature, but, unlike a metal, the 
number of conduction electrons increases very rapidly with 
increasing temperature, and the second effect predominates. 
Pure boron is an intrinsic semiconductor with the relatively 
high resistivity of 2Xx10® ohm cm at room temperature; 
its 
forbidden energy gap is almost exactly one electron-volt. Grey 
tin, at the other extreme, has an energy gap of only 0-08 eV, and 
a resistivity of 2X10~* ohm cm. 
Intrinsic conductivity is a 
property of the pure material; in practice this conductivity is 
generally obscured by another kind due to impurities. 
The 
purification of semiconductors to the high degree necessary for 
the elimination of any conductivity due to impurities is a great 
technical feat only accomplished with the advent of modern 
semiconductor technology. 
Conductivity due to impurities is of two kinds: defect or p-type, 
and excess or n-type. Typical examples are the metallic oxides 
and sulphides with, respectively, fewer metal atoms 
in the 
lattice than the stoichiometrical amount, and more metal atoms 
than this amount. 
An excess of metal atoms provides extra 
electrons which carry the current and gives an n-semiconductor 
(n for negative). A deficit of metal atoms is regularized by holes 
being formed corresponding to the missing electrons, and the 
holes carry the current giving a p-semiconductor (p for positive). 
The ‘impurities’ involved are atoms of metal, oxygen, or sulphur

152 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII 
where there should be molecules; an alternative way of looking 
at the solid is to say that the lattice has deficiencies of one kind 
of atom at certain lattice points. A simpler example is that of 
a substitutional imperfection in the lattice, atoms at certain 
lattice points being replaced by another kind of atom foreign to 
the lattice. Germanium is an element belonging to the fourth 
group of the periodic table which crystallizes in the diamond 
structure with four neighbours to each atom arranged at the 
corners of a tetrahedron with the other atom at the centre. 
There are four valence electrons, so that each atom is bonded 
to its neighbour by two shared electrons belonging, in the crystal, 
to the valence band which is therefore a full band. Germanium 
is an intrinsic semiconductor, but its conductivity is increased 
when a small proportion of germanium atoms are replaced by 
arsenic atoms, scattered throughout the lattice. 
Arsenic has 
five valence electrons, four of which are required for the bonding 
of the atoms with the germanium lattice, the other being super- 
fluous for this purpose and therefore lightly bound. Itis,in fact, 
so lightly bound that it can be freed by thermal agitation at 
room temperature, leaving an arsenic positive ion in the lattice 
and supplying a mobile electron to the conduction band. 
The 
arsenic impurity introduces lattice imperfections which may be 
regarded as localized electron levels below the conduction band, 
but so near it that the electron can easily be excited into the 
band. The arsenic-doped germanium is an n-semiconductor and 
it is known that the donor level is 0-:0127 eV below the conduction 
band. This state of affairs is shown schematically in Fig. 7.10 (a). 
If, instead of arsenic, gallium is introduced into the germanium 
lattice, a different situation arises. 
Gallium has three valence 
electrons, one too few to saturate the bonds with its neighbouring 
germanium atoms. 
It can therefore very easily steal an electron 
from the valence band of the germanium, becoming a negative 
gallium ion and leaving a positive hole in the valence band. 
The gallium-doped germanium is a p-semiconductor and it is 
known that the acceptor level is 0-0108 eV above the top of the 
valence band. This state of affairs is shown in Fig. 7.10 (). The 
order of magnitude of impurity concentration required to con-

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
153 
tribute an additional conductivity equal to the intrinsic conduc- 
tivity at room temperature in germanium 
is one part in 
a 
‘thousand million. 
(a) 
(b) 
Conduction 
Conduction 
band 
band 
Donor levels 
  
  
  
  
  
Valence band 
Valence band, 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
F1a. 7.10. 
(a) n-type semiconductor, (b) p-type semiconductor. 
Interior electron traps 
Donor levels are levels which are occupied unless they have 
been ionized; acceptor levels are unoccupied unless they have 
received an electron excited from a lower level. Semiconductors 
are unusual materials in that they have either donor levels close 
to the conduction band or acceptor levels close to the valence 
band (or a small energy gap). 
All solids normally considered 
pure still have a much higher concentration of some kind of 
impurity than that used for doping semiconductors, and this 
may give rise to localized electron levels within the forbidden 
region which may be either occupied or unoccupied though not 
sufficiently near to the conduction or valence bands to act as 
donor or acceptor levels in the laboratory temperature range. 
If an acceptor level is too far above the valence band to be 
likely to have received an electron from it, it can nevertheless 
accept one introduced into the conduction band from outside, 
and if it is sufficiently far below the conduction band it will be 
unlikely to lose this electron to that band. 
Such a captured 
electron will remain in the localized level and be trapped. 
Electron 
traps 
must 
be 
very common. 
Relevant thermal 
energies are much smaller than the typical width of the energy 
gap, so most of the forbidden region can provide effective traps. 
Moreover it can be proved (Mott and Gurney, 1940) that inter- 
stitial positive ions and lattice sites where a negative ion is 
missing always have localized energy levels below the conduction

154 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII1 
band associated with them. 
These levels are analogous to the 
levels of the hydrogen atom, the electron being confined to a 
potential energy well with the central positive charge at the site 
of the lattice imperfection, but with the attractive force reduced 
because of an effective dielectric constant. The consequence of 
this is to decrease the depth of the energy levels and increase the 
size of the Bohr orbits. 
Very little impurity of a kind that provides traps is sufficient 
to make room for a significant electric charge. Rock-salt contains 
4-6 X 1022 atoms per cm?; if one in a thousand million is an 
impurity atom forming an electron trap, a layer of rock-salt 1 u 
in thickness can hold a charge of 2-2 e.s.u./ecm?. 
On p. 10 it 
was found that the field just outside a patch of surface charge 
on a much larger piece of insulator is 47o/(1+ 
K). Assuming the 
dielectric constant of rock-salt to be 5-6, and remembering that 
the formula is in e.s.u., the field due to the above layer of charge 
is 1-3 kV/em. This is sufficient to repel any electron of moderate 
energy approaching the surface from not too close. 
It appears 
that an insulator does not have to contain many traps before 
it will capture electrons, trickling into it from the outside, in 
these traps and so acquire a thin ‘surface’ layer of charge which 
will keep out further electrons. 
An insulator which becomes 
charged in this way may be expected, in the ordinary course of 
events, to ‘discharge’ itself by attracting positive ions from the 
surroundings and forming 
a compensating layer 
of charge 
literally on the surface. If left in this condition, even though the 
conductivity of the insulator is quite minimal, the double layer 
can, ultimately, neutralize itself, provided the electron levels 
involved are the right way round. 
We recall that the model 
which gave Fig. 7.3 was unsatisfactory in predicting conductivity 
when tested by method (ii). If the modelisimproved by allowing 
for the existence of electron traps, then testing by method (ii) 
comes into line with methods (i) and (iii). Itis generally believed 
that this is in accordance with what actually happens. 
The 
presence of traps will reduce the photoconduction of such an 
insulator because electrons excited into the conduction band are 
progressively captured by the traps.

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
155 
When discussing electron traps mention must be made of a 
process which has been supposed by some writers to be of direct 
significance for triboelectrification, the process in which the 
electron is said to 
‘dig itself in’, first postulated by Landau 
(1936). 
He pointed out that an electron in a dielectric is sur- 
rounded by polarization in the medium, and that the ionic 
component of the polarization has 
a relaxation time that 
is 
long from the standpoint of a moving electron. The polarization 
field might provide an energy well of sufficient permanence for 
the electron to be bound in it. Landau thought that an electron 
caught in its own polarization field, now called a polaron, would 
not be mobile, and the electron would be trapped. 
It is now 
known, however (Frohlich, 1963), that although the great mass 
of the ions enables the electron to acquire negative binding 
energy in this way and so be a stable entity in its own polariza- 
tion, it still remains mobile, though with an increased effective 
mass. 
Self-trapping, though in principle possible, is rare. 
In 
general, we can safely ignore the digging-in of electrons when 
considering the nature of triboelectric processes. 
Electron traps may be formed at dislocations in the lattice 
and on grain boundaries in polycrystalline material. Such traps 
are closely related to the surface states which will next be 
considered. 
Surface states 
When a metal is in contact with a semiconductor electrons 
may flow from the metal into the semiconductor, or leave the 
semiconductor for the metal, forming a layer of excess electrons 
or positive holes in the conductor. 
This layer is thin and close 
to the surface; one may speak of it loosely as a ‘surface’ layer. 
We shall not, however, regard the electrons or holes as belonging 
to surface states since the states they occupy are characteristic 
of the interior. In speaking of surface states we shall be thinking 
of states associated with the layer of atoms on the surface which 
differs from layers beneath in having other layers of atoms on 
one side only. 
It is, however, important to realize that a thin 
layer of semiconductor near the surface may, for various reasons,

156 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII1 
be differently doped from the main body of the material, so 
giving rise to pseudo-surface states. 
The first theoretical approach to the problem of surface levels 
came from the nearly-free-electron model. Tamm (1932) con- 
sidered the one-dimensional model 
of an insulator shown in Fig. 7.11. 
The ion cores are represented by 
square potential wells, 
as in the 
| 
| 
| 
I 
| 
l 
| 
| 
l 
| 
l 
I 
Kronig—Penney model, but termi- 
Fic. 7.11 
nated in one direction by a high 
though 
finite 
square 
wall. 
The 
bands of allowed levels are unaltered by the termination, but an 
additional level appears because of it. This level can be anywhere 
within the forbidden region for the semi-infinite model, depend- 
ing on lattice parameters, but is localized near the termina- 
tion. Fowler (1933) pointed out that a model terminated at both 
ends is more correct, and produces two surface levels. Surface 
levels in the energy gap of insulators would have three conse- 
quences. 
(i) If empty when the insulator 
is uncharged they would 
provide electron traps to intercept electrons approaching from 
outside the solid and prevent them from reaching the conduction 
band, thus ensuring that the material proves to be an insulator 
when tested by method (ii) p. 149. 
(ii) If empty when the insulator is uncharged they would 
tend to fill up if the surface is brought into contact with a metal 
having occupied levels higher than the surface levels, which is 
a likely state of affairs. This process would provide a mechanism 
for the contact charging of insulators. 
(iii) Ifa band of surface levels were neither quite full nor quite 
empty, there would be surface conductivity comparable with 
that produced by a monomolecular layer of metal on the surface, 
since in generalizing to three dimensions it is supposed that there 
is one surface level for each surface atom. 
Shockley (1939) considered a more general one-dimensional 
model than that of Tamm, and investigated the behaviour of 
the energy levels as energy wells in a finite row are brought 
 

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
157 
closer together from a large distance apart, that is as the lattice 
spacing is reduced. 
He concluded that the extra levels that 
Tamm obtained were, 
in effect, 
a mistake in counting: the 
termination in the model of Fig. 7.11 is equivalent to introducing 
an extraenergy well and this gives the extralevel. In the absence 
of this extra energy well at the surface, pairs of levels in the 
forbidden region arise if bands from two atomic levels overlap 
as the lattice spacing is reduced, for spacings less than that at 
which overlap first occurs. This does not happen in the Tamm 
model and Shockley says it is not to be expected for rock-salt, 
but 
it 
is predicted 
for diamond. 
For diamond, moreover, 
Shockley found that the surface levels should be only partly 
filled: Diamond should therefore exhibit surface conductivity. 
The author has carried out 
a large number of experiments 
(unpublished) on the charging of diamond and no such effect 
appeared. 
Precisely this effect did appear, incidentally, with 
freshly cleaved mica, but in this case it could be attributed to 
the deposition of the water layer investigated by Macaulay and 
Carson (1930) and described on p. 81. 
It is, however, now 
widely held that the extension of theoretical results derived 
from a one-dimensional model to three dimensions is unsound. 
Statz (1950) has emphasized that this is so and he concluded 
from a revised treatment of surface levels that diamond should 
not exhibit surface conductivity. 
The conclusions to be drawn from the nearly-free-electron 
model appear to depend rather critically on what assumptions 
are made in formulating the model; 
it is furthermore rather 
optimistic to suppose that such a simple model will give correct 
results when applied to any actual material. 
The approach of 
Goodwin (1939) would seem to be more hopeful. He considered 
the tight-binding approximation and concluded that surface 
levels would arise, in number equal to the number of surface 
atoms. 
There is, however, no unambiguous proof that surface 
levels within the forbidden region must arise as a consequence 
of the sudden termination of an otherwise perfectly periodic 
lattice structure, and it would, in any case, seem more reasonable 
to look for them as a result of there being chemical binding to

158 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
V1II 
spare at the surface. 
They might well be provided by the 
so-called ‘dangling bonds’. 
Hanemann (1961), however, has 
pointed out that the chance of surface levels being formed by 
dangling bonds is greatly reduced because the surface layer of 
atoms becomes distorted in such a way as to allow a partial 
mutual saturation of the spare bonds of neighbouring atoms. 
Such distortion is demonstrated by the experimental investiga- 
tions of Farnsworth ef al. (1955) on the structure of surfaces 
which were claimed 
to 
be atomically 
clean. 
The cleaning 
procedure was applicable to germanium, silicon, indium anti- 
monide, 
and gallium 
arsenide, 
all substances possessing 
a 
diamond-like structure, but not to diamond itself. By working 
in an ultra-high vacuum the surfaces could be maintained clean 
and investigated using electron diffraction at very low voltages. 
So-called ‘half-order’ diffraction patterns were obtained, imply- 
ing reinforcement from double the normal lattice spacing, and 
these patterns were attributed to a single layer of atoms on the 
surface. They were explained by assuming that alternate atoms 
were displaced from the plane that they would have occupied 
if the lattice spacing were uniform right up to the surface. The 
staggering of atoms in the surface layer will lead to an important 
change in the electron configuration which is completely ignored 
in theories of surface levels. These theories involve many other 
simplifying assumptions, so it is better to rely on the experi- 
mental evidence. 
A number of semiconductor phenomena can 
only be explained by the existence of surface levels of which 
there must be several kinds. Centres which lead to recombination 
are of two kinds, known as fast and slow surface states, depending 
on whether the recombination is immediate or delayed. 
The 
slow states involve a delay in recombination because they are 
supposed to be situated on the outside of an insulating oxide 
or similar surface film through which the electrons from the 
bulk material have to pass before they can recombine in the 
slow centre. Fast surface states, in the case of the contaminated 
surface, are situated at the interface between the bulk material 
and the contaminant film. 
It is the fast states on clean material 
in which we are most interested. Lax (1961) has reviewed the

VII 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
159 
position. Information on atomically clean surfaces is confined 
to germanium which proves to have a concentration of surface 
states in the range 10! to 1012/cm?2. This is three to four orders 
of magnitude smaller than the concentration that would be 
expected from dangling bonds 
if these were not mutually 
saturated. This concentration would be 1015/cm?2. Lax concludes 
that ‘the observed surface states may not be related in any way 
to the intrinsic states discussed by most theories’. He suggests 
that they may be associated with surface flaws or impurities. 
It seems to the present author, however, that abandoning the 
idea of surface states arising from the sudden termination of 
the lattice very much weakens the idea that they will arise at 
lattice imperfections, whether surface or interior. 
It has been 
found that the fast states in germanium are sensitive to humidity, 
oxygen, and trace impurities, and this supports the view that 
surface states are due to impurity centres. In the end one comes 
back to the opinion expressed by Mott (1951) that 
‘it is very 
doubtful whether surface states exist at the uncontaminated 
surface of a non-metal’. He goes on to emphasize the importance 
of contamination by oxygen which, being strongly electro- 
negative, provides a deep-lying electron level which is therefore 
acceptor in type. 
There is, nowadays, 
a strong consensus of 
opinion that acceptor electron levels 
are commonly due 
to 
oxygen. 
If oxygen atoms are adsorbed 
on the surface of a semi- 
conductor, the low-lying levels in these atoms will be able to 
receive 
electrons 
that would 
otherwise 
get 
into 
the 
con- 
duction band of the semiconductor, leaving positive holes in 
the valence band. 
Hence a surface layer of negative oxygen 
ions is formed, and the holes are attracted to it so making 
a double layer. The limitation on permissible concentration of 
holes will necessitate the positive component of the double layer 
being 
a space charge which 
is distributed in depth though 
forming a thin layer near the surface. 
If, however, deep-lying 
impurity levels are present on the surface of an insulator and 
these fill up with electrons from outside, then the compensating 
positive charge that ultimately neutralizes the negative surface

160 
INTERNAL AND SURFACE ENERGY LEVELS 
VII 
charge will have to come from the surroundings. 
This positive 
charge can be supplied by stray positive ions as these become 
available. The positive ions are likely to be loosely bound. As 
we have seen in Chapter V, such ions are important for tribo- 
electrification.

CHAPTER VIII 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES AT 
INTERFACES 
The Fermi-Dirac distribution function 
I~ the last chapter energy levels were considered with only 
passing reference to the effect of temperature on them, or on 
their occupation by electrons. This was justified because, in the 
majority of the circumstances with which we are concerned, the 
effect of temperature is slight. 
The effect must now be con- 
sidered, because it is relevant to 
a proper understanding of 
equilibrium conditions and because it is sometimes of direct 
significance. 
If, instead of confining quantum-mechanical electrons in an 
energy well, we put mass-particles obeying the laws of classical 
mechanics into a box, then all of them can have zero kinetic 
energy at the absolute zero of temperature: there is no exclusion 
principle to forbid this. 
At elevated temperatures a particle is 
permitted to have any value of (kinetic) energy: there is no 
quantization. 
Under these circumstances the distribution of 
particles among the available energy statesis given, as a function 
of temperature, by the Boltzmann function. The probability of 
a state being occupied by a particle is proportional to e~#/kT, 
where W is the energy of the state, k is Boltzmann’s constant, 
and 7 the absolute temperature; the constant of proportionality 
must be chosen so that the probability integrated over all the 
states is equal to the number of particles. In the case of particles 
possessing kinetic energy but no potential energy, states are 
thought of as forming a continuum in phase-space. Ason p. 117, 
states are regarded as filling this space with uniform density, 
but whereas the exclusion principle then restricted the density 
to 
a finite value depending on Planck’s constant, 
no such 
restriction now arises. 
We recall that phase-space is the six- 
dimensional space combining position and momentum: x, 
¥, 
z, 
Dy Dy P,» 
We have W = p?/2m where p? = p2-4-p2-+p;. 
Let

162 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
the number of states between p and p+-6p be N, 6p and the 
number of states between W and W-+6W be N, 6W.T Then 
Ny, = N, dp/dW. 
N,op is the number of states between two 
spheres in phase-space, of radii p and p-+dp; this is proportional 
to 4mp?dép. NNy is therefore proportional to 4mp?dp/d 
W which is 
2 
;ﬂ/—z or 4rmp = 4am,/(2mW). There being still an undetermined 
constant, it is sufficient to observe that the variation of density 
of states N, with energy is of the form W#. The probability of 
a state being occupied is proportional to e="/*T 
Tt follows that 
the number of particles having kinetic energy between W and 
W 4-6W, when there are n in the box, is 
2n 
N 
Integrating the expression between 0 and oo should give the 
total number of particles; the factor (2n/+vm)(kT)-? is introduced 
to make this so. 
If, now, the particles have potential energy as well as kinetic, 
the distribution of states is unaltered in classical theory, but the 
distribution of particles among the states must make allowance 
for the potential energy by including 
it 
in the Boltzmann 
distribution function. 
This means that 
W?# will still refer to 
kinetic energy, but the 
W in the exponential must now represent, 
the total energy, the sum of kinetic and potential energies. 
In 
brief, classical statistics requires particle states to be propor- 
tional in density to the root of the kinetic energy, but the 
distribution of particles among states to be proportional to 
e WIkT where W is the total energy; the constant of propor- 
tionality is to be chosen so as to normalize to the actual number 
of particles. 
In quantum statistics the distribution 
of states N, with 
respect to energy is determined by the quantum mechanics of 
the system in question; because quantization gives discrete 
levels, Ny, is always finite. The distribution of particles among 
the available states is one of two functions of the temperature, 
T Strictly, Np and Ny, are infinite, but it will be clear a posterior: that it is 
legitimate to treat them as large but finite. 
(kT 
-2 Whe-WIkT ST,

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
163 
depending on whether the particles obey the Einstein—Bose or 
the Fermi-Dirac statistics. 
Both these statistics simplify to Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics 
in the limit when the situation is such that the exclusion principle 
is of negligible importance. 
This will be the case when we are 
concerned with ions which obey the Einstein—Bose statistics. 
Electrons obey the Fermi-Dirac statistics; for them the approxi- 
mation 
of Maxwell-Boltzmann 
statistics 
is 
in general 
not 
allowable. 
For electrons, the Boltzmann distribution function must be 
replaced by the Fermi—Dirac distribution function, the differ- 
ence coming about because of the exclusion principle which 
limits the occupation of states to two electrons of opposite spin 
in each state, and so forces electrons into higher states than they 
would oceupy according to the Boltzmann function. Normaliza- 
tion is carried out as before. 
The distribution function for electrons among the available 
energy levels which replaces the classical Boltzmann distribution 
function can be found most simply by considering two systems 
which can interchange energy, the one subject to the exclusion 
principle, the other one in which the exclusion principle makes 
no difference and which, therefore, obeys the Boltzmann law 
(Kittel, 1962). The first system is taken as any system in which 
there is a quasi-continuous distribution of energy levels, such as 
the free-electron gas. The second system is a hypothetical atom 
having two bound energy levels only—a kind of simplified 
hydrogen atom. An electron from the continuous distribution, 
having energy W, can collide inelastically with the atom in the 
ground state and excite it to the upper state at a height U above 
the ground state, losing energy 
U in the process, provided 
W > U. 
This is the process of excitation by electron collision, 
and is shown schematically on the left in Fig. 8.1. The reverse 
process, shown on the right, is also possible. 
This is a collision 
of the second kind, 
in which the electron collides with the 
excited atom, gains energy U from it, and leaves the atom in the 
ground state. The principle of detailed balancing requires that 
these two processes must have the same inherent probability

164 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
of occurring. This principle, long believed to be correct though 
unproven, has been deduced for classical statistics by Tolman 
(1938, 
p. 
161). 
It 
is 
a straightforward consequence 
of the 
symmetry 
of the expressions 
for transition probabilities in 
opposite directions in quantum mechanics (Tolman, 1938, p. 521). 
  
  
  
  
\ 
/ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Fw"" 
L% 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Fia. 8.1 
On left : excitation of atom. 
On right : collision of second kind. 
The exclusion principle reduces the overall probability of an 
electron with energy W exciting the atom and finishing with 
energy W—U, because the state at W—U may be occupied. 
If the probability of a state being occupied is f(W), the prob- 
ability of it being unoccupied is 1—f(W). The probability of 
the atom being excited in unit time is therefore proportional to 
f(W{1—f(W—U)}F,, where F, is the probabihty of the atom 
being in the ground state. 
If P, is the probability of it being in 
the excited state, the probability of the reverse process occurring 
in unit time is proportional to 
f(W—U){1—f(W)}P,. 
Since the 
probabilities in which we are interested refer to thermodynamic 
equilibrium, the principle of detailed balancing requires the two 
coefficients of proportionality to be equal. We therefore have 
fW{I—f(W—=U)}F = f(W—UX1—f(W)}h. 
The atom only possesses a single electron so, whichever level the 
electron is in, the other to which it can go is certainly empty. 
The exclusion principle is therefore irrelevant and the Boltzmann 
distribution function applies. Thus P,/F, = e¢~UXT, The detailed

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
165 
balancing requirement may therefore be written 
J0) 
1~ (W=U) _ _vpr 
1—-f(W) f(W=U) 
which is a functional equation for f(W). 
Written in this form, the equation obviously has the solution 
  
  
f (W) 
— B(T)e‘W/kT, 
  
1—f(W) 
6 being a function of 7' but not of W. After rearranging, we find 
1 
We know the form this functlon must take for 7' = 0: all levels 
up to an energy u, must be occupied, all higher levels must be 
empty; so f(W) =1 for W < pg, f(W) =0 for W > p,. 
We 
observe that this is fulfilled if we take 6(7") into the exponential 
and write 
1 
f(W) = é(W_P)/kT_I__I’ 
  
in which u is a function of 7' having the value u, for 7' = 0. In 
previous chapters we have assumed tacitly that since we are 
only interested in conditions for which u, > kT, f(W) never 
departs very much from its form at 7' = 0. We shall continue 
to take this as obvious, and investigate the form of u(7') on the 
assumption that it only differs markedly from p(0) for W ~ w,. 
We shall find that the precise form of u(7") depends on the form 
of N, but that for any N, u = u, is a good approximation 
if 7' is not too large. 
We assume, therefore, that f(W) and of/oW have the general 
form shown schematically in Fig. 8.2, and follow a procedure 
first given by Sommerfeld and Bethe (1933). 
If there are 
n» 
electrons in the system, normalization requires that 
f 
N, dW 
n — 
. 
eW—mikT _|_ ] 
  
This is of the form 
0 — f faJV ” W 
with A3, = [ Ny dW.

166 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
Integration by parts gives 
n =[] — fmwafdw_ fmwafdw 
since 
f =1 and A4, = 0 at the lower limit, and though A7, 
becomes infinite at the upper limit, it does so like a power of W, 
  
  
  
  
  
I 
S(w) 
0 
Ho 
' 
) 
of(w) 
ow 
Fia. 8.2 
whereas f becomes exponentially small. 
Now of/oW is small 
except in the region of u,. Let us therefore change the variable 
so as to reckon energies from a zero at u, and also reckon them 
in units of k7. 
This means putting » = (W —u)/kT and gives 
n = — 
f N gi dn, 
—ulkT 
in which A" is A7, expressed in terms of 5. Since u > kT, the 
lower limit may be replaced by —oo giving 
Apart from cases in which 4" is not a smooth function of n for 
n = 0, 4/ may be expanded in a Taylor series, and in the range 
within which 9f/oy is significant the series will be rapidly con- 
vergent. Hence 
of 
oN| 
1PN 
{JV (0) 4+ —— 
3 ot 
  
  
1+ 
n2+.--} dn. 
0 
0

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
167 
Consider the integral term by term. The first term is 
xo | S—J:-’dn = HONSIE = H(0). 
The second term is 
——I 
f ,’ﬁ dn. 
0 
Now of/on = —(e"+2+e—1)-t., 
This has the same value for 
positive and negative values of n. 
It follows that the second 
term is zero. The third term, the last that we need to consider, is 
[#Zan 
0 
on 
+ 
oo 
The definite integral may be evaluated by expressing 9f/on in 
a form in which it may be expanded as a power series by the 
binomial theorem. We have 
1 24 
2 
on? 
  
  
—_ 
0 
+ 
o 
Qf 
nze‘ﬂ 
2 % 
— 
_ 
f Ton @1 
=2 f GRS 
+ 
oo 
  
(= 
+ o 
= 2 f n%e~N(1—2e~143e-21—4e~31|-5e~41—_..) dy 
0 
4+ oo 
= 2 f n2(e~M1—2e~214-3e-31—4e~4M4 
5e-51—...) dny 
0 
1 
— 
(1_2_2+3_2_Z§+5§_"') 
2 
N2 
The third term in the integral is therefore % 9   
, giving 
  
o 
o 
6 
on? 
By transforming back to the original variable, using 
n = (W—u)/kT, 
we obtain, as the equation for 4 when XV, is a smooth function 
n = A(0) 4 
  
0

168 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
of W in the neighbourhood of p, and for sufficiently low tem- 
peratures, 
2N 
n = Al YT 
Since A3 = f N, dW, the equation for u may be written 
alternatively as 
  
  
® 
  
r 
oN 
n— f Nyy AW 43k Ty 
0 
For temperatures at which 47 is small compared with u, the 
second term is a correction term to the first; it is moreover a 
second order correction. 
Its magnitude depends on the form of 
N, and 
is therefore different for different materials. 
The 
variation of yu with temperature comes entirely from this term; 
the variation will be small except in special cases. 
If the second 
term is neglected, as is frequently permissible, the equation for 
p reduces to 
73 
n:OfNWdW. 
This equation states that u is the energy level to which the 
electrons in the system fill levels from the bottom up when every 
level is occupied, i.e. to the top of the distribution at absolute 
zero. Apart from a second order correction, then, u, = u, We 
conclude finally that the Fermi-—Dirac distribution function, 
correct to the first order, is 
) 
! 
~ exp{(W—po)kT}+1" 
We shall return to the second order correction term when 
discussing thermoelectric effects; meanwhile the exceptional 
importance of the energy level at u, has to be explained. 
(8.1) 
  
The Fermi level 
It will be seen that the form of the Fermi-Dirac distribution 
function is such that any level below un is more likely to be 
occupied than unoccupied, whereas any level higher than u is 
more likely to be unoccupied than occupied. 
If there is a level

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
169 
at u, the chance of it being occupied is exactly 1, at any tempera- 
ture. Thelevel pisknown as the Fermilevel. With due attention 
to units, it may be identified as the electrochemical potential of 
thermodynamics because, as we shall now show, it must have 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
___________________________ 
; 
w 
: 
* 
: 
952 
: 
| 
| 
¢! 
Sw 
l 
1 
| 
t 
l 
S 
y A 
N\ 
l 
l 
L 
[ 
) 
| 
M2 
P 
f-—--- T 
| 
? 
B 
| 
l 
l 
| 
I 
' 
I 
N 
E 
1 
If 
ar 
W 
| 
T 
| 
l 
| ~©- 
l 
| 
I 
| 
|'_. 
V 
; 
| 
| 
:-& 
l 
I 
| 
+ 
b 
| 
I 
= 
b 
| 
| 
| 
I 
Zero 
¥ 
Ly 
I 
ﬁ§ 
energy 
| 
£ 
[ 
5 
l 
F1c. 8.3 
the same value for all the phases of any heterogeneous system 
in thermodynamic equilibrium. 
It is sufficient to consider two phases in juxtaposition. 
The 
first system, shown on the left in Fig. 8.3, has its lowest level at 
a height #” above the arbitrary zero of energy. At the absolute 
zero, electrons would fill the higher levels up to the Fermilevel u, 
above; there are then empty levels for a further height ¢,. Above 
this there are only unbound levels. To allow for an electrostatic 
difference of potential between the two phases, the highest 
bound level in the second phase, on the right in Fig. 8.3, is at 
a height w above the corresponding level in the first phase. 
The height of the lowest level in the second phase is 
W 
w4 (b1 — o)+ (1 —po); 
where ¢, and u, for the second phase correspond to ¢; and u, 
for the first. 
The Fermi-Dirac distribution functions f; and f,

170 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
are plotted horizontally against energy W vertically. NN has 
the values N; and N, in the two phases. 
Consider a small energy range 
8 W. The number of electrons 
in this range on the left is 
N, oW 
exp{(W—# —py) eI} 
1 
The number of electrons on the right is 
N, oW 
Sxp{(W—H —w—pyt 
$a—p) R} 1° 
The number of states in the energy range 
6 
W which are un- 
occupied and therefore capable of receiving an electron is, on 
the left, 
  
  
NSW 
N, oW — 
0 
Sxp(W—H 
—p) kT 
1 
  
N, oW 
~ exp{—(W—# —u)[kT}+1° 
The number of unoccupied states on the right is 
N, oW 
exp{—(W—#"—w—¢;+do—p) 
[T} 
+1 
The rate of transition of electrons in the energy range 
6 W from 
phase 1 to phase 2 (from left to right in Fig. 8.3) is proportional to 
N, oW 
oxp((W—W —p)RT} 
41" 
  
  
  
y 
N, 8W 
xp(—(W—H 
—w—y T pa—p)FTIF1 
From phase 2 to phase 
1 (right to left) the rate of transition is 
proportional to 
  
N, oW 
exp{(W—W —w—s+ $o—p) 
JETIF1 
y 
N, oW 
oxp{— (W —# — )T+ 1° 
At thermodynamic equilibrium the principle of detailed balanc- 
ing requires the two coefficients of proportionality to be equal. 
  
 

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
171 
After equating the two rates, cancelling and rearranging, we have 
exp{(W— 
W —p)/kT}+1 
oxp{—(W—W 
—py) BT} 1 
_ exp{(W—# —w—¢y+dp—pu) KT} +1 
exXp{—(W—¥"—w—¢1+dy—p1)/kT}+1 
which is of the form 
eWikI)—a_t ] 
 ¢WIkI)- ] 
e~ WIRD) 
11~ of-WIkT) {1’ 
and is true for all W. For W/kT = « we have 
Bl 
et 
¥’ 
  
  
  
whence ¢2¢-F) = 1 and so o = B. 
Referring back, we 
see that # +u, = #"+w+¢;—do+pyg 
whence w = ¢,—d;. 
It appears that thermodynamic equili- 
brium requires there to be an electrostatic difference of potential 
between the phases, and that this potential difference shifts the 
relative position of the energy levels in the two phases so that 
the Fermi levels are at the same height. 
When energy level 
diagrams such as Fig. 6.5 are drawn for several solids in equili- 
brium, the Fermi level must run horizontally right through the 
diagram. 
It is worth mentioning that this is no longer true 
when an electric current flows across the picture, though we 
shall not be concerned with this case; the current may be 
supposed to arise from electrons ‘rolling down the Fermi level’. 
The Fermi level in metals 
A first approximation to the dependence of the Fermi level 
on temperature in metals may be obtained from the free-electron 
gas model, for which N, 
= CW?, where C is a constant depend- 
ing on the metal. We have 
M 
| Mo aW = §Cut, 
0 
oN,, 
and 
5 = %OW'_%.

172 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
The equation for p is 
  
  
  
i 
oN, 
n = | Ny dW+L(=kT)2=2| 
, 
ow 
|, 
0 
oN. 
oN, 
and 
W 
o~ W 
oW 
|, 
"~ oW 
|, 
2 
Thus 
n = 30pt+ ;’_2 (kT)2Cug . 
For T = 0 the equation gives » = 2Cu§, whence 
- () 5Ga) 
" 
o= i), 
6 
since pu, > kT. 
When kT has attained 1 eV all metals have melted, and g, 
is several eV. 
It may be concluded that p is within 1 per cent 
of u, for any metal in the solid state. 
This justifies neglecting 
the effect of temperature on the equilibrium between metals 
when considering contact charging. 
Metals in equilibrium 
Two pieces of different metal, placed sufficiently close together 
to exchange electrons, will reach thermodynamic equilibrium by 
equalizing the height of their Fermi levels. 
It would be trivial 
to remark that for close contact of metals equilibrium is attained 
practically instantaneously, were 
it not that this statement 
will require closer examination later, and because it breaks 
down for semiconductors and is the opposite of the truth for 
insulators. We have seen that, to a high degree of approximation 
for metals up to the temperature of their melting point, the 
equilibrium is the same as at absolute zero. 
KEquilibrium is 
reached by the establishment of a contact potential, as shown 
schematically in Fig. 8.4. The temperature blurring of the top 
of the electron distribution is ignored, since it does not affect 
the argument when p =~ p,. 
In Fig. 8.4(a) two blocks of metal 
A and B are shown separated and uncharged, with their energy

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
173 
level diagrams beneath. We assume ¢, > ¢,;; the value of p is 
irrelevant. 
If the gap between the blocks of metal is sufficiently 
small for electrons to be able to cross by tunnelling, electrons 
  
  
(a) 
A 
B 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
N 
(b) 
1 
  
  
i 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(c) 
  
F1c. 8.4. Contact of dissimilar metals. 
near the top of the distribution in 4 can spill over into B without 
change of energy, going into vacant levels in B. This results in 
B acquiring a negative charge, leaving 4 with a positive charge. 
The gap is charged like a condenser, an electric field is established 
across the gap, and this raises the ‘potential’ of B with respect 
to A for electrons. The flow of electrons is discouraged by the 
rise in ‘potential’, but the process continues until the rise has

174 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
shifted the levels in A relative to those in B so that the tops of 
the distributions are at the same height. 
The result is shown 
in (b). The equalization of the Fermi levels at equilibrium is an 
obvious consequence of this simplified picture; we have seen 
that it is also the equilibrium condition when the blurring of 
the tops of the electron distributions is taken into account. 
The charges on A and B are not confined to the surfaces in the 
gap; owing to fringing some lines of force cross from all parts 
of 4 to B, terminating on negative charges distributed over B, 
A being correspondingly positively charged. One of these lines 
of force is shown in (b). Such lines of force are required to ensure 
that the potential difference between 4 and B is not confined 
to the gap: all parts of 
4 must be at the same potential and all 
parts of B must be at the same potential (different from that 
of A). 
If the gap is closed and contact made between A and B, 
the equilibrium height of the Fermi levels remains unchanged, 
and ¢,/e—d¢,/e = ®,—D, is then to be identified with the contact 
potential. Comparing (c¢) with (b) in Fig. 8.4, it is apparent that 
when two wires of dissimilar metals are joined together at one 
end, 
the 
contact potential difference appears between 
the 
unjoined other ends and may be measured there by any of the 
standard methods. 
If these ends are now joined, the contact 
potential is present at both junctions, having the same sign at 
the two junctions with respect to 4 and B but having opposite 
senses taken round the circuit and so cancelling out. 
Contact 
potentials, therefore, do not drive currents round a closed circuit 
consisting of different metals when the metals are in thermo- 
dynamic equilibrium. 
Seebeck effect 
If different junctions in a mixed circuit are not at the same 
temperature, the system is not in thermodynamic equilibrium 
and it is in general impossible for the Fermi levels to be all lined 
up, because the temperature-dependent term in the formula for 
p affects different junctions differently. 
There 
is no longer 
cancellation 
of contact potentials reckoned round 
a closed 
circuit and an electric current flows. 
The second order term

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
175 
in formula (8.2) for u gives a resultant e.m.f. round the circuit, 
but this formula does not give the correct value of the Seebeck 
potential for metals because it was derived from a consideration 
of pieces of material at uniform temperatures (Heikes and Ure, 
1961). 
If allowance is made for heat flow in the materials, a 
modified e.m.f. is obtained, though the correct value can be 
derived from the variation of p with temperature provided the 
treatment is carried out for the actual circuit with heat flow. 
The difference comes from thermal diffusion of electrons, from 
(8.2) not allowing for the possibility of a variation of the free 
electron density with temperature, important in the case of 
semiconductors, and from phonon drag which, however, is only 
significant for some semiconductors at low temperature. Thermo- 
electric e.m.f.s are small for metals, though the currents that 
flow can be comparatively large, because of the low resistivity 
of metals; for semiconductors, the e.m.f.s may be of a higher 
order of magnitude. 
The magnitude 
of the Seebeck e.m.f.s 
cannot be predicted from simple theory; they are found experi- 
mentally. 
It has already been remarked that thermoelectric 
effects can play only a secondary role in the contact and frictional 
charging of metals; for semiconductors they are more important. 
Fermi level in semiconductors 
At moderate temperatures the Fermi level in an intrimsic 
semiconductor is approximately half-way between the top of the 
valence band and the bottom of the conduction band, as will now 
be shown. 
Consider the population of energy levels at a height 
w, above the bottom of the conduction band and also at a depth 
w, below the top of the valence band (Fig. 8.5), measuring the 
energy W from the Fermi level which will be at some distance W 
below the bottom of the conduction band and W, above the top 
of the valence band. Let N;6W be the number of states in the 
energy range 
6 W 
in the conduction band, and N,6W the corre- 
sponding quantity in the valence band. 
The number of electrons in the energy range oW in the 
conduction band is 
N, 5W 
eWIkT 1.1’ 
 

176 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
whereas the number of holes in the energy range W in the 
valence band is 
1 
N, oW 
N, o W(l T eWIRT 1) T e WIkT ]’ 
Since each electron excited into the conduction band leaves one 
hole in the valence band, the total number of electrons in the 
  
  
  
  
bm} k)4 
Wi 
I 
Conduction band 
| 
Forbidden 
F 
. 
W 
; 
rermi 
_ | 
y 
region 
Iovel 
! 
W, 
b 
‘ 
. 
e 
;.'Valen.'ce__ba_'pd-'f: ; 
  
  
  
Fi1c. 8.5 
conduction band must be equal to the total number of holes in 
the valence band. We therefore have 
  
The integrals may be taken to oo because their rapid convergence 
makes the precise value of this limit unimportant. By putting 
W' = — W in the right-hand integral we obtain 
FNAW 
[ N, dW 
VKT L]~ | T 
The two integrals are now identical in form, and since the 
integrand is single-valued and always positive, it follows that 
W, = W, when N, = N,. 
We note that this has come about 
because the form of the Fermi-Dirac distribution is such that 
the probability of a level above the Fermi level being occupied 
is the same as the probability of the level the same distance 
below the Fermi level being unoccupied. 
Electrons and holes 
balance each other, as it were, about the Fermi level. 
Since, in 
 

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
177 
an intrinsic semiconductor, W;+W, > kT, most of the electrons 
in the conduction band reside within a few k7' of the bottom of 
the band, that is in a region narrow compared with the gap 
between the conduction band and the valence band. 
For the 
same reason most of the holes in the valence band are close to 
the top of the band. This will still be true when &, £ N,, though 
the distribution will be different. 
It is apparent from these 
considerations, by inspection of the integrals, that W, = W, 
even when N; = N,. For intrinsic semiconductors at moderate 
temperatures the Fermi level is always nearly at the middle of 
the forbidden gap. 
In view of what has just been said about intrinsic semi- 
conductors, and referring to Fig. 7.10, 
it can easily be seen 
where the Fermi level lies in impurity semiconductors. 
In the 
case of n-type semiconductors, the valence band is fully occupied, 
but there are vacancies in the donor levels and the electrons 
that have been excited from these levels reside near the bottom 
of the conduction band. For sufficiently low temperatures they 
will be mainly in a region considerably narrower than the gap 
between the donor levels and the bottom of the conduction band. 
Under these conditions the Fermi level will be a little higher 
than half-way between the donor levels and the bottom of the 
conduction band. 
This is close to the conduction band, quite 
different from its position in an intrinsic semiconductor. 
The 
corresponding argument for a p-type semiconductor obviously 
leads to the conclusion that the Fermi level is a little lower than 
half-way between the acceptor levels and the top of the valence 
band. 
At sufficiently low temperatures the Fermi level in n-type 
semiconductors is in the forbidden region close to the conduction 
band, in p-type semiconductors it is in the forbidden region close 
to the valence band. At sufficiently high temperatures, however, 
both n-type and p-type semiconductors show intrinsic conduec- 
tivity, because some electrons can be excited from the valence 
band across the forbidden region into the conduction band. At 
still higher temperatures the intrinsic effect is the principal cause 
of the conductivity; under these conditions the Fermi level must

178 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
be in the middle of the forbidden region. This involves a large 
shift in the position of the Fermi level with temperature, and 
we see at once how thermoelectric effects with semiconductors 
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
(a) 
= 
2 
80 
E 
___________ 
c 
Donor levels 
")) 
o) 
2 
L 
L) 
S 
b 
Temperature 
(b) 
c 
O 
o0 
W 
] 
c 
< Ol _ _ 
~— _Acceptor levels 
5 
tor level 
S 
S 
Temperature 
  
Fic. 8.6. Dependence on temperature of Fermi levels in (a) n-semi- 
conductor and (b) p-semiconductor (schematic). 
( 
“{\ 
el 
\ / 
Excess of 
Excess of 
acceptors 
donors 
  
Forbidden 
region 
A 
    
  
  
  
Fic. 8.7. Dependence of Fermi level on ratio of donors to acceptors in 
a semiconductor containing both. 
can be orders of magnitude greater than with metals. The way 
in which the Fermi level depends on temperature in n-type and 
p-type semiconductorsisshown in Fig. 8.6. Many semiconductors 
contain both donor and acceptor levels. 
If the concentration of 
these levels changes from all acceptor to all donor, the Fermi 
level moves from near the bottom to near the top of the forbidden 
region, as shown in Fig. 8.7.

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
179 
In general, the Fermi level can be almost anywhere in the 
forbidden region in semiconductors, its position depending on 
the type of conductivity and on temperature. One cannot say 
where it will be in a given material without knowing the implica- 
tions of all the impurities the material contains. 
Different parts of a surface having different inner poten- 
tials 
It was mentioned in Chapter VI (p. 109) that the different 
faces of a crystal have different strengths of electrical double 
layer associated with them so that the inner potential as calcu- 
lated from the structure is different for the different faces. The 
inner’ potential is 
a sudden change of electrostatic potential 
across the surface. In the case of a metal crystal its conductivity 
ensures that the potential in the interior, as averaged by 
a 
conduction electron, is everywhere the same. The potential just 
outside one crystal face must therefore be different from the 
potential just outside another. At great distances the potential 
can have nothing to do with the crystal faces. 
It therefore 
follows that charges must be so distributed on the surface of the 
metal crystal as to give rise to lines of force which equalize the 
potential at great distances. These lines of force must go from 
one crystal face to another, terminating in charges of opposite 
sign on the two faces. The case of an insulator is not so straight- 
forward. The situation is one of classical electrostatics and can 
be considered by taking into account the fringing fields at the 
edges of the double layers. 
Consider first two double layers of equal strength and sign, 
meeting in an edge, as shown in section in Fig. 8.8(a). 
For 
precision, let them be semi-infinite planes. 
Consider the way 
the potential energy of an electron changes along the path 
A B, 
ignoring, at first, any complication arising from the edge where 
the two double layers join. The electron then only changes its 
potential energy when passing through the double layers, giving 
the result shown in Fig. 8.8 (b). Allowing, now, for the fact that 
the double layers do not join up neatly at the edge, we must 
include the effect of the fringing field as shown in Fig. 8.8 (c).

180 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
If an electron is taken along the path CD and back along DC, 
symmetrically with respect to the two double layers, the poten- 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
A 
I 
+ 
A 
| 
B 
L 
- 
] 
1 
3 
@ 
gl 
(b) 
C 
C 
(d) 
D 
o 
— 
l 
1 
] 
| 
TTTTTT 
1 
| 
(f) 
L3 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
- 
+ 
F1c. 8.8. Double layer on neighbouring crystal faces: lines of force 
and potential shifts (schematic). 
tial change passing through the edge will be spread out a little, 
as in Fig. 8.8 (d), but the simpler consideration that led to (b) 
is a good approximation. 
This is no longer so if the double

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
181 
layers 
are reversed in sign as in Fig. 
8.8 (e). 
Ignoring the 
fringing field when taking an electron along the path 4B leads 
to a potential energy plot like the dotted one in Fig. 8.8 (f), 
but allowing for the fringing and taking the electron along CD, 
B — 
— 
- /—/ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Fia. 8.9. 
(a) Insulator with different inner potentials 
at 
different 
faces. 
(b) Metal with 
different 
inner 
potentials at different faces. 
and back again, gives the full line plot in (f), because there is 
no component of field anywhere along CD, as follows at once 
from symmetry considerations. 
Thus there 
is 
a major dis- 
crepancy which comes from ignoring the fringing field in the 
first case. 
Allowing for the fact that 4B must pass through 
some fringing field, we conclude that the correct form of the 
potential energy plot is like Fig. 8.8 (g). 
If, finally, we have 
two double layers of the same sign but different strengths, the 
first being the greater, then the potential energy plot will be 
compounded of two curves, one like (b) and the other like (g). 
The result is Fig. 8.9 (¢) in which the bands for an insulator 
have been inserted. 
The two inner potentials belonging to the 
two surfaces are different, but this involves significant fields 
both inside and outside the insulator, in consequence of which 
the Fermi level is not horizontal. 
The situation is not one of 
thermodynamic equilibrium, but there are no electrons available

182 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
inside the insulator to roll down the Fermi level and bring 
equilibrium about; the situation inside is therefore permanent 
unless or until the material ceases to be strictly an insulator. 
Outside, the field will collect stray ions from the surroundings 
until the field is neutralized. 
  
  
  
  
    
  
F1e. 8.10. 
Lines of force arising from intrinsic charging of faces of a meta 
block with different inner potentials at different faces. 
In the case of a metal, electrons can roll down the Fermi level 
so that this evens out. 
In doing so surface charges (not double 
layers) will form giving an energy plot as in Fig. 8.9 (b) and 
external lines of force as in Fig. 8.10, in which the section has 
been completed. The potential difference between infinity and 
a positively charged face is different from that between infinity 
and a negatively charged face, asis apparent from a consideration 
of the paths 
£ F and E'F’'. We see that a quantum-mechanical 
metal is not a classical conductor when it is in crystalline form:

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
183 
it charges itself spontaneously so that a potential difference 
exists between different crystal faces. 
This is in principle 
a 
contact potential and will not drive 
a current. 
The contact 
potential measured between a crystalline metal and another 
metal will depend on which crystal face is used. 
Rose (1933) 
investigated single crystals of copper which he obtained suffi- 
ciently nearly single-faced and atomically clean to conclude 
that the [111] face is positive with respect to the [100], and the 
contact potential between them is somewhat greater than 0-46 V. 
Smoluchowski (1941) has calculated work-function differences 
for the different crystal faces of tungsten, obtaining reasonable 
agreement with experiment. 
The surface of a polycrystalline 
metal will be covered with patches of positive and negative 
charge, the resulting electrostatic field being localized near the 
patches and disappearing at distances large compared with the 
size of a patch. 
It will be clear from what has been said that 
phenomena (such as the current passing through a narrow gap) 
which depend on local conditions will vary markedly over the 
surface, whereas other phenomena (such as the signal generated 
on a moving electrode used to measure contact potential) which 
depend on an effect at a distance will be related to average values. 
A metal surface which has been carefully prepared and gives a 
definite value of contact potential need not give consistent 
contact charging if the contact area used is very small. Similar 
remarks apply to insulators which are covered with inhomo- 
geneous patches of adsorbed or chemically combined electro- 
positive or electronegative materials forming double layers on 
the surface. 
Table 8.1 compares the work-functions of several metals with 
the first ionization potentials of the atoms. The work-functions 
are all a great deal less than the corresponding ionization poten- 
tials. 
The energy required to remove an electron from the 
assembly of atoms is less than that required to remove it from 
a single atom. One would expect the work required to remove 
an electron from an assembly of a few atoms to be intermediate 
in value. Hence one may anticipate that the work-function of 
a very small particle of metal, or thin film, will be greater than

184 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
  
  
TABLE 8.1 
Ionzrzation 
Metal 
Work-function 
potential 
Caesium 
1:8 eV 
3-89V 
Aluminium 
3-0 
5-98 
Tungsten 
4-5 
7-98 
Platinum 
5-3 
8:96 
Mercury 
4-5 
10-4 
  
for the metal in bulk. This has been observed for thin films of 
copper by Moppett (1961). 
It is of importance in the inter- 
pretation of the entrainment charging of gases by mercury 
(Harper, 1957). Moppett found that it was only for copper films 
thicker than 1500 A that the film behaved like the bulk metal. 
In the case of very thin films one would expect the nature of 
the substrate to play a part. An obvious example is that of an 
adsorbed layer of caesium on tungsten for which the work- 
function is 1:36 eV, the work-function of caesium being 1:8 eV 
and that of tungsten 4-5 eV. The moral for triboelectrification 
is that contaminant films which change the properties of the 
substrate will not behave like bulk contaminating material unless 
the films are quite thick. 
Oxide layers 
What has just been said is borne out by an observation of the 
author’s that invisibly oxidized and obviously tarnished metals 
usually behave 
differently, 
though 
visible 
tarnish 
can, 
on 
occasion, behave like invisible tarnish. 
The visible tarnish is, 
nearly always, ©ve with respect to the invisible. 
Oxide layers 
on metals are very important because, as is well known, nearly 
all clean metals rapidly acquire an invisible protective film when 
exposed to a laboratory atmosphere, the film consisting mainly 
of oxide (Evans, 1963). 
p 
A theoretical approach to the formation of oxide films on 
metals has been given by Cabrera and Mott (1949), and experi- 
mental support for the theory found by Bloomer (1957). 
The 
features of the theory that are relevant to contact charging are 
illustrated in Fig. 8.11. 
It is supposed that there is an adsorbed

VIII 
AT INTERFACES 
185 
layer of oxygen atoms on the outside of the oxide layer and that 
there 
are 
deep acceptor 
levels in these oxygen atoms. 
It 
is irrelevant for sufficiently thin films whether the oxide 
is 
insulating 
or semiconducting, because electrons can tunnel 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
- 
v & 
(a) 
20 
X @ 
Metal 
Oxide 
O 
' Acceptor 
T 
level 
% 
(b) 
g‘z 
  
level 
  
  
Metal 
Oxide 
— 
Partially 
________ L. 
filled 
  
  
  
  
F1g. 8.11. Thin oxide layer on surface of a metal. 
(a) Electronic 
levels before electrons have passed through oxide. 
(b) After equili- 
brium has been established. 
through such films. 
If energy diagrams for metal, oxide, and 
oxygen atoms are put together, we have Fig. 8.11 (a). 
In this 
diagram the Fermi level in the metal is higher than the empty 
level in the oxygen atoms, so electrons will tunnel through the 
oxide and occupy some of the oxygen levels. 
This raises the 
energy levels on the right until the oxygen levels are at the same 
height as the Fermi level in the metal. 
In the equilibrium 
condition shown in (b) a double layer has introduced the neces- 
sary potential difference, there being a deficit of electrons at the 
surface of the metal and a partially filled set of levels in the 
adsorbed oxygen. 
The oxygen levels, being neither completely 
full nor completely empty, will show surface conductivity, and 
tunnelling provides the conductivity to maintain the double

186 
POTENTIAL DISCONTINUITIES 
VIII 
layer if electrons are added to or removed from the oxygen 
levels. The Fermi level on the outer surface of the oxide layer 
is therefore maintained just as in a metal. 
In consequence the 
oxidized metal will behave, as far as contact charging is con- 
cerned, like a different metal with a work-function equal to the 
depth of the acceptor levels in the adsorbed oxygen. According 
to Cabrera and Mott, this will be about 5-5 V, not greatly 
dependent on the nature of the metal. 
It follows that contact 
potentials between tarnished metals will be less than between 
pure metals, although the individual work-functions are greater. 
This is found experimentally to be the case. 
Most oxides are semiconductors; when the oxide layer is too 
thick for tunnelling to occur, the levels in the oxygen can be 
supplied with electrons from the metal, but more slowly. The 
oxidized metal will no longer behave quite like a metal. Thick 
layers of oxide will behave like semiconductors, but, be it noted, 
with surface levels due to oxygen that may be significant for 
triboelectrification.

CHAPTER IX 
SPACE CHARGES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
AND INSULATORS 
Semiconductors in contact with a metal 
WE have already discussed the positions of the Fermi level in 
semiconductors, and we know that when contact equilibrium has 
been established Fermi levels must be lined up horizontally. 
The lining-up must come about by 
a shift of energy levels 
resulting from the change in potential produced by a double 
layer of positive and negative charge. 
In the case of metals 
the layers 
of charge and their separation are of molecular 
dimensions, but such concentrated layers of charge cannot be 
accommodated in the levels which are available in semicon- 
ductors, with certain exceptions such as the oxygen layer on 
oxides, so that in general the charge layers have a considerable 
thickness. We must now consider what space charge densities 
are permitted in semiconductors. 
Equilibrium space charges 
must conform to the Fermi-Dirac distribution function among 
the available electron (and hole) levels. 
It will be recalled that 
the distribution function was normalized so as to make the total 
number of electrons in all the permitted levels equal to the 
number of available electrons, that is, equal to the number of 
positive cores. 
In other words, the normalization makes the 
material electrically neutral. 
If it is not, the Fermi level will 
be moved from its normal position. 
If the Fermi level is raised, 
higher levels are more likely to be occupied and lower levels less 
likely to be empty. This makes the material negatively charged. 
If it is lowered, the converse is true and the material is positively 
charged. 
In both cases, the space charge is due to electrons 
having been gained or lost by a displacement of the Fermi level 
up or down. 
The magnitude of the space charge density is 
determined by the displacement, which is reckoned relative to 
a base line at the inner potential. 
Actually, it is the base line 
which changes, since the Fermi level must remain at the same

188 
SPACE CHARGES IN 
IX 
height when 
a space charge 
is formed in order to preserve 
thermodynamic equilibrium. The displacement of the base line 
is due to the superposed electrostatic potential which comes 
from the cumulative effect of the diffuse double layer. Hence 
there is a differential equation which determines the way in 
which the space charge density changes through the layer, and 
this equation depends on the nature of the material. The thick- 
ness of the layer will be such as to conform to the boundary 
conditions; in our case the requirement is to match the Fermi 
level in the semiconductor with the Fermi level in another 
material with which it is in contact. 
Three straightforward 
cases will be considered: an excess semiconductor, 
a deficit 
semiconductor, and an intrinsic semiconductor, all in contact 
with a metal whose Fermi level is well removed from both the 
top and the bottom of the forbidden region in the semiconductor. 
It is not sufficient to derive a formula for one type of semi- 
conductor and then apply it to the others with appropriate 
modifications in the meaning of the parameters, as done by 
Bredov and Kshemianskaia 
(1951): 
we 
shall 
find essential 
differences between intrinsic semiconductors and excess and 
deficit semiconductors. 
The first case 
is illustrated in Fig. 
9.1 (a). 
The localized 
impurity energy wells are drawn in the appropriate positions, 
shown empty when they are so far above the Fermi level that 
their electrons are unlikely to be in either the localized level or 
the conduction band, being lost to the metal, and shown occupied 
when undisturbed by the potential shift so that the electron is 
either actually in the localized level or raised from it into the 
conduction band, the charge on the positive core being compen- 
sated and no space charge present. Ifthe amount by which the 
Fermi level is shifted at equilibrium is large compared with 
the gap between the impurity levels and the conduction band, 
the impurity levels will all have lost their electron in the region 
of the space charge and the charge density will be uniform and 
equal to the density N; of the donor levels times the electronic 
charge e. 
In reality, there will not be a sharp cut-off of space 
charge; there will be a small tail in which some donor levels have

IX 
SEMICONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS 
189 
lost their electron and some have not. Ignoring this refinement, 
we may attribute a definite thickness X to the space charge 
(a) 
$ 
© 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
F1c. 9.1. Formation of space charge at metal/semiconductor contacts 
(schematic) : (a) n-type, (b) p-type, (¢) intrinsic. The localized levels 
are indicated, and whether these are likely to be occupied or empty. 
layer. 
The valence band is so far below the upper levels that 
any change in its electron population may be disregarded, unless 
the material is behaving in part as an intrinsic semiconductor. 
The 
second 
case 
is 
illustrated 
in Fig. 
9.1 (b). 
Here the

190 
SPACE CHARGES IN 
IX 
localized energy wells are shown empty when they have no 
electron or when the electron in the level has come from the 
valence band leaving a positive hole which compensates the 
charge, but are shown occupied when an electron has been 
received from the metal so that there is both an electron in the 
valence band and in the acceptor level. 
In this region 
all 
impurity levels have gained an electron, and the charge density 
is uniform and equal to the density N, of acceptor levels times 
the electronic charge. 
Again, unless the material is behaving 
like an intrinsic semiconductor there will be only a negligible 
decrease in electron density in the conduction band of the 
semiconductor. 
For both n-type and p-type semiconductors, then, the space 
charge density is uniform and equal to N;e and 
— N, € respec- 
tively. 
In 
a charge layer 
of thickness X, 
the electrostatic 
potential must build up 
to the contact potential which 
is 
approximately (y—d¢)/e in the first case and (y+E,—d¢)/e in 
the second. For the first case the electrostatic potential V(x) 
is given by 
B2V 
in which it will be convenient to reckon x from the inner surface 
of the space charge towards the metal. 
Since dV/dx = 0 for 
x = 0, integration gives 
V(x)—V(0) = 27N, eX?/K, 
  
  
_ 
[[e—x)K 
whence 
Xy = A/{ o, 
| 
(9.1) 
For the second case, X is given by 
_ 
(x+E1—¢)K} 
X, = A/ { | 
(9.2) 
In Fig. 9.2 X is plotted as a function of N; or N, for different 
values of the contact potential. 
It is unfortunate, that in the experiments in which we shall 
want to make use of the formulae, the supposedly n-type semi- 
conductor behaved anomalously and charged negatively (see 
p. 253).

IX 
SEMICONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS 
191 
An intrinsic semiconductor has a gap between the top of the 
valence band and the bottom of the conduction band which is 
not too wide for significant numbers of electrons to be excited 
from the valence band into the conduction band at normal 
N4 or N, 
105 
1010 
'OlS 
'020 
L 
I 
. 
. 
  
| 
1 
| 
Xqor X, incm 
2 
- 
I 
106} 
  
  
10°8L 
Fie. 9.2. 
Thickness of space charge layer in impurity semiconductors as a 
function of density of donor or acceptor levels for different values of contact 
potential (in volts) X dielectric constant. 
temperatures, and the Fermi level is approximately at the middle 
of the gap when the semiconductor is uncharged. 
In contact 
with a metalin which the Fermilevelis higher, the semiconductor 
becomes negatively charged, and the situation at equilibrium is 
shown in Fig. 9.1 (¢). Ostenburg and Montgomery (1958) have 
considered contacts of this nature. 
They derive results based 
on equation (9.5) but do not reach equations (9.7) and (9.8). 
Their calculations are intended to be applied to insulators; we 
shall see, however, in the next section, that the situation in a 
true insulator is somewhat different and shall reach a conclusion 
that isin contradiction with that of Ostenburg and Montgomery. 
An extension of the brief discussion of the energy levels in a 
solid given in Chapter VII leads to the conclusion that when 
there is a forbidden region the band above it fills up with electrons 
in a manner similar to the way in which the energy wellin a metal 
fills up from the bottom according to the free-electron theory. 
The energy states become more closely packed as the energy 
increases, but not indefinitely as in the free-electron theory. 
Above the centre of the band the density of states decreases,

192 
SPACE CHARGES IN 
IX 
decreasing to zero at the top of the band in the same way that 
it increased at the bottom. 
Let the number of states per cm3 
in the range of energy éw be Z(w) dw. If the energy w is reckoned 
from the bottom of the conduction band upwards, then 
Z(w) = 
w(zmz)%w* 
near the bottom of the conduction band. 
m¥ is the effective 
mass of the electron in the crystal lattice. 
If, however, the 
energy w is reckoned from the top of the valence band down- 
wards, then 
%\ 8 
Z(w) = 477(%)210% 
near the top of the valence band. 
mf is the effective mass of 
a hole in the crystal lattice. 
When the effective masses m¥ and mf differ from the mass 
of the free electron m, the Fermi level is moved upwards from 
the centre of the forbidden region by an amount 
& = ngln(%*;). 
(9.3) 
These results are proved in textbooks on the solid state, but the 
correctness of the formula for & will shortly become apparent. 
If the displacement of the Fermi level due to the space charge 
is V(x), « for convenience now being measured to the right in 
Fig. 9.1, from the metal/semiconductor interface, the height of 
a level in the conduction band is w+1E,—&—eV above the 
displaced Fermi level, and the depth of a level in the valence 
band is w+1F,4+ &+€eV below the displaced Fermi level (see 
Fig. 9.3). The probability of a level in the conduction band 
being occupied by an electron is 
1 
exp{(w+31EB,—&—eV)kT}+1’ 
whereas the probability of there being a hole in the valence 
band is 
1 
  
  
1 
" exp{—(w+3E,+ELV)ETH1 
  
1 
~ exp{(wt LB+ E+eV)kT}+1° 
 

IX 
SEMICONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS 
193 
The total number of electrons per cm? in the conduction band is 
J‘ 
Z(w) dw 
J exp{wT 
3B, — 6=V RT}T1 
o0} 
  
  
a2 
w d 
h? 
f exp{(w+3E,—E—eV)/kT}+1° 
0 
  
  
  
  
  
_— 
| 
Wy 
{ 
| 
Displaced Fermi l?!.el_ 1 
Y 
Fermilevel _ 
E, 
‘ 
’ 
<Ey 
A 
‘ 
KN 
  
  
  
Fic. 9.3 
For convenience the integral has been taken to oo, instead of to 
the top of the band, this being permissible because nearly all 
the electrons are close to the bottom of the band. 
The total 
number of positive holes per cm? in the valence band is similarly 
  
in (2mh) J‘ 
wt dw 
h? 
exp{(w+1E,+E+€V)/ET}+1 ) 
0 
In a semiconductor w+31E,+&+eV > kT, so we may drop the 
second term in the denominator of the integrals. After substi- 
tuting for & we then obtain 
8\/(2)77 
wt dw 
N == 
(memi)’ f exp{(w 
T 1B, —<V)kT) 
for the concentratlon of electrons in the conduction band, and 
8\/ 2)77 
%, 
%\ fo 
wt dw 
Ny = 
(mem3) 
exp{(wt 1B, 1-<V) kT 
for the concentration of positive holes. 
  
  
  
 

194 
SPACE CHARGES IN 
IX 
The charge density in e.s.u./cm? is €(N,—N_) which is 
8\/(2)77'6 mi)t f 
wt dw 
h3 
exp{(w+L1E,+V)kT} 
0 
  
  
  
wt dw 
o Ofexp{(w—l——%—El—eV)/kT} 
— §\%)W—€ (mE mi)exp{— 
(3,1 €V)/kT}— 
—exp{—(3E,—¢€V)/kT}] f wk e~ WIkT gy, 
0 
Using f yte¥ dy = 147, the charge density is found, after a 
little rearrangement, to be 
——{2 kT 
(mE mi)}E e—2EART smh;V 
(9.4) 
When V = 0 the charge density is zero, thus verifying that the 
correct normalization has been carried out in determining the 
Fermi level, and hence the correctness of the formula that was 
quoted for its position in the forbidden region. 
Since for a dielectric constant K, 
K @V = —47 X charge density 
da? 
’ 
we obtain, as the differential equation for V, 
d?V 
_ 
16me 
V 
% 
o—tEAET 
T = T8 
——{2nkT\[(mEmf) 
e 
sinh — 
T 
which is of the form 
a2V 
. 
. €V 
__ 167re 
with 
{27k T\ (mEmi)}E e AEET 
— Kh® 
When the semiconductor is in thermodynamic equilibrium with 
the metal, the displaced Fermi level in the semiconductor at 
the interface must be at the same height as the Fermi level in 
the metal. 
The latter is at a depth ¢, the former is higher by

IX 
SEMICONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS 
195 
the amount ¢V than the undisplaced depth which is y+1E;,—&. 
The value of V for 
= 0 is therefore given by 
¢ = xt+ibh—E&—eh, 
so the first boundary condition to be satisfied is 
hy =3B, +x—6—¢ 
at 
*x = 0. 
The second boundary condition 
is dV/dx = 0 at 
x = 00. Since V = 0 beyond the charge layer, the second condi- 
tion is equivalent to dV/dx = 0 for V = 0. 
To solve the equation for V we write it in the form 
dl 
eV 
EW 
= ocsmhkT 
in which ¥ = —dV/dx. 
This integrates to 
182 = %L cosn sV 
E? = 
- 
(COShkT 
1), 
having regard to the second boundary condition. Hence 
2= 
it 
and 
 @-+const. 
= 4/ (2akT) f AJ{cosh( eV/kT —1} 
In taking the square root the negative sign is chosen to suit 
the conditions of the problem. 
It is now possible to deduce the charge per unit area of charge 
layer in the semiconductor, making use of the fact that this is 
equal and opposite to the surface density of charge o on the 
  
  
  
metal, and that 
dns 
d_V 
K = 
dx|, 
Using the first boundary condition we have 
_ _Kady 
47 dx 
|, 
  
  
  
K 
|{2kT 
1B, +xy—&—d¢ 
=L 
( 
- 
)N/{cosh(2 
T 
)——1}. 
Since B, x, and ¢ > kT, we may in most cases drop the second

196 
SPACE CHARGES IN 
IX 
term under the square root, and also drop the negative expo- 
nential when writing the cosh in exponential form. 
This gives 
K e 
(“kT)exp{ (3B, +x—&—¢)/2kT}. 
If we substitute for o« we find 
K’“ 
kT 
N 
&\ 
|k 
o= 
hg{ 
NimEm) exp{—(¢—x+&)/kT} 
(9.6) 
Let N 
be the electron concentration in the conduction band 
when the Fermi level is ¢—y-+ 
& below it. We have 
J‘ 
Z(w) dw 
exp{(w+¢—x—+&)/kT}+1’ 
  
and this, following the procedure we have already used, integrates 
to give the expression in the square brackets in the formula for o. 
The charge per unit area of the intrinsic semiconductor is —o, 
and for practical purposes we may write this as 
K 
lcT 
concentration of electrons in conduction band 
when Fermi level is ¢— x| & below it 
(9.7) 
In deriving this formula we dropped the negative exponential 
in the cosh because the positive exponential was dominant. 
This implies that the charge resides .almost entirely in the 
conduction band, since the positive exponential came from the 
electron population in the conduction band and the negative 
exponential from the population of positive holes in the valence 
band. 
If 
$ > LE,+x—&, so that the semiconductor becomes posi- 
tively charged, 
V is negative. 
When following through the 
derivation for this case it is necessary to take the positive sign 
of the square root, and it is the other exponential that may be 
dropped in the cosh. This implies that the charge resides almost 
entirely in the valence band. 
The charge per unit area of

IX 
SEMICONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS 
197 
intrinsic semiconductor proves to be} 
n 
K kT 
concentration of positive holes in valence band 
when Fermi level is #,+4y—&—d¢ above it 
(9.8) 
These results will be discussed in Chapter XII, meanwhile it is 
of interest to complete the solution of the differential equation 
for V, and to inquire about the thickness of the charge layer. 
We found that 
  
x-}-const. 
= N/ (2akT> f J{cosh(eV/kT) 1} 
The substitution cosh(eV/kT)—1 = z reduces the integral to 
kT J‘ 
dz 
e 
J z2/J(z+2) 
which is a standard form integrating to 
kT L J@z+2)—v2 
kT 
nJ{cosh(eV/kT)+1}—V2 
J(2)e 
¢(z+2)+42 J(2)e 
 f{cosh(eV/[kT)-}1}--~2° 
Remembering that el = 1E,+ y—&—¢, we find 
_ 1 N/(k_T>ln{J[cosh{(—é-EnLx—rf—-gb)/kTH1]—-42 
2 
Jcosh{(3 B+ x— E—) [k T3+ 1]+ V2 
J{cosh(eV/kT)+1}+42} 
Jicosh(eV[kT)+1}—~2f 
It is only 
a matter of algebra to rewrite this as an explicit 
equation for V as a function of x, though the result is rather 
complicated. The exact solution is 
kT 
G266+ 
V= e e 
a_ J[cosh{(1E,+x— & — gb/kT}—}—l]—l—«/2 
Jlcosh{(3 
B+ 
x—E—)[RT)+1]—2 
and 
X= J ( 
2%) 
T The form of this equation is suggestive, but there does not seem to be 
any simple physical meaning such as for the insulator in Fig. 9.7. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(9.9) 
  
with 
 

198 
SPACE CHARGES IN 
IX 
From these formulae ¥V may be calculated as a function of x for 
any particular case. 
In most cases, however, 
and G reduces to ¢¥X., We then have 
kT 
_ ¥ 
X - 6e" X 41 
V = —e—cosh X 51’ 
but the approximation is clearly not valid if « is too small, 
(9.10) 
  
3— 
    
8 
10 
12 
P 
ON 
Fia. 
9.4. 
Displacement of Fermi level due to space charge in an intrinsic 
semiconductor near a contact with a metal. 
For # << X, V depends on the 
‘contact potential’, as well as on B,. For z > X, V is a function of /X only, 
X depending on E,. 
For large values of z/X, V falls off exponentially with 
a half-value thickness of 2 log,2 X. 
since ¥V would then tend to co. 
It will be reasonably good for 
x > X. Forz > X it is easy to see that V falls off exponentially 
with = and only becomes 0 at co, though V is already quite 
small after 
x = 5X. 
The function (9.10) is plotted in Fig. 9.4. 
Since the charge density is proportional to sinh(eV/kT') it will 
fall off at large distances like V. 
The magnitude of X can be related to the conductivity of the 
semiconductor. 
Bearing in mind that the charge density 
is 
proportional to the difference in the numbers of electrons in 
the conduction band and positive holes in the valence band, 
whereas the conductivity depends on the number of charge 
carriers irrespective of sign—that is the sum of the numbers of 
electrons in the conduction band and positive holes in the

IX 
SEMICONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS 
199 
valence band—it will be seen that the formula for charge density 
is changed into a formula for concentration of charge carriers N 
by altering sinh into cosh and dividing by €. For the uncharged 
material V = 0 and N = Ka/4me, whence 
1 
KT 
X = 2 ,\/(277621\7). 
If the resistivity is p, we have 1/p = Neu, where u is the mobility. 
To remain consistent with our conventions as to units, u and p 
must be reckoned in e.s.u. 
In terms of p, X is given by 
) 
o 
27re 
  
The resistivity in e.s.u. is p,/9 X 101! where p,, is the resistivity 
in ohm em. 
A typical mobility for a semiconductor is 2x 103 
cm? V-1 g-1 which is 6Xx10° e.s.u. 
If we take K = 10 and 
calculate X for 300° K, we find 
X = 4-8x10-%,p,, cm. 
For a semiconductor having the above characteristics and a 
rather low resistivity of 10-¢ ohm c¢m, X ~ 5 A—the charge 
layer is of atomic dimensions, perhaps an order of magnitude 
thicker than the layer in a metal. For a rather high resistivity 
of 10 ohm cm, X =~ 5% 10-3 cm. The charge layer is far from 
being a surface layer—it has a quite considerable thickness. 
The implications of this for triboelectrification will be left until 
Chapter XII. 
Insulators in contact with a metal 
Reference to values of resistivity for various solids quoted in 
standard tables shows that for a resistivity exceeding about 
1014 ohm cm the solid would normally be considered an insulator 
rather than a poor semiconductor, but the best insulators have 
resistivities greatly exceeding this. Rhombic sulphur is given 
as having a resistivity of 2 
X 1022 ohm cm. Volume resistivities 
in the insulator range must not be accepted without close 
scrutiny, however, because it is difficult when measuring them 
to eliminate the effect of surface conductivity which is usually 
dominant 
(Curtis, 
1914). 
Inadequate allowance for surface

200 
SPACE CHARGES IN 
IX 
conductivity, however, results in the volume resistivity being 
underestimated. 
If the resistivity of a material is low, the charge initially 
generated by contact may leak back through the material as 
the surfaces are separated until the last point of contact is 
16   
  
  
  
  
o/K (e-s.u. per cm’ per unit K ) 
: 
// 
108 
10'0 
10'? 
10" 
10'6 
10" 
Resistivity (Q.cm) 
  
  
  
  
  
    
F1c. 9.5. Charging of good and poor insulators. 
broken, 
as happens with 
a metal. 
This was evident in the 
experiments of Rose and Ward (1957) on more or less insulating 
materials, already discussed on p. 
18. 
In these experiments 
the residual charge on the better insulator was normally limited 
by gas discharge in the ambient gas, with the result that the 
ratio of charge density to dielectric constant o/K was nearly 
constant. 
As shown in Fig. 
9.5, however, the charging was 
greatly reduced for materials which hardly qualified as insulators. 
In these measurements the back leakage became significant for 
resistivities less than 102 ohm cm. 
If we assume that an insulator 
is just an intrinsic semi- 
conductor with a large forbidden energy gap, and calculate X 
from (9.11), we find values of X ranging from, approximately, 
50 cm for the poorest insulators to 2Xx10% c¢m for the best.

IX 
SEMICONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS 
201 
For a resistivity of 1018 ohm cm, 
a typical value for a good 
insulator, X is about 5000 cm. 
These values for X are much 
larger than the dimensions of insulators used in triboelectrie 
experiments; 
it follows, therefore, that the theory for semi- 
conductors must be revised for insulators to allow for the fact 
that it is no longer permissible to assume it to be a good approxi- 
mation to put in a boundary condition for & = o0 when the 
block is actually finite. 
There 
is, moreover, another question. We have seen that 
the existence of electron traps must be postulated to explain 
the high resistivity of insulators when electrons trickle into the 
solid from the outside. 
These electron traps become charged 
and give rise to 
a potential energy hill which stops further 
electrons from getting into the conduction band. 
In principle, 
the traps may be involved in any triboelectric charging mechan- 
ism, and should make their presence 
felt in the boundary 
condition at a metal/insulator interface. 
In practice, however, 
the situation is not very clear. 
In one instance where there is 
clear-cut experimental evidence, 
the boundary condition 
is 
unaffected by the existence of traps (Mott and Gurney, 1940, 
pp. 73 and 173). 
There is a form of blue rock-salt which has 
this colour because it contains sodium particles in colloid form. 
One may be sure that the interface between the metal and the 
insulator is clean. 
The contact of bulk sodium with rock-salt, 
and of colloidal sodium with rock-salt, is shown in Fig. 9.6. 
The work-function of bulk sodium is known from experiment to 
be 2-2 eV, and the electron affinity () of pure rock-salt has been 
determined from ultra-violet absorption measurements to be 
0-5eV. The figure shows, on the left, a sodium/rock-salt interface 
undisturbed by any charge layer. On the right is shown an inclu- 
sion of sodium with a potential shift at the interface, due to 
charged electron traps, of amount E; eV. In consequence of this 
shift, the energy required to raise an electron from the top of 
the electron distribution in the sodium inclusion to the conduc- 
tion band in the rock-salt is (1:7— Z;) eV. This energy has been 
measured in experiments on the photoconductivity of blue rock- 
salt, and found to be 1-7 eV, whence E, = 0. 
Electron traps,

202 
SPACE CHARGES IN 
IX 
therefore, do not give rise to a potential shift at the interface 
in the case of the sodium inclusions in blue rock-salt. 
It must 
be realized, however, that electron excitation in the photo- 
conductivity experiments takes place from the inclusion into 
Sodium 
Rocksalt 
F 
}o-sev 
  
  
2:2eV 
  
N, 
{Sodium 
inclusion 
A 
I 
| 
I 
I 
I 
| 
m 
(T 
< 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
F16. 9.6. Energy levels in sodium and rock-salt (not to scale). 
the insulator in the close neighbourhood of the inclusion. We 
are therefore only justified in deducing that no potential shift 
occurs in close proximity to the interface, which means that the 
presence of the electron traps has no effect on the boundary 
conditions; formation 
of 
a diffuse charge layer remains, 
in 
principle, 
possible, though 
it seems unlikely 
in 
a 
colloidal 
dispersion such as blue rock-salt in which the inclusions are 
probably close together from the standpoint of such a charge 
layer. 
If electron traps do not affect the boundary condition at the 
contact of an insulator with a metal, their existence will only 
give rise to a change in the electron distribution in the bands 
at each individual trap and no significant displacement of the 
average Fermi level will occur. 
If the traps do, in fact, become 
charged, and form a sparsely charged layer with a resultant 
shift of the energy levels in the insulator at a distance from the 
contact interface with the metal, a shift of 1K, +yxy—&—d¢ is 
required for levelling up at thermodynamic equilibrium. 
In 
other respects the formation of the charge layer will follow the 
same lines as those considered on p. 189 for acceptor levels. 
If the number of traps per cm? is N, the thickness of the charge

IX 
SEMICONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS 
203 
layer is given by analogy with (9.2) as 
X 
(Bt fodDK) 
27 N, €2 
Using the approximation that the charge density is uniform 
throughout the layer, the total charge in the layer per unit area 
of contact is seen to be 
oy — /{( %Entx—@”—«,bl)NtK}. 
  
  
2 
We do not really know what value to take for N,, nor how much 
it varies from insulator to insulator. 
If we guess a value of 
N, = 1012 per cm? and put K = 10, we find X; = 33 u for a 
potential difference of one volt. 
o, is then 1-6 e.s.u./em?2. 
This 
would be recognized experimentally as an appreciable tribo- 
electric charge but not a large one. At first sight, then, it appears 
that significant contact charging might arise from the filling up 
of previously empty electron traps in an insulator as a result of 
contact with a metal, though one would regard the process as 
a secondary one. 
Doubts about this mechanism of charging 
appear, however, as soon as one considers the time scale. 
In 
order to find the localized electron levels in which electrons 
from the metal become captured, these electrons have to diffuse 
through insulating material in which the resistivity is unaffected 
by the presence of traps. 
The charging is a diffusion process, 
but when it is completed, the concentration gradient gives rise 
to a diffusion transport of electrons which is balanced by the 
electrical current which flows down the potential gradient, thus 
producing equilibrium. The rate at which equilibrium is set up 
by diffusion is therefore correlated with the rate at which charge 
is transported by the electric field present when equilibrium has 
been reached. The latter is easy to calculate from the resistivity 
of the material. If the time constant associated with the charging 
is 7, then the order of magnitude will, according to this argument, 
be given by the charge divided by the mean current, and this is 
. 
2p 
X, 
N %‘El‘l‘X'—‘g)_Sbot. 
For the case just considered, 
7 = 6 min when p,, = 10 ohm cm, 
 

204 
SPACE CHARGES IN 
IX 
10 hr when p,, = 1016 ohm cm, 41 days when p, = 1018 ohm cm, 
and 2 x 10* years when p,, = 2 X 1022 ohm em (rhombic sulphur). 
It follows that the charging of electron traps will not be revealed 
in experiments involving short contacts with poor insulators 
for which the above assumptions apply, nor by long contacts 
with better insulators. 
It must be admitted that the numerical 
assumptions are very uncertain, but it still seems safe to conclude 
that no experimentally feasible contact will be long enough to 
reveal the charging of the best insulators. With poor insulators 
bordering on semiconductors some charging does seem possible; 
1t will be very dependent on duration of contact and the previous 
triboelectric history of the specimen.t We can now proceed to 
consider the behaviour of insulators which are so good that 
electron traps cannot contribute to their charging. Such insula- 
tors will behave, in principle, as intrinsic semiconductors with 
a large gap between the valence and conduction bands. 
We have seen that the pieces of insulating material used in 
triboelectric experiments are not nearly large enough to contain 
anything like a complete space charge layer, so we now proceed 
to consider the equation which gives the distribution of space 
charge, for a slab of finite thickness. The equation (9.5) was 
The boundary conditions for a slab of thickness L are (neglecting 
E)eV = L1E,+xy—d¢ at 
x = 0 (as before) and dV /dx = Oat x = L. 
If the differential equation is solved for these conditions it is 
found that the value of V for 
x = L is the solution of a transcen- 
dental equation, and the general value of V is a complicated 
function involving it. 
Moreover there is no short cut to the 
magnitude of the total charge. The general solution, however, 
is not of immediate interest, though it is worth mentioning that 
a slab that is thick enough to contain most of the space charge 
T The author has, possibly, observed such charging in experiments which 
gave results too inconsistent to be worth publishing. 
Attempts to obtain 
consistency by deleting the effects of past history through heating the specimen 
in a field-free space to make it conducting and so discharge it gave no promise 
of enabling consistent results to be obtained for the variation of charge with 
duration of contact.

IX 
SEMICONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS 
205 
that would be present in an infinite slab may still be too thin 
for V to have fallen to a small value at 
x = L. 
In other words, 
as the thickness of the slab is increased, most of the charge has 
appeared before much of the contact potential has become estab- 
lished. This means that the formula for the charge in an infinite 
slab is a better approximation for finite slabs than might have 
been supposed. 
We are interested in slabs of insulator for which L < X. 
This permits approximations which enable 
the 
differential 
equation for space charge to be easily solved. 
For such slabs 
very little of the contact potential will be established and V;, 
the value of V at 
x = L, will be comparable with E,, ¥, and ¢. 
Usually, then, ¢V > kT throughout the range of x with which 
we are concerned. The equation to be solved may be written as 
a2V 
dx? 
and the second exponentlal may be dropped. Let 
B +x—¢—eV =0. 
eVIkT 
__ 
,—eV[kT 
(e 
e 
) 
This gives 
2V 
 « 
1 
T2 
§eXP{(§E1+X_¢)/kT}eXP(_8/kT)~ 
We shall make the further restriction that 
%E1+X—¢_€VL < kT. 
This is a very severe restriction, but will prove to be valid for 
a good insulator. We now have 6/kT always small, so 
azv 
7 —eXP{(§E1+X ¢)[kT}, 
to a sufficient degree of approximation. We again put 
av 
- =E, 
so that 
B — 
ol Zex {E,+x—¢) kT 
av 
=~ 
g 
PdEt 
X 
and 
E? = oc(V—VL)eXP{(%E1+X—¢)/k?7}, 
7o = NV —To)lexp{(3 
B, +x—9)/2k T},

206 
SPACE CHARGES IN 
IX 
the negative sign being appropriate to the boundary conditions. 
The second stage of integration gives 
x-+const, = —2 J (Y;—V}')exp{—(%El—l—x——@/ZkT}. 
V =V, for 
x 
= L, so 
L—a=2 [ (V’“”f?)exp{—(%E1+x—¢>/2kT}- 
6 
  
eV = 1B, +x—¢ for x = 0, whence 
12 
7 = 3B, +x—¢ ———exp{(}B; +x—4)/kT}, 
  
and 
eV = 1B+ x—$—to(2Le—aexp{(1 
B +x— KT} 
(9.12) 
For this solution to be valid we must have 
B +x—¢—eVp <EkT 
which, after substituting for ¥;, becomes 
L2 
——exp{(} 
B, +x—¢)/kT} <kT. 
By comparing the definition of « on p. 194 with the formula 
for N_ with V = 0 (the total number of electrons per cm3 in 
the conduction band when the Fermi level is 
1 £, below it) on 
p. 193, we find that 
  
X — 8__2;§N_. 
The inequality therefore becomes 
  
2 
2L2 
o N-exp{(3B+x—#)/kT} <1, 
2we? 
L2 
., 
1 
or 
wr 
- 
< 
in which 
N* = N_exp{(3E,+ x—¢)/kT}. N*is the total number 
of electrons per cm?® in the conduction band when the Fermi 
level is ¢—x below it. 
This is the condition that obtains in a 
thin wafer of insulator in contact with a metal, as may be seen 
from Fig. 9.7, and also close to the metal when the slab of 
insulator is thick. 
If the resistivity in e.s.u. close to the metal 
in the charged insulator is p*, then 1/p* = N* eu, where p is the

IX 
SEMICONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS 
207 
mobility. The inequality becomes 
2me L2 
| 
H; 
$-X 
  
  
  
Metal 
] 
  
Insulator 
T 
| 
  
  
  
Fic. 9.7. Contact of metal and thin lamina of insulator. 
or, finally, after substituting numerical values for the physical 
constants, and expressing the resistivity in ohm cm (cf. p. 199), 
L < 9-5X 1078 Jpk. 
p¥ is the resistivity of the most highly charged part of the 
insulator; this will be less than that of the uncharged part. The 
material will, however, still be insulating: the presence of an 
electrostatic charge of moderate charge density does not render 
an insulator sufficiently conducting for the charge to leak away. 
For a resistivity even as low as 102 ohm cm we must have 
L <€ 95 cm, but the inequality really applies to L2, so L as 
small as 
1 em will meet the requirement. 
For poor insulators, 
then, the condition is probably met, for good ones it certainly 
is, at any rate in most triboelectric experiments. 
By differentiation of V we find 
G|, = —IaLexp{(B 
- x—g)RT), 
The total charge per unit area of slab is equal and opposite to 
the surface density of charge on the metal, and this is 
i 
| = o Xl B xR} 
— LN_exp{(}By+x—4)/bT} = <LN*, 
following the argument of the last paragraph. The slab of in- 
sulator therefore charges throughout to an extent corresponding 
to the excitation of electrons into the conduction band from 
  
 

208 
SPACE CHARGES 
IX 
a Fermi level ¢—y below it.t 
Fig. 9.6 makes this almost self- 
evident. 
For the case of the poor insulator considered above for which 
pe =102 
ohm 
ecm, 
making 
p* = 1012/9x 101! 
es.u. 
and 
L =1 cm, the charge 
is 1-5Xx10-¢ e.s.u./em? 
This is quite 
negligible for all triboelectric experiments. 
If, however, we use the value of N_ derived on p. 193, the 
charge per unit area of slab of insulator is found to be 
2 Rk T 
s 
P exp{—$— 
T} 
(9.13) 
If, now, we take the case of both effective masses being equal 
to the mass of the free electron and evaluate the constant for 
300° K, we find for the charge in e.s.u./cm?, 
1-20 X 101°L exp{— (¢—x)[ET}. 
To give the charge of 1-5X 10-¢ e.s.u./cm?, just calculated for 
a poor insulator, $—x would have to be 0-95 eV. 
We are now in a position to formulate a conclusion of crucial 
importance for the theory of triboelectrification. Let us review 
the foregoing discussion, taking things in 
a different order. 
pXis the resistivity that would be measured if the slab of material, 
chosen arbitrarily, but not unreasonably, to be 1 cm thick, were 
tested between metal electrodes in contact with two opposing 
faces. 
If §—y is 0-95 eV for the metal and insulator concerned, 
the resistivity measured in this way would be 102 ohm cm, and 
the material would just about pass as an insulator. Even for as 
poor an insulator as this, the charge imparted to the slab of 
material by placing it in contact with the metal at one face of 
the slab (or both faces), in virtue of the insulator behaving like 
an intrinsic semiconductor, is absolutely negligible. For a better 
insulator the charge would be still smaller. 
The practical im- 
plications of this conclusion will be discussed in the next chapter. 
+ Mott and Gurney 
(1940) 
consider the charging 
of an insulating slab 
extending to infinity by contact with a metal as being like the thermionic 
emission of electrons from the top of the Fermi distribution in the metal into 
a vacuum over a surface barrier of height ¢— x. 
This is an oversimplification 
of both the physics of the problem and of the mathematics, as has been 
pointed out by Ostenburg and Montgomery (1958), but it leads to the same 
charge density close to the metal that we have derived for a thin slab.

PART III 
  
CHAPTER X 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
MoTT and Gurney (1940) have pointed out that the bottom 
of the conduction band in silver bromide is at a depth of 3:5 eV, 
whereas the work-function of caesium is only 1-8 eV. The top 
of the electron distribution in caesium is therefore higher than 
vacant levels in silver bromide, and it is theoretically possible 
for electrons to pass straight from caesium into the conduction 
band of silver bromide. 
If this happens, the silver bromide 
should behave as a conductor unless electrons are trapped near 
the interface and form a potential energy hill which stops further 
flow. 
This would charge the silver bromide negatively. 
An 
electronegative contaminant layer, even one molecule thick, 
however, on the caesium, would shift the levels so that electrons 
would not leave the caesium. 
This is a severe obstacle in the 
way of obtaining the effect in the laboratory, and the author is 
not aware of this or any similar case having been observed. 
It 
seems that metals and insulators, 
at any rate 
as normally 
encountered with contaminated surfaces, have not got the 
disposition of energy levels which would permit free flow of 
electrons into the conduction band of the insulator. Nor can it 
be considered likely that they will happen to be within a few £ T 
of it. In the author’s opinion it is still less likely that the bottom 
of the conduction band of an insulator would be so deep that 
electrons could pass straight into it from the valence band of 
another insulator, as has been suggested by Montgomery (1959). 
Reasons were given in the last chapter for supposing that 
charging by the capture of electrons from a metal into electron 
traps in an insulator would only be observable in poor insulators,

210 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
X 
if at all, and that the charging of a good insulator in virtue of 
its having a band structure like that of an intrinsic semiconductor 
will be quite negligible. It is to be concluded that good insulators 
are unable to acquire significant electric charges from being in 
contact with a metal, so far as electron transfer is concerned. 
We saw, however, on p. 181 that differences between the inner 
potentials for the different faces of a crystal will lead to the 
collection, from the surroundings, of compensatory charges on 
these crystal faces, probably consisting of loosely bound ions. 
The possibility of one crystal face being charged by contact with 
another because of the transfer of such ions will be discussed 
later; meanwhile we note that this mechanism does not lead to 
charging with amorphous materials. Chemisorbed ions, such as 
protons and OH 
™, may be sufficiently loosely bound to become 
transferred to another surface for which they have a greater 
affinity, so giving rise to contact charging. 
It seems unlikely, 
however, that ions which are part of an ionically bound lattice, 
such as Na™ and CI” in rock-salt, will be transferred in this way. 
However this may be, 
no mechanism 
is apparent whereby 
tightly bound (and particularly 
if the bonding 
is covalent) 
amorphous insulators with no dangling bonds at the surface can 
become charged by contact, either by the transfer of ions or by 
the transfer of electrons. The hydrophobic synthetic polymers 
are such insulators. 
It was discovered by Harper in 1953 that a group of insulators 
does exist which is extremely reluctant to charge. These insula- 
tors were hydrophobic and included synthetic polymers. Their 
electrophobic behaviour was a chance discovery and seemed 
inexplicable at the time. 
It now appears that it could have been 
foreseen. 
Apparatus for the investigation 
of electrification after 
light contact 
The apparatus used in the experiments on electrophobic 
insulators was also used in other investigations and is therefore 
worth describing in some detail. 
It was designed to eliminate 
troublesome corrections that it had been necessary to make

X 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
211 
with earlier apparatus which had been used for the investigation 
of metals, to permit 
a precise and absolute measurement of 
charge for comparison with theory, and to exclude uncertainty 
about whether lack of repeatability in measurements was due 
to experimental errors or to real differences in the charging. In 
order to work with single, instead of multiple, contact, at least 
one surface had to be convex, and it was desirable to hold the 
specimens using a supporting member of the smallest possible 
size. 
This dictated the choice of spherical specimens resting in 
a triangular support of stretched fibres. Three stretched fibres 
were joined at a point as shown in Plate VI; two of these and 
a cross-bar supported the sphere. 
This arrangement had the 
further advantages 
that 
the specimens 
could 
be 
optically 
polished when 
of suitable material 
and, 
by using suitably 
designed instruments for handling them, could be removed 
from their support for cleaning. 
The contamination from the 
handling instruments most to be feared is grease, since a mono- 
molecular layer spreads instantaneously over some surfaces 
when perfectly clean and can suppress the charging. 
It was 
found satisfactory to use forceps with Perspex tips washed with 
recently distilled ether, and a pneumatic device with a hard- 
glass end shaped to fit the specimen and degreased by heating 
in 
a blowpipe flame. 
These precautions are essential when 
handling clean quartz; they are unnecessary, however, when 
handling materials such as synthetic polymers over which grease 
does not easily spread. 
The use of two spherical balls in the 
experiments on the charging of metals permits a direct com- 
parison with theory without having to contend with awkward 
geometry. 
The balls used were 1 in. and % in. in diameter. 
The smaller, upper, ball was supported by +;-mm fused silica, 
fibres, welded at the junctions. 
The lower ball was supported 
by i-mm fused silica fibres, except when it was conducting and 
electrical contact with it was required, in which case it was 
supported on a similar suspension of {-mm phosphor-bronze 
wires. These could be maintained at a different potential from 
the screening of the apparatus. 
As shown in Fig. 10.1, the upper ball could be lifted on its

212 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
X 
suspension into an inverted Faraday cylinder with 
slots in 
its walls to accommodate the fibres without touching them. 
The general layout of the apparatus is shown in Plate VII. 
The upper suspension is stretched on the circular frame A4, the 
  
   
\ 
  
      
    
Fia. 10.1. Perspective view of upper suspension lifted 
into inverted Faraday cylinder with slots in walls. The 
upper ball sits in the triangle formed by the fibres of 
the suspension. 
lower on the similar frame B. 
Both these frames are outside 
the inner electrostatic screening C which has slots to permit the 
passage of the fibres of the suspensions. The lower ball can be 
seen in the photograph. 
The upper frame can be slid up the 
pillar D by turning the wheel X, and the lower frame can be 
tilted through 
a small angle using the lever F. 
The latter 
movement is brought about by the rotation of an inclined plane 
on which one of the three ball-bearings carrying the frame rests. 
This movement is smooth and free from backlash and is used 
for separating the surfaces without danger of sliding, after which 
the other movement is used to transfer the upper ball to the 
Faraday cylinder. This was designed so that the leakage of lines 
of force through the slots and out of the open end should be very 
small, whence the charge induced on it would be equal and

X 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
213 
opposite to that on the ball, and a charge equal to that on the 
ball be measured by the electrometer valve connected to the 
Faraday cylinder. This valve is used in a bridge circuit and 
the deflection compensated using a potentiometer and condenser 
connected to the grid, so that the valve can be used under the 
condition of zero grid current and the charge be measured in 
absolute units. An extension of the Faraday cylinder forms one 
electrode of the cylindrical condenser with guard rings built into 
the apparatus at G@. An earthing key H is incorporated in the 
lead 
to the electrometer valve which 
is inside 
J, with the 
attendant circuit components inside the box K. 
The electro- 
meter valve assembly can easily be removed to give access to 
the specimens. The screening C, which was adequate from the 
standpoint of electrostatics, needed to be supplemented by 
additional screening not shown in Plate VII, for the benefit of 
the electrometer valve. The electrometer was never less sensitive 
than 4 X 10-5 e.s.u. per galvanometer division; under favourable 
conditions after the electrometer valve and its circuit had been 
given a few hours to settle down, it was feasible to work to a 
tenth of a division. Under these conditions, the limiting factor 
on reliability was probably stray charges on the suspension of 
the upper ball. 
Charged fibres could easily be recognized by 
a characteristic movement of the galvanometer spot as the 
fibres entered the slots of the Faraday cylinder, quite unlike 
that caused by the charged ball. 
When fibres accidentally 
became charged, it was extremely difficult to discharge them, 
much more difficult than to discharge the insulated ball before 
an experiment. This could be done in about 1 min, using y-rays 
from a source of about 100 mc 1%2Ir. 
In order to discharge the 
upper ball completely, it was necessary to move it well away 
from the lower ball when this was metallic, since otherwise the 
upper ball collected a charge through being in a field due to the 
contact potential between the lower ball and the screening. This 
effect has been made the basis of a modified ionization method 
of determining contact potential (Harper, 1953b). 
In the experiments on quartz, the movement of the lower 
suspension, lifting the lower ball into contact with the upper,

214 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
X 
and then removing it, was controlled by a pendulum and fly- 
wheel mechanism, 
thereby ensuring smooth operation and 
repeatability of contact duration. 
The point of contact could 
be moved across the surface within a small range by means of 
a mechanism which displaced slightly the position of one of the 
three ball-bearings on which the frame carrying the lower 
suspension rested. To protect the specimens from atmospheric 
pollution in the later experiments, argon was passed into the 
apparatus through a distributor at the bottom, whence it rose 
to’ the level of the balls before spilling out through the slots. 
The argon could be purified and dried. 
It was necessary to 
keep the accumulators used for the electrometer valve in an 
air-tight box with a soda-lime breather to prevent sulphuric acid 
spray from polluting the atmosphere of the laboratory. 
The 
argon could be ionized by passing it over a 8-ray source of about 
5 me 204T1, and the balls discharged in this way, as an alternative 
to using the y-ray source. 
Ionized argon was the preferred 
alternative, it being thought less likely to cause any change in 
the surface being discharged. 
Because of this danger, and to 
avoid delays between successive measurements, it was usual to 
measure the cumulative charge for a succession of contacts up 
to ten. 
It was assumed that the charge from one contact would 
spread sufficiently over the surface before the next contact for 
the charge from the latter contact to be unaffected by the 
previous charging, but that the previous charge would not be 
lost. 
This assumption never came under suspicion but could 
not be clearly verified because it was seldom found possible to 
obtain the consistency between individual chargings that 
is 
necessary to do so. The real variability, not due to experimental 
errors, is a characteristic of single contact charging. Metal/metal 
separation charging, described in Chapter X1, is an exception. 
Consistency can then be obtained, but the balls discharge them- 
selves by conduction between successive contacts. 
In general, 
in all experiments carried out in the manner just described, it is 
the incremental charge at a contact that will be taken as signifi- 
cant, ignoring its position in a sequence of observations. 
Con- 
fidence in this point of view is encouraged by the occasional but

X 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
2156 
striking instances in which the incremental charges were all the 
same. Three examples are shown in Fig. 10.2. In none of these 
cases, however, could the whole charging curve be repeated. 
    
10F 
+ 
+C 
) 
oo 
= 
< 
0 
o 
+ 
2 
2 
B 
2 
°f 
* 
5 
@) 
+ 
x'/x 
¥ 
//{ 
//X/ 
0 
/’1( 
) 
1 
\ 
1 
1 
\ 
1 
1 
(0] 
10 
Number of contacts 
Fi1e. 10.2. 
Cumulative charge (in arbitrary units) for (4) magnesium 
oxide/steel, (B) beryl/aluminium, (C) silica/diamond. 
Further details 
of experimental method can be found in 
Harper (1953a) and Harper (1955). 
Contrasting types of insulator 
Shaw and Jex (1928) found that the charge acquired by glass 
rubbed with a metal changed in the direction @ve to Ove as 
the contamination of the glass surface changed from alkaline 
to acid. At an appropriate value of hydrogen ion concentration, 
therefore, one expects no charging. 
The absence of charging 
may be thought of as the cancellation of the effect with clean 
glass by the effect of the contamination. Until the experiments 
now to be described had been carried out, instances of dissimilar 
surfaces failing to charge were rare and were regarded as having 
no special significance. 
The observations which confirmed a

216 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
X 
suspicion that this opinion is incorrect are explained in Harper 
(1953a); 
it will be sufficient here to describe the contrasting 
triboelectric behaviour 
of typical examples 
of electrophilic 
  
  
  
  
+8r 
() 
+7r 
@ 
() 
+6 
+5F 
& 
- 
& 
S 
5 
+4 
\b 
() 
—_ 
O 
3 
% 
g 
(& 
A 
o 
0 
T 2 
; 
£ 
v 
A~ 
= 
S 
+1F 
> 
50 
@, 
S 
2 
3’./ 
Chromium/amber 
o 
0= 
O 
oO—-QO0—C 
-O 
O 
-O 
o 
O 
.\z 
O 
Steel/m 
. 
-1r 
0 
O 
A agnlu'-n Oxide 
O 
A 
Goy 
" 
O 
d/ma 
2 
O gnesu 
O)Q-de 
@ 
_3_ 
@ 
-4 
1 
1 
L 
1 
1 
1 
1 
i 
1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Number of contacts 
Fia. 10.3. Examples of metal/insulator contact charging. 
insulators (which charge freely) with the known examples of 
electrophobic insulators (which show negligible charging by 
comparison), and to describe the experimental precautions that

X 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
217 
were taken to ensure that the apparent failure to charge on the 
part of the electrophobic insulators was not an error of observa- 
tion or interpretation. 
In Fig. 10.3 four examples of electrophilic combinations of 
metal and insulator are shown, together with chromium/amber. 
The charging was investigated in the light contact apparatus 
just described, in laboratory air in the range of relative humidity 
40 to 60 per cent. The metal specimens were electroplated steel 
ball-bearings in the case of gold and chromium; the glass and 
magnesium oxide specimens were optically polished spheres. 
These specimens were cleaned and washed in a sequence of 
liquids; details are given in the original paper. 
The amber 
specimen was a turned ambroid sphere with a small flat filed 
on it with a specially cleaned No. 6 file. 
The flat appeared to 
be smooth under the microscope with a magnification of 100X, 
as did the surface of the electroplated ball-bearings. 
On the 
scale of Fig. 10.3 the charging of the chromium/amber combina- 
tion is nil. 
In general it was found that insulators fell into two classes. 
The electrophiles showed charging that was easily measured 
with the apparatus that has been described; the electrophobes 
showed so little charging that, with two exceptions to be dis- 
cussed shortly, it was within the experimental error, if indeed 
there was any charging at all. The difference between the charg- 
ing of the two classes was, typically, two orders of magnitude. 
Before announcing that an effect does not oceur, it is well to 
check that the absence of the effect is not due to the apparatus 
having failed. 
Precautions were taken to eliminate any such 
possibility, as follows: 
(1) The electrometer sensitivity was checked in the middle of each 
set of measurements. 
(i) 
It was verified, before and after each set of measurements and 
occasionally at every contact, that the balls actually did touch. 
This was evident on inspection with a microscope, the upper ball 
being lifted slightly when the lower ball was brought into contact 
with it. 
(111) For each insulator (against one metal) 
a charging curve was 
taken with the upper ball initially charged. 
An example is

218 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
X 
shown in Fig. 10.4. 
It was always found that the initial charge 
remained substantially unchanged by the contacts. This excludes 
the possibility of a contact charge being generated but subse- 
quently lost. 
+4 
= 
- 
Initially charged 
£ 
S 
5 53 21 
i 
S © 
.Lcj e 
Initially uncharged 
  
l 
] 
1 
| 
1 
1 
L 
1 
i 
1 
—_— 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Number of contacts 
  
F1c. 10.4. Absence of contact charging with gold/polystyrene. 
Two further precautions were: 
(iv) The contact potential between the lower metal ball and the 
screening was measured by 
the author’s modified ionization 
method (Harper, 1953b) and compensated. 
This ensured that 
the upper ball would not acquire charge by conduction from the 
lower ball when in contact with 
it, but was probably an un- 
necessary refinement. 
(v) The point of contact was changed occasionally. 
It was checked, for the case of polystyrene, that increasing the 
duration of contact, up to two hours, did not result in charging. 
Electrophobic combinations 
The insulators that showed negligible charging after light 
contact with steel, chromium, and gold, were: 
Amber, 
Alkathene (polyethylene), 
Distrene (polystyrene), 
Nylon, 
Perspex (polymethylmethacrylate), 
Silicone on silica, 
Teflon (polytetrafluoroethylene), 
Ceresin wax. 
To these were subsequently added (unpublished) pure cellulose 
and Kel-F (polychlorotrifluoroethylene).

X 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
219 
Different methods of preparation of the surfaces and of clean- 
ing were used appropriate to the materials. 
The polyethylene 
contained no plasticizer. 
The variety of the methods used for 
getting the surfaces clean ensures that no systematic contamina- 
tion could have been present. 
+0-8F 
+0-6 - 
+0-4 
+0-2 
Charge on metal (10 *e.s.u.) 
    
  
_O.l 
1 
1 
1 
] 
[ 
1 
1 
1 
[ 
] 
0] 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Number of contacts 
  
F1c. 10.5. Contact charging (a) steel/nylon, 
(b) chromium/polystyrene. 
One of the two insulator/metal combinations which gave an 
accumulated charge after ten contacts in excess of the experi- 
mental error of charge measurement was nylon/steel. 
Since 
nylon/chromium and nylon/gold did not, the charging with 
nylon/steel was attributed to electrophilic contamination, either 
on the steel or localized in the region of the nylon surface that 
was used with steel. 
It happened that the electrometer was 
particularly stable when the nylon/steel observations were made, 
and it was clear that the charging, though comparable with the 
experimental error under more usual conditions, was systemadtic. 
The charging curve, plotted on ten times the scale of Fig. 10.4, 
1s shown in Fig. 10.5, which also shows a curve for polystyrene/ 
chromium taken when the electrometer was at its most stable. 
These two curves, taken at a useful sensitivity which was ten 
times normal, provide additional evidence for the reliability of

220 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
X 
the null result with other combinations subject to the larger 
experimental error. The upper limit of charging for polystyrene/ 
chromium as plotted in Fig. 10.5, is 4 X 10-% e.s.u./ten contacts. 
The only other instance of charging greater than the experi- 
mental error, with an insulator otherwise electrophobic, was 
polyethylene/steel, with polyethylene/gold and polyethylene/ 
chromium falling into line. 
It seems likely that this anomalous 
result was associated with 
a slight tendency shown by the 
polyethylene to adhere to the metal, not shown by the other 
insulators. 
The tendency was evident through causing slight 
sticking at contact which made the upper ball oscillate to an 
extent that was obvious, when observed with a microscope, on 
breaking contact. The charging could be an example of charging 
by material transfer. Thisraises the question of whether material 
transfer could conceivably have occurred in all the cases of null 
charging, to an extent which would result in contact being made 
between the surface of the insulator on one side and a thin film 
of insulator transferred to the metal on the other, so forming 
a contact between like materials and hence giving no charging. 
This possibility is discussed but rejected in the original paper. 
If the charging with nylon/steel is correctly ascribed to electro- 
philic contamination and the charging with polyethylene/gold 
to material transfer, 
it seems likely that 
the polystyrene/ 
chromium result would have been matched by the other com- 
binations if the electrometer had been steady enough to prove it. 
This would give us 4 X 10-7 e.s.u./contact as an upper limit for 
the charging of electrophobic insulators. 
It was only possible to make a rough estimate of the force 
between the balls at contact; this was thought to have been 
about 
10 mg weight 
in the case 
of polystyrene/chromium. 
Young’s modulus is 2-4 X 101° dyn/cm? for polystyrene; for steel 
it is two orders of magnitude higher. 
The deformation was 
thought to have been elastic; formula (2.1) then gives 5 X 10-7 cm? 
for the area of contact. 
This makes the upper limit for the 
charging about 
1 e.s.u./cm?. 
The charge density of 1 e.s.u./cm? refers to the area of true 
contact. 
In most practical situations the area of true contact

X 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
221 
is several orders of magnitude smaller than the area of general 
contact. 
The average charge density would then be several 
orders of magnitude smaller than 
1 e.s.u./cm?2, too small to be 
significant as triboelectrification. 
The industrial handling of 
thin plastic film, in which it may be passed under considerable 
tension over polished rollers, does, perhaps, give rise to areas of 
true contact comparable with the area 
of general contact. 
Average charge densities of the order of 1 e.s.u./cm? could then 
be generated by only a slight departure from truly electrophobic 
behaviour, like that shown in the nylon/steel result. As shown 
on p. 20, such electrification is very noticeable on thin films. 
It does, in fact, occur in industrial processes, causing great 
nuisance. 
It would seem that it should be accounted for in 
some such way, in the absence of vigorous rubbing (cf. p. 72). 
The possibility must be considered that in Harper’s experi- 
ments charge may have been lost by gas discharge from poly- 
styrene and the 
like, 
in the conditions prevailing, though 
retained when using glass and the like, thus giving 
a false 
impression about the inability of some materials to generate 
charge. 
This alternative would only be possible if an initial 
high charge density led to complete spontaneous discharge from 
polystyrene before the charge density had been sufficiently 
reduced by surface conduction to prevent gas discharge, with 
surface conduction preventing it in the case of glass. 
Such an 
explanation is rendered improbable if we compare Perspex with 
fused silica. Their surface resistivities are comparable and very 
high, nevertheless one is apparently electrophobic whereas the 
other is electrophilic. 
It seems unlikely that the behaviour of 
Perspex can be explained as being due to loss of charge, when 
fused silica retains its charge. Moreover, reference to Fig. 1.8 
shows that surface densities of charge greater than those that 
are permanently stable can survive if localized within the small 
area of contact with which we are concerned (radius = 4x 104 
cm) for durations up to the order of a second. During this time, 
charges of high density would almost certainly have time to 
spread over the surface because of enhanced surface conductivity 
(cf. p. 
19). 
In the experiments on crystalline quartz 
to be

222 
ELECTROPHOBIC INSULATORS 
X 
described on p. 280, at any rate, much greater charge densities 
than we are concerned with in the present experiments did 
survive. 
The significance of electrophobic behaviour 
If deep surface electronic levels not fully occupied had existed 
on the electrophobic insulators investigated, which could receive 
electrons from a metal, or if there had been shallow occupied 
levels capable of donating electrons, these levels would have 
given rise to charging unless the Fermi levels in the metal and 
at the surface of the insulator had happened to coincide. 
It is 
unlikely that this would be the case for all the insulators; it is 
impossible that it should have been so for one insulator and three 
different metals. The work functions of the chromium and gold 
used in the experiments actually differed by 0-9 eV, as deter- 
mined from the measured contact potentials. 
It appears then that no surface levels which are capable of 
giving rise to contact charging exist in the case of the class of 
electrophobic insulators, just as was anticipated on theoretical 
grounds. 
Nor 
do these insulators exhibit charging due 
to 
electron traps. 
They behave as we expected insulators with 
a negligible affinity for positive and negative ions to behave, 
since insulators are unable to accommodate a significant volume 
charge. 
A corollary 
is that electrophobic behaviour should 
be 
a 
characteristic of a particular insulator, not of a combination of 
two materials. 
An insulator that is electrophobic should be 
electrophobic irrespective of what it makes contact with. Amber 
is electrophobic when tested against metals. 
The author has 
checked (unpublished) that it is also electrophobic when tested 
against polystyrene (another electrophobic insulator) and when 
tested against fused silica (an electrophilic insulator). 
It 
is 
remarkable that amber, from which electricity takes its name, 
should be found among the electrophobes!

CHAPTER XI 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
The charging of metals 
THE importance of metal/metal contact in triboelectrification 
is not generally appreciated. 
Vollrath 
(1932), however, 
in 
describing an electrostatic dust generator capable 
of giving 
260000 V, mentions that iron and antimony powders, blown 
through copper tubes, charged better than the other powders 
tried. The charging of metal powders by blowing them against 
metal surfaces is a well-established phenomenon, the charges 
found being comparable with those obtained when insulating 
powders are used (Shaw, 1929). The charges acquired by the two 
metals are not necessarily equal and opposite; with sufficiently 
violent blowing there may be a difference which is accounted 
for by the gas acquiring the balance of charge. When this occurs, 
one suspects that formation of hot spots and consequent ther- 
mionic emission is involved, and it is easy to calculate (Harper, 
1961) that there is enough energy supplied by the impact for this 
to happen. 
With sliding contact, more than one triboelectric mechanism 
is involved. Fig. 3.2 shows some results obtained by the author 
with the precision lever apparatus shortly to be described. The 
apparatus was designed to eliminate sliding in the measurement 
of the charges on metals following contact. After it was thought 
that this had been achieved, a modification was made which 
deliberately introduced a component of sliding at the breaking 
of contact. The result of doing so was to spoil the consistency 
of measurement to the extent of some charges having a reversed 
sign. 
Comparison of the two histograms in Fig. 3.2 indicates 
that the attempt to eliminate sliding must have been successful, 
and also that a form of charging which gives the opposite sign 
of charge to the usual one is sometimes present during sliding. 
The additional form of charging could have been charging by 
material transfer, or charging due to a Seebeck potential. The

224 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
XTI 
two metals, nickel and stainless steel, being used in air, will have 
had an invisible tarnish layer on them and the tarnish layer 
would be semiconducting. Frictional heat generated on the out- 
side of the layer would give rise to a difference of temperature 
  
  
    
    
  
NONNANNANN 
  
  
  
  
  
  
     
  
  
  
  
    
F1e. 11.1. Apparatus for investigating the separation 
charging of metals with very light contact. 
between the outside of the layer and the oxide/metal interface. 
This would generate a Seebeck potential across the oxide layer, 
which for a semiconductor can be large (see p. 175). Hence the 
metals could have received an additional charge.} 
A similar observation, referring to the case of the contact 
charging of metals and insulators under high pressure, was made 
by Rose and Ward (1957). They found that the consistency of 
T Such an effect may provide an explanation of the so-called triboelectric 
sorting of metals, described by Doscheck (1951).

XI 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
225 
charging was spoilt when a component of sliding was deliberately 
introduced into an apparatus designed to eliminate it. 
The consistent charging of metals in the absence of sliding has 
been related to the contact potential between them (Harper, 
1951), and has permitted the experimental measurements to be 
correlated accurately with theory without the use of disposable 
constants. We have seen (p. 172) that the equilibrium state of 
two metals in contact requires the existence of a double layer 
of charge astride the interface. 
This double layer gives rise to 
the contact potential between the metals; one may think of the 
interface as being charged by the contact potential, like a con- 
denser. When the surfaces are separated, some of this charge 
leaks back by tunnel effect so that the double layer of charge is 
partially self-neutralized, but some of the charge remains. 
At 
a certain critical separation tunnel effect leakage fades out. 
The residual charge is that on the surfaces when separated by 
this critical gap, charged by the contact potential. The magni- 
tude of the residual charge is determined by the situation when 
there is this gap—the critical gap—between the surfaces, and 
not by what happens when the surfaces are in contact, as far 
as electrons are concerned. If positive ions, negative ions and/or 
bulk matter are transferred when the surfaces are in contact, it 
is still the electrons which have the last say when the critical 
gap is reached and determine what the charge shall be. For this 
reason, the charging in question was called ‘separation’ charging, 
rather than contact charging. 
Its magnitude depends, in prin- 
ciple, on the speed with which the surfaces are separated, since 
the fade-out of tunnel effect is not instantaneous. 
In practice, 
however, we shall see that the dependence is slight. 
Apparatus 
Before comparing experimental results with theory it is first 
necessary to be sure that unwanted forms of charging have been 
eliminated, leaving only the separation charging that comes 
from the contact potential. 
Three quite different forms 
of 
apparatus were used in the investigations. 
That described in 
Chapter X was 
not constructed 
until 
the experiments on

226 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
X1 
metal/metal contact were substantially complete; it was only 
used to confirm that the results obtained with another apparatus 
had not been vitiated by certain corrections required in this 
apparatus which were found to be much larger than had been 
foreseen when it was designed. The earlier apparatus used 1-in. 
and 2-in. electroplated balls 
as 
specimens, 
but they were 
mounted on sizeable supports, one being a lever which retracted 
the smaller ball from the larger. The lever was mounted on two 
carriages permitting movements at right angles so that the 
surface of the larger ball could be explored. 
This ball was con- 
nected to an electrometer, the other being earthed. Accuracy 
of movement comparable with that of an interferometer was 
ensured by the use of accurately machined components combined 
with a system of springs to eliminate all backlash. 
The force 
which moved the lever was kept small and applied pneumatically 
in such a way as to keep any jarring of the rest of the apparatus 
to 
a minimum. 
Using this precision-lever apparatus 
it was 
possible to get consistent charging: the upper histogram of 
Fig. 3.21s typical of the results. There was some doubt, however, 
as to whether the magnitude of the charge might not be depen- 
dent on the force at contact within the range of small forces that 
it was practicable to use with the precision-lever apparatus, and 
the limit of charge for indefinitely light contact be significantly 
greater than the mean of a set of observations such as those in 
Fig. 
3.2. 
If the spread of these observations were due to 
a 
variation of the force at contact around the mean value of about 
1 
g weight, then the true separation charge would be right 
outside the histogram. For this and other reasons an apparatus 
was constructed which sets no lower limit to the force at contact, 
so that if really light contact gives exceptional charges, these 
exceptional charges will sometimes appear. 
It proved that they 
did not. 
The apparatus in question was used for three other 
checks, 
it having certain advantages not possessed by the 
precision-lever apparatus and that described in Chapter X. 
Its electrostatic capacitance was very low and the gas pressure 
could be varied down to 5 mm mercury. The larger ball floated 
on a cushion of mercury and was raised and lowered by altering

XI 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
227 
the level of the mercury. An arrangement of reservoirs and taps 
permitted control of the height of the ball at all pressures, the 
ball floating on mercury in a vertical cylinder which was one 
limb of a U-tube, the other limb forming part of the reservoir 
system. The essentials of the metal parts are shown in section 
in Fig. 11.1. 
The mercury on which the ball A floats is not 
shown, nor is the narrow hole which makes connexion to the 
other, glass, limb of the U-tube. The ball could be raised very 
gently, and allowed to fall suddenly in the cylinder machined 
out of the body of the apparatus B. The clearance between the 
ball and the cylinder was very critical for satisfactory operation. 
If too small, the ball failed to move freely, but if too great, tiny 
drops-of mercury tended to jam the ball. The correct clearance 
was 0-0003 in, with a permissible tolerance of only 0-0001 in. 
Scrupulous care had to be exercised to prevent almost invisible 
particles of dust from jamming the ball. 
The ball C is gripped by the cap D which screws on to the 
block E supported by the insulator F, waxed in position using 
a jig to ensure concentricity with the rings H and K which are 
of metal and the rings J and L which serve to insulate K and 
position the assembly. 
D and K are the two electrodes of the 
standard 
cylindrical 
condenser 
used 
for compensating 
the 
electrometer deflexion, H and the upper part of B serving as 
guard rings. The electrometer is connected at M which is one 
contact of the earthing key. 
The upper part of the apparatus 
is carried by @ which screws down on to B and has nearly 
bottomed on the flange when the ring assembly is firm, so that 
the joint between B and G can easily be made gas-tight with 
Apiezon plasticine. 
This apparatus permitted the ball to be moved very delicately 
indeed without there being any danger of accidentally applying 
excessive forces during an experiment. 
Sets of readings taken 
with the lightest possible contact, with normal working contact, 
and with contact which gave 
a just audible click, 
all gave 
reasonably Gaussian distributions of charge with similar spread. 
The possibility of two mechanisms of charge production operat- 
ing within the range of light contact whose relative importance

228 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
XI 
depends on the force at contact therefore received no support 
from the floating ball apparatus, and such a possibility will be 
discounted. 
Experimental checks 
It is hardly conceivable that the separation charging of two 
ball-bearings should involve any gas discharge, nevertheless 
the floating ball apparatus was used to investigate the possi- 
bility of the charging being affected by gas pressure. 
The 
magnitude of the charge for nickel/steel was found to be inde- 
pendent of pressure from atmospheric to {{; mm mercury when 
air was the ambient gas; on admitting hydrogen there was an 
irreversible change which must have been due to reduction of 
the oxide film, but no indication of variation with pressure. 
When two metal balls are in contact any electrolytic con- 
tamination in the neighbourhood of the contact forms a battery 
which is short-circuited and therefore quickly runs down. 
If 
any were to remain, there would be an e.m.f. between the balls 
during the earliest stages of separation 
(cf. 
p. 271) and the 
electrometer would be charged to a definite potential, irrespec- 
tive of the capacitance of the system. 
If, on the other hand, 
separation charging is responsible for the effect, then charge 
which was bound in the double layer at contact is released to 
give rise to the electrometer deflexion, and the amount released 
depends on the capacitance of the contact but not on that of 
the measuring system. 
The inverse of the potential change 
indicated by the electrometer is therefore proportional to the 
capacitance of the measuring system. Varying the capacitance 
of a condenser 
in parallel with the electrometer permits 
a 
discrimination to be made between separation charging and 
electrolytic charging, at any rate in its crudest form. A constant 
charge independent of capacitance indicates that electrolytic 
contamination has been eliminated. A check on the metal balls 
as cleaned for the measurements using the floating ball apparatus 
demonstrated that this was indeed the case. 
The constancy of charge generated, the lack of dependence 
on gas pressure, and the evidence that both rubbing and excessive

XTI 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
229 
contact pressures did not occur in the experiments, indicate that 
the phenomenon of separation charging can be freed from other 
effects and 
is amenable to quantitative investigation. 
As 
a 
further check that the charging being investigated could be 
    
  
  
  
  
IS5 
> 
| 
o 
2 
ot 
- 
3 
a. 
~~ 
| 
) 
S O 
S 
1ol 
-;: 
= 
| 
? 
57 
In nickel 
:_} 
10 |- 
g 
| 
I 
- 
lo 
i 
: 
3i26 
N 
2 
_ 
| 
{ 
. 
. 
g 
i 
' 
J 
5 in nickel 
= 
) 
| 
2|6 
= 
| 
, 
& 
[ 
11-3, 
| 
E 
5 - 
| 
i 
2 in steel 
O 
O 
| 
32 
% 
| 
T 
L 
E 
l 
Q 
' 
I 
i 
E 
| 
4-9 
QL 
¢ 
7 
- 
= 
: 
| 
- 
| 
l 
o 
{ 
+ 
-;—in steel 
  
Fia. 11.2. Additive property of separation charging. 
associated with contact potentials, an experiment was performed 
which showed that the charge obeyed the same additive law 
that is obeyed by contact potentials, viz. the charge for 4/C 
is the algebraic sum of the charges for 
A/B and B/C. 
A small 
and a large steel, and a small and a large nickel ball, in the 
four combinations 
possible 
in 
the 
floating 
ball apparatus, 
enabled this to be done, the contact potentials of the small 
and large balls being sufficiently different because of different 
oxide films for them to behave like different metals. 
Fig. 11.2 
shows that the additive law does hold within the limits of 
experimental error for the charging. Thisimplies, quite generally, 
that the charging 
is associated with 
a level system, 
as are 
contact potentials.

230 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
X1 
Detailed theory of the charging measurement 
It is now necessary to consider precisely what the apparent 
charge, as measured by the null method, corresponds to theoreti- 
cally.t 
In Fig. 11.3 let conductor 
1 be the fixed ball with its 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
_4] 
T 
Electrometer 
(] 
—\JU/— 
'O 
9 
  
  
  
  
  
F1a. 11.3. Schematic circuit for separation charging. 
connexions 
to 
earthing 
key, 
compensating 
condenser, 
and 
electrometer, together with those parts of these components to 
which it is connected, conductor 2 the moving ball with its 
mounting, and conductor 3 the screening. 
Conductor 4 is the 
compensating condenser electrode whose potential is varied to 
neutralize the electrometer deflexion. 
Let the charges on the 
conductors be represented by @ with the appropriate subscripts, 
their potentials by ¥V with corresponding subscripts, and let the 
coefficients of induction and capacitance be represented by C 
with double subscripts. 
The potentials include, of course, any 
contact potentials present, and undashed V’s will, in fact, refer 
to contact potentials with respect to earth = 0, that 
is, 
to 
potentials in the absence of applied potentials when all con- 
ductors are connected to earth. 
The procedure followed in making a measurement will be 
treated generally, allowing for the production of charge by some 
process (or processes) the nature of which need not be specified, 
and for the initial redistribution of charge through a potential 
barrier (assumed in the first instance to have a sharp cut-off) 
t Bredov and Kshemianskaia (1951) are aware of the need for corrections 
to be applied to their measurements but do not give the theory.

XI 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
231 
that occurs when the balls are separated. 
Let us consider, in 
turn, the various stages involved. 
Initially, all the conductors 
are 
‘earthed’, with the balls touching. 
Because 
of contact 
potentials, however, the charges will not be zero. In particular, 
Q1 - 011 VH‘Om V;.'l‘om V:>,+014 V4, 
in 
which, 
classically, 
(}; = —C}y = 00 
and 
the 
differences 
between the V’s are the contact potentials. 
It would follow, 
classically, that if there is a contact potential between the balls, 
so that V] # 15, @, is infinite. 
Initially, therefore, though the 
balls are ‘earthed’ in the conventional sense, they are by no 
means necessarily discharged. 
We now insulate conductor 1 and separate the balls. At the 
very beginning of the separation some of the charge on the balls 
leaks through the potential barrier so as to maintain the contact 
potential between them. 
Very shortly, however, the barrier 
becomes too wide to permit this redistribution of charge and 
the redistribution ceases. 
At this moment the potentials are 
still as they were at the outset, and we have 
Q'1 — 0111/1“!‘ 0121/;‘1‘ 0131734‘014 Ka 
C,, being unchanged throughout the measurement and @; < @;. 
From now on it becomes possible for unspecified processes to 
produce charges that will be retained by the conductors and 
ultimately measured, instead of neutralizing themselves through 
the potential barrier. Let this happen when C}; has become C7;, 
an additional charge ¢ being given to conductor 1, whereby 
Q'1 = 
'1' — 
0'1'1 V'{+01'2%+0:3%+014I{1 
is replaced by 
@119 = Ci1(Vi+v)+ 
05, Vo-+Cia Vz-+Cyy V. 
Apart from this production of charge and the initial leak through 
the potential barrier, the charge on conductor 1 is constant, and 
the changes in its potential result from the changing geometry 
of the system. 
Continuing the separation of the balls to their 
final position we have 
1 = @Q1+q = O Vi 
+CpVa+CiVs+C, 
V.

232 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
X1I 
Finally, V, is changed to V¥ in such a way as to bring the 
electrometer deflexion back to zero, in other words to make 
IV = V. This gives 
1 = @i+q = CiiN+ O+ CiEV+0, VY. 
Subtracting 
@ = OuN+CpVe+ 
0V +04 Y, 
we get 
¢ = (Of— O H(CE— Cro Vo +(CF— Cis)Vs +Ciu(VE —Vy). 
We have, because of the geometry of the system, 
C+0Ch+C13+Cy = 0, 
and 
CH{+OF+COF+0y, = 0. 
It follows that 
¢+ Cre(o—N) = Cu(VE—TV) +CE1—N) +(CH— Crs) (W) 
The left-hand side is the sum of the created charge and the 
residual charge arising from the contact potential. 
The right- 
hand side is the compensation charge plus two correction terms. 
The first arises because the two balls are not separated to an 
infinite distance, and the second is an effect of induction by the 
screening arising from a change in the coefficient of induction 
between the fixed ball and the screening brought about by 
moving the other ball. Note that the singly dashed terms refer 
to the moment at which the redistribution of charge through 
the potential barrier is cut off, and the quadruply dashed ones 
to the final state when the compensation has been carried out. 
The doubly dashed terms, referring to the moment at which ¢ 
was produced, have disappeared. 
It is therefore irrelevant at 
what moment this occurs (provided always that it is later than 
the redistribution cut-off), and the principle of superposition 
justifies replacing q by f dq. When f dq = 0 we have, for the 
‘separation capacitance’, 
,_ 
Cu(VT V), (C—C)B—T) | 
iy 
2= 
"y 
+ 
T—7, 
+ O 
In principle the separation capacitance is the separation charge 
divided by the contact potential, but two correction terms arise 
 

XTI 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
233 
in practice. The apparatus shown in Plate VII was designed so 
that these two terms would be negligible. They, and three other 
corrections, had to be allowed for in the precision-lever apparatus 
which was used for investigating the correlation of charge with 
contact potential. 
Correlation of charge with contact potential 
No success was attained in correlating these two quantities 
until the 
contact potentials were measured 
for 
the 
actual 
surfaces for which the charge was determined. 
The precision- 
lever apparatus was adapted for the contact potential measure- 
ment as well as for charge measurement by using the fact that 
a condenser with plates of dissimilar materials is charged by 
its own contact potential. 
If one plate 
is earthed and the 
other insulated, the potential difference between the plates will 
change if the plates are moved about, and the change may be 
indicated by an electrometer, thus enabling the contact potential 
to be measured (Hankel, 1862). 
By connecting the first plate 
to a potentiometer instead of to earth, the contact potential 
may be compensated and the method made a null one (Pellat, 
1881). This procedure, first used in a crude form by Kohlrausch 
in 1851, was described by Lord Kelvin in 1898 and is generally 
known by his name, though he quotes Hankel and Pellat in his 
paper. 
Later workers have improved the sensitivity of the 
method by using electronic devices. A very high sensitivity was 
required for measuring the contact potential in the neighbour- 
hood of the contact ‘point’ of the two balls, the effective area 
with the balls in juxtaposition being very much less than 1 mm?2, 
whereas several mm? of surface was the smallest that had been 
used before. 
The way in which the necessary sensitivity was 
achieved is described in the original paper. 
Experimental results for different }-in. balls tested against 
a chromium plated 2-in. ball are plotted in Fig. 11.4. Two 
measurements made with the other apparatus which required 
no correction to the charge measurements are included; the ones 
made with the precision-lever apparatus have been corrected 
as already explained. 
The charging is quite clearly correlated

234 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
X1 
with the contact potential: it is certainly the separation charge 
that has been measured. 
A similar correlation of measured 
charge with measured contact potential is reported by Bredov 
20 
    
Aux 
Pt x 
—_ 
X Rh 
3 
I5F 
?-Q) 
x Ag 
© 
~ 
= 
“ 
g 
65) 
SteelxxCu 
£ 
10- 
< 
X Ni 
e 
N 
E 
O 
Q 
Gt 
o 
‘é:o 
o) 
i 
xCo 
o 
5+ 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
i 
0 
0-2 
0-4 
0-6 
0-8 
[-O 
Contact potential (volts) 
Fia. 11.4. Charge on #-in. chromium ball as a function of contact 
potential of chromium against }-in. ball. 
The points indicated by 
circles were obtained with the apparatus described on p. 210. 
and Kshemianskaia (1951), but the constant of proportionality 
is not determined. 
The theory which will be developed in the 
next section requires the correlation to be linear; the prediction 
for a mean work-function of 5 eV, appropriate to oxidized metals, 
is shown in Fig. 11.4. There are no adjustable parameters. The 
question therefore arises as to why the experimental points are 
consistently low. 
The reason is not far to seek. 
The electro- 
plating on the metal balls used in the experiments departed 
from the idealized assumption of perfect spheres in the theory. 
The effect of protuberances in the spheres is twofold. 
In the 
first place they provide small areas from which current can pass 
after the average gap has exceeded the critical value for current

XTI 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
235 
cut-off. 
In the second place they modify the capacitance 
between the spheres at the critical gap. The maximum effect a 
protuberance can have is when it is so small that the capacitance 
has the value that belongs to smooth spheres with centres the 
same distance apart, but is nevertheless large enough to provide 
equalization current until its tip is at the same distance from the 
other sphere as would give current cut-off for smooth spheres. 
Such a protuberance results in the spheres being charged in the 
way smooth spheres would be if the critical gap were increased 
by the height of the protuberance. 
This is calculable from the 
theoretical formula that we shall derive. 
Conversely, one can 
calculate what heights of protuberances would account for the 
low valuesin Fig. 11.4. The calculation actually gives a minimum 
value for the sum of the heights of the protuberances on opposing 
balls, but because of two of the balls being exceptionally smooth, 
an estimate could be made of the degree of perfection of individual 
1-in. balls. 
It was thus found that the irregularities of surface 
of the balls must have exceeded heights that ranged from 200 
to 9000 A for different balls. This is quite reasonable, allowing 
for the fact that the metals used included both those that are 
difficult to electrodeposit and those that come down with 
a 
perfect mirror finish. The consistently low values of the experi- 
mental points are most probably to be explained as being due 
to topographical surface imperfections. 
A general formula for the effect of protuberances is given in 
Harper (1957). 
Theory of the separation charging of metal spheres 
The mathematical theory of the charging of two pieces of 
metal which are brought into contact and then separated will 
be given for the idealized case of two spheres in infinite space.¥ 
It 
is of interest to follow through what happens during the 
approach of the two pieces of metal as well as during their 
t The treatment can easily be generalized by introducing the principal 
radii of curvature belonging to the undulations on the two surfaces which 
make contact, when integrating to obtain the conductance of the gap, and 
the actual coefficient of induction between the two surfaces as 
a funection 
of width of gap.

236 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
XI 
separation, though it 
is only the separation that determines 
what the charge will be. 
As the two pieces of metal are brought together, effective 
electrical contact is made before they touch in the mechanical 
sense, because of tunnel effect. 
The metals then acquire the 
charge that originates in the contact potential and lose any 
excess charge they may have had at greater distances. As they 
come closer together, the charge increases in such a way as to 
maintain the contact potential. When they are in contact the 
charge is a maximum, and if the two components of charge in 
the double layer were strictly confined to the mathematical 
surfaces the charges would be infinite. 
Since, however, the 
charge is not sharply localized, it is finite, though large. Assum- 
ing the double layer to be of the order of 1 A thick (see p. 108), 
the charge required to provide a contact potential of 
1 V is 
about 
3 X 10% e.s.u./cm? 
Dissimilar metals in contact are not 
uncharged, they are highly charged. When the pieces of metal 
are separated part of this charge is lost. The charge decreases, 
as long as tunnel effect 
is operative, so as to maintain the 
contact potential between the surfaces. After tunnel effect has 
faded out the remaining charge 
is retained, and, since the 
capacitance between the surfaces decreases, the potential differ- 
ence between them rises above the contact potential. The metals 
finish up with the separation charge and this is, in principle, 
equal to the contact potential times the capacitance between 
the surfaces at the moment of cut-off of tunnel effect. 
The 
cut-off, however, is not sharp, and instead of the redistribution 
current suddenly terminating, it is continuously, though rapidly, 
reduced to zero. The separation charge acquired will depend on 
how rapidly the current is reduced, and hence on the speed of 
separation of the surfaces. The problem is a dynamical one. 
The current in the critical region depends on the e.m.f. driv- 
ing it, which is not the whole potential difference between the 
surfaces but the difference between this and the contact poten- 
tial. The current also depends on the conductance of the gap. 
The gap is not plane parallel, being the gap between spheres. 
It is axially symmetrical about the line of centres and, if we

XI 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
237 
assume, as we may, that the distance between the surfaces 
changes only slowly as we go off axis when the spheres are 
separated by about the critical gap, then elements of surface 
that can pass significant current will be nearly parallel in the 
region of the gap near the axis and the current flow will be nearly 
parallel to the axis. 
This permits the conductance of the gap 
to be obtained by integration, over annuli, of formula (6.10) for 
the specific conductivity of a plane parallel gap. 
The specific 
conductivity for a gap thickness of z A, expressed in ohm~1 cm~2, 
was found to be 
4-0% lologexp{—0-92z¢%\/(l— 10/24)(1—17-2/2¢)}, 
4 — Ui teidi+da) 
oNpi+e3)? 
$, and ¢, being the work-functions of the two metals in eV. 
Let r be the perpendicular distance of a point from the axis, 
measured in A, and let R} and R; be the radii of the two spheres 
also measured in A. 
Then, since z is to be measured in A, we 
have, for points not too far off axis, 
Ar) = z(0)+%r2(%,1 4 -11?) — 2(0) o, 
where o« = 1/2R;-}1/2R, and z(0) is the value of z on the axis. 
We are only concerned with z(r) not very different from the 
value of z near cut-off. 
The effective area of the gap, defined as the area of a plane 
parallel gap of width z(0) that has the same conductance as the 
actual gap, is given, in square A, by 
7-2 
X {1 “{z(o>+ar2}¢}] 
| —osmow J(1-aplti- 
) 
Q0 
27r 
— 2(0) f I 
oy 
sSSP 
0°92440), 
  
in which 
  
  
  
  
  
0

238 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
XI 
where 
V= «/( =00+ rz}qb){ O)J”’”_%}_ 
=0,/ (1 =@l x033) 
The effective area will enter into the final result logarithmically, 
whence errors of the order of {10/2(0)¢}* are negligible. Noting 
that the significant part of the integral comes from z(r) =~ 2(0), 
¢ is found to reduce to ar?. The effective area becomes 
  
o0 
z(0) f drz ( O?:_Tarzexp(—0~92a¢%rz) 
0 
  
  
_ _”zOEO) exp{0-922(0)$tEi{—0-922(0)$t}, 
in which 
Ei(y) — f %" du. 
For |y| > 17, Jahnke and Emde (1928) give 
y 
L 
2! 
3! 
Ei(y) 
= 3-(1 
Bl 
) 
(%) 
” 
‘|‘y+yz+y3‘|‘ 
Assuming, as may be verified a posteriors, that the condition is 
fulfilled, we obtain finally, for the effective area, after substi- 
tuting for «, 
27 Ry R, 
1 
— 
. 
11.1 
0-924%( 
i—I-R'z){l 
0°92z(0)¢*} 
— 
The units are square A. After changing units and combining 
with the formula for the specific conductivity of the gap, we 
obtain for the conductance of the gap in ohm-1, 
R, R 
1 
— 9. 
103 
1-"2 
o(?) 
73x10 z(Rl—l—Rz)(l 
O-92z¢‘1’) X 
X exp{—0-922¢%,/(1—10/2¢)(1—7-2[24)} 
(11.2) 
in which R, and R, are in e¢m, but z in A. 
For the idealized case of two spheres in free space, which we 
are considering, there are no correction terms; it is the relative 
  
  
 

X1 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
239 
motion of the spheres which gives rise to the separation charging, 
and this charging depends on the contact potential between the 
spheres. 
In consequence, there is no loss of generality in taking 
the potential of the first sphere V; as zero initially when the 
spheres are touching, and letting the first sphere move, it being 
insulated during the motion. The potential of the second sphere 
¥, will then be ®,—®, throughout the motion.T 
It will be con- 
venient to measure potentials in electrostatic units for the time 
being, changing to volts later. 
We are concerned with the 
increase of ¥ (¢) to its final value ¥j(0) = M(®,—®,), from which 
the charge generated on the first sphere follows immediately. 
By making ¥;(0) = 0 and V,(¢) = ®,—®, for 
all 
{, we have 
arranged that it is just V] that drives the current, so that, if ¢, 
1s the charge on the first sphere, then 
~%h_ o). 
For the purpose of calculation we assume a constant force to 
be suddenly applied to the first sphere to bring about the 
separation, the resulting acceleration being a cm/sec?. The final 
charge, however, will prove to be so little dependent on o that 
we may take the formula for it as applying to the general case 
with a representing the constant acceleration that would give 
the actual velocity in the region of cut-off. We have 
dz 
Et — \/(2&2)’ 
i@, o(@%@) 
whence 
7 
= 
\/(2%) 
. 
We have, for all ¢, 
@1 = Cu(2)11(2) +Cyp(2) (@ 
—D,), 
  
whence 
4@ _ 
a0y 
N 
ib 
o) P 
= 
h(2) W'{"Ou(z ‘&;‘l‘(q)z 
@ 
dz 
T @ is the height of the surface barrier (a potential); ¢ is the work function 
(an energy). 
When @ is reckoned in volts, and 
¢ in electron-volts, these 
quantities are numerically the same for an electron. They will appear in this 
form in the final equation for the separation charge, but one must be careful 
to distinguish between them because of dimensional considerations.

240 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
XI 
By substitution we obtain, as the differential equation for V] as 
a function of z, 
ote) 
an, 
iy 
{4(2az)+ dll}I/l( )+Ci1(2) 5= 
= 1y (D,—D 
—J;_ _ 0. 
(11.3) 
It is shown in the Appendix that a detailed consideration of 
the relative importance of the different terms in this equation 
in different ranges of z enables use to be made of upper and 
lower limits for the final charge in such a way as to show that 
the charge is what would be obtained for a sharp cut-off at an 
equivalent critical gap z,, where 
  
_ 
d012 
(%) 
M‘/ (202¢) —= 
Zc 
7 is an undetermined parameter which we shall discuss shortly; 
it certainly lies between 1 and 100. 
Strictly, 
M 
is a function of 
z., but this can be seen to be trivial. 
The coefficients of capacitance and induction for two spheres 
have been the subject of much computation; since R, and R, 
are large compared with z,, we use the formula for C), in the 
form given by Russell (1909): 
R, R, 
2R, R, 
. 
1 
R1+R2{y+%lnR1+R2 
fln“}’ 
in which y = Euler’s constant = 0-5772, and all lengths are 
in ecm. 
From this we obtain dC),/dz. 
o(z) we already know. 
Substituting these values in the previous equation, after chang- 
ing to the same units throughout, gives 
  
—Cy = 
(11.4) 
1 
—12 
-1 
- 2-87TX 10712 
M1, /( azc)(l—l-o 
99 96*) 
- enlomp 12 
019 
as the equation for z, in A. 
Most conveniently, it no longer 
contains R, and R,. 
The order of magnitude of z, is of importance for further 
calculation and 
is 
also 
of physical interest. 
By successive 
approximation z, is found to be 12:7 A for reasonable particular

XI 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
241 
values of the other quantities, viz. 
n = 10, a = 981 cm/sec?, 
¢ =5eV, ®,—D, =05V, M = 0-04. 
The order of magnitude we have found for z, permits a useful 
simplification when calculating C},. 
The procedure is to take 
logarithms in the equation for z,, expand and neglect high order 
terms, then drop the term in logz, but retain the term in z,, 
thus obtaining as a simplified formula for z,: 
28 9 
12 2 2:50 
Na 
Ze = + 
5 
pE logmnw—. 
Before substituting this value in the formula for C,,, it is neces- 
sary to change the units to cm and to alter the base of logarithms 
in the latter. 
In this way we obtain for the separation capaci- 
tance C,(z,): 
(11.6) 
  
  
  
  
R, R, 
R, R 
nVa 
R1+R2{1 18Llogu 
7 R +C(¢ )} 
in which 
[ = 10-13—1-151log10[¢—%{28-9+12-2¢—%—2-5logw%‘}]. 
We have finally, for the separation charge in e.s.u. 
1-1511 
17, 
11. 
in which 
| 
  
R, and R, are the radii of the spheres in cm, 
®, and @, are the surface potential barriers in V, 
5 _ Lot it 
9(Pi+43)? 
a is the acceleration with which the spheres are separated, 
in cm/sec?, 
, the mean work function in eV, 
  
M is the factor by which @®,—®, is magnified in giving the 
final potential, 
and 100 > 
> 1. 
The function ( 
The mathematical approximations used in deriving (11.7), 
when reviewed in the light of orders of magnitude, are seen to

242 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
X1 
affect the final formula so little that the error in the charge 
should not exceed about 1 per cent on this account. Uncertain- 
ties in the physical assumptions, furthermore, enter into the 
formula uncritically, because of its logarithmic form, except for 
extreme conditions of no practical significance for which the 
assumptions break down. 
For practical laboratory conditions 
the formula should be reliable to within a few units per cent. 
It is worth inquiring about extreme conditions, since they 
highlight some rather odd consequences of the theory. 
The 
separation charge is what is left of the double layer of charge 
arising from the contact potential at the interface between two 
metal spheres when in contact, after some of it has leaked back 
by tunnel effect through the gap during the separation of the 
spheres. 
In principle, the separation charge depends on how 
quickly the spheres are moved apart. If moved apart sufficiently 
quickly, one might think that all the charge of the double layer 
would be retained; if moved apart infinitely slowly, all would 
be lost and the separation charge would be zero. At first sight, 
this prediction would appear to be in complete contradiction 
with what is found in practice: no variation of charge with speed 
of separation has been found.t Formula (11.7) for the separation 
charge, in which the variation depends on the acceleration a, 
shows that the dependence is in principle not just a correction 
factor. Consideration of numerical values of {, however, provides 
an explanation of the seeming contradiction. 
The explanation 
comes from the doubly logarithmic form of the dependence of { 
on a. 
In a specified piece of apparatus, the only variable is the 
acceleration a. The formula for the separation charge then takes 
the form D log{¥ log(Fa)}, in which D, E, and F are constants. 
In consequence, impracticably large changes in the speed of 
separation of the spheres would be required to show a measurable 
effect on the separation charge, though this charge is, it appears, 
determined by the order of magnitude of accelerations that can 
be used in laboratory practice! This is apparent from Fig. 11.5,in 
+ The large variation found by Bredov and Kshemianskaia (1951) is, surely, 
to be attributed to the effect of a relatively thick layer of poorly conducting 
oxide (cf. p. 248).

XI 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
243 
which {is shown as a function of nva/M for ¢ = 5eV. Practicable 
laboratory conditions are shown by the shaded region of nva/M 
which is plotted on a logarithmic scale. 4 represents the condi- 
tions of the experiment of Fig. 11.4. At B a separation of 1 cm 
i 
1ot 
  
: 
I 
| 
st 
| 
| 
| 
i 
| 
| 
4H 
| 
| 
2| 
l 
l 
| 
-   
  
  
  
Ollrllll'lljlllr“”.” 
10715 
10710 
1073 
I 
I 
I 
IR I 
IR A 
105 
100 
10 
: 
C 
  
B 
Wa 
| M 
Fic. 
11.5. 
I for 
¢ = 5. 
The shaded region covers practicable laboratory 
conditions. 
A corresponds 
to the conditions 
of the experiment. 
At B 
a 
separation of 1 cm is attained after 2:6 X 10° years. At C the velocity of light 
is attained after half an angstrom unit. 
  
is attained after 2-6x 10° years—the age of the earth as at 
present estimated. Even this fantastically slow separation still 
leaves most of the charge which was originally present in the 
double layer still not leaked away. 
It is of no importance, 
therefore, that the formula for the separation charge does not 
go to zero asymptotically with decreasing a as it ought to do, 
a consequence of mathematical approximations used in the 
derivation. The formula also fails for impracticably large values 
of a, in this case not only because of mathematical approxima- 
tions but also because we have used the classical formula for C},,

244 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
XI 
which implies an infinite charge with the spheres in contact. 
In fact, the fuzziness of the charge layer means that the double 
layer should be taken as being about 
1 A thick (cf. p. 108). 
An approximate value for the upper limit of charge (quite 
unattainable in practice) will be given by using the classical 
formula for O}, with a gap of 1 A. The asymptotic limit is shown 
in Fig. 11.5, and it is assumed that it will virtually have been 
reached at C, for which the velocity of light is supposed to be 
attained after an insignificant separation of only 1 A. 
It is 
remarkable that only 15 per cent of the maximum attainable 
charge is normally lost by tunnel effect during a laboratory 
separation of the spheres, and that only a further 
5 per cent 
would be lost by prolonging the experiment to last for a time 
equal to the age of the earth. Thus we see why it is that, when 
investigating a phenomenon which is in principle time dependent, 
it does not seem to matter in the least how slowly, or how quickly, 
the two balls are separated. 
Approximate formulae for the separation charge 
The logarithmic form of ¢ permits useful simplifications to be 
made in the formula for the separation charge when the highest 
accuracy is not required. Krrors incurred by the simplifications 
may be estimated from Figs. 11.5 and 11.6. We have said that 
n must lie between 1 and 100. Taking it to be 10 will not intro- 
duce an error as much as 
1 per cent. 
If, furthermore, we take 
nva|M = 103, a value not far removed from the conditions of the 
experiment of Fig. 11.4, the error introduced will only be about 
2 per cent at most. 
With an overall possible error of about 
5 per cent in the charge, we may, therefore, simplify { to 
10-13—1-151log,(12-2¢-1+21-4¢ 
1), 
(11.8) 
which is now a function of ¢ only. 
If it is sufficient to work to 10 per cent, we may put ¢ = 5eV, 
whereby 
{ simplifies to 8:85, and the formula for the charge 
becomes 
(©,—®,) 
By B, 
300(F, 1+ Fy) 
(11.9) 
  {8-85—|—1'151 log;, B, £y } 
R,+R,

X1 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
245 
10 
  
  
1 
1 
1 
2 
3 
$ (eV) 
Fie. 11.6. 
¢ for nva/M = 10°. 
  
il 
Separation charging of metallic powders 
Theoretical aspects of the electrostatic charging of powders 
have been discussed by Harper (1961) and it will be sufficient 
here to apply the formula for the separation charge to metallic 
powders. 
The high specific charge obtained by Vollrath with 
antimony/copper has already been mentioned (p. 223). 
In his 
dust generator the particles of one metal were charged by being 
blown against an effectively plane surface of the other metal. 
If all the particles are charged independently and subsequently 
retain their charge, the appropriate formula for separation 
hareing 
i 
charging is 
(O, —D,) R 
300 
in which R is the (mean) radius of the particles, and the charge 
is in e.s.u. per particle. For a powder of material density p, the 
charge in coulombs per gramme is easily found to be 
?,—, 
pR? 
Unfortunately, Vollrath does not quote figures for the amount 
  (8-:854-1-1511og,, k), 
(11.10) 
2-66x 1018 
(8:85+1-151log,o B). 
 (11.11)

246 
SEPARATION CHARGING OF METALS 
X1I 
of charge carried by metal dusts, but he states that this was 
comparable with that carried by diatomaceous earth, and the 
latter was charged to an extent which made it fit the prediction 
for metals with a contact potential of 1 V (Harper, 1961). The 
charge would have been limited by the charging process, not by 
subsequent discharge into the ambient gas.

CHAPTER XII 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
W 
E have seen that it is possible to give a quantitative account 
of what happens when two metal spheres are brought into 
contact and then separated. 
We now consider what occurs 
when a piece of semiconductor is brought into contact with 
a piece of metal, left in contact with it for a while, and then 
removed. The essential difference is that, whereas any redistri- 
bution of charge in metal, required by the proximity of the 
other material, may be supposed to happen so quickly that 
the redistribution follows the movement of the other material 
adiabatically, this 
is not necessarily so in 
a semiconductor. 
The resistivity of the semiconductor slows down the redistribu- 
tion; charging and discharging take time, and the time need 
not be small compared with the duration of contact. 
Let us again idealize by considering spheres. When a sphere 
of semiconductor is brought up to a sphere of metal, there will 
be a critical gap below which a significant current can pass 
because of tunnel effect. 
The formula for the conductivity of 
the gap that was used for two metals will not apply exactly, 
because there are fewer electrons available for tunnelling in 
the semiconductor than in a metal. 
The critical gap will be 
somewhat smaller. Furthermore, the component of the double 
layer which resides in the semiconductor cannot be considered 
as being effectively in the surface; it has a very real distribution 
in depth. Current passing through the gap to alter this distribu- 
tion must therefore pass also through a thin surface layer of 
semiconductor to reach its destination. 
The resistance of this 
layer will slow down the redistribution, to an extent that will 
depend on the relaxation time for the redistribution of charge 
in the material of the semiconductor. 
This relaxation time is 
well known to be Kp/4w, where K is the dielectric constant and 
p the resistivity in e.s.u. 
In terms of the resistivity in ohm cm, 
the relaxation time 
is 8-85x 10-14Kp 
. 
The proper value to

248 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
XII 
take for p,, is that which refers to the thin surface layer which 
is largely denuded of charge carriers. The value is therefore in 
excess of that for the bulk material. 
The latter covers a very 
large range, since, in principle, it fills the gap between metals 
and insulators, say 10~* ohm cm to 10! ohm cm. 
We must 
compare the relaxation time with the time it takes to close (or 
open) the critical gap. The critical gap will be between 1 A and 
10 A wide, and speeds within a few orders of 10 from 1 cm/sec. 
This makes the time of closing within a few orders of 10 from 
10-7 sec, a time that comes somewhere in the middle of the range 
of relaxation times for the redistribution of charge. 
Semi- 
conductors of low resistivity, therefore, will be able to redistri- 
bute their charge to follow the gap as it goes through the critical 
value, and behave very like metals. 
Semiconductors of high 
resistivity, however, will be too sluggish to take advantage of 
tunnel effect: for them electrical contact implies mechanical 
contact, and for a redistribution of charge to occur the contact 
may need to be prolonged. This leads to what may be considered 
as characteristic semiconductor behaviour; we now inquire what 
that is. 
It will be contact charging, as distinct from separation 
charging. 
If the spheres were initially uncharged, they will 
remain so until mechanical contact is established. 
As soon as 
contact is made, a double layer will build up at a rate determined 
by the relaxation time, so establishing the contact potential. 
This contact potential will then cause the spheres to charge up 
because of the capacitance between them, at a rate which will 
depend on another relaxation time, determined by the magni- 
tude of the capacitance and the effective resistance between the 
‘point’ of contact at which the contact potential resides and the 
site on the capacitor that is being charged. 
If the duration of 
contact is long enough the capacitor will become fully charged, 
if it is less the charge will be smaller for shorter contacts. Imme- 
diately contact is broken the doublelayeris split, and the charges 
already in it together with the charges on the capacitor become 
the contact charges on the two spheres as finally measured. 
There is no loss of charge during the separation, as with metals. 
There are two components in a contact charge: that from the

XII 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
249 
area of true contact and that from the distant parts. They are 
of the same sign. 
In the case of metal spheres, for which the 
separation charge is established with a gap between them, there 
is no distinction between the two components. 
The two com- 
ponents which arise with a semiconductor will be discussed 
separately. 
The component that comes from the double layer established 
over the area of true contact has a saturation value that can 
be calculated using formulae obtained in Chapter IX. Referring 
to what was said about relaxation times, we see that a high 
resistivity of 1011 ohm cm, which makes the semiconductor 
almost a poor insulator, gives a relaxation time of i; sec for 
K ~ 10, and lower resistivities give shorter relaxation times. 
Even allowing for the higher resistivity of the denuded layer, it 
will only be for semiconductors that are almost insulators, and 
for short contact times, that the saturation value of this com- 
ponent of contact charge fails to be attained. We shall therefore 
restrict the discussion to equilibrium. values of the space charge 
in double layers without further comment. 
We obtained formulae for the thickness of the charge layer 
in n- and p-type semiconductors in Chapter IX, from which the 
charge per unit area of interface follows at once. 
N; and N, 
were the concentrations of localized donor and acceptor levels 
respectively, and X4 and X, the thicknesses of the charge layers 
in the corresponding semiconductors. 
For an n-type semi- 
conductor we found (9.1) = 
and for a p-type semiconductor (9.2) 
%= ) 
  
  
E,, ¢, and y are measured in e.s.u., K is the dielectric constant, 
and e the electronic charge in e.s.u. 
The total charge per unit area of interface in the layer is 
XgeNy = [{(¢—x)KNy/27} 
(12.1)

250 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
XII 
for the n-type semiconductor,} and 
X, eN, = */{(X+E1_¢)KN3/277} 
(12.2) 
for the p-type. 
Introducing the resistivity p = 1/Neu, this referring to the 
uncharged material, the charges per unit area become 
  
A/{(GI;T———E%?} 
(n-type) 
(12.3) 
and 
A/ {(X_l—zzt;zb)K} 
(p-type). 
(12.4) 
These formulae give the saturation charge per unit area of 
true contact for simple n- and p-type semiconductors in terms 
of band structures and easily measurable constants. 
Let us 
consider the order of magnitude of the charging. Level differ- 
ences are, characteristically, of the order of 
1 eV; K may be 
taken as 10 and p as 6X10° e.s.u., for a typical case. 
After 
changing the units of resistivity, this gives 89/,/(p,) for the 
charge per unit area. 
A rather similar result follows for intrinsic semiconductors 
from formulae 
(9.7) and (9.8) for the charge per unit area. 
These took the form 
n 
K 
IcT 
concentration of positive holes in valence band 
when Fermi level is B, 
+y— & —d¢ above it 
(12.5) 
for a positive charge, and 
_ 
(K 
kT 
concentration of electrons in conduction band 
when Fermi level is ¢—y 
- & below it 
(12.6) 
for a negative charge. 
1 Bredov and Kshemianskaia (1951) derive a more complicated formula ; 
this would seem to be the result of using boundary conditions incompatible 
with Fig. 9.1. They compare their formula with experimental measurements 
on the charging of semiconductors against gold, for different semiconductor 
carrier concentrations, 
different 
dielectric constants, and different contact 
potentials. The experimental results show a linear correlation of charge with 
contact potential when the dielectric constant and carrier concentration are 
fixed. 
It is not clear why the contact potential varied through a considerable 
range when the other parameters were unchanged. 
The linear correlation of 
charge with contact potential is not to be expected from formula (12.1), nor, 
incidentally, from the formula of Bredov and Kshemianskaia.

XII 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
251 
These formulae give the saturation charge per unit area of 
true contact for intrinsic semiconductors 
in terms 
of band 
structures, the dielectric constant, and Boltzmann’s constant. 
Calling the concentrations under the square root N*, we may 
write 1/p* = N *eu, where p* is a hypothetical resistivity which 
will be in the semiconductor range. 
The charge per unit area 
becomes 
KET 
2meup*) 
Taking the same values for the constants as before, the charge 
at 300° K is found to be 20/,/(p¥). 
The formulae for charging come from a mathematical treat- 
ment which will not be valid for low values of resistivity when 
the semiconductor behaves rather like 
a metal and exhibits 
separation 
charging. 
To 
exclude 
such semiconductors 
the 
resistivity must exceed values around 
10¢* ohm em. 
It is at 
about these values that the formulae predict that saturation 
charges per unit area of true contact fall below 
1 e.s.u./ecm?2. 
Since areas of true contact are usually several orders of magni- 
tude smaller than the areas of general contact, it appears that 
the first component of contact charge that we have been dis- 
cussing will seldom contribute a significant amount to the total. 
There is a special situation, however, in which the first com- 
ponent contribution might be important. This is when extended 
true contact has been made because one of the contacting 
materials was able to flow over the surface of the other or deform 
sufficiently to fit it. 
A particular instance is when an adhesive 
is applied to a surface and allowed to set, and the adhesive then 
stripped off. 
It is well known that the stripping of one surface 
from another, when these have been in molecular contact, can 
lead to strong electrification. Charge separation may be caused 
by the stripping process, but we have seen that positive and 
negative charges are present before the stripping in the case of 
metal/semiconductor contact, 
the charges forming 
a double 
layer near the interface. 
Since the opposite charges in the 
double layer attract one another, an electrostatic force must 
exist which contributes to the adhesion of the surfaces. Opinions 
 

252 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
XII 
have differed regarding the magnitude of this force in the theory 
of adhesives. 
Skinner, Savage, and Rutzler (1953, 1954) and 
Skinner (1955) consider it to be important and have examined 
the problem mathematically, considering the case of two layers 
of different insulators, sandwiched between two different metals. 
What they call insulators, however, ought properly to be called 
semiconductors, since the case of particular interest is that of 
¢—x small, and this imphes that sufficient electrons will get 
into the conduction band to make the sandwich to some extent 
conducting. Morant (1954) has pointed out that this assumption 
undermines their use of a simplification which treats the forma- 
tion of the space charge in the ‘insulator’ as being like thermionic 
emission into a vacuum. He also drew attention to a confusion 
in their use of energy level diagrams, in particular the Fermi 
levels not being horizontal at equilibrium. As a consequence of 
this error, their boundary conditions are incorrect. They further- 
more use a solution of the differential equations which is in- 
admissible 
for the problem under consideration, 
the result 
being evident in a misfit of the two parts of their solution at 
the interface between the two ‘insulators’. Morant does not give 
an alternative treatment but what he says is compatible with 
the results derived in this book. 
We have seen that a significant charge density can arise in a 
semiconductor of moderate resistivity; we must now consider the 
force of adhesion resulting from it. The normal force per unit 
area at the metal is 2702, 
For this to amount to as much as the 
relatively small pressure of i1; atmosphere, or 10° dyn/cm?, o has 
to be 126 e.s.u./cm?. Reference to the formulae for charge density 
shows that such a value could only be attained for a resistivity 
so low that the semiconductor would be in the range just above 
the metals. Such a semiconductor is a very unlikely adhesive. 
We now proceed to discuss the second, and more important, 
component of the contact charge, that which comes from the 
charging of the capacitance between the surfaces by the contact 
potential between them. 
If the bulk resistivity of the semi- 
conductor is high, the charging will take an appreciable time, 
and, if the surface makes contact over a restricted area, e.g. at

XII 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
2563 
a single contact point, the constriction resistance will slow down 
the charging further. 
The constriction resistance may be the 
determining factor. 
Let the effective resistance which slows 
down the charging be R, and the contact potential be 7},. Then 
the charge acquired after a contact time ¢ will bet 
Q = £y V(1 —e4R0w). 
The only experiments known to the author which can be 
correlated with this theory (Harper, 1960) are those of Cooke 
(Thesis, 1954) and Jewell-Thomas (Thesis, 1957) on the electri- 
fication of rutile powder sliding down a metal chute. 
Donald 
(1958), who has reported these results, supposed the charging 
to be frictional in origin; and Cooke and Jewell-Thomas gave 
a different interpretation from that of Harper. They supposed 
that there was a steady transfer of charge to the capacitor, 
accompanied by a leakage current which balanced the transfer 
when the maximum charge had been attained. This leads to the 
same dependence of charge on time of contact, but is an essen- 
tially different explanation. 
It implies mechanical transfer of 
charge, by which is meant a movement of charge brought about 
by forces that are not electrical, since the movement is against 
the potential difference. The forces of thermal agitation which 
bring about diffusion are an example; another is provided by 
the belt electrostatic generator. The contact charging postulated 
by the present author involves the charge transfer being n the 
direction of the potential difference; when the saturation charge 
has been transferred, the potential difference has been elimi- 
nated, so leakage current cannot be involved. 
The charging of rutile 
The experiments on rutile consisted essentially in allowing 
rutile powder to slide down a metal chute and measuring the 
charge acquired as a function of chute length and inclination. 
The time for which the powder was in contact with the chute 
was 
also measured, and 
it was found that this 
time alone 
determined the amount of the charge, irrespective of whether 
+ This assumes that terms in C,; and C,, are unimportant, as they are in 
the experiments that will be considered.

254 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
XII 
it referred to a short chute and a small inclination or a long chute 
and a large inclination, provided the duration of the descent 
w 
o 
) 
Charge in units 
of 10-10Coulombs/gramme 
NI 
o 
o 
Fi1c. 12.1. 
was the same. 
    
B 
e O N8 
)o/x)o/x 
X 
o 
| 
1 
1 
{ 
1 
1 
0-2 
0-4 
0-6 
0-8 
[-O 
[-2 
t (sec) 
Charging of rutile powder sliding down a chute. 
1-8 
-6 
) 
N 
1 
] 
Log {Q max/(Q max‘Q,)} 
S 
    
O-8¢ 
0-6r 
0.4.. 
02+ 
O 
| 
i 
1 
1 
J 
02 
04 
06 
0:8 
1:0 
t (sec) 
Fi1c. 12.2 
The variation of charge @ with duration 
¢ is 
shown, for three inclinations, in Fig. 12.1. The function 
log{ Qmax/ ( Qmax T Q)} 
is plotted against time of descent in Fig. 12.2, and is seen to be 
proportional to {. From this it follows that 
@ = Qmax(l_e_t/T):

XIT 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
255 
where 7 is a relaxation time. 
Comparison of the experimental 
results with any theory which predicts the above form of the 
variation of charge with duration of contact requires a check 
on the magnitude of two constants. These appear in the equation 
as the saturation charge @, and the relaxation time 
. We 
shall, however, find it more convenient to check the saturation 
charge and the initial charging rate. Unfortunately, an accurate 
comparison of theory and experiment, such as was made for the 
separation charging of metals, cannot be carried out in the 
present case because of uncertainty about the physical charac- 
teristics of the rutile used in the experiments. 
In principle, 
however, no arbitrary constants are involved, so that an order 
of magnitude comparison, in which large powers of 10 occur, 
should be significant. 
Rutile 
(titanium dioxide) 
has 
a 
specific gravity 
of 4-25. 
Assuming the particles of the powder used in the experiments 
of Cooke and Jewell-Thomas to have been spherical, their mean 
radius of 7-0 X 10~ em corresponds to a mass of 6-08 X 10-¢ g, 
which implies there having been 1-65 X 10° particles per gramme 
of powder. We shall estimate the area of contact between a 
rutile particle and the nickel chute from the formula given in 
Chapter II for the elastic deformation of a sphere pressed against 
a plane. 
It will be sufﬁciently accurate to use the formula in 
the form (2.2): - 
in which 7 is the radius of the circle of contact, R is the radius 
of the spherical particle, F the normal force between sphere and 
plane, and ¥; and ¥, the Young’s moduli of the two materials, 
all being expressed in c.g.s. units. Taking Young’s modulus for 
rutile to be 5:1 X 10'2 dyn/ecm? and for nickel 5-4 X 10'2 dyn/cm?, 
the radius of contact comes out to be 2-2x 10-6 cm. 
The radius of contact is small compared with the size of the 
particle. An electrical current flowing from the chute into the 
particle is therefore severely constricted at the contact, and 
the constriction resistance will determine the magnitude of the 
current. 
Since the resistivity of the rutile is many orders of

256 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
XII 
magnitude greater than that of the metal, the contact resistance 
is that of a circular electrode of radius r feeding current into a 
semi-infinite medium, of resistivity p. 
The resistance is well 
known to be p/4r. When the particle first makes contact with 
the chute, the current flowing into the particle is equal to the 
contact potential divided by the resistance, because no back- 
voltage has yet been built up. A contact potential of 1 V would 
therefore give an initial charging current of 4r/p, amperes per 
particle. 
If the contact ‘point’ changes to another position on 
the surface of the particle, the current will still be 4r/p 
, until 
a back-voltage builds up, because the constriction resistance 
will be the same and the relaxation time for the redistribution 
of charge over the ‘surface’ of the particle is very small. 
The 
initial charging rate found by Jewell-Thomas was 1-1Xx10-8 
amperes per gramme, which is 6:7 X 10~14 amperes per particle. 
Using the value of r just calculated, the resistivity works out 
to be 1-3 X 108 ohm cm, for an assumed contact potentialof 1V. 
If the particles were inhomogeneous, this would be an average 
value. 
The resistivity of rutile was investigated by Cooke, who 
measured the resistance of the compressed powder in a tube. 
He found that the apparent resistivity varied with compression 
and concluded that the resistance he measured was that of the 
contacts between particles. Unfortunately he did not measure 
the compression, but one can easily see that the true resistivity 
must have been very much less than the apparent. 
If the com- 
pression was, for example, 
1 kg/ecm?, the formula already used 
predicts a radius of contact of almost exactly one-hundredth of 
the radius of the particle. 
Compare now the resistance of a 
column of particles, strung like beads on the axis of an enveloping 
cylinder, with the resistance of the solid cylinder. 
If the radius 
of the particle is R, there will be 1/2R particles per unit length. 
There will also be this number of contacts per unit length, and 
each contact has a resistance p/4r on each side of the contact. 
The resistance per unit length is therefore p/4r B. The resistance 
of the solid cylinder is p/7R2. 
The apparent resistivity of the 
powder is therefore 
= R/4r times the value for the solid. At

XII 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
257 
1 kg/cm? this ratio is 1007/4. The apparent resistivity measured 
by Cooke was 2-4 X 10190hm cm. At 1 kg/cm? the true resistivity 
would have been 3 X 108 ohm em. Since r is proportional to the 
cube root of the compression, the value assumed for it is not 
very critical. 
The resistivity required by the theory of the charging of 
spheres was 1-3X 108 ohm cm, so the order of magnitude is in 
agreement, but the numerical value is wrong by just over a 
factor of 2. 
There are plenty of reasons for not expecting the 
agreement to be exact, apart from not knowing the value of the 
compression used in Cooke’s determination of resistivity. The 
assumption of 1 V for the contact potential is an order of magni- 
tude guess (though supported by the calculation of contact 
charge that we shall make). The actual contact area may well 
have been greater than that calculated for the idealized case of 
sphere/plane contact; this would increase the initial charging 
current and improve the agreement. What has been demon- 
strated by the numerical calculations 
is that the theory of 
contact charging will predict the initial charging rate of rutile 
if assumptions about its physical characteristics are made which 
come very close to what was actually known about the rutile. 
The semiconducting properties of rutile have been investi- 
gated by Breckenridge and Hosler (1953), but the rutile they 
used was much more conducting than that used by Cooke and 
Jewell-Thomas. 
However, the mechanism of conduction was 
presumably not very different. 
Rutile is normally an n-type 
semiconductor, current being carried by electrons in the conduc- 
tion band that have reached it by thermal excitation from donor 
levels. 
The number of vacant donor levels 
is equal to the 
number of electrons that have been excited into the conduction 
band, N per em3. 
It is reasonable to assume that the difference 
in conductivity between the rutile of Jewell-Thomas and that 
of Breckenridge and Hosler was due to a difference in N, the 
mobility of the charge carriers being the same. The mobility u 
measured by Breckenridge and Hosler was about 1-0 cm?/V sec 
for crystalline rutile, and 0-1 cm?/V sec for rutile in ceramic 
form. The latter is probably more applicable to the rutile used

258 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
XII 
in the charging experiments. 
Since the resistivity is given by 
p = 1/Neu, where e is the electronic charge, one finds, from the 
value assumed 
for 
u, that N = 4-8x 101! 
for the charging 
experiments, and this is the minimum value that N; could have. 
If the rutile had been positively charged by the metal, the 
space charge would have been carried by the ionized donor 
levels, the conduction band being denuded of electrons, in which 
case the space charge would be limited by the concentration of 
donor levels ;. The resulting surface layer has a thickness given 
by (9.1) and is 4/(V;5 K /27Ny €2), where ¥, is the contact potential 
and K the dielectric constant. The dielectric constant of rutile 
has been measured by Schmidt (1902, 1903) and is very high. 
For rutile powder it is 114. From the assumed figures one finds 
that the thickness of a surface layer of (positive) charge will be 
very considerable if N is not much greater than the minimum 
just calculated. 
Using that value, the maximum thickness of 
the surface layer comes out to be 1-6 X 102 ecm. 
This is rather 
greater than the diameter of a particle (1-4X10-2 cm). 
If the 
rutile had charged positively, then the particles might have been 
too small to accommodate the ‘surface layer’. 
In fact, the rutile charged negatively. If we retain the picture 
of the rutile as an n-type semiconductor, the negative charge 
would be carried by electrons in the conduction band. 
There 
are many more levels to accommodate electrons at the bottom 
of the conduction band than there are donor levels, though 
fewer than in a metal in which the vacant levels come half-way 
up a band. Thus there will be a limitation on charge density 
for negative charging, but not nearly as severe as for positive 
charging. The thickness of the ‘surface’ charge will be between 
that for a metal and that for positive charging. The thickness 
depends on factors for which 
it 
is difficult to allow; rough 
calculations make it reasonable to assume that it will be between 
10 and 100 A. Fortunately, however, the value is not critical. 
The saturation charge depends on the effective capacitance C,. 
We allow for the finite thickness of the ‘surface’ charge by taking 
the equivalent sphere to be smaller than the actual particle. 
This has a negligible effect on the assumed radius, but intro-

XII 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
2569 
duces a gap between sphere and plane. The appropriate value 
for the gap is half the thickness of the charge layer; this is taken 
to be between 5 and 50 A. 
There is also an allowance to be 
made for the dielectric constant. 
If we assume the effective 
depth of the charge layer below the true surface to be K times 
less than the above values, we shall overestimate the effect of 
the dielectric constant. 
It will be sufficient to take 3 A as 
the lower limit for the effective gap and 50 A as the upper limit. 
Choosing the same expression for the capacitance as was used 
in the theory of separation charging, we have, for a gap z between 
a plane and a sphere of radius R, a capacitance 
2R} 
  
< 
Rly+ihn 
in whichy = Euler’s constant = 0-5772 and all lengths are in cm. 
Substitution 
of numerical 
values 
gives 6:4X10-2 
cm 
and 
4-0 X 102 cm as the upper and lower limits for the capacitance. 
It is, perhaps, surprising that these limits are so close together; 
mathematically, this comes from the gap occurring logarithmic- 
ally in the formula for capacitance, and physically because the 
contribution to the capacitance from the region of surface close 
to the contact is less important than one might think. 
It may 
be concluded that a mean value of 5 10-2 ecm cannot be far 
from the true value of the capacitance. 
Jewell-Thomas 
gives 
the 
saturation 
charge 
for 
rutile 
as 
3:0 X 10-9 coulombs/gramme, which works out at 5:5 X 105 e.s.u/ 
particle. For a contact potential of 1 V, the capacitance would 
be 1-7X 102 em. For a smaller assumed contact potential the 
capacitance would be greater. 
It is, however, doubtful if the 
discrepancy should be accounted for entirely by 
a smaller 
contact potential. 
We have assumed perfectly maintained 
contact between sphere and plane 
to represent the actual 
conditions as the particles slide down the chute. This, obviously, 
is idealized: the particles will execute a jumping motion for at 
least part of the time. As a result, the effective capacitance will 
be reduced. 
It is, however, quite fair to say that a contact 
potential of one volt or less will account for the saturation

260 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
XII 
charge, and we recall that one volt or more was required to 
account for the initial charging rate. Thus it is not in any way 
forcing the agreement to say that a contact potential of about 
one volt will account for both the initial charging rate and the 
saturation charge. 
The theory automatically accounts for the 
variation of charge with duration of contact. We therefore have 
a satisfactory quasi-quantitative theoretical explanation of the 
charging of rutile as investigated by Jewell-Thomas. 
Semiconductor powders 
The mechanism that accounts for the charging of rutile will 
be operative in the charging of any semiconductor powder in the 
intermediate range of resistivity. 
The saturation charge on a 
particle for sufficiently long durations of contact is the contact 
potential multiplied by the effective capacitance. The effective 
capacitance of the particle differs from that of a conducting 
particle because the charge resides at a certain depth below the 
surface of the particle. The effective depth of the charge below 
the surface plays the same role in the calculation of capacitance 
as does the critical gap in the charging of metals. 
The higher 
the resistivity of the semiconductor the greater will be the 
effective depth of the charge, the smaller the capacitance, and 
the less the acquired charge. It can be calculated that the charge 
on the rutile in Jewell-Thomas’s experiments was about one- 
third of what it would have been if the powder had been a metal 
with a contact potential of one volt. The lower the resistivity of 
a semiconductor powder, the more nearly will the charging 
approach that of a metal; the higher the resistivity, the less 
will the powder charge, until finally it behaves as an insulator 
and does not charge at all—by the mechanism which we are 
considering. The higher its resistivity, however, and the less it 
charges by this mechanism, the more is it possible for it to charge 
like an electrophilic insulator. As typical semiconductor charg- 
ing disappears, so does the possibility of electrophilic charging 
arise. 
If we discount this kind of charging of semiconductors as 
being in principle the charging of insulators, we may say that 
semiconductor powders will charge to an extent which lies

XI1I 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
261 
between zero and the amount that a metal charges, depending 
on the resistivity. We obtained formulae for the charging of 
metallic powders on p. 245. From these we may calculate the 
upper limit of the charging of semiconductor powders by contact 
I 
  
107} 
E 
1072 
€ 
< w 
Coulombs/pgramm 
S 
S 
9 
S 
3 
o 
NN 
v 
o» 
  
    
Semiconductors 
1 
107° 
  
  
  
IO_IO 
: 
i 
{ 
{ 
1073 
167* 
1073 
1072 
1o 
R (cm) 
Fia. 12.3. 
Specific charge on powders, following contact with 
a plane surface, for a contact potential of 1 V. 
with a plane surface. 
The result is plotted in Fig. 12.3, which 
also shows that the charge is always less than the maximum 
permitted by the discharge limit calculated from Fig. 1.7. The 
case of powder/powder charging is discussed in Harper (1961). 
The charging of ice 
At temperatures somewhat below its melting point, ice is a 
poorly conducting semiconductor. 
Unlike the semiconductors 
that we have so far been dealing with, the conductivity is due 
to protons (or possibly H;O" ions) with some contribution from 
OH  ions, not to electrons. Some electrolytic dissociation occurs 
in the solid, as well asin the liquid, and the extent of the dissocia- 
tion is strongly dependent on temperature. When there is a 
temperature gradient in ice, the highest ionic concentration is

262 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
X1I 
at the less cold end, and both protons and OH™ ions diffuse 
towards the colder end, the protons having much the greater 
diffusion coefficient. 
In consequence, the colder end becomes 
@®vely charged and the less cold ©vely. The separation of charge 
gives rise to an electric field which opposes further movement 
of the protons, though encouraging that 
of the OH™ ions. 
A steady state is ultimately established, in which the tendency 
of the protons to diffuse down the concentration gradient is 
balanced by their tendency to move in the opposite direction 
because of an electric potential gradient, with OH™ ions compli- 
cating the situation. 
This form of charging, which, as far as the author is aware, is 
peculiar to ice among common materials, is of special interest 
for two reasons. 
B. J. Mason was led to investigate it as a 
possible origin of the electrification that causes thunderstorms, 
and Latham and Mason (1961b) have established the soundness 
of this view; also that the charging is associated with a remark- 
able phenomenon in which splinters of ice are ejected from 
bursting supercooled water drops. Furthermore, Latham and 
Mason (1961a) have been able to obtain quantitative agreement 
between theory and experiment without the use of disposable 
constants—an unusual achievement in the subject. 
Finally, 
Latham (1963) has applied the theory to explain the electrifica- 
tion of icefice in asymmetric rubbing. 
Latham and Mason obtained their ice by freezing distilled 
water which had been further purified by passing through an 
ion exchange column. 
The conductivity 
of the water was 
10-% ohm-1 ecm~1; that of the ice was 10-9 ohm-! em-1. 
This 
raises the question of whether the conductivity of the ice was 
due to electrolytic dissociation of the ice itself, or to residual 
impurities. 
The influence of impurities was therefore investi- 
gated; it was found that their effect was unimportant, and that 
the charging measured was to be attributed to effectively pure 
ice. 
Ice dissociates according to the law of mass action: 
¢ c_ = ae~PkT, 
where ¢ and c_ are the concentrations of protons and OH 
™ ions

XII 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
263 
respectively and ¢ here refers to the electrolytic dissociation of 
ice for which Grénicher (1958) gives the value 
1-2 eV. 
The 
relaxation time for dissociation equilibrium is 5 X 10-5 sec; this 
is small compared with other characteristic times that occur in 
the theory, whence it follows that dissociation equilibrium will 
be maintained at each point along the concentration gradient. 
The mobility of protons in ice is only two orders of magnitude 
less than that of electrons in copper. According to Eigen and 
de Maeyer (1958) it is about 0:3 ecm? V-1 sec—!. 
The mobility 
of OH ™ ions is ten times smaller. 
Since the effect in which we 
are interested is largely due to the protons, we shall simplify 
the theory by assuming that the contribution from the OH ™ ions 
may be neglected. 
We shall also ignore 
a small effect from 
thermal diffusion which is included in the theory as given by 
Latham and Mason. We take the dielectric constant K to be 100. 
With these simplifications, and another used by Latham and 
Mason, it is easy to obtain a solution for the case of a plane 
parallel block of ice with a uniform temperature gradient be- 
tween opposite faces. The further simplificationis to make dV 
/dx 
constant, where V is the electrostatic potential and « is measured 
along the temperature gradient normal to the faces of the block. 
This assumption implies that there is no space charge inside the 
block, so that all the charge generated resides on its faces; it 
requires ¢, = c_ = c¢. The simplification is somewhat ruthless, 
being equivalent to taking the average value for dV/dx every- 
where, instead of the varying value, but it is reasonable to hope 
that it will give a numerical result differing from the correct one 
by a factor not very far from unity. 
When a steady state has been set up, the diffusion current 
must be balanced by the conduction current, so that 
where D, is the diffusion coefficient, n, the mobility, and e the 
charge on the proton. The diffusion coefficient and the mobility 
give the rate of drift brought about by forces of thermal agitation 
and by an electrostatic force respectively; there is therefore a

264 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
XII 
relation between them. 
This relation 
is well known to 
be 
p/D = e[kT. We also have ¢ = ae~?*T from which we find 
1do_ ¢ dT 
cdr 
2kT? dx’ 
Our equation therefore becomes 
4 AT _ AV _dmo 
2¢T dx 
dx 
K’ 
where o is the surface density of charge on the two faces of 
the block. Hence we find 
o Ko 1dT 
" 8me T dx 
Inserting numerical values for 270° K, we obtain 
o= 59x10-° d—Te.s.u./cm2. 
dx 
Allowing for thermal diffusion, and including the effect of the 
relatively sluggish OH ™ ions, Latham and Mason found 
c = 495X 105 ﬂe.s.u./cmz. 
dax 
If the thickness of the block is b, the potential difference between 
the faces is 4meb/K which works out as approximately 
2(Ty—1T,) mV, 
T, and 7, being the temperatures of the opposing faces. 
It 
should be noted that the magnitude of the effect is proportional 
to ¢, the other physical characteristics of ice having disappeared 
in the final equation. 
The experimental check was conducted in a cold room, so 
that the ambient temperature could be controlled below 0° C. 
The specimen of ice of cross-section 1 cm? and thickness 0-5 cm 
was frozen between insulated copper discs, one earthed, the 
other connected to a Vibron electrometer. 
The sandwich was 
squeezed between copper heating and cooling bars by means of 
which 
a temperature gradient could be maintained. 
It was 
found that the potential difference indicated by the electrometer 
was proportional to the temperature difference between the 
copper discs, provided the warm end was below —7° C. At

XII 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
265 
higher temperatures the effect being investigated was confused 
by another one. The ratio of potential difference to temperature 
difference was in close agreement with the theoretical prediction 
of Latham and Mason; actually, the agreement was surprisingly 
good in view of the simplification introduced to make the 
differential equation manageable. 
There can be little doubt 
about the explanation of the effect: a wrong explanation could 
easily have led to a discrepancy of many orders of magnitude. 
Further confirmation comes from the charging of two pieces 
of ice at different temperatures when brought into momentary 
contact. In this case the predicted charge depends, not only on 
the value of ¢, but also on the electrical and thermal conductivi- 
ties (which, in the case ofice, are unrelated). Latham and Mason 
consider two rods which are effectively half-infinite in length 
and at different temperatures 7} and 7}, brought into contact 
at their ends, and then separated. During contact, both protons 
and OH™ ions diffuse from the less cold to the colder rod, but 
protons much faster, 
so the 
colder rod becomes positively 
charged. 
At first the charge increases rapidly, but since heat 
also 
is flowing across the contact, 
it 
is not long before the 
temperatures in its neighbourhood equalize, and the charge 
disappears. 
The charge rises rapidly to a maximum and then 
falls off more slowly. 
Latham and Mason again introduce a simplification in the 
mathematics which would appear to be equivalent to taking 
a wrong kind of mean for the effects of protons and OH™ ions. 
Their solution depends on the thermal diffusivity & which is 
the ratio of the thermal conductivity to the specific heat per 
unit volume. 
For ice 
& 
is 10~2 e¢m? sec~!. 
The variation of 
charge with time is found to be given by 
where 
A = %06(;1”;{—;1,_), 
  
T—Tf 
¢ 
1 
1 
_ 
142 
and 
B = {ce(D,—D._) (D) \2kT2+T1+T2)°

266 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
XII 
AtT = 260° K, 4 = 114e.s.u.and B/4 = 2-8X 10-4(T}—1T),), 
whence 
B 
g 
= 
e 
A tmax 
  = 3-05 X 10-3(T,—1T,) e.s.u./cm?, 
with 
tmax = 85X 1073 sec. 
These predictions were compared with experiment, though 
not so accurately as for the steady state effect. 
The end faces 
of two rods ofice initially at different temperatures were brought 
into contact and then separated, after which the charge acquired 
by one of them was measured. 
For the shortest duration of 
contact, which was ~ 115 sec, bouncing contact was used; 
longer contacts were made and broken by a cam mechanism 
controlled electronically. The area of real contact was indicated 
using a marking solution and found to be 10 per cent of the area 
of apparent contact; it is, however, the area of true contact that 
enters into the theory. Nevertheless, if in an area of real contact 
there are spots of true contact surrounded by areas of close 
contact, then ions which migrate through the spots of true con- 
tact will fan out the other side and charge areas larger than these 
spots, thus increasing the effective area of the spots. Further- 
more, the presence of the areas of close contact will delay 
temperature equalization and hence increase ¢, and o,,,,.. Thus 
the area that is effective will be greater, for two reasons, than 
the area of true contact, and the measured area of real contact 
could be a good approximation. 
The measured charge was proportional to the temperature 
difference for bouncing contact and agreed with the calculated 
value to within 10 per cent. 
No better agreement could be 
expected in view of the simplifications introduced into the 
theory; 
again 
it should 
be emphasized that 
the 
charging, 
depending, as it does, on three separate physical characteristics 
of ice, could have disagreed with prediction by many orders of 
magnitude if the theory had been wrong. 
It was found that the 
charging fell off with increasing duration of contact in about the 
way anticipated, giving a further check.

XII 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
267 
Reynolds, Brook, and Gourley (1957) have rubbed crossed 
rods of ice and obtained charging which was correctly correlated 
with the asymmetry of rubbing. 
The rod used as rubber{ was 
@ve, that rubbed Ove. 
It is the rubbed rod that gets hotter 
and supplies protons which migrate to the rubber. 
Latham 
(1963) investigated the effect quantitatively by sliding cubes of 
ice down an inclined metal plane which had been coated with 
a layer of ice. The ice was polished. Thermocouples were used 
to measure temperatures, and the charge acquired by the ice- 
cube measured in a Faraday cylinder in which the cube was 
caught. 
The apparatus is rather more a device for generating 
a temperature difference across the ice/ice interface than a way 
of investigating highly localized rubbing asymmetry in the 
Henry sense. Latham found the charge transfer to be indepen- 
dent of the ambient temperature between —10° C and —20° C. 
The degree of rubbing asymmetry, indicated by the temperature 
difference across the interface, was varied by altering the ratio 
of length of side of cube to length of inclined plane. There was 
a nearly linear relationship between the temperature difference 
and the asymmetry defined in this way; there was also a nearly 
linear relationship between the asymmetry and the charge 
generated. 
The relationship between the charge and the tem- 
perature difference was strictly linear and is shown in Fig. 12.4. 
Latham compares the experimental curve with what would be 
expected from the steady state theory, though admitting that 
the conditions of the experiment correspond neither with 
a 
uniform temperature gradient, nor with a steady state. 
The 
result is shown also in Fig. 12.4. Again there is agreement as 
to order of magnitude, and, indeed, much better than that. 
One may be reasonably sure that the effect investigated has 
been correctly assigned to ionic migration down the temperature 
gradient. 
It follows that when ice slides on ice the triboelectric 
charging 
is 
a direct consequence 
of temperature differences 
deriving from heat released in friction. 
It 
is true frictional 
charging. 
T The definition of rubber and rubbed has been altered from that of Reynolds, 
Brook, and Gourley, to correspond with the definition on p. 61.

268 
THE CHARGING OF SEMICONDUCTORS 
X111 
    
3_. 
- 
- 
% 
) 
o 
2 
(@) 
= 
-~ 
L 
// 
&g 
-~ 
b 
-~ 
< 
-~ 
£ 
// 
O 
Itk 
_ - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
o~ 
. 
1 
1 
] 
0 
2 
4 
Temperature difference (°C ) 
Fia. 12.4. Frictional charging of ice. 
Full line experimental, dotted 
line theoretical. 
Frenkel’s theory 
Frenkel (1941) proposed a theory whereby the charging of 
insulators was explained as being frictional in origin. As a result 
of localized heating where rubbing was intense, the temperature 
of the insulator was supposed to rise to an extent which made 
it an intrinsic semiconductor. While temporarily semiconduct- 
ing, the hot spots on the insulator could charge in the course 
of establishing a contact potential, in the manner described 
earlier in this chapter. When the hot spots cooled, the charge 
would be ‘frozen in’. 
We have, however, seen in Chapter IV 
that hot spots are much less prevalent than Frenkel supposed 
and will, in general, only be significant for very vigorous rubbing. 
When rubbing is both vigorous and asymmetric, charging by 
this mechanism seems likely.

CHAPTER XIII 
ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
WE have seen in Chapter V that many surfaces are covered 
with a water layer under laboratory or industrial conditions, 
and that this water layer, normally several molecules thick, 
will usually contain dissolved impurities. 
It was remarked that 
such impurities were likely to be ionized and that the ions could 
be a source of electrification. The extent to which electrolytic 
ions do contribute to the static electrification that is found in 
practice, has been the subject of widely divergent opinions. 
Freundlich, as already remarked, thought it all-important; the 
present author is inclined to take the opposite view. 
Experi- 
ments which point towards triboelectric charging by electrolytic 
ions (other than the experiments on ice which have just been 
discussed) will be reviewed in this chapter; the evidence will 
prove to be somewhat ambiguous. 
Electrolytic charging can be invoked to explain some results 
of Cooke and Jewell-Thomas that are very difficult to explain 
in any other way. Their charging curves for the semiconductor 
rutile were explained in the last chapter in terms of the rutile 
particles being charged as capacitors by the contact potential, 
the charging current being limited by the constriction resistance 
at the contact. 
This mechanism fails to explain the contact 
electrification of insulators, as we saw in Chapter I1X; Cooke 
and Jewell-Thomas, however, found that the initial charging 
current for the insulator zircon was of the same order of magni- 
tude as that for the semiconductor rutile, the charges attained 
after moderate contact durations were comparable, and, further- 
more, the charge on zircon continued to increase when that on 
rutile had already reached saturation. Suppose, now, the zircon 
had 
a surface conductivity much greater than 
its volume 
conductivity, due to the presence of a moisture layer containing 
dissolved electrolyte. Without being precise about the source 
of an electrolytic potential difference at the metal/insulator

270 
ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
XIII 
interface in the presence of an electrolyte, we may be sure that 
the situation is analogous to that in a battery, and that there 
will be such a potential difference which could easily amount to 
as much as 
1 V. 
This e.m.f. can play the same part as the 
contact potential at a metal/semiconductor interface, and drive 
a current through the conducting surface layer, so charging the 
surface because of its capacitance. 
The saturation charge will 
depend on the effective capacitance. This, at first sight, should 
be very large, since the two surfaces involved are in contact. 
There is, however, a limitation on permissible charge density 
in the moisture layer: scarcity of available ions will take care 
of this. 
One would, however, expect the effective capacitance 
to be at least as large as for the metal/semiconductor case, thus 
permitting as great, or greater, charges to accumulate. Hence 
the behaviour of zircon after long contact durations is in con- 
formity with an electrolytic model. The magnitude of the initial 
charging current has still to be accounted for, but this also can 
be done. 
If the surface resistivity 
is represented by 
p,, we 
assume the resistance across a rectangle of length [ and breadth 
b to be p,l/b. 
The resistance between the inner and outer 
perimeters of an annulus of internal and external radii », and 7, 
respectively is then 
ra 
Psdr _ psynTe 
(13.1) 
27r 
2w 
14 
1 
The contact resistance for a circle of radius 7 feeding current 
into a semi-infinite volume was inversely proportional to r, but 
when it is feeding current into a surface we see that the resistance 
depends logarithmically on 
r, so the value of r;, is not very 
critical, nor is that of the distance to the boundary to which 
the current is going. 
The general characteristics of the zircon 
powder were not very different from those of the rutile powder; 
let us therefore take the same value for the particle radius and 
the radius of the circle of contact—this will suffice for an order 
of magnitude comparison of the predicted initial charging rate 
with that found, and give 
a direct comparison between the 
initial charging rates for the semiconductor model and the

XIIT 
ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
271 
electrolytic model. 
We put r; = 22X 10-¢ cm (the radius of 
contact) and r, = 7-0X 10-2 cm (the radius of the particle—an 
approximation). Only meagre information is available regarding 
surface resistivities; these are often in the range between 103 
and 10 ohm. 
Since we are postulating electrolytic charging, 
it is appropriate to assume the lower resistivity of 103 ohm for 
the order of magnitude calculation. 
The resistance comes out 
to be 1-:3 X 1013 ohm, so 1 V would give a current of 8 
X 10-1* amp. 
This is about the magnitude we are looking for. 
The initial 
charging current with rutile was 7 X 1014 amp. We therefore 
see that if we replace a volume resistivity of 102 ohm c¢m for 
a semiconducting particle by a surface resistivity of 103 ohm 
for a -particle of high volume resistivity, but otherwise retain 
the model of charging, we predict initial charging currents of 
the same order of magnitude in the two cases. The electrolytic 
model is satisfactory in this respect. The initial charging current 
should, however, decrease with decreasing relative humidity, 
since 
surface 
resistivities 
increase 
with 
decreasing 
relative 
humidity (Curtis, 
1914), and very markedly so. 
Cooke and 
Jewell-Thomas, however, found no such effect. 
In another 
series of experiments with small glass spheres, they found that 
spheres cleaned and allowed to reach humidity equilibrium in 
the atmosphere, and similar spheres subsequently desiccated, 
gave identical initial charging currents, though they had surface 
resistivities differing by three orders of magnitude. The differ- 
ence 1n resistivities could hardly have been balanced by a corre- 
sponding change in e.m.f.s; one would expect the drier surface 
to give a lower e.m.f., not a higher one. 
This was actually the 
case in experiments shortly to be described. The glass spheres, 
incidentally, did not conform to the law of charge depending 
only on duration of descent down the chute. 
Electrolytic potential differences at contacts 
The existence of e.m.f.s of the kind we have supposed capable 
of giving rise to contact charging was demonstrated experi- 
mentally by Rohmann many years ago (1920), and, more clearly, 
by Deaglio (1928). Both experimenters used devices for adjusting

272 
ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
XIII 
the gap between the two metal components of a contact for 
gaps below 1000 A. Deaglio achieved this by applying a small 
force magnetically to a stiff spring and used highly polished 
silver and nickel balls for the contacts. Metal plates of the same 
  
  
  
   
  
    
04 Fee 
Q 
P.D. across wide gap 
© 
03 
S 
0-2r 
0 
o 
"D.across narrow gap 
O-'1r 
OO 
S0 
1 
| 
! 
i 
o 
100 
200 
300 
400 
Pressure of moist air (mm Hg) 
F1a. 13.1. Evidence for electrolytic contact e.m.f. 
materials were provided in the apparatus to enable the contact 
potentials to be checked for the same ambient conditions. These 
were varied by changing both pressure and humidity with air 
as the ambient. 
It was found that the contact potential was not 
affected by these changes. With a very small gap between the 
balls, however, an electrometer connected between them indi- 
cated a potential difference somewhat smaller than the contact 
potential, and of opposite sign, when the ambient contained 
sufficient moisture. 
The effect was absent ¢n vacuo, in dry air 
at any pressure, and in moist air below a certain pressure. The 
effect 
is illustrated in Fig. 
13.1. 
As the balls were brought 
together the potential difference appeared fairly suddenly at a 
critical gap in the region of a few hundred angstrom units, 
falling off as the gap was further reduced. The foregoing observa- 
tions are simply explained if a drop of condensed water fills the 
gap between the electrodes when this is small, and if electrolytic 
contamination turns the system into a tiny battery. 
The statement that the electrolytic e.m.f. is of opposite sign 
to the contact potential requires explanation; and must not be 
misunderstood, because it is tempting, but wrong, to call on it

XIII 
ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
273 
to explain the reversed triboelectric series discussed in Chapter 
XV. 
Strictly, the potential difference is not reversed, though 
it appears to be so to an observer checking polarity with an 
electrometer or voltmeter and describing his observations accord- 
ing to the usual conventions. These conventions ignore the fact 
that 
the 
circuit used includes two opposing differences 
of 
potential: in addition to the e.m.f. in which one is interested, 
there is another potential difference at a junction of dissimilar 
metals somewhere else in the circuit. 
We are thinking of a 
circuit in which the e.m.f. is said to come from two dissimilar 
metals with an electrolyte between them. The simplest case of 
a circuit of this kind is one consisting of two different conductors 
joined together and looped back so as to close the circuit except 
for a gap which is filled with electrolyte. The e.m.f. which drives 
the current in such a circuit is the difference between the poten- 
tial changes at the junction of the metals and at the pair of 
metals with interposed electrolyte. 
A crude way of looking at 
the action of the battery so formed, but one which is sufficient 
and valid for our purpose, is to say that the positive and negative 
ions in the electrolyte diffuse to the electrodes and neutralize 
the negative and positive components of the double layer that 
would be present at the surface of the metals and give rise to the 
contact potential in the absence of the electrolyte. This leaves 
the contact potential at the other junction to drive the current. 
Actually, the neutralization is not complete and the picture is 
oversimplified, the potential difference between the metals being 
greatly reduced, not eliminated, by the electrolyte. 
Consider 
now what interpretation will be given to an experiment such as 
that of Deaglio. The essentials of the two experiments to check 
polarity are shown in Fig. 13.2; (a) refers to the check on contact 
potential, (b) to the check on battery effect when there is electro- 
lyte between the dissimilar metals. 
The upper plate of the 
combination to be tested is made of the metal X, the rest of the 
circuit of another metal, the same throughout. 
When X 
is 
positively charged with respect to the other metal, the polarity 
of the double layers is as shown. 
The procedure for checking 
contact potential is to open the earthing key and then widen

274 
ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
XIII 
the gap between the dissimilar metals, observing whether 
a 
positive or a negative potential is developed across the electro- 
meter. With the gap charged as shown, the capacitance decrease 
will result in some of the positive charge going to the electrometer, 
so we say that X is positive with respect to the other metal. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Metal of which rest of circuit is made 
/////, 
Electrolyte 
F1a. 13.2. Reversal of apparent contact potential by electrolytic 
contamination. 
The procedure in checking e.m.f. at (b) is to open the short- 
circuit and observe 
in which direction the electrometer 
is 
deflected. With the same polarities as before but the contact 
potential dominant, a negative charge reaches the electrometer 
and, conventionally, we say that X is negative with respect to 
the other metal, though in fact it is slightly positive. 
Experiments which suggest electrolytic charging 
Experiments described by Knoblauch in 1902 are probably 
still the most convincing evidence for the existence of electro- 
lytic charging. 
The interpretation that he gave of his results 
requires a little editing to bring it up to date but the experiments 
were simple and clear-cut. They were performed with powders 
of varying chemical nature. 
A small quantity of the powder 
was placed on a plate, and either allowed to slide off, or the 
plate was tapped so that the powder dropped off. 
The charge 
acquired was usually of the same sign whichever procedure was

XIIT 
ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
275 
adopted, but in a few cases in which different polarities were 
obtained, the one given by the first method was preferred. 
Glass and platinum plates, and plates coated with sulphur or 
paraffin wax were used. Knoblauch found few exceptions, among 
the seventy-five powders investigated, to the following rules. 
Irrespective of what powder was used, the sulphur was left 
©vely charged but the glass plate ®vely charged. With platinum 
and paraffin plates, the charge obtained with salts was small and 
of uncertain sign, but acid powders charged the plates @vely 
and basic powders Ovely. 
A number of organic powders tried 
charged all plates ©vely. The outstanding fact was the strong 
correlation between sign of charging and acidic or basic proper- 
ties. When such a property is present it is the controlling factor 
and according to Knoblauch it operates as follows. 
Some water is always present in the neighbourhood of the 
contact. H* and OH™ ions, when present, diffuse into the water 
layer, and away from the contact. Being light ions, they diffuse 
further than sluggish heavy ions (cf. ice, p. 261) and are the 
ones most likely to be left behind when the contact is broken. 
Thus, acids and bases tend to charge chemically inactive and 
insoluble plates (platinum and paraffin wax) @vely and Ovely 
respectively. 
Glass surfaces, however, are slightly soluble and 
strongly basic in character, and this reinforces or over-rides the 
nature of the powder, the glass becoming @ve. 
Sulphur, an 
acid-forming element, works the opposite way and becomes Ove. 
A few acids, however, did charge the sulphur-coated plate Dvely. 
In general, exceptions to the rule were not of such a nature as 
to invalidate the general picture, excluding diamond—which 
seems always to be non-conformist in triboelectric experiments. 
Knoblauch also proposed a mechanism to explain the charging 
of materials which could be regarded as being totally insoluble; 
the charging was supposed to be due to the attraction of H* or 
OH™ ions present in a (probably contaminated) water layer to 
the material of greater dielectric constant. 
This process may 
be regarded as being a special case of the redistribution theory 
of Henry described in Chapter XV. 
Rudge (1912, 1913, 1914), apparently unaware of the work

276 
ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
XIII 
of Knoblauch, carried out an extensive series of experiments 
of a similar but more diverse nature. 
Some of these are very 
difficult to interpret, but, in so far as they can be compared 
with those of Knoblauch, confirm his findings. 
More recent experiments of Medley (1953b) point even more 
clearly to electrolytic charging. Polar polymers acquire electrical 
conductivity in a humid atmosphere due to electrolytic dissocia- 
tion in adsorbed water, but only one ion is free to move, the 
other being part of the polymer matrix. Taking two examples, 
De-acidite FF', which is a strong base, and Permutit sulphonated 
polystyrene which is a strong acid, we have 
R.NOH = R.N*1OH", 
and 
RSO,H = R.S0; +H*. 
On shaking the powders from filter paper at 30 per cent relative 
humidity, Medley found that the De-acidite became consistently 
@ve and the Permutit consistently Ove, the ‘loose’ ions having 
presumably been transferred to the filter paper, and he obtained 
confirmatory evidence from other polar polymers. 
In Knoblauch’s experiments, glass had an over-riding effect 
on the charging, being strongly basic in character. This suggests 
that glass, at any rate, is electrolytic in its charging behaviour. 
The supposition is strengthened by the observation of Shaw and 
Jex (1928) that the sign of the charge acquired by glass when 
rubbed by metals can be changed to negative if the glass is 
washed with acids. 
Since electrolytic dissociation requires the 
presence of water, one would therefore anticipate that the 
charging of glass would be eliminated, or at any rate reduced, 
by prolonged desiccation. 
Cooke (1935), however, found that 
the charging was markedly increased in the case of glass though 
decreased in the case of rock-salt. 
The author has carried out 
many experiments (unpublished) in an attempt to obtain 
a 
sensible correlation between humidity and charging, without 
any success, and he is therefore suspicious of any too facile 
conclusions about the importance of electrolytic ions. 
One 
recalls the failure of Coehn and Lotz (1921), discussed on p. 79, 
to eliminate charging by stringent drying.

XIIT 
ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
2717 
Since 
it 
is certain that many insulators can charge when 
completely dry, it follows that if charging by electrolytic ions 
does 
occur, 
there 
will be 
cases 
in which both mechanisms 
compete; this may be responsible for some of the confusion in 
the subject. 
It must be realized that many surfaces giving 
triboelectrification will Aave been wet at some time in their past 
history and are therefore likely to have acquired a surface layer 
of what were once electrolytic ions. When the surface subse- 
quently becomes dry, these ions will be retained ¢n situ, perhaps 
changing their character and now firmly attached, but without 
losing their charge. 
In this event, ions of opposite sign would 
sooner or later be attracted to the surface from the surroundings 
to neutralize the charge. Thus a surface that has been wet may 
be contaminated with deeply bound ions of the sign having an 
affinity for the surface, together with ions of opposite sign which 
need have no particular affinity for it, these latter being loosely 
bound by electrostatic attraction to the first mentioned ions. 
If the surface were, say, basic in character, and had attracted 
H* ions when wet, then the loosely bound ions subsequently 
attached to it would be negative stray ions, and it would probably 
be these ions that would be transferred to a contacting surface. 
The sign of the charge transferred is the same as if the ions were 
OH™ from the uncontaminated surface but their nature 
is 
different. 
The electrolytic ions originally adsorbed would not 
behave as truly electrolytic unless residing in an adsorbed water 
layer of sufficient thickness to give them the solvation energy 
required for electrolytic dissociation. To acquire nine-tenths of 
this energy, the water layer must be about ten molecules thick 
(Gurney, 1936). 
This, we have seen, is by no means unlikely 
(p. 80). 
It is not only from having been wet that a surface can become 
contaminated with miscellaneousions. Henry (1957) has pointed 
out that the formation of hot spots on the surface of organic 
materials may bring about chemical decomposition which could 
involve the formation of ions, and these ions can remain bound 
to the surface. If only one sign of ion is bound in this way, then 
stray ions of the opposite sign will ultimately settle on the

278 
ELECTROLYTIC IONS 
XIII 
surface, so adding to the confusion. 
The formation of ions by 
chemical decomposition implies, 
in general, the presence 
of 
friction to provide hot spots; the friction may be that involved 
in the triboelectric charging, or it may have been present during 
some previous rubbing. 
The importance of miscellaneous ions for the contact charging 
of insulators is probably very great, even though the charging 
process involved is secondary in character. The transfer of such 
ions from one surface to another will be considered theoretically 
in Chapter XV, after experiments which require an explanation 
in terms of a primary process have been described.

CHAPTER XIV 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
Ix Chapter V, experiments were described showing that differ- 
ent faces of a quartz crystal have very different triboelectric 
properties. Now quartz is notably piezoelectric, so it may be 
asked whether or not the different charging shown by different 
faces 
is associated with the piezoelectric properties 
of the 
material. 
The experiments referred to were, in fact, designed 
with this in mind and will be discussed shortly. 
Both piezo- 
electric and pyroelectric effects have been held responsible for 
the charging of certain natural fibres, the sign of charging of 
which was found by Martin (p. 334) to depend on the direction 
of stroking. Martin was able to show the existence of a pyro- 
electric effect in the keratin of wool fibres; for theoretical reasons 
all pyroelectric materials are necessarily piezoelectric as well. 
The possibility that piezoelectric effect may contribute to tribo- 
electric charging, or even in some cases be responsible for the 
charging, is an important one. Quartz is an excellent material 
for an investigation of the possibility. 
The piezoelectric properties of quartz 
To enable the triboelectric experiments to be described suc- 
cinctly, it is first necessary to give an outline account of the 
piezoelectric properties of quartz. 
A quartz crystal can be cut 
in three equivalent ways to give a rectangular block with X, Y, 
and Z faces having the following properties. No stress produces 
any charge on the Z face, which is perpendicular to the optic 
(pseudohexagonal) axis. 
Charge only appears on the Y face as 
a result of shear stresses. The X face, which is a natural crystal 
face (whereas the Y and Z are not), develops a charge under 
pressure and also as the result of certain other stresses. 
The 
charge is positive on one X face of the block and negative on 
the opposing face, but the crystal may be twinned electrically, 
so that the sign reverses on crossing the twinning boundary.

280 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
X1V 
It may also be twinned optically but this is a different pheno- 
menon. 
Piezo-triboelectric experiments on quartz 
Peterson (1949) investigated the charge acquired by silica 
powder after sliding over the face of a piezoelectric quartz 
crystal under 
stress. 
Pressure 
applied 
along 
the 
direction 
perpendicular to the Y face caused the X face to become charged; 
a pair of crystals cut from the same block but charging with 
opposite polarities were used side by side and formed the chute 
down which the powder slid. Irrespective of stress in the quartz 
plates, the silica was always negatively charged; the charge was 
not large. The difference in charge on the silica powder between 
runs in which the plate was positively or negatively charged by 
stress was at most 20 per cent of the charge with the plate 
unstressed. The difference was in the direction required if the 
powder had picked up some of the piezoelectric charge from the 
plate, but Loeb (1958, p. 199) does not consider the effect as 
being well established. The difficulty of interpreting experiments 
of this kind is evidenced by Peterson’s observation that the 
charging with quartz powder on the quartz plate was quite large, 
whereas with silica powder on the quartz plate it was relatively 
small. 
Here is a case in which like materials give much more 
charging than unlike materials. 
It is certain, in any case, that 
most of the charging with quartz did nof come from piezoelectric 
effect. 
The experiments of Harper (1955) were performed as follows, 
using the apparatus described on p. 210. The charging due to 
light contact of two quartz balls was measured for certain definite 
orientations of the tangent planes at the point of contact with 
respect to the piezoelectric axes. 
In one set of measurements 
the tangent plane was a Z face for the upper ball but an X face 
for the lower. These two faces differ, in respect of piezoelectric 
properties, as much as two quartz faces can, and the lower ball 
is so orientated as to give maximum piezoelectric effect on 
pressure. 
This arrangement is, therefore, the one most likely 
to show charging due to the piezoelectric properties of quartz.

XIV 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
281 
Furthermore, any such charging must reverse in sign when the 
lower ball is turned upside down. 
In a second set of measure- 
ments, both balls were Z cut and could not, therefore, show any 
charging due to piezoelectric properties, 
so that turning the 
lower ball over should make no difference. 
From the piezo- 
electric standpoint, the second set of measurements was a control. 
To 
be 
able actually 
to perform the experiments, 
it was 
necessary to have some means of identifying the orientations of 
the crystal axes, and the identification had to be compatible 
with the stringent cleaning to which the balls were subjected 
(p. 78). 
The relevant planes were identified with small flats. 
The lower (3 in.) ball was provided with two small X cut, or two 
small Z cut flats, at opposite ends of a diameter, and these flats 
were used as the contact surfaces. The upper (3 in.) ball had 
one small Z cut flat, used to locate contact at the other end of 
the diameter, thus making the contact between the curved 
surface of the upper ball and a flat on the lower ball, which 
latter could then be turned over to make contact with the other 
flat. The balls were made and optically polished from plates cut 
with the required orientation from clear quartz of the first 
quality, selected to be free from both electrical and optical 
twinning and other flaws. 
The plates were cut to a thickness 
less than the diameter of the finished ball, thereby ensuring that 
the flat or flats left after working to a spherical shape had the 
orientation intended. 
The finished X cut balls were sensed 
electrically, using an electronic device. 
Two balls of each type were used, giving four Z/X combinations 
and four Z/Z; in each of the eight experiments the effect of 
turning the large ball over was investigated. 
Charging curves 
for three neighbouring positions for each pair of crystal faces 
were taken. The charging obtained with the Z/X combinations, 
which was very large, never reversed sign on turning the lower 
ball over, the X face always being positive irrespective 
of 
whether the face was piezoelectrically positive 
or negative. 
A piezoelectric origin for the charging is therefore definitely 
excluded. The Z/Z charging was much smaller and sometimes 
reversed on turning the ball over. Typical sets of three charging

282 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
XIV 
curves for Z/Z (lower curves)and Z/X (upper curves) were shown 
in Fig. 5.4 apropos of charging being different with different 
crystal faces. The individual charges for the two sets of Z/X 
measurements obtained by turning the X cut ball over were in 
fair agreement (without reversal of sign); the averages were in 
very close agreement indeed. The average for Z/Z charging was 
two orders of magnitude smaller than the average for Z/X charg- 
ing, though still quite considerable when using the highest 
electrometer sensitivity. 
The effect of turning the Z cut ball 
over was unpredictable; 
a histogram of the charges showed 
that the most probable charge was zero. The values distributed 
on either side must be the result of some departure from the 
intended conditions of the experiment. 
Since a Z face is not 
a natural crystal face, it may be that the prepared Z face is in 
part stepped, so giving variability of charging. The Z/Z charging 
may be regarded as being in a sense spurious; the Z/X charging 
must be due to some difference between different crystal faces 
—Dbut not the piezoelectric difference. 
Since quartz is strongly piezoelectric, and this property was 
proved not to have contributed significantly to charging in 
Harper’s experiments, it seems very unlikely that piezoelectric 
effect is ever of significance in triboelectric charging. 
Adhesional charging 
On p. 251 the charging due to stripping an adhesive from 
a surface was discussed. In general, adhesion implies that direct 
or molecular contact has occurred, and when the surfaces are 
separated material transfer is likely. These conditions may well 
favour triboelectric charging, so we might expect adhesional 
charging to be important in practice, particularly with powders. 
The author, indeed, found that extremely clean quartz, which 
tends to stick to itself, also gives exceptionally strong charging, 
and investigated what was at first thought to be adhesional 
charging. 
After investigation, however, 
it proved that the 
charging had nothing whatever to do with the adhesion. Before 
discussing these experiments, it will be convenient to describe 
the work of Kunkel (1950) on the charging of powders when

X1V 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
283 
dispersed into a cloud; Kunkel interprets his results in terms of 
adhesional charging and gives a theory. 
The charge on individual particles in a dispersed powder can be 
measured by investigating the motion of the particles in .an ap- 
plied electric field; several experimental procedures are suitable, 
all analogous to the method used by Millikan in his determina- 
tion of the charge on the electron. Nakaya and Terada (1935) 
observed the sinuous tracks of the particles when falling through 
an alternating electric field; Kunkel used the Hopper and Laby 
technique, in which the particles fall through a uniform trans- 
verse electric field which is periodically switched on and off, 
with intermittent lighting which is used for timing, the particles 
appearing, when photographed, as a sequence of dots on a film. 
Kunkel obtained statistical charge distributions among the 
particles of different size for various powders dispersed in several 
ways from containers of different materials. For nearly all the 
conditions studied he concluded that most of the charging 
occurred at the separation of contiguous particles, contacts in 
the turbulent cloud being of little consequence, and the nature 
of the container being irrelevant 
in most cases. 
Somewhat 
similar conclusions were reached by Nakaya and Terada. 
In 
their experiments, a majority of particles would seem to have 
been charged on some occasions, a minority on other occasions. 
In Kunkel’s experiments very few particles were uncharged, 
and positive and negative particles were present in not very 
different numbers. 
The average charge per particle increased 
more rapidly than the first power of the radius but less rapidly 
than the second power, the charge distributions being nearly the 
same for positive and negative particles. Examples of charge 
distributions for nearly symmetrical charging (the usual case), 
and rather unsymmetrical charging (the uncommon case), are 
given in Figs. 14.1 and 14.2. Kunkel showed that changing the 
relative humidity in the range below 90 per cent (at 20° C) had 
but little effect on the charging; he also found that the quartz, 
which had been well cleaned, was covered with an adsorbed 
layer of water at most two molecules thick under these condi- 
tions. 
This suggests that direct contact between quartz and

284 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
X1V 
quartz will be common in the powder before dispersion, so that 
the dispersion process will involve the fracture of microwelds. 
Kunkel supposes that this gives rise to adhesional charging. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
2000 
Positive 
1500 |- 
000 
b} 
= 
500 
=) 
= 
o 
b 
o 
o} 
) 
5 
o0 
L 
-500 | 
= 
QO 
-1000 
. 
Negative 
-1500 [ 
] 
] 
i 
I 
-2000 
o) 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Particle size () 
Fig. 14.1. 
Symmetric charging of quartz powder. 
The process visualized makes no distinction between the 
material on the two 
sides 
of the microweld, and therefore 
accounts automatically for charge distributions being sym- 
metrical when the charging arises at the separation of contiguous 
particles. Which particle becomes positive and which negative 
depends on the way in which the fracture of the microweld 
happens to assign localized charge centres to one side of the 
break or the other. 
We suppose that the positive cores in a 
perfect crystal will take their associated electrons, which belong

XIV 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
285 
to the crystal as a whole, with them when they go to one side 
of the break. We suppose also that electrons associated with 
Charge in electron units 
  
1000 
500 |- 
Positive 
-500 
  
" Negative 
I 
-1000 
1500 - 
-2000 - 
-2500 
  
    
- 
IS 
I 
UNNN 
SN 
SN 
SN 
N 
N 
N 
E— 
V00T 
23 
4+ 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
1 
12 
13 
Particle size (u) 
F1c. 14.2. Asymmetric charging of quartz powder. 
localized positively charged centres, in other words, electrons 
which have got into the conduction band from donor centres, 
will be fairly distributed between the two sides of the break.

286 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
XIV 
On the other hand, ionized donor centres, or trapped electrons, 
which are situated near to the plane of the fracture will go to 
one side or the other, depending on the precise course the 
fracture takes. 
On the average the localized charges will be 
fairly distributed, but for a given fracture of limited size this 
need not be so. 
Kunkel speaks of a random distribution of 
electrons being involved; the electrons would need to be localized 
in traps for the theory to apply. The author thinks that donor 
centres are more likely to be the origin of such charging, but 
both possibilities are covered by the statistics. 
There is no doubt about the side of the break to which charged 
centres distant from the course of the fracture will go; it is only 
centres near to the general course of the break which are in doubt. 
There will be some area s in the plane of the fracture such that, 
on the average, one elementary charge from it will be assigned 
at random to one or other side of the break. 
If the area of the 
break is S, then the number of elementary charges assigned at 
random will be S/s = N. The total number of ways of assigning 
N charges to either of the two surfaces is 2V. 
The number of 
occasions on which & of these charges will be on one surface, and 
N —F on the other, is the number of combinations of 
N things 
taken k at a time, and is 
0. — 
N! 
NZk = (N—E)E! 
The probability of there being k charges on one surface and 
N —Fk on the other is 
  
NI 
2N(N —k) k! 
When N/2 charges go to each of the two surfaces, all charges 
are fairly distributed and neither surface has any resultant 
charge. The surface density of charge over the fracture is there- 
foret +o = ne/S, where n = {N—Fk. 
The probability of this 
charge arising is 
N 
2N(%N—{—n)!. (AN —n)!’ 
7 Kunkel assumes that when a negative charge goes to one surface, an 
aqual positive charge goes to the other, and conversely. 
This introduces a 
factor of 2. 
  
 

X1V 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
287 
Since N is large, we may use Stirling’s formula, and obtain 
2 
on] -GN+n+d) 
o] —GN-n+d) 
J(w—)[”ﬂ 
[l‘ﬁ] 
' 
Again since N is large, we may use lim{l1-+}(1/x)}* = e, so re- 
T—>» 
0 
ducing the probability to i3 
The average number of elementary charges is 
= ) [ ) 
Recalling that 
N = S/s, we find that the average charge is 
- 
12) 
Before comparing this prediction with experiment, it is con- 
venient to derive a relation between the size of the particles in 
an idealized powder and the area of contact between particles 
when the powder is subjected to a quasi-hydrostatic pressure P. 
The ideal powder will be considered to consist of spherical solid 
particles of uniform size and constitution. Making the simplifying 
assumption that representative spheres are loose-packed and 
the distortions elastic, the radius of the circle of contact » follows 
from (2.1) and is 
L RF\} 
o 
2Y 
with ¥ = 
7 R2P, whence 
P 
= 1'1R(Z 
=118 
The radius of the circle of contact is proportional to the radius 
of the particle for all pressures. 
Since 8 = =2, the average 
charge on a particle is 
R(P\} 
2352(2 
)3, 
+0.2357 (Y) 
For the idealized powder, we see that the theory of adhesional 
charging requires the charge on a particle to be proportional to

288 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
X1V 
its radius. 
Kunkel found 
a relation for quartz intermediate 
between the first and second power of the radius. 
The quartz 
particles were far from spherical and the forces between them 
possibly not elastic, so no more than a rough agreement between 
theory and experiment is to be expected. 
The agreement is 
therefore satisfactory. 
Kunkel could only guess the areas of 
contact involved in his experiments which were assumed to 
weld up and then fracture; the values implied by the foregoing 
reasoning depend on the value of P, and this again must be 
guessed. P is the pressure that was operative when the particles 
welded up before being dispersed; it must be close to the maxi- 
mum pressure that arose when handling the powder. 
For an 
order of magnitude estimate, let us suppose it to have been 
1 atmosphere. 
Y for quartz is 6 X 10! dyn/cm?. Kunkel found 
the average charge on 
a particle of diameter 4 u to be 150 
elementary units (see Fig. 
14.1). 
This makes 
s, the area of 
surface which 
is sure on the average to have one localized 
charge centre associated with it, about 
10-17 cm?, less than 
the area of a lattice square. 
That is nonsense. The situation 
is helped by taking larger values of P, but impossibly large 
values would be required to give a sensible value for s. 
The 
observed charges can only be accounted for in terms of a sensible 
value of s if the cross-section of a typical fracture was much 
larger than implied by the foregoing theory. Such would be the 
case if flat crystal faces on the particles became welded up, or 
if extended areas of surface could otherwise mate together. 
Photographs of the powder taken by Kunkel make this plausible. 
Accepting 
the 
explanation, 
however, 
immediately involves 
another difficulty. Having explained how larger areas of surface 
become welded up, there follows the question of how the welds 
become fractured. Looking at the discussion which related the 
areas of contact to a quasi-hydrostatic pressure, in reverse, one 
must substitute a tensile strength of about 10 dyn/em? for 
Young’s modulus to get an idea of the forces that would be 
required to break up the aggregations in the powder. 
These 
forces are clearly so large that it seems unlikely that they could 
arise during the dispersion of the powder. 
Kunkel himself,

X1V 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
289 
moreover, made an observation which renders it improbable 
that such forces did, in fact, arise. He found that the distribution 
of particle size in the cloud did not depend on the degree of 
turbulence during dispersion; this implied that aggregates which 
existed in the powder did not break up during dispersion—and 
there were many such aggregates in the cloud. We now see that 
there are good reasons for rejecting Kunkel’s explanation of his 
own results, even without appeal to other experiments. A rejec- 
tion 
of Kunkel’s explanation 
is supported by experiments 
(Harper, 1955) with larger pieces of quartz which gave direct 
proof that charging is not a consequence of adhesion. 
Before 
describing these experiments some further comment on Kunkel’s 
observations is appropriate. 
A valuable feature of Kunkel’s explanation is that it accounts 
for the preponderance of small over large charges, though the 
experimental points in Fig. 14.1 cluster round a small, not a 
zero charge as required by the theory. 
This theory is based on 
the assumption of homogeneous particles, the assumption being 
supported by the observation that 
it made practically no 
difference whether fused silica or ground quartz was used for 
the experiments. 
It was argued that the quartz was like the 
silica. 
In Chapter V, however, it was concluded that it is silica 
that behaves rather like quartz, as a result of devitrification. 
If different crystal faces are involved at different points on the 
surface of the particles, then asymmetric contacts will occur 
and contact charging 
is in principle possible. 
This also will 
give rise to a statistical distribution of charges on the particles 
with zero charge the most probable, as may be seen from a 
consideration of what happens if just two kinds of crystal face, 
A and B, are involved. The different kinds of possible contact 
are A/B, B[4, A[A, and B/B, and all are equally probable. 
One of these contacts gives a positive charge, one a negative 
charge, and two zero charge, so zero charge is the most probable. 
For asymmetric contacts, contact charging will give a charge 
proportional to the area of contact, other things being equal. 
Reference to the equations for a quasi-hydrostatic pressure as 
the determining factor 
in the charging shows that contact

290 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
X1V 
charging will give a distribution law in which the charge on a 
particle is proportional to the square of its radius. Adhesional 
charging gave 
a first power law, and experiment something 
between a first and second power. 
There is nothing to choose 
between the two theories here. 
Not knowing the actual areas of contact in Kunkel’s experi- 
ments, let us rely again on the equations for quasi-hydrostatic 
pressure to form an estimate of surface charge densities. Again 
taking 150 elementary units as the average charge for a particle 
of 4 p diameter, and a pressure of 
1 atmosphere, we find the 
charge density over the area of contact to have been 2:5x103 
e.s.u./cm2, 
This suggests a primary charging process and is of 
a similar order of magnitude to that in Harper’s experiments, 
for which the mean charge in one set of measurements was 
8-7x 103 e.s.u./cm?2. The weight of evidence is therefore in favour 
of the same mechanism of charging having been operative in 
both Kunkel’s and Harper’s experiments. 
Harper’s (1955) experiments on the charging and adhesion of 
quartz were carried out with the apparatus described on p. 210, 
using a 2-in. and a 1-in. quartz ball. After the stringent cleaning 
procedure described on p. 78 had been carried out, it was found 
that there was marked adhesion between the balls on about half 
the occasions when they were brought into contact. This sticking 
was made evident by the sudden release of the adhesion during 
the breaking of contact setting up an oscillation of the suspension 
carrying the upper ball. On nearly every occasion the oscillation 
was either quite marked or seemingly absent; there was seldom 
any doubt as to whether sticking had occurred or not. 
This 
simplified the interpretation of the experiments, which were 
concerned with the possibility of correlation between sticking 
and the magnitude of charging for a wide range of other condi- 
tions. 
A wide range of charging resulted from varying crystal 
orientations. 
Before considering the observations statistically, we may 
deduce at once that any simple correlation is excluded by certain 
individual charging curves—the four shown in Fig. 14.3. Com- 
parison of the two cumulative charging plots for which the

XIV 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
291 
charging is small, the one with no sticking and the other with 
sticking prevalent, prove that large charging is not a necessary 
consequence of sticking. The two plots for which the charging 
Charge (1073 e.s.u.) 
  
    
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Number of contacts 
Fia. 14.3. 
@ sticking, O not sticking. 
is large, the one with no sticking, the other with sticking at nine 
out of ten contacts, prove that sticking 
is not 
a necessary 
consequence of large charging. 
Consider now Fig. 14.4. 
The number of observations of a 
given size of charge in the whole sequence of measurements is 
shown as a histogram, the proportion of the total which stuck 
being shown shaded. 
The sign of the charge is ignored, this 
corresponding to ignoring which surface was which. 
The two 
charge distributions both show a maximum at the origin and 
fall off at a similar rate. The close similarity between the two

292 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
XIV 
distributions make it most improbable that one mechanism of 
charging operates when the contact happens to stick and a 
totally different one when it happens not to stick. 
It is much 
more likely that the similarity of shape comes from the mechan- 
ism that operates when there is no sticking, operating also when 
80 
60+ 
40 
Observations 
20k 
(0] 
2 
40 
60 
80 
Charge (107*e.s.u.) 
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
Fic. 14.4. 
The proportion of the total which stuck is 
shown shaded. 
sticking occurs. Interpreting the distributions in this way, the 
question now arises as to whether there is some mechanism of 
adhesional charging in addition to the mechanism that normally 
operates. 
If this were so, then both mechanisms would be 
involved in the distribution for sticking and only one in the 
distribution for no sticking. This would lead to a greater scatter 
of the observations in the distribution for sticking. 
The slight 
difference that exists, though probably not significant, is actually 
in the opposite direction. 
It is to be concluded that adhesional 
charging, if it exists, is of small importance compared with the 
charging normally present, and that charging and sticking are 
two independent phenomena. 
" The interpretation that has now been reached, for Kunkel’s

XIV 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
293 
experiments and for Harper’s, is only reasonable if it is possible 
for the microwelding causing sticking to be associated with a 
small fraction of the total area of true contact, the charging 
being associated with the rest of this area. This would be so if 
the adsorbed water layer were swept away over part of the area 
giving direct contact of quartz with quartz, leading to micro- 
welding, contact over the rest of the area being molecular in 
nature but with water molecules intervening between the quartz 
surfaces, enabling these 
to separate without sticking when 
contact is broken. Qualitatively there is no objection but there 
is still need for an order of magnitude check. A rough estimate 
of the force between the balls during contact, and of the force of 
adhesion, could be made from the displacement of the suspension 
of the upper ball. The former was 150 dyn, and the latter 100 dyn. 
Using equation 
(2.1), the area 
of contact comes out 
to be 
3:2X10-7 cm?. From the tensile strength of quartz, the area of 
cross-section of the fracture is found to be 10-8 ecm?2 
This is 
only one-thirtieth of the area of contact, so there is no difficulty 
here about accepting that charging is independent of sticking. 
Charging and the force of friction 
From Fig. 14.4 it appears that charges of up to 7x 103 e.s.u. 
were observed without there being detectable sticking. 
For a 
charged area of 3-2< 10~7 cm?, the force of attraction between 
opposing surfaces which is 2nqg%/area comes out to be about 
102 dyn, sufficient to give much stronger sticking than was ever 
observed. There is no doubt about the magnitude of the charge, 
which was accurately measured, and sticking of the calculated 
order of magnitude was quite certainly absent. 
It follows that 
the area put into the calculation must be much too small. The 
only explanation, an entirely satisfactory one, is that the charge 
spread over the surface of the quartz as the balls moved apart; 
any sticking initially present disappeared during the early stages 
of the breaking of contact. This really means that sticking was 
present but too evanescent to have been observed. 
Schnurmann and Warlow-Davies (1942) were of the opinion 
that an important contribution to the force of sliding friction

294 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
XIV 
can come from electrostatic forces resulting from the frictional 
generation of opposite charges on the two rubbing surfaces. 
Such forces will increase the adhesion, but do not appear to 
the author to provide the tangential forces which are required 
to give rise to friction. 
It is different when the adhesion is due 
to microwelding; shearing forces are needed to tear the welds 
when the surfaces slide over each other, and these forces are 
comparable with those required to pull the welds apart when 
adhesion is broken down. 
The experiments on the adhesion and charging of quartz 
surfaces show that, even when significant adhesional forces due 
to charging would be expected, they do not make themselves 
evident in practice. Compared with the forces of adhesion due 
to sticking (microwelding), they were negligible. It seems certain 
that electrostatic forces cannot contribute significantly to the 
force of static friction in the case of adhering quartz surfaces. 
Accepting that the shearing of microwelds provides a large part 
of the force of sliding friction, and rejecting the possibility that 
sliding gives rise to still larger charging, it would follow that 
electrostatic forces cannot contribute significantly to the force 
of sliding friction in the case of clean quartz surfaces. 
Contact 
between two electrophilic insulators favours any electrostatic 
effect, and the charging in the relevant quartz/quartz experi- 
ments was, in fact, exceptionally large. This makes it reasonable 
to generalize and conclude that it is unlikely that electrostatic 
forces ever contribute appreciably to the force of friction. 
Charging by rolling 
We have seen in Chapter I1I that free rolling involves surfaces 
being brought into contact under normal pressure and then 
separated with the simultaneous formation of a new contact 
area, slipping being negligible. 
Rolling therefore provides 
a 
method 
of investigating 
contact 
charging 
with 
a 
steadily 
increasing contact area. Advantage has been taken of this in 
a technique developed by Peterson (1954a, 
1954b). 
Wagner 
(1956) improved the method and his results using quartz are of 
particular interest because, though the charging had a superficial

XIV 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
295 
resemblance to that described on p. 253 for rutile, there were 
differences which imply a completely different mechanism of 
electrification. 
The essential difference was that whereas the 
charging of rutile sliding down a chute depended on the duration 
of contact but not on the speed of sliding, Wagner found that 
  
  
  
_—-_-——-——-——-——j—-— 
o | 
To electro- 
meter 
_]\/ 
Fic. 14.5 
his charging rate was proportional to the speed of rolling for 
a given (sufficiently small) duration of contact. 
The apparatus consisted of a hollow metal cylinder which 
rotated about a horizontal axis with the ball freely rolling inside 
it. The cylinder was dished, as shown in Fig. 14.5, so that the 
ball was confined to near the centre. 
The essential parts were 
enclosed in a vacuum apparatus which could be baked out or 
filled with gas. 
A metal probe was situated just above the 
rolling ball and was connected to an electrometer. 
The probe 
was an 80° sector of a cylinder of somewhat smaller diameter. 
The charge acquired by the rolling ball could be deduced from 
the change of potential of the probe brought about by electro- 
static induction; alternatively the charging current could be 
registered directly by the electrometer by working at a reduced 
gas pressure such that a continuous gas discharge was running 
between the ball and the probe. 
The former method appears 
to have been used by Wagner, the latter by Peterson, though 
this is not explicitly stated in their papers. 
The presence of 
a gas discharge during the contact charging 
in Peterson’s 
experiments seems to the author to be highly undesirable, with 
a strong possibility of leading to confusing results. 
It may

296 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
XIV 
account for the fact that Peterson did not get an initial charging 
rate proportional to speed, whereas Wagner did. 
It is Wagner’s 
results that are susceptible of a straightforward interpretation. 
T 
=20   
Initial charging rate (C/min) 
| 
o 
I 
  
  
  
0O 
] 
] 
i 
| 
] 
0] 
4 
8 
12 
|6 
20 
24 
Speed (cm/sec) 
Fic. 14.6. Charging of silica by rolling on platinum. 
The experimental evidence for the proportionality of initial 
charging rate with speed for silica/platinum is shown in Fig. 14.6. 
Peterson had concluded that the maximum charge was limited 
by surface conduction and gas discharge, but the latter was 
eliminated 
in Wagner’s experiments, though some form 
of 
discharge through the high vacuum, maintained by ions and 
electrons from the electrodes, may have been present. 
Let us derive the way in which the saturation charge will be 
reached, following Peterson. 
It is assumed that contact results 
in the transfer of charge from one surface to the other only 
when contact has not already occurred between the areas in 
question. 
This is equivalent to saying that charging will not 
occur if it has occurred already, but requires qualifying to the 
extent that charge previously transferred may have been lost 
by conduction (we ignore discharge through the gas or high 
vacuum): a discharged surface can charge again. Thus the rate 
of contact charging corresponds to the area of surface not so far 
charged. 
It is therefore proportional to the difference between

XIV 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
297 
the charge g, that would be attained finally in the absence of 
conduction and the charge g already transferred. We therefore 
write 
dg 
dt = a(Qs—Q)—:Bq, 
where Bq is the leakage term due to conduction. 
The solution 
of this equation is 
og 
= 
11 —-6'"(a+'3)t 
. 
The saturation charge q,, when there is leakage is 
_ 
o 
] 
« is dependent on the speed of rolling, though B is not. 
It 
follows that ¢,, is dependent on the speed of rolling though g, 
18 not. 
Iflog(q,,—q) is plotted against £, the graph should be a straight 
line. 
Wagner found that this was only the case for the early 
stages in the charging, as may be seen from the lower curve of 
Fig. 
14.7. 
Wagner assumes that the departure for the later 
stages of charging 
is due to some breakdown of the theory 
caused by the high voltages then present; this seems very likely. 
He therefore finds, by trial and error, what value of ¢,, gives 
the best straight line for the early stage of the charging; the 
result is the upper plot in Fig. 14.7. From values of ¢,, found 
in this way, 
it should be possible to determine the relative 
importance of « and S as a function of rolling speed. The values 
of q,, obtained, however, were constant within the limits of the 
rather considerable experimental error. 
It must be concluded 
that leakage of charge by conduction was not very important 
in Wagner’s experiments. 
Charging curves for silica and two varieties of quartz, against 
nickel, the surface of which would have been covered with a 
thin layer of oxide, are shown in Fig. 
14.8. 
The differences 
between fused silica, synthetic and natural quartz, 
are not 
marked; moreover, 
as discussed on p. 88, Wagner found no 
evidence of difference between different crystal faces of quartz.

    
  
    
    
« 
-2.0- 
Extrap. 
qnm 
c 
_I.O_ 
8 
¢ 
L 
Ui'- 
—05 
» 
o 
19 cm/sec 
-0.2 
= 
—O.I 
L. 
000 
0O0:-25 
0-50 
075 
[-00 
[-25 
Time (min) 
Fic. 14.7 
[-50 - 
4-8 cm/sec 
[-25 
-~ 
) 
) 
\c 
avet 
o 
e 
= 
[-O0F 
8\3‘\'&‘(\6 
<) 
00 
1 
uartz 
2 
S 
O 
075 
0-50} 
0:25F 
OOO 
I 
1 
1 
L 
1 
4 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
[0 
12 
Time (min) 
Fi1c. 14.8. Charging of quartz and silica by rolling on nickel.

XIV 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
299 
It is to be presumed that the method of preparation of the 
surfaces used by Wagner resulted in different crystal faces of 
quartz and the surface of amorphous silica being triboelectrically 
rather similar for contact charging against nickel. 
The possibility that the charging of quartz against metals is 
correlated with the work function of the metals was investigated 
with very sophisticated equipment, but no such correlation was 
found. 
This is not unexpected if one accepts that the charging 
must be due to ions and not to electrons. 
The 6-mm diameter spheres used in the experiments were 
accurately ground and polished. 
It is therefore surprising that 
Wagner discussed the contact charging on the assumption that 
the load between the surfaces was supported by asperities. 
As 
we have seen in Chapter II, though a small proportion of the 
load is probably always supported in this way (the sticking in 
Harper’s experiments may have been caused by the presence of 
asperities), the bulk of the load will be carried by elastic deforma- 
tion, the area of contact being given by equation (2.1). Wagner 
gives this area as 5 
10-7 cm? which corresponds to a diameter 
of 8 u. The rate of formation of new contact area is this diameter 
times the speed. From Fig. 14.8 it appears that the initial rate 
of charge generation for a speed of 4-8 cm/sec was 1-7x 10-2 
e.s.u./sec for fused silica, whence the surface density of generated 
charge comes out to be 4-3 e.s.u./em? 
This is, of course, an 
average value; the experimental method could not resolve the 
differences that Harper found between neighbouring contact 
‘points’. 
It is curious that the charging found by Wagner for 
both silica and quartz against a metal should have been three 
orders of magnitude smaller than Harper found for two different 
crystal faces of quartz. 
It suggests that quartz prepared by the 
method used by Wagner (p. 90) was in principle electrophobic, 
but that surface contamination was present to an extent which 
gave charging that should be considered secondary in character. 
This idea 
is supported by Wagner’s finding that, although 
working with his most refined technique, using sapphire, the 
charging was unpredictable because of its being dependent on 
the past history of the sample.

300 
QUARTZ AND SILICA 
XTIV 
The saturation charge for fused silica should be the superficial 
area of the ball times the surface density of charge calculated 
from the initial charging rate. For a 6-mm sphere and 4-3 e.s.u./ 
cm?, the calculated value of the saturation charge is 4-8 e.s.u. 
The observed value, extrapolated from Fig. 14.8, is 4-2 e.s.u. 
This remarkable agreement is evidence both for the correctness 
of the assumed charging mechanism and for the value of the 
contact 
area being calculable from the formula 
for 
elastic 
deformation.

CHAPTER XV 
THE CHARGING OF 
ELECTROPHILIC INSULATORS 
It is truly remarkable that, depending on circumstances, silica 
and quartz charge on contact to an extent which ranges over 
four orders of magnitude. 
Harper observed surface densities 
up to 10% e.s.u./cm?, and Kunkel, possibly, not much less. An 
experiment 
of Wagner’s gave 
4 e.s.u./em? and the author 
(unpublished) found that quartz, when contaminated with what 
was supposed to have been a monomolecular layer of grease, 
behaved like a truly electrophobic insulator. 
Other materials; 
prepared in different ways, exhibit charging which may come 
anywhere in the same range, though it is true that cleaned 
materials tend to be either obviously electrophilie, or obviously 
electrophobic. 
When there 
is electrophilic 
or electrophobic 
contamination on the opposite kind of surface, we may expect 
intermediate values of charging; we must also inquire whether 
intermediate behaviour may sometimes have other explanations. 
It may be remarked that deliberate attempts to contaminate 
an electrophobic surface with electrophilic dirt are not very 
successful. This is probably because electrophobic surfaces are 
usually hydrophobie, and electrolytic ions, at any rate, cannot 
appear in the absence of a water layer. 
In the absence of con- 
tamination there are three factors which may reduce the extent 
of contact charging with electrophilic insulators. 
Firstly, the 
difference between the affinity of the ions for one surface and 
for the other may be small. 
If it is small, then a small surface 
charge will shift the ionic levels enough to terminate ionic 
transfer. 
Secondly, it may happen that the available ions are 
associated with occasional sites such as lattice imperfections, 
not with each lattice square. 
If these sites were sufficiently 
sparse, there might be too few carriers of charge available to 
shift the ionic levels to the same height. 
Thirdly, the effect of 
thermal agitation, which operates against levelling up, might

302 
THE CHARGING OF 
XV 
limit the transfer of ions to less than would correspond to a 
complete levelling up. Incomplete levelling up with only partial 
transfer of the available ions will ocecur when the temperature 
is sufficiently high for a significant fraction of ions to be excited 
into the level on the donor surface from the level on the acceptor 
surface. 
The great charging found by Harper with quartz implies that 
there was a large difference in height between the levels on the 
two surfaces, and no dearth of ions for the levelling up. Dunning 
(1961) has suggested that the ions transferred in these experi- 
ments were protons. He points out that the preparation of the 
surfaces, which involves treatment with sulphuric acid and 
water, will leave them covered with OH groups. Considering the 
detailed structure of the surfaces investigated, a difference is to 
be expected in the nature of the bonding of the OH groups. 
On the basal plane surface each silicon atom will be bonded to 
two OH groups and two oxygen atoms; on the prism surface 
each silicon atom will be bonded to one OH group and three 
oxygen atoms. 
The protons in the OH groups are differently 
bonded on the two surfaces; in particular the vibrational energy 
level systems will be different and the lowest states will be 
different for the two surfaces. There will also be higher levels, 
again different for the two surfaces, arising from autoprotolysis: 
28i0H = SiOH3 +Si0™. 
The distribution of protons between all these levels will depend 
on the temperature, but when two different surfaces are brought 
together protons will fall from levels on the one surface into 
lower levels on the other, until the double layer so formed shifts 
these energy levels and prevents any further transfer. 
In 
support of this explanation of the charging, Harper (1953) 
found that when the OH groups were replaced by silicone groups 
the charging disappeared. 
The order 
of magnitude 
of the 
charging is compatible with the above model. 
It must be at 
a very early stage in the separation of the surfaces that the 
transfer of ions is completed, since, as we saw on p. 104, tunnelling 
of ions is negligible. The transfer cannot occur when the surfaces

XV 
ELECTROPHILIC INSULATORS 
303 
are actually in contact since any ion then belongs to both 
surfaces, but it must occur when the ion is so close to the two 
surfaces that it is strongly attracted to both. The thickness of 
the double layer when levelling up stops should therefore be of 
the order of magnitude of 1 A. 
A surface density of 8:7x 103 
e.s.u./cmm? would then give a potential shift of 1 V. 
This is 
quite reasonable, but we have still to consider just what it means 
in terms of energy levels. 
It is not the difference between the 
energy levels of the ion when residing on the two surfaces with 
the other surface at a distance. 
Redistribution of ions 
The redistribution of positive and negative ions between two 
surfaces which have just been in contact has been considered 
by Henry (1957), and we shall follow his treatment, though 
making it rather more explicit. It applies when there is a dearth 
of ions, so that complete levelling up does not occur. When 
this does occur, the theory reduces to the simple picture we have 
just used. 
We confine our considerations to one type of ion which is 
attracted to both surfaces and has a single energy state at the 
absolute zero when residing on either one of the surfaces, though 
different for the two surfaces. 
An example would be an ion 
attracted to the surfaces, by image force alone, of two materials 
with different dielectric constant. 
At relatively high tempera- 
tures the ion will vibrate normally to the surface, so increasing 
itsenergy. Thestate of affairs contemplated is shown in Fig. 15.1. 
The potential energy of the ion is given as a function of the 
position between the surfaces and the vibrational levels are 
indicated. In (a) the surfaces are far apart and the energy wells 
near the surfaces quite separate. As the surfaces come together 
the two wells overlap, so that the upper levels are shared between 
the two surfaces, whilst the lower ones are not, tunnelling being 
negligible. This is shown in (b). In (c) there is a single well, but 
with the difference between the surfaces still evident as a marked 
asymmetry. In-(d) the surfaces are so close that the ion belongs 
effectively to them both and there is a single, narrow, energy

304 
THE CHARGING OF 
XV 
well. 
In the case of image force binding, the well gets deeper 
as the surfaces come nearer together, the ion being bound twice 
over in (d). 
In general, however, this need not be so. 
(a) 
  
  
    
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
  
  
  
| 
| 
[‘—P 
y 
Z 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
F1a. 15.1. 
Potential energy curves and lowest vibrational 
levels for an ion between two surfaces. 
The ions transferred during contact charging may start on 
either or both surfaces, but the final distribution will be inde- 
pendent of the initial one since there is clearly plenty of time 
for the appropriate equilibrium distribution to be maintained 
as the surfaces 
are separated: 
the redistribution process 
is 
adiabatic. 
As the surfaces move apart a hump appears at the 
bottom of the energy well, and this divides ions in the lower 
vibrational levels into a group that will subsequently belong to 
one surface and a group that will belong to the other—at least 
it would do so if the further growth of the hump were not 
accompanied by a change in the shape of the two subsidiary 
wells. 
When, however, the hump has risen beyond the vibra- 
tional levels which are significantly populated, the division is

XV 
ELECTROPHILIC INSULATORS 
305 
complete, and further changes in the shape and depth of the 
two wells have no effect on the redistribution. 
The difference 
in depth of the two wells at cut-off will be much less than the 
difference in (a); it cannot be found from a consideration of the 
affinity of the ion for the two surfaces taken separately. 
Let there be an energy difference AW, between the lowest 
vibrational levels in the two wells at cut-off, and let the effective 
distance between the wells be Z,, as indicated in Fig. 15.1 (). 
Let the number of mobile ions per ecm? on the two surfaces 
before contact be n, and n,, the charges on these ions being 
compensated by some other associated but immobile charges. 
If n ions per cm? are transferred from surface 
1 to surface 2, 
the numbers on the surfaces per cm? become n,—n and n,+n, 
respectively, and the surface charge densities +ne. 
The work 
done in moving unit charge from one surface to the other, on 
account of the surfaces being charged, will depend on how near 
the 1on moved is to other individual ions on the surfaces, since 
we are considering a sparse distribution, but, on the average, it 
will be 4mneZ,T The total work required to transfer a singly 
charged ion is 47mne2Z,— AW,. If there is an ample supply of ions, 
levelling up will be complete and AW, = 4mne?Z,. 
If there is a 
dearth of ions, so that levelling up cannot proceed to completion, 
then the distribution of ions between the two surfaces will be 
determined by a statistical distribution function and depend on 
the temperature. 
The distribution 
is among the vibrational 
levels in the two wells, as for equilibrium. We may assume that 
the ions behave independently of each other; Fig. 15.1 refers to 
an individual ion. Thus we have to consider one ion at a time 
which can be in any vibrational level: no exclusion principle is 
involved and Boltzmann’s distribution function should be used. 
The vibrational levels will be differently spaced in the two wells 
but we shall ignore that complication. With this simplification, 
the ratio of the probability of the ion being in a particular 
vibrational level in one well to the probability of its being in the 
corresponding vibrational level in the other well is the same for 
t Henry introduces an effective dielectric constant, but it appears from 
Chapter I that this should be unity.

306 
THE CHARGING OF 
XV 
all the levels, in particular the same as for the lowest levels. 
The ratio is 
exp{— (AW, — dnne?Z 
) [k T}, 
and this is equal to (n,—n)/(ny+n). Taking logarithms and re- 
arranging we find 
e — AW, +kT In{(n,—n)/(ny+n)} 
dmeZ, 
If n is small compared with »; and n,, this is an explicit formula 
for the charge density; if n is comparable with either n; or n,, 
it is an equation for ¢ which must be solved numerically. The 
interesting thing about the equation is that there are two terms 
contributing to the charge transfer: the first depending on a 
difference in affinity of the ions for the two surfaces, the second 
depending on any difference there may be between n; and n, 
when these are large, or the change in numbers when they are 
small. The first term is the familiar levelling-up term, the second 
is what Henry calls the ‘abundance’ term. 
It gives rise to 
charging even when AW, is zero if the ions are more abundant 
on one surface than the other; it turns up because ions can to 
a limited extent be driven across from one surface to the other 
by thermal agitation. 
It is a diffusion term, in fact. 
Henry is of the opinion that the diffusion term is an important 
one. How far is this likely to be so? 
It will be important when 
AW, is small and the ions in question are not abundant on the 
surfaces, particularly if they are much more abundant on one 
surface than the other. Now these are just the conditions that 
hold when casual ions have been caught from the surroundings 
to neutralize deeply bound charges once associated with 
a 
nascent surface. We have found many reasons to suppose that 
triboelectric charging is often due to the transfer of such ions; 
it follows that the ‘abundance’ effect may have a very wide- 
spread importance. 
Henry goes on to discuss what further causes of ionic transfer 
there may be when different temperatures are assigned to the 
two surfaces, and derives two more effects. 
The separation 
process pictured in Fig. 15.1, however, implies that the ions are 
shared thermally by the two surfaces until they become assigned 
 

XV 
ELECTROPHILIC INSULATORS 
307 
to one of them: during the redistribution process the surfaces 
are in thermal, almost in mechanical, contact, and therefore at 
the same temperature. 
This model, then, excludes the two 
further effects deduced by Henry, and it does not seem to the 
author that any alternative model appropriate to the redistribu- 
tion of vons between surfaces will permit such effects. Electrons 
do not take part in the charging of insulators. 
A temperature 
difference between the two materials can only be relevant if the 
charge carriers come from within the materials, as in the asym- 
metric rubbing of ice. The carriers can only be electrons if the 
temperatures are sufficiently high for the materials to be no 
longer insulators; if the carriers were ions other than protons, 
electrolytic conduction would be involved. 
In either case, the 
preceding mathematics is inapplicable. 
If these general con- 
clusions are correct, some interesting experiments of Bowles 
(1961), in which the impact charging of polyethylene spheres 
having different temperatures was investigated, require 
an 
explanation depending on an indirect, not, as postulated by 
Bowles, a direct, effect of the temperature difference. 
Effect of an external field 
It is of interest to inquire what effect there may be on tribo- 
electrification when this takes place in an electric field. 
In 
discussions of this question published hitherto, certain points 
have been overlooked. Morris-Jones (1915) was the first to look 
for such an effect but he found none, working with flannel, silk, 
and chamois leather. 
Wolf (1929), however, found it, and Gill 
and Alfrey (1949) found an effect for surprisingly low fields of 
the order of 100 V/em, proportional to the field, using ebonite 
and sand sliding down a metal chute. 
It was possible to reverse 
the sign of the charge by applying a sufficiently large field in 
the appropriate direction. 
Nevertheless, 
the only properly 
documented account of an experiment of this kind is that given 
by Medley, using the apparatus described on p. 51, and it is 
only in this instance that one can be sure just what was being 
investigated. 
In addition to a possible effect of the field on the process of

308 
THE CHARGING OF 
XV 
electrification that occurs when true contact is established and 
then broken, 
it must be remembered that the bodies being 
charged may, if they are semiconductors or insulators having 
some surface conductivity, 
acquire additional 
charge from 
conduction currents associated with.potential differences that 
are there because of the applied electric field. 
In the case of 
particles sliding down a chute, for instance, if the field is applied 
by having an electrode parallel to and above the chute raised 
to a high potential, then some of the lines of force from this 
electrode will terminate on charges on the chute itself but others 
on charges on particles resting on the chute. 
When these 
particles drop off they will retain some of their charge. Charging 
of this nature is put to practical use in certain forms of machine 
for the electrostatic separation of mixed granular solids (Ralston, 
1961). 
The charging 
is not triboelectric in origin, but may 
confuse the interpretation of experiments on the effect of an 
electric field on triboelectric phenomena. The charging is merely 
a consequence of electrostatic induction, and in the contact 
charging of semiconductors (or the separation charging of metals) 
it would seem to be the only possible significant disturbance that 
can be caused by an applied field. 
The disturbance to be expected in the case of electrophilic 
insulators will depend on the nature of the process of electrifica- 
tion. 
If this is the result of material transfer, it is uncertain 
whether or not there will be an effect. If the electrification is the 
result of the transfer of electrolytic ions, these ions can convey 
charge in an electric field, so an effect is to be anticipated, but 
its magnitude will depend on the topography of the surfaces 
around the point of contact and the conductivity of the electro- 
lytic layer. 
In the case of a redistribution of ions between 
surfaces such as was considered in the last section, however, an 
exact prediction of the effect of an electric field can be made. 
If both bodies concerned are insulators, an electric field can 
be applied without there being any transfer of charge by induc- 
tion. 
Let the field be £, normal to the surfaces between which 
the redistribution of ions takes place and from left to right in 
Fig. 15.1 (b). To a first approximation, the field will change the

XV 
ELECTROPHILIC INSULATORS 
309 
difference in level between the two wells from W, to W, 
EeZ,,. 
Making this substitution in the formula for o, we find that o is 
increased by E/4w when n is small compared with n; and n,, 
i.e. when there is an abundance of ions. 
The way this comes 
about is clear from first principles. Immediately before cut-off 
the gap is conducting and no field can exist within it. 
The 
applied field 
£ must therefore be cancelled by an equal and 
opposite field, and this will be provided by a double layer of 
charge on the two surfaces. A surface charge density of amount 
E[47 is needed to give the requisite field. 
If, however, there is 
a dearth ofions, this charge cannot be provided without upsetting 
the redistribution of ions that would occur in the absence of a 
field. 'Referring again to the equation for o, it is apparent that 
the effect of the field will be less than E/47 because of n being 
a function of o; if n, and n, are known the effect can be calculated. 
Conversely, experiments on the variation of ¢ with 
£ 
can, in 
principle, produce information about n, and n, but they would 
be very difficult to carry out. 
Consider orders of magnitude. 
A high field for such an experiment would be 10000 V/cm. 
After changing units, we see that the alteration in o caused by 
this field will be less than about 3 e.s.u./cm?2. This refers to the 
area of true contact; 
the surface density averaged over the area 
of apparent contact will usually be orders of magnitude less. 
3 e.s.u./cm? is small compared with 
a charge density of 103 
to 
10% e.s.u./cm? such as corresponds to 
a primary charging 
process. 
The effect of an electric field on primary charging is 
therefore found to be negligible; the effect on secondary charging 
may 
be considerable but secondary effects 
are 
difficult 
to 
investigate. 
Medley’s quantitative results on the effect of an applied field 
were obtained with mercury/polyethylene, using the arrange- 
ment shown in Fig. 4.1. 
His results were in conformity with 
expectation but unfortunately give practically no information 
about the charging process. The field was applied between the 
two mercury surfaces across the polyethylene film, the lower 
mercury withdrawn from contact with the film, and the charge 
on the lower surface of the polyethylene measured from the

310 
THE CHARGING OF 
XV 
charge induced on the electrometer. 
The additional charge on 
the film due to the applied field was found to be the same as 
the calculated charge carried by the lower mercury when in 
contact with the film and acting as one electrode of a parallel 
plate capacitor. 
The two effects, triboelectric charging and 
charging due to the applied field, were additive. The capacitative 
charge, originally in the lower mercury, must have been trans- 
ferred to the lower surface of the polyethylene as the mercury 
receded. One cannot say whether this was associated with the 
process postulated in the theory of the redistribution of ions, 
or with the discharge of excess charge that was supposed to 
oceur in the discussion of Medley’s experiments on p. 54. 
Triboelectric series 
There has frequently been occasion to observe that the more 
or less adventitious presence of positive or negative ions that 
have settled down on the surface of an electrophilic insulator in 
order to compensate some unsatisfied affinity that is associated 
with the termination of the interior structure at the surface, 
provides 
a reason 
for the electrophilic insulators becoming 
charged after contact. 
The theory, due to Henry, of the re- 
distribution of ions between surfaces, will clearly be applicable 
in these circumstances—one might say especially 
so. 
This 
mechanism of triboelectrification could, indeed, prove to be the 
most usual form in practice, but we do not yet know. 
When considering a wide range of materials, it is of interest 
to inquire how many different kinds of ion, positive or negative, 
could be involved. 
Allowing for unusual circumstances, one 
might expect a considerable variety, but the most obvious candi- 
dates are hydrogen and hydroxyl ions. Since many surfaces are 
likely to have combined oxygen on them, and since oxygen has 
a high electron affinity, it is likely that these surfaces will have 
deep-lying filled electron levels, a compensating positive charge 
being required 
for 
electrical neutrality. 
This leads 
to 
the 
supposition that the loosely bound ions on many surfaces will 
be hydrogen ions. Whether or not this is so, if only one kind 
of ion, whether adventitious or not, is involved in the charging,

XV 
ELECTROPHILIC INSULATORS 
311 
an interesting consequence follows. The ion in question will be 
bound differently to different surfaces, with a binding energy 
characteristic 
of each. 
These binding energies will form 
a 
sequence of levels which can be ordered in increasing depth. 
When a redistribution of ions occurs between two surfaces, more 
ions will go to the one with the deeper level. This surface will 
become positively charged if the ion is a positive one but nega- 
tively charged if the ion is a negative one. The surfaces can be 
ordered so that each charges the next in the sequence positively 
or negatively depending on which sign of ion is involved. 
If one 
kind of ion only is involved we have a simple triboelectric series. 
If one kind of ion only is involved and that ion is positive, e.g. 
the hydrogen ion, and if, furthermore, the ion is bound to the 
surface by image force attraction, then the order of materials 
in the triboelectric series will be that of the dielectric constants, 
the surface with higher dielectric constant becoming positively 
charged with respect to the lower. This is Coehn’s so-called law. 
If several kinds of ion can participate in triboelectrification and 
if more than one mechanism is involved, as we have supposed 
sometimes to be the case, then Coehn’s ‘law’ will have a limited 
application and different materials will not all fall into a tribo- 
electric order. 
What are the facts? Coehn (1898) based his ‘law’ on a com- 
parison between published triboelectric series and the published 
values of dielectric constants. 
There certainly seemed to be a 
correlation, though not without exceptions. Coehn did not then 
claim universality for the principle, only that it could be a useful 
guide. 
Later, however (Coehn and Raydt, 1909), he claimed 
more for it, in particular that the magnitude of the charge was 
proportional to the difference between the dielectric constants. 
Richards (1923), in his experiments on wringing optical flats, 
obtained what at first sight appears to be a good confirmation 
of the ‘law’, but ebonite/steel was a bad misfit and steel had to 
be given the notional dielectric constant of 31 to obtain agree- 
ment with the ‘law’. In his experiments on charging by impact 
(1920) Richards found no agreement whatsoever. Macky (1928) 
has pointed out that the results 
of Morris-Jones (1915) on

312 
THE CHARGING OF 
XV 
rubbing various specimens on silk and chamois leather are 
incompatible with Coehn’s 
‘law’. 
Some specimens charged 
positively and some negatively. 
All specimens, irrespective of 
the sign of charging, received larger charges from silk than from 
chamois 
leather. 
Considering 
positive 
charging, 
the 
‘law’ 
requires the dielectric constant of chamois leather to be greater 
than that of silk; considering negative charging, the dielectric 
constant of silk should be greater than that of chamois leather. 
The ‘law’ fails. 
Harper’s (1955) experiments on the charging of different 
crystal faces of quartz provide what may be regarded as 
a 
crucial test. Here is a case where the two materials concerned 
are the same, but the dielectric constants, for an electric field 
normal to the surface, different. 
It was found that the surface 
with the higher dielectric constant charged negatively with 
respect to the other, not positively as required by Coehn’s ‘law’. 
The sign of charging is only compatible with loose ions being 
transferred because of image force if the ions were negative. In 
view of the method of preparation of the quartz, they would 
then almost certainly have to be hydroxyl ions; such groups, 
however, would be tightly bound. It is more likely, as described 
on p. 302, that the mobile charge carriers were protons. 
If this 
is correct, the depth of binding of the protons must be in the 
reverse order to what would be the consequence of image forces 
alone. 
The results portrayed in Fig. 
10.3 provide an example of 
materials which cannot be arranged in a triboelectric series. 
Gold is more positive than steel when tested against glass, but 
more negative when tested against magnesium oxide. 
These 
four materials do not form a series, so the charging cannot be 
accounted for in terms of energy levels of one ion only. 
Ofthe many attempts that have been made to arrange common 
materials in a triboelectric series, by far the most important is 
that of Shaw (1917). 
Having achieved 
a great measure 
of 
success, however, his relatively consistent findings were spoilt 
(Shaw and Jex, 1928) by the discovery that the charging of 
five materials—zinc, glass, cotton, filter paper, and silk—was

XV 
ELECTROPHILIC INSULATORS 
313 
correctly represented by a closed series as shown in Fig. 15.2. 
Counting round the figure clockwise, neighbours charge each 
other so that the second is positive 
Zinc 
with respect to the first. Neverthe- 
/ 
\ 
less, 
Shaw’s 
earlier 
conclusions 
WOTE+ 
1] 
were the result of a great deal of 
>k 
Glass 
painstaking work and are intrigu- 
ingly suggestive. 
Rather surpris- 
ingly, he says that the triboelectric 
order was not much affected by 
Filter 
dirt but considerably affected by 
paper 
Cotton 
the manner of rubbing, which he 
Fie. 
15.2. 
Closed triboelectric 
found necessary to standardize. The 
series. 
position in the series occupied by a material was different when 
it was bent so as to make the surface convex; making the surface 
concave moved its position in the opposite direction. 
Matt 
surfaces sometimes occupied a different position from smooth. 
Many surfaces, when heated above a critical temperature which 
was in the range 70° C to 300° C, acquired changed properties 
which were metastable, reverting to the normal state after 
continued rubbing, gentle heating, or lapse of time. 
Combined 
pressure and heating, referred to as pressing hot, had a different 
effect from heating alone. 
The triboelectric order of materials 
in the stable condition, together with that of many in the 
abnormal (metastable) condition, as well as some that were 
prepared matt, or were bent or pressed hot, is givenin Table 15.1. 
The materials fall into two groups, group B following group 4. 
Materials in group 4 move up in the sequence when pressed hot 
or made concave, down in the sequence when made convex, 
when abnormal or matt. 
Materials of group B move in the 
opposite direction from those of group 4 under the same condi- 
tions. 
In all, there are 78 materials arranged in 36 places. 
It 
is odd to find all materials of animal origin in group 4 and all 
materials of vegetable origin in group B. Shaw suggests that 
different charge carriers are associated with the two kinds of 
surface and determine the characteristic behaviour. The charge 
carriers might be hydrogen and hydroxyl ions, but this is pure 
 

XV 
THE CHARGING OF 
  
Joded 
* g 
Z11ene) 
9] ‘SA0OM | 
03 
VOITIQ *A 
STOOM 
Jeds unges ‘qres-3yoo1 ‘umnje yseoJ| 
61 
VOII 
winifeuse | 
81 
(0L2) o118 
NOLIOD | 
LI 
Jsoded 
¢ (0%3) €D 
0IqT) *A 
HILL] QEZINVOTIOA | 
9] 
dgAvd H4ELTL | 
Q1 
(002) PO 
Joded 
* g 
s 
HIIOTV) 
I9yUjeo] ysem ‘puey ‘LI ‘40 ‘pD ‘uzZ ‘up 17| 
¥1 
ATIS | 
€1 
xeroq ‘reds tony ‘94 ‘bur ‘vp| 
3ZI 
q40q sLvp | 
11 
uyz 
IOOM 
HIIOTV]) | 
01 
A10AT1 ‘(63po-ulq) ssVIH | 
6 
urepeoxod pezeld ‘(‘jod) zzavad ‘(‘jod) ssvin | 
g 
BOTIN 
TOOM | 
L 
VOIN| 
9 
BOTIN 
BOTIA[ 
(‘usny) ssvin | 
¢ 
A0 SNASSO0d( ‘VOITIS SAOTHIIA [ 
F 
(eqn,--uquwo)) ssvin | 
¢ 
[(8H) 1reH ‘“4ng s Iigavy | 
3 
(100ys) soxsaasy | 
1 
sapouo) | 
wmaauop 
|10y posssug| 
o1qUISLIO T 
1O 
IDULLO NT 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2J0)s 21qQISDIPUL 2Y) 01 Bursddfo4 UWN00 2Y) UL UIALD 
314 
240 ), UL sadngosaduia) (0o 
9¢ 03 1 suowsod g dnosb ‘F1 03 
T suowpsod burfidnoso figppusou sppIsIOUL 
Jo 81515100 7 dnosl oaQ 03 20D wo4f burob ‘sa14as oY) UL 4IPL0 oY) $9aU6 UWNI0D JS4If YT, “SOYDIL UL SIDIOUL 
‘spopdno ut 24v spUIOW JuDOdWL 240U DY, T, "MDYS 0 BUIPLOIOD ‘SIOUDISGNS UOWUL0D JO SIS D14109]20Q14 ], 
I'GT H'1I4dV 
J,

ELECTROPHILIC INSULATORS 
315 
XV 
  
PIO[0YS) 
oyruoq 
31200 
  
proniey 
eyTuOqH 
3100 
  
pro[nRfied 
ojTuoqy 
3100 
SPoOM   
.HOQ.QE_&%GH 
(0g1) 24 
(0g1) nv 
pronje) 
{(012) us 
(0€1) a8 
(003) IN 
mm_&.nm 
(00€) zyaend 
(0L3) BotI{ 
(e¥3) ssen 
(g¥3) ©oI[ls 
“ A 
(003) o 
(033) uz 
(0%3) 1V 
(0¥3) dd 
(001) eyruoqy 
(0L) @aqy “A   
YOHITAQ 
aroInTIIH) 
HIINOLE 
T 
OVITHEHS 
NISHY 
XV 
ONITVEQ 
gg0.J, ‘NIWo)) 
SSVTH   
YAIINTVIANT 
droinIix) 
ny ‘6H 1d 
dNHITAY 
VHOUAJI-VLLAY) 
wnfe uoal ‘auddny vavd 
sseiq ‘oyeydins zoddoo ‘mexys 
BY0ING ‘o, ‘u0qie) ‘pd by ‘@9 “1g SV ‘np ‘ug ‘N ‘0p 
HLINOE 
XV ONITVES ‘NISHY ‘OVITEHS 
wnje owoay? ‘eye[s 
IoquIy 
Auoqe ‘Xgo)) 
UOIT pouur) ‘NIZIVAVJ ‘9)BWOIYII] WINISSB)OJ 
orTUOWIWIE-[BS ‘ure[eorod peze[dun   
1€ 
0€ 
66 
86 
L6 
9¢ 
gé 
Ve 
€¢ 
66 
|4

316 
THE CHARGING OF 
XV 
speculation, and the time is hardly ripe for comment on Shaw’s 
curious findings. It should, however, be mentioned that Héséhus 
(1902, 1903, 1905), in a remarkable series of early researches, was 
already thinking along similar lines. 
As far as the reality of 
triboelectric series is concerned, the mature opinion of Shaw and 
Jex expressed in 1928 is probably still the best that can be given: 
sub-groups such as woods, furs, and glasses, can each be ordered 
in a simple series, but more complex ordering is required between 
sub-groups. 
Metals occur in Table 15.1 between places 13 and 34, with 
many and varied materials interspersed. Shaw states that the 
metals occur in the order of their electrochemical potentials 
with the exception of lead and mercury. 
This 
is nearly the 
same as the order of the work-functions of the clean metals. 
Apart from the fact that Shaw’s metals were not clean, there 
is no straightforward reason why the order of work-functions 
should be relevant to metal/insulator charging, since, as we have 
seen, electrons do not take part. The reason must be an indirect 
one, presumably associated with the nature of the oxide layer 
on the metal. 
This consideration makes it less surprising that 
whereas the triboelectric order of metals is sometimes correlated 
with the order of work-functions, the correlation is more often 
with that order reversed. 
Coehn and Lotz (1921) found that 
metals having a high work-function charged positively against 
hard glass and metals with 
a low work-function negatively. 
Shaw and Jex (1928) and Shaw and Leavey (1932) found that 
well-washed glass and flame-cleaned silica were charged by 
metals to an extent which agreed roughly with the electro- 
chemical series of the metals reversed; but if the metals were 
tested against filter paper, the electrochemical order was not 
reversed. 
The experimental results shown in Fig. 10.3, which 
do not conform to a triboelectric series, show an inversion of 
the order of the metals when the material against which they 
were tested was changed. We have seen that an explanation 
of these inversions should not be sought in terms of a battery 
effect (p. 272). 
Rose and Ward (1957) give a triboelectric series for materials

XV 
ELECTROPHILIC INSULATORS 
317 
tested for contact electrification under great pressure; the six 
metals investigated all come together in the same place between 
glass and polystyrene. In the series for textiles given by Hersh, 
however, in which the method of testing was gentle rubbing, 
the metals do nof come together. 
Vieweg (1926) has published an interesting triboelectric series 
in which most of the members are mineral crystals with a speci- 
fied face rubbed (p. 86). 
The different faces of a crystal are 
grouped together in the series without other crystals intervening.

CHAPTER XVI 
MERCURY 
THE metallic state being well understood, and a liquid being 
incapable of experiencing friction in the sense that is pertinent 
to triboelectrification, mercury would seem to be provided by 
a beneficent providence as a means of disentangling the pheno- 
mena of contact electrification from those of frictional electrifica- 
tion. We have already argued (p. 51) from the experiments of 
Medley on mercury that friction is not necessary for the genera- 
tion 
of the largest charges produced 
in triboelectrification. 
When, however, we go further than this, we find that the 
experimental results on mercury, far from being simple, show 
the greatest complexity. There is no reason for supposing that 
charging against electrophilic insulators will not occur with 
mercury as 
it does with other metals, but mercury charges 
electrophobic insulators as well, as Medley found. This implies 
an additional mechanism of charging. 
If neither electrons nor 
ions can be the charge carriers, then these must be particles of 
mercury. 
The assumption that material transfer plays a large 
part in the charging of mercury goes a long way towards explain- 
ing the experimental results, 
but discrepancies remain. 
A 
coherent explanation of all the results seems quite elusive at 
the present time; let us therefore adopt the procedure of inquiring 
how far the assumption of charging by material transfer is a 
useful working hypothesis. 
Christiansen (1894) found that the presence or absence of 
traces of oxygen determined the sign of charging of mercury 
with oxidizable insulators; Shaw and Jex (1928) found reversals 
due to the presence 
or absence of moisture. 
Perhaps more 
important, and certainly more difficult to control, is the presence 
of traces of other metals dissolved in the mercury: in experiments 
on entrainment charging which are discussed below 
(p. 319) 
1011 parts of zinc in the mercury had a detectable effect. 
It 
follows that the findings 
in individual experiments cannot

XVI 
MERCURY 
319 
satisfactorily be assessed without knowing the purity of the 
mercury and the extent to which water and oxygen were present. 
Most experimenters have been aware of the importance of this, 
but have worked under widely varying conditions and with 
different degrees of control. 
Each experiment must be con- 
sidered on its merits. 
In addition to experiments on the charging of solids by 
mercury, investigation of the charging of gases when bubbled 
through mercury (and of splashing, spraying, and the shattering 
of drops) have yielded comparable information which needs to 
be taken into account when looking for interpretations. There 
1s overwhelming evidence (Harper, 1957) that such charging of 
gases is normally the result of the entrainment of liquid droplets 
in the gas stream; subsequent evaporation of the entrained liquid 
leaves nuclei 
of non-volatile impurity behind. 
These nuclei 
represent large ions when the original droplets were charged, 
neutral centres when they were not. 
Neutral centres can be 
detected by ionizing the ambient gas; 
if neutral centres are 
present they become charged by capturing small ions and can 
be recognized as additional large ions. 
Particulate matter in 
the liquid (motes and veils) may also become entrained and 
contribute to the formation of nuclei. 
In general, entrainment 
charging puts both positive and negative ions together with 
neutral centres into the gas, with one sign of charge predominat- 
ing. There are exceptions, however. 
It is well established in the field of entrainment charging that 
the progressive addition of small amounts of an impurity metal 
to mercury can result in an excess of ions of one sign changing 
into an excess of ions of the opposite sign: there is an inversion 
point at which equal numbers of ions of both signs are present. 
The apparent lack of charging does not mean that the mechanism 
of entrainment charging has ceased to operate, since ions of both 
signs are still produced. 
Biihl (1926) found the inversion point 
when spraying mercury with air to be at 2 X 10-8 parts of zinc 
or 4X10-¢ parts of tin. 
Obviously, such small amounts 
of 
impurity cannot affect the charging properties of mercury if the 
impurity is uniformly distributed throughout the volume; a

320 
MERCURY 
XVI 
concentration at the surface must occur. 
In the case of zinc, 
there 
is only enough to form a monomolecular layer on the 
surface of such quantities of mercury as are required for the 
experiments. Now there is no reason to expect dissolved metal 
to become preferentially attracted to the surface in any high 
degree. When the metal is oxidized, however, this is likely to 
occur. One visualizes patches of oxide swimming on the surface, 
or a uniform film. The oxide must be more strongly attracted 
to the mercury than to itself and so tend to spread; if this were 
not the case it would agglomerate to form particulate matter 
that would be much too sparsely distributed to affect the charg- 
ing. A tendency to film formation makes it possible that oxide 
which has not yet reached the surface will form a foam-like 
structure within the mercury, like the veils that have been 
observed in water 
(p. 83). 
A structure of this kind could be 
stable. 
However this may be, 
it would seem that traces of 
impurity metal cannot affect the charging unless at least one 
of the other impurities to which the charging is sensitive, viz. 
oxygen and water, is present as well. This opinion is confirmed 
by the observation that inversion can be caused by the base 
metals which are readily oxidizable, but not by the noble metals; 
gold has a negligible effect on the charging. Speaking generally, 
it would appear safe to conclude that 
it 
is oxide (perhaps 
hydrated) on the surface of mercury to which the charging is 
so sensitive, and that when inversion occurs one should look 
for an oxide film as the probable cause. 
This conclusion need 
cause no surprise. 
The oxidation 
of 
a freshly formed mercury surface 
in 
a 
laboratory atmosphere takes some hours. 
Its course was fol- 
lowed by Perucca (1921) who observed the slow change 
of 
contact potential with reference 
to 
a standard metal. 
The 
mercury surface became more ©ve as the oxidation proceeded. 
This is in conformity with the oxidation process as described 
on p. 184 according to the theory of Cabrera and Mott. 
We can now formulate an hypothesis of contact charging by 
mercury through material transfer. 
Clean, pure mercury can 
only charge a chemically stable insulator if a retreating mercury

XVI 
MERCURY 
321 
surface leaves behind droplets of the metal. As we saw on p. 183 
when discussing contact potentials, these droplets, because of 
their small size, will be negatively charged. 
It is to be presumed 
that the droplets will promptly evaporate, or possibly oxidize if 
oxygen is present, but this will not alter the amount of the charge 
(a) 
(b) 
  
  
  
C 
F1e. 16.1. Mercury receding from surface of insulator. 
(a) no charging, 
(b) charging due to detachment of droplets. 
  
  
left on the surface of the insulator. 
The tendency of mercury 
to be left behind by receding mercury when an insulating surface 
is being charged thereby is demonstrated by an observation 
of Medley (1953a) to the effect that the contact angle becomes 
90° under these conditions. We visualize a state of affairs like 
that in Fig. 16.1. When charging occurs, the insulator surface 
is not far from being wetted by the mercury. 
Our hypothesis 
requires an insulator to be charged Svely by clean pure mercury. 
We do not expect the sign of charging to be altered by metallic 
impurities in the mercury unless these have become oxidized. 
Suppose, now, there is a film of oxide on the mercury surface. 
If its composition is stoichiometric and it is perfectly insulating 
it can hinder, but not otherwise modify, the charging. 
If, how- 
ever, it has oxygen negative ions adsorbed on it, as we would 
postulate in the case of Perucca’s experiments, then the oxide 
film will be negatively charged with respect to the bulk metal 
and the neighbouring mercury will be positively charged. 
If a 
receding mercury surface, contaminated with an oxide film of 
this kind, leaves the oxide film behind, then the insulator will 
again become Ovely charged; if, on the other hand, the oxide 
film retreats with the bulk mercury and droplets of metal are 
left behind, then the insulator will become @vely charged and 
the oxide film has caused an inversion of the sign of charging,

322 
MERCURY 
XVI 
as found in experiments on entrainment charging. These experi- 
ments lead us to suppose that the oxide film is strongly held by 
the mercury surface, whence it would follow that the film is 
unlikely to be left behind on the surface of an insulator; it need 
not, however, prevent mercury droplets from breaking through 
the oxide film and being left behind. 
Thus, our hypothesis 
suggests that the presence of an oxide film, perhaps coming 
from metallic impurities that have become oxidized, may lead 
to an inversion of contact charging. 
Inversions in mercury/insulator charging are well known, 
particularly with dilute amalgams. Medley (1953a) investigated 
the charging of polymer and other materials tn vacuo. 
Poly- 
ethylene was cleaned before the observations by applying heat 
(the method used by Harper in the experiments which estab- 
lished polyethylene 
as 
an electrophobe), 
the mercury was 
redistilled, and water vapour should have been largely removed 
by the diffusion pump, though it must be admitted that Dawson 
(1929) found it necessary to bake out a similar apparatus before 
the disturbing effects of water were completely got rid 
of. 
Nevertheless, there is little reason to doubt that Medley observed 
the charging given by clean mercury without an oxide layer. 
Under these circumstances, Medley found that all the insulators 
were charged Ovely. 
After a small quantity of sodium, zine, 
lead, or tin had been added to the mercury, the sign of charging 
was reversed. 
Here, then, is experimental confirmation of our 
hypothesis. 
Coehn and Lotz (1921), and Coehn and Curs (1924), investi- 
gated charging under strict vacuum conditions which should 
have eliminated oxygen and particularly water, using carefully 
purified mercury and amalgams. They found that silica, hard 
glass, soft glass, and diamond were charged ©vely by pure 
mercury. They found inversion of charging with amalgams of 
base metals but not with amalgams of noble metals. Diamond, 
however, was an exception, charging ©vely under all circum- 
stances. 
It is easy to invent an ad hoc reason for this one excep- 
tion. 
Shaw, in his paper on triboelectric series (1917), observes that

XVI 
MERCURY 
323 
mercury cannot be fitted into a series. 
This failure would be 
expected if the charging is due to material transfer. 
He also 
found that everything (except celluloid and indiarubber) became 
@vely charged if inserted into and removed from a vessel of 
mercury gently, whereas everything (except asbestos) became 
©vely charged if stirred violently in it. The mercury had been 
exposed to a laboratory atmosphere for some time and was not 
necessarily dry or pure, so we probably have to do with an oxide 
film. 
This would account for the positive charging with gentle 
immersion; 
the negative charging with vigorous stirring 
is 
explained if the procedure was sufficiently violent to bring the 
insulator into contact with uncontaminated mercury inside the 
bulk liquid without encountering any oxide film on the way out, 
the latter having been broken up into swirling islands. 
Shaw 
also found that a glass rod plunged into mercury became highly 
charged the first time, but on repeating the process several times 
the charge became very small. The original excitability, however, 
was restored by rubbing the glass by hand or with a cotton 
duster. 
This looks like charging by material transfer, with a 
limitation on available space on the insulator for accommodating 
the material, so that the insulator becomes saturated with the 
transferred material unless 
it 
is rubbed 
off. 
Perhaps more 
significant is the finding that as the mercury was heated above 
room temperature, the charging decreased, finally disappearing 
at 200° C. The progressive disappearance was unlike the change 
to a metastable state above a critical temperature found with 
other substances. 
It could be due to increasing vapour pressure, 
particularly at the convex surface of the forming drop, which 
might lead to the liquid in the drop distilling back to the bulk 
of the mercury before the droplet had time to become detached, 
so reducing the size of the droplet being charged by contact 
potential and ultimately eliminating 
it altogether at 
a suffi- 
ciently high temperature. 
So far the hypothesis of material transfer has worked well. 
Unfortunately, however, this comes from selecting experimental 
results, and we must now admit that there are other findings 
which do not fit and cannot easily be explained away. Dawson

324 
MERCURY 
XVI 
(1929) obtained consistent charging against silica by carefully 
eliminating water; he found it necessary to bake out his apparatus 
to achieve this. The silica charged @vely. It is true that he made 
the measurements in dry air, but it does not seem likely that 
there was time for his mercury to have become contaminated 
with oxide, unless his remark that slow separation was important 
for consistency is to be taken as implying that it had already 
happened (cf. Shaw). The charge density was low—1 e.s.u./cm?2. 
The unexpected sign of charging in this one experiment is not 
very strong evidence against the charging hypothesis, but the 
same cannot be said of the work of Christiansen (1894). 
Although published at the end of the last century, Christian- 
sen’s paper is one of the best in the subject. He was well aware 
of the pitfalls when working with mercury and his methods, 
though simple, were carefully chosen. The sign of charging in 
his experiments was consistently opposite to that obtained by 
most other workers and the reverse of what has been deduced 
for charging by material transfer. He used both electrometers 
and a sensitive galvanometer for measuring the charging and 
he explains exactly how he identified the sign of the charge. 
It is hardly conceivable that he should have made a mistake 
about sign, though there is an instance in the literature of this 
having been done. His anomalous conclusions were as follows. 
(i) The insulator 
is charged @vely by mercury when oxygen 
is 
excluded. The insulators used were pitch, sealing wax, colophony, 
silk, camphor, and paraffin wax. 
The effect with paraffin wax, 
incidentally, was an order of magnitude smaller than with the 
other insulators. 
(ii) The insulator charges ©vely in the presence of oxygen. 
(iii) In the complete absence 
of oxygen, 
all amalgams make the 
insulator @ve. 
(iv) In 
the presence 
of traces 
of oxygen, amalgams 
of calcium, 
barium, aluminium, magnesium, 
zinc, manganese, and ammo- 
nium make the insulator @ve (i.e. these amalgams do not give 
a reversal). 
(v) In the presence of traces of oxygen, amalgams of iron, nickel, tin, 
lead, copper, and silver make the insulator ©ve (i.e. these amal- 
gams do give a reversal). 
(vi) Zinc amalgam exhibits a rather complicated behaviour. 
In the 
complete absence of oxygen it charges the insulator @vely. In

XVI 
MERCURY 
325 
the presence of a trace of oxygen it charges the insulator still 
more @vely, but with further oxygen the charge changes to ©ve. 
The worst discrepancy between our working hypothesis and 
experiment is the sign of entrainment charging. 
Briefly, the 
inversion is the wrong way round, but the matter is complicated 
by an experiment of de Broglie’s (1910) which showed that 
perfectly dry mercury gives neither large ions nor neutral centres 
when bubbled with dry nitrogen and only a tenuous uncharged 
smoke of oxide when bubbled with dry air. 
The presence of 
large ions or neutral centres was detected by shining a beam 
from an arc-light through a lens on to the gas; particles illumi- 
nated by the intense light near the focus were rendered visible 
by scattering. 
A stream of dry, filtered nitrogen, passed over 
mercury which was being shaken vigorously, at first contained 
ions and neutral centres attributed to water. 
In the course of 
time, as the mercury dried progressively, both ions and neutral 
centres disappeared. 
This means that entrainment is absent 
with perfectly clean mercury, and that the oxide formed under 
the conditions of de Broglie’s experiment was non-conducting. 
The absence of entrainment can be explained by reference to 
an observation of Dombrowski and Fraser (1954) concerning 
the manner in which the sheet of liquid sprayed from an orifice 
breaks up. 
Most liquids form a large number of tiny droplets 
either by direct disintegration, or from filaments torn off the 
edges of the sheet, or through the intermediary of a lace-like 
structure. 
Pure mercury is an exception: the sheet breaks up 
through the appearance of perforations which grow without the 
formation of threads or drops. 
A 2 per cent sodium amalgam, 
however, behaves typically. 
The unusual behaviour of pure 
mercury when sprayed from an orifice is presumably matched 
by similar behaviour when the liquid is shaken. 
The effect of 
water contamination in encouraging entrainment doubtless acts 
through surface tension. 
Biihl (1926), following the earlier work of Becker (1909, 1910), 
carried out an extensive 
investigation 
of the entrainment 
charging 
of mercury by bubbling, splashing, and spraying. 
He regarded the results obtained from spraying as the least

326 
MERCURY 
XVI 
complicated, because the surface of the mercury was continually 
being renewed from below; they will be assumed to be the most 
significant for the present discussion. 
Biihl worked with air. 
Splashing gave comparable numbers of positive and negative 
ions, bubbling gave mainly positive ions with some negative, 
but spraying, provided the mercury was as pure as he could 
obtain it, gave positive ions only. The mercury was very care- 
fully purified, finishing with three distillations ¢n vacuo in a still 
in which sprinting was eliminated. The occurrence of negative 
ions from bubbling and splashing was attributed to there being 
sufficient time for some oxidation to occur; 
the absence 
of 
negative ions from spraying may be interpreted as evidence 
that oxidation did not occur, and this was supported by the 
observation that there were very few neutral centres. 
Biihl 
showed spectroscopically that his large ions contained mercury; 
they were not water as in the case of de Broglie’s experiments. 
It would seem that the fact that Biihl obtained ions whereas 
de Broglie did not, should be attributed to different mechanics 
of entrainment, not to contamination. The important thing is 
that the nearer Biihl got to the ideal conditions of entrainment 
of uncontaminated mercury by an unreactive gas the fewer 
negative ions there were, his best conditions giving positive ions 
only. He obtained inversion with zinc and tin but not with gold. 
The mere fact that he did obtain inversion is strong evidence 
that his mercury was sufficiently pure to give the correct sign 
of charging when no other metal was added to it. Confirmation 
of the sign of the charge comes from the finding of Coehn and 
Duhme (1924) that hydrogen bubbled through pure mercury 
gives positive ions. 
If the unexpected sign of charging in these experiments cannot 
be explained away by postulating an effect of contamination, 
one may ask whether it can be accounted for in terms of the 
mechanics of entrainment. The answer appears to be that it can, 
but in so doing the possibility of inversion 
is automatically 
excluded. One can identify (Harper, 1957) two distinect possible 
origins of the large ions formed by entrainment charging during 
bubbling. With some liquids, water being typical, a blister forms

XVI 
MERCURY 
327 
on the bubble (Fig. 16.2), the blister shatters, and the debris 
consists of tiny droplets. These droplets come from a thin film 
of liquid which would be negatively charged in the case of a 
metal. After the bubble has burst, a jet of liquid is thrown up 
(a) 
(b) 
   
Fr1c. 16.2. The bursting of a gas bubble at the surface of a liquid. 
(a) droplets 
from bursting blister, (b) droplets from jet thrown up after bubble burst. The 
polarity refers to the case of a metal. 
from the centre of the depression. 
The thread of liquid so 
formed breaks into drops. 
These drops come from underlying 
parts of the liquid from which, in the case of a metal, a negatively 
charged film has been removed, so the drops should be positively 
charged. 
In the case of water, Harper concluded that the jet 
was an unlikely source of large ions, which almost certainly come 
from the blister. We have, however, seen that a sheet of mercury 
produced by spraying from an orifice perforates without much 
formation of drops; one may guess that a bubble on mercury can 
burst without the formation of a blister. 
In that event, any 
large ions would have to come from the jet and might be posi- 
tively charged. 
Biihl’s sprayer was unlike a bubbler and also 
unlike the sprayer used by Dombrowski and Fraser. Itis difficult 
to visualize any sprayer that would involve a process giving jets 
like those formed in bubbling, but such a process is, perhaps, 
just possible. 
If the positive ions obtained by Biihl from the spraying of 
clean mercury are explained in the above way, we have, so to 
speak, already used the subsurface positive charge to account 
for the entrainment charge of pure mercury. With a negatively 
charged oxide film on a mercury surface, the subsurface mercury 
is still positively charged; when entrained it should give positive

328 
MERCURY 
XV1 
ions as before. 
This means that we are unable to account for 
inversion, unless we abandon our working hypothesis and say 
that the negative ions are formed out of the oxide layer. Doing 
this would invalidate much of the previous discussion and would 
not, as far asthe author can see, give as good an overall agreement 
between theory and the experiments on the charging of mercury.

CHAPTER XVII 
TEXTILES 
A TEXTILE is a woven material, or a fibre suitable for weaving. 
The natural fibres are somewhat hydrophilic, the synthetic ones 
less so, but both cellulose and nylon were found in Chapter X 
to be electrophobic. 
In a dry atmosphere they are quite good 
insulators. 
Light contact and gentle rubbing should give no 
charging with clean dry textiles, since only vigorous rubbing 
will provide the hot spots necessary to make primary charging 
possible, but 
if secondary charging occurs, due perhaps 
to 
adsorbed water, the charge will be well retained. We have seen 
in Chapter I that it is easy to be misled about the extent of 
charging by confusing persistent retention of charge with strong 
original charging. Hence one must ask whether the reputation 
that textiles have of charging freely may not be evidence of 
great nuisance value rather than strong charging. 
The author suspects that there has been a number of occasions 
on which dissimilar materials have given zero charging, which 
have remained unpublished because the experimenter has felt 
that the absence of charging was unnatural and caused by some 
disturbing circumstance that he was unable to identify. 
Two 
such findings, however, have been published in the literature on 
textiles, without any special significance having been attached 
to the absence of charging, which absence the present author 
regards as being fundamental. Kluge (1929), in one of the most 
careful investigations ever conducted and which will be described 
later, found and confirmed absence of charging when rubbing 
a particular specimen of cleaned, unloaded, natural silk against 
platinum which had been heated to a dull red n vacuo, in dry 
air. The silk behaved as an electrophobic insulator, as it should. 
Sereda and Feldman (1964), investigating the charging of various 
fabrics by rolling them between a nickel-plated roller and a 
nickel plate in air at different humidities, found very small 
charging with cotton (cellulose fibre) which had been washed

330 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
with a detergent, irrespective of relative humidity. The washed 
cotton was electrophobic, in agreement with Harper’s finding 
(p. 218) that a block of pure cellulose was electrophobic. Since 
the charging of cotton was normally dependent on the humidity, 
it would appear that washing with the detergent removed some 
kind of contamination which facilitated the adsorption of water. 
The charging said to be very small was small compared with 
that normally obtained with cotton, but this was only 1-2 e.s.u./ 
cm? at most. 
It is true that this figure is the average surface 
charge density, and that the charge density generated over the 
area of true contact would have been greater, but a metal roller 
pressing on a woven material deforms both the individual fibres 
and the weave itself in such a way as to minimize the disparity 
between true and apparent areas 
of contact. 
A secondary 
charging mechanism can easily account for the charge densities 
obtained. 
Nevertheless, the fabrics were what can reasonably 
be called highly charged. 
The capacitance 
of the Faraday 
cylinder and measuring instrument, an electrostatic voltmeter, 
was 25 pF'; the fully charged cotton specimen of size 
4 X 5 in., 
when placed in the Faraday cylinder, deflected the measuring 
instrument to 4000 V. 
Sereda and Feldman found that the charge on the fabric 
increased with the number of passes of the roller until it reached 
a maximum, after which it remained steady or fell off. 
The 
maximum was reached more quickly at greater values of relative 
humidity; as many as a hundred passes might be needed to reach 
it at low relative humidity. The maximum charge attained was 
investigated as a function of relative humidity. The results for 
cotton are shown in Fig. 17.1; the two sets of points are for 
material which has reached equilibrium at the given relative 
humidity by approaching it from a high, or from a low, humidity 
respectively. 
The four fabrics investigated all gave the same 
value of maximum (negative) charge, but the maxima occurred 
at different values of relative humidity. 
These values were: 
cotton drill, r.h. 18 per cent; nylon taffeta, r.h. 21 per cent; wool 
flannel, r.h. 18 per cent; propylon, r.h. 50 per cent. The sorption 
isotherms were then investigated for these materials and it was

XVII 
TEXTILES 
331 
deduced that the preceding values of relative humidity corre- 
sponded to the formation of 
a monomolecular layer of water on 
the surface of the material. Thus the maximum charge transfer 
  
4000 
2000   
Electrostatic voltmeter deflexion 
    
o0 Adsorption cycle 
e Desorption cycle 
1000 
- 
  
    
0 
O 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
RH (per cent) 
F1e. 17.1. Charging of cotton pressed between a nickel roller and a nickel plate. 
was of the same amount for all the materials and occurred when 
they were covered by a monomolecular layer of water. 
It looks 
as if the charging of the nickel was really charging by this mono- 
molecular layer of water, the textile fabric merely acting as a 
base supporting the water. 
Since the metal became Pve, one 
would suppose the charge carriers to have been protons, as seems 
likely to have been the case in Harper’s experiments on quartz 
(p. 302). The falling part of the curvesin Fig. 17.1 was attributed 
by Sereda and Feldman to a dissipation of charge resulting from

332 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
increasing electrical conductivity. 
There remains the question 
of the charging at zero r.h.; this was different in magnitude for 
the different materials. It is presumably due to some contamina- 
tion present to a different extent or different in character for 
the different fabrics, and removable from cotton by washing in 
detergent. The contamination would be electrophilic, the cotton 
base electrophobic, and the disappearance of charging the result 
of exposing the electrophobic cotton to the metal. This explana- 
tion is in better accord with what has been said about charging 
mechanisms than the explanation given by Sereda and Feldman. 
Their explanation was that electrophilic cotton was covered by 
electrophobic dirt as a result of the washing with detergent; 
washing with detergent, however, is one method of degreasing, 
and one would expect the detergent itself to be electrophilic. 
The importance of contamination on textile fibres was investi- 
gated by Shaw and Jex (1926) for different textiles rubbed on 
glass. They found a correlation between the effects of contami- 
nation on friction and on charging, and summarized their con- 
clusions as follows. 
(1) A glass surface starting in a standard state of cleanliness adsorbs 
condensable material if it is left in the air of the laboratory and 
the coefficient of friction u slowly decreases during the course of 
several days from say 1-2 to about 0-7. 
(ii) Ordinary textiles, when rubbed on the standard glass, bring 
about a lowering of u quickly. 
Continued rubbing will bring it 
down even as low as 0-13. For a value of 0-18 the charge on the 
glass due to rubbing becomes @®ve, having been Sve for higher 
values of w. 
(iii) Textile materials rendered very clean by prolonged treatment 
with solvents (benzene, etc.) slowly reduce u for the glass on 
which they are rubbed to about 0-6 as the limit. The coefficient 
of friction never reaches 0-18 and the charge on the glass remains 
©ve, the glass never acquiring a @ve charge. 
(iv) When a glass surface has attained a low value of u, say 0-13, it 
acquires a higher value (even 0-54) when heated, or placed in a 
vacuum, or left in air. 
(v) With glass having medium values of yu, the sign of the charge 
due to rubbing can be made @ve or ©Ove according as the rubbing 
i1s gentle or violent: when yarns or fabrics are used, according 
as the rubbing is along or across the fibres.

XVII 
TEXTILES 
333 
(vi) Two standard glass surfaces acquire no charge when rubbed 
together, but if one has been rubbed by a textile more than the 
other, it is @ve to the other. 
(vii) 
If one of two identical surfaces of glass be heated and then rubbed 
on the other, it becomes ©ve to it. 
The changes in the coefficient of friction that result from 
rubbing glass with textiles indicate that the latter were con- 
taminated by some substance with lubricating properties; the 
fact that glass contaminated with this substance becomes @ve 
with respect to uncontaminated glass implies that the contami- 
nant gives up negative ions to the other surface. Since, however, 
uncontaminated textile materials are electrophobic but glass is 
electrophilic, one would expect transfer of ions from the glass 
to the textile to be the dominant form of charging. Since well- 
cleaned textiles become @ve with respect to glass, the standard 
glass of these experiments must have given up positive ions. 
If these assumptions are correct, we can explain the reversal 
of the sign of the charge on glass when rubbed progressively 
with ordinary textiles as due to the contaminant at first situated 
on the textile being transferred to the glass and covering the 
latter, leaving the textile relatively clean. 
In the first stage of 
rubbing, we have some positive ions leaving the glass and some 
negative ions arriving, so giving strong negative charging. 
At 
reversal, when the glass is contaminated in parts, only a few 
positive ions leave the glass and these are accompanied by a lot 
of negative ions from the contaminant on the glass returning to 
the textile, the negative ions swamping the positive ions and 
compensating for negative ions still arriving from the contami- 
nant on the textile. Finally, the principal charge transfer is due 
to negative ions leaving the fully contaminated glass, so charging 
it positively. 
The other observations of Shaw and Jex are compatible with 
our assumptions, which therefore provide a coherent picture of 
their results. 
The contaminant on the textile in these experi- 
ments must have given rise to negative mobile ions, whereas in 
Sereda and Feldman’s experiments it gave rise to positive ions. 
One can only conclude that the nature of the contaminant was

334 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
different in the two cases. 
This is not unlikely; Shaw and Jex 
make no mention of cleaning their textiles, whereas Sereda and 
Feldman washed theirs with ether, alcohol, and water. 
If contaminants are mainly responsible for the charging of 
textiles, it is not to be expected that different workers using 
textiles from different sources will agree on the sign of charging, 
and 
it will account for what one might 
call the consistent 
inconsistency of their results. Another cause of what might at 
first 
sight 
be considered inconsistency 
is indicated by 
the 
observation of Shaw and Jex that the sign of charging of glass 
with an intermediate value of u, and therefore not far from the 
inversion point and sensitive to changing conditions, depends 
on whether the rubbing is gentle or vigorous. 
One presumes 
that vigorous rubbing produces hot spots which give rise to the 
opposite sign of charging from that present for gentle rubbing. 
An interesting experiment to be considered in this context, 
and already referred to on p. 279, was carried out by Martin 
(1941). 
He found that the charge acquired by a single fibre 
pulled out from a bundle of similar fibres depended, in some 
instances, on whether the fibre was pulled out by the root or 
by the tip. The effect was confined to natural fibres of animal 
origin and shown to be correlated with their microscopic struc- 
ture. 
For it to occur, the fibre had to possess a scaly surface. 
It did not occur with the main part of the fibre nor with the 
cortical cells, requiring the presence of cuticle cells to give it. 
A fibre pulled out of the bundle by the root end was @ve, pulled 
out by the tip end it was ©Ove. Martin supposed the explanation 
of the difference to lie in a piezoelectric effect resident in the 
cuticle cells but not in the rest of the fibre, but there was no 
direct evidence of this, and it has seemed to other commentators 
more likely that it was an effect of asymmetric rubbing. 
McClelland and Power (1917) investigated the rubbing of 
metals on natural silk up to very high speeds (56 ft/sec). They 
found the sign of charging with a given metal to depend on 
circumstances. 
A polished metal tended 
to become Pvely 
charged; if the metal were roughened it tended to become Ovely 
charged. 
" Heating the metal rubber to 100° C decreased the

XVII 
TEXTILES 
335 
charging when this was positive but increased it when it was 
negative; in both cases the increase in temperature altered the 
charging towards ©ve. This suggests that the effect of roughen- 
ing a metal rubber was to increase the heating by friction and 
  
  
  
120 
Load =120 ¢ 
100 
- 
o 
Load=90 ¢ 
5 
° 
80 
Load 
= 60 
o 
a 
a 
g 
   
    
Load= 
30 g 
  
  
Rate of production of charge 
oy 
- 
T 
  
1 
1 
| 
I 
| 
| 
1 
] 
0O 
2-8 
56 
84 
11-2 
14-0 
168 
196 
22:4 
252 
280 
Revolutions per sec (I rev.=2 feet) 
  
Fia. 17.2. Charging of copper by silk. Copper @ve. 
hence make for a tendency towards negative charging. McClel- 
land and Power found that the effect of varying the humidity 
depended markedly on whether the metal was charging positively 
or negatively. 
The effect of varying the speed of rubbing also 
depended on the sign of charging, and satisfactory results at 
high speeds could not be obtained when the metal was charging 
negatively. 
With this sign of charging, increasing the speed 
increases 
the temperature 
and 
an 
increase 
of temperature 
increases the charging because of the sign of the temperature 
coefficient, quite apart from the increase resulting directly from 
increase of speed. McClelland and Power pointed out that this 
might lead to unstable behaviour which would account for the 
difficulty in obtaining reliable results. 
The curves of current 
against speed were, in fact, sometimes concave upwards. When 
the metal charged positively, curves such as those shown in 
Fig. 17.2 were obtained. An increase in pressure of the rubber 
on the silk would undoubtedly increase the area of true contact

336 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
and also the number of hot spots, two reasons why the curves 
for higher pressure should lie above those for lower pressure. 
Several reasons can be advanced for the curves showing satura- 
tion, the most obvious being dissipation of charge by conduction 
or gas discharge, and a reduction of charging caused by the 
electric field between the rubbing metal and the silk. MeClelland 
and Power point out, and rightly one would suppose, that since 
the metal was connected to a current measuring device it ought 
to be the accumulated charge on the silk that is significant in 
this respect. 
Rather oddly, however, Kluge, using somewhat 
similar apparatus, showed conclusively that the accumulated 
charge on his silk did not have any such effect. In his apparatus, 
however, accumulated charge, not current, was measured, and 
the potential of the rubbing metal increased during the course 
of a set of measurements. When plotted, these showed a satura- 
tion effect which was difficult to account for unless due to the 
electric field resulting from the increased potential of the metal. 
McClelland and Power’s results for what they call low speeds 
(which would be reckoned high speeds by Kluge) are shown for 
three metals charging negatively in Fig. 17.3. 
The points for 
platinum lie on a straight line passing close to the origin. 
This 
is compatible with Volta—Helmholtz contact charging: a given 
area is charged to a given extent irrespective of speed, whence 
the current is proportional to the area passing under the rubber 
in unit time, that is, proportional to the speed. The points for 
silver and iron, however, 
lie on straight lines which have 
a 
definite intercept on the speed axis. 
It would seem that no 
charging occurs until a definite speed has been reached, after 
which the current is proportional to the excess speed. The initial 
lack of current could be accounted for by postulating that 
charging, when it does occur, is due to hot spot formation, and 
that these require a minimum speed to appear, but the subse- 
quent linear rise of current would then be very difficult to 
explain. Thus there is no certain indication in these experiments 
as to whether the current arose from contact charging or from 
frictional charging. 
Cunningham (1964), however, has investigated the charge

XVII 
TEXTILES 
337 
generated on a belt slipping over a roller, and in this case the 
charging was clearly frictional in origin. 
The belt passed over 
a driving roller and was then discharged by a corona discharge. 
400 - 
& 
() 
>/ 
< 
XN 
v 300r 
y, 
= 
£ 
] 
G 
() 
o 
o 
.g 
\(0‘\ 
v 200 
- 
5 
g 
. 
o 
o 
o 
4 
o 
I 
S 
1001 
- 
o 
(o) 
9 
f 
1 
1 
1 
| 
1 
1 
    
| 
| 
1 
0 
0-2 
04 
06 
0-8 
-0 
12 
14 
-6 
1-8 
2:0 
Revolutions per sec (I rev.=6 feet) 
F1e. 17.3. Charging of metals by silk. Metals ©Ove. 
It then passed over the charging roller which was driven from 
the driving roller through a differential. By altering the speed 
of rotation of the differential a chosen amount of slip, positive 
or negative, could be introduced between the belt and the 
charging roller. The charge density on the belt so acquired was 
measured by a field-meter. Experiments were carried out with 
a cellulose triacetate belt slipping over a chromium-plated roller, 
and with a polyester belt slipping over a hardened steel roller, 
the results being similar. 
Fig. 17.4 shows the charge density as 
a function of slip for different belt speeds with the cellulose 
acetate belt. There was no charging in the absence of slip; the 
charge increased symmetrically with positive and negative slip 
and was greater for increased belt speeds. 
These findings are 
incompatible with contact charging but would be expected from

338 
Charge density (arbitrary units) 
TEXTILES 
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
    
  
  
+500 
Tension = 710 grams 
+400  Angle of wrap = 90° 
4 
50 per cent RH 
75° F (23-9°C) 
+300 - 
O~ 
+200 - 
+100 - 
0 
1 
l 
| 
| 
' 
[ 
| 
I 
1 
-8 
-6 
-4 
-2 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
Slip (per cent) 
Fic. 17.4 
0 
Tension = 302g 
+600 - 
Belt speed =6ft/min 
50 per cent RH 
o 
75° F (23-9°C) 
+500 
5 
> +400 
r 
= 
.% 
" 
+300 
" 
e 
5 
+200 
L 
20 
< 
~ 
O 
+100 - 
0 
& 
L 
1 
! 
! 
l 
0 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
Work per unit area (g-cm/cm?) 
Fie. 17.5 
frictional charging. In confirmation of this, Fig. 17.5 shows how 
the charge density varied with the energy dissipated at the 
belt/roller contact 
as calculated from the mechanics 
of the 
apparatus. 
The charge density 
is proportional to the work

XVII 
TEXTILES 
339 
(energy dissipated) per unit area. 
It appears that the charge 
generated was directly dependent on the heat liberated. 
It 
should be emphasized that Cunningham’s apparatus subjected 
his materials to considerable engineering stresses, probably more 
so than any other described in this chapter. 
Kluge (1929), at any rate, worked at the other extreme, that 
of gentle rubbing, and under extremely carefully controlled 
conditions. 
He 
chose unloaded natural 
silk 
as 
the 
textile, 
because of its exceptional (in 1929) high resistivity. The silk was 
washed with puref ether for several hours, and then dried at 
120° C. It was rubbed against platinum (also against palladium 
and gold), chosen because it could be freed from most forms of 
contamination by degassing at a red heat wn vacuo. 
Prior to 
this it was washed in absolute alcohol. 
By working in a good 
vacuum (c. 10-5 torr), he found it possible to eliminate reversals 
of charging, which was not the case when the measurements 
were carried out in dry air. The force between platinum rubber 
and silk was kept low, between 10 and 20 g weight; speeds were 
also low, around 1 cm/sec. The procedure of working in a good 
vacuum involved rather special apparatus; this is shown in Figs. 
17.6 and 17.7. With this procedure Kluge obtained an enviable 
degree of reproducibility—but some rather surprising results. 
The results are displayed 
in the form 
of curves showing 
accumulated charge as a function of number of turns of the 
drum carrying the silk. The drum was stopped temporarily in 
order to read the electrometer. 
In some experiments 
a full 
rotation of the drum occurred between successive readings, so 
that the same area of silk was used again when the conditions 
were changed, but in other experiments a fraction of a turn was 
assigned to each set of conditions, the rubber being withdrawn 
from the drum for the remainder of the turn, so that the charging 
curves refer to the charge accumulated during a number of half 
or quarter turns, and fresh silk for a change of conditions. The 
two procedures, however, led to the same conclusions. 
T He does not say, however, whether the ether had been recently distilled 
or not. Ether which has been left standing for some time contains a peroxide, 
and this, the author has found, can cause trouble in triboelectric experiments.

340 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
Having put new silk and platinum washed in absolute alcohol 
into the apparatus, Kluge got no charging in dry air (Fig. 17.8, 
curve 
1). 
After pumping out, the platinum charged Ovely 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Fi1c. 17.6 
A experimental tube 
F heating circuit 
L backing pump 
B screening 
G electromagnets 
M diffusion pump 
C 
electrometer 
H motor 
N fore-vacuum 
D earthing key 
J 
revolution counter 
P 
to McLeod gauge 
E earth connexion 
K filter pump 
@ mercury trap 
(curve 2); the charging became stronger when the platinum had 
been degassed at a red heat (curve 3). Dry air was then admitted, 
left for 24 hours, and again pumped out. The charging returned 
to what it had been before under the same conditions (curve 4). 
On letting in dry air again, there was no charging (curve 5). 
The platinum charged Ovely. 
A different specimen of silk gave slight charging when first

XVII 
TEXTILES 
341 
tested in air, but this was at first ©ve on the platinum changing 
rapidly to @ve (Fig. 17.9, curve 1). When tested after pumping 
out (curve 2), after heating (curve 3), and after admitting air 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
      
Fie. 17.7 
A copper disk 
F spindle 
L soft iron armatures 
B foil on amber support 
G supporting bearings 
M pole pieces 
C 
to electrometer 
H shaft 
N ground joints 
D heating connexions 
J spring 
P 
to pumps 
E amber insulation 
K bearings

342 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
and 
again 
pumping 
out 
(curve 
4), 
all 
the measurements 
being made in vacuo, the charging behaved in the same way as 
in the first experiment. 
When tested finally in air (curve 5), 
however, the platinum charged strongly @vely. 
26 [ 
+ 
24 — 
+/+ 
22 — 
+ 
Charge in arbitrary units 
+ 
0—2 
    
lg 
1g 
I 
2 
Number of rubs 
Fia. 17.8. Charging of platinum by silk. The sign of charge refers 
to the silk. 
The change from negative to positive charging due to the 
admission 
of air was further investigated by letting 
air 
in 
progressively, testing the while 
for 
sign and magnitude of 
charging. It was found that the change from negative to positive 
charging, i.e. zero charging, occurred between 2 and 10 torr, 
depending on the past history of the specimen. 
Whereas the

XVII 
TEXTILES 
343 
charging in air depended on past history, the charging n vacuo 
depended only on the conditioning. 
Gold and palladium gave results very like those obtained with 
platinum; the metals charged Ovely, except for the anomalous 
charging in air, similar to that of platinum. 
+12 
+10 
+8 
+6 
+4 
+2 
  
Number of rubs 
  
Charge in arbitrary units 
  
1 
] 
2 
i 
L 
1 
| 
0 
I 
2 
3 
0 
6 
7 
8 
9 
L 
12 
() 
-4L 
~6} 
0 
Al 
0 
O 
5\0\ 
Fic. 17.9. Charging of platinum by silk. The sign of charge refers to the silk. 
Kluge attempted to explain the anomalous charging as being 
due to material transfer, supposing platinum dust to have been 
formed on the surface of the platinum in some way when it was 
degassed at a red heat, and transferred to the silk later, carrying 
with 
it 
a negative charge. 
But there was no experimental 
evidence for any transfer and there would appear to be no 
reason why it should not have occurred at stage 4 as well as at 
stage 5. Material transfer following abrasion seems very unlikely 
at rubbing speeds of the order of 1 em/sec and light pressures, as 
Kluge admits. He went on to discuss the problem in terms of what 
is nowadays discredited theory; one is forced to admit that the 
explanation of his experimental results cannot yet be given.

344 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
Apart from the experiment of Martin, the investigations so 
far described have been carried out on fabries, not on individual 
fibres. 
More fundamental information should be obtainable 
from experiments on single filaments of textile materials; with 
Counterweight 
it x 
Ny 
R 
Lifting arm 
       
   
     
   
   
    
  
Lifting bar 
  
- 
‘ 
AN 
N 
Top yoke 
o 
Reciprocating 
\ (’l 
rod 
N 
  
  
7 
< IS 
_ 
Earthing 
\J 
welght 
‘\ 
bar 
To electrometer 
      
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
    
    
Insulator 
F1a. 17.10. Stroking apparatus for fibres. 
this in mind Hersh (Hersh and Montgomery, 1955) devised the 
apparatus shown in Fig. 17.10. 
Two filaments under tension 
are crossed at an angle which can be altered and the one stroked 
along the other. Reference to Fig. 4.5 will show that according 
as the stroke is along the direction of one filament, or at 45° to 
both, a single spot on one filament is rubbed against constantly 
changing spots on the other, or the contact spot is kept changing 
on both filaments. One filament is held in the earthed top yoke, 
the other is held in the bottom yoke which is insulated and 
connected to an electrometer. 
Some lines of force from the 
fibre terminate on the bottom yoke and so give rise to a deflexion 
of the electrometer. Both yokes can be rotated to the desired 
angle in the horizontal plane. The arm supporting the top yoke

XVII 
TEXTILES 
345 
is moved back and forth by a reciprocating rod driven by an 
electric motor. As the rod moves, an adjustable guide keeps the 
top filament away from the bottom filament at position A4, 
lowers it into contact with the bottom filament as the arm 
reaches depression 
B, then separates the filaments when 
it 
reaches the end of the depression at €. 
On the return journey 
the lifting arm engages the flat brass spring at the end of the 
lifting bar, so keeping the top yoke raised until it has been 
returned to position 4 in readiness for the next stroke. Cunning- 
ham and Montgomery (1958) improved the apparatus so that 
the rubbing could be carried out under controlled conditions 
of temperature, pressure, and humidity. A slave selsyn replaced 
the reciprocating rod and rotary solenoids actuated the lifting 
arm. 
A further improvement was made by Levy, Wakelin, 
Kauzmann, and Dillon (1958) so that the work expended in 
friction could be measured during the stroke. The force moving 
the filament was measured by what was, in effect, 
a spring 
balance the displacement of which was transferred to a linear 
variable differential transformer acting as a mechanical/electrical 
transducer. 
The output of the transformer was fed into an 
electronic circuit which integrated the force times the distance 
moved to derive the work expended during the stroke. The time 
constants were sufficiently short for the integration to follow the 
stick-slip motion of the filament. Discharging of the filaments 
was effected using radioactive sources; Levy ef al. improved the 
arrangements for doing this, thereby eliminating a discrepancy 
between the magnitude 
of the charges obtained when the 
filaments were interchanged, which had puzzled Hersh and 
Montgomery. 
Fair 
consistency was obtained 
by Montgomery 
and 
his 
co-workers when measurements were made after conditioning 
with only a few rubs. 
Considerably improved consistency was 
claimed by Levy et al. as a result of conditioning with several 
thousand rubs. The effect of continued rubbing was to reduce 
the magnitude of the charging considerably, as may be seen 
from Fig. 17.11; the charging only reaches a steady value after 
very long continued rubbing indeed. 
Interchanging the fibres

346 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
gave nearly the same magnitude of charge with opposite sign. 
Levy et al. express surprise that Montgomery and his co-workers 
obtained results as consistent as they did in view of their not 
having thoroughly conditioned the fibres, but, if their measure- 
400 
350+ 
300+ 
250     
Nylon on viscose 
(negative) 
- 
Charge (upc) 
    
200 
150 
Viscose on nylon 
100+ 
(positive) 
  
| 
| 
1 
1 
| 
| 
] 
0O 
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
6000 
7000 
Number of rubs 
  
F1e. 17.11. Secular change in charging. 
ments were all made within a few tens of rubs from the start, 
not much conditioning would have occurred during the measure- 
ments, since several thousands of rubs are required for the full 
change to be brought about, and the measurements could be 
consistent, though taken under quite different conditions from 
those of Levy ef al. Extensive conditioning will seldom corre- 
spond to conditions met with in textile processing, to which the 
relatively unconditioned 
fibres 
of Montgomery and 
his co-

XVII 
TEXTILES 
347 
workers correspond better, but the conditioning process helps 
in understanding 
the nature 
of the 
charging. 
Differences 
between the findings of Hersh and Montgomery and of Levy 
et 
al. 
are 
probably 
mainly 
genuine 
and 
attributable 
to 
differences in working conditions, particularly the difference in 
conditioning. 
Levy et al. used 1-mm diameter monofilaments which were 
allowed to reach equilibrium at a relative humidity of 33 per cent 
for 15 hours. The rub extended along both filaments which were 
at 45° to the direction of motion. 
Three different speeds were 
used: low—~0-88 
cm/sec, medium—1-89 
cm/sec, 
and high— 
4-03 cm/sec. 
These speeds are all at the very low end of the 
range used by McClelland and Power. 
If the charging behaviour 
had been the same the charge per rub would have been indepen- 
dent of the speed; instead of this, Levy et al. found the charge 
actually decreased with increasing speed. 
The decrease, as we 
shall see later, was probably a consequence of the long condition- 
ing. 
Hersh and Montgomery (1955), without the long condi- 
tioning, found the charge either increased with speed or was 
constant, depending on the materials. Teflon was different from 
other polymers. 
Generally, pairs of polymers gave the charge 
independent of the speed. 
Teflon with another polymer gave 
the charge increasing with speed. 
A metal filament rubbed 
against a polymer gave the charge increasing with speed up to 
about 5 cm/sec, after which it was independent of speed, but 
when the polymer was Teflon the charge slowly increased in the 
second part of the range instead of remaining constant. 
The 
behaviour with metals 
is compatible with McClelland and 
Power’s results. 
Levy et al. discharged the filaments before the rub after which 
the charge was to be measured, but not after each rub during 
conditioning: this they found to be unnecessary. 
During the 
conditioning 
of dissimilar 
fibres 
the 
coefficient 
of friction 
decreased concurrently with the charging. 
This was attributed 
to a long-term transfer of material from one fibre to the other, 
giving a lubricating effect. 
That material transfer does occur 
was 
proved 
by photomicrographs 
showing 
the transferred

348 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
material in question. An example is reproduced in Plate V(b). 
Lubrication, however, does not always decrease the charging of 
fibres. Medley (1954) found that keratin charged more strongly 
against platinum after being lubricated with paraffin oil. 
For 
a pair of similar fibres, Levy ef al. found that conditioning had 
no effect—the coefficient of friction, and the charging, remained 
constant. 
The difference 
in behaviour between similar and 
dissimilar fibres was explained in terms of welding, brought 
about by the formation of hot spots. 
In the case of dissimilar 
fibres the bridges of material formed by welding will be more 
strongly attached to one material than to the other, and may 
be expected to break off near the base of the attachments on 
the weaker side. This will result in the progressive detachment 
of asperities from one fibre and the transfer of material from 
this fibre to the other. 
In this way the first fibre becomes 
smoother. 
Hence the coefficient of friction decreases, rubbing 
causes less heating and, according to Levy et al., there will be 
less charging. The assumption that the charging is frictional in 
character at such low speeds seems to the present author rather 
doubtful, though 
it must be remembered that the localized 
pressure between two crossed fibres can easily be quite large. 
In the case of similar fibres, Levy ef al. point out that the welds 
are symmetrical in character, will probably break in the middle, 
and there is no reason to expect transfer of material in one 
direction rather than the 
other. 
Hence conditions 
are not 
changed by continued rubbing. Levy ef al. found that lubrication 
with paraffin decreased both the coefficient of friction and the 
charging under their conditions, except in one instance, viscose/ 
nylon, in which there was 
a temporary increase both in the 
coefficient of friction and in the charging; this was followed by 
a decrease. The lubricant at first failed to lubricate! 
The variation of charging with speed is difficult to investigate 
reliably, because when the speed is changed for a new set of 
readings and then returned to a previous value, charging may 
not be what it was before. 
The long conditioning adopted by 
Levy et al., however, eliminated this ambiguity, so that the 
variation with speed could be reliably investigated. Results for

XVII 
TEXTILES 
349 
cellulose triacetate/nylon are shown in Fig. 17.12. 
The charge 
has been plotted against the root of the frictional work and is 
200 
180 - 
—0— Low velocity 
160 - 
—o— Medium velocity 
—— High velocity 
> 
Qo 
l 
120 - 
Positive charge (ppc) 
100 - 
80 
|- 
  
  
O 
Vv 
l 
L 
| 
i 
| 
] 
) 
26 
30 
34 
38| 
42 
46 
(Frictional work) 2 
Fia. 17.12 
roughly proportional to it for different pressures at a given speed 
but the charging decreases for increasing speed. The hypothes1s 
of material transfer 
is versatile enough to account for this 
remarkable result—perhaps it is rather too versatile to be a 
really useful hypothesis! One postulates that higher speeds give

350 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
more hot spots and hence increased welding with more material 
transfer, and then says that the transferred material blocks 
charge transfer to some extent, because, where it is situated, the 
rubbing is between like surfaces. The difficulty about accepting 
this interpretation of Levy ef al. is that the material transfer 
must occur to the right extent 
at different speeds without 
affecting the conditioning of the fibres which is supposed to be 
determined by the amount of material transferred during the 
conditioning process. 
Perhaps there is an essential difference 
between the short-term transfer required to account for the 
results of the experiment and the long-term transfer involved 
in conditioning. The supposition of increased material transfer 
at higher rubbing speeds receives support from measurements 
of the coefficient of friction which was found to be greater at 
higher speeds. This was also true for the rubbing of like materials: 
the charging was small or zero for all speeds, but the frictional 
work expended in a rub greater for higher speeds, presumably 
indicating more welding. 
Further work will be required before the charging can be 
correlated with the mechanical parameters of a theory. Mont- 
gomery, Smith, and Wintermute (1961), working with practically 
unconditioned filaments, found the charge to be proportional to 
the square root of the product of the filament diameter and the 
normal force for nylon/tantalum, but proportional to the square 
root of the normal force and nearly independent of diameter for 
nylon/polyethylene. Levy et al., in Fig. 17.12, show the charge 
nearly proportional to the square root of the frictional work (for 
varying normal force), but it must not be concluded that this 
represents any significant correlation of charge with energy 
expended (comparable with the relation found by Cunningham), 
because the charge also depends on the speed. 
In the absence 
of such correlation, it has little meaning to calculate the mechani- 
cal efficiency of charge production, and we have seen in Chapter 
IV that we would not expect such a procedure to have any direct 
relation to the mechanism of charging. In the work of Levy ef al. 
efficiencies (the ratio of electrical energy produced to frictional 
work expended) varied in the range 2 per cent down to a small

XVII 
TEXTILES 
3561 
fraction of a percent. 
The highest efficiency was from dried 
materials in a dry atmosphere. 
This was associated with both 
a modest increase of charging and a considerable decrease in the 
700 
650 - 
+—-0%R.H. 
N 
Q 
Qo 
T 
w 
n 
o 
1 
Positive charge (puuc) 
500 
450 - 
  
  
A—L 
] 
| 
l 
| 
W 
| 
1 
l 
| 
| 
| 
1 
18 
20 
22 
24 
26 
28 
30 
32 
34 
36 
38 
40 
42 
44 
I 
(Frictional work) 2 
Fic. 17.13 
1 
] 
  
coefficient of friction. 
The effect of humidity on the charging 
of cellulose acetate/nylon is shown in Fig. 17.13. Different points 
refer to different stages in conditioning. There are no results on 
monofilaments which are directly comparable with those 
of 
Sereda and Feldman on fabrics, but the change from R.h. 33 per 
cent to dry conditions affected the charging in opposite directions 
in the two cases. 
Series for textiles 
We have seen that material transfer plays an important role 
in the charging of textiles, but that it is not yet clear how far 
the material transferred carries the charge and how far 
it 
prevents it. For vigorous rubbing, however, it is fairly certain 
that charge is transferred thermoelectrically in the hot spots. 
For gentle rubbing, charge is probably mainly transferred as ions 
of contaminant material in most instances. These conclusions 
apply tomaterials similar to those normally considered as textiles.

3562 
TEXTILES 
XVII 
It is therefore only for gentle rubbing that we are entitled to 
look for 
a triboelectric series, and in view of the variety of 
sources of extraneous contamination which can provide ions of 
different kinds on or in the fibres, one would hardly anticipate 
being able 
to find 
a 
series. 
Nevertheless, though different 
investigators disagree on order to some extent, it does appear 
that there is something close to a triboelectric series of textiles 
and similar materials. Montgomery, who has worked extensively 
with textiles, gives the following series. 
Pve end of series 
Wool 
Nylon (copolyamide of hexamethylene diamine and adipic 
acid) 
Viscose (cellulose) 
Cotton 
Natural silk 
Acetate rayon (cellulose acetate) 
Lucite or Perspex (vinyl polymer of methyl methacrylate) 
Polyvinyl alcohol 
Dacron (copolyester of ethylene glycol and terephthalic acid) 
Orlon (vinyl polymer of acrylonitrile) 
P.V.C. (vinyl polymer of vinyl chloride) 
Dynel (vinyl copolymer of acrylonitrile and vinyl chloride) 
Velon 
(vinyl copolymer 
of vinylidene chloride and vinyl 
chloride) 
Polyethylene (vinyl polymer of ethylene) 
Teflon or Fluon (vinyl polymer of tetrafluoroethylene) 
Sve end of series 
Reduction and elimination of static charge 
Apart from ‘Saran Wrap’, a polymer film designed to electrify 
freely and so adhere to itself and other things as well, static 
electrification is a nuisance in plastics and textile technology, 
and may be a danger. 
Static can be dissipated after it has been 
formed by rendering the surrounding air conducting, using a 
corona discharge or 
a radioactive source, or by keeping the 
humidity sufficiently high for the fabric itself to possess enough

XVII 
TEXTILES 
353 
electrical conductivity to enable the charge to leak away in a 
short time. 
Different textiles charge to different extents, but 
the rapidity with which they discharge is more important in 
determining their rating with respect to static nuisance (Wilson, 
1963), because their resistivities range over at least six orders 
of magnitude. The charging can be reduced in the first instance 
by the use of anti-static agents which can also act by increasing 
conductivity. Medley (1954) considers the relative importance 
for charge dissipation in textiles of conduction within the fibres, 
this being a function of humidity, of conduction due to impurities 
on the surface of the fibre, the anti-static agent Lubrol MO 
providing an example of this, and of discharge through the 
ambient gas. 
It would be of great technological value if one could find a way 
of eliminating static generation in the processing of textiles and 
plastics. Unfortunately, what has been said in this chapter gives 
little hope of doing that. Unless all rubbing can be kept gentle, 
hot spots are sure to occur and are likely to cause electrification, 
even with pure fibres. 
Gentle rubbing is likely to electrify any 
textile which is contaminated with an ion-forming substance. 
Since textile processing requires the use of catalysts, plasticizers, 
loading materials, mordants, dyes, and many other chemicals, 
it would seem hopeless to eliminate all such sources of charging. 
If designed-in anti-static properties are sought for, 
a better 
approach would be to provide the textile fibres with sufficient 
electrical conductivity to prevent static retention.

APPENDIX 
TrE differential equation (11.3) found for the separation charging of 
spheres was 
  
| Moy + P+ 
Ounte) G @—00) 
To obtain a solution of quite high numerical accuracy by appropriate 
methods, we take advantage of the fact that the current cut-off, though 
not instantaneous, is nevertheless sharp. 
The separation process falls 
naturally into three stages. 
Stage I is the first (adiabatic) stage during 
which equilibrium is maintained as the separation proceeds, the potential 
difference between the spheres being equal to the contact potential 
throughout this stage. The charge decreases in such a way as to ensure 
that this is so. The last stage of the separation, during which the charge 
is constant, with the potential difference increasing in accordance with 
the decrease of C),, 
is defined as Stage III. 
The transition between 
Stage I and Stage II, defined as occurring at z = z;, and the transition 
between Stage II and Stage III, defined as occurring at z = z,, are not 
uniquely defined, but it will be sufficient if 2, is made small enough and 
z, large enough but with the conditions still holding with the accuracy 
required to ensure the degree of precision being aimed at in the calculated 
value of the separation charge. 
The equation becomes simplified and is immediately soluble for z < 2, 
and for z > z,. Itisonly in Stage II, forz, > 
2z > 2,, that approximation 
is required. We know, however, that 2z, must be fairly close to z,, because 
the rapid (exponential) decrease of conductance of the gap with increasing 
thickness round the critical value ensures a quite sharp current cut-off. 
If now we calculate the final charge on the assumption that Stage IIT 
follows Stage I at z,, we obtain an upper limit, because, in fact, some 
charge is lost in Stage II. If we repeat the calculation on the assumption 
that Stage I ends at 2z, and Stage III follows, we obtain a lower limit, 
because the loss of charge would have been less in Stage II. 
If, lastly, 
we calculate the final charge on the assumption that Stage I ends and 
Stage IIT begins 
at some 
critical gap width 
z,, knowing only that 
2y > 2¢ > 2;, we shall obtain a value closer to the true value, and our 
result will be the more useful the more closely we can assign values to 
z, and z,. 
It is possible to obtain quite an accurate value of the final 
charge in this way, because z; enters into C;, logarithmically. 
The transition from Stage I to Stage II and from Stage II to Stage II1 
is determined by a change in relative importance of the individual terms 
in the differential equation. We note firstly that, since 2, is quite close 
to z,, the values of Cy;, (5, and their derivatives are nearly the same at 
2, and z,. 
It follows from the fact that C;, changes but little between z,

APPENDIX 
355 
and z,, whereas it ultimately changes a lot, that V; can only rise to a 
small fraction of its final value during Stage II. 
Remembering that 
V1(2z,) = 0, we may therefore write V;(o0) = 7, V}(2,), and be sure that », 
is quite large. We may also be sure that C),(z) is several times greater 
than C),(00), because we are interested in very narrow gaps. 
It follows 
from the formulae for the coefficients of capacitance and induction for 
spheres that 
dCy, 
dz 
dCn 
~ — 
2 
dz 
Consider now the differential equation when applied to Stage 111 in 
which o(z) = 0, and for values of z just greater than z,. We see that the 
term in V}(z) is much smaller than the others, so the equation reduces to 
dO'l2 
Cha(2c) = —Ch(2c) 
and 
  
  
  
  
% 
C11(%) %gl = (D,—D,) 
- 
for these values of z. As z takes smaller values in Stage 111, we reach z,, 
o(2)V1(2) 
/(202). 
We therefore 
by definition, when ¢(z) comes into evidence. This occurs when 
dO'l2 
  
ceases to be negligible in comparison with (9, —®,)   
have 
0'( 2) 
2 J(2az,) 
where 7, is large. Referring to the last paragraph, we may write this as 
d 
N(2zy) 
= (©,—D,) 
012 
  
  
z2 
M2 
a(2,) 
m J(2a22) 
1, and 1), are arbitrary large numbers but are not independent. 
We 
therefore write 7,/m; = n, where u is of the order unity. 
Let 
(0)/(D,—D,) = M 
Strictly 
M 
is a function of z¢, but this is trivial and we ignore it. 
Our 
equation for z, becomes 
  () = (@—@,) 212 
  
22 
        
  
uMo(zy) = 
Consider now 
Stage 
I 
and values 
of 
z slightly smaller than 
z,. 
(©,—D,) dggz has much the same value as before; dgll Vi(z) 1s, a fortiors, 
much smaller. Moreover, C};(2) C(li—[j must now be small. 
This leaves 
o(2) 
V(2az) 
in which V3(2) is small but o(z) large. As z increases in Stage I, we reach z,, 
by definition, when o(z) ceases to be large enough to keep V;(z) small., 
2y )+ (@,—y) T2 
  = 0,

356 
APPENDIX 
Let 13Vi(2;) = V3(0). 
73 1s large. The equation for 2, is 
o(z,) 
dCy,| 
7 \/(21a,z )V1(°0)+(‘I) —®,) 
— 
|z1 
or 
—0(z,) 
= 
/(202 
——E’ 
. 
"730( ) = y(2az) 24 
  
= 0, 
Remembering that o(z) is sharply dependent on z, whereas C, is not, 
we may rewrite the equations for z; and z, as 
d012 
  
a(z,) 
= J (2a2;) 
  
Zc 
d012 
  
and 
o(z,) 
= MJ(2azc) 
  
with u the order unity and 7, large. Since o(2;) > o(z,) > o(2;), we have 
o(z,) = —J(z 2c) d012 
  
  
as the equation for the critical gap z.. 
7 is a number which we may be 
sure lies between 1 and 100. For purposes of calculation we shall assume 
it to be 10.

TABLE OF CONSTANTS 
Planck’s constant A 
6-625 x 10~%7 erg sec 
Boltzmann’s constant & 
1-380 x 10~ erg/deg 
Elementary charge e 
4-803 x 10710 e.s.u. 
Mass of the electron m 
9-108 x 1028 g 
Ratio of proton mass to electron mass 
1836 
Avogadro’s number 
6-025 x 1023 atoms/mole 
Faraday’s constant 
9-652 x 10* coulombs/mole 
The 15° calorie is equal to 4-185; joules. 
1 e.s.u. of charge = 3—><11—O9 coulomb. 
1 e.s.u. of potential = 300 volts. 
: 
1 
1 e.s.u. of capacitance (1 cm) = 9 < 1ot farad. 
1 e.s.u. of resistance = 
9 x 101! ohms.

REFERENCES 
BARDEEN, J. (1936), Phys. Rev. 49, 653. 
BasTow, S. H., and BowbpgN, F. P. (1931), Proc. R. Soc. A 134, 404. 
BECKER, A. (1909), Anniln. Phys. 29, 909, 
(1910), Annin. Phys. 31, 98, 
Broomer, R. N. (1957), Nature, Lond. 179, 493. 
Brount, E. 1. (1962), Solvd St. Phys. 13, 305 (p. 352). 
Bowbpen, F. P., and TABor, D. (1939), Proc. R. Soc. A 169, 391. 
(1954, 1964), The friction and lubrication of solids, Parts 1 
and II, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
and TaoMmAs, P. H. (1954), Proc. R. Soc. A 223, 29. 
and Tarosserr, W. R. (1951), Nature, Lond. 167, 601. 
and Youne, J. E. (1949), Nature, Lond. 164, 1089, 
BowwrEes, A. H. (1961), Proc. phys. Soc. 78, 958. 
BRECKENRIDGE, R. G., and HosLEr, W. R. (1953), Phys. Rev. 91, 793. 
BrEDOV, M. M., and KSHEMIANSKAIA, 1. Z. (1957), Soviet Phys. tech. 
Phys. 2, 844. 
BtHL, A. (1926), Annin. Phys. 80, 137. 
CABRERA, N., and MotT, N. F. (1949), Rep. Progr. Phys. 12, 163. 
Carsraw, H. S., and JAEGER, J. C. (1959), Conduction of heat tn solids, 
2nd ed., Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
CHRISTIANSEN, C. (1894), Annln. Phys. 53, 401. 
Cocks, M. (1952), Nature, Lond. 170, 203. 
CoeHN, A. (1898), Annin. Phys. 64, 217, 
and CuUrs, A. (1924), Z. Phys. 29, 186. 
and DurwmE, E. (1924), Z. Phys. 27, 358. 
and Lorz, A. (1921), Z. Phys. 5, 242, 
and Raypr, U. (1909), Annin. Phys. 30, 7717. 
CooxkeE, B. A. (1954), Ph.D. Thesis, University of London. 
CouLson, C. A. (1961), Valence, 2nd ed., p. 323, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
CourTNEY-PRrATT, J. S. (1950), Research 3, 417. 
and EisNer, E. (1957), Proc. R. Soc. A 238, 529. 
CunNingHAM, R. G. (1964), J. appl. Phys. 35, 2332. 
and MoNTGOMERY, D. J. (1958), Text. Res. J. 28, 971. 
Curtis, H. L. (1914), Bureau of Standards Bulletin 2, paper S234. 
Dawson, L. H. (1929), J. opt. Soc. Am. scient. Instrum. 18, 344. 
DracrIo, R. (1928), Z. Phys. 51, 279. 
DE BrocGrie, M. (1910), C. r. hebd. Séanc. Acad. Scz., Paris 150, 1115, 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

REFERENCES 
359 
DoMBROWSKI, N., and FRASER, R. P. (1954), Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 247, 
101. 
DoxNaLp, M. B. (1958), Research 11, 19. 
Dorsey, N. E. (1940), Properties of ordinary water substance, Reinhold, 
New York. 
DoscHECK, A. (1951), Non-destructive testing, Fall, 1951, p. 22. 
DunNiNGg, W. J. (1961), Soc. Chem. Industry Monograph No. 14, p. 127. 
Dvyson, J., and HirsT, W. (1954), Proc. phys. Soc. B 67, 309. 
EHRENBERG, W., and Ho~NrL, H. (1931), Z. Phys. 68, 289. 
E1ceN, M., and pE MAEYER, L. (1958), Proc. R. Soc. A 247, 505. 
Evans, U. R. (1963), An introduction 
to metallic corrosion, 2nd ed 
Arnold, London. 
FarxsworTH, H. E., ScHLIER, R. E., GEorcE, T. H., and BurcER, R. M. 
(1955), J. appl. Phys. 26, 252. 
Fowrer, R. H. (1933), Proc. R. Soc. A 141, 56. 
e 
and NorpHEIM, L. (1928), Proc. R. Soc. A 119, 173. 
FrRENKEL, J. (1930), Phys. Rev. 36, 1604. 
(1941), Fiz. Zh. 5, 25. 
FreunDLICH, H. (1926), Colloid and capillary chemastry, 3rd ed., p. 284, 
Methuen, London. 
FroaLice, H. (1963), Polarons and excitons, p. 
1, Scottish Universities 
Summer School 1962, Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh. 
GEDDES, S. (1936), JI. R. tech. Coll. Glasg. 3, 551. 
Gin, E. W. B., and ArFrEY, G. F. (1949), Nature, Lond. 163, 172, 
Goopwin, E. T. (1939), Proc. Camb. phil. Soc. math. phys. Sci. 35, 221 
and 35, 232. 
GRANICHER, H. (1958), Proc. R. Soc. A 247, 453. 
GrRUNER, H. (1953), Faserforsch. TextTech. 4, 249. 
GUILLERY, P. (1932), Anniln. Phys. 14, 216. 
GurNEY, R. W. (1936), Ions in solution, University Press, Cambrldge 
Harrer, R. (1940), Z. Phys. 116, 604. 
HanemanyN, 
D. 
(1961), 
International 
conference 
on 
semiconductor 
physics, Prague, 1960, p. 576, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. 
HangeL, W. (1862), Annln. Phys. 115, 57. 
Harper, W. R. (1951), Proc. R. Soc. A 205, 83. 
(1953 a), Proc. R. Soc. A 218, 111. 
—— (1953 b), Br. J. appl. Phys. 4, 111, 
———(1955), Proc. R. Soc. A 231, 388. 
—— (1957), Phil. Mag. Supp. 6, No. 24, 365. 
——(1960), Br. J. appl. Phys. 11, 324, 
(1961), Soc. Chem. Industry Monograph No. 14, p. 115. 
Hast, N. (1952), Ark. Fys. 4, 37. 
  
  
  
 

360 
REFERENCES 
Heiges, R. R., and Urg, R. W. (1961), Thermoelectricity, Interscience, 
New York. 
HeLmuoLTz, H. (1879), Annin. Phys. 7, 337. 
Hexnry, P. S. H. (1953), Br. J. appl. Phys. Supp. 2, S 31. 
—— (1957), J. Text. Inst. 48, P5. 
HersH, S. P., and MoNTGOMERY, D. J. (1955), Text. Res. J. 25, 279. 
HerTz, H. (1882), J. reine angew. Math. 92, 156. 
Hisgnus, N. A. (1902, 1903, 1905), Zh. russk. fiz.-khim. Obshchr. 34, 
1 
; 
35, 575; 37, 30. 
Howrm, R. (1958), Electric contacts handbook, Springer, Berlin. 
JAEGER, J. C. (1942), J. Proc. R. Soc. N.S.W. 76, 203. 
JAHNKE, 
E., and EmbpE, 
F. 
(1928), Funktiontafeln mit Formeln und 
Kurven, 1st ed., p. 19, Teubner, Leipzig. 
JEFFREYS, B. (1942), Proc. Camb. phil. Soc. math. phys. Sci. 38, 401. 
KEeLviN, Lorp (1898), Phil. Mag. 46, 82. 
KITCHENER, J. A., and ProssER, A. P. (1957), Proc. R. Soc. A 242, 403. 
Krrrewn, C. (1962), Elementary solid state physics, Wiley, New York. 
KrLEMPERER, O. (1961), Electron physics, Butterworth, London. 
Kruce, W. (1929), Annin. Phys. 1, 
1. 
Kw~oBravucs, O. (1902), Z. phys. Chem. 39, 225. 
KorLrAUSCH, R. (1851), Annin. Phys. 82, 
1. 
KRrAMER, J. (1949), Z. Phys. 125, 739. 
Krotova, N. A., and KArasgv, V. V. (1953), Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 
92, 607. 
Kuxker, W. B. (1950), J. appl. Phys. 21, 820. 
LaNpav, L. (1933), Phys. Z. SowjUn. 3, 664. 
LaTHAM, J. (1963), Br. J. appl. Phys. 14, 488. 
and Mason, B. J. (1961 a), Proc. R. Soc. A 260, 523. 
(1961 b), Proc. R. Soc. A 260, 537. 
Lax, 
M. 
(1961), 
International 
conference 
on 
semiconductor 
physies, 
Prague, 1960, p. 484, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. 
Levy, J. B., WakEeLIN, J. H., KavzmanN, W. J., and Dirron, J. H. 
(1958), Text. Res. J. 28, 897. 
Lors, L. B. (1958), Static electrification, Springer, Berlin. 
Lupwic, G. W., and WaATTERS, R. L. (1956), Phys. Rev. 101, 1699. 
MacAavuray, J. M. (1953), JI. R. tech. Coll. Glasg. 3, 353. 
and Carson, D. (1930), JI. R. tech. Coll. Glasg. 2, 161. 
MacDowNALD, J. R. (1953), Phys. Rev. 92, 4. 
Macky, W. A. (1928), Proc. R. Soc. A 119, 107. 
MArTIN, A. J. P. (1941), Proc. phys. Soc. 53, 186. 
McCLELLAND, J. A., and POWER, C. J. (1917), Proc. R. Ir. Acad. 34, 40, 
  
  
 

REFERENCES 
361 
McHAFFIE, 1. R., and LENHER, S. (1925), J. chem. Soc. 127, 1559, 
MepiEY, J. A. (1953 a), Br. J. appl. Phys. Supp. 2, S 28. 
—— (1953 b), Nature, Lond. 171, 1077, 
(1954), J. Text. Inst. 45, T123. 
MonTGcoMERY, D. J. (1959), Solid St. Phys. 9, 139. 
SMmiTH, A. E., and WINTERMUTE, E. H. (1961), Text. Res. J. 31, 25, 
MorpETT, D. J. (1961), Bulletin of the Institute of Physics and the Physical 
Society, October 1961. 
MoraxT, M. J. (1954), J. appl. Phys. 25, 1053. 
Morris-Jones, W. (1915), Phil. Mag. 29, 261. 
Morr, 
N. 
F. 
(1951), 
Semiconducting 
materials, 
p. 
1. 
Butterworth, 
London. 
  
  
  
and GUurNEY, R. W. (1940), Electronic processes in tonic crystals, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
and SNEDDON, I. N. (1948), Wave-mechanics and its applications, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Mrowka, B., and RECKNAGEL, A. (1937), Phys. Z. 38, 758. 
Naxava, U., and TeEraDa, T. (1935), Phil. Mag. 19, 115. 
NorpHEIM, L. (1928), Proc. R. Soc. A 121, 626. 
OsTENBURG, D. O. vaAN, and MoNTGOMERY, D. J. (1958), Text. Res. J. 
28, 
22. 
PArraT, L. G. (1959), Rev. Mod. Phys. 31, 616. 
PervaT, H. (1881), Annls. Chim. Phys. 24, 5. 
PeERUCCA, E. (1921), Nuovo Cim. 21, 34; 21, 275; 22, 56. 
PeTERSON, J. W. (1949), Phys. Rev. 76, 1882. 
—— (1954 a), J. appl. Phys. 25, 501. 
(1954 b), J. appl. Phys. 25, 907. 
PrEscorT, J. (1924), Applied elasticity, Longmans, London. 
RaBiNnowicz, E. (1952), Proc. phys. Soc. B 65, 630. 
RausToN, O. C. (1961), Electrostatic separation of mixed granular sokds, 
Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
RavvreIicH, Lorp (1936), Proc. R. Soc. A 156, 326. 
REDFIELD, A. G. (1954), Phys. Rev. 94, 526. 
REYNOLDS, S. E., BrRooOk, M., and GourLEY, M. F. (1957), J. Met. 14, 
426. 
RicuArDS, H. F. (1920), Phys. Rev. 16, 290. 
(1923), Phys. Rev. 22, 122, 
Rommanw, H. (1920), Phys. Z. 21, 699. 
Rosg, B. A. (1933), Phys. Rev. 44, 585. 
Rosk, G. S., and WaARrRD, S. G. (1957), Br. J. appl. Phys. 8, 121. 
ROTHER, F. (1926), Annin. Phys. 81, 317. 
  
  
 

362 
REFERENCES 
Rupce, W. A. D. (1912), Phil. Mag. 23, 852. 
—(1913), Phil. Mag. 25, 481. 
——(1914), Proc. R. Soc. A 90, 256. 
Russerr, A. (1909), Proc. R. Soc. A 82, 524. 
, 
Sacms, R. G., and DExXTER, D. L. (1950), J. appl. Phys. 21, 1304. 
ScamipT, W. (1902), Annin. Phys. 9, 919. 
— 
(1903), Annin. Phys. 11, 114, 
SCEHNURMANN, R., and Warrow-Davies, E. (1942), Proc. phys. Soc. 
54, 14. 
ScrOoTTKY, W. (1923), Z. Phys. 14, 63. 
ScHUMANN, W. O. (1923), Elektrische Durchbruchfeldstirke von Gasen,. 
Springer, Berlin. 
SEREDA, P. J., and FELDMAN, R. F. (1964), J. Text. Inst. 55, T288. 
Seaw, P. E. (1917), Proc. R. Soc. A 94, 16. 
——(1927), Proc. phys. Soc. 39, 449, 
——(1929), Proc. R. Soc. A 122, 49. 
and HaxsTtock, R. F. (1930 a), Proc. R. Soc. A 128, 474. 
(1930 b), Proc. R. Soc. A 128, 480. 
and JEx, C. S. (1926), Proc. R. Soc. A 111, 339. 
(1928), Proc. R. Soc. A 118, 97; A 118, 108. 
and LeEAvEY, E. W. L. (1932), Proc. K. Soc. A 138, 502. 
SHOCKLEY, W. (1939), Phys. Rev. 56, 317. 
SKINNER, S. M. (1955), J. appl. Phys. 26, 498. 
SAavaGe, R. L., and RuTzLER, J. E. (1953), J. appl. Phys. 24, 438. 
(1954), J. appl. Phys. 25, 1055. 
SMoLucHOWSKI, R. (1941), Phys. Rev. 60, 661. 
SOMMERFELD, A., and BETHE, H. (1933), Handbuch der Physik, 2nd ed., 
24/2, p. 441, Springer, Berlin. 
’ 
StaTz, H. (1950), Z. fiir Naturf. 5A, 534. 
STERNE, T. E., GosrLiNGg, B. S., and Fowrer, R. H. (1929), Proc. R. Soc. 
A 124, 699. 
STRACHAN, J. G.. (1935), JI. R. tech. Coll. Glasg. 3, 343. 
Tamwm, I. (1932), Phys. Z. SouyUn. 1, 733. 
ToranNsky, 
S. (1948), Multiple-beam 
interferometry, Clarendon Press, 
Oxford. 
’ 
TormaN, R. C. (1938), The princiﬁles of statistical mechanics, Clarendon 
Press, Oxford. 
Vieweag, H. F. (1926), J. phys. Chem. 30, 865. 
VOLkL, A. (1932), Annin. Phys. 14, 193. 
VorrraTH, R. E. (1932), Phys. Rev. 42, 298. 
WaAGNER, P. K. (1956), J. appl. Phys. 27, 1300. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
   

REFERENCES 
363 
WHITEHEAD, J. R. (1950), Proc. R. Soc. A 201, 109. 
WILLIAMSON, J. B. P., GREENWOOD, J. A., and HARRIs, J. (1956), Proc. 
R. Soc. A 237, 560. 
WiLson, D. (1963), J. Text. Inst. 54, T97. 
Worr, L. (1929), Annin. Phys. 1, 260.


AUTHOR INDEX 
Alfrey, G. F., 307. 
Bardeen, J., 109. 
Bastow, S. H., 26. 
Becker, A., 325. 
Bethe, H., 120, 128, 132, 165. 
Bloomer, R. N., 184. 
Blount, E. 1., 147. 
Bowden, F. P., vi, 26, 40, 41, 43, 44, 
57, 64, 68, 71, 79. 
Bowles, A. H., 93, 307. 
Breckenridge, R. G., 257. 
Bredov, 
M. 
M., 
94, 
230, 
234, 
242, 
250. 
Brook, M., 267. 
Bihl, A., 319, 325. 
Burger, R. M., 158. 
Cabrera, N., 184. 
Carslaw, H. S., 65. 
Carson, D., 81, 157. 
Christiansen, C., 318, 324. 
Cocks, M., 41. 
Coehn, A., 79, 276, 311, 316, 322, 326. 
Cooke, B. A., 253, 269, 271, 276. 
Coulson, C. A., 143. 
Courtney-Pratt, J. S., 32, 41. 
Cunningham, R. G., 72, 336. 
Curs, A., 322. 
Curtis, H. L., 81, 199, 271. 
Dawson, L. H., 322. 
Deaglio, R., 271, 273. 
de Broglie, M., 325. 
Dexter, D. L., 124. 
Dillon, J. H., 345. 
Dombrowski, N., 325. 
Donald, M. B., 253. 
Dorsey, N. E., 25. 
Doscheck, A., 224. 
Duhme, E., 326. 
Dunning, W. J., 90, 302. 
Dyson, J., 33, 47, 59. 
Ehrenberg, W., 127. 
Eigen, M., 263. 
Eisner, E., 41. 
Emde, F., 238. 
Evans, U. R., 184. 
Farnsworth, H. E., 158. 
Feldman, R. F., 329. 
Fowler, R. H., 120, 127, 156. 
Fraser, R. P., 325. 
Frenkel, J., 63, 64, 127, 268. 
Freundlich, H., 77. 
Frohlich, H., 155. 
Geddes, S., 82. 
George, T. H., 158. 
Gill, E. W. B., 307. 
Goodwin, E. T., 157. 
Gosling, B. S., 127. 
Gourley, M. F., 267. 
Gréanicher, H., 263. 
Greenwood, J. A., 27. 
Griiner, H., 63. 
Guillery, P., 149. 
Gurney, R. W., 153, 201, 208, 209. 
Haefer, R., 120, 125. 
Hanemann, D., 158. 
Hankel, W., 233. 
Hanstock, R. F., 62, 63, 77. 
Harper, W. R., 23, 48, 77, 78, 86, 91, 
95, 
215, 
218, 
223, 
225, 
235, 
245, 
253, 261, 276, 280, 290, 302, 312, 
319, 326. 
Harris, J., 27. 
Hast, N., 83. 
Heikes, R. R., 175. 
Helmholtz, H., 4, 13, 21. 
Henry, P. 
S. H., vi, 62, 63, 94, 277, 
303. 
Hersh, S. P., 62, 63, 344, 347. 
Hertz, H., 36. 
Héséhus, N. A., 31, 316. 
Hirst, W., 33, 47, 59. 
Holm, R., 41, 46, 133. 
Honl, H., 127. 
Hosler, W. R., 257. 
Jaeger, J. C., 65, 66. 
Jahnke, E., 238. 
Jeffreys, B., 102, 
Jewell-Thomas, 
S. 
R. 
C., 
253, 
269, 
271. 
Jex, C. S., 77, 215, 276, 312, 316, 318, 
332.

366 
Karasev, V. V., 85. 
Kauzmann, W. dJ., 345. 
Kelvin, Lord, 233. 
Kitchener, J. A., 26, 30. 
Kimball, G. E. 145. 
Kittel, C., 163. 
Klemperer, O., 98. 
Kluge, W., 329, 339. 
Knoblauch, O., 75, 78, 274. 
Kohlrausch, R., 233. 
Kramer, J., 84. 
Krotova, N. A., 85. 
Kshemianskaia, 
I. 
Z., 
94, 
230, 
234, 
242, 250. 
Kunkel, W. B., 282. 
Latham, J., 262, 267. 
Landau, L., 155. 
Lax, M., 158. 
Leavey, E. W. L., 316. 
Lenher, S., 80. 
Levy, J. B., 345. 
Loeb, L. B., vi, 63, 280. 
Lotz, A., 79, 276, 316, 322. 
Ludwig, G. W., 148. 
Macaulay, J. M., 81, 82, 157. 
MacDonald, J. R., 148. 
Macky, W. A., 55, 311. 
Maeyer, L. de, 263. 
Martin, A. J. P., 279, 334. 
Mason, B. J., 262. 
McClelland, J. A., 334. 
McHalffie, I. R., 80. 
Medley, J. A., 51, 276, 307, 321, 322, 
348, 353. 
Montgomery, D. J., vi, 62, 150, 191, 
209, 344, 347, 350, 352. 
Moppett, D. J., 184. 
Morant, M. J., 252. 
Morris-Jones, W., 307, 311. 
Mott, N. F., 102, 153, 159, 184, 201, 
208, 209. 
Mrowka, B., 108. 
Nakaya, U., 283. 
Nordheim, L., 120, 124. 
Ostenburg, D. O. van, 150, 191. 
Parratt, L. G., 146. 
Pellat, H., 233. 
Perucca, E., 320. 
Peterson, J. W., 63, 280, 294. 
AUTHOR INDEX 
Power, C. J., 334. 
Prescott, J., 36. 
Prosser, A. P., 26, 30. 
Rabinowicz, E., 35, 44, 49. 
Ralston, O. C., 308. 
Raydt, U., 311. 
Rayleigh, Lord, 56. 
Recknagel, A., 108. 
Redfield, A. G., 148. 
Reynolds, S. E., 267. 
Richards, H. F., 30, 56, 311. 
Rohmann, H., 271. 
Rose, B. A., 183. 
. 
Rose, G. 8., 18, 200, 224, 316. 
Rother, F., 127. 
Rudge, W. A. D., 74, 275. 
Russell, A., 240. 
Rutzler, J. E., 252. 
Sachs, R. G., 124. 
Savage, R. L., 252. 
Schlier, R. E., 158. 
Schmidt, W., 258. 
Schnurmann, R., 293. 
Schottky, W., 125. 
Schumann, W, O., 12, 14. 
Sereda, P. J., 329. 
Shaw, P. E., 31, 50, 62, 63, 77, 215, 
223, 276, 312, 316, 318, 322, 332. 
Shockley, W., 157. 
Skinner, S. M., 252, 
Smith, A. E., 350. 
Smoluchowski, R., 183. 
Sneddon, I. N., 102. 
Sommerfeld, A., 120, 128, 132, 165. 
Statz, H., 157. 
- 
Sterne, T. E., 127. 
Strachan, J. G., 82, 
Tabor, D., vi, 40, 41, 43, 44, 57, 64, 
71. 
Tamm, I., 157. 
Terada, T., 283. 
Thomas, P. H., 68. 
Throssell, W. R., 79. 
Tolansky, S., 32. 
Tolman, R. C., 164. 
Ure, R. W., 175. 
Vieweg, H. F., 86, 93, 317. 
Volkl, A., 149. 
Vollrath, R. E., 223.

AUTHOR INDEX 
Wagner, P. E., 86, 294. 
Ward, S. G., 18, 200, 224, 316. 
Warlow-Davies, E., 293. 
Wakelin, J. H., 345. 
Watters, R. L., 148. 
Whitehead, J. R., 42. 
Williamson, J. B. P., 27. 
Wilson, D., 353. 
Wintermute, E. H., 350. 
Wolf, L., 307. 
Young, J. E., 40. 
367

SUBJECT INDEX 
Abrasion, 31. 
Abundance term, 306. 
Adhesion, 251, 282, 291. 
Amber, 222. 
Antistatic agent, 353. 
Asperities, 33. 
Asymmetric rubbing, 61, 267. 
Breakdown field, 13. 
Charge: nature of, 
1; movement, 2; 
limitation of, 3. 
Charge density: high, 23, 55; maxi- 
mum, 
13, 51; semiconductor, 250. 
Charging 
processes: 
contact, 
248; 
entrainment, 319 ; frictional, 60, 68, 
337; 
inversion, 
319, 
322; nature, 
22, 72; separation, 225, 241. 
Cleaning, 26, 76, 78, 79, 86, 90. 
Clean surfaces, 32, 81. 
Coehn’s law, 311. 
Conductivity: criteria, 
146; surface, 
81. 
Constriction resistance, 
41, 
67, 
133, 
253. 
Contact: 
definitions, 
37; 
impeded, 
27 ; nature of, 3, 34. 
Contact angle, 321. 
Contact potential, 174, 184, 213, 233; 
apparent reversal of, 272; electro- 
lytic, 271. 
Contamination, 82, 184, 332; electro- 
phobic, 
301; 
electrophilic, 
301; 
hydrophobic, 83; hydrophilic, 
83. 
Critical gap, 240. 
Crystal anisotropy, 86, 179. 
Dangling bonds, 84, 158. 
Digging-in, 155. 
Double layer, 21. 
Duration of contact, 
203, 
218, 
242, 
247, 253, 265. 
Elastic deformation, 33, 36. 
Electrolytic ions, 79, 269. 
Electron traps, 153, 201. 
Energy wells, 105, 
Ether, 339. 
Exo-electrons, 84. 
Fabrics, 329, 334, 339. 
Fermi level, 168; metals, 
171 
; semi- 
conductors, 175, 189 ; space charge 
shift, 198; temperature shift, 178. 
Fibres, 279, 332, 334, 344. 
Field: effect of external, 307 ; outside 
dielectric, 8. 
Field emission, 119, 127. 
Force of friction, 293, 332. 
Gap conductance, 237. 
Gas discharge, 
11, 54, 200, 221, 295, 
336. 
Hot spots, 63, 64, 268, 336. 
Hydroxyl groups, 90. 
Ice, 261. 
Inhomogeneity, 91. 
Inner potential, 109, 179. 
Insulators, 135, 191, 199, 210; electro- 
phobic, 216, 218, 329; electrophi- 
lic, 216. 
Tons: 
miscellaneous, 
85, 
160, 
277, 
310; redistribution of, 303. 
Mercury, 50, 318. 
Microwelds, 40, 42, 45. 
Moisture: 
adsorbed, 
77, 
275, 
276; 
circumambient, 
330; 
elimination 
of, 79. 
Motes, 25. 
Neutral centres, 319, 325. 
Optical flats, 26, 30, 32, 56. 
Oxide, 40, 42, 184, 320, 321. 
Oxygen, 84, 159, 318. 
Particulate contamination, 
25, 
30, 
75. 
Phase space, 115. 
Piezoelectric effect, 280, 334. 
Polarons, 155. 
Polished surfaces, 34. 
Powders, 245, 261, 274, 276, 282. 
Protons, 302. 
Quartz, 87, 280, 297,

SUBJECT INDEX 
Rolling, 44, 88, 294. 
Rutile, 253. 
Schottky effect, 119. 
Seebeck effect, 174, 224. 
Series, 86, 310, 314, 317, 352 ; reversal, 
316. 
Silica, 92, 280, 297. 
Sliding : adherent, 47 ; initial, 41, 49; 
smooth, 47, 
Slipping belt, 337. 
Space charge, 189, 198. 
369 
Surface barrier, 124, 127. 
Surface states, 155. 
Temperature effects, 77, 306, 334. 
Thompson effect, 62. 
Thunderstorms, 262. 
Transference of material, 35, 49, 63, 
73, 318, 343, 349. 
Tunnel effect, 101, 133, 236. 
Veils, 83. 
Vibration, 47. 
Volta—Helmholtz hypothesis, 
4, 57.

