
Hate Crimes

Recent Titles in the 
CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES 
Series
Steroids and Doping in Sports: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
LGBT Youth Issues Today: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Science and Political Controversy: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Nuclear Power: A Reference Handbook, second edition
Harry Henderson
Internet Censorship: A Reference Handbook
Bernadette H. Schell
School Violence: A Reference Handbook, second edition
Laura L. Finley
GMO Food: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Wind Energy: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Profiling and Criminal Justice in America: A Reference Handbook, second 
edition
Jeff Bumgarner
Fracking: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Cyber Warfare: A Reference Handbook
Paul J. Springer
Cloning: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, business-people, 
activists, and others. Each book, carefully organized and easy to 
use, contains an overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, 
biographical sketches, facts and data and/or documents and 
other primary source material, a forum of authoritative per-
spective essays, annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, 
and an index. Readers of books in the Contemporary World 
Issues series will find the information they need in order to 
have a better understanding of the social, political, environ-
mental, and economic issues facing the world today.

This page intentionally left blank

Hate Crimes
A REFERENCE HANDBOOK
THIRD EDITION
Donald Altschiller
CONTEMPORARY     WORLD     ISSUES

Copyright © 2015 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or other-
wise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, with-
out prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Altschiller, Donald.
  Hate crimes : a reference handbook / Donald Altschiller. — 
Third Edition.
    pages cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-61069-946-4 (alk. paper) —  
ISBN 978-1-61069-947-1 (ebk)  1.  Hate crimes—United 
States.  I.  Title. 
  HV6773.52.A47 2015
  364.15—dc23      2015018857
ISBN: 978-1-61069-946-4
EISBN: 978-1-61069-947-1
19  18  17  16  15    1  2  3  4  5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO
An Imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America

vii
Contents
Preface, xv
1	
Background and History, 3
Introduction, 3
History of Hate Crimes Legislation, 5
Civil Rights Act of 1968, 7
Interference with the Exercise of Religious Beliefs 
and Destruction of Religious Property, 8
Federal Explosives Statute, 8
Hate Crimes Statistics Act, 9
Hate Crimes Sentencing Enhancement Act, 12
Violence against Women Act of 1994 (VAWA), 12
Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996, 13
U.S. Armed Forces and Hate Crime Prevention, 15
Campus Hate Crimes Right to Know Act of 1997, 16
Local Law Enforcement Enhancement Act, 16
Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes 
Prevention Act, 16
Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crime Act 
of 2007, 18
Executive Branch, 20
U.S. Supreme Court Decisions, 23

viii	
Contents
Apprendi v. New Jersey, 23
Barclay v. Florida, 24
R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 25
Wisconsin v. Mitchell, 26
Hate Crimes Legislation at the State Level, 30
Conclusion, 32
References, 33
2	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 37
Criticism and Defense of Hate Crime Laws, 37
Methodology, 40
Hate Crime Hoaxes, 44
Bias Crimes and Violence before Hate Crime Laws, 44
Hate Crimes against Selected Groups: A Recent 
Overview, 45
African Americans, 46
Asian Americans, 51
Violence against Sikhs, 54
Americans with Disabilities, 58
Jewish Americans, 59
Lesbians, Gay Men, Bisexuals, and Transgendered 
People (LGBT), 65
Arab and Muslim Americans, 76
Native Americans, 84
Conclusion, 85
References, 89

	
Contents	
ix
3	
Perspectives, 97
Punish Crime, Not Thought Crime: Jeff Jacoby, 98
References, 102
The Law vs. Violent Bigotry: The Case for Strong  
Hate Crime Laws in the United States: Michael 
Lieberman, 103
Punishing Bias-Motivated Violence: The Policy 
Frame for Hate-Crime Laws, 104
The Constitutional Frame for Hate-Crime Laws: 
First Amendment Protections, 106
Expanding Federal Hate-Crime Protection: The 
Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate 
Crimes Prevention Act (HCPA), 107
Contemporary Anti-Semitism in American Higher 
Education: Kenneth L. Marcus, 108
References, 111
Anti-Hispanic Immigrant Hate Crimes: Michele Stacey, 
Kristin Carbone-Lopez, and Richard Rosenfeld, 112
References, 115
Hate Crimes against Sikh Americans: Simran  
Jeet Singh, 117
Hate Crimes and the LGBT Community: Michael 
Bronski, 120
References, 125
Hate Crime Hoaxes on College and University 
Campuses: Ashley Thorne, 125
References, 130

x	
Contents
4	
Profiles, 135
People, 135
Zainab Al-Suwaij (1971–), 135
Chip Berlet (1949–), 136
Heidi Beirich (1967–), 137
Kathleen M. Blee (1953–), 138
Floyd Cochran (1956–), 139
Rabbi Abraham Cooper (1950–), 140
Morris S. Dees (1936–), 141
Steven Emerson (1954–), 142
Phyllis B. Gerstenfeld (1967–), 143
Mark S. Hamm, 143
Gregory Herek (1954–), 144
Paul Iganski, 145
James B. Jacobs (1947–), 146
Valerie Jenness (1963–), 146
Brian Levin (1963–), 147
Jack Levin (1941–), 147
Daniel Levitas (1960–), 148
Michael Lieberman, 148
Kenneth L. Marcus (1966–), 149
Karen K. Narasaki (1958–), 150
Barbara Perry (1962–), 151
Mark Potok (1955–), 152
Kenneth Stern (1953–), 152
Lu-in Wang (1962–), 153
Bill Wassmuth (1941–2001), 154

	
Contents	
xi
Organizations, 155
American Islamic Congress (AIC), 155
American Jewish Committee (AJC), 157
Anti-Defamation League (ADL), 158
Asian Americans Advancing Justice (AAJC), 159
Brudnick Center on Violence and Conflict, 159
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), 160
Committee against Anti-Asian  
Violence (CAAAV), 161
Disability Law Center, 162
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 162
Gonzaga University Institute for Hate Studies, 163
Institute for the Study of Global Antisemitism and 
Policy (ISGAP), 164
International Association of Jewish Lawyers and  
Jurists (IAJLJ), 165
Leadership Conference on Civil  
Rights (LCCHR), 165
Matthew Shepard Foundation, 166
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data 
(NACJD), 167
National Center for Victims of  
Crime (NCVC), 167
National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs 
(NCAVP), 168
National Gay and Lesbian Task  
Force (NGLTF), 169
New York City Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence 
Project (AVP), 169

xii	
Contents
Not in Our Town (NIOT), 170
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency  
Prevention (OJJDP), 171
Police Executive Research Foundation (PERF), 171
Simon Wiesenthal Center, 172
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), 172
Stephen Roth Institute for the Study of  
Contemporary Anti-Semitism and Racism, 173
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 174
Vidal Sassoon International Center for the Study  
of Antisemitism, 175
5	
Data and Documents, 177
Hate Crime Overview, 178
Investigation of Hate Crimes Model Policy, 182
Hate on the Internet, 191
Hate Violence in 2013, 204
Vulnerable to Hate: A Survey of Hate Crimes 
Committed against Homeless People in 2013, 222
Kennedy Introduces the Hate Crimes Amendment, 225
Obama on the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. 
Hate Crimes Prevention Act, 229
Federal Hate Crimes Laws, 232
6	
Resources for Further Research, 241
Books, 241
Articles, 259

	
Contents	
xiii
Reports, 279
U.S. Government Documents and Reports, 279
Organization Reports, 293
Nonprint Resources, 293
Antibias Videos, 300
7	
Chronology, 303
Glossary, 353
Index, 357
About the Author, 373

This page intentionally left blank

xv
Preface
While the national media occasionally highlight notorious hate 
crimes and diligently record the number of people the perpe-
trators kill, the names of the victims are rarely remembered. 
On August 5, 2012, six Sikhs praying at their Oak Creek, Wis-
consin, temple were murdered by Wade Michael Page, a white 
supremacist gunman. Four others were wounded in the neck. 
The murder victims were Paramjit Kaur, 41; Satwant Singh 
Kaleka, 65, the founder of this Sikh temple (known as a gurd-
wara); Prakash Singh, 39, an assistant priest; Sita Singh, 41; 
Ranjit Singh, 49; and Suveg Singh, 83. All of the male victims 
wore turbans as part of their Sikh faith.
Almost two years later on April 13, 2014, three individuals 
who were walking near the Jewish Community Center in a 
Kansas City, Missouri suburb, were murdered by Frazier Glenn 
Miller, a longtime violent anti-Jewish and white supremacist 
racist. The victims included a 14-year-old boy, Reat Griffin 
Underwood, and his 69-year-old grandfather, Dr.  William 
Lewis Corporon. Both were Christians who worshipped at a 
local Methodist church. A 53-year-old woman, Terri LaManno, 
of Kansas City was killed at the parking lot of Village Shalom, 
where her mother resides. LaManno was also a Christian, who 
attended a Catholic church in Kansas City. Unbeknownst to 
the bigoted gunman at that time, only one person targeted by 
his gunfire was Jewish. The uninjured person’s name was not 
reported.
In the last few decades, there have been many hate crime 
incidents throughout the United States and the aforementioned 

xvi	
Preface
violent incidents were widely publicized on TV, radio, and 
newspapers. When these horrific murders are later recalled, the 
victims of these tragic incidents—some of whom were not even 
the intended targets—should not be described solely as name-
less members of a racial, religious, or other minority group or 
recorded mainly as a statistic in the FBI annual hate crime statis-
tics report. Any discussion about the prevalence and dangers of 
hate crimes aimed at specific minority groups should include the 
names of individual victims. In this book, I have tried to include 
their personal names, whenever available, because it offers a cru-
cial human dimension to these dehumanizing murders.
The first edition of this book was published 16 years ago and 
since that time, much has changed in the national understand-
ing of hate crimes. Sadly, though, a lot hasn’t changed. First, 
the bad news: some individuals throughout the United States 
are still victimized because of their race, religion, ethnicity, skin 
color, sexual orientation, gender, or other immutable character-
istics. But there is much encouraging news: all three branches 
of government—legislative, executive and judicial—have 
become more involved in combating these crimes. The U.S. 
Congress, state legislatures, and municipal governments have 
passed national and local hate crime legislation. Law enforce-
ment agencies ranging from the FBI to local police have 
become more vigilant in enforcing these statutes. Finally, the 
courts have been empowered to stipulate enhanced penalties 
for crimes that target individuals because of their membership 
(or perceived membership) in particular minority groups.
A revised and updated version of the 2005 second edi-
tion, the present work includes significant new material and 
two new chapters. The first chapter provides a background 
and history of hate crime legislation while the second chap-
ter, a new addition, discusses the ongoing controversies about 
the passage of such laws and related discussions and debates 
about the gathering and accuracy of hate crime statistics. 
Chapter 3, another new feature, provides divergent and eclec-
tic viewpoints on hate-crime statutes, the problem of hoax 

	
Preface	
xvii
hate crimes, and the impact of these crimes on some affected 
groups, among other topics. Experts on hate crimes along with 
noted civil and human rights organizational authorities are 
profiled in the following chapter. The Data and Documents 
chapter offers important statistical reports and studies on hate 
crimes directed at particular groups, including gays, lesbians 
and transgendered, and the homeless, among other data. The 
sixth chapter provides annotated bibliographies of books and 
journal and magazine articles; this section also offers the most 
extensive detailed listing of congressional hearings and reports 
on hate crimes currently available. This chapter is followed by 
a Chronology providing an annotated listing of hate crime 
incidents beginning with the birth of the modern civil rights 
movement in the mid-1950s. Since the book contains some 
terms many readers have not heard before, the concluding sec-
tion is a Glossary.
Despite media coverage of hate crime incidents, there are 
still widely held misperceptions about who perpetrates these 
crimes. Too much of American history has been soiled by cen-
turies of slavery, antireligious, and anti-immigrant prejudice 
and violence carried out predominantly by white Christians 
who defended and championed often violent horrendous big-
otry toward those they did not view as their equals. Given this 
dark historical backdrop, it may be understandable to assume 
all of the victimizers are white, even though this is not currently 
accurate. In fact, in multicultural America, the perpetrators 
occasionally resemble the diverse racial, ethnic, and religious 
spectrum of our society. The Chronology chapter of this book 
specifically documents several incidents that disprove the pre-
vailing perception that these crimes are almost solely commit-
ted by white racists: On a few occasions, African Americans 
have harassed and abused Asian Americans; American Muslims 
have torched synagogues and physically attacked American 
Jews; Hispanics have beaten up African Americans; and gays, 
lesbians, and transgendered individuals have been harassed and 
assaulted by members of different minority groups. Fortunately 

xviii	
Preface
these incidents are isolated but nevertheless, it is important to 
note that membership in a racial or religious minority does not 
immunize a person against harboring poisonous hatred and 
bigotry. The incidents cited in the Chronology chapter are sta-
tistically recorded (without names) in the annual FBI national 
hate crime charts and these statistics also indicate the multicul-
tural range of hate crime perpetrators.
If there is any solace derived from the terrible hate crimes, 
mentioned above, in Wisconsin and Kansas City, the surround-
ing communities expressed both their intense grief and outrage 
and showed fervent concern for their fellow citizens so affected 
by these tragedies. Following the Wisconsin tragedy, Presi-
dent Obama along with many religious and civic groups ral-
lied around the Sikh community. A year after the Kansas City 
murders, more than 3,000 participants engaged in a week-long 
three-mile walk titled “Seven Days: Make a Ripple, Change the 
World” to promote “faith, love and kindness.” While the topic 
of this book is depressing, one should never lose perspective 
about the basic goodness and humanity of our fellow citizens.
I am indebted to several individuals for their invaluable 
assistance in writing this book. Michael Lieberman, the ADL 
Washington Counsel and the preeminent national expert on 
hate crimes, kindly and generously provided me important 
information and contacts. Kenneth Marcus, the president and 
general counsel of the Louis D. Brandeis Center for Human 
Rights Under Law offered excellent advice and support. I also 
want to thank the several contributors to the Perspectives chap-
ter for providing their diverse and important viewpoints on hate 
crimes and hate crimes legislation. Robin Tutt, the ABC-CLIO 
editor, shepherded the manuscript throughout the process and 
very promptly answered my questions and addressed my pub-
lishing concerns.
While I can’t say that writing a book on this topic has been 
enjoyable, the love of my wife, Ellen, has always helped me to 
focus on the precious aspects of life.

Hate Crimes


3
1	
Background and History
Introduction
Alan Berg, Vincent Chin, Matthew Shepard, James F. Byrd 
Jr., Balbir Singh Sodhi. During the past two decades, these 
names—previously unknown to the public—were in the news. 
They were all mentioned in newspapers and magazines; a few 
were noted in books, television documentaries, and even a the-
atrical performance. Although these five individuals came from 
different regions of the country and had vastly different profes-
sional, ethnic, and family backgrounds, they all had one ter-
rible experience in common: they were killed because of their 
affiliation—or perceived affiliation—with a minority group.
On June  18, 1984, Alan Berg, a popular Denver radio 
talk show host, was murdered in a machine gun attack in the 
driveway of his home. His assailants—members of a neo-Nazi 
group—were convicted three years later of murder. According 
to trial testimony, the murderers stalked him for several days 
because they were enraged by his frequent on-air attacks against 
white supremacists and neo-Nazis. “They killed him because of 
his job, and they did it because he was a Jew,” asserted Thomas 
O’Rourke, an assistant U.S. attorney (Los Angeles Times, 1987). 
During the economic downturn of the early 1980s, two 
A hangman’s noose dangling from an automobile driven by a hooded Ku 
Klux Klan member is among the grim warnings to blacks to stay away from 
the voting places in the municipal primary election at Miami, Florida, on 
May 3, 1939. In spite of the threats, more than 500 blacks exercised their 
right to vote. (AP Photo)

4	
Hate Crimes
unemployed Detroit autoworkers bludgeoned Vincent Chin to 
death, blaming this Chinese American—who looked Japanese 
to them—for their lost jobs. More than 15 years later, on Octo-
ber 6, 1998, Matthew Shepard, a University of Wyoming stu-
dent, was beaten, tortured, tied to a fence, and left for dead by 
local teenagers because he was gay. Only a few months earlier, 
James F. Byrd Jr., an African American from Jasper, Texas, was 
found decapitated and dismembered on a road near his home-
town. His assailants, who had connections with the Ku Klux 
Klan (KKK), had tied him up and dragged his body with their 
truck. Two days after the Arab terrorist attacks on Septem-
ber 11, 2001, Balbir Singh Sodhi, a Sikh gas station owner in 
Arizona, was viciously murdered by an assailant who thought 
that because the victim wore a turban, he was a follower of 
Osama bin Laden. Although these tragic incidents are relatively 
infrequent, they nevertheless represent the disturbing phenom-
enon of hate crimes occurring throughout the United States.
What is a hate crime? How does it differ from other crimes 
directed at individuals or property? “For the purpose of collect-
ing statistics, Congress has defined a hate crime as a ‘criminal 
offense committed against a person or property that is motivated 
in whole or in part by the offender’s bias against a race, reli-
gion, ethnic/national origin group or sexual orientation group,’ ” 
according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (2015). In short, 
hate crimes are directed against members of a specific group 
largely because of their membership in that particular group.
Hate crimes take many forms: a swastika scrawled on a grave 
in a Jewish cemetery; racist and threatening telephone mes-
sages against African Americans; physical assaults against gay 
men and lesbians. Many of these so-called nonviolent crimes 
rarely make the news. Although the aforementioned murders 
did receive media attention, many violent incidents do not 
receive such coverage. (See Chapter 7, “Chronology.”)
Few people would dispute the odious nature of hate crimes, 
but should they be punished differently from other criminal 
activities? Advocates of hate crime legislation directly address 
the rationale for special punishment. Kent Greenawalt, a 

	
Background and History	
5
Columbia law professor, noted that “harm caused by violence 
that is motivated by bias can be greater than the harm done 
by ordinary acts involving the same amount of violence. The 
victim may suffer special injury because he or she is aware that 
race is the basis for an attack. Such crimes can frighten and 
humiliate other members of the community; they can also rein-
force social divisions and hatred. For our society at this time, 
crimes of bias present particular dangers. That is a sufficient 
justification in principle to warrant special treatment under the 
criminal law” (Greenawalt, 1992–93, 627).
History of Hate Crimes Legislation
Although bias crimes have occurred throughout U.S. history, 
it is only in the past few decades that specific legislation has 
been enacted in response to violent bigotry directed at spe-
cific groups. (For clarification, bigotry is the state of mind of 
a bigot, a person voicing intolerant opinions and prejudices; 
these views are protected under the First Amendment as long 
as they are not accompanied by violence.)
According to New York University law professor James B. 
Jacobs, the term hate crime was popularized by three members 
of the U.S. House of Representatives who cosponsored a bill in 
1985—which was later passed in 1990—requiring the federal 
government to collect and publish statistics on the increasing 
number of violent crimes motivated by ethnic, religious, and 
racial hatred. Jacobs noted that only 11 articles on hate crimes 
appeared in national newspapers that year; a few years later, more 
than 1,000 stories were published (Jacobs and Potter, 1998, 4).
A century ago, bias-related crimes were prosecuted under 
a variety of laws, including the Civil Rights Act of 1866, the 
Enforcement Act of 1870, the Ku Klux Klan Act of 1871, and 
the Civil Rights Act of 1875. These federal laws were specifically 
intended to stop both the violent rampages directed against 
southern African Americans and the curtailment of their rights 
during Reconstruction. (For a more detailed historical discus-
sion of each of these laws, see Lawrence, 1999, 110–160.) Of 

6	
Hate Crimes
course, it must be noted that federal and state statutes had pre-
viously legalized slavery and state-sanctioned violence in the 
United States. Under legislation in many southern states, Afri-
can Americans were enslaved and suffered innumerable human 
rights violations. Almost 80 years later, the modern civil rights 
movement successfully lobbied for legislation to ensure the full 
civil rights of black Americans and to strengthen the already 
existing statutes prohibiting racially based violence.
However, it wasn’t until the early 1980s that the concept of 
bias-motivated crimes expanded to include other religious and 
racial minority groups. In 1981, the Anti-Defamation League 
(ADL), the most prominent Jewish civil rights organization in 
the United States, drafted model hate crimes legislation to cover 
not only anti-Jewish crimes but all types of hate crimes aimed at 
minority groups. Almost all states and the District of Columbia 
have enacted laws similar to or based on the ADL model. The 
majority of states have at least one or more hate crime laws (con-
sult the ADL Web site at www.adl.org for more information).
These laws establish a number of rules:
•	 They penalize criminal vandalism against religious institu-
tions, including synagogues, churches, mosques, and other 
houses of worship.
•	 They prohibit bias-motivated violence and intimidation 
against individuals.
•	 They require state governments to compile hate crime statistics.
•	 They enact “penalty-enhancement” statutes for crimes moti-
vated by hate.
•	 They mandate special training for law enforcement personnel.
As the ADL notes, the Bill of Rights protects expressions of 
hate, but criminal actions motivated by hate should receive 
more stringent punishment than actions stemming from other 
motivations. (See Chapter 2 for arguments both pro and con 
on the enactment of hate crime laws.) A convicted criminal is 

	
Background and History	
7
subject to an enhanced penalty if the victim is chosen because 
of race, religion, national origin, sexual orientation, or gender. 
The ADL model statute includes criminal penalties for vandal-
ism aimed at houses of worship, cemeteries, schools, and com-
munity centers. This legislation allows for victims to recover 
punitive damages and attorneys’ fees, and holds parents liable 
for the criminal actions of their children. In 1996 the ADL 
added the category of gender to its model hate crimes legisla-
tion, because gender-based crimes are similar in nature to race- 
or religion-based hate crimes.
The federal government also has many civil rights statutes 
that cover a range of activities, including the exercise of rights 
provided by special laws and the U.S. Constitution, the exer-
cise of religious freedom, housing-related rights, and federally 
protected activities such as voting or the right to use public 
accommodations.
The following are descriptions of significant federal laws and 
pending legislation on hate crimes, largely adapted from the 
Anti-Defamation League Web site (Anti-Defamation League, 
2015) and the U.S. Department of Justice (2015).
Civil Rights Act of 1968
In response to the growing power of the civil rights movement 
(and also the national shock in reaction to the 1963 murders 
of civil rights workers Andrew Goodman, Michael Schwerner, 
and James E. Cheney), the U.S. Congress enacted this omni-
bus law, which greatly expanded protections against all types of 
discrimination. The protections include:
•	 voting or qualifying to vote, qualifying or campaigning as a 
candidate for elective office, or qualifying or acting as a poll 
watcher, or any legally authorized election official, in any 
primary, special, or general election;
•	 participating in or enjoying any benefit, service, privilege, 
program, facility, or activity provided or administered by 
the United States;

8	
Hate Crimes
•	 applying for or enjoying employment, or any perquisite 
thereof, by any agency of the United States;
•	 serving, or attending upon any court in connection with 
possible service, as a grand or petit juror in any court of the 
United States;
•	 participating in or enjoying the benefits of any program or 
activity receiving federal financial assistance; and
•	 allowing any person regardless of his race, color, religion or 
national origin to enroll in or attend any public school or 
public college.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) claims that its 
jurisdiction over hate crimes is mainly predicated on this Sec-
tion 245 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
Interference with the Exercise of Religious Beliefs and 
Destruction of Religious Property
First enacted in 1988, this statute provides federal jurisdiction 
for religious vandalism cases in which the destruction exceeds 
$10,000. Since the enforcement of the statute is restricted 
by the interstate commerce clause of the U.S. Constitution 
and the requirement that the vandalism exceed the stipulated 
amount of money, some federal officials have been somewhat 
hampered in their ability to invoke this statute.
Federal Explosives Statute
In 1982, Congress added the word “fire” to previous legisla-
tion on explosives, thus creating the federal crime of arson. The 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) branch of the 
U.S. Treasury is empowered to enforce this statute.
According to Maj. Gen. Reynold N. Hoover, an expert on 
explosives and ordnances,
Title XI, as originally enacted, established federal jurisdic-
tion in those cases where property was damaged or destroyed 

	
Background and History	
9
by means of an explosive. Congress sought to relieve these 
restrictions through the Anti-Arson Amendment. At 
hearings on the amendment, ATF officials estimated that 
30  percent of the significant arson investigations were 
discontinued because proof that the arson was caused by 
means of an explosive was too difficult. The House Com-
mittee considering the amendment also found that fire was 
used extensively for criminal purposes such as extortion, 
terrorism, revenge, homicide, and fraud against insurance 
companies. The addition of “fire” to Title XI indicated con-
gressional intent to provide a comprehensive definition of 
explosives that encompassed a combination of ingredients 
that could explode when assembled. (Hoover, 1995)
Federal arson legislation simplified federal prosecution by 
eliminating the need to prove that an explosive was used to 
damage property. Although there have been additional amend-
ments to Title XI following the adoption of the Anti-Arson Act 
of 1982, there have been no substantive changes made to the 
federal explosives law since that time.
This statute has been used by the U.S. Department of Justice 
(DOJ) to prosecute cross burnings.
Hate Crimes Statistics Act
On April 23, 1990, Congress passed the Hate Crime Statistics 
Act, which requires the attorney general to collect data “about 
crimes that manifest evidence of prejudice based on race, reli-
gion, sexual orientation, or ethnicity.” The attorney general 
delegated the responsibilities of developing the procedures for 
implementing, collecting, and managing hate crime data to the 
director of the FBI, who in turn, assigned the tasks to the Uni-
form Crime Reporting (UCR) Program. Under the direction 
of the attorney general and with the cooperation and assistance 
of many local and state law enforcement agencies, the UCR 
Program created a hate crime data collection to comply with 
the congressional mandate.

10	
Hate Crimes
The UCR Program’s first publication on the subject was 
Hate Crime Statistics, 1990: A Resource Book (Federal Bureau 
of Investigation, 1992), which was a compilation of hate crime 
data reported by 11 states that had collected the information 
under state authority in 1990 and were willing to offer their 
data as a prototype. The UCR Program continued to work with 
agencies familiar with investigating hate crimes and collecting 
related information so that it could develop and implement a 
more uniform method of data collection on a nationwide scale. 
Hate Crime Statistics,1992 (U.S. Department of Justice, 1993) 
presented the first published data reported by law enforcement 
agencies across the country that participated in the UCR Hate 
Crime Statistics Program.
The hate crime data in this Web publication comprise a 
subset of information that law enforcement agencies submit 
to the UCR Program. The types of hate crimes reported to the 
program (i.e., the biases that motivated the crimes) are fur-
ther broken down into more specific categories. As collected 
for each hate crime incident, the aggregate data in this report 
include the following: offense type, location, bias motivation, 
victim type, number of individual victims, number of offend-
ers, and the race of the offenders.
•	 Incidents and offenses—Crimes reported to the FBI in-
volve those motivated by biases based on race, religion, sex-
ual orientation, ethnicity or national origin, and disability. 
Forthcoming system changes will also allow the reporting 
of crimes motivated by biases based on gender and gender 
identity, as well as crimes committed by, and crimes directed 
against, juveniles.
•	 Victims—The victim of a hate crime may be an individual, 
a business, an institution, or society as a whole.
•	 Offenders—Law enforcement specifies the number of of-
fenders and, when possible, the race of the offender or of-
fenders as a group.

	
Background and History	
11
•	 Location type—Law enforcement may specify one of 30 
location designations (e.g., residence/home, school/college, 
and parking lot/garage, camp/campground, gambling facil-
ity/casino/race track, industrial site, park/playground, and 
shopping mall).
•	 Hate crime by jurisdiction—Includes data about hate crimes 
by state and agency (Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2013).
According to the ADL, many law enforcement agencies 
were gratified by this legislation, which offers them the abil-
ity to chart the national distribution of these crimes and thus 
discern patterns and forecast possible racial and ethnic ten-
sions in different localities. Ideally, the act helps foster better 
police–community relations, allowing police to demonstrate 
their concern for the welfare of citizens victimized by hate 
crimes by vigorously pursuing the criminal activities of violent 
bigots. This special reporting system also encourages victims 
to file charges. Nevertheless, the means of collecting such data 
and the lack of comprehensive reporting by law enforcement 
agencies throughout the United States has been criticized.
In September 1994, lawmakers amended the Hate Crime 
Statistics Act to include bias against persons with disabilities by 
passing the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act 
of 1994. The FBI started gathering data for this additional bias 
type on January 1, 1997.
The Church Arson Prevention Act, which was signed into 
law in July 1996, mandated that the collection of hate crime 
data become a permanent part of the UCR Program.
In 2009, Congress further amended the Hate Crime Statis-
tics Act by passing the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. 
Hate Crime Prevention Act. The amendment includes requir-
ing the collection of data for crimes motivated by bias against 
a particular gender and gender identity, as well as for crimes 
committed by, and crimes directed against, juveniles.
The FBI approved a recommendation by the Criminal Jus-
tice Information Services Division’s Advisory Policy Board to 

12	
Hate Crimes
expand the bias types in the religious category to include all the 
religions identified by the Pew Research Center and the U.S. 
Census Bureau. Also, the hate crime data collection procedures 
were modified to include an anti-Arab bias motivation. The 
collection of both types of data began on January 1, 2015.
Hate Crimes Sentencing Enhancement Act
Originally introduced in the U.S. Senate, this measure was 
enacted into law as Section 280003 of the Violent Crime Con-
trol and Law Enforcement Act of 1994. The provision defined 
a hate crime as “a crime in which the defendant intentionally 
selects a victim, or in the case of a property crime, the property 
that is the object of the crime, because of the actual or perceived 
race, color, religion, national origin, ethnicity, gender, disabil-
ity, or sexual orientation of any person.” This provision required 
the U.S. Sentencing Commission to increase the penalties for 
these crimes. This measure also applies to attacks and vandalism 
which occur in national parks and on federal property.
In May  1995, the United States Sentencing Commission 
announced its implementation of a three-level sentencing 
guidelines increase for hate crimes, as directed by Congress. 
The amendment took effect on November 1, 1995.
Violence against Women Act of 1994 (VAWA)
Enacted as Title IV of the Violent Crime Control and Law 
Enforcement Act of 1994, this act covers the increasing prob-
lem of violent crime against women. Under this law, “persons 
within the United States shall have the right to be free from 
crimes of violence motivated by gender.”
Passed in September 1994, the law includes the following 
provisions:
•	 education and training programs for police and prosecutors,
•	 support for domestic violence and rape crisis centers, and

	
Background and History	
13
•	 a “Civil Rights Remedy” for victims of gender-based vio-
lent crimes, including punitive and compensatory damage 
awards.
The provision for a Civil Rights Remedy has been challenged in 
several state court cases. On May 15, 2000, the U.S. Supreme 
Court, in United States v. Morrison, ruled that Congress had no 
legal authority to provide victims of gender-motivated violence 
access to federal courts. In a 5–4 ruling, the Court decided that 
the VAWA’s Civil Rights Remedy was unconstitutional and 
that Congress could not regulate intrastate criminal conduct 
under the commerce clause. Rather, this matter must be left to 
the states to decide. The Court declared that the Civil Rights 
Remedy strayed beyond Congress’s authority to enforce the 
Fourteenth Amendment because it was directed against private 
individuals, not state jurisdictions.
In 2003, Rep. John Conyers Jr. (D-MI) introduced the Vio-
lence against Women Civil Rights Restoration Act. The bill 
responds to the Supreme Court’s decision in United States v. 
Morrison and restores the ability of victims of gender-motivated 
violence to sue their attackers in federal court, where there is a 
connection to interstate commerce. This bill was sent to com-
mittee but was never submitted for a full vote by the House of 
Representatives.
Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996
A series of arson attacks against churches from 1995 through 
1997 created a great deal of alarm among law enforcement 
agencies and the general public. Despite the widespread nature 
of these incidents, neither the government nor human rights 
organizations were able to document a national domestic terror 
conspiracy orchestrated by violent extremists. The large num-
ber of these incidents—committed by individuals in different 
parts of the country acting independently—was nevertheless a 
worrisome phenomenon.

14	
Hate Crimes
Sponsored by Sen. Edward Kennedy (D-MA), Sen. Lauch 
Faircloth (R-NC), Rep. Henry Hyde (R-IL), and Rep. John 
Conyers (D-MI), the Church Arson Prevention Act was intro-
duced to facilitate federal investigation and prosecution of 
crimes against houses of worship and to amend an earlier stat-
ute enacted by Congress in 1988 that mandated federal pros-
ecution for religious vandalism incidents exceeding $10,000 
in property damage. (See the earlier discussion, “Interference 
with the Exercise of Religious Beliefs.”) In an unusual biparti-
san effort, both the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. 
Senate unanimously approved legislation broadening criminal 
prosecutions for attacks against houses of worship and estab-
lishing a loan guarantee for rebuilding them. The legislation 
also authorized additional personnel for several agencies. The 
law was enacted on July 3, 1996.
The National Church Arson Task Force notes that of the 
308 persons arrested, 254 were white, 46 were African Amer-
ican, and eight were Hispanic. One hundred nineteen people 
arrested were juveniles. Of the 106 suspects arrested for arsons 
at African American churches, 68 were white, 37 were African 
American, and 1 was Hispanic. Of the 197 suspects arrested 
for arsons at non–African American houses of worship, 181 
were white, 9 were African American, and 7 were Hispanic. 
Five of the white suspects were arrested for arsons at both Afri-
can American and non–African American churches (National 
Church Arson Task Force, 1998).
Between January 1, 1995, and September 8, 1998, federal, 
state, and local prosecutors successfully obtained convictions 
of 235 defendants in connection with 173 arsons or bombings 
of houses of worship. These successes included the first convic-
tions under provisions of the Church Arson Prevention Act of 
1996. Of the 61 defendants who have been convicted of federal 
charges, 29 defendants were convicted of hate crimes arising 
from 24 incidents. Another four defendants were convicted of, 
or were allowed to plead guilty to, lesser federal charges in cases 
in which hate-based motives were alleged. Of 171 defendants 

	
Background and History	
15
convicted of state criminal charges, 25 defendants were con-
victed for 13 incidents connected to hate crime motives.
The National Church Arson Task Force report acknowl-
edges that some crimes “were motivated by multiple factors, 
including racism and religious hatred. Arsonists have burned 
churches for other reasons, including opportunistic and ran-
dom vandalism, pyromania, mental health disturbances, feud-
ing with ministers, retribution against religious authorities, 
parking or neighborhood disputes, covering up of burglaries, 
and financial profit. In some cases, the arsonists claimed they 
believed the church to be an abandoned building” (National 
Church Arson Task Force, 1998).
The report concludes, however,
when actual or perceived racial hatred has sparked the arson 
of a church, the crime is even more egregious. In the African 
American community, the church historically has been a 
primary community institution. It was the only institution 
that was permitted during the years of slavery. It was the 
institution that enabled people to read. It has been the insti-
tution that formed the backbone for a tremendous amount 
of political activism. Critical events of the civil rights move-
ment, such as the Montgomery bus boycott, had their gene-
sis in the church. Many leaders within the African American 
community grew up in the church or remain ministers of 
the church. So, for the African American community, it was 
decidedly disturbing to see the number of churches being 
burned. (National Church Arson Task Force, 1998)
U.S. Armed Forces and Hate Crime Prevention
In 1997, Congress included a provision in the National 
Defense Authorization Act requiring the Secretary of Defense 
to provide ongoing human relations training for armed forces 
personnel that would cover “race relations, equal opportunity, 
opposition to gender discrimination, and sensitivity to ‘hate 
group’ activity.”

16	
Hate Crimes
Campus Hate Crimes Right to Know Act of 1997
This law amended the Higher Education Act of 1965 to include 
a requirement to report all crimes “based on race, gender, reli-
gion, sexual orientation, ethnicity, and disability.” This act does 
not include the classes of color and national origin. Under this 
law, all colleges and universities that receive federal funds must 
collect and report hate crime statistics to the Office of Postsec-
ondary Education for crimes in which the victim was targeted 
because of race, gender, religion, sexual orientation, ethnicity, 
or disability. Since the Department of Education used broader 
categories of hate crimes than the FBI, a coalition of civil rights 
and religious groups successfully helped enact an amendment 
to the Higher Education Opportunity Act to expand the hate 
crime data mandate and thus make the collection policies of all 
these government agencies uniform.
Local Law Enforcement Enhancement Act
On June 15, 2004, the U.S. Senate approved legislation by a 
65–33 vote that would expand federal hate crime protection 
to include sexual orientation, gender, and disability. Offered as 
an amendment to a Department of Defense authorization bill, 
this legislation, which would also increase federal assistance to 
local and state officials in the investigation and prosecution of 
hate crimes, was introduced by Sen. Edward Kennedy (D-MA) 
and Sen. Gordon Smith (R-OR) and was identical to provisions 
approved by the Senate in June 2000 and by the U.S. House of 
Representatives in September 2000. In both pieces of legisla-
tion, however, the hate crimes provisions were not inserted in 
the final version of the bill. This legislation was later incorpo-
rated in different form into the Matthew Shepard–James Byrd 
statute.
Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes 
Prevention Act
On October 28, 2009, President Barack Obama signed this 
act into law. The Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate 

	
Background and History	
17
Crimes Prevention Act of 2009 gives the FBI authority to 
investigate violent hate crimes, including violence directed at 
the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender community.
This federal civil rights law criminalizes willfully causing 
bodily injury (or attempting to do so with fire, a firearm, or 
other dangerous weapon) when:
(1)	the crime was committed because of the actual or perceived 
race, color, religion, national origin, of any person; or
(2)	the crime was committed because of the actual or perceived 
religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, or disability of any person, and the crime affected 
interstate or foreign commerce, or occurred on federal 
property.
This law broadens federal jurisdiction over hate crimes by 
authorizing the attorney general to provide assistance, when 
requested by federal or state officials. Prior to enactment of 
this law, hate crimes were not considered separate and distinct 
offenses under federal law; federal jurisdiction over hate crime 
was limited to only certain civil rights offenses.
On the fourth anniversary of the passage of this law, the 
U.S. Justice Department issued a press release hailing its ability 
now to prosecute crimes motivated by race, color, religion, and 
national origin without having to show that the defendant was 
engaged in a federally protected activity. The Shepard–Byrd 
Act also empowers the department to prosecute crimes com-
mitted because of a person’s sexual orientation, gender identity, 
gender, or disability as hate crimes.
The law also marked the first time that the words, “lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and transgender” appeared in the U.S. Code 
(U.S. Department of Justice, 2013).
In the fall of 2013, the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. 
Justice Department brought federal hate crimes charges against 
two Latino men associated with the Compton 155 street 
gang in California. These men attacked a 17-year-old Afri-
can American who was walking down a street in the city of 

18	
Hate Crimes
Compton—striking him in the head with a metal pipe—and 
pointed a gun at another African American juvenile who was 
present. Both attackers admitted their actions were substan-
tially motivated by race and color (U.S. Department of Justice, 
2013).
In an earlier crime, a Justice Department investigation and 
prosecution in response to the beating of an Atlanta man 
resulted in the first conviction in Georgia under the sexual ori-
entation provision of the Shepard–Byrd Act. In this case, two 
men pleaded guilty to assaulting a 20-year-old gay man as he 
left a grocery store in an Atlanta neighborhood. Video footage 
of the incident showed not only physical violence but also the 
use of antigay epithets. The two men were sentenced to serve 
10 months in prison on federal hate crimes charges as well as 
five years on state charges for aggravated assault, robbery by 
force, and theft by receiving stolen property and obstruction.
The Civil Rights Division has held trainings for thousands 
of law enforcement officials—federal, state, and local—to 
ensure that first responders to an assault or other act of violence 
know what questions to ask and what evidence to gather at the 
scene to allow prosecutors to make an informed assessment of 
whether a case should be prosecuted as a hate crime under this 
recent statute.
Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crime Act of 2007
In an incident that is often cited as the beginning of the mod-
ern civil rights movement, Emmett Till, a 14-year-old African 
American from Chicago was brutally murdered in 1955 while 
visiting his relatives in the Mississippi Delta region. The mur-
der was allegedly sparked by Till’s conversing with Carolyn 
Bryant, a white woman who worked in a store in the area that 
he was visiting. Some accounts claimed he “whistled” at her. 
Till’s reported conversation with a white southern woman so 
enraged her husband, Roy, and his half-brother J.W. Milam 
that they pistol-whipped him and they later forced him to tie a 
heavy cotton gin fan to his body just before he was murdered 

	
Background and History	
19
and dumped into the Tallahatchie River. Bryant and Milam 
were indicted for the murder and tried in September 1955. 
After only a little more than an hour of deliberation, the jury 
unanimously acquitted them of capital murder. However, both 
Roy Bryant and J.W. Milam admitted to the murders in a 1956 
interview with Look magazine. After being acquitted, how-
ever, no charges could legally be brought against them again. 
According to the author of the book Death in the Delta, “the 
crime and the exoneration later affected writers and musicians 
as important and diverse as novelists Toni Morrison and James 
Baldwin (both of whom wrote plays about it), scenarist Rod 
Serling (who wrote a television drama), singer Bob Dylan (who 
wrote a song), and poet Gwendolyn Brooks (who wrote a bal-
lad)” (Whitfield, 1988).
On May 10, 2004, the DOJ reopened the Till case for further 
investigation. The FBI sent an 8,000-page file to Mississippi 
officials on the August 1955 slaying of Till, which included 
among other items, the gruesome photos of Till’s body lying in 
an open coffin, which evoked national outrage.
Although the confessed killers were dead, some civil rights 
lawyers thought a case could have been made against others 
who might have played a role before or after the killing. A local 
grand jury, however, failed to return any indictments, and the 
case was officially closed in December 2007.
Soon after the 2004 reopening of the Till case, there was 
political pressure to re-examine many of the unsolved murders 
of the civil rights era. The Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights 
Crime Act of 2007 was introduced in Congress in 2007. Rep-
resentatives Kenny Hulshof (R-MO) (retired) and John Lewis 
(D-GA) introduced the act in the House; and senators Christo-
pher Dodd (D-CT) and Patrick Leahy (D-VT) introduced the 
act in the Senate. The act had bipartisan support in Congress. 
The House of Representatives passed it on June 20, 2007, by 
a vote of 422 to 2; only representatives. Lynn Westmoreland 
(R-GA) and Ron Paul (R-TX) voted against it. The Senate 
passed the act unanimously on September 24, 2008, and it was 

20	
Hate Crimes
signed into law by President George W. Bush on October 7, 
2008 (Civil Rights and Restorative Justice Project, 2010).
The act directed the DOJ and the FBI to coordinate the 
investigation and prosecution of civil rights era homicides 
that occurred on or before December 31, 1969. The act also 
directed the DOJ and FBI to coordinate their activities with 
state and local law enforcement and to make annual reports 
to Congress on the progress of investigations and prosecutions 
falling under the auspices of the act. The act is in effect until 
2017 (Civil Rights and Restorative Justice Project, 2010).
For fiscal years 2008 through 2017, the act authorized grants 
to state or local law enforcement agencies for costs associated 
with their investigation and prosecution of civil rights era 
homicides; and to DOJ’s Community Relations Service (CRS) 
to bring together law enforcement agencies and communities 
to further the investigation of these homicides. However, since 
the Till Act has been in effect, the amount of funds actually 
appropriated to DOJ for these grants have been minimal (Civil 
Rights and Restorative Justice Project, 2010).
Executive Branch
As a result of the aforementioned legislation, the executive 
branch of the U.S. government has been involved in the fol-
lowing ongoing activities and initiatives:
•	 In November 2014, the DOJ launched a new Interagency 
Initiative on Hate Crimes coordinated by the White House 
Domestic Policy Council that will promote cross-agency 
collaboration and will address prevention of violent hate 
crimes, as well as effective responses to hate crimes. The DOJ 
also announced several actions to strengthen and improve 
the federal government’s ability to prevent and respond to 
hate crimes, including a new series of trainings on the Shep-
ard–Byrd Act around the country for state, local, and tribal 
law enforcement agencies and community leaders.

	
Background and History	
21
•	 The Civil Rights Division, FBI, and CRS committed to 
conducting a series of trainings on the Shepard–Byrd Act 
around the country for state and local law enforcement 
agencies and community leaders. DOJ did a series of these 
trainings across the country shortly after the Act was passed. 
In many cases, the relationships grew in the years after the 
training through inclusion in police chief’s roundtables and 
regular community meetings. These trainings helped local 
law enforcement agencies identify cases that should have 
been investigated as a hate crime.
•	 Since statistical data is critical to understanding hate 
crimes and to understanding what works in terms of re-
sponding to and preventing hate crimes, the National 
Crime Statistics-Exchange (NCS-X), FBI, and Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS) are working to increase the par-
ticipation of a sample of law enforcement agencies in 
the National Incident Based Reporting System (NIBRS) 
in order to create a nationally representative system of 
incident-based crime statistics of crimes known to the 
police. Unfortunately, too many jurisdictions fail to re-
port or under-report hate crimes data, preventing law en-
forcement officials, government leaders, and community 
members form working effectively to prevent and respond 
more effectively to hate violence. The Obama administra-
tion and DOJ are continuing to collaborate and identify 
new ways to expand state and local law enforcement agen-
cies’ use of NIBRS.
•	 In the years 2009–2013, the DOJ charged 201 defendants 
on federal hate crimes or hate crimes–related charges, in-
cluding the Shepard–Byrd Act and other federal hate crimes 
provisions—an increase of almost 50 percent from the prior 
five fiscal years (2004–2008). The Department also con-
victed almost 50 percent more defendants on federal hate 
crimes or hate crimes-related charges, compared to the prior 
five fiscal years.

22	
Hate Crimes
•	 The CRS, an arm of the U.S. DOJ, is a specialized federal 
conciliation service available to state and local officials to 
help resolve and prevent racial and ethnic conflict, violence, 
and civil disorders. When governors, mayors, police chiefs, 
and school superintendents need help to defuse racial crises, 
they turn to CRS. CRS helps local officials and residents 
tailor locally defined resolutions when conflict and violence 
threaten community stability and well-being. CRS concilia-
tors assist in identifying the sources of violence and conflict 
and utilizing specialized crisis management and violence 
reduction techniques that work best for each community. 
CRS has no law enforcement authority and does not impose 
solutions, investigate or prosecute cases, or assign blame or 
fault. CRS conciliators are required by law to conduct their 
activities in confidence, without publicity, and are prohib-
ited from disclosing confidential information.
•	 The Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention 
(OJJDP) provided $100,000 for a study to identify the char-
acteristics and types of juveniles who commit hate crimes 
(Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 
1996). The OJJDP also provided funding for a “Healing 
the Hate” curriculum to assist the prevention and treatment 
of hate crimes committed by young people.
•	 In addition, the U.S. DOJ, the U.S. Department of the 
Treasury, and the U.S. Office of Education have been in-
volved in hate crime enforcement, education, and preven-
tion. The ADL and other human rights organizations and 
professionals have assisted in a model hate-crime training 
curriculum for use by the federal Law Enforcement Training 
Centers, a program of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
•	 As a result of the church arson attacks in the 1990s, the Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) organized 
seminars to discuss a $10 million loan guarantee rebuilding 
fund for houses of worship devastated in hate-motivated arson 
attacks. Under the National Rebuilding Initiative program of 
HUD, more than 100 institutions have received assistance.

	
Background and History	
23
U.S. Supreme Court Decisions
Most legislation on hate crimes was enacted during the early to 
mid-1990s, but some court cases have challenged the consti-
tutional and legal grounds of these statutes. During a 10-year 
period, a few major cases were eventually argued in the U.S. 
Supreme Court. (For a more detailed discussion, please refer to 
Hate Crime Laws: The ADL Approach [ADL, 2015] from which 
some of the following summaries were derived and the Policymak-
er’s Guide to Hate Crimes [U.S. Department of Justice, 1997].)
Apprendi v. New Jersey
On December 22, 1994, Charles C. Apprendi Jr. fired several 
shots into the home of an African American family. While in 
custody, Apprendi made a statement, which he later retracted, 
that he did not want the family in his neighborhood because 
of their race. Apprendi was charged under New Jersey law with 
second-degree possession of a firearm for an unlawful purpose, 
which carries a prison term of 5 to 10 years. The count did 
not refer to the state’s hate crime statute, which provides for 
an enhanced sentence if a trial judge finds, by a preponder-
ance of the evidence, that the defendant committed the crime 
with a purpose to intimidate a person or group because of race. 
After Apprendi pleaded guilty, the prosecutor filed a motion 
to enhance the sentence. The court found, by a preponderance 
of the evidence, that the shooting was racially motivated and 
sentenced Apprendi to a 12-year term on the firearms count. In 
upholding the sentence, the appeals court rejected Apprendi’s 
claim that the due process clause requires that a bias finding be 
proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. The New Jersey 
State Supreme Court affirmed that decision.
On June 26, 2000, the U.S. Supreme Court held in an 5–4 
opinion delivered by Justice John Paul Stevens held that the 
due process clause requires that any fact that increases the pen-
alty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum, 
other than the fact of a prior conviction, must be submitted to 
a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Justice Stevens 

24	
Hate Crimes
wrote for the Court that “the New Jersey procedure challenged 
in this case is an unacceptable departure from the jury tradition 
that is an indispensable part of our criminal justice system.”
Besides its impact on hate crime laws, the decision has wider 
implications for future criminal justice cases. The Apprendi case 
did not reject penalty enhancement for hate crime cases but 
did assert that a hate crimes charge must be established during 
the trial, and not afterward.
Barclay v. Florida
In this case brought before the Supreme Court in 1983, defen-
dant Elwood Barclay, an African American, was convicted of 
murdering a white man on June 17, 1974. He had pinned a 
racist note to the victim’s body with a knife. In assessing several 
aggravating factors at the penalty phase, a Florida trial judge 
considered Barclay’s membership in the Black Liberation Army 
and the group’s mission to kill white people indiscriminately 
and instigate a race war.
Barclay claimed that the trial judge’s consideration of his 
racist beliefs and group membership violated his First Amend-
ment rights. A plurality of the Supreme Court disagreed. The 
Black Liberation Army’s desire to start a race war, the Court 
concluded, was relevant to three of Florida’s statutory aggra-
vating factors.
As summarized in the Southern Poverty Law Center Web 
site (Southern Poverty Law Center, 2004), the Court majority 
stated that Barclay selected five other victims to kill for being 
white before settling on his ultimate victim which demon-
strated that the defendant posed a “great risk of death to many 
persons.”
Second, the evidence of his beliefs and group affiliation was 
relevant to his intent to “disrupt or hinder the lawful exercise of 
a governmental function”; the notion of a race war threatened 
the foundation of American society, the Supreme Court said.
Finally, the sentencing judge’s comparison of the racist mur-
der to Nazi concentration camps was relevant to weighing the 

	
Background and History	
25
“especially heinous, atrocious and cruel” aggravating circum-
stance of the crime.
R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul
An important early challenge to hate crime laws involved a 
group of white skinheads who burned a cross in the yard of a 
black family in St. Paul, Minnesota, on June 21, 1990. Soon 
after, 17-year-old Robert A. Viktora was charged and later con-
victed of violating the municipal bias-motivated crime ordi-
nance, which banned cross burning and displaying the swastika. 
The statute stipulated that these actions “arouse anger, alarm, 
or resentment in others on the basis of race, color, creed, reli-
gion or gender.” Appealing the conviction to a Minnesota dis-
trict court, the lawyer for Viktora claimed the law violated his 
client’s First Amendment right of free speech. The district court 
ruled in favor of the defendant, overturning the conviction and 
declaring the law unconstitutional. The court claimed that the 
St. Paul ordinance was too broad in its application and violated 
First Amendment rights of freedom of expression.
In a counter appeal brought by the City of St. Paul, the Min-
nesota Supreme Court ruled that the local ordinance was valid 
because cross burning was similar to “fighting words”—a phrase 
used in a 1942 landmark U.S. Supreme Court decision—that 
incited violence and hence was not protected by the First 
Amendment of the Constitution.
R. A. V. v. City of St.  Paul was finally brought before the 
U.S. Supreme Court on June 22, 1992. In an opinion written 
by Justice Antonin B. Scalia, a majority of the U.S. Supreme 
Court reversed the Minnesota Supreme Court’s ruling, finding 
that the ordinance unconstitutionally restricted speech on the 
basis of its content. Applying its free speech precedents to the 
St. Paul ordinance, the majority concluded that the ordinance 
applied only to “fighting words” that insult or provoke vio-
lence “on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, or gender.” 
A jurisdiction may proscribe unprotected speech on the basis 
of its content, the Court held, but it may not select one area 

26	
Hate Crimes
of speech to criminalize while leaving other areas unrestricted, 
unless the selection is content-neutral. Therefore, Scalia wrote, 
a jurisdiction may criminalize unprotected speech in a selec-
tive manner, as long as the selectivity is not “conditioned upon 
the government’s agreement with what the speaker may intend 
to say.”
The Court noted that words that expressed hostility toward a 
person because of his or her sexual orientation or political affil-
iation were not prohibited by the city ordinance. The Court 
wrote that because the ordinance restricted biases of a particu-
lar nature, it barred only those viewpoints that the city council 
found distasteful. Scalia asserted that the ordinance unconsti-
tutionally allowed persons on one side of a debate to speak 
freely while restricting the other side’s response. The majority 
held that a law prohibiting all fighting words communicated in 
a threatening manner, instead of proscribing all fighting words 
that convey messages of racial intolerance, would be constitu-
tional. In this case, the Court ruled, the Minnesota ordinance 
went beyond permissible regulation and infringed upon the 
free speech rights of the defendant.
The decision declared that pure or symbolic bias-motivated 
speech, no matter how damaging to the intended target, can-
not be outlawed solely on the basis of its effect on the victim. 
In 2003, the Supreme Court in Virginia v. Black, reasserted 
the government’s authority to punish cross burning aimed at 
intimidating minority groups or others.
Wisconsin v. Mitchell
This landmark case decided in 1993 involved a racial assault 
committed against a white boy by a group of young black men. 
According to the Supreme Court summary:
On the evening of October 7, 1989, a group of young 
black men and boys, including Mitchell, gathered at 
an apartment complex in Kenosha, Wisconsin. Several 
members of the group discussed a scene from the motion 

	
Background and History	
27
picture “Mississippi Burning,” in which a white man beat 
a young black boy who was praying. The group moved 
outside and Mitchell asked them: “Do you all feel hyped 
up to move on some white people?” Shortly thereafter, a 
young boy approached the group on the opposite side of 
the street where they were standing. As the boy walked by, 
Mitchell said: “You all want to fuck somebody up? There 
goes a white boy; go get him.” Mitchell counted to three 
and pointed in the boy’s direction. The group ran toward 
the boy, beat him severely, and stole his tennis shoes. The 
boy was rendered unconscious and remained in a coma 
for four days. (Wisconsin v. Mitchell, 1993)
After a jury trial in the Kenosha County Circuit Court, Mitch-
ell was convicted of aggravated battery. Although the offense 
generally carries a maximum sentence of two years’ imprison-
ment, the jury found that the defendant intentionally selected 
his victim because of the boy’s race and increased his sentence 
to seven years based on the Wisconsin hate penalty enhance-
ment statute. (The Wisconsin statute, modeled after the ADL’s 
proposed hate-crime law, mandates increased penalties for a 
crime when the victim is targeted because of “race, religion, 
color, disability, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry 
of that person.”) Mitchell’s attorney claimed that the additional 
punishment violated his client’s right to free speech, and the 
Wisconsin Supreme Court concurred by reversing the judg-
ment and held that the penalty enhancement statute “violates 
the First Amendment directly by punishing what the legisla-
ture has deemed to be offensive thought.” The decision also 
stated that “the Wisconsin legislature cannot criminalize big-
oted thought with which it disagrees.”
The supporters of the Mitchell case, including defense 
lawyers and constitutional scholars, argued that the Wiscon-
sin statute punished thoughts. The friend-of-the-court brief 
issued by the Wisconsin Association of Criminal Defense Law-
yers asserted: “the right of all people to assert their opinion, 

28	
Hate Crimes
regardless of how unpopular or odious, must be preserved . . . 
the Wisconsin statute does not even attempt to punish one 
for the harm caused by the expression of hurtful opinions. 
Such expression, however, is absolutely protected by the First 
Amendment, regardless of the pain or fear it may engender.”
The State of Wisconsin appealed the decision of the Wis-
consin Supreme Court. On June 11, 1993, the U.S. Supreme 
Court, in Wisconsin v. Mitchell, reversed the Wisconsin court 
ruling. In a unanimous decision, the justices agreed that the 
hate penalty enhancement ordinance does not violate the First 
Amendment. The Court held that the enhanced penalty is 
appropriate “because this conduct is thought to inflict greater 
individual and societal harm.” Furthermore, the justices argued 
that the statute would not stifle free speech because the bias 
motivation would have to be connected with a specific act; the 
law focused on a person’s actions, not on an individual’s big-
oted ideas.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist, who wrote the Mitchell 
court’s unanimous opinion, found that the St. Paul ordinance 
targeted expression, which is protected by the First Amend-
ment, while the Wisconsin statute is aimed at conduct not 
protected by the Constitution. Wisconsin’s enhanced-penalty 
law created an increased penalty for illegal conduct inspired by 
the defendant’s “bigoted motivations,” according to the Court. 
While a particular bias was an element of the crime itself under 
the Minnesota ordinance, it was a factor to be considered 
during sentencing under the Wisconsin statute, said the Court. 
The chief justice said that, although a sentencing judge may 
not take into account the defendant’s beliefs, however offen-
sive to most people, the Constitution does not preclude the 
admission of evidence concerning one’s beliefs and associations 
at sentencing if those beliefs and associations are in some way 
related to the commission of the crime. Rehnquist explained 
that sentencing judges often consider many factors in addition 
to evidence bearing on guilt, including a defendant’s motive 

	
Background and History	
29
for committing the offense. The judges noted that, for exam-
ple, murder, if committed for financial gain, can be considered 
an aggravating factor under many states’ sentencing statutes. 
According to the judges, the First Amendment allows admis-
sion of a defendant’s statements to prove intentions or motive, 
as long as they are relevant and fairly described. Especially note-
worthy, the Court ruled that the statute has no “chilling effect” 
on free speech. Rehnquist said that it would be highly unlikely 
that an individual would withhold his “bigoted” beliefs for fear 
that evidence of those beliefs would be used against him at trial 
if he committed a serious offense.
Other state appellate and high courts considering the con-
stitutionality of hate crime legislation since Mitchell have fol-
lowed either Mitchell or R.A.V. without expressing difficulty 
in reconciling the two decisions. These courts generally have 
upheld state statutes that punish specific behavior motivated 
by bias, and the U.S. Supreme Court has denied appeals of 
these state courts have ruled that there is no meaningful differ-
ence between such statutes and the penalty-enhancement stat-
ute upheld in Mitchell. Both types of statutes punish a crime 
motivated by bias, the courts asserted. Based on this legal juris-
prudence, the Maryland appellate court, upheld a statute mak-
ing it a crime to “harass or commit a crime upon a person . . . 
because of that person’s race, color, religious belief or national 
origin.” The Supreme Court of Missouri summarized with 
regard to a similar statute, “While [the statute] admittedly cre-
ated a new motive-based crime, its practical effect is to provide 
additional punishment for conduct that is already illegal but 
is seen as especially harmful because it is motivated by group 
hatred” (American Prosecutors Research Institute, 2000, 12). 
Thus, these state court decisions, in line with the U.S. Supreme 
Court decision in the Mitchell case uphold the concept that 
enhanced punishment for criminal conduct on account of a 
defendant’s motives of bias or hatred toward a protected group 
is consistent with the U.S. Constitution.

30	
Hate Crimes
Hate Crimes Legislation at the State Level
Shortly after the ADL drafted the model hate crime statutes 
in 1981, Oregon and Washington passed similar legislation. 
By 1994, 34 states and the District of Columbia enacted hate 
crime laws with penalty enhancements. As of 2014, only five 
states have not enacted any hate crime laws (Human Rights 
Campaign, 2015).
The ADL initiative garnered the support of other human and 
civil rights organizations, lobbying many states to enact local 
and municipal penalty enhancement statutes for bias-motivated 
crimes inspired by this important model legislation. These stat-
utes do not establish a separate category for these crimes; the 
perpetrators, however, are subject to enhanced punishment if 
their crimes were motivated by bias.
The earlier sections detail federal hate crime laws, but many 
states have also enacted some form of ethnic intimidation or 
bias-motivated sentence-enhancement laws in attempts to cur-
tail hate crimes. In some instances, state statutes afford broader 
protection to include sexual orientation, mental or physical 
disability, age, and/or marital status.
States have various statutory provisions covering hate crimes. 
These provisions include ones that:
•	 criminalize destruction of religious institutions;
•	 criminalize bias-motivated violence and intimidation;
•	 mandate reporting of hate crimes;
•	 mandate training for state police officers in recognizing and 
reporting hate crimes; and
•	 prohibit infringement on another person’s civil rights.
State hate crime statutes vary in the protection offered to vic-
tims. The ADL (2012) provides a superb detailed chart of 
state hate crime laws, including the statutes covering penalty 
enhancement, the categories for penalty enhancements (race/
religion/ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, 

	
Background and History	
31
disability), and separate columns noting the state statutes for 
civil action, police training, institutional vandalism, and cross 
burning.
A few state statutes include other protected characteristics 
such as age (California, District of Columbia, Florida, Hawaii, 
Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Minnesota, Nebraska, New 
Mexico, New York, and Vermont) and political affiliation (Cal-
ifornia, District of Columbia, Iowa, Louisiana, and West Vir-
ginia). The District of Columbia law covers the widest range of 
categories, including prejudice based on “actual or perceived 
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, marital status, 
personal appearance, sexual orientation, family responsibility, 
physical handicap, matriculation or political affiliation.” In 
Vermont, a defendant convicted of an offense punishable by 
one year of imprisonment may receive double the sentence if 
the crime was motivated by bias. Even though the court must 
consider the motivation of the perpetrator in the sentencing, 
the judge is not required to enhance the punishment. Most sur-
prisingly, as of 2015, the state legislature in Wyoming, where 
Matthew Shepard was murdered, still refuses to pass legislation 
to punish hate crimes against gay men and lesbians.
The actions of the states where hate crimes statutes have been 
declared constitutional are especially significant because most 
prosecutions of bias-motivated violence occur at the state level.
The state of Washington has a bold and uncompromising 
policy that echoes concerns held by some other state legisla-
tures: “The legislature finds that crimes and threats against 
persons because of their race, color, religion, ancestry, national 
origin, gender, sexual orientation or mental, physical or sensory 
handicaps are serious and increasing. The legislature also finds 
that crimes and threats are often directed against interracial 
couples and their children or couples of mixed religions, colors, 
ancestries or national origins because of bias and bigotry . . .  
The legislature finds that protection of those citizens from 
threats of harm due to bias and bigotry is a compelling state 
interest” (Revised Code of Washington, 2014).

32	
Hate Crimes
Other state measures and policies include the following:
•	 Prohibiting particular acts that have traditionally been asso-
ciated with racial hatred, such as burning crosses or wearing 
masks or hoods. In 1951, for example, the state of Georgia 
passed an antimask law because of the violence and intimi-
dation carried out by mask-wearing members of the KKK. 
(These laws, however, exempt holiday costume masks or 
other “innocent activities.”)
•	 Enacting statutes that provide compensation to the victims 
of hate crimes. These laws specify monetary damages (in-
cluding damages for emotional distress and punitive dam-
ages), attorneys’ fees, and other costs of litigation.
•	 Providing funding to school districts to implement programs 
designed to reduce and prevent hate motivated incidents.
Conclusion
In the last few decades, several bias-motivated crimes were 
widely reported in the media. Yet the phrase “hate crime” 
only gained currency in the mid-1980s. Throughout Ameri-
can history, these crimes were mostly described by the victims 
ethnicity or other group membership, for example, antiblack, 
anti-Chinese, antihomosexual (the earlier term), or “racist.” In 
the wake of the social and political ferment of the 1960s, federal 
and state legislators began introducing legislation to protect the 
rights of African Americans. But the growing number of hate 
crimes directed at a variety of groups inspired the enactment 
of additional and broader statutes to protect other victims. In 
1981, the ADL, the prominent Jewish civil and human rights 
organization, drafted model legislation to cover all types of 
hate crimes aimed at minority groups. This legislative initiative 
soon became the basis for major hate crime laws throughout 
the United States. All three branches of the federal government 
are now involved in hate crime issues: the legislative branch 
enacts the legislation; the executive branch administers these 

	
Background and History	
33
statutes and the judiciary weighs in when these laws are chal-
lenged or need further interpretation. In addition, state and 
local governments are greatly involved in this chronic societal 
problem.
References
American Prosecutors Research Institute. 2000. “Local Pros-
ecutor’s Guide for Responding to Hate Crimes.” https://
www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/Digitization/182629NCJRS.pdf.
Anti-Defamation League. 2012. State Hate Crime Statutory 
Provisions. http://www.adl.org/assets/pdf/combating-hate/
ADL-hate-crime-state-laws-clickable-chart.pdf.
Anti-Defamation League. 2015. Hate Crime Laws: The 
ADL Approach. http://www.adl.org/combating-hate/
hate-crimes-law/c/adl-approach-hate-crimes-laws.html.
Civil Rights and Restorative Justice Project. 2010. “Emmitt 
Till Act.” Northeastern University School of Law. http://
nuweb9.neu.edu/civilrights/emmett-till-act/.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 1992. Hate Crime Statistics, 
1990: A Resource Book. Washington, DC: Federal Bureau of 
Investigation.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2013. “About Hate Crime  
Statistics.” http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/hate- 
crime/2013/resource-pages/about-hate-crime.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2015. “Hate Crimes Over-
view.” http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/civilrights/
hate_crimes/overview.
Greenawalt, Kent. 1992–1993. “Reflections on Justifica-
tions for Defining Crimes by the Category of Victim.” 
1992/1993 Annual Survey of American Law. New York: 
New York University School of Law, 617–628.
Hoover, Reynold N. 1995. “Learning from Oklahoma City: 
Federal and State Explosives Laws in the United States.” 
Kansas Journal of Law and Public Policy, Fall.

34	
Hate Crimes
Human Rights Campaign. 2015. “Maps of State Laws.” http:// 
www.hrc.org/state_maps.
Jacobs, James B. and Potter, Kimberly. 1998. Hate Crimes, 
Criminal Law and Identity Politics. Oxford: Oxford  
University Press.
Lawrence, Frederick M. 1999. Punishing Hate: Bias Crimes 
under American Law. Boston: Harvard University  
Press.
Los Angeles Times. 1987. “2 Supremacists Guilty in Death of 
Jewish Radio Host.” November 18. http://articles.latimes 
.com/1987–11–18/news/mn-14825_1_neo-nazi.
National Church Arson Task Force. 1998. “Report for the 
President.” http://www.justice.gov/crt/church_arson/
arson98.php.
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. 1996. 
Report to Congress on Juvenile Hate Crime. Washington, 
DC: Government Printing Office.
Revised Code of Washington. 2014. “Malicious Harassment- 
Finding.” Volume 2, 9A.36.078.
Southern Poverty Law Center. 2004. “Hate on Trial.”  
Intelligence Report, Winter, Issue 116. http://www 
.splcenter.org/get-informed/intelligence-report/browse- 
all-issues/2004/winter/hate-on-trial.
U.S. Department of Justice. 1993. Hate Crime Statistics, 1992.  
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Justice. 1997. Policymaker’s Guide to Hate 
Crimes. https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bja/162304.pdf.
U.S. Department of Justice. 2013. “Commemorating  
the Fourth Anniversary of the Shepard-Byrd Hate 
Crime Prevention Act.” http://www.justice.gov/
opa/blog/commemorating-fourth-anniversary-shepa
rd-byrd-hate-crime-prevention-act.

	
Background and History	
35
U.S. Department of Justice. 2015. “Statutes-Hate Crimes.” 
http://www.justice.gov/crt/about/crm/statutes.php.
Whitfield, Stephen J. 1988. Death in the Delta: The Story of 
Emmett Till. Baltimore: Free Press.
Wisconsin v. Mitchell, 1993, 508 U.S. 476. https://supreme.
justia.com/cases/federal/us/508/476/case.html.


37
2	
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
Criticism and Defense of Hate Crime Laws
As noted in the previous chapter, the enactment of laws spe-
cifically directed to punish and prevent hate crimes dates back 
only to the last few decades. Since their inception, these laws 
have been criticized on a number of grounds: constitutional, 
philosophical, political, and even methodological (regarding 
the collection of statistical data).
Professor Susan Gellman summarizes the stance of many 
critics of hate crime legislation: “Those who oppose ethnic 
intimidation laws, or at least who question them most vigor-
ously, do not disagree that bigotry (and certainly bigotry-related 
crime) is a serious problem. In fact, many such critics are civil 
rights and civil liberties advocates. These critics, however, focus 
on threats to constitutional liberties under the First and Four-
teenth Amendment and the enactment of statutes that ‘create 
thought crimes’ ” (Gellman, 1991, 334).
In addition, these critics question the wisdom of enacting 
such laws; even if they can be drafted in a way that does not 
offend the Constitution, they may ultimately undercut their 
own goals more than they serve them. James B. Jacobs and 
Texas lawmakers form a prayer circle to support a bill to toughen the state’s 
hate crimes law.  The prayer was held in the Texas Capitol Rotunda on May 
14, 1999. (AP Photo/Harry Cabluck)

38	
Hate Crimes
Kimberly A. Potter raise questions about the sociological and 
criminological consequences of hate crime legislation:
The concept of hate crime is easy to grasp as an ideal type, 
but it is difficult to effectuate in a workaday criminal 
justice system. Most putative hate crimes are not ideo-
logically motivated murders, although some of those do 
occur. . . . Whether it aids understanding of their con-
duct and of our society to brand them as bigots as well as 
criminals is not an easy question to answer. . . . Beyond 
the problem of definition, labeling particular incidents 
as hate crimes bristles with subjectivity and potential for 
bias. Nevertheless, the very existence of the term, the 
attempt to measure the incidence of hate crime, and the 
prosecution and sentencing of some offenders under dif-
ferent types of hate crime statutes have already changed 
how Americans think about the crime problem. At a 
minimum, the new hate crime laws have contributed fur-
ther to politicizing the crime problem . . . Rather than 
Americans pulling together and affirming their common 
ground by condemning criminal conduct, they may now 
increasingly see crime as a polarizing issue that pits one 
social group against another, thereby further dividing an 
already fractured society. (Jacobs, 1997, 41–42)
Other arguments often invoked against hate crime statutes:
•	 The diversity of hate crime laws creates problems in identi-
fying, investigating, and reporting the incidents.
•	 Hate crimes are no more harmful to society than other 
criminal activity and hence do not merit a separate category 
of criminal law.
•	 A key argument of hate crime law proponents is that the 
bias of the perpetrators necessitates an enhanced punish-
ment but critics, however, claim that isolating a bigoted 
motivation is often difficult to assess since many crimes are 
frequently inspired by multifarious factors.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
39
•	 Hate crime legislation does not confront the most socially 
destabilizing types of violence, for example, gang and 
drug-related violence, so their impact on the general society 
does not warrant this form of extra punishment.
•	 The laws punish thoughts and beliefs and are no more 
deserving of enhanced punishment as are other human 
traits such as greed or cruelty.
•	 The selection of protected groups to be covered by hate 
crime statutes are political decisions, resulting from the un-
fair influence and power of advocates who are able to enact 
these laws.
Hate crime law proponents cite the following justifications for 
these laws:
•	 While many victims of violent crimes may suffer from psy-
chological and sometimes, traumatic reactions to these as-
saults, there is some anecdotal evidence indicating that hate 
crime victims suffer from greater depression and anxiety 
than other victims (Herek and Berrill,1992, 212).
•	 Hate crimes have an impact on the wider community. 
Recent widely publicized incidents (the murder of Sikhs 
in Wisconsin; attacks on the Jewish Community Center in 
Missouri, etc.) have had a chilling effect on the lives of Sikhs 
and Jews, especially when they visit their houses of worship 
or community centers.
•	 Hate crime laws demonstrate societal concern for the rights 
of vulnerable minority communities. Some social scientists 
praise the symbolic values of these laws in guaranteeing 
safety and respect for all citizens. Legal scholars also have 
supported these laws for affirming traditional American val-
ues of ensuring justice under law.
•	 According to some legal experts, hate crime laws are anal-
ogous to civil rights statutes that prohibit discrimination 
based on race, religion, gender, ethnicity, among other 
immutable factors. Similarly, hate crime legislation punishes 

40	
Hate Crimes
the intentional selection of targeted individuals based on 
these similar traits.
•	 Many criminal codes stipulate that so-called status crimes 
committed against police officers, young children, and 
teachers, to name only a few groups, provide enhanced pen-
alties for assaults directed against these members of these 
groups. Similarly, hate crime laws also provide extra legal 
protection for identified groups who require this special 
legal status because of their historic vulnerability.
•	 Motivation often determines the punishment for convicted 
criminals. In those states with capital punishment, for in-
stance, the defendant’s motivation in committing a homi-
cide is of special concern to both judges and juries, because 
certain factors may contribute to the imposition of the death 
sentence. Similarly, the motivation of hate crime perpetra-
tors is also relevant to the court in deciding what sentence 
to impose for this type of crime.
Methodology
Besides the philosophical and legal arguments raised against 
hate crime legislation, several critics—including even law 
proponents—have raised questions about both how the data is 
collected and even the accuracy of hate crime statistics.
In a July 2011online report entitled Assessing the Validity of 
Hate Crime Reporting: An Analysis of NIBRS Data, the authors 
of the report identified the following problems and issues 
(Haas, 2011):
•	 “Classification errors can, and in fact do, impact the statistical 
accuracy of hate crime statistics. Our findings show that the 
true number of hate crimes in the population is likely much 
greater than official crime reports suggest. A vast majority of 
the error found in this study related to the undercounting of 
hate crimes in official records.” (Classification error refers to 
incidents where police officers record an incident but don’t 
fully classify the crime, e.g., an African-American woman 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
41
asks a white man walking two large dogs to keep the animals 
away from her. He refused and then assaults the woman; the 
police report classified the incident solely as a felony, even 
though the man uttered a racial slur against the woman.)
•	 Some police officers had a specific—but arbitrary 
definition—of hate crimes. “When you see a hate crime, it 
is the type that makes national headlines”—it is a “clear-cut 
case.” The officers were reticent to solely rely on the victim 
statements to assess whether bias was the motivating factor 
of the perpetrator.
•	 In a focus group with police officers, one policeman said 
that we hear “racial slurs all the time but that doesn’t make 
it a hate crime.” Other officers “do not consider most situa-
tions involving racial slurs as hate crimes but rather just the 
way people talk.”
•	 The large number of undercounts in this study found that 
many officers fail to recognize “bias indicators” in some inci-
dents. Furthermore, some police assume only severe crimi-
nal incidents can be classified as hate crimes, even though a 
large number of bias-motivated crimes do not necessarily fit 
this extreme definition.
•	 Some undercounted hate crimes can be classified as 
“response/retaliation offenses,” which are not initially trig-
gered by bias, but soon devolve into a crime motivated by 
the prejudice of a perpetrator. These incidents often go 
unrecorded in hate crime statistics.
Frederick Lawrence, a prominent hate crime laws propo-
nent and former dean of the George Washington University 
Law School, has written that: “(t)here is reason to believe that, 
despite increased bias crime reporting by police agencies, a 
majority of bias crime victims do not report incidents at all. 
Victims’ distrust of the police, language barriers, and fear of 
either retaliation by the offender or public exposure generally 
may well lead to systemic underreporting of bias crimes” (Law-
rence, 2002, 776).

42	
Hate Crimes
Some state government agencies have expressed concern 
about convincing victims to report hate crime incidents. The 
California attorney general issued a hate crimes report that 
listed some reasons why victims were reticent to report these 
crimes to law enforcement or other government agencies:
The reasons include, but are not limited to the following:
*	 Lack of knowledge about what hate crimes are and how the 
laws are applied
*	 Denial by the victim(s) that a hate crime was perpetrated
*	 Fear of retaliation by the perpetrator for reporting
*	 Fear of being revictimized by law enforcement or a belief 
that law enforcement does not want to address hate crimes
*	 Shame for being a victim of a hate crime
*	 Cultural or personal belief that one should not complain 
about misfortunes
*	 Fear of being exposed as being gay, lesbian, bisexual, or 
transgendered to one’s family, employer, friends, or the gen-
eral public
*	 Lack of English language proficiency and knowledge of how 
to report hate crimes
*	 Fear of being identified as an undocumented immigrant and 
being deported
*	 Fear on the part of people with disabilities who use care-
givers that the caregivers who have committed hate crimes 
against them will retaliate and leave them without life sup-
porting assistance
*	 Inability of some people with disabilities to articulate when 
they have been a victim of a hate crime (California Attorney 
General, 2001, 11)
The underreporting of hate crimes also results from the lack 
of comprehensive data collection from the major U.S. law 
enforcement agencies. “Unfortunately, this FBI data does not 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
43
necessarily mean that there are fewer hate crimes in the U.S.,” 
according to the Newsweek online edition (Bekiempis, 2014). 
The FBI receives its numbers from other law enforcement 
agencies participating in the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) 
program. But these agencies voluntarily tell the FBI how many 
of these crimes have been reported in their jurisdictions. In 
2013, for example, 18, 415 city, county, rural and other local 
agencies participated in UCR but only 15,016 of these law 
enforcement agencies reported hate crime data to the FBI in 
2013—demonstrating a wide gap in comprehensive hate crime 
coverage. In fact, Hawaii and Puerto Rico didn’t submit any 
hate crime data for that year. Even more troubling, the Justice 
Department’s Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) indicates that 
some 60 percent of hate crimes go unreported.
The FBI data are based on police reports; BJS data are based 
on yearly interviews of some 160,000 people in 90,000 U.S. 
households. The findings from this survey group are then 
extrapolated to the rest of the population.
Mark Potok, a senior fellow at the Southern Poverty Law 
Center and editor-in-chief of its journal, Intelligence Report, 
told Newsweek that the FBI numbers “don’t tell us much of 
anything at all” (Bekiempis, 2014).
Some human and civil rights organizations also dispute the 
accuracy of the official annual FBI hate crime statistics audit. 
“Even with record high participation, underreporting remains 
a problem,” said Barry Curtiss-Lusher, ADL national chair, and 
Abraham H. Foxman. “Thousands of police departments did 
not report data to the FBI, and of those that did, only about 
12 percent reported one or more hate crimes to the Bureau. 
Over 80 cities with over 100,000 in population either did not 
participate in the reporting program, or affirmatively reported 
zero hate crimes to the FBI—which would be welcome news, 
but seems unlikely” (Leadership Conference, 2014).
More than 250,000 Americans over the age of 12 are victim-
ized every year by hate criminals, according to a 2013 Depart-
ment of Justice study that puts the number some 50,000 higher 

44	
Hate Crimes
than the best earlier analyses. At the same time, the study found 
that in recent years only about one in three hate crimes are ever 
reported to law enforcement officials. The study, conducted by 
the Department of Justice’s BJS, was based primarily on the 
annual National Crime Victimization Survey, which employs 
detailed questionnaires that are widely considered the most 
accurate measure of U.S. crime available and includes data for 
the years 2003–2011. Like other analyses, the new study also 
showed that a vastly higher percentage of hate crimes are vio-
lent than are crimes overall. About 92 percent of all hate crimes 
between 2007 and 2011 were violent, up from 84 percent in 
the 2003–2006 period. By comparison, the latest FBI statistics 
(from 2011) show that just 13 percent of all crime is violent. 
Experts also have long noted the extreme violence that char-
acterizes hate crimes, with many murder victims, for instance, 
showing signs of suffering “overkill” (Potok, 2014).
Hate Crime Hoaxes
A growing number of hate crime hoaxes have been committed 
by misguided or ill-intentioned individuals who believe that 
by staging these incidents they might heighten public aware-
ness about bigotry and prejudice. But their actions may instead 
provoke a critical response from some in the public who resent 
deliberate deception (see Chapter 3). As a result, future reports 
of hate crimes may be greeted with much skepticism, even 
though they were genuine incidents.
Bias Crimes and Violence before Hate Crime Laws
Since the terrorist attack on the United States on September 11, 
2001, Americans have become understandably fearful for their 
personal safety and security, resulting in a regrettable rise in 
prejudice against Middle East immigrants and others not con-
sidered “real” Americans. Unfortunately, during other stressful 
times in U.S. history, some Americans were scapegoated or dis-
criminated against because of their national, religious, or ethnic 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
45
background. During the 19th century, many immigrants were 
subjected to prejudice, and even violent assaults. Chinese Amer-
icans were killed in mob violence; the Know-Nothing Party 
whipped up crowds to attack Catholics; the Irish were subjected 
to much prejudice in Boston; an Atlanta mob lynched a Jewish 
man who was wrongly charged with committing a murder. In 
the 20th century, Japanese Americans were interned because 
they were deemed a security threat. Few Americans know that 
German Americans were subjected to discrimination during 
World War I or that American Jews were accused of dragging 
the United States into World War II and were also subjected to 
much prejudice during that war. And, of course, throughout 
American history, African Americans who were brought to this 
country as slaves and then treated as second-class citizens until 
the rise of the civil rights movement in the 1960s, have been 
longtime victims of brutal violence and prejudice.
Even during peacetime, many U.S. citizens have been sub-
jected to harassment, discrimination, and occasionally physical 
violence because of their religion, race, skin color, ethnic ori-
gin, economic class, or sexual orientation. The targets of this 
hatred have included Spanish and other non-English speakers; 
Italian, Jewish, and other European immigrants; and peoples 
from Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. Sadly, the list of such 
groups is too large to enumerate.
Hate Crimes against Selected Groups:  
A Recent Overview
This section surveys the recent history of hatred and violence 
directed against some of the major groups that—according 
to FBI annual crime statistics—are most frequently targeted: 
African Americans, Asian Americans, gay men and lesbians, 
and Jewish Americans. As a result of the September 11 attacks, 
this section will also include a survey of hate crimes committed 
against Sikhs, Muslims and Arab Americans. Americans with 
disabilities and Native Americans will also be briefly discussed, 

46	
Hate Crimes
even though the government statistics indicate they are victims 
of a relatively small number of hate crimes.
African Americans
Since the passage of the Hate Crime Statistics Act of 1990, offi-
cial government statistics indicate that the vast majority of hate 
crimes motivated by racial bias have been committed against 
black Americans.
The most recent FBI hate crime statistics covering the year 
2013 reported that racial bias incidents represented the largest 
percentage of all bias-motivated incidents. Among single-bias 
hate crime incidents in 2013, there were 3,563 victims of 
racially motivated hate crime: 66.5 percent (2,371) were vic-
tims of crimes motivated by their offenders’ antiblack or 
African American bias. (The term victim refers to a person, 
business, or institution.)
Hate crime laws are not always employed when prosecut-
ing violence committed against individual African Ameri-
cans. Sometimes prosecutors don’t use the hate crime penalty 
enhancement provision for a variety of reasons, including an 
inability to prove that racism was the motivating factor in the 
homicide or lesser crime.
This law enforcement issue arose when Alonzo Bailey, a 
homeless man, was found chained to a fence in an Oklahoma 
City industrial park on May 5, 2002. The body of this 33-year-
old African American had been set on fire and covered with 
wooden pallets. The suspected murderer, Anthony Lee Ted-
ford, had Ku Klux Klan (KKK) tattoos on his body. Although 
the FBI planned to investigate whether the murder was a hate 
crime, the Oklahoma County District Attorney Wes Lane 
asserted that a police investigation did not support racism as 
the motive.
This grisly murder—regardless of whether it was racially 
motivated—recalled the tragic history of violence directed 
against African Americans throughout U.S. history. From 1882 
to 1968, 4,743 people were reportedly lynched; of those, the 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
47
vast majority were black. Long before hate crime statutes were 
enacted, black Americans have been the most frequent victims 
of hate violence in the United States.
While such violent incidents were generally ignored by the 
public during the 19th and 20th centuries, antiblack violence 
is now met with outrage and shame. When James Byrd Jr., a 
49-year-old black man in Jasper, Texas, was dragged along an 
asphalt road for almost two miles by white supremacist attack-
ers on June 7, 1998, this barbaric murder was condemned by 
President Bill Clinton. The accused perpetrators were later 
found guilty of the crime and executed by the state of Texas. 
The incident was reported and analyzed in a few books, and 
it received widespread media coverage. In partial reaction to 
this dastardly crime, Congress passed the Matthew Shepard and 
James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act in 2009.
While much attention in 2014 has been focused on the 
police officer murders of unarmed African American males 
in Missouri, New York and Ohio, the most widely publicized 
racial incidents in the last few decades involved the burning 
of southern black churches in the 1990s. In June 1996, Pres-
ident Clinton established the National Church Arson Task 
Force (NCATF) to better coordinate the efforts of federal, 
state, and local law enforcement to combat such crime. The 
NCATF opened investigations into 945 arsons, bombings, 
and attempted bombings that occurred at houses of worship 
between January 1, 1995, and August 15, 2000. Since Janu-
ary 1995, federal, state, and local authorities have arrested 431 
suspects and 305 defendants have been convicted. An NCATF 
report asserted that the arsons at both African American and 
other houses of worship “were motivated by a wide array of 
factors, including not only blatant racism or religious hatred 
but also financial profit, burglary, and personal revenge” (U.S. 
Department of Justice, 1998).
Although the NCATF report findings do not indicate a 
national conspiracy against black churches, this widespread 
criminal violence warranted the concern of law enforcement 

48	
Hate Crimes
officials and the public. Although newspapers and other media 
extensively covered the rash of church bombings, it wasn’t until 
USA Today published 12 articles over a three-day period that 
examined the nature of these crimes in great detail (USA Today, 
1996). However, investigative journalist Michael Fumento, writ-
ing in the Wall Street Journal, argued that USA Today was partially 
responsible for wrongly charging, in his view, that African Amer-
ican church arsons constituted an epidemic (Fumento, 1996).
Epidemic or not, attacks against black churches have a long 
and tragic history. Reportedly, the first recorded arson against 
a black church occurred in South Carolina in 1822. After the 
civil war, the KKK targeted African American churches; almost 
a century later, four black children were killed in the Sixteenth 
Street Baptist Church bombing in Birmingham, Alabama in 
1963. It is worth noting that former secretary of state Condo-
leezza Rice was the kindergarten classmate of Denise McNair, 
who was killed in the bombing.
Recent hate crimes committed against African Americans 
include the following:
•	 Steven Sandstrom and Gary L. Eye, both of Kansas City, 
Missouri, were sentenced to multiple life sentences on Sep-
tember 9, 2008, for the racially motivated murder of William 
L. McCay on March 9, 2005. While McCay was walking to 
work one morning, Eye attempted to shoot McCay with 
Sandstrom’s gun as they were driving in a stolen car. He 
missed and McCay fled. Eye and Sandstrom, afraid that 
McCay would report them to the police, pursued him. At 
the next block, Eye got out of the car and fatally shot him.
•	 In the early-morning hours after Obama’s election on 
November 4, 2008, 27-year-old Michael Jacques and sev-
eral accomplices used gasoline to torch the Macedonia 
Church of God in Christ’s nearly completed $2.5 million 
worship center in Springfield, Massachusetts. Nobody was 
in the building at the time. After a lengthy investigation, 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
49
police ultimately secured confessions from the participants 
indicating that the fire was racially motivated. Jacques “was 
angry that the country was going to have an African Amer-
ican president and that the blacks and Puerto Ricans would 
now have more rights than whites,” according to court doc-
uments. After a three-week trial, Jacques was convicted of 
numerous federal civil rights charges, including destruction 
of religious property and conspiracy against civil rights. In 
addition to serving almost 14 years in federal prison, fol-
lowed by four years of supervised released, he must pay 
nearly $1.6 million in restitution.
•	 Timothy Flanagan, a former member of the Church of the 
National Knights, a KKK affiliate—admitted that on the 
night of April 30, 2012, he and two other individuals devised 
a plan to burn a cross in the yard of an African American 
man in Minor Hill, Tennessee. Flanagan’s co-conspirator, 
Timothy Stafford, constructed a wooden cross in a work-
shop behind his house. Using Flanagan’s credit card, Stafford 
and co-conspirator Ivan “Rusty” London then purchased 
diesel-fuel with which to soak the cross. Flanagan and the 
other co-conspirators then drove the cross to the victim’s 
residence and upon arriving at the residence, Flanagan and 
London exited the truck. The cross was placed in the drive-
way leading up to the house and was ignited. According to 
the local authorities, the co-conspirators burned the cross 
with the purpose of intimidating the African American male 
who resided at that residence (U.S. Department of Justice, 
December 2014).
•	 In July 2014, the acting assistant attorney general Jocelyn 
Samuels for the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division 
and U.S. Attorney Gregory K. Davis for the Southern Dis-
trict of Mississippi announced that a federal grand jury had 
indicted several individuals for their alleged roles in a con-
spiracy to commit federal hate crimes against African Amer-
ican people in Jackson, Mississippi.

50	
Hate Crimes
 Some defendants were additionally charged with a 
racially motivated hate crime resulting in the death of 
a victim run over by a truck and two additional racially 
motivated hate crimes involving alleged assaults, and 
with carrying a firearm in relation to one of those assaults 
including soliciting others to commit hate crimes against 
African-Americans.
 The indictment alleges that, beginning in the spring of 
2011, the defendants and others conspired with one 
another to harass and assault African-American peo-
ple in and around the Jackson area. According to the 
indictment, on numerous occasions, the co-conspirators 
used dangerous weapons, including beer bottles, sling 
shots and motor vehicles, to cause, and attempt to 
cause, bodily injury to African-American people. The 
co-conspirators are alleged to have specifically targeted 
African-American people they believed to be homeless 
or under the influence of alcohol because they believed 
that such individuals would be less likely to report an 
assault. The co-conspirators would often boast about 
these racially motivated assaults. The indictment details 
several such assaults, including the fatal assault on a vic-
tim who was intentionally run over (U.S. Department of 
Justice, July 16, 2014).
•	 In September 2014, the Department of Justice announced 
that Robert Keller, 70, pleaded guilty in the U.S. District 
Court for the District of Utah to a federal civil rights crime 
related to interfering with the housing rights of three mem-
bers of an interracial family because of the family member’s 
races and because the family members were living in a home 
while associating with an African American family member 
in Hurricane, Utah. During the plea proceedings, Keller ad-
mitted that on December 30, 2013, he wrote a note to two 
Caucasian family members of an interracial family threaten-
ing to kill them if they did not make their African American 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
51
family member leave their home. Keller admitted that he 
used threats of force to willfully intimidate and interfere 
with the two Caucasian family members because they were 
occupying a dwelling while associating with their African 
American family member.
The above incidents sadly demonstrate that W.E.B. DuBois’s 
famous statement about racism in America still resonates, 
although it is now more than a century later. “The problem of 
the twentieth century is the problem of the color-line,” wrote 
the eminent African American scholar in 1900. While there is 
much to be optimistic about in American race relations—the 
election of the first African American president, a growing black 
middle class and the large increase of black students in colleges 
and universities, among other good news—the persistence 
of racist violence against blacks remains a festering problem. 
When Barack Obama was elected president, there was much 
fear about a possible large increase in bias-motivated incidents 
against African Americans, but fortunately, the number of such 
hate crimes has not greatly expanded. One can only hope that 
it will decrease in the coming years.
Asian Americans
Following the September 11 terrorist attacks, some Asian Amer-
icans were targeted in violent and deadly hate crimes. Some inci-
dents were ostensibly aimed at “Muslim-looking” individuals 
but were mostly perpetrated against recent Asian non-Muslim 
U.S. citizens or recent immigrants, especially Sikhs.
Many Asian Americans have succeeded in achieving the 
much-vaunted American dream in the last few decades; They 
are highly represented in many professions (science, business, 
and the professoriate), their children often attend the top col-
leges and universities, and some Asian Americans earn the 
highest median incomes in the country. But the picture has 
not always been so rosy for immigrants from Asia who started 

52	
Hate Crimes
arriving on these shores in the mid-19th century. Unfortu-
nately, there is a long history of violence against Asian immi-
grants due to their race, dating back to the Gold Rush of 
the 1840s and 1850s when whites confronting competition 
from Chinese miners resorted to violence against these recent 
immigrants. Anti-Asian sentiment, accompanied by numer-
ous anti-Chinese riots, culminated in a notorious massacre in 
Rock Springs, Wyoming, against Chinese miners resulting in 
28 deaths on September 2, 1885. A few years earlier, Congress 
passed the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 which barred vir-
tually all immigration from China and prevented almost all 
Chinese within the United States from becoming U.S. citizens.
This law was the first time in U.S. history that a specific eth-
nic group was excluded from entering the United States. Fili-
pino workers, many of whom had been educated by American 
teachers and already spoke English, were also met with violence 
and denied U.S. citizenship As a result of white resentment 
against Japanese farmers developing agricultural tracts from the 
fertile soil of the Golden State, the state of California lobbied 
the federal government to stop all immigration from Japan 
soon resulting in the Asian Exclusion Act in 1924.
During World War II, the U.S. government forcibly removed 
over 120,000 Japanese Americans–the vast majority of whom 
were U.S. citizens–from their homes and incarcerated them in 
internment camps for periods of up to four years. The govern-
ment claimed they represented a security risk to the nation. 
But in 1983, more than 40 years after the evacuation order, the 
Federal Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment 
of Civilians determined that one of the primary causes for the 
Japanese American internment was racial prejudice.
In more recent times, a widely publicized anti-Asian hate 
murder occurred in 1982. Vincent Chin, a Chinese American 
from Detroit, was beaten to death by two white autoworkers, 
while celebrating his upcoming wedding. This deadly incident 
arose at the height of anti-Japanese sentiment in reaction to 
the growing import of Japanese automobiles. The workers who 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
53
killed him were worried about their job security and assumed 
Mr. Chin was Japanese.
Other notorious crimes in earlier years include the following:
•	 On April 28, 2000, Anil Thakur, 31, a customer at the India 
Grocers store in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, was murdered 
and Sandip Patel, the store manager, was paralyzed from 
the neck down. The assailant was Richard Baumhammers, 
a white immigration attorney who professed hatred of mi-
norities. He began his murderous rampage by killing Anita 
Gordon, his 63-year-old Jewish neighbor. Later, he went to 
a Chinese restaurant and killed Thao Q. Pham, 27, a Viet-
namese American, and Ji-Ye Sun, 34, a Korean American. 
His final victim was Garry Lee, a 25-year-old African Amer-
ican man. Although Baumhammers was initially sent to a 
psychiatric facility, a jury found him guilty of five murders 
and he was sentenced to death.
•	 Thung Phetakoune, a 62-year-old U.S. citizen of Laotian 
ancestry, was murdered by Richard Labbe in Newmar-
ket, New Hampshire, on July 14, 2001. Witnesses over-
heard Labbe uttering anti-Asian racial comments before 
the attack, and Labbe reportedly told the arresting police 
officer, “Those Asians killed my brother and uncle in Viet-
nam. Call it payback.” Although the defendant was origi-
nally charged with a hate crime, the state later dropped the 
charge, and Labbe pleaded guilty only to manslaughter. 
The dropping of the hate crime indictment evoked out-
rage among Asian American organizations (Asian Week, 
2001).
•	 Mizanor Rahman, a Bangladeshi immigrant, was beaten to 
death in Brooklyn, New York, in a racially motivated mob 
attack on August 10, 2002. The 37-year-old journalist was 
attacked by a local Hispanic gang when he stumbled into a 
violent confrontation between local Dominican and Ban-
gladeshi youths over a stolen bicycle.

54	
Hate Crimes
•	 While working at a part-time job delivering pizzas in 
New Bedford, Massachusetts, Saurabh Bhalerao, 24, was 
robbed, beaten, burned with cigarettes, stuffed in a trunk, 
and stabbed twice on June 23, 2003. He was later dumped 
along a road. His assailants shouted anti- Muslim slurs at 
Bhalerao, even though he is Hindu. Police and community 
leaders described the attack as a hate crime.
According to the FBI’s 2013 hate crimes statistics, there were 
164 incidents of hate crimes aimed at Asian Americans, consti-
tuting 4.6 percent of racially motivated hate crimes that year.
The now-defunct National Asian Pacific American Legal 
Consortium (NAPALC), formerly compiled a very useful 
itemized annual audit of bias-motivated crimes against Asian 
Americans but their successor group Asian Americans Advanc-
ing Justice doesn’t currently compile such a list. The Leader-
ship Conference, however, does list some incidents since before 
2009 (Leadership Conference, 2009).
Violence against Sikhs
Sikhism is a monotheistic religion with over 25 million follow-
ers worldwide, including an estimated 700,000 adherents in the 
United States. It is the world’s fifth largest religion. Although 
Sikh men wear turbans and are erroneously perceived as Mus-
lims, the Sikh religion is not related to Islam. In the wake of the 
September 11 terrorist attacks of 2001, South Asians, primarily 
Sikhs, were targets of violence and hatred. The following selec-
tive list highlights some of the violent and deadly hate crime 
incidents against this community.
•	 On September 15, 2001, Balbir Singh Sodhi, a 52-year-old, 
was the first Sikh American targeted in the wake of 9/11 
Sodhi was murdered outside his Chevron gas station in 
Mesa, Arizona, by a man wanting to “kill a Muslim” in retri-
bution for the terror attacks. Frank Silva Roque, a machinist, 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
55
was convicted of this first-degree murder and sentenced to 
death on October 9, 2003. During his 25-minute rampage, 
Roque also fired on the home of an Afghan family and 
shot multiple times at a Lebanese American clerk without 
injuring him.
•	 On September 17, 2001, the fires of hatred were further 
stoked when U.S. congressman, John Cooksey (R-LA), 
referred to Arab Americans and South Asians as “towel 
heads” and suggested racial profiling of these groups. The 
Louisiana representative said, “If I see someone [who] comes 
in that’s got a diaper on his head and a fanbelt wrapped 
around the diaper on his head, that guy needs to be pulled 
over” (Leadership Conference, 2001).
•	 On December  12, 2001, Surinder Singh Sidhi, a liquor 
store owner in Los Angeles who wore a turban embroidered 
with an American flag after 9/11 for fear of being attacked, 
was beaten in his store by two men who accused him of 
being Osama bin Laden.
•	 On July 12, 2004, Sikhs Rajinder Singh Khalsa and Gurcha-
ran Singh were viciously beaten by an intoxicated group of 
white males in their twenties began to taunt them, refer-
encing September 11th and making fun of their turbans. 
Rajinder Singh Khalsa attempted to explain the significance 
of their headgear to the attackers, who responded by assault-
ing him. He was beaten unconscious and was found to have 
multiple broken bones.
•	 On January 30, 2009, Jasmir Singh was attacked by three 
men around 4 a.m. outside a grocery store in Queens, New 
York, with a glass bottle. Jasmir’s friend who was with him 
the morning of the attack, told the police that while Jasmir 
was being attacked, the criminals made racist slurs about 
Jasmir’s beard and turban. His father was attacked on the 
subway two years later (See the incident discussed later.) 
(Burton, Summer Anne, 2012).

56	
Hate Crimes
•	 On May 30, 2011, a Sikh man lost three of his teeth after 
being sucker-punched in a New York subway car by a man 
who accused him of being related to Osama bin Laden. 
Jiwan Singh, who came to America 30 years earlier and was 
an employee of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority 
(MTA), was attacked by a black passenger who grabbed him 
by the shirt collar, picked him up and threw him into a sub-
way seat in the mostly empty train. The father of five said 
his son, Jasmir, 23, had also lost an eye after being stabbed 
by attackers in 2009 who targeted him because of his turban 
and traditional beard. (See the incident described earlier.)
•	 On August  5, 2012, 40-year-old Wade Michael Page, a 
white supremacist, fatally shot six people and wounded four 
others at a Sikh temple (gurdwara) in Oak Creek, Wiscon-
sin. The worshippers were: a woman Paramjit Kaur, 41; 
and five men: Satwant Singh Kaleka, 65, the founder of the 
gurdwara; Prakash Singh, 39, an assistant priest; Sita Singh, 
41; Ranjit Singh, 49; and Suveg Singh, 84. The assailant 
later took his own life by shooting himself in the head after 
he was shot in the stomach by a responding police officer.
Despite these disturbing incidents, many Americans were 
heartened that President George W. Bush issued a strong state-
ment on September 17, 2001, condemning violent incidents 
against U.S. immigrants and citizens. The U.S. Department of 
Transportation employees who had been subjecting Sikhs to 
rigorous searches at airports because of their turbans and other 
garb were issued formal guidelines that prohibited inspection 
of an individual based on his manner of dress (U.S. Depart-
ment of Transportation, 2001). Another encouraging develop-
ment was the congressional resolution to condemn “bigotry 
and violence against Arab-Americans, Muslim-Americans, 
South Asian-Americans, and Sikh-Americans.” This resolution 
urged federal and local officials to fully prosecute hate crime 
perpetrators in their respective jurisdictions. The U.S. Senate 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
57
unanimously agreed to the resolution on May 22, 2003, and 
the U.S. House of Representatives agreed to its version of the 
resolution on October 7, 2003. As of January 1, 2015, the FBI 
has expanded its hate crime statistics collecting to include Sikh, 
Hindu, and Arab categories.
In April 2011, the California state legislature took an admi-
rable stance on deadly hate crimes committed against Sikhs 
in the earlier months: Darrell Steinberg, the California state 
Senate president, donned a turban in the Senate building to 
demonstrate solidarity with the Sikh community. This gesture 
was inspired by the King of Denmark who reportedly wore a 
yellow star to show solidarity with the Jewish community in 
Nazi-occupied Denmark so Jews would not feel alone (Ameri-
can Turban, 2011).
In 2013, Stanford University’s Peace and Innovation Lab 
partnered with Sikh American Legal Defense and Education 
Fund (SALDEF) and published the first national survey of 
the public perception of Sikh Americans and their religious 
headwear, Turban Myths: The Opportunities and Challenges for 
Reframing Sikh American Identity in Post-9/11 America. This 
study corroborates the existence of a specific cultural bias 
against the Sikh American community. Key findings of the 
research include the following:
•	 Bias exists against the Sikh American articles of faith, in-
cluding the turban, beard, and uncut hair.
•	 Seventy percent of the American public cannot identify a 
picture of a Sikh man as a Sikh.
•	 About half of the public associates the turban with Islam 
and believes that Sikhism is a sect of Islam.
•	 Anti-turban bias exists even among people with a greater 
knowledge of Sikhs.
•	 The media contributes to and fuels the bias against the Sikh 
articles of faith.

58	
Hate Crimes
•	 Bias is unconscious, charged by emotion, and reinforced by 
the environment.
•	 The Sikh American community and experience remain an 
understudied population (SALDEF, 2013).
Americans with Disabilities
In the first reported hate crime case involving a person with a 
disability to go on trial in the United States, eight people were 
charged with kidnapping, harassing, and torturing Eric Kroch-
maluk, a mentally retarded 23-year-old living in Middletown, 
New Jersey, in 1999. Seven of the eight perpetrators were con-
victed of bias assault and sentenced to prison. Most sadly, the 
victim who had limited mental capacity was unable to describe 
the torture or understand the brutal nature of the crime—he 
simply wanted to make friends with the perpetrators who had 
lured him to a party (Perry, 2008, v. 3, 172).
In January 2013, a grand jury in Philadelphia indicted several 
individuals for holding four mentally disabled people in virtual 
bondage and depriving them of food among other offenses. 
Two people died as a result of the imprisonment aimed at fun-
neling social security funds to the perpetrators. This horrifying 
incident received national and international coverage and is 
one of the most publicized cases where government prosecu-
tors invoked the hate crime statutes to prosecute on behalf of 
individuals with disabilities (Los Angeles Times, 2013).
Disability was the last protected class to be included in 
the reauthorization of the Hate Crime Statistics Act in 1996. 
Although advocacy groups lobbied for inclusion of gender and 
sexual orientation protections at that time, only disability was 
included in this act. Nevertheless, this important legal protec-
tion may be misleadingly misunderstood because FBI statistics 
indicate that persons with disabilities are 350 times less likely 
to be the victim of a hate crime than a victim selected because 
of race. Since there are an estimated 50 million Americans with 
disabilities, the authors suggest that poor data collection and 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
59
the underreporting of such crimes may account for the vast 
omission of recorded incidents (McMahon et al, 2004, 70).
The 2013 FBI report cited 99 victims of hate crimes, result-
ing from the offender’s bias against a disability: 75 were tar-
gets of anti–mental health disability bias and 24 were victims 
of anti–physical disability bias. These numbers account for 
1.4 percent of all single-bias crimes reported that year. From 
1996 to 2004, only 257 cases were reported from various 
state agencies but apparently there was no follow-up study on 
later years (Perry, 2009, 193). Sociologists and social workers 
advocate a more rigorous review of the underreporting of hate 
crimes. Most tragically, many hate crimes are committed by 
family members or caregivers, who are employed to assist indi-
viduals with disabilities (Sherry, 2010, 127). Perhaps, these 
close relationships may be a great inhibiting factor preventing 
the victims from reporting such crimes.
Jewish Americans
Hatred of Jews—commonly known by the semantically mis-
leading term anti-Semitism—has a very long and bitter history. 
In 1991, British television aired a documentary series on the 
subject, aptly titled The Longest Hatred. In the United States 
too, anti-Jewish hatred and violence has flared periodically. 
One of the most notorious anti-Jewish incidents in the United 
States during the 20th century occurred in Atlanta, Georgia. 
Leo Frank, a Jew who was part owner of a pencil factory, was 
wrongfully accused of murdering a 14-year-old employee, 
Mary Phagan. In July 1915, encouraged by widespread com-
munity anger and the anti-Jewish invective of Tom Watson, a 
southern populist politician, a mob lynched Frank. This mur-
der stirred immense fear among southern Jews and precipitated 
a massive exodus of Jews from the region. Despite this incident 
and the rise of anti-Jewish hatemongers like Father Coughlin, 
Gerald L. K. Smith, and pro-Nazi groups during World War II,  
the virus of anti-Semitism has fortunately never exhibited a 

60	
Hate Crimes
major strain in U.S. life. “No decisive event, no deep crisis, 
no powerful social movement, no great individual is associated 
primarily . . . with anti-Semitism (in America),” once wrote 
historian John Higham (Dinnerstein, 1971). Nevertheless, 
anti-Jewish incidents continue to occur, ranging from swasti-
kas being spray-painted at synagogues and Jewish cemeteries to 
harassment, intimidation, and violent assaults.
According to the FBI’s 2013 Hate Crime Statistics tabula-
tions, Jews were the largest religious group victimized by hate 
crimes accounting for 60.3 percent of all bias-motivated reli-
gious crimes and numbered 737 victims. For many years, FBI 
statistics frequently indicate that between 60 and 70 percent of 
these crimes are directed at Jews; anti-Muslim incidents usually 
range from 5 to 15 percent of the total.
According to the 2014 ADL Audit of Anti-Semitic Incidents 
in the United States, the total number increased by 21 per-
cent in 2014 in a year marked by a violent anti-Semitic shoot-
ing attack targeting Jewish community buildings in Kansas 
and anti-Jewish expressions linked to the war in Gaza. The 
Anti-Defamation League’s (ADL) Audit counted a total of 
912 anti-Jewish incidents across the United States during the 
2014 calendar year. This represents a 21 percent increase from 
the 751 incidents reported during the same period in 2013, 
and is the first time in nearly a decade of declines where the 
overall number of incidents has substantially risen. Despite the 
increase in incidents, the total number of anti-Jewish acts still 
represents one of the lowest totals of anti-Semitic acts reported 
by ADL.
More than a decade before the FBI began tallying hate crime 
statistics, the ADL began issuing an annual audit of anti-Jewish 
incidents first beginning in 1979. As mentioned earlier, there 
is often a discrepancy between statistics compiled by the U.S. 
government and the tallies compiled by different human rights 
and ethnic organizations.
Although the most recent ADL report will be released after 
this book is completed, it will probably indicate a rise in the 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
61
number of anti-Jewish incidents in the United States in wake 
of the Gaza war in the summer of 2014. European Jews have 
experienced numerous attacks on individuals, synagogues, 
and community centers, arousing great fear in communities 
in France, Great Britain, Belgium, Denmark, and Ukraine, 
among other countries.
While there is often much discussion about whether one can 
distinguish anti-Israel from anti-Jewish statements and actions, 
the ADL has a useful and succinct response:
While the Audit does not categorize criticism of Israel 
or Zionism as an anti-Semitic incident, such reports are 
included if they cross the line from legitimate criticism to 
anti-Semitism by invoking classic anti-Jewish stereotypes 
or inappropriate Nazi imagery and/or analogies. Public 
expressions of anti-Israel sentiments that demonize Jews 
or create an atmosphere of fear or intimidation for U.S. 
Jews are counted. (ADL Audit, 2014)
The distinction between anti-Jewish and anti-Israel actions 
and statements, however, has become increasingly blurry, espe-
cially in the last few years. Martin Luther King Jr. was aware of 
it many years ago when he said, “When people criticize Zion-
ists, they mean Jews. You’re talking anti-Semitism.” Criticism 
of Israel is increasingly displayed through violent means and on 
occasion blatantly offensive, evoking Holocaust images against 
Jews worldwide, erasing the line between the two “anti” ide-
ologies. On college campuses, Jewish students have been sub-
jected to particularly virulent hatred and occasional violence. 
Daniel Vessal, a member of a Jewish fraternity and an active 
pro-Israel supporter, was assaulted at Temple University’s main 
campus in Philadelphia in the summer of 2014 (Jewish Expo-
nent, 2014). On many college campuses that year, Jewish stu-
dents faced hostile rallies, threats on social media, and placards, 
which make obscene comparisons of Jews and Israel to Nazis 
in several reported incidents (Louis D. Brandeis Center, 2014).

62	
Hate Crimes
An Orthodox synagogue in Florida was spray-painted with 
the word “Hamas” and swastikas on its entrance; a Jewish sum-
mer camp in Malibu was vandalized with the words, Jews=Kill-
ers. On July 17, 2014, about two dozen anti-Israel protesters 
targeted the Florida Holocaust Museum with graphic images 
of dead Palestinians and slogans charging Israel with genocide. 
Earlier that month, the Chabad of Southern Nevada in Las 
Vegas (a Hasidic Jewish group) was spray-painted with graffiti 
that read “Free Palestine” and “Free Gaza” (ADL Blog, 2014).
Anti-Jewish incidents were more violent in Europe during 
the summer of 2014. French and German synagogues and Jew-
ish community centers were firebombed. In Berlin, an Israeli 
tourist was attacked and in Britain, a rabbi was attacked near 
a Jewish boarding school. In Australia, a bus carrying Jew-
ish schoolchildren was targeted by teenagers shouting “Heil 
Hitler” and threatening to slit the children’s throats. In July, 
the Community Security Trust in Britain, which monitors 
anti-Jewish incidents, received five times the monthly average 
of reports. In Paris, an anti-Semitic protest following the start 
of the recent Gaza conflict resulted in violent threats against 
Jews and destruction of Jewish-owned businesses reminiscent 
of Kristallnacht, the notorious night in November 1938 when 
Jews were attacked and killed and their businesses were burned 
and destroyed.
Other major incidents in the United States since 1990 and 
including the Gaza war were the following:
•	 The most serious anti-Jewish incident in the early 1990s 
occurred in the Crown Heights neighborhood of Brook-
lyn, New York, following a traffic accident. On August 19, 
1991, the driver of a car that was part of a motorcade for 
Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson (the spiritual leader of 
the Lubavitcher Hasidic movement) accidentally hit Gavin 
Cato, a seven-year-old African American boy, and his 
cousin, resulting in his death and the injury of his cousin. 
A riot ensued over the following three days, during which 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
63
crowds roamed the streets yelling, “Get the Jews.” Jewish 
homes, cars, and property were attacked. On the night of 
the accident, 20 black youths assaulted Yankel Rosenbaum, 
an Australian Jewish scholar, stabbing him and leaving him 
bleeding on the hood of an automobile. He later died. Lem-
rick Nelson, age 16, was charged with the murder. On Oc-
tober 29, 1992, Nelson was found not guilty of the murder 
because the prosecution did not prove that the attack had 
caused Rosenbaum’s death. Defense lawyers did not deny 
that Nelson had stabbed the 29-year-old Jewish scholar. His 
attorneys contended the slaying had nothing to do with the 
fact that the victim was Jewish—a crucial element needed 
for a hate crimes conviction. Amidst angry protests by the 
public and the media about an unfair verdict, the U.S. gov-
ernment subsequently charged the defendant with violating 
Rosenbaum’s civil rights. In 1997, Nelson was convicted of 
these charges and was sentenced to 21 years in prison. The 
U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals, however, overturned 
the verdict on the grounds of an improper race-based jury 
selection. Nelson was then sentenced to a maximum of 
10 years in prison and was released on June 2, 2004.
•	 On March 1, 1994, Rashid Baz, a Lebanese immigrant, shot 
at a van carrying 15 Hasidic Jewish students over the Brook-
lyn Bridge. One student, 16-year-old Aaron Halberstam, 
died in the attack. Three other students were wounded; one 
of them, 18-year-old Nachum Sasonkin, fell into a coma 
and had few prospects for a normal life. Although he still 
had a bullet lodged in his brain, Sasonkin has had a mirac-
ulous recovery. He later married, became a father, and was 
ordained as a rabbi. The murderer once vowed to “kill all 
Jews” (New York Times, 1994).
•	 In another violent incident, a Jewish store owner in Harlem 
wanted to expand his clothing store, Freddy’s Fashion Mart, 
to a space occupied by a black-owned record store. The 
owner of the record store didn’t want to move, and some 

64	
Hate Crimes
community activists supported his decision. For several 
weeks, they picketed Freddy’s Fashion Mart, occasionally 
shouting anti-Jewish slurs and rhetoric, including the term 
“bloodsuckers”—a phrase that Nation of Islam leader Louis 
Farrakhan had used only a few weeks earlier in a widely 
publicized interview to describe Jews. On December  8, 
1995, Roland Smith, one of the protesters, entered Fred-
dy’s brandishing a revolver and shot four people. He then 
doused the store with lighter fluid. Eight people—including 
Smith—died in the blaze. Although none of the victims 
were Jewish, anti-Jewish hatred was nevertheless an under-
lying factor of the crime.
•	 On June 10, 2009, James W. von Brunn, an 88-year-old 
white supremacist and anti-Jewish racist walked into the 
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, and began 
shooting, fatally wounding a security guard and sending 
tourists scrambling before he himself was shot. The gunman 
and the security guard were both taken to nearby George 
Washington University Hospital, with von Brunn hand-
cuffed to a gurney. The 39-year-old guard Stephen T. Johns, 
died a short time later. Museum officials said he had worked 
there for six years. Von Brunn was incarcerated in North 
Carolina and died of natural causes on January 6, 2010.
•	 On August 10, 1999, Buford O. Furrow Jr., a member of 
the Aryan Nations, entered the North Valley Jewish Com-
munity Center in Los Angeles and wounded several people, 
including a small child. Furrow later claimed that his action 
was a “wake-up call to white America to start killing Jews.” 
Furrow also killed Joseph Ileto, a Filipino American postal 
worker.
•	 On November  4, 2009, three teenagers broke into the 
Chabad Jewish Center in Hyannis, Massachusetts, and sig-
nificantly vandalized it by defacing its walls and by throw-
ing religious objects on the floor. In addition, during the 
break-in the three teenagers downloaded images of Adolf 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
65
Hitler and anti-Semitic symbols using the rabbi’s computer. 
The three suspects were arraigned in the Barnstable Juvenile 
Court (Trends in Hate).
•	 On April 13, 2014. Frazier Glenn Miller, a neo-Nazi and 
former KKK member, killed three people at the Jewish Com-
munity Center of Greater Kansas City and Village Shalom, 
a Jewish retirement community, both located in Overland, 
Kansas. The victims were a 14-year-old boy, Reat Griffin 
Underwood, and his 69-year-old grandfather, Dr. William 
Lewis Corporon, who were killed at the Jewish Commu-
nity Center. Both individuals were Christians and attended 
a Methodist church. A 53-year-old woman, Terri LaManno, 
also a Christian was killed at the parking lot of Village Sha-
lom, where her mother resides. Unbeknownst to the gun-
man, only one person targeted by gunfire was Jewish.
Lesbians, Gay Men, Bisexuals, and Transgendered  
People (LGBT)
In a 1988 case involving the beating death of a gay man, a 
circuit court judge in Broward County, Florida, jokingly asked 
the prosecuting attorney, “That’s a crime now, to beat up a 
homosexual?” The prosecutor replied, “Yes, sir. And it’s also a 
crime to kill them.” The judge reportedly replied, “Times have 
really changed” (Jenness, 1997, 50).
Prior to the passage of the Hate Crime Statistics Act in 1990, 
no federal statute had addressed the problem of antigay vio-
lence. Similarly, very few laws at the state and local levels had 
specifically addressed these types of crimes. Only recently has 
violence against gay men and lesbians been considered a hate 
crime by the federal government and by most state and local 
law enforcement agencies. Despite a tide of new legislation con-
cerning the issue, the number of reported crimes against gays 
has continued to increase in some years. On October 9, 1986, 
the U.S. House of Representatives Judiciary Subcommittee on 
Criminal Justice convened the first congressional hearings on 

66	
Hate Crimes
antigay violence throughout the United States. Physicians, psy-
chologists, sociologists, and other health professionals offered 
testimony on the nature, extent, and consequences of antigay 
violence.
The first national study focusing exclusively on the topic 
of antigay violence was conducted by the National Gay and 
Lesbian Task Force in 1984. Interviewing almost 1,500 gay 
men and 654 lesbians in eight U.S. cities (Boston, New York, 
Atlanta, St. Louis, Denver, Dallas, Los Angeles, and Seattle), 
the respondents reported the following:
•	 Nineteen percent of the respondents reported having been 
punched, hit, kicked, or beaten at least once in their lives 
because of their sexual orientation.
•	 Forty-four percent had been threatened with physical 
violence.
•	 Ninety-two percent of those who had been targets of anti-
gay verbal abuse had experienced such harassment “more 
than once or many times” (Herek and Berrill 1992, 19–25).
These survey results also highlight another issue involving bias 
crimes against homosexuals: Statistics on antigay crimes vary 
greatly in reports issued by gay rights activists and law enforce-
ment authorities. The National Coalition of Anti-Violent Pro-
grams (NCAVP) later assumed this duty in 1997. From 1985 
to 1989, the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF) 
gathered statistics from a wide range of community groups 
and media sources. Since 1990, these reports have focused on 
major metropolitan areas, including Boston, Chicago, Denver, 
Minneapolis, St. Paul, New York City, and San Francisco and 
many other cities throughout the country. Gay rights organ-
izations have consistently claimed that antihomosexual hate 
crimes are vastly underreported and that this is true for several 
reasons. The primary explanation is that lesbians and gay men 
are often reluctant to report these incidents, fearing that such 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
67
publicity would adversely affect their employment or relations 
with family members who are unaware of their sexual orien-
tation. “While victims may want to prosecute their assailants, 
they are too vulnerable as homosexuals in American society to 
be exposed in this manner,” asserts law scholar Teresa Eileen 
Kibelstis. She cites a 1994 incident in Los Angeles in which 
eight men were arrested for assaulting two others with baseball 
bats. Although the police termed the incident “a gay bashing” 
and arrested the assailants with the aid of witnesses, the victims 
quickly left the scene of the crime and were never located. “Gay 
bashing crimes involve gay victims, and for some lesbians and 
gay men, that label can have too many repercussions,” Kibelstis 
concludes (Kibelstis 1995).
Many gays and lesbians have been distrustful of police 
departments nationwide, both historically and in recent times. 
The Stonewall riot, which occurred at a gay bar in New York’s 
Greenwich Village in 1969 and considered the founding event 
in the birth of the modern gay liberation movement, involved a 
police assault against gay and transgendered men. Violent hate 
crimes committed against gays and lesbians are also notable in 
another respect: These incidents are especially brutal. Accord-
ing to one study, “an intense rage is present in nearly all homi-
cide cases involving gay male victims. A striking feature . . . is 
their gruesome, often vicious nature. Seldom is the homosex-
ual victim simply shot. He is more apt to be stabbed a dozen 
or more times, mutilated, and strangled.” A hospital official in 
New York City remarked, “Attacks against gay men were the 
most heinous and brutal I encountered. . . . They frequently 
involved torture, cutting, mutilation . . . showing the absolute 
intent to rub out the human being because of his (sexual) pref-
erence” (Winer 1994).
In 2001, the NCAVP recorded 2,210 attacks on gay men 
and lesbians; the FBI, however, cited 1,555 incidents in its 
annual report. Phyllis B. Gerstenfeld notes that the “actual dis-
crepancy is actually much greater because the FBI data purport 
to include almost all of the United States, whereas the NCAVP 

68	
Hate Crimes
report included only a dozen reporting regions with a com-
bined population of about 51 million” (Gerstenfeld 2004).
When comparing the FBI figures with those from nongov-
ernmental monitoring groups, it is important to remember that 
the private advocacy groups have been monitoring hate crimes 
for a longer period of time than has the government. Whereas 
the FBI’s first Hate Crime report covered the year 1991, the 
NGLTF conducted annual surveys of antihomosexual violence 
from 1985 to 1995.
Several decades later the disparity in hate crime statistics 
persists. The 2013 FBI annual hate crime report noted 1,402 
offenses committed against gay men, lesbians, bisexuals, and 
transgender individuals. Yet the NCAVP posted the following 
statistics:
•	 2001 incidents of anti-LGBT violence in 2013
•	 18 homicides; 90 percent of victims were black or Hispanic 
and the rest were white
•	 Undocumented people, transgender women, people of color 
and gay men were at the most risk from violence
•	 Only 45 percent of survivors reported their incidents to the 
police.
•	 Of those reporting incidents to the police, 32 percent com-
plained that they received hostile treatment from the law 
enforcement officers.
Transgender Victims
In the last few decades, there have been many references in the 
broadcast and print media to transgender individuals but many 
people might not understand the meaning of this term. The 
Gay and Lesbian Alliance against Defamation (GLAAD) offers 
the following useful explanation:
Transgender is an umbrella term for people whose gen-
der identity differs from what is typically associated with 
the sex they were assigned at birth. Gender identity is 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
69
someone’s internal, personal sense of being a man or a 
woman (or as someone outside of that gender binary). For 
transgender people, the sex they were assigned at birth 
and their own internal gender identity do not match.
Trying to change a person’s gender identity is no 
more successful than trying to change a person’s sexual 
orientation—it doesn’t work. Most transgender people 
seek to bring their bodies more into alignment with their 
gender identity. People under the transgender umbrella 
may describe themselves using one (or more) of a wide 
variety of terms, including (but not limited to) transgen-
der, transsexual, and “genderqueer.”
Transgender people may or may not alter their bodies 
hormonally and/or surgically, but it’s important to know 
that being transgender is not dependent upon medical 
procedures. (GLAAD, 2015)
The murder of Brandon Teena on December 31, 1993, a girl 
who passed as a man, was probably the first anti-transgender 
homicide to receive wide media attention. The award-winning 
film Boys Don’t Cry tells the story of Teena’s life and tragic death.
Two decades later, Cecilia Chung, senior strategist at the 
Transgender Law Center, a national advocacy group, sadly 
notes that there has been an increase of violence and murders 
against transgender individuals.
Chung said that violence against transgender people occurs 
so frequently because they are marginalized by the systems 
and institutions in society. “If you look at some of the data, a 
high number of trans people of color make less than $15,000 
a year and in order to survive they must be exposed to a lot of 
high-risk elements in their lives,” she said. “Where they live, or 
the type of relationship they end up in—those all play a huge 
factor. The bottom line to that is, violence is an indicator of the 
marginalizing that our community faces” (Merevick, 2014).
Chung believes that several economic disparities, includ-
ing lack of access to health care, housing, and education make 
transgender people more vulnerable to violence.

70	
Hate Crimes
“We have a long way to go in addressing issues with housing, 
employment, and affordable healthcare,” Fukui said. “This is 
about racism, control, and policing of our community in ways 
that are violent and actually increases violence. Our commu-
nities have the solutions and know what we need in order to 
survive. I think once we break this really intense spider web of 
oppression at work in the United States, we’ll be able to really 
break this down.”
Mara Keisling, executive director at the National Center for 
Transgender Equality, also said that the violence stems from 
cultural and economic problems. Because of these factors, 
“you’re going to have more violence,” she said. “You’d like to 
think that it’s improving, but we’ve just had our worst recorded 
month of murder in the history of the transgender movement 
and we’re not hearing about all of them, too.”
In 2014, the NCAVP issued a comprehensive report in May 
that found 344 transgender people—more than 10 times the 
FBI’s figure—were the victims of hate-motivated violence in 
2013. That was up from 305 the year before. The group found 
13 transgender people in the United States were killed last year 
in bias attacks.
Among the reasons federal statistics underrepresent attacks 
on transgender people is because many state and local hate 
crime laws don’t include protections for LGBT people. Ohio 
has no statewide law to prosecute hate crimes against LGBT 
victims so can’t report these incidents as hate crimes. Aaron 
Eckhardt, a leader of Buckeye Region Anti-Violence Organi-
zation (BRAVO), pointed out in an interview recently with 
BuzzFeed News, “According to Ohio, there have been zero 
hate crimes committed against people in those categories.” But 
in Ohio alone, three transgender women were killed in 2013 
in what the organization found were hate-driven crimes. In 
addition, BRAVO, which contributes to the NCAVP reports, 
found 14 incidents of nonfatal hate-motivated attacks in their 
state that year. Still, the FBI report issued today shows zero 
gender-identity hate crimes in Ohio. Many law enforcement 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
71
agencies also don’t have congenial or understanding relation-
ships with transgender communities. Police frequently note the 
wrong gender in their reports and sometimes subject transgen-
der victims to taunting and further violence. The result is that 
many transgender people do not report violence to police at all 
(Holden, 2014).
Major Violence against the LGBT Community since 1988
In recent years, the most widely reported hate crime against 
gays occurred in Wyoming. On October 6, 1998, Matthew 
Shepard, a 22-year-old gay student at the University of Wyo-
ming, was lured from a local bar by two men, kidnapped, 
beaten with a .357 Magnum, and tied to a wooden fence. He 
hung there for almost 18 hours until a passing bicyclist noticed 
his bloodied body. He lay in a coma in a hospital in Fort Col-
lins, Colorado, until he died on October 12. Sadly, there have 
been many other grotesquely violent incidents directed against 
gays and lesbians—or those thought to be gay—both before 
and after Shepard’s murder:
•	 In May 1988, a lesbian couple, Rebecca Wright and Claudia 
Brenner, were victims of a gruesome murder in Pine Grove 
State Park in Pennsylvania. Stephen Ray Carr was convicted 
of first-degree murder and sentenced to life imprisonment.
•	 Also in May 1988, a college freshman committed a grisly 
murder of two gay men, Tommy Trible and Lloyd Griffin, 
in a Dallas, Texas, neighborhood. Although the prosecutor 
requested life imprisonment for the murderer, Richard Lee 
Bednarski, the trial judge imposed a 30-year sentence and 
callously declared, “I put prostitutes and gays at about the 
same level and I’d be hard put to give somebody life for kill-
ing a prostitute” (Belkin 1988).
•	 Vietnam War veteran James Zappalorti was brutally beaten 
in Staten Island, New York, on January 21, 1990. The mur-
derers, Phillip Sarlo and Michael Taylor, later defiantly 

72	
Hate Crimes
declared that they had “only killed a gay” (Newsday, Novem-
ber 4, 1990, p. 8).
•	 On October 27, 1992, Seaman Allen Schindler, while serv-
ing on a U.S. Navy ship stationed in Japan, was murdered 
outside his base. The assailant, Navy Airman Terry Helvey, 
who had recently learned of Schindler’s homosexuality, 
stomped on his face and chest with his feet. Schindler’s body 
was so disfigured by the brutal attack that seasoned Navy 
medics were sickened at the sight of the body.
•	 On July 1, 1999, Gary Matson and Winfield Scott Mowder, 
a gay couple, were shot to death in their home outside Red-
ding, California. James Tyler Williams, the killer of the gay 
couple, was sentenced to 29 years to life in prison for the 
murders, plus a 19-year sentence for the firebombing of 
three Sacramento area synagogues. His brother, Benjamin 
Williams, who was an accomplice in the crimes, commit-
ted suicide in his Shasta County jail cell on November 17, 
2002. Benjamin Williams reportedly said that the murder 
of the gay couple was “God’s will.”
•	 In Atlanta, Georgia, Gregory Love was attacked with a base-
ball bat by a fellow Morehouse College student because he 
believed Love was making a sexual pass at him in a dor-
mitory shower. A  jury found Aaron Price, a 19-year-old 
sophomore at Morehouse, guilty of aggravated assault and 
aggravated battery in the November 3, 2002, beating. Price 
received 10 years on each count, to be served concurrently. 
Price, who was subsequently expelled from Morehouse, was 
acquitted of a hate crime after prosecutors failed to convince 
jurors that Price’s action was motivated by antigay feelings. 
Love also testified that he was not gay. This violent incident 
aroused great fears among gay students at Morehouse, a his-
torically black men’s college. As a result, many black gays 
and lesbians spoke out for the first time about antigay prej-
udice in the African American community. This trial was 
the first case involving Georgia’s recently passed hate crimes 
enhancement penalty statute.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
73
•	 On February 2, 2006, Jacob D. Robida, 18, of New Bed-
ford, Massachusetts entered a gay bar and then attacked 
patrons with an axe and also shot at them. Three patrons 
were wounded by the gunfire and one of them also received 
head lacerations from the axe attack. Robida fled the state 
and was later killed as a result of the shootout with police.
•	 On January 16, 2009, in Sacramento, California, a trans-
gendered woman, Brenda Torres, 20, was attacked inside 
the tunnel between Old Sacramento and the K Street Mall 
by two African American men who shouted transgendered 
slurs at her. She was assaulted with a beer bottle and robbed. 
There were eyewitnesses, but apparently none of them called 
the police or intervened. Police investigated the attack/rob-
bery as a hate crime.
•	 On October 30, 2011, Burke Burnett, 26-year-old gay man, 
was the victim of a brutal hate crime in Reno, Texas, a small 
town just east of Paris and about 100 miles northeast of 
Dallas. He was at a private party when four men suddenly 
attacked him, stabbing him at least twice with a broken beer 
bottle before throwing him onto a fire. His attackers yelled 
vicious antigay epithets against him. Burnett said it took 30 
stitches to close stab wounds to his back and forearm, as well 
as a cut above his left eye. He also sustained second-degree 
burns and severe bruises. “They knew I was gay,” Burnett 
said Monday. “I’m convinced they were trying to kill me.”
•	 On June  19, 2014, David Malcolm Strickland, 27, was 
apprehended in Helotes, Texas, a San Antonio suburb and 
charged with capital murder, aggravated assault with a 
weapon and aggravated sexual assault for the June 23, 2012 
murder of a 19-year-old lesbian, Mollie Olgin, because of 
her sexual orientation. Her girlfriend, Kristene Chapa, then 
18, survived the South Texas hillside attack but suffered seri-
ous head injuries.
•	 On November  17, 2014, the Justice Department’s Civil 
Rights Division, the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the North-
ern District of Texas, and the FBI’s Dallas Division Office 

74	
Hate Crimes
announced that Brice Johnson, 19, of Springtown, Texas, 
was sentenced to 183 months imprisonment for kidnapping 
a young gay man after luring the victim to his home and 
brutally assaulting him because of his sexual orientation. 
After the beating, Johnson locked the victim in the trunk of 
his own car and drove the car to a family friend’s house. The 
victim suffered multiple skull and facial fractures from the 
beating, which required him to be hospitalized for 10 days.
Despite this very gloomy news, Valerie Jenness, a sociologist 
who has written extensively about hate crimes, was heartened 
when U.S. attorney general John Ashcroft held a nationally tel-
evised news conference on April 10, 2002, to announce that 
Darrell David Rice was to be charged with a federal hate crime 
for the murder of Laura Winans and Julianne Marie Williams, 
two lesbians who were found dead on June 1, 1996, in Shenan-
doah National Park in Virginia. (Later evidence required the 
U.S. government to dismiss the federal case against Rice.) Rice 
was then indicted by a grand jury in Prince William County, 
Virginia, on June 7, 2004, on charges of abduction, robbery, 
and malicious wounding of a 37-year-old woman in Manassas, 
Virginia, on February 24, 1996. In a plea bargain agreement he 
pleaded No Contest on August 24, 2005, to unlawful wound-
ing in that case. The Federal Bureau of Prisons reported that on 
July 17, 2007, Rice, 39, was released from federal prison.
Nevertheless, this was reportedly the first case in which the 
federal government tried to use the Hate Crimes Sentencing 
Enhancement Act (1994) to prosecute a hate crime based on 
gender and sexual orientation. In his news conference, Ash-
croft noted that he had met with the parents of the victims and 
learned about their lives. He declared that the Department of 
Justice would “pursue, prosecute, and punish those who attack 
law-abiding Americans out of hatred for who they are.”
The 2014 FBI annual report on U.S. hate crimes—which 
covers the previous year—placed the number of antigay inci-
dents at 1,454 for 2013. According to the report, the number 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
75
of sexual orientation bias victims constituted 16.6 percent of all 
hate crime victims. This publication contained newly required 
data to be collected under the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd 
Jr. Hate Crime Prevention Act of 2009 for hate crime victims. 
First, biases against gender (male or female) and gender iden-
tity (transgender and gender nonconformity) have been added 
to the list of bias categories. As a result, federal hate crimes law 
now addresses violent crimes based on a victim’s race, color, 
religion, national origin, gender, disability, sexual orientation, 
and/or gender identity. Nevertheless, gay rights groups believe 
the FBI figures are gross underestimates.
The Human Rights Campaign (HRC), the nation’s largest 
LGBT civil rights organization, responded to the 2014 report 
by urging all law enforcement to report hate crimes in their 
jurisdiction in order to ensure that the state of hate violence in 
the United States is accurately reported.
“Hate crimes are different from other crimes because they 
affect not only the victims and their families, but gen-
erate fear and insecurity for the entire community they 
target,” said David Stacy, HRC’s Government Affairs 
Director. “While reporting statistics on hate crimes based 
on sexual orientation—and now on gender identity—are 
important first steps, so much more work is needed to 
prevent bias-motivated violence. For example, too many 
states still do not have an LGBT-inclusive state-level hate 
crimes law, and we are committed to working with our 
partners and allies to change that. All people should have 
the opportunity to live openly, honestly, and safely in 
their community without fear of harassment or violence.”
In 2014, law enforcement agencies reported 5,928 hate 
crime incidents involving 6,933 offenses to the FBI. Of those, 
20.2 percent of all hate crimes were motivated by sexual orien-
tation, second to crimes motivated by racial bias, and 0.5 per-
cent of hate crimes were based on gender identity. According 

76	
Hate Crimes
to the FBI, more law enforcement agencies in the United 
States participated in the 2013 data collection effort than ever 
before. That year, 15,016 law enforcement agencies voluntarily 
reported their statistics to the FBI compared to 14,511 partic-
ipating agencies in 2012.
There was a slight decrease in crimes against LGBT individ-
uals in 2013, after increases each year since 2009. That year, 
1,233 incidents based on sexual orientation were reported, 
down slightly from the past three years, when law enforcement 
agencies reported 1,299, 1,293, and 1,277 hate crimes in 2012, 
2011, and 2010, respectively.
HRC believes that the low number of responses for hate 
crimes based on gender identity and gender nonconformity—31 
incidents—suggests that law enforcement are mischaracterizing 
hate based crimes as ones based on either sexual orientation or 
gender. As in past years, the vast majority of the participating 
agencies (88%) reported zero hate crimes. In addition, thou-
sands of police agencies across the nation did not submit data to 
the FBI, including at least one agency with a population of more 
than 250,000 people, and at least seven agencies in cities with a 
population between 100,000 and 250,000 (HRC Blog, 2014).
On October 28 2014, HRC and advocates across the coun-
try commemorated the fifth anniversary of the signing of the 
federal HCPA. The passage of the HCPA was a significant vic-
tory in the fight for equality because it was the first major piece 
of civil rights legislation protecting LGBT individuals.
Arab and Muslim Americans
Following the Arab terrorist attacks on the United States on 
September 11, 2001, there appeared to be a significant increase 
in anti-Arab and anti-Muslim prejudice throughout the coun-
try, resulting in a few widely reported incidents of harass-
ment, vandalism, and occasionally violence. According to the 
annual FBI Hate Crimes Statistics, in the last several years 
anti-Muslim incidents have generally accounted for the second 
or third highest number of religious-motivated hate crimes, 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
77
but anti-Catholic and anti-Protestant crimes were almost sta-
tistically similar. (Anti-Jewish crimes accounted for a signifi-
cantly higher number of such incidents.)
Most of the deadliest hate crimes ostensibly aimed against 
Muslims were, in fact, committed against Sikhs, who wear tur-
bans, and others who look Middle Eastern but are not Arab or 
Muslim. (See “Asian-American” subsection discussed earlier.)
The following list includes some of the most violent inci-
dents directed against American Arabs or Muslims since the 
9/11 terrorist attacks:
•	 On March 25, 2002, Charles D. Franklin crashed his pickup 
truck into the Islamic Center of Tallahassee, Florida, after 
evening prayers. No one was inside the mosque when the 
truck smashed into the doorway, causing about $1,000 in 
damage to the building.
•	 On September 12, 2001, 300 angry protestors tried to storm 
a mosque in Bridgeview, Illinois, a Chicago suburb. More 
than 100 police controlled the demonstrators and arrested 
three people.
•	 On September 11, 2001, the Islamic Center of Irving, Texas, 
which serves as a school and a mosque, was fired upon, 
leaving 13 to 14 bullet holes in the building. No one was 
injured. In the following week, there were also gunshots and 
vandalism directed at mosques in Toledo, Ohio; Bridgeport, 
Connecticut; Claremont, California; Lexington, Kentucky; 
and Sterling, Virginia, among other places.
•	 On September 29, 2001, Abdo Ali Ahmed, a Yemenite, was 
shot behind the counter of his store in Reedley, California. 
Recent incidents in the area indicated it was a bias-motivated 
crime against Arabs.
•	 In October 2002, hundreds of leaflets containing anti-Islamic 
obscenities and threats were distributed at the Muslim Asso-
ciation of Honolulu mosque. The FBI investigated the inci-
dent as a hate crime.

78	
Hate Crimes
•	 In Salt Lake City, Utah, James Herrick, 32, was sentenced to 
more than four years in prison after pleading guilty to setting 
fire to the “Curry in a Hurry,” a Pakistani American–owned 
restaurant, on September 13, 2001.
•	 On December 17, 2002, in what federal officials described 
as the most stringent penalty for a post–September  11, 
2001, hate crime, Patrick Cunningham, 54, was sentenced 
to six-and-a half years for an assault on the Islamic Idriss 
mosque in Seattle two days after the terrorist attacks. He 
admitted to trying to set fire to parked vehicles and to 
threatening two worshipers with a loaded .22-caliber pis-
tol. In an emotional plea before U.S. district judge Barbara 
Rothstein, Cunningham said that on the night of the assault 
he was drunk and distraught over the terrorist attacks. He 
apologized to his victims and thanked God “for interven-
ing” before things got worse. Although Cunningham main-
tained he had fired his pistol only once, the prosecutors said 
that he had fired three additional times but that the weapon 
had misfired. No one at the mosque was injured. Judge 
Rothstein acknowledged the defendant’s apologies and his 
crime-free record, but she also denounced his crime. She 
remarked that the ability to practice religion without fear of 
violence “is a foundation of our country. It’s a reason why 
people come here” (Seattlepi, 2002, p. B1).
•	 Vandals hit all three floors of the Islamic Foundation of 
Central Ohio in Columbus on the evening of Decem-
ber 29, 2001, shredding copies of the Koran and breaking 
water pipes to cause damage to the building. According to a 
November 2002 Human Rights Watch report, the damage 
was estimated at $379,000.
•	 On August 24, 2002, federal authorities arrested Dr. Rob-
ert Goldstein, a 37-year-old Tampa, Florida, podiatrist, for 
plotting to bomb local mosques and an Islamic cultural 
center in south Florida. He pleaded guilty and was later 
sentenced to 12-and-a-half years in prison. The defendant 
wanted to get revenge for the September 11 terrorist attacks.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
79
•	 During the last week of August 2003, a fire at the Islamic 
Center in Savannah, Georgia, destroyed a building that 
had been used as a mosque by approximately 100 of the 
estimated 400–500 Muslims in the area. Early evidence 
indicated that the arson was motivated by hate. During 
the first Gulf War, from 1990 to 1991, there were several 
recorded incidents of harassment and vandalism directed 
against Arab and Muslim Americans in cities throughout 
the country. On September  24, 1990, President George 
H. W. Bush declared that “death threats, physical attacks, 
vandalism, religious violence and discrimination against 
Arab-Americans must end.”
•	 June 1, 2009: A Cape Girardeau man is charged with a hate 
crime for vandalizing the Islamic Center and a car parked 
near it. Nicholas T. Proffit, 31, was charged with two counts 
of felony property damage under Missouri’s hate crime law, 
along with misdemeanor offenses for driving while intox-
icated, speeding and failing to wear a seat belt. The large 
glass window on the south side of the mosque was broken 
out and the windshield of a Mercedes-Benz parked in the 
lot was also cracked. He is later sentenced to three years in 
prison.
•	 In October 2010, four Staten Island teens faced hate-crime 
charges for taunting a Muslim classmate because of his faith, 
calling him a “terrorist” and repeatedly punching him in the 
genitals. “They took advantage of me because I was quiet,” 
the 16-year-old-victim, whose first name is Kristian, told 
the Staten Island Advance, which first reported the story 
of the abuse. Police said the four Staten Island boys—three 
14-year-olds who are Latino and a 15-year-old who is 
black—were arrested October 10 on charges of assault and 
aggravated harassment, both as hate crimes. They are being 
charged as minors, and police did not release their names.
•	 On February 4, 2011, Bradley Kent Strott, 52, stabbed a 
57-year-old Muslim man during a conversation at a bar. 
The defendant then became upset after the man told Strott 

80	
Hate Crimes
he was a Muslim. He grabbed the victim by his shirt, and 
stabbed him in the neck with his pocket knife. The defen-
dant stated that “Muslims are the root of the problem,” 
Strott was charged with hate crime and aggravated battery.
•	 On October  5, 2012, the FBI announced hate crimes 
charges were filed in U.S. District Court in Toledo against 
an Indiana man stemming from the arson this week of the 
Islamic Center of Greater Toledo, Randolph Linn, 52, of 
St. Joe, Indiana, was charged with intentionally defacing, 
damaging, and destroying religious real property because of 
the religious character of that property and with using fire 
and explosives to commit a felony.
•	 In June 2013, Michael Enright, a college student was sen-
tenced to nine-and-half years behind bars after pleading 
guilty to charges he attacked a New York City taxi driver 
from Bangladesh during an anti-Muslim tirade inside a 
cab on August 10, 2010. “I used a knife. I cut him in the 
throat,” Michael Enright said in a low, voice when asked by 
a Manhattan judge to describe his crimes. Prosecutor James 
Zaleta argued that Enright deserved an 18-year prison term 
for a “vicious, cold-blooded attack” that came as the Sep-
tember 11 anniversary neared, which occurred at the same 
time as a contentious debate over a planned Islamic center 
and mosque near ground zero. “After insulting the tenets of 
Islam and mocking the restrictions of Ramadan, the defen-
dant, unprovoked, reached through the cab partition and 
sliced the victim across his neck.”
Sympathetic Reactions to Muslims and Arabs
Despite these disturbing hate crime incidents, there was much 
heartening news with the wide range of expressions of concern 
and support throughout the country from politicians and aver-
age citizens who understood that no single group should be 
scapegoated for the murder of some 3,000 Americans in the 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
81
September 11 terrorist attacks. The support ranged from the 
president of the United States to elementary-school children:
•	 Only a day after the terrorist attack, President George W. 
Bush wrote, in published remarks to Mayor Rudolph Gi-
uliani: “Our nation should be mindful that there are thou-
sands of Arab-Americans who live in New York City, who love 
their flag just as much as we do . . . we treat Arab-Americans 
and Muslims with the respect they deserve.” The president 
also visited the Islamic Center of Washington, D.C., and 
issued similar supportive remarks.
•	 In 2003, both the U.S. Senate and House of Represen-
tatives passed a resolution “condemning bigotry against  
Arab-Americans, Muslim-Americans, South Asian-Americans, 
and Sikh-Americans.”
•	 Governors, mayors, and town officials appeared publicly with 
Arab Americans and Muslims to condemn hate crimes and 
ensure the prosecution of perpetrators, according to a Human 
Rights Watch report, “We are Not the Enemy: Hate Crimes 
Against Arabs, Muslims, and Those Perceived to be Arab or 
Muslim After September 11,” issued in November 2002. The 
authors of the report noted that this type of solidarity was 
uniformly expressed in every area of the country.
•	 The Anti-Defamation League (ADL), the largest Jewish 
civil rights organization in the United States, publicized 
anti-Arab and anti-Muslim hate crimes on its Web site 
and worked with law enforcement officers to prosecute 
these crimes. They actively cooperate with law enforcement 
agencies to ensure that Arabs and Muslims receive full legal 
protections.
•	 Dearborn, Michigan, which has a large Arab American pop-
ulation, experienced only two September 11–related assaults. 
Some officials credit an ongoing community police coopera-
tive relationship with stemming any potential violence.

82	
Hate Crimes
The following incidents also were indicative of the attitudes of 
most Americans after the September 11 attacks:
•	 According to the October  18, 2001, issue of the Seattle 
Post-Intelligencer, a bus driver in Seattle posted a sign on his 
bus exhorting riders to beware of Muslims. When a passen-
ger filed a complaint, the driver was suspended from work 
and the sign was removed.
•	 Elementary school students at the Park Day School in 
Montclair, California, organized a “Walk of Acceptance” to 
raise money for a hate crimes information hotline.
•	 In Cambridge, Massachusetts, members of a local synagogue 
joined other religious groups in a march against hate. “I’m 
inundated with calls from rabbis,” said Tahir H. Chaudhry, 
president of the Islamic Center of Boston, a Wayland, Mas-
sachusetts, mosque (Boston Globe, 2001).
•	 Harvard University president Larry Summers addressed a 
regular Friday prayer meeting for the school’s Muslim com-
munity, emphasizing the university’s commitment to its 
Islamic students. “We cannot tolerate any failure to respect 
individuals as individuals,” he said. His expression of con-
cern was typical of other college and university officials 
throughout the United States.
•	 In early 2014, Jews and Muslims in the Detroit area attended 
a conference “A Shared Future: Jews and Muslims in Metro 
Detroit,” cosponsored by the Michigan Muslim Community 
Council and the American Jewish Committee—Detroit re-
gion. A survey conducted before the conference found high 
levels of interest among members of each group to learn 
about the other community’s practices and customs and 
also demonstrated an eagerness to engage in joint activities 
(Building a shared future, 2014).
In addition, local synagogues, churches, and community 
groups around the country demonstrated their concern in a 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
83
variety of interreligious activities, congregational visits, and 
local programs.
Although the press seemed to publicize—and, some would 
argue, exaggerate—the extent of anti-Muslim hate crimes, some 
Muslim Americans criticized their coreligionists for wrapping 
themselves in the “mantle of victimhood.” In an open letter to 
his fellow Muslims, M. A. Muqtedar Khan criticized the atti-
tudes of many of his coreligionists. Writing in the electronic 
journal Salon.com, the Adrian College (Michigan) professor 
wrote: “Muslims love to live in the U.S. but also love to hate it. 
As an Indian Muslim, I know for sure that nowhere on earth, 
including India, will I get the same sense of dignity and respect 
that I have received in the U.S. . . . In many places hundreds 
of Americans have gathered around Islamic centers in symbolic 
gestures of protection and embrace of American Muslims. In 
patience and in tolerance ordinary Americans have demon-
strated their extraordinary virtues” (Khan 2001).
Similar sentiments have been expressed by a growing num-
ber of Muslim and Arab Americans on the Internet and in 
newspaper and magazine articles. The founding of the Amer-
ican Islamic Congress (AIC) raises hopes for better mutual 
understanding among Muslims and other Americans. The AIC 
explicitly notes its dual concerns: “We must work to guarantee 
our equal rights and prevent hate crimes. At the same time, we 
must condemn hate speech and calls for violence by Muslims. 
Hateful statements and actions by fellow Muslims threaten the 
reputation of our entire community. We must censure intoler-
ance, whatever its source.”
Islamophobia and Muslim Self-criticism
Like many minority groups, Arabs and Muslim Americans 
have been the victims of hate crimes.
But David J. Rusin, a fellow at the Middle East Forum, 
believes that despite Islamist attacks against the U.S. Muslims 
are not disproportionately victimized. He notes that the past 
decade (2002–2011), the FBI recorded hate 1,388 incidents 

84	
Hate Crimes
against Muslims during this span, compared with 25,130 
against blacks, 12,030 against homosexuals and bisexuals, 
9,198 against Jews, and 5,057 against Hispanics. Even majority 
whites endured 7,185 incidents, while Christians (Protestants 
and Catholics combined) were targeted in 1,126 incidents. 
Adherents of “other religions” faced 1,335, very close to the 
anti-Muslim tally.
His analysis asserts that, despite several major terrorist 
attacks committed by American-based jihadis—from 9/11 to 
Fort Hood to the Boston bombing—“the statistics show that 
‘Islamophobia’ has not become a part of American culture” 
(Rusin, 2013).
Abdur-Rahman Muhammad, a former member of the Inter-
national Institute of Islamic Thought (IIIT), a U.S. Muslim 
Brotherhood front, recalls being at a group meeting in the 
early 1990s where the idea was proposed to use “Islamopho-
bia” as a political weapon. Of the use of the word, Muham-
mad later said, “This loathsome term is nothing more than a 
thought-terminating cliche conceived in the bowels of Muslim 
think tanks for the purpose of beating down critics” (Clarion 
Project, 2015).
Nevertheless, many American Muslims claim that in their 
daily life, they are subject to suspicion, social ostracism and fear.
Native Americans
According to hate crimes expert Barbara Perry, there is an 
“absence of concrete data on hate crimes against Native Amer-
icans. There is no Native American equivalent to the annual 
audits of anti-Semitic violence or anti-gay violence published 
by the Anti-Defamation League and the National Gay and Les-
bian Task Force.” She notes that even though there is an exten-
sive literature on the contemporary “victimization of American 
Indians as nations,” there is little narrative material on racially 
motivated violence against individual Native Americans (Perry, 
2008, 2).

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
85
According to the latest FBI hate crime statistics for 2013, 
only 4.5 percent of racially biased crime incidents that year 
were committed against American Indians or Alaskan natives; 
the statistical charts indicate there were 129 incidents with 
159 victims. But some critics claim that the relatively small 
number of reported incidents minimize the problem. As earlier 
noted, underreporting of hate crimes occurs for a variety of 
reasons. Some sociologists and Native American scholars claim 
that “aboriginal peoples” are reluctant to report these crimes 
because of a hesitancy to engage in confrontation. These ana-
lysts also note that police are not often privy to information 
in a culture that “values informal community control” and 
“conciliation over retribution” (Perry, 2008, 3). But the much 
larger issue, according to Barbara Perry, are the lingering effects 
of the colonization of Native Americans since the arrival of 
Europeans in their land several centuries ago, resulting in their 
segregation in tribal areas. Sadly, the centuries-old discrimina-
tion and violence committed against them still has current res-
onance. In her book, she discusses the research and interviews 
conducted by her staff in tribal communities in Arizona, Mon-
tana, and Wisconsin and broadens the discussion about hate 
crimes by providing an historical and contemporary analysis 
on the plight of Native Americans (and also aboriginal peoples 
in Canada), not easily quantified by official U.S. government 
crime statistics.
Conclusion
The enactment of hate crime legislation in the 1990s and in 
the subsequent decades can be viewed as a continuation of the 
laws Congress mandated during the civil rights era. While 
that legislation was primarily enacted to protect the civil and 
legal rights of African Americans, hate crime laws have greatly 
expanded some protections to many other minorities: Jews, 
gays and lesbians, Asian Americans, Sikhs, Arabs, Muslims, 

86	
Hate Crimes
among other groups. Minority groups have applauded these 
laws, which expand their sense of security in a pluralistic soci-
ety and uphold the ideals of an open and tolerant society so 
many Americans cherish.
The passage of hate crime laws has provoked a long and vig-
orous debate, both philosophical and constitutional among 
proponents and opponents. The critics of these laws—who 
have expressed these unpopular opinions—merit our respect 
for raising important legal and social issues about the complex 
nature of a democracy and the need to ensure legal safeguards 
for all citizens, even those with reprehensible views. While 
some may not understand how these critics can oppose such 
laws, their commitment to a just and tolerant society should 
never be questioned—they passionately feel that a different 
approach is needed to deal with the festering problem of hate 
crimes.
By and large, though, the supporters of hate crime laws have 
decisively won the debate: more than two decades of legislative 
action and judicial decisions have established these laws as part 
of the American legal corpus. Although a few states still haven’t 
passed hate crime statutes, the prevailing trend throughout the 
nation indicates that every state will offer these protections in 
the coming years.
While the debate about the constitutionality of these laws 
may have been settled, a few practical problems still remain: 
questions about the accuracy of hate crime statistics and the 
methodology of their collection. The Hate Crime Statistics Act 
authorized the FBI to collect statistics and publish an annual 
publication tallying their findings. This federal government 
document is now widely considered the preeminent source 
for assessing the extent of hate crime incidents throughout the 
country. Yet a few civil rights and ethnic groups have pointed 
out in detail serious problems with these statistics, claiming 
they are inadequately collected and thus underreport inci-
dents on this disturbing topic that demands much greater 
national concern. Some groups—especially the ADL and the 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
87
NCAVP—compile their own reports, which frequently tally 
many more hate crime incidents than found in the FBI annual 
publication. Some analysts hope that these discrepancies might 
be bridged in coming years by increased cooperation with the 
FBI since these and other groups have expended much time 
and expense to gather, in their view, the most accurate statistics.
Hate crime expert Phyllis Gerstenfeld once raised a critical 
question about the meaning of the term to the American pub-
lic: “hate crimes seem to be a topic of some interest to nearly 
everybody, and yet few people really know much about them” 
(Gerstenfeld, 2004, xv). She notes that many Americans adopt 
a “more literal interpretation of the term” based on widely pub-
licized violent and extreme incidents. But some social scientists 
see hate crime as a social construct and engage in theoretical 
discussions about the nature of these incidents in a complex 
society. These different approaches don’t necessarily converge, 
sometimes confusing the public and possibly exasperating aca-
demics who see no easy long-term solutions to dealing with 
these troubling crimes.
Since the terrorist attack on the United States on Septem-
ber 11, 2001, many Americans have become understandably 
fearful for their personal safety and security. But some minority 
groups in the country are worried because they feel unjustly 
blamed for these horrifying terrorist actions. Indeed, these 
attacks have provoked an increase in hate crimes, directed 
against Arabs and Muslims but especially among Sikhs, who 
are often erroneously perceived as Muslims because of their 
clothing.
The literature on the backlash against these minority groups, 
especially some of the published analyses, is very extensive. But 
sometimes the extent and breadth of these incidents have been 
exaggerated by some academics and journalists, inadvertently 
diminishing the disturbing nature of these crimes by using 
alarmist rhetoric and hyperbole. Indeed some of this litera-
ture that has appeared in respectable journals and books may 
make future readers—who were born after the September 11 

88	
Hate Crimes
attack—think that these backlash crimes were as bad—if not 
worse—than the terrorist attack which claimed the lives of 
almost 3,000 people. Nevertheless, serious crimes were com-
mitted against some Arab and Muslim Americans in the wake 
of the 9/11 terrorist attacks and it is important that these crimes 
be placed in a soberly discussed historical context.
The perpetrators of hate crimes are often perceived as 
being young white tattooed males—who look like or are 
skinheads—and commit violent crimes against African Amer-
icans, Jews, Hispanics, gays and lesbians, or other vulnerable 
minority groups. While this description has been accurate, it 
is only partially true. A perusal of the “Chronology” chapter 
demonstrates that many perpetrators of hate crimes are not 
always white: African Americans have assaulted gays and les-
bians; Hispanics have committed hate crimes against Asian 
Americans; Muslim Americans have assaulted Jews and van-
dalized synagogues. The FBI aggregate statistics on hate crimes 
provide ample documentation of the diverse background of 
the offenders. As America becomes an increasingly multicul-
tural society, hate crime perpetrators will invariably reflect the 
demographic diversity of the country. While one would hope 
that minority group members would be more sensitive given 
their historical vulnerability, it is important to note that they 
also perpetrate hate crimes. Nevertheless, we should be pleased 
that few women commit these crimes so full gender representa-
tion, is not at least in this case, always a desirable goal.
The festering problem of racism, anti-Semitism, and other 
forms of bigotry offers no easy legal solution. However, hate 
crime laws and severe criminal sentencing have certainly helped 
many victims and have presumably aided the safety and welfare 
of many communities. When a youth involved in an anti- Jew-
ish crime is sentenced to serve time in prison, or the inciters 
of skinhead violence against African Americans are forced to 
pay restitution to the families of victims, or antigay felons are 
fully prosecuted for their crimes, violent bigots and their ilk are 
made aware that their hate-motivated criminal actions will have 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
89
punitive consequences. This type of legislation is only about two 
decades old, so it is still too soon to assess its ultimate impact 
or success on U.S. society. Nevertheless, many human rights 
professionals agree with law enforcement officials that these 
federal and state laws are a useful and important measures in 
the long-term battle against hate crimes. Nevertheless, few pro-
ponents of hate crime legislation believe that these statutes will 
eradicate the growing problem of hate-motivated violence in the 
United States.
References
ADL Web site. 2015. http://www.adl.org.
ADL Audit. 2014. Anti-Semitic Incidents Declined 19 
Percent across the United States in 2013. http://www.adl 
.org/press-center/press-releases/anti-semitism-usa/adl-audit-
anti-semitic-incidents-2013.html.
ADL Blog. 2014. Some Anti-Semitism in U.S. in Reaction  
to Israeli Operations in Gaza. July 29. http://blog.adl.org/ 
international/some-anti-semitism-in-u-s-in-reaction-to-israeli- 
operations-in-gaza.
American Turban. 2011. California Senate President Darrell 
Steinberg. http://americanturban.com/2011/04/11/picture- 
of-the-day-california-senate-president-darrell-steinberg/
Asian Americans Advancing Justice. 2014. AAJC Testimony: 
U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee Hearing on “The State of 
Civil and Human Rights in the United States.” http://www 
.advancingequality.org/news-media/publications/advancing- 
justice-aajc-testimony-us-senate-judiciary-committee-hearing- 
state.
Asian Week. 2001. “Hate Crime Charged in Death of Thung 
Phetakoune.” August 17–23. http://www.asianweek.com/ 
2001_08_17/news_deathhate.html.
Bekiempis, Victoria. 2014. “FBI Hate Crime Statistics:  
Are Bias Offenses Really on the Decline?” Newsweek  

90	
Hate Crimes
online, December 9. http://www.newsweek.com/fbi-hate- 
crime-statistics-are-bias-offenses-really-decline-290023.
Belkin, Lisa. 1988. “Texas Judge Eases Sentence for Killer of 2 
Homosexuals.” New York Times, December 17, 8.
Boston Globe. 2001. “Jews, Muslims Finding Healing of Rifts.” 
September 20.
“Building a Shared Future.” 2014. http://www.umdilabs.com/
sites/default/files/Final%20AJC%20Report.pdf.
Burton, Summer Anne. 2012. A Tragic History of Hate 
Crimes against Sikhs in the U.S. http://www.buzzfeed.com/
summeranne/a-tragic-history-of-hate-crimes-against-sikhs- 
in-t#.jqDbkqPan.
California Attorney General. 2001. Reporting Hate Crimes. 
http://oag.ca.gov/sites/all/files/agweb/pdfs/publications/
civilrights/reportingHC.pdf.
Clarion Project. 2015. http://www.clarionproject.org/content/
abdur-rahman-muhammad.
Dinnerstein, Leonard. 1971. Anti-Semitism in the United 
States. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
FBI. 2014. Uniform Crime Report: Hate Crime Statistics 2013.
Fumento, Michael. 1996. “A Church Arson Epidemic? It’s 
Smoke and Mirrors.” Wall Street Journal, July 8.
Gellman, Susan. 1991. “Sticks and Stones Can Put You in 
Jail, but Can Words Increase Your Sentence? Constitutional 
and Policy Dilemmas of Ethnic Intimidation Laws.” UCLA 
Law Review (December): 333–396.
Gellman, Susan B. and Lawrence, Frederick M. 2004. 
“Agreeing to Agree: A Proponent and Opponent of Hate 
Crime Laws Reach for Common Ground.” Harvard Journal 
on Legislation, 41, No. 2 (Summer): 421–448.
Gerstenfeld, Phyllis. 2011. Hate Crimes: Causes, Controls and 
Controversies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
GLAAD. 2015. “Transgender 101.” http://www.glaad.org/
transgender/trans101.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
91
Greenawalt, Kent. 1992–1993. “Reflections on Justifications 
for Defining Crimes by the Category of Victim,” 
pp. 617–628. In Annual Survey of American Law. New 
York: New York University School of Law.
Haas, S. M., Nolan, J. J., Turley, E., and Stump, J. 2011. Assessing 
the Validity of Hate Crime Reporting: An Analysis of NIBRS Data, 
July. Charleston, WV: Criminal Justice Statistical Analysis 
Center, Office of Research and Strategic Planning, Division of 
Justice and Community Services. www.djcs.wv.gov/SAC.
Herek, Gregory M., and Berrill, Kevin, eds. 1992. Hate 
Crimes: Confronting Violence against Lesbians and Gay Men. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Holden, Dominic. 2014. “FBI Understates Hate-Motivated 
Attacks on Transgender People.” http://www.buzzfeed.com/
dominicholden/new-fbi-report-vastly-underrepresents-anti- 
transgender-hate#.yuwAXW1Nj.
HRC Blog. 2014. “For the First Time, FBI Reports on Hate 
Crimes Based on Gender Identity.” http://www.hrc.org/
blog/entry/for-the-first-time-fbi-reports-on-hate-crimes- 
based-on-gender-identity.
Human Rights Watch. November 2002. “We Are Not the 
Enemy: Hate Crimes against Arabs and Muslims and Those 
Perceived to Be Arabs and Muslims.” http://www.hrw.org.
Jacobs, James B., and Potter, Kimberly A. 1997. “Hate 
Crimes: A Critical Perspective,” pp. 1–50. In Crime and 
Justice: A Review of Research 22, edited by Michael Tonry. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jenness, Valerie, and Broad, Kendal. 1997. Hate Crimes: New 
Social Movements and the Politics of Violence. New York: 
Aldine de Gruyter.
Jewish Exponent. 2014. “Jewish Student Assaulted at Temple 
University,” August 21.
Khan, M. A. Muqtedar. 2001. “A Memo to American 
Muslims,” October 18. http://www.philosophy-religion.
org/world/a-memo.htm.

92	
Hate Crimes
Kibelstis, Teresa Eileen. 1995. “Preventing Violence against 
Gay Men and Lesbians: Should Enhanced Penalties at 
Sentencing Extend to Bias Crimes Based on Victims’ 
Sexual Orientation?” Notre Dame Journal of Law, Politics 
and Public Policy, 9, no. 1: 309–343.
Lawrence, Frederick M. 1999. Punishing Hate: Bias Crimes 
under American Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Lawrence, Frederick. 2002. “Hate Crimes,” pp. 774–778. In 
Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice, 2nd ed., edited by Joshua 
Dressler. New York: Macmillan Reference USA.
Louis D. Brandeis Center. 2014. Worst Campus Anti-Semitic 
Incidents of 2013–2014. http://brandeiscenter.com/blog/
the-worst-campus-anti-semitic-incidents-of-2013–2014.
Leadership Conference. 2002. http://www.civilrights.org/
hatecrimes/united-states/new-report-documents-increased- 
hate-crimes-and-intolerance.html.
Leadership Conference. 2009. “Hate Crimes against Asian 
Pacific Americans.” http://www.civilrights.org/publications/
hatecrimes/asian-pacific.html.
Leadership Conference. 2014. “FBI Report Indicates Decrease 
in Hate Crimes.” December 11. http://www.civilrights.org/
archives/2014/1482-hate-crimes-report.html.
Los Angeles Times. 2013. “Feds Charge 5 with Hate Crimes  
for Allegedly Imprisoning Disabled.” http://articles.latimes 
.com/2013/jan/23/nation/la-na-nn-feds-charge-5-with- 
hate-crimes-for-imprisoning-disabled—20130123.
McMahon, B. T., West, S. L., Lewis, A. N., Armstrong, A. J., 
and Conway, J. P. 2004. “Hate Crimes and Disability in 
America.” Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 47: 66–75.
Merevick, Tony. 2014. “A Year Later, ‘Nothing’ Has Changed  
Since Transgender Woman Islan Nettles Was Killed.”  
BuzzFeed LGBT. http://www.buzzfeed.com/tonymerevick/a- 
timeline-of-violence-agianst-transgender-people-in-the-us# 
.neMPo31DD.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
93
NCAVP. 2014. Media Release: National Report on Hate 
Violence against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, 
Queer and HIV-Affected Communities. http://www.avp 
.org/storage/documents/2013_mr_ncavp_hvreport.pdf.
New York Times. 1994. “Hasidic Gunshot Victim Crosses a 
Personal Bridge: City Gunshot Victim Crosses a Personal 
Bridge.” October 20.
Perry, Barbara. 2008. Silent Victims: Hate Crimes against 
Native Americans Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Perry, Barbara. 2009. “Hate Crimes Committed against 
Persons with Disabilities,” pp. 173–197. In Hate Crimes: 
The Victims of Hate Crimes, vol. 3. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Potok, Mark. 2013. “DOJ Study: More Than 250,000 Hate 
Crimes a Year, Most Unreported.” HateWatch. http://www 
.splcenter.org/blog/2013/03/26/doj-study-more-than- 
250000-hate-crimes-a-year-a-third-never-reported/
Rusin, David. J. 2013. “Hate-Crime Stats Deflate 
‘Islamophobia’ Myth.” http://www.nationalreview.com/
articles/337417/hate-crime-stats-deflate-islamophobia- 
myth-david-j-rusin.
SALDEF. 2013. Turban Myths: The Opportunities and 
Challenges for Reframing Sikh American Identity in Post-9/11  
America. http://saldef.org/policy-research/turban-myths/# 
.VLQqEKNWYSF.
Seattlepi. 2002. “Man Sentenced to 6 Years for Attack on Mosque.” 
http://www.seattlepi.com/news/article/Man-sentenced-to-
6-years-for-attack-at-mosque-1103400.php.
Sherry, Mark. 2010. Disability Hate Crimes: Does Anyone 
Really Hate Disabled People? Burlington, VT: Ashgate 
Publishing.
Trends in Hate. http://www.trendsinhate.com/dateinhate.html
United States Department of Justice. December 2014. Federal  
Bureau of Investigation. Hate Crime Statistics, 2013.  
http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/hate-crime/2013/ 
resource-pages/about-hate-crime.

94	
Hate Crimes
United States Department of Justice. 1998. National Church 
Arson Task Force. Second Year Report for the President. 
http://www.justice.gov/crt/church_arson/arson98.php.
United States Department of Justice. 2014. Former 
Klansman Pleads Guilty to Federal Hate Crime for Cross 
Burning. September 30. http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/
former-klansman-pleads-guilty-federal-hate-crime-cross-
burning.
United States Department of Justice. 2014. Four Mississippi 
Men and Women Indicted for Racially Motivated Hate 
Crimes Spree in Jackson, Mississippi, July 16. http://www 
.justice.gov/opa/pr/four-mississippi-men-and-women- 
indicted-racially-motivated-hate-crimes-spree-jackson.
U.S. Department of Transportation. 2001. Carrying Out 
Transportation Inspection and Safety Responsibilities in a 
Nondiscriminatory Manner. http://airconsumer.ost.dot 
.gov/rules/20011012.htm.
USA Today. 1996. “Why Are Churches Burning?” 
June 28–30. (See other articles on church burning in these 
three issues.)
Winer, Anthony S. 1994. “Hate Crimes, Homosexuals and 
the Constitution.” Harvard Civil Rights Civil Liberties 
Review (Summer): 387–438.

This page intentionally left blank


97
3	
Perspectives
Like many current issues, the topic of hate crimes draws a wide 
range of opinions ranging from the philosophical, legal, and 
ideological, to name only a few. This section includes essays 
offering a variety of viewpoints: some essays cover material in 
the text but offer a specific viewpoint; other pieces discuss top-
ics not directly addressed in the book.
The first essay, written by Boston Globe columnist Jeff Jacoby, 
questions the need for hate crime legislation. He believes that 
current laws already address these types of crime and that the 
“best hate-crimes law is none at all.” In stark contrast, Michael 
Lieberman, the Washington counsel of the Anti-Defamation 
League, explains the legal and criminological justification for 
hate crime legislation.
The next essays explain the impact of hate crimes on particular 
communities. Ken Marcus, the president of the Louis D. Brandeis 
Center for Human Rights Under Law, discusses some incidents 
on college campuses where Jewish students were subjected to 
hatred, hostility, and, in a few instances, violence. When Mr. Mar-
cus served as the assistant director of education for civil rights, 
he helped expand the mandate to protect the rights of Jews and 
other religious minorities. But other agency administrators were 
On August 6, 2012, the day after a racist gunman killed six Sikh worship-
ers at the Sikh temple (gurdwara), the local Sikh community gathered for 
a candle light vigil in Brookfield, Wisconsin. Religious groups through-
out the country and government leaders including President Obama con-
demned this terrible massacre. (AP Photo/M. Spencer Green)

98	
Hate Crimes
either “unsteady” in their enforcement or else misunderstood the 
nature of these crimes. Although Sikhs constitute a tiny religious 
minority in the United States, they have suffered a disproportion-
ate amount of hate crime violence. Simran Jeet Singh, assistant 
professor in the Department of Religion at Trinity University and 
the senior religion fellow for the Sikh Coalition, explains that it is a 
popular misconception that every attack against a Sikh American 
was committed because of their “apparent Muslim” appearance. 
He argues that the “deep history of xenophobia in the U.S. over-
looks the fact that Sikhs are attacked precisely of who they are.” 
Although the news media often covers the discrimination against 
undocumented individuals from mostly Spanish-speaking coun-
tries, three professors (Michele Stacey, Kristin Carbone-Lopez, 
and Richard Rosenthal) raise a seldom-asked question: “To what 
extent is ant-Hispanic hate crime related to patterns of Hispanic 
immigration to the United States?” The FBI annual hate crime 
statistics publication invariably lists lesbian, gay, bisexual, lesbian 
(LGBT) individuals as one of the most vulnerable groups in the 
United States, which is why gay rights groups are usually in the 
forefront of supporting hate crime legislation. But Harvard profes-
sor and longtime gay rights historian Michael Bronski raises some 
doubts about the efficacy of these laws. He notes that Matthew 
Shepard’s murderers are serving two consecutive life sentences 
without the possibility of parole in Wyoming, which doesn’t even 
have any hate crime statutes; Bronski also believes that hate crime 
laws are “based on emotion, not logic.”
Finally, Ashley Thorne, the executive director of the National 
Association of Scholars, has written a provocative essay detail-
ing hate crime hoaxes on college campuses in recent years. She 
believes that these documented incidents of crying wolf “erode 
the credibility of real wrongdoing.”
Punish Crime, Not Thought Crime
Jeff Jacoby
When President Barack Obama signed the Matthew Shepard 
and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act in October 

	
Perspectives	
99
2009, he hailed it as “another step forward” on America’s “jour-
ney towards a more perfect union” (Obama, 2009). In reality, 
it was just the opposite. For like all such laws, the measure 
signed by the president prevents not hatred, but fairness. Every 
criminal code punishes bad deeds; hate-crime statutes punish 
bad opinions. However well-intentioned, that is something no 
liberal democracy should tolerate.
The law was named for the victims in two of the most noto-
rious murders of the 1990s. Matthew Shepard was a gay stu-
dent at the University of Wyoming who was lured from a bar 
in Laramie by two acquaintances on the night of October 6, 
1998 (Gumbel, 2013). They drove him to a remote spot out of 
town, pistol-whipped him to a bloody pulp, then tied him to a 
fence, and left him to die.
Four months earlier, three white supremacists in Jasper, Texas, 
had lynched James Byrd Jr., a middle-aged black man. It was a 
ghastly killing: The victim was stripped, chained by his ankles to 
the back of a pickup truck, and dragged along an asphalt road 
until he was decapitated. Byrd’s shredded body parts stretched 
along a grisly, miles-long trail (“3 whites . . .”, 1998).
The atrocities in Jasper and Laramie set off a vehement 
national outcry for the passage of stronger legislation to deter 
“hate crimes”—acts of violence motivated by bigotry, racism, 
or intolerance. Hate-crime laws, which increase the punish-
ment for offenses fueled by bias, were already on the books in  
41 states by 1998. But because Texas and Wyoming were among 
the few holdouts, Democrats (and a few Republicans) in Con-
gress and the White House insisted it was imperative to enact 
a federal law.
“Crimes that are motivated by hate really are fundamentally 
different and I believe should be treated differently under the 
law,” contended the then president Bill Clinton after meeting 
with members of Byrd’s family (“Senate passes . . . ”, 2000). 
Massachusetts Senator Ted Kennedy, the chief sponsor of a mea-
sure that would add new categories of hate crimes to the federal 
code, declared that if the bill were passed, “we’d have fewer hate 
crimes in all the days that follow” (“Mother of . . .,” 1999).

100	
Hate Crimes
The punishment meted out to Shepard’s and Byrd’s murder-
ers could hardly have been stronger: Two received the death 
penalty, and the others were sentenced to life imprisonment 
with no possibility of parole. In any event, hate-crime laws 
were being widely enforced by the late 1990s. Not only had 
the great majority of states adopted such measures, but the fed-
eral government had as well. In 1988, Congress had passed the 
Hate Crimes Statistics Act. That was followed in 1994 by the 
Hate Crimes Sentencing Enhancement Act and the Violence 
Against Women Act, then by the Church Arson Prevention 
Act in 1996. The measure named for Shepard and Byrd, even-
tually passed during the Obama administration, broadened the 
federal government’s reach still further, enlarging the power 
of U.S. attorneys to prosecute attacks based on race, religion, 
national origin, gender, sexual orientation, or disability.
For all their popularity, though, hate-crime statutes advance 
no legitimate criminal justice end. The laws serve a symbolic 
function, not a practical one—they proclaim that crimes 
inspired by certain types of bigotry are particularly wicked, 
and deserve to be punished with particular harshness. But that 
is tantamount to proclaiming that the exact same crimes, if 
spurred by bigotry against other groups, or by motives having 
nothing to do with bias at all, wouldn’t be so terrible. Is that a 
message any decent society should wish to promote?
Bias crimes are said to be uniquely toxic because they target 
and terrorize both individuals and groups. “Hate violence is 
very personal,” writes Wade Henderson, the president of the 
Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, “with 
an especially emotional and psychological impact on the 
victim—and the victim’s community” (Henderson, 2012). The 
Anti-Defamation League argues that a “priority response” is 
justified for hate crimes because they “may effectively intimi-
date other members of the victim’s community, leaving them 
feeling isolated, vulnerable, and unprotected by the law. . . . 
These incidents can damage the fabric of our society and frag-
ment communities” (Anti-Defamation League, 2012).

	
Perspectives	
101
But isn’t that true of all violent crime? Doesn’t every murder, 
every rape, every armed robbery, every bombing intimidate or 
frighten more people than just the immediate victim?
When a child is abducted and killed, or a jogger is gang 
raped by “wilding” predators, or elderly bank customers are 
mugged outside an automated teller machine (ATM), entire 
neighborhoods or groups are apt to be rocked by panic and 
dread. It is hard to see the logic of demanding harsher penalties 
for crimes that inflict “an especially emotional and psychologi-
cal impact” on, say, African Americans, gays, or Muslims, while 
refusing to demand the same penalties for attacks that have the 
same effect on senior citizens, or joggers, or young parents.
There is no evading the double standard: By definition, a 
law that cracks down harder on offenses that hurt members of 
certain groups signals simultaneously that hurting members of 
other groups isn’t as bad. That is immoral and indefensible.
The lynching of James Byrd by three white bigots was 
unspeakable. Wouldn’t it have been just as unspeakable had the 
killers been black? It should have made no difference to the 
law—or to the media, or to the political class—whether  
the monsters who murdered Byrd were motivated by racism, 
by a personal grudge, or by greed for his money. The blood 
of a man assaulted by bigots is no redder than that of a man 
attacked by ruthless thieves or thrill-seeking sadists. The grief 
of his loved ones is the same either way. So is the threat to soci-
ety. A legal system that upholds the principle of “equal justice 
under law”—the very words are engraved over the door to the 
U.S. Supreme Court—must not have rules that make some 
victims of hatred more equal than others.
In fact, the law has no business intensifying the punishment 
for violent crimes motivated by bigotry at all. Murderers or 
arsonists or terrorists should be prosecuted and punished with 
equal vehemence regardless of their agenda. It is not a crimi-
nal’s evil thoughts that society has a right to avenge, only his 
evil acts. Advocates of hate-crime laws maintain that what is 
being punished isn’t the ugly state of mind, but the crime it 

102	
Hate Crimes
led to. But that argument doesn’t wash. When the judge has 
you thrown in prison for an extra 10 years because the crime 
you committed was influenced by your opinion of the vic-
tim, the inescapable conclusion is that your opinion has been 
criminalized.
That is “thought crime,” in George Orwell’s chilling phrase. 
And if big brother can penalize you today for your inappropri-
ate thoughts about Jews, Asians, or lesbians, it is only matter 
of time until you can be penalized for having impermissible 
thoughts about anything else.
The best hate-crimes law is none at all. But if we are going 
to have such laws, let’s not restrict them to only six or eight 
categories of victims. Lawmakers should expand their scope 
to cover every crime of violence—regardless of the attacker’s 
motive, or of the group to which the victim(s) belong. Let us 
learn to treat every murder, rape, and brutal assault as a crime 
of “hate”—not the criminal’s hate for his victim, but society’s 
hate for the crime.
References
“3 Whites Indicted in Dragging Death of Black Man in 
Texas,” CNN.com, July 6, 1998. Available at http://edition. 
cnn.com/US/9807/06/dragging.death.02/.
Anti-Defamation League. “Hate Crimes Law: 
the ADL Approach,” 2012. Available at http://
www.adl.org/combating-hate/hate-crimes-law/c/
adl-approach-hate-crimes-laws.html.
Gumbel, Andrew. Matthew Shepard’s Murder: “What It 
Came Down to Is Drugs and Money,” The Guardian, 
October 14, 2013. Available at http://www.theguardian 
.com/world/2013/oct/14/matthew-shepard-murder- 
wyoming-book.
Henderson, Wade. “Bias Laws Ensure Action against 
Hate,” New York Times, March 7, 2012. Available at 

	
Perspectives	
103
http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2012/03/07/
are-hate-crime-laws-necessary/bias-laws-ensure-actio
n-against-hate.
“Mother of Slain Student Pleads for Hate Crime Bill,” CNN.
com, May 11, 1999. Available at http://www.cnn.com/
US/9905/11/hate.crimes/.
Obama, Barack. Remarks by the President at Reception 
Commemorating the Enactment of the Matthew 
Shephard and James Byrd Hate Crimes Prevention Act. 
October 28, 2009. Available at http://www.whitehouse.
gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-reception-comm
emorating-enactment-matthew-shepard-and-james-byrd-.
“Senate Passes Hate Crimes Legislation; Prosecutors 
Revisiting Murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner,” 
CNN.com, June 20, 2000. Available at http://transcripts.
cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/0006/20/wt.07.html.
	 Jeff Jacoby is a columnist for The Boston Globe.
The Law vs. Violent Bigotry: The Case for Strong Hate 
Crime Laws in the United States
Michael Lieberman
All Americans have a stake in effective response to violent big-
otry. Bias crimes have special impact; they are designed to intimi-
date the victim and members of the victim’s community, leaving 
them feeling fearful, isolated, vulnerable, and unprotected by 
the law. Failure to address this unique type of crime often causes 
an isolated incident to explode into widespread community 
tension. The damage done by hate crimes, therefore, cannot be 
measured solely in terms of physical injury or dollars and cents. 
By making members of minority communities fearful, angry, 
and suspicious of other groups—and of the power structure 
that is supposed to protect them—these incidents can damage 
the fabric of our society and fragment communities.

104	
Hate Crimes
Punishing Bias-Motivated Violence: The Policy  
Frame for Hate-Crime Laws
Criminal activity motivated by bias is distinct and different 
from other criminal conduct.
First, these crimes occur because of the perpetrator’s bias or 
animus against the victim—the victim’s race, religion, national 
origin, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disabil-
ity is the reason for the crime. One dramatic example of this 
phenomenon is the murder of Marcelo Lucero, a 37-year-old 
Ecuadoran immigrant who was killed in November 2008 in 
Patchogue, New York. According to the testimony of one of 
the Long Island teenagers who pleaded guilty to second-degree 
attempted assault as a hate crime, and other charges, several 
bored teenagers decided to go “beaner hopping”—a periodic 
practice in which they hunted Hispanics to beat up for sport. 
They had allegedly already shot at a Hispanic man on his porch 
with a BB gun and harassed another Hispanic man on a bike 
when they came across two Hispanic men near the Patchogue 
train station. The teenagers taunted the two with racist names 
and picked a fight. During the fight, Lucero was knifed. He 
subsequently died. His murderers were successfully prosecuted 
under federal hate crime laws.
Second, hate crimes have a very special emotional and psy-
chological impact on the victim—and the victim’s commu-
nity. Few individual crimes can spark riots, but bias-motivated 
crimes can. Civic leaders and police officials have come to 
recognize that strong enforcement of these laws can have a 
deterrent impact and can limit the potential for a hate crime 
incident to explode into a cycle of violence and widespread 
community disturbances.
The FBI and law enforcement officials recognize the special 
impact of hate crimes. The FBI has been the nation’s repos-
itory for crime statistics since 1930. It publishes an annual 
encyclopedic report called Crime in the United States. Every 
year, the FBI disaggregates that data and publishes just two 
other reports on crime issues that it believes have a dramatic 

	
Perspectives	
105
impact on Americans. One report is focused on law enforce-
ment officers killed and assaulted in the line of duty—and 
the other is about hate crimes in America. The FBI has been 
collecting this data, under the Hate Crime Statistics Act 
(HCSA), from state and local police since 1990. The most 
recent data, for 2013, documented that 1,826 police agen-
cies reported about 5,900 hate crimes, which is almost one 
hate crime every ninety minutes of every day. Race-based hate 
crimes were most frequent, second were crimes based on sex-
ual orientation, and third most frequent were crimes based on 
religious biases. This year, as in the past, more than 60 percent 
of the religious based-crimes were directed against Jews and 
Jewish institutions.
Third, hate crimes are message crimes. Gay men beaten 
outside of a gay bar are rarely robbed. Vandals do not often 
spray-paint messages like “Jane Loves Bobby” on the side of 
synagogues; it is much more frequently defacement featuring 
anti-Jewish threats or a swastika. And bigots do not burn paral-
lelograms on the front lawns of African American families who 
have just moved into a previously all-white neighborhood. The 
message of a burning parallelogram might be misunderstood. 
But not the remains of a burned cross.
As Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor wrote in a 
2003 case involving a First Amendment challenge to the Com-
monwealth of Virginia’s cross-burning statute:
the burning cross often serves as a message of intimida-
tion, designed to inspire in the victim a fear of bodily 
harm. Moreover, the history of violence associated with 
the Klan shows that the possibility of injury or death is 
not just hypothetical . . . when a cross burning is used 
to intimidate, few if any messages are more powerful.  
(Virginia v. Black, 538U.S.343, 357 [2003])
Finally, these laws demonstrate our society’s commitment to 
fight discrimination. Hate-crime laws are a criminal justice 

106	
Hate Crimes
system parallel to antidiscrimination civil rights laws. Under 
our nation’s workplace civil rights laws, for example, an 
employer can refuse to hire, fire, or fail to promote employ-
ees for virtually any reason. It is only when that decision is 
made “by reason of” race, religion, national origin, gender, or 
disability (and in too-few state and local jurisdictions, sexual 
orientation and gender identity) that the conduct becomes 
unlawful.
The Constitutional Frame for Hate-Crime Laws: First 
Amendment Protections
Hate-crime statutes—federal criminal civil rights statutes 
and laws now on the books in 45 states and the District of 
Columbia—do not punish speech or thoughts. The First 
Amendment does not protect violence, nor does it prevent 
the government from imposing criminal penalties for violent 
discriminatory conduct. Americans are free to think, preach, 
and believe whatever they want. It is only when an individual 
commits a crime based on those biased beliefs and intention-
ally targets another for violence or vandalism that a hate crime 
statute can be triggered.
Over the years, federal and state hate crime laws have 
been upheld against a variety of challenges under the Four-
teenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause and Due 
Process Clause, and under the First Amendment. The most 
important case, Wisconsin v. Mitchell (508 U.S. 476 (1993)), 
involved a challenge to Wisconsin’s penalty-enhancement 
hate crime statute, under which Mitchell had received an 
enhanced sentence for having instigated a vicious racial 
assault by a group of young black men against a white youth 
in Kenosha, Wisconsin. The United State Supreme Court 
unanimously upheld the Wisconsin hate crime law, stating 
that it was intended to address conduct that the Wiscon-
sin legislature thought would “inflict greater individual and 
societal harm.”

	
Perspectives	
107
Expanding Federal Hate-Crime Protection: The  
Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes 
Prevention Act (HCPA)
Enacted in October, 2009, the HCPA (Public Law 111-84) 
provides new tools to combat violent hate crimes and encour-
ages federal–state partnerships to investigate and prosecute 
them. In the five years since the HCPA passed, the Department 
of Justice has brought over two dozen hate-crime cases and has 
successfully defended the constitutionality of the Act against 
several challenges. Thousands of law enforcement officials have 
undergone training, and new hate-crime prevention resources 
have been developed. In addition, following the August, 2012 
murder of six Sikh worshippers at their gurdwara in Oak 
Creek, Wisconsin, civil rights groups successfully lobbied for 
expanded categories of hate crimes to be collected by the FBI, 
including hate crimes against Sikhs, Arabs, and Hindus.
Yet there is still much work to be done. Five states have no 
hate crimes law, and too many states do not protect all victims 
of hate violence. We should have no delusions about hate-crime 
laws. Bigotry, racism, homophobia, and anti-Semitism cannot 
be legislated out of existence. The law is, in fact, a blunt instru-
ment; it is much better to prevent these crimes from happening 
in the first place.
But when these crimes do occur, we must send an unmis-
takable message that our society takes them very seriously. 
Hate-crime laws demonstrate an important commitment to 
confront and deter criminal activity motivated by prejudice. 
Hate violence merits priority attention—and hate crime laws 
help ensure they receive it.
Michael Lieberman has been the Washington Counsel for the 
Anti-Defamation League (ADL) since January, 1989 and also 
serves as director of the League’s Civil Rights Policy Planning 
Center. He led the broad coalition of civil rights, religious, law 
enforcement, educational, and professional organizations in Wash-
ington that worked for 13 years to secure passage of the Matthew 

108	
Hate Crimes
Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act—and is 
now working closely with Justice Department and FBI officials to 
educate about the Act and implement it.
Since 1913, the mission of ADL has been to “stop the defama-
tion of the Jewish people and to secure justice and fair treatment to 
all.” Over the past three decades, the League has been recognized 
as a leading resource on effective responses to violent bigotry, con-
ducting an annual Audit of Anti-Semitic Incidents, and drafting 
model hate crime statutes for state legislatures. ADL led the broad 
coalition of civil rights, religious, educational, professional, law 
enforcement, and civic organizations that worked in support of the 
Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act 
(HCPA) for more than a decade.
Contemporary Anti-Semitism in American  
Higher Education
Kenneth L. Marcus
Although Jewish Americans today enjoy unprecedented toler-
ance, some American universities have maintained atmospheres 
that are hostile toward Jewish students. Research suggests that 
faculty and student attitudes toward Jewish students are gen-
erally favorable. Nevertheless, anti-Semitic incidents have 
worsened on several campuses since roughly the turn of this 
century, including assault, battery, vandalism, and hate speech. 
In 2006, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights concluded that 
“[m]any college campuses throughout the United States con-
tinue to experience incidents of antisemitism” and that “[t]his 
is a serious problem which warrants further attention” (U.S. 
Commission on Civil Rights, 2006).
Prior to 2004, the U.S. Department of Education’s Office 
for Civil Rights had refused to investigate anti-Semitism 
cases because it lacks jurisdiction over religion. Ten years ago, 
the U.S. Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights 
(OCR), under my direction, issued policy guidance to protect 
the rights of students who are members of groups that exhibit 

	
Perspectives	
109
ethnic as well as religious characteristics. The 2004 policy, 
which clarified provisions of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act 
of 1964, applied to Jewish and Sikh students, among others. 
Over the ensuing years, OCR’s enforcement of this policy has 
been unsteady, as agency leaders initially resisted it, then offi-
cially embraced it, while often appearing to misunderstand it. 
In some cases, they balked at the idea of extending Title VI 
to Jewish students; in others, they have had difficulty distin-
guishing between anti-Semitism and hostility to Israel; and in 
still others, they have interpreted challenged conduct as being 
protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
In 2004, the Zionist Organization of America (ZOA) filed 
an OCR complaint alleging a hostile environment for Jew-
ish students at the University of California at Irvine. ZOA 
described rock-throwing, epithets, threats, among others. At 
my direction, OCR investigated. After my departure, regional 
officials proposed finding that a hostile environment had 
existed for Jewish students but that Irvine had responded ade-
quately. OCR headquarters reversed this proposed determina-
tion. OCR then issued a decision closing the case. Specifically, 
OCR dismissed some allegations as untimely filed, including 
claims that anti-Israel activists destroyed a Holocaust memo-
rial and called Jewish students “dirty Jew,” telling at least one 
to “go back to Russia,” and proposing to “slaughter the Jews.” 
OCR conceded that other allegations were timely filed, includ-
ing intimidation of Jewish students; defacement of an Israel 
flag on a student’s dormitory room door; and allegations of 
anti-Semitic activities at anti-Israel protests. OCR found that 
some of these statements were offensive to Jewish students but 
nevertheless dismissed them on the questionable grounds that 
they were based on the Jewish students’ political views rather 
than their ethnic identity.
While OCR was investigating Irvine I, ZOA provided inves-
tigators evidence of more recent incidents. OCR investigated 
these allegations in a separate case, Irvine II. Irvine II involved 
claims that Jewish students were targeted for adverse treatment, 

110	
Hate Crimes
or otherwise subjected to a hostile environment, based on their 
Jewish identity, in nine separate incidents of varying severity. 
For example, Jewish students argued that a campus event com-
paring Israel with apartheid South Africa worsened the campus’ 
anti-Jewish atmosphere. OCR countered that such matters are 
constitutionally protected free speech. A rabbi who attended the 
event was loudly taunted, “Don’t you have somebody’s money 
to steal?” OCR found this statement to be “offensive” but found 
that it was not, standing on its own, sufficiently serious to con-
stitute a legal violation. This finding was odd, since the allega-
tion was not “standing on its own.” Rather, it was included with 
a myriad of other troubling allegations not only in Irvine II but 
also in the Irvine I complaint from which it had been separated. 
On August 19, 2013, OCR dismissed this case as well.
In 2009, University of California at Santa Cruz (UCSC) 
lecturer Tammi Rossman-Benjamin complained to OCR that 
UCSC had created a hostile environment for Jewish students at 
university-sponsored public events featuring strongly anti-Israel 
rhetoric. OCR dismissed this case on August 19, 2013, find-
ing that the facts did not warrant finding a violation. OCR 
held that all of the events amounted to “expression on matters 
of public concern directed to the University community.” He 
added that “exposure to such rough and discordant expressions, 
even when personally offensive and hurtful, is a circumstance 
that a reasonable student in higher education may experience” 
(UC Berkeley News Center, 2013).
In March 2010, during the so-called Israel Apartheid Week, 
Jewish undergraduate student Jessica Felber stood in Sproul 
Plaza at the University of California at Berkeley holding a 
sign that read, “Israel wants peace.” In response, another stu-
dent allegedly rammed a shopping cart into Felber, causing 
her physical injuries that required medical attention. Activists 
conducting a mock checkpoint protest during the so-called 
Israel Apartheid Week blocked Brian Maissy, a disabled Jew-
ish student, from passage through the Berkeley campus. Felber 
and Maissy sued in federal court, arguing that Berkeley had 

	
Perspectives	
111
tolerated a hostile environment for Jewish students. The court 
partially dismissed Felber and Maissey’s complaint with leave 
to amend, holding that much of the protesters’ activity was 
protected under the First Amendment. The students later set-
tled their case with Berkeley. The students’ lawyers then filed a 
similar complaint before OCR, repeating their hostile environ-
ment allegations. OCR dismissed this case.
In the wake of these cases, it is fair to ask whether OCR 
remains committed to its 2004 Title VI policy. Meanwhile, 
incidents are frequently reported at other campuses, such 
as the recent assault on a Jewish student at Temple Univer-
sity and the taunting of University of Michigan students as 
“kike” and “dirty Jew.” These cases point to three problems. 
First, OCR needs further guidelines clarifying what constitutes 
anti-Semitism under its 2004 policy and what does not. Sec-
ond, OCR should better clarify the relationship between First 
Amendment freedom of speech protections and its antiharass-
ment regulations. Third, Congress should prohibit religious 
harassment at federally funded institutions, in order to close a 
glaring loophole that continues to exist in American civil rights 
law. Until these changes are made, Jewish students will face 
legal uncertainty amidst worsening campus climates.
References
UC Berkeley News Center. “Department of Education 
Dismisses Complaint Alleging Anti-Semitism at Berkeley,” 
August 27, 2013. Available at http://newscenter.berkeley.
edu/2013/08/27/doe-dismisses-anti-semitism-complaint/.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. “Findings and Recommen‑ 
dations of the United States Commission on Civil Rights  
Regarding Campus Anti-Semitism,” April 3, 2006. Avail­‑ 
able at http://www.usccr.gov/pubs/050306FRUSCCRR 
CAS.pdf.
Kenneth L. Marcus is president and general counsel of the Louis 
D. Brandeis Center for Human Rights Under Law and author of 

112	
Hate Crimes
Jewish Identity and Civil Rights in America (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press: 2010). Marcus founded the Brandeis 
Center in 2011 to combat the resurgence of anti-Semitism in 
American higher education.
Anti-Hispanic Immigrant Hate Crimes
Michele Stacey, Kristin Carbone-Lopez, and Richard Rosenfeld
Over the course of the past century immigration patterns in the 
United States have changed. Prior to the 1970s the majority of 
immigrants came from Western European countries; by 2007, 
80 percent of the foreign-born population in the United States 
originated in Latin American and Asian countries (Grieco, 
2009). Along with these changing immigration patterns, there 
has been an increased concern both in public and political 
spheres over U.S. immigration policy, and a number of recent 
changes to those policies have been enacted (for example, SB 
1070 in Arizona in 2010). Many of these policies are born 
out of and act to perpetuate an immigrant-as-threat narrative 
(Ibrahim, 2005), which portrays immigrants as threatening 
national security, economic security, and cultural security. To 
what extent these concerns have filtered down to the individual 
level remains uncertain. It is possible that the anti-immigrant 
sentiment that follows increased immigration may contribute 
to increased intolerance and subsequent violence against immi-
grant groups, including in the form of hate crime.
In this paper we examine the question of whether recent 
population changes in immigration patterns are associated 
with hate crimes against Hispanics. Specifically, we ask: To 
what extent is anti-Hispanic hate crime related to patterns of 
Hispanic immigration to the United States? While research on 
hate crimes has been increasing over the past decade, most stud-
ies focus on hate crimes against racial and sexual minorities. 
Less attention is paid to the role of ethnicity, specifically with 
regard to Hispanics, many of whom are immigrants. Immi-
grants, however, are not a protected category in hate crimes, 

	
Perspectives	
113
and as such crimes against them are not considered “hate 
crimes.” Therefore, we focus on bias crimes against Hispanics, 
who are often assumed to be immigrants, and hypothesize that 
Hispanics may be targeted in response to fear over changing 
patterns of immigration.
Blalock (1967) proposed a thesis on minority threat, which 
argues that minority groups pose a threat to the majority group 
when resources are limited. As the minority population grows 
in numbers, they compete with the majority for scarce eco-
nomic and political capital. Group conflict increases as a result, 
and the majority group will seek to discriminate against the 
minority in both formal and informal ways. Research exam-
ining minority group threat has found evidence of these pro-
cesses in studies of formal social control (Eitle, D’Alessio, and 
Stolzenberg, 2002), and recently research on hate crime (a 
form of informal social control) has shown evidence of similar 
processes (King, Messner, & Baller, 2009; Perry, 2001). Most 
of this research has focused on racially motivated hate crime, 
however, and where ethnic hate crime is considered, prior 
research does not address the role that immigration patterns 
and anti-immigrant sentiment may play.
To address this limitation in prior research, we use data from 
the Uniform Crime Reports (2000–2004), Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS), and the Census to examine His-
panic hate crimes. We hypothesize that an increase in Hispanic 
immigration will result in an increase in anti-Hispanic hate 
crime. We also expect, consistent with the traditional minority 
threat theory, that the relative size of the Hispanic population in 
the state will be positively related to anti-Hispanic hate crime. 
The threat framework also suggests that there may be a non-
linear effect of minority group size on social control, such that 
when the minority group grows large enough to exert political 
power, it may be able to limit the majority group’s social con-
trol efforts. The minority threat framework also predicts that 
economic competition will result in increased social control 
from the majority group. To test this hypothesis we examine 

114	
Hate Crimes
the effect of the ratio of white-to-Hispanic unemployment on 
anti-Hispanic hate crime, as well as the effect of general eco-
nomic conditions on hate crime.
The results of the study reveal a positive relationship between 
state-level variation in anti-Hispanic hate crime and recent His-
panic immigration, consistent with our expectations and the 
minority threat framework. The relative size of the Hispanic 
population is negatively related to anti-Hispanic hate crime, 
however, suggesting that where Hispanics are more numerous, 
hate crimes against them are less frequent. Taken together, these 
results suggest that anti-Hispanic hate crime is a consequence 
of Hispanic immigration, and arguably the fear and anger it 
produces in segments of the majority population, rather than 
the relative size or economic position of the Hispanic minority, 
which if anything may serve as protective factors.
Our analysis is limited to the relationship between hate 
crime and legal immigration, despite the fact that the primary 
concerns of policymakers and public sentiment focus on the 
control of undocumented immigrants. The validity of our 
analysis rests heavily on two assumptions about the connection 
between legal and illegal immigration. The first is that the set-
tlement patterns of both legal and illegal immigrants are largely 
the same. The second is that, as a practical matter, potential hate 
crime offenders are unable to distinguish readily between legal 
and illegal immigrants or, for that matter, between immigrants 
and the longstanding residents who resemble them. Although 
we believe both assumptions appear reasonable, more research 
is needed to validate them. The current estimates of illegal 
immigration are imperfect and vary considerably depending 
on the source (Bialik, 2010).
Likewise, while the measurement of hate crime has improved 
since the FBI first started collecting data, many agencies con-
sistently fail to report any hate crime in their jurisdiction. 
Research shows that many police officers do not take victim 
reports of hate crime seriously or do not understand how to 
identify a hate crime (McDevitt, Balboni, Bennett, et al., 2003; 

	
Perspectives	
115
Nolan & Akiyama, 2003). The abundance of zeroes in the hate 
crime data indicates a need to improve hate crime reporting by 
both victims and law enforcement. Immigrant victims may be 
especially likely to forgo reporting an incident because they fear 
deportation. Although Congress has attempted to encourage 
and facilitate reporting of particular crimes by undocumented 
immigrants by creating special visa categories (the S, T, and 
U visas), it is unclear whether these alleviate the underreport-
ing problem (Kittrie, 2006). There are limits on the number 
of such visas that can be extended, and only victims of cer-
tain crimes are eligible. An alternative approach may be the 
implementation of “sanctuary policies” with law enforcement 
agencies to ensure undocumented immigrant crime victims are 
not reported to federal immigration authorities (Kittrie, 2006). 
Additionally, specialized training of police officers is needed 
regarding hate-crime identification. Formal policies on how to 
handle hate crime within police agencies could also improve 
the accuracy and integrity of hate crime statistics. In addition, 
greater attention to crimes experienced by immigrants that go 
unreported to police is needed to assess victimization risk more 
accurately and strengthen policies to reduce the risk of hate 
crime.
References
Adapted from: Stacey, M., Carbone-Lopez, K., & Rosenfeld, 
R. 2011. “Demographic Change and Ethnically Motivated 
Crime: The Impact of Immigration on Anti-Hispanic 
Hate Crime in the United States.” Journal of Contemporary 
Criminal Justice, 27: 278–398.
Bialik, C. 2010. “The Pitfalls of Counting Illegal 
Immigrants.” Wall Street Journal, May 7. http://blogs.wsj 
.com/numbersguy/the-pitfalls-of-counting-illegal- 
immigrants-937/.
Blalock, H. M. 1967. Toward a Theory of Minority-group 
Relations. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

116	
Hate Crimes
Eitle, D., D’Alessio, S. J., and Stolzenberg, L. 2002. 
“Racial Threat and Social Control: A Test of the Political, 
Economic, and Threat of Black Crime Hypotheses.” Social 
Forces, 81: 557–576.
Grieco, E. M. 2009. Race and Hispanic Origin of the 
Foreign-Born Population in the United States: 2007, 
American Community Survey Reports, ACS-11. U.S. 
Census Bureau, Washington, DC.
Ibrahim, M. 2005. “The Securitization of Migration: A Racial 
Discourse.” International Migration, 43: 163–187.
King, R. D., Messner, S. F., and Baller, R. D. 2009. 
“Contemporary Hate Crimes, Law Enforcement, and the 
Legacy of Racial Violence.” American Sociological Review, 
74: 291–315.
Kittrie, O.F. 2006. “Federalism, Deportation, and Crime 
Victims Afraid to Call the Police.” Iowa Law Review, 91: 
1449–1508.
McDevitt, J., Balboni, J. M., Bennett, S., Weiss, J. C., 
Orchowsky, S., and Walbolt, L. 2003. “Improving the 
Quality and Accuracy of Bias Crime Statistics Nationally: 
An Assessment of the First Ten Years of Bias Crime Data 
Collection.” In B. Perry (Ed.), Hate and Bias Crime: 
A Reader. New York: Routledge.
Nolan, J. J. and Akiyama, Y. 2003. “Assessing the Factors that 
Affect Law Enforcement Participation, in Hate Crime 
Reporting.” In P.B. Gerstenfeld and Diana Grant (Eds.), Crimes 
of Hate: Selected Readings (reprint). New York: Sage Publications.
Perry, B. 2001. In the Name of Hate: Understanding Hate 
Crimes. New York: Routledge.
Stacey, M., Carbone-Lopez, K., & Rosenfeld, R. 2011. 
“Demographic Change and Ethnically Motivated Crime: 
The Impact of Immigration on Anti-Hispanic Hate Crime 
in the United States.” Journal of Contemporary Criminal 
Justice, 27: 278–398.

	
Perspectives	
117
Michele Stacey is assistant professor of Criminal Justice at East 
Carolina University. Her current research focuses on the social con-
trol of minority groups, both formally and informally, with a par-
ticular interest in hate crimes.
Kristin Carbone-Lopez is associate professor in the Depart-
ment of Criminology and Criminal Justice at the University of 
Missouri—St. Louis. Her research focuses on gender and the con-
nections between crime and victimization across the life course 
with a particular emphasis on violence against women.
Richard Rosenfeld is Founder Professor of Criminology and 
Criminal Justice at the University of Missouri—St.  Louis. His 
current research encompasses the economic correlates of crime 
trends and policing effects on crime. He is a fellow and past presi-
dent of the American Society of Criminology and currently serves 
on the Science Advisory Board of the Office of Justice Programs, 
U.S. Department of Justice.
Hate Crimes against Sikh Americans
Simran Jeet Singh
Their distinct religious identity, including turbans and beards, 
has marked Sikhs as “other” since their arrival in North Amer-
ica in the late 1800s. In the first major incident of anti-Sikh 
violence in America—the Bellingham Riots of 1907—violent 
mobs targeted and physically assaulted hundreds of Sikh civil-
ians on the streets of Bellingham, Washington.
Early Sikh settlers contributed to American society through 
various means, such as farming, building railroads, and serving 
in the military. Bhagat Singh Thind served with the U.S. Army 
during World War I, and he famously fought for the right of 
non-Caucasians to receive U.S. citizenship. The 1923 Supreme 
Court decision in United States vs. Bhagat Singh Thind ruled 
in favor of the United States and specifically denied the right 
of South Asians to become U.S. citizens. After more than a 
decade, Thind applied for U.S. citizenship through the state of 
New York and finally received it in 1936.

118	
Hate Crimes
As the 20th century progressed, Sikhs have been increasingly 
subsumed into a new de facto racial category—the apparent 
Muslim. This category includes all those with physical features 
similar to those associated with terrorism (e.g., brown skin, 
facial hair, turbans). The distinctive visible identity of Sikh 
Americans, coupled with the practice of associating this iden-
tity with terrorism, has led to a disproportionate amount of 
hate crimes targeting Sikh Americans.
After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, xenopho-
bia and hate crimes against the “apparent Muslim” surged dra-
matically. The violent backlash that swept around the country 
primarily targeted those who resembled the perpetrators. Four 
days after the attacks, a Sikh American became the first casualty 
of a hate crime in post-9/11 America. Balbir Singh Sodhi was 
gardening outside his gas station in Mesa, Arizona when Frank 
Roque drove up and shot him. According to doctors, Sodhi 
was dead within seconds.
Witnesses reported hearing Roque express hate speech prior 
to the murder, including his desire to “shoot some rag heads,” 
“slit some Iranian throats,” and “kill Middle Eastern People.” 
Roque’s words and actions evidence a sense of racialized reli-
gious identity that conflate the distinctive religious articles of 
Sikhism with features that have commonly been associated 
with terrorism.
Roque’s hateful murder of Sodhi is representative of the Sikh 
experience in post-9/11 America. The Sikh Coalition has doc-
umented more than 700 bias-related instances against Sikhs 
since September  11, 2001, and its studies have shown that 
more than 60 percent of Sikh children are bullied in school. 
Sikhs also continue to endure discriminatory policies enacted 
by the U.S. government, such as racial profiling and workplace 
discrimination. These policies perpetuate negative stereotypes 
and implicitly condone treating Sikh Americans as second-class 
citizens.
On August 5, 2012, white supremacist Wade Michael Page 
wreaked havoc on a gurdwara (Sikh place of worship) in Oak 

	
Perspectives	
119
Creek, Wisconsin, carrying out the largest hate crime at a place 
of worship in recent American history. Page opened fire on the 
congregation, killing six and wounding four others, before tak-
ing his own life. Page was a member of the Hammerskins, one 
of the largest and most violent groups in the United States. 
U.S. attorney general Eric Holder characterized this attack as 
domestic terrorism, and First Lady Michelle Obama marked 
the significance of this moment in American history by visit-
ing the Sikh community in Wisconsin. The Oak Creek Massa-
cre also led the FBI to begin tracking hate crimes against Sikh 
Americans as well as other minority communities in 2013.
The media has typically described hate crimes against Sikh 
Americans as instances of “mistaken identity,” a moniker that 
was also widely applied to the Oak Creek Massacre. However, 
scholars have rejected the framework of mistaken identity for a 
number of reasons. First, the descriptor “mistaken” implies that 
there is a correct identity that should have been targeted (i.e., 
Muslim). This framework also takes away from the agency of 
the perpetrator by characterizing their actions as unintentional. 
Perhaps most significantly, it wrongly assumes that every attack 
against a Sikh American was actually intended for a Muslim 
American. This naïve outlook ignores the deep history of xeno-
phobia in the United States and overlooks the fact that some-
times Sikhs are attacked precisely because of who they are. The 
broad application of the “mistaken identity” framework has led 
to a general misdiagnosis of the problem, and therefore the 
resolution still remains at large.
The question of intention continues to loom over the Oak 
Creek Massacre. Page did not reveal what motivated his attack, 
and the media framed his motivation as a case of “mistaken 
identity” (i.e., that he actually intended to harm Muslims). 
However, a quick perusal of neo-Nazi discussion boards that 
Page was known to frequent complicates this assumption. 
Users regularly direct xenophobic hate speech toward Sikh 
Americans while clearly demonstrating knowledge that Sikh-
ism is an independent religion.

120	
Hate Crimes
The Sikh experience in modern America is closely tied to 
the experiences of all those who fall within the racial category 
of the “apparently Muslim.” Yet hate violence against Sikh 
Americans does not only come in this form. Sikhs have long 
been targets of xenophobia—both in the homeland and in the 
diaspora—and if history holds true, their distinctive identity 
and commitment to standing up for justice will make them 
targets of xenophobia in the years to come.
Simran Jeet Singh is an assistant professor in the Department 
of Religion at Trinity University and the senior religion fellow for 
the Sikh Coalition. He earned his PhD from the Department of 
Religion at Columbia University, a master’s degree from Harvard 
University, and his bachelor of arts from Trinity University. Sim-
ran currently serves as a Truman National Security Fellow and 
speaks and writes frequently on a wide range of issues relating to 
religion and culture.
Hate Crimes and the LGBT Community
Michael Bronski
Many members of the LGBT community, and most of its 
national and local state advocacy groups, fervently believe that 
hate crime legalization is good for LGBT people. They believe 
that it deters crime, and that hate crime laws make LGBT 
people are safer. They are not alone. Progressive groups such 
as The National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People (NAACP) and the Jewish Anti-Defamation League 
(ADL) agree. The correctness of this position seems confirmed 
when you consider that conservative, often overtly homopho-
bic organizations, such as Focus on the Family and Concerned 
Women of America, are vehemently against hate crime legis-
lation that they fear may impede conservative religious people 
from voicing beliefs and upholding what they understand to be 
“traditional values.”
But political disagreements are not rational conclusions and 
basic questions remain: Do hate crime laws work? Do they 

	
Perspectives	
121
deter violence? Do they make LGBT people safer? And, most 
important, are they just and fair?
The LGBT community’s or liberals’ support for hate crime 
laws is not universal. Progressive LGBT groups, such as Queers 
for Economic Justice and the Sylvia Rivera Law Project, do 
not support them for two primary reasons. The first is that 
these laws are disproportionately used against poor people 
and people of color. The second is that they address bias crime 
by putting people in prison for longer periods of time. This 
often produces more hardened criminals. The American Civil 
Liberties Union (ACLU) has long objected to many (not all) 
hate-crime laws because they are predicated on punishing not 
only action—such as assault—but also constitutionally pro-
tected speech. They argue that hate-crime laws criminalize 
thoughts, and that it is not a crime to think or articulate hurt-
ful statements about people. Hurting someone’s feelings may 
be offensive, even emotionally painful; it should not be a crime.
Many religious and conservative groups argue against hate 
crime laws—particularly the inclusion of LGBT people as a 
protected class—fearing that they will criminalize the articu-
lation of deeply held moral or religious beliefs. Mike Pence, 
governor of Indiana, lobbied against the Matthew Shepard and 
James Byrd Jr. Hate Crime Prevention Act legislation when he 
was a Congressman stating:
The issue of hate crimes legislation that continues to be 
advanced on Capitol Hill is part of a larger effort that we 
already see working in state statutes. And however well 
intentioned, hate crimes statutes around the country 
have been used to quell religious expression. Individual 
pastors who may wish to preach out of Romans Chap-
ter  1 about what the bible teaches about homosexual 
behavior, but they could be charged or subject to intimi-
dation for simply expressing a biblical moral view on the 
issue of homosexual behavior. (Bronski, Pellegrini, and 
Amico, 2013)

122	
Hate Crimes
Pence’s misstates how hate-crime legislation works. His argu-
ment is a scare tactic aimed at demonizing LGBT activists as 
dictators who punish people who for not agreeing with them. 
In reality, these religious organizations are simply upset that 
any protections are being put in place for minority groups. Pro-
ponents of hate crime laws make two primary arguments. The 
first is that enhanced penalties deter attacks on minorities. The 
second is that they are just in dealing with criminal activity. 
Both are, on the face of it, appealing arguments.
Do hate crime laws deter crime? Hundreds and hundreds of 
studies have argued that the death penalty deters murder—all 
of them have been debunked for statistical and methodological 
reasons. Far fewer studies have been done on hate crime laws 
as a deterrent; none have demonstrated this is the case. They 
certainly don’t change hateful opinions.
Hate crime law proponents often argue that we don’t need 
scientific proof, only common sense. They argue that laws 
shape public attitudes, and hence behavior.” Laws do shape 
attitudes, but we don’t write laws to shape attitudes; we write 
them to justly and fairly punish behaviors. People who commit 
crimes and are caught almost always get punished. Getting rid 
of hate crime laws would not let convicted criminals go free.
Most groups who oppose hate crime legislation don’t have 
a problem with the official recording of crime statistics that 
give a snapshot of social attitudes. They do, however, oppose 
the enhanced penalty provisions. Prisons are not the place to 
change social attitudes; it is in schools, around the dinner table, 
at houses of worship, and places where people can talk, and 
learn that disagreement may be a productive means of growth.
There is no evidence that hate crime laws deter crime, and 
people who commit these crimes—which may range from 
intimidation to vandalism—are, if caught, given harsh pun-
ishments under existing law. Why do LGBT people, and oth-
ers, feel so deeply that we need them? The Matthew Shepard 
case provides some insight. In 1998 21-year-old college stu-
dent Matthew Shepard was found brutally beaten in a desolate 

	
Perspectives	
123
field in Laramie, Wyoming. He died six days later. Russell 
Henderson and Aaron McKinney, both 21, were arrested, 
confessed, and were convicted—but not under a hate crime 
law since Wyoming did not have one—in two separate trials. 
They are each serving two consecutive life terms in Wyoming 
State Penitentiary. In 2009, federal legislation titled the Mat-
thew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act 
was passed—after a decade of obstruction by a Republican 
Congress—and signed into law by Barack Obama. The leg-
islation expanded the 1969 federal hate crime law to include 
religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, and disability.
Was Shepard’s murder a hate crime? Was he killed simply 
for being gay? Or was it a robbery gone horribly wrong with 
no clearly articulated animus? No one knows for sure, but his 
murder is a case study in how multiple causes can affect peo-
ple’s actions. In “A Boys Life: For Matthew Shepard’s Killers 
What Does It Take to Be a Man?” journalist JoAnn Wypijew-
ski persuasively argues Matthew Shepard’s murder perhaps 
had more to do with poverty, economic conditions, a deadly 
methamphetamine drug culture, and American ideas about 
masculinity than antigay bias. We will never know for certain 
if Matthew Shepard was murdered because he was gay. But we 
do know that his killers are serving two consecutive life sen-
tences without possibility of parole without a “hate crime” law 
(Jiminez, 2013).
The public outcry over the Matthew Shepard case, which 
led to the demand to include LGBT people as protected cate-
gories in existing hate crime laws, was based on emotion, not 
logic. There is no evidence that hate crime laws prevent crimes, 
but they do make people feel safe, and that the legal system 
cares about them. But it is vital to realize that “feeling safe” and 
“being safe” are very different.
There is another, very understandable, reason why people 
support hate-crime laws. That is the very basic human emotion 
of vengeance. LGBT people are well aware of the injustices 

124	
Hate Crimes
committed against them. They are acutely aware of the long 
history of these injustices. The impulse to vengeance is com-
pletely understandable. But the law exists precisely to make 
sure that justice and fairness take the place of vengeance. Just 
as basing laws on “feeling safe” makes bad legal policy, laws that 
do not promote justice and fairness have no place in our legal 
codes.
Violent actions are already punishable under the law. Does 
more punishment equal more justice? Where do we draw that 
line? And whose hateful behavior rises to the threshold of a hate 
crime? Whose is cast as a private affair? In America hate crime 
laws are enforced very selectively. Do parents of LGBT youth 
who intimidate and physically abuse their children because 
they are queer get charged with hate crimes? How often are 
police convicted of hate crimes when they routinely intimidate 
or physically abuse LGBT people or people of color? Unless 
laws can be written and enforced equally and with complete 
fairness, they are not just.
If hate crime laws are not an answer to discriminatory vio-
lence, what is? Kay Whitlock, in “Reconsidering Hate: Pol-
icy and Politics at the Intersection,” argues that the simplistic 
framework of “hate” to describe and punish violence is inade-
quate to address the deeper cultural divisions that are the root 
of the problem. Arresting people and placing them, for long 
periods of time, in prisons that make no attempt at rehabilita-
tion and place many of them in the way of more violence, are 
part of the problem: not a solution (Wypijewski, 1999).
Whitlock (2001, 2012) suggests that as a country and a polit-
ical system we can move beyond a culture of violence is to work 
from the bottom-up, not the top-down. We need to address 
violence and hatred on the most basic interpersonal levels and 
at the level of small communities. Working within communi-
ties, schools, and neighborhoods to examine the racial, eco-
nomic, and psychological reasons that are often underpinning 
these crimes will move us beyond the simple rhetoric of an 
ambiguously defined “hate.” Hate-crime laws do none of this. 
Nor do they prevent violence against LGBT people.

	
Perspectives	
125
References
Bronski, Michael, Pellegrini, Ann, and Amico, Michael. 2013. 
“Hate Crimes Laws Don’t Prevent Violence Against LGBT 
People,” The Nation, October 2. Available at http://www.
thenation.com/article/176437/hate-crime-laws-dont- 
prevent-violence-against-lgbt-people#
Jimenez, Stephen. 2013. The Book of Matt: Hidden Truths 
about the Murder of Matthew Shepard. Hanover, NH: 
Steerforth Press.
Whitlock, Katherine. 2001. In a Time of Broken Bones: A Call 
to Dialogue on Hate Violence and the Limitations of Hate 
Crimes Legislation. Philadelphia, PA: American Friends 
Service Committee.
Whitlock, Kay. 2012. “Reconsidering Hate: Policy and 
Politics at the Intersection.” Cambridge, MA: A Political 
Research Associates Discussion Paper.
Wypijewski, JoAnn. 1999. “A Boy’s Life: For Matthew 
Shepard’s Killers, What Does It Take to Pass as a Man,” 
Harpers, September.
Michael Bronski is professor of the Practice in Activism and 
Media in the Studies of Women, Gender and Sexuality at Harvard 
University. He is the author of several books, including A Queer 
History of the United States, and most recently coauthored “You 
Can Tell Just by Looking”: And 20 Other Myths about LGBT 
Life and People.
Hate Crime Hoaxes on College and University 
Campuses
Ashley Thorne
Two labels said “whites only,” and two said “colored.”
Created with a label-maker, they were found the morning of 
August 28, 2014, on doors and the water cooler on the fourth 
floor of a first-year residence hall at all-female Sweet Briar Col-
lege in Virginia. It was the first day of class.

126	
Hate Crimes
The night before, new student orientation had included a 
performance of a play on Sweet Briar’s history of slavery from 
when it was a plantation in the 19th century. Sweet Briar pres-
ident James F. Jones wrote to the campus community on the 
afternoon of the day the labels were found, calling the act an 
“assault on human dignity” and saying that either “We have 
among us someone who is essentially bigoted and mean-spirited 
who would recall the Jim Crow days of separation,” or, “Some-
one, moved by the play, sought to use the old, abusive words 
to remind us that while such terms were part of the historical 
past, some of the emotions lurking behind the words might 
still linger in a few” (Sweet Briar College, August 29, 2014).
The latter turned out to be the case; a few days later, the 
student who was responsible for the labels confessed to the 
administration and apologized anonymously to the college 
community. President Jones announced, “I can tell you that 
she is African-American and that I believe her apology was sin-
cere” (Sweet Briar College, September 3, 2014).
The student wrote that she had placed the labels because she 
“was trying to make a point” that “While moving forward, we 
can never really shake the past” (Sweet Briar College, Septem-
ber 2, 2014).
The next day an unidentified man—who apparently was 
unaware of the student’s confession—called the college 
demanding, “who is the white girl that did this?” and threatened 
to come to Sweet Briar to exact “justice.” The campus went on 
lockdown; sirens blared; police investigated; students huddled 
in their rooms behind bolted doors (WSET-TV, 2014).
This episode at Sweet Briar is one of numerous similar stories 
in which American college campuses have been thrown into 
panic over hate crimes that turned out to be hoaxes. The hatred 
isn’t real in these cases, but the resulting fear and disruption is.
Sadly, real bias-motivated insults and slurs, as well as physi-
cal harassment and violence, also happen on campus, though it 
remains unclear how often (Jaschik, 2013). At the same time, 
false hate is on the rise.

	
Perspectives	
127
Examples are plentiful. In the last 25 years, nearly 200 hoax 
hate crimes have been documented (Fake Hate Crimes, 2015), 
more than 30 of which were perpetrated by college students or 
teachers (Wilcox, 1994; Freddoso, 2013; Grasgreen, 2012; Tra-
vis, 2015; MacDonald, 2013). (In addition to these, numerous 
incidents where culprits were never found leave open the possi-
bility of hoaxes (Chan, 2008).) Here are a few:
In the fall of 2013, two Vassar College students, including 
transgendered student Genesis Hernandez, the sole member 
of the Bias Incident Response Team, scrawled a series of rac-
ist and anti-transgender messages in graffiti in residence halls, 
and then filed reports (Soave, 2013). In April 2013, Univer-
sity of Wyoming student Meghan Lanker-Simons received 
an anonymous Facebook rape threat against her because she 
“runs her liberal mouth all the time,” but police determined 
that Lanker-Simons wrote the message herself and then lied 
about it (Owens, 2013). In spring 2013, Oberlin College stu-
dents Dylan Bleier and Matt Alden, who considered them-
selves “white allies against racism,” drew swastikas and wrote 
“No N*****s,” “Whites Only,” and “N*****faggot” on walls 
and posters around campus. They were caught in the act and 
admitted that they had written the slurs as “a joke to see the 
college overreact to it as they have with the other racial postings 
that have been posted on campus” (Ross, 2013). In 2012, Cen-
tral Connecticut State University student Alexandra Pennell 
received hate letters for being a lesbian. Authorities investigated 
the case and caught her on camera slipping new notes under 
her own door (Owens and Munoz, 2012). In April 2011, Uni-
versity of North Carolina-Chapel Hill student Quinn Matney 
filed a police report saying he was branded with hot metal for 
being gay; officials found he had made up the story (“Quinn 
Matney . . . ,” 2011). Later that month, third-year UVA law 
student Johnathan Perkins, who is part African American, 
wrote a 900-word letter to the editor of the law school’s student 
newspaper claiming to have been racially profiled and harassed 
by the university police. None of his story was true (Lat, 2011). 

128	
Hate Crimes
In December  2007, a conservative Princeton student, Fran-
cisco Nava, said he had received hate e-mails with death threats 
and had been assaulted by cloaked attackers after he published 
a controversial article in the Princetonian warning against the 
campus hookup culture. Three days later Nava confessed to 
police that he had sent the e-mails himself, and that his injuries 
were self-inflicted (“Princeton Attack . . ., ” 2007).
Thankfully these were not real instances of targeted hate. But 
what can we make of this troubling trend? How did students 
at campuses all over the country, both liberal and conservative, 
get into their heads that faking hate crimes was a good idea? 
One answer is that their colleges are teaching them to do it. 
Students are constantly told that bias is everywhere. This doc-
trine needs examples to keep it alive; if there are no examples, 
then they have to be invented. Hoax hate crimes are the answer. 
They enable students to substantiate what they’ve been taught.
Faculty have also internalized this idea—the most notorious 
hoax crime by a faculty member was in 2004, when Clare-
mont McKenna visiting professor of psychology Kerri Dunn 
vandalized her own car, announced she’d been the victim of 
a hate crime, lied to federal investigators, and tried to collect 
insurance money (Harden, 2010).
Colleges, for their part, employ a feint of their own. In many 
cases, before all the details are known in an apparent bias inci-
dent, the college enacts a full-on response, usually involving a 
day of diversity rallies and canceled classes (e.g., Oberlin Col-
lege canceled classes and held a “Day of Solidarity”; see Office 
of Communications, 2013). Hate crimes provide instances of 
both the victimized and the victimizers in their purest forms, 
and so while colleges affect sorrow when they hear of a hate 
crime, they in fact leap at the chance to show that bias exists. 
Their large-scale reactions to reported bias incidents, in turn, 
incentivize more hoaxes.
And though some institutions punish hoax-perpetrators 
(Sweet Briar, for instance, expelled the responsible student), 

	
Perspectives	
129
others let culprits off the hook and allow the idea to remain 
that the campus is infected with hatred. UVA’s law school 
allowed Johnathan Perkins to receive his degree, and he went 
on to become an attorney representing universities and corpo-
rations (Lat, 2012).
Ultimately those who perpetuate hoaxes are hurting both 
themselves and the larger community. As individuals, they 
show that they lack the work ethic and character to face obsta-
cles in their lives, and that they have to play the victim to get 
ahead. As members of society, they are taking themselves out 
of the game—they are resolved not to be responsible adults 
accountable for their actions.
All Americans should strive toward good citizenship and 
against public displays of ill will against others. Name-calling, 
ad hominem attacks, and threats of violence weaken a com-
munity. Ceasing such attacks begins with individuals prac-
ticing temperance and generosity of mind toward people 
around them.
Frequent hoaxes tend to cause people to assume on first 
hearing that a reported bias incident is a fraud. For example, 
Michelle Malkin, who has documented decades of hoax hate 
crimes, said that as soon as she heard about the racist graffiti 
at Oberlin, “the fake hate crime alarm bells went off” (Malkin, 
2013). But crying wolf erodes the credibility of real wrongdo-
ing. We will be better equipped to respond to true instances of 
hate crimes when false ones fall away.
Finally, hoax crime culprits often say they were motivated by 
a desire to “raise awareness” of the presence of prejudice. They 
seek to establish that hate is still with us. “The race problem in 
America persists,” wrote Perkins. “We can never really shake 
the past,” wrote the Sweet Briar label-maker. But what we really 
need to be aware of is plain reality. Awareness of something 
perpetuated by a lie is worthless. We can shake the past. The 
way to move forward is to live in the real world today and live 
by the truth.

130	
Hate Crimes
References
Chan, Sewell. “Professor in Noose Case Is Cited for 
Plagiarism,” New York Times City Room, February 20,  
2008. http://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/02/20/ 
victim-of-noose-crime-is-cited-for-plagiarism/?_php= 
true&_type=blogs&_r=0
Fake Hate Crimes: A Database of Hate Crime Hoaxes in the 
USA. http://www.fakehatecrimes.org/.
Freddoso, David. “A Recent History of Hate-Crime Hoaxes,” 
August 23, 2013. Conservative Intelligence Briefing. http://
www.conservativeintel.com/2013/08/23/a-recent- 
history-of-hate-crime-hoaxes/
Grasgreen, Allie. “Hate Crime Hoaxes,” Inside Higher 
Ed, July 31, 2012. https://www.insidehighered.com/
news/2012/07/31/hate-crime-hoaxes-present-burdens
-lessons-college-campuses
Harden, Nathan. “The Godmother of Fake Hate 
Crimes,” National Review, March 15, 2010. http://
www.nationalreview.com/phi-beta-cons/39720/
godmother-fake-hate-crimes
Lat, David. “A Law Student Plays the Race Card—and Gets 
Busted, Big Time,” Above the Law, May 7, 2011. http://
abovethelaw.com/2011/05/a-law-student-plays-the-race- 
card-and-gets-busted-big-time/
Lat, David. “An Update on Johnathan Perkins: Did He 
Get His Law Degree?” Above the Law, January 10, 2012. 
http://abovethelaw.com/2012/01/an-update-on-johnatha
n-perkins-did-he-get-his-law-degree/
MacDonald, Steve. “A Collection of Recent Hate-Crime 
Hoaxes,” Granite Grok, August 26, 2013. http://
granitegrok.com/blog/2013/08/a-collectio
n-of-recent-hate-crime-hoaxes
Malkin, Michelle. “Oberlin College: Still Manufacturing Hate 
Crimes Hoaxes after All These Years,” Michelle Malkin, 

	
Perspectives	
131
March 5, 2013. http://michellemalkin.com/2013/03/05/
oberlin-college-still-manufacturing-hate- 
crimes-hoaxes-after-all-these-years/
Office of Communications. “Classes Canceled: Monday, 
March 14, 2013,” Oberlin OnCampus, March 4, 2013, 
https://oncampus.oberlin.edu/source/articles/2013/03/04/
classes-canceled-monday-march-4–2013.
Owens, David, and Muñoz, Hilda. “CCSU Police Say 
Student Faked Anti-Gay Notes,” Hartford Courant, July 2, 
 2012. http://articles.courant.com/2012–07–02/news/ 
hc-new-britain-ccsu-bias-made-it-up-0703–20120702_ 
1_ccsu-police-anti-hate-rally-notes
Owens, Eric. “Police Say 28-Year-Old Undergrad Threatened 
Herself with Rape in Facebook Hoax,” The Daily Caller, 
May 1, 2013. http://dailycaller.com/2013/05/01/
police-say-28-year-old-undergrad-threatened-hers
elf-with-rape-in-facebook-hoax/#disqus_thread
“Princeton Attack Was Hoax,” Newsmax. December 18, 2007. 
http://www.newsmax.com/InsideCover/Princeton-Attac
k-Was-Hoax/2007/12/18/id/322449/
“Quinn Matney, UNC Student, Allegedly Faked Hate Crime 
Report,” Huffington Post, June 12, 2011. http://www.huff 
ingtonpost.com/2011/04/12/quinn-matney-unc-student-_ 
n_848372.html
Ross, Chuck. “Meet the Privileged Obama-Supporting White 
Kids Who Perpetrated Cruel Oberlin Race Hoax,” The 
Daily Caller, August 22, 2013. http://dailycaller 
.com/2013/08/22/meet-the-privileged-obama-suppo
rting-white-kids-who-perpetrated-cruel-oberlin-race-hoax/
Soave, Robby. “EXCLUSIVE: Shocking Discovery in 
Hoax Bias Incident at Vassar College,” The Daily Caller, 
November 27, 2013. http://dailycaller.com/2013/11/27/
exclusive-shocking-discovery-in-hoax-bias-incident- 
at-vassar-college/

132	
Hate Crimes
Sweet Briar College. “Important Message from President 
Jones,” August 29, 2014. http://sbc.edu/news/
uncategorized/important-message-president-jones/
Sweet Briar College. “Important Update from President 
Jones,” September 3, 2014. http://sbc.edu/news/
uncategorized/important-update-president-jones-2/
Sweet Briar College. “Important Update from President 
Jones,” September 2, 2014. http://sbc.edu/news/
uncategorized/important-update-president-jones/
Travis, J.P. Bogus Hate Crimes. http://www.bogushatecrimes 
.com/ByDate.php.
Wilcox, Laird. Crying Wolf: Hate Crime Hoaxes in America, 
1994. http://www.fakehatecrimes.org/Crying-Wolf-by- 
Laird-Wilcox.pdf
WSET-TV. “Update: Student Who Put Up Labels at Sweet 
Briar Leaves School,” September 8, 2014. http://www.wset 
.com/story/26437771/update-threat-to-sweet-briar-coll
ege-in-reaction-to-racial-incident
Ashley Thorne is the executive director of the National Associa-
tion of Scholars.

This page intentionally left blank


135
4	
Profiles
People
Much information on hate crimes and violent extremist groups 
comes from the research and publications of human rights activists 
and organizations, college and university professors, investigative 
journalists and authors. Because their work often involves expos-
ing the activities of violent individuals and organizations, some of 
these human rights activists prefer to remain out of the public eye. 
Their legitimate concerns have been respected, and they have not 
been included in this chapter. The following are brief biographies 
of some notable experts on hate crimes, racial and religious bigotry, 
and political extremists.
Zainab Al-Suwaij (1971–) 
Zainab Al-Suwaij is the executive director of the American 
Islamic Congress (AIC). This organization represents the diverse 
political and cultural interests of Muslim Americans and aims 
to combat both hate crimes committed against Muslims and 
those crimes perpetrated by their coreligionists. Born in Basra, 
Iraq, Al-Suwaij comes from a religious Muslim family. She was 
on a visit to Kuwait in 1990 when Iraq invaded that country. 
In 1991 she returned to Iraq, participated in the failed uprising 
against Saddam Hussein’s regime, and fled to Jordan. According 
Jim Mohr, a Washington state college official, is on the board of the Gon-
zaga University Institute for Hate Studies in Spokane, a unique center ded-
icated to the academic study of hate. (AP Photo/Rajah Bose)

136	
Hate Crimes
to a Boston Globe story on April 7, 2003, she bears a thin scar 
from an Iraqi army attack during the rebellion. After the first 
Gulf War, she fled to the United States to complete her studies. 
She has worked as a refugee case manager and a teaching fellow 
in Arabic at Yale. On April 4, 2003, Al-Suwaij and other promi-
nent Iraqi Americans met with President George W. Bush at the 
White House. Al-Suwaij has written articles in support of the 
coalition war against Hussein’s tyranny and has also published 
essays against Muslim intolerance for the New York Times, Bos-
ton Globe, and Wall Street Journal. She helped organize a Boston 
memorial service for slain Jewish Wall Street Journal reporter 
Daniel Pearl—which were also held in London, New York, and 
Los Angeles—and observed that “to remember Daniel Pearl is 
to remind ourselves of the human side of terror and intoler-
ance.” In addition to her work with the American Islamic Con-
gress, she is involved in developing education programs in Iraq.
Chip Berlet (1949–) 
Chip Berlet has spent several decades studying prejudice, hate 
groups, reactionary backlash movements, theocratic funda-
mentalism, civil liberties violations, police misconduct, govern-
ment and private surveillance abuse, and other antidemocratic 
phenomena. He worked for many years at Political Research 
Associates, an independent, nonprofit research center that pub-
lishes extensive reports on hate group activities aimed against 
blacks, Jews, gays, lesbians, and other minority groups. Berlet 
has written chapters in several scholarly books, reviewed articles 
for sociology journals, and prepared entries in encyclopedias on 
fundamentalism, millennialism, and criminal justice. He was 
coauthor with Matthew N. Lyons of Right-Wing Populism in 
America: Too Close for Comfort (Guilford Press, 2000) and also 
has written op-ed pieces for the Boston Globe, the New York Times 
and other major newspapers and magazines. Following the ter-
rorist bombing in Oklahoma City, Berlet frequently appeared 
in the media to discuss the nature and overlap of right-wing 
populism, the patriot movement, and armed militias. He has 

	
Profiles	
137
personally attended meetings held by right-wing patriots, 
armed militia activists, white supremacists, Holocaust deniers, 
the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), and neo-Nazis. He also was among 
the first researchers to warn of the attempt by anti-Jewish and 
other white supremacist hate groups to recruit financially fail-
ing Midwest farmers in the late 1970s and early 1980s. A long-
time critic of the extremist ideologue Lyndon LaRouche, Berlet 
has been sued twice by the LaRouche movement for his char-
acterization of it as a conspiracist neo-Nazi movement engaged 
in illegal fund-raising activities. LaRouche’s organization lost 
both cases. In 1985 Berlet cofounded the Public Eye BBS, the 
first computer bulletin board system designed to challenge the 
information circulated by the KKK and neo-Nazis on racist and 
anti-Jewish bulletin boards. He has worked on joint projects 
with many groups, including Facing History and Ourselves, 
Planned Parenthood, the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, 
the Massachusetts chapter of the American Jewish Congress, 
and the Chicago chapter of the American Jewish Committee.
Heidi Beirich (1967–) 
Heidi Beirich leads the Southern Poverty Law Center’s (SPLC) 
Intelligence Project, “one of the most respected anti-terror 
organizations in the world,” according to the National Review. 
She is an expert on various forms of extremism, including the 
white supremacist, nativist and neo-Confederate movements 
as well as racism in academia. She oversees the SPLC’s yearly 
count of the nation’s hate and hard-line antigovernment groups 
and is a frequent contributor to the SPLC investigative reports. 
Heidi Beirich has appeared on numerous television news pro-
grams and is quoted regularly by journalists and scholars in 
both the United States and abroad. Prior to joining the SPLC 
staff in 1999, Heidi earned a doctorate in political science from 
Purdue University. She has published widely in academia and is 
the coeditor and author of several chapters of Neo-Confederacy: 
A Critical Introduction, published by the University of Texas 
Press in 2008.

138	
Hate Crimes
Kathleen M. Blee (1953–) 
Professor Blee has written pioneering studies on women 
involved in racist and extremist movements. She received her 
BA in sociology from Indiana University in 1974. She carried 
out her graduate studies at the University of Wisconsin, Madi-
son, earning the MS and PhD in sociology in 1976 and 1982, 
respectively. Professor Blee began her faculty career in 1981 at 
the University of Kentucky where she eventually held the rank 
of professor. While at Kentucky, she served as associate dean 
for the College of Arts and Sciences (1989–1991; 1992) and as 
director for the Women’s Studies Program (1987–1989). Blee 
joined the University of Pittsburgh’s Department of Sociology 
at the rank of professor in 1996, and her recruitment to Pitt 
included appointment as the director of the Women’s Studies 
Program. She served in that capacity from 1996 to 2001. Blee 
was appointed distinguished professor of sociology in 2007, 
and she has served as chair of the Department of Sociology 
since 2008. She has affiliated appointments in Departments 
of History and Psychology, as well as the Women’s Studies 
Program. She is also associated with the Cultural Studies Pro-
gram and the Center for Race and Social Problems. A highly 
productive scholar who communicates her research through 
both scholarly articles and books, Blee has published 76 jour-
nal articles, encyclopedia entries, and book chapters. She has 
published three edited or coedited books and has four schol-
arly monographs (one coauthored) published or in press. Her 
first monograph, Women in the Klan: Racism and Gender in the 
1920s, was published by the University of California Press in 
1991. Her coauthored book with Dwight Billings, The Road to 
Poverty: The Making of Wealth and Hardship in Appalachia, was 
published by Cambridge University Press in 2000. Inside Orga-
nized Racism: Women in the Hate Movement was published by 
the University of California Press in 2002. Blee’s monograph, 
Making Democracy: How Activist Groups Form, was published 
in 2012.

	
Profiles	
139
Floyd Cochran (1956–) 
Floyd Cochran was the founder and director of Education & 
Vigilance, a Pennsylvania-based grassroots group that mon-
itored and exposed white supremacist activity. Born in rural 
Cortland, New York, Cochran, like many individuals involved 
in racist hate movements, came from a troubled background. 
His mother was jailed for armed robbery and his father phys-
ically abused him. He was eventually placed in a foster home. 
Early on, Cochran developed an interest in Nazism and Adolph 
Hitler. After high school, he became a member of the Ku Klux 
Klan. He married and soon divorced his wife after they had two 
sons. In 1990 he moved to the Pacific Northwest and became 
active in the largest neo-Nazi group in the United States, Aryan 
Nations, whose headquarters were in northern Idaho. He soon 
became a major spokesman for the group, recruiting skin-
heads and other disaffected individuals. “In six months,” he 
once boasted, “I went from milking cows in upstate New York 
to being in Newsweek. There are very few racists who could 
smile and make hatred sound as palatable as I could.” At a 
1992 youth festival, however, he was shocked when he heard 
someone talking about killing disabled people. His son, then 
four years old, had been born with a cleft palate. He became 
disillusioned, left the movement, and eventually met with two 
individuals who had formerly been his most bitter adversaries: 
Lenny Zeskind and Loretta Ross, a Jewish man and an Afri-
can American woman who worked with the Center for Demo-
cratic Renewal. After several meetings with Zeskind and Ross, 
Cochran eventually renounced his racist and anti-Jewish views. 
He soon emerged as a leading national speaker warning against 
the dangers of racist hate movements. He now tours the coun-
try, speaking to civic groups and on radio and television. He 
recounts his odyssey in the racist movement, especially aiming 
his message at susceptible young people. Cochran recalls indoc-
trinating one youth who was later convicted of firebombing the 
Tacoma, Washington, office of the National Association for the 

140	
Hate Crimes
Advancement of Colored People. Although his life has been 
repeatedly threatened by former comrades, Cochran continues 
to give public talks. He often ends his speeches with a heartfelt 
sentiment: “If my racism harmed you in any way, directly or 
indirectly, I am sorry.”
Rabbi Abraham Cooper (1950–) 
Rabbi Abraham Cooper is the associate dean of the Simon 
Wiesenthal Center, a leading Jewish human rights organization 
with a reported 400,000 family members or affiliates. Born in 
New York City, he has been a longtime activist for Jewish and 
human rights causes on five continents. His extensive involve-
ment in Soviet Jewry included visiting refuseniks in the 1970s, 
helping to open the first Jewish Cultural Center in Moscow in 
the 1980s, and lecturing at the Soviet Academy of Sciences and 
the Sakharov Foundation in the 1990s. In 1977, he came to Los 
Angeles to help Rabbi Marvin Hier found the Simon Wiesen-
thal Center. Rabbi Cooper worked with Simon Wiesenthal for 
nearly 30 years. Together with Rabbi Hier, Rabbi Cooper regu-
larly meets with world leaders, including the former Pope Ben-
edict XVI, presidents and foreign ministers to defend the rights 
of the Jewish people, combat terrorism and promote intergroup 
relations. For several decades, Rabbi Cooper has overseen the 
Wiesenthal Center’s international social action agenda rang-
ing from worldwide anti-Semitism and extremist groups, Nazi 
crimes, to interfaith relations and the struggle to thwart the 
anti-Israel divestment campaign, to worldwide promotion of 
tolerance education. He has been a pioneer and international 
authority on issues related to digital hate and the Internet. In 
1992, and 2003 he helped coordinate international conferences 
in Paris on anti-Semitism cosponsored by UNESCO. In 1997, 
he coordinated the Center’s international conference, Prop-
erty and Restitution-The Moral Debt to History in Geneva, 
Switzerland. In 2000, he coordinated an International Con-
versation on Digital Hate in Berlin, which was cosponsored by 

	
Profiles	
141
the German government. He has testified before the United 
Nations (where the Wiesenthal Center is an official NGO) in 
New York and Geneva, presented testimony at the U.S. Senate, 
the Japanese Diet, the French Parliament, the Organization for 
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and is a found-
ing member of Israel’s Global Forum on Antisemitism. Rabbi 
Cooper’s work in Asia has reportedly countered negative ste-
reotypes about Jews and has opened new venues in dialogue 
and intergroup relations in Japan, South Korea, The People’s 
Republic of China, India, and Indonesia. He was a leader of the 
SWC mission to China that brought the first Jewish-sponsored 
exhibition to the world’s most populous nation. Rabbi Coo-
per brought the Center’s special Anne Frank and the Holo-
caust to tour Japan, which has been viewed by a reported two 
million Japanese in each of Japan’s 47 prefectures. He brought 
the Center’s Courage to Remember Holocaust Exhibit to the 
Gandhi Cultural Center in New Delhi. Rabbi Cooper is the 
editor-in-chief of the center’s Response magazine. His editori-
als have appeared in major newspapers throughout the world. 
He supervises the center’s Digital Terrorism and Hate Project, 
supervised the center’s entry into the digital age through www.
wiesenthal.com, and created the Center’s innovative AskMusa.
com, a multilingual Web site designed to familiarize Moslems 
around the world to the values of the Jewish people, its history 
and Faith. Rabbi Cooper earned his BA and MS from Yeshiva 
University and a PhD from the Jewish University of America. 
He is a recipient of Yeshiva University’s Bernard Revel Com-
munity Service Leadership Memorial Award and of the Ortho-
dox Union’s National Leadership Award.
Morris S. Dees (1936–) 
The son of an Alabama farmer, Morris Seligman Dees gave up 
a successful career running a mail order and book publishing 
business to pursue his commitment to civil rights. A graduate 
of the University of Alabama Law School, Dees filed a suit in 

142	
Hate Crimes
1967 to stop the construction of a white university in an Ala-
bama city that already had a predominantly black state college. 
In 1969, he filed a suit to integrate the all-white Montgomery 
YMCA. Dees and his law partner Joseph Levin Jr. saw the need 
for a nonprofit organization dedicated to seeking justice and, 
with civil rights activist Julian Bond, founded the Southern 
Poverty Law Center (SPLC) in 1971. As chief trial counsel for 
the SPLC, he filed suit against white supremacist Tom Metzger 
and his White Aryan Resistance group for their responsibility 
in the beating death of a young Ethiopian student in Portland, 
Oregon. His second book, Hate on Trial: The Case against Amer-
ica’s Most Dangerous Neo-Nazi (Villard Books, 1993) chronicles 
this case, which resulted in an unprecedented $12.5 million 
judgment against a U.S. hate group. His autobiography, A Sea-
son for Justice (Charles Scribner) was published in 1991, and 
the American Bar Association later released it in 2001 as A 
Lawyer’s Journey: The Morris Dees Story. His third book, Gath-
ering Storm: America’s Militia Threat, exposes the danger posed 
by today’s domestic terrorist groups (Harper-Collins, 1996).
Steven Emerson (1954–) 
Steven Emerson is an expert on terrorism and national security 
and an author who also serves as the executive director of a 
consulting firm, The Investigative Project. He was one of the 
earliest researchers to warn about the dangers posed by Islamic 
extremists who were living in the United States and preaching 
violence against Americans here and abroad. Emerson started 
The Investigative Project in late 1995, following the broadcast 
on public television of his documentary film Jihad in America, 
which portrayed the clandestine operations by militant Islamic 
terrorist groups on U.S. soil. This film later received the George 
Polk Award in 1994 for best television documentary. Since the 
mid-1990s, Emerson has testified before Congress and has 
briefed the National Security Council at the White House as 
well. He has won three awards from the organization Investiga-
tive Reporters and Editors for magazine journalism. Emerson’s 

	
Profiles	
143
latest book is American Jihad: The Terrorists Living among Us 
(Simon & Schuster, 2002). He has authored or coauthored four 
other books: Terrorist: The Inside Story of the Highest- Ranking 
Iraqi Terrorist Ever to Defect to the West (Villard/Random House, 
1991); The Fall of Pan Am 103: Inside the Lockerbie Investiga-
tion (Putnam, 1990); Secret Warriors: Inside the Covert Military 
Operations of the Reagan Era (Putnam, 1988); and The Ameri-
can House of Saud: The Secret Petrodollar Connection (Franklin 
Watts, 1985). Between 1990 and 1993, Emerson served as a 
special investigative correspondent for CNN, where he was an 
international reporter. He has also served as a senior editor for 
U.S. News & World Report. He earned a BA and an MA from 
Brown University.
Phyllis B. Gerstenfeld (1967–) 
Phyllis B. Gerstenfeld is professor and chair of criminal jus-
tice at California State University—Stanislaus, where she has 
taught a hate crimes class for over 20 years. She is the author 
of several works on hate crime, including Hate Crimes: Causes, 
Controls, and Controversies, which is currently in its third edi-
tion. She is also coauthor of one of the leading textbooks on 
criminal justice. Her recent work has focused on approaches 
to hate crimes outside the United States, especially in Croatia, 
where she twice received Fulbright grants. Her other areas of 
research include juvenile justice and psychology and law. She 
earned a BA in psychology from Reed College, and a PhD in 
psychology and a JD from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
Mark S. Hamm
A professor of criminology at Indiana State University, Hamm 
is a major scholar of prison radicalization in the United States. 
In the 1980s and 1990s he wrote widely about white right-wing 
extremists in this country, as well as subjects as diverse as apoc-
alyptic violence, cop killer violence, ethnography and terror, 
and the USA Patriot Act. His books include Terrorism as Crime: 
From Oklahoma City to Al-Qaeda and Beyond (2007); In Bad 

144	
Hate Crimes
Company: America’s Terrorist Underground (2002); Apocalypse in 
Oklahoma: Waco and Ruby Ridge Revenged (1997); and American 
Skinheads: The Criminology and Control of Hate Crime (1993). 
Professor Hamm received two major grants from the National 
Institute of Justice: one to study crimes committed by terrorist 
groups and the other to study terrorist recruitment in Amer-
ican correctional institutions. He is currently working on a 
study of terrorist recruitment in U.S. and British prisons and is 
compiling a database on the subject.
Gregory Herek (1954–) 
Gregory M. Herek, a professor of psychology at the University 
of California at Davis (UCD), is an internationally recognized 
authority on prejudice against sexual minorities, antigay vio-
lence, and AIDS-related stigma. He received his PhD in social 
psychology from UCD in 1983, then was a postdoctoral fellow 
at Yale University. He subsequently served as a faculty member 
at Yale and the Graduate Center of the City University of New 
York before returning to UCD, first as a research psychologist 
and later as a tenured professor. He has been a pioneer in the 
scientific study of heterosexuals’ prejudice against lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender people, as well as the effects of that 
prejudice on its targets. Professor Herek serves or has served 
on the editorial board of several academic journals, including 
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, The Journal of Social Issues, 
The Journal of Sex Research, The Journal of LGBT Health, and 
The Journal of Homosexuality. Professor Herek is a fellow of 
the American Psychological Association (APA) and the Asso-
ciation for Psychological Science (APS). He is the recipient of 
the 2006 Kurt Lewin Memorial Award for “outstanding con-
tributions to the development and integration of psychological 
research and social action,” presented by the Society for the 
Psychological Study of Social Issues. He is a past chairperson 
of the APA Committee on Lesbian and Gay Concerns and has 
also served on the APA Task Force on Avoiding Heterosexist 
Bias in Research and the APA Task Force on AIDS. He worked 

	
Profiles	
145
closely with the late Evelyn Hooker to organize the Wayne F. 
Placek Award, administered by the American Psychological 
Foundation from a bequest left to Dr. Hooker. Professor Herek 
was a member of the NAS Institute of Medicine’s Committee 
on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) Health 
Issues and Research Gaps and Opportunities, and coauthored 
that panel’s 2011 consensus report, The Health of Lesbian, Gay, 
Bisexual, and Transgender People: Building a Foundation for 
Better Understanding. He has also contributed his professional 
expertise to government policy work involving lesbian and gay 
concerns and AIDS issues. In 2011, he provided oral and writ-
ten testimony for the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights hear-
ings on Federal Enforcement of Civil Rights Laws to Protect 
Students Against Bullying, Violence and Harassment. In 1997, 
he was an invited participant at President Clinton’s White 
House Conference on Hate Crimes. In 1993, he testified on 
behalf of the APA, the APS, and four other national profes-
sional associations for the House Armed Services Committee 
hearings on gays and the U.S. military. In 1986, he testified 
on behalf of the APA for the House Criminal Justice Subcom-
mittee’s hearings on antigay violence. He also has assisted the 
APA in preparing amicus briefs in more than 30 major court 
cases and served as a consultant or expert witness for numerous 
court cases and administrative proceedings involving the civil 
rights of lesbians and gay men and people with disabilities.
Paul Iganski
Paul Iganski is professor of criminology and criminal justice in 
the Lancaster University Law School in the United Kingdom. 
For almost two decades, he has specialized in research, writ-
ing, teaching, and public engagement about hate crime. His 
books include Hate Crime and the City (Policy Press, 2008), 
Hate Crimes against London’s Jews (Institute for Jewish Policy 
Research, 2005) and the edited volumes Hate Crime: The Con-
sequences of Hate Crime, and The Hate Debate (Profile Books, 
2002). He mostly conducts his research in collaboration with, 

146	
Hate Crimes
or commissioned by, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) 
and the “equalities sector” in the UK and internationally. At 
Lancaster University he teaches courses on criminological per-
spectives on violence, hate crime, human rights and the state.
James B. Jacobs (1947–) 
James Jacobs is the director of the Center for Research in Crime 
and Justice and the Chief Justice Warren E. Burger Professor of 
Constitutional Law and the Courts at the New York University 
School of Law. A leading critic of hate crimes legislation, he has 
written widely on the topic in many law and academic journals, 
including the Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology, Annual 
Survey of American Law, Criminal Justice Ethics, and The Public 
Interest. Jacobs is the coauthor, with Kimberly Potter, of Hate 
Crimes: Criminal Law and Identity Politics (Oxford University 
Press, 1998). He has a JD and a PhD in sociology from the 
University of Chicago. His first book, Statesville: The Peniten-
tiary in Mass Society (University of Chicago Press, 1977), is a 
standard textbook in college and university classrooms.
Valerie Jenness (1963–) 
Valerie Jenness, the chair of the Department of Criminology, 
Law and Society and an associate professor in the Department 
of Sociology at the University of California at Irvine, has writ-
ten widely on sociological aspects of hate crimes and hate crime 
legislation. Her research focuses on the links between deviance 
and social control (especially law), gender, and social change. 
She is the coauthor of two recent books on hate crimes: Making 
Hate a Crime: From Social Movement to Law Enforcement Prac-
tice (Russell Sage Foundation, 2001) and Hate Crimes: New 
Social Movements and the Politics of Violence (Aldine de Gruyter, 
1997). She has also written for academic journals on a variety 
of subjects, including the politics of prostitution, AIDS, and 
civil liberties, hate crimes and hate crime law, the gay/lesbian 
movement, and the women’s movement in the United States. 

	
Profiles	
147
She has served as an associate editor for the journal Social Prob-
lems and is active on several committees of the American Socio-
logical Association.
Brian Levin (1963–) 
A civil rights attorney, Brian Levin is an associate professor of 
criminal justice and the director of the Center for the Study of 
Hate and Extremism at California State University, San Ber-
nardino, where he specializes in the analysis of hate crimes, and 
terrorism. Previously, Levin served as the associate director of 
legal affairs For the Southern Poverty Law Center’s Klanwatch/
Militia Task Force in Montgomery, Alabama; legal director 
of the Center for the Study of Ethnic and Racial Violence in 
Newport Beach, California; and as a corporate litigator for 
a law firm. He was also a New York City policeman in the 
drug-plagued sections of Harlem and Washington Heights 
during the 1980s. Levin began his academic career in 1996 
as an associate professor at Stockton College in New Jersey. 
A graduate of Stanford Law School, he was awarded the Block 
Civil Liberties Award for his work on hate crime. An author or 
coauthor of many publications on extremism and hate crime, 
he also wrote briefs in the U.S. Supreme Court case of Wis-
consin v. Mitchell in 1992–1993, analyzing criminological data 
that established the prevalence and severity of hate crimes.
Jack Levin (1941–) 
Jack Levin is the Irving and Betty Brudnick Professor of Sociol-
ogy at Northeastern University, where he has taught since 
1970. He has authored or coauthored more than two dozen 
books; his most recent include Dead Lines: Essays in Murder 
and Mayhem (Allyn & Bacon, 2001) and The Violence of Hate: 
Confronting Racism, Anti-Semitism and other Forms of Bigotry 
(Allyn & Bacon, 2002). A social psychologist and media per-
sonality, Levin’s research interests focus on prejudice. As the 
codirector of the Brudnick Center on Conflict and Violence at 

148	
Hate Crimes
Northeastern, he has researched school violence, riots, celebri-
ties in popular culture, and hate crimes. Levin is the coauthor 
of Hate Crimes: The Rising Tide of Bigotry and Bloodshed (West-
view Press, 1993) and the revised and updated work, Hate 
Crimes Revisited: America’s War against Those Who Are Different 
(Westview Press, 2002). Levin has written extensively on hate 
crimes for academic and popular journals and lectures widely 
on the topic. He received a BA from American International 
College and a PhD from Boston University.
Daniel Levitas (1960–) 
Daniel Levitas has written on the subject of extreme right-wing 
racist, anti-Jewish, and neo-Nazi organizations. Starting in 
1986 he has testified as an expert witness or provided pretrial 
consulting expertise on the Ku Klux Klan, anti-Semitism, 
Holocaust denial, the skinhead movement, Aryan Nations, and 
hate-motivated violence. From 1989 to 1992, Levitas served as 
the executive director of the Center for Democratic Renewal in 
Atlanta, a nonprofit organization that monitored hate groups. 
Levitas is the author of The Terrorist Next Door: The Militia 
Movement and the Radical Right (St. Martin’s, 2002). He was 
also a contributing author to Anti-Semitism in America Today 
(Birch Lane Press, 1995). From 1991 to 1992 he edited When 
Hate Groups Come to Town: A Handbook of Effective Community 
Responses, a 192-page handbook about constructive responses 
to local hate group activity and violence. Levitas contributed 
articles to Grolier’s Multimedia Encyclopedia on the history of 
American anti-Semitism, hate crimes, and the U.S. militia 
movement. He has written for the Nation, the Los Angeles Times 
Book Review, the New York Times, Roll Call, Congress Monthly, 
Reform Judaism magazine, and other publications.
Michael Lieberman
Michael Lieberman has been the Washington counsel for the 
Anti-Defamation League since January 1989 and also serves as 
director of the League’s Civil Rights Policy Planning Center. 

	
Profiles	
149
He helps coordinate the ADL’s involvement in legislative ini-
tiatives before Congress and develops and implements ADL 
policy positions on a wide range of domestic and international 
affairs. He previously served as the ADL’s Midwest civil rights 
director in Chicago. Before coming to work for ADL in Sep-
tember of 1982, Lieberman served as legislative assistant and 
counsel in Washington for two different members of Congress. 
He received his BA from the University of Michigan where 
he majored in Judaic studies and international relations. He 
received his law degree from Duke University where he served 
as a member of the Duke Law Journal, and editor-in-chief of 
the Duke International and Comparative Law Institute. Lieb-
erman is the League’s point person on federal and state response 
to bias-motivated crimes and chairs the coalition of religious, 
civil rights, law enforcement, education, and civic organiza-
tions in Washington promoting improved federal response 
to hate violence. He has testified on hate crime issues before 
Congress and before a number of state legislative bodies. He 
has participated in a number of academic and law enforcement 
training seminars on hate violence—including training at the 
FBI Academy at Quantico—and has written on this issue for a 
number of criminal justice and civil rights publications.
Kenneth L. Marcus (1966–) 
Kenneth L. Marcus is president and general counsel of the 
Louis D. Brandeis Center for Human Rights Under Law and 
author of the award-winning Jewish Identity and Civil Rights 
in America (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010). 
Marcus founded the Brandeis Center in 2011 to combat the 
resurgence of anti-Semitism in American higher education. In 
November 2012, Marcus was named to the Forward 50, the 
Jewish Daily Forward’s listing of the “American Jews who made 
the most significant impact on the news in the past year.” The 
Forward described its 50 honorees as “the new faces of Jewish 
power,” predicting that “if Marcus has any say in it, we may 
witness a new era of Jewish advocacy.” During his public service 

150	
Hate Crimes
career, Marcus served as staff director at the United States 
Commission on Civil Rights and was delegated the authority 
of assistant secretary of education for civil rights and assistant 
secretary of housing and urban development for fair housing 
and equal opportunity. Shortly before his departure from the 
Civil Rights Commission, the Wall Street Journal observed 
that “the Commission has rarely been better managed,” and 
that it “deserves a medal for good governance.” For his work 
in government, Marcus was named the first recipient of the 
Justice and Ethics Award for Outstanding Work in the Field of 
Civil Rights. Marcus also serves as associate editor of the online 
Journal for the Study of Antisemitism and vice president of the 
International Association for the Study of Antisemitism. Mar-
cus previously held the Lillie and Nathan Ackerman Chair in 
Equality and Justice in America at the City University of New 
York’s Bernard M. Baruch College School of Public Affairs 
(2008–2011) and was chair of the Scholars for Peace in the 
Middle East Legal Task Force. Before entering public service, 
he was a litigation partner in two major law firms, where he 
conducted complex commercial and constitutional litigation. 
He publishes frequently in academic journals as well as in more 
popular venues such as Commentary, The Weekly Standard, and 
The Christian Science Monitor. Marcus is a graduate of Williams 
College, magna cum laude, and the University of California at 
Berkeley School of Law.
Karen K. Narasaki (1958–) 
Karen Narasaki is an independent civil and human rights con-
sultant. President Barack Obama appointed Narasaki to the 
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights in July 2014.
She is the immediate past president and executive director 
of the Asian Americans Advancing Justice, one of the nation’s 
premier civil rights organizations. Prior to that position, she 
was the Washington Representative for the Japanese American 
Citizens League.

	
Profiles	
151
Ms. Narasaki began her career as a law clerk for Judge Harry 
Pregerson of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
from 1985 to 1986. Ms. Narasaki is currently chair of the Asian 
American Diversity Advisory Council for Comcast/NBCU and 
co-chair of the Asian American Advisory Council for Nielsen 
Media Research. She also manages the Shelby Response Fund 
for Neo Philanthropy.
She has served on many boards and commissions throughout 
her career, including vice chair of the Leadership Conference 
on Civil and Human Rights and chair of the Rights Work-
ing Group. She was a board member for Common Cause, the 
Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Independent 
Sector, the National Adult Literacy Commission, National 
Immigration Law Center and the National Asian Pacific Amer-
ican Bar Association. Narasaki received a BA from Yale College, 
magna cum Laude, and a JD from the University of California, 
Los Angeles School of Law.
Barbara Perry (1962–) 
Barbara Perry is professor and associate dean in the Faculty of 
Social Science and Humanities at the University of Ontario 
Institute of Technology in Oshawa, Ontario, Canada. She 
has written extensively on hate crime, including several books 
on the topic, among them, In the Name of Hate: Understand-
ing Hate Crime (Routledge, 2001) and Hate and Bias Crime: 
A Reader (Routledge, 2003). She has also published in the area 
of Native American victimization and social control, including 
one book entitled The Silent Victims: Native American Victims of 
Hate Crime, based on interviews with Native Americans (Uni-
versity of Arizona Press, 2008). She has also written a related 
book on policing Native American communities—Policing 
Race and Place: Under- and Over-enforcement in Indian Coun-
try (Lexington Press, 2009). She was the general editor of a 
five-volume set on Hate Crime (Praeger, 2009), and the editor 
of volume 3: Victims of Hate Crime. Perry continues to work 

152	
Hate Crimes
in the area of hate crime, and has begun to make contribu-
tions to the limited scholarship on hate crime in Canada. Most 
recently, she has contributed to a scholarly understanding of 
anti-Muslim violence, hate crime against LGBTQ communi-
ties, and the community impacts of hate crime.
Mark Potok (1955–) 
As director of publications and information for the Southern 
Poverty Law Center’s Intelligence Project (formerly known as 
Klanwatch), Potok is frequently interviewed in the national 
media about right-wing extremist and violence-prone groups. 
Before joining the center, Potok was the southwest corre-
spondent for USA Today, covering the siege in Waco, Texas; 
the bombing in Oklahoma City; and the trial of Timothy 
McVeigh. Potok has also worked at the Dallas Times Herald 
and the Miami Herald. In early 2000, he presented a paper at a 
United Nations conference in Geneva on hate on the Internet 
and also testified at a U.S. Senate hearing on that topic. Potok 
is the editor of the journal Intelligence Report, a publication fre-
quently consulted and quoted by journalists and law enforce-
ment officials.
Kenneth Stern (1953–) 
Attorney Kenneth S. Stern is a program specialist on anti- 
Semitism and extremism for the American Jewish Commit-
tee (AJC). Since joining the AJC in October 1989, Stern has 
written for a variety of publications on the militia movement, 
bigotry on campus, hate on talk radio, hate on the Internet, 
anti-Zionism, skinheads, David Duke, Louis Farrakhan, and 
the extremist Christian Identity movement. His AJC report 
Militias: A Growing Danger, issued two weeks before the Okla-
homa City bombing, predicted such attacks on government 
buildings. He also wrote Holocaust Denial, one of the earliest 
works on the dissemination of lies by anti-Jewish propagan-
dists about the Nazi Holocaust. His investigative study of the 

	
Profiles	
153
PBS documentary The Liberators: A Background Report (Amer-
ican Jewish Committee, 1993) questioned the accuracy of the 
film; PBS later withdrew the documentary from distribution. 
Stern’s book Loud Hawk: The United States vs. The American 
Indian Movement (University of Oklahoma Press, 1994) sur-
veys prejudice against Native Americans and A Force upon the 
Plain: The American Militia Movement and the Politics of Hate 
(Simon & Schuster, 1996) details the growth in that extreme 
right-wing movement. As an attorney for the AJC, he has writ-
ten a critique of the court of appeals decision in the matter 
of Nazi war criminal John Demjanjuk and was of counsel on 
AJC’s brief in Wisconsin v. Mitchell, the landmark hate crimes 
case decided by the U.S. Supreme Court. Stern was an adviser 
to the defense in the historic London-based Holocaust denial 
trial of Irving v Penguin. He has helped create two major Web 
sites to combat bigotry. Stern has written and spoken about the 
upsurge of anti-Jewish activities on college campuses following 
the collapse of the Arab–Israeli peace process. In 1997 Stern 
served as an invited presenter at the White House Conference 
on Hate Crimes and was an official member of the U.S. dele-
gation to the Stockholm International Forum on Combating 
Intolerance in 2001. He also serves as a board member of the 
Gonzaga University Institute for Action against Hate, which 
publishes the Journal of Hate Studies. Stern earned an AB at 
Bard College and a JD from Willamette University College 
of Law.
Lu-in Wang (1962–) 
Lu-in Wang teaches and writes in the area of antidiscrimina-
tion law. She is currently on the faculty of the University of 
New Mexico Law School, after teaching for 19 years at the 
University of Pittsburgh School of Law, where she received the 
University of Pittsburgh Chancellor’s Distinguished Teaching 
Award in 2001 and the Student Bar Association’s Excellence 
in Teaching Award in 2000 and 2006. Wang’s scholarship 

154	
Hate Crimes
examines different types of discrimination and also explores the 
relationship between social and economic stereotypes and how 
the law reinforces their connection. Her latest project examines 
tipped service transactions as a vehicle for discrimination on 
both the customer and server sides, as well as the employer’s role 
in promoting that discrimination. Her book, Discrimination by 
Default: How Racism Becomes Routine (New York University 
Press 2006), draws on social psychology to detail three com-
monplace but generally unrecognized ways in which uncon-
scious assumptions lead to discrimination in a wide range of 
everyday settings and how these dynamics interact to produce 
an invisible, self-fulfilling, and self-perpetuating prophecy of 
racial disparity. Wang’s earlier work examined more extreme 
forms of discrimination. In addition to being the author of 
Hate Crimes Law (West, 1994), the first legal treatise on that 
subject, Wang has published several articles that apply insights 
from historical, sociological, and social psychological literature 
to illuminate the legal issues related to bias-related violence. 
Wang’s articles have appeared in many journals including the 
Southern California Law Review, the Ohio State Law Journal, 
the Boston University Law Review, the Lewis  & Clark Law 
Review, and the Michigan Journal of Race and Law. Before she 
began teaching, Wang was an attorney at law firms in Chi-
cago, Illinois, and Ann Arbor, Michigan, and also served as a 
staff attorney for The Center for Social Gerontology, a national 
support center on law and aging. She also served as a law clerk 
for the late Justice Ralph J. Cappy of the Supreme Court of 
Pennsylvania. Wang is an elected member of the American Law 
Institute and The Fellows of the American Bar Foundation. 
She has a BS and a BA degree from Pennsylvania State Univer-
sity and a JD from the University of Michigan.
Bill Wassmuth (1941–2001)
A leading activist against neo-Nazi and white supremacists 
in the Northwest region of the United States, Bill Wassmuth 
was praised by Idaho governor Dirk Kempthorne as an “early 
voice for human rights and human dignity in our state” (News 

	
Profiles	
155
Release, Idaho Office of the Governor, August 28, 2002). Born 
in Green Creek, Idaho, a small farming community, Wassmuth 
later entered the Catholic priesthood and became a well-known 
activist. He was appointed chairman of the Kootenai County 
Task Force on Human Relations, a civil rights group formed in 
1981 in response to the harassment of a multiracial family. In 
September 1986, a pipe bomb exploded at Wassmuth’s Coeur 
d’Alene home, causing extensive damage but no injuries. Local 
authorities determined that the bombing was carried out by 
neo-Nazi members of the Aryan Nations in retaliation for 
Wassmuth’s human rights work. They were later convicted of 
the crime. After leaving the priesthood in June 1988, Wass-
muth moved to Seattle and later became the first executive 
director of the Northwest Coalition against Malicious Harass-
ment. This nonprofit Seattle-based human rights organization 
formed under his guidance, served Washington, Idaho, Ore-
gon, Montana, Wyoming, and Colorado and was composed of 
approximately 100 smaller organizations and 2,500 individual 
members. In his book Hate Is My Neighbor (Stand Together 
Publishers, 1999), written with Tom Alibrandi, Wassmuth said, 
“To ignore hate groups, even though they usually include rel-
atively small numbers of people, is to miscalculate the impact 
that they can have on a community.” Wassmuth retired from 
the Northwest Coalition in December  1999 but remained 
active in human rights circles. He died of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, commonly known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, in 2001.
Organizations
This section includes descriptions of selected human and civil rights 
organizations and also government agencies that monitor hate 
crimes and extremist and violent hate groups and/or try to foster 
interethnic and interreligious harmony.
American Islamic Congress (AIC)
Organized by concerned Muslims in New Haven, Connecti-
cut, following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, the 

156	
Hate Crimes
AIC is dedicated to building interfaith and interethnic under-
standing. In order to counteract the charge that many Ameri-
can Muslims were silent in the face of Muslim extremism, this 
nonprofit, nonreligious organization aims to foster respect and 
tolerance between Muslims and non-Muslims by promoting 
civil and human rights through advocacy, engagement, and 
education.
According to the AIC statement of principles: American 
Muslims have been profoundly influenced by their encounter 
with the United States and the organization works to guaran-
tee equal rights within American society for Muslims while at 
the same time condemning Muslim hate speech and calls to 
violence against non-Muslims. AIC believes that hateful state-
ments and actions by their fellow Muslims threaten the integ-
rity and reputation of the entire community.
The AIC strongly advocates for the rights of minorities in 
the Muslim world and strives for equality for Muslim women. 
The organization advocates for an end to “honor killings” and 
strongly believes that knowledge about past episodes of intoler-
ance in the Muslim world will help combat disturbing current 
trends.
AIC members live throughout the United States and also 
in largely Muslim countries throughout the world, including 
Egypt, Malaysia, Nigeria, Tunisia Kuwait, and Morocco. The 
organization has been featured on major television and radio 
programs, and articles by and about the group have been pub-
lished in the Toronto Globe and Mail, the Boston Globe, and the 
Wall Street Journal. AIC has organized many programs includ-
ing Cairo Human Rights Film Festival and established advo-
cacy groups for the Persecution of Marginalized Individuals (to 
combat the persecution of Iraqi gays and lesbians in Iraq), inter-
faith councils, among other projects. Project Nur, a student-led 
group, actively tries to build mutual respect between Muslims 
and all other communities.
One of the first events sponsored by AIC after its founding 
was a memorial vigil conducted by a rabbi, imam, and minister 

	
Profiles	
157
for Daniel Pearl, the Jewish Wall Street Journal reporter who 
was murdered by Muslim terrorists in Pakistan in 2002.
American Jewish Committee (AJC)
Founded in 1906 in response to anti-Jewish pogroms in Russia 
and other parts of Europe, the AJC is a membership organi-
zation with chapters nationwide. Its programs are guided by 
the values of Jewish teachings and the principles of Amer-
ican democracy. Committed to working in partnership with 
the diverse racial, ethnic, and religious groups in the United 
States, the AJC promotes intergroup relations and combats 
anti-Jewish hatred and other forms of racism and bigotry. On 
Capitol Hill and in statehouses across the country, the AJC 
supports legislation mandating severe penalties for hate crimes 
and for the collection of reliable statistics about these incidents. 
In its earlier years, the AJC pioneered the “quarantine” or 
“dynamic silence” approach to counter notorious anti-Jewish 
and racist rabble-rousers. This tactic aimed to minimize the 
publicity for these speakers. Instead of confronting these big-
ots in counterdemonstrations, Jewish and civil rights advocates 
stayed away from these racist rallies and thus the news media 
had no story to cover so the event went unreported. Although 
this approach was successful for many years, one commenta-
tor pointed out that the Internet and talk show programs have 
now limited the effectiveness of this strategy. In recent years, 
the AJC has actively exposed extremist groups and publicized 
the violent activities of the militia movement even before the 
1995 bombing in Oklahoma City. The AJC is actively involved 
in many current issues including energy security, human rights, 
immigration reform, and the Iran threat, among others. The 
organization is particularly interested in promoting intergroup 
understanding and cooperation, among many ethnic and reli-
gious groups, for example, Christian, Hindu, Muslim, and 
African American, and others. The organization has regional 
offices in major U.S. cities and overseas bureaus in Jerusalem, 
Berlin, Brussels, and Rome.

158	
Hate Crimes
Anti-Defamation League (ADL)
In 1913, Sigmund Livingston, a Chicago attorney, persuaded 
B’nai B’rith, the oldest Jewish communal organization in 
the country whose Hebrew name means “Children of the 
Covenant,” to establish a defense agency to combat grow-
ing anti-Jewish hatred in the United States. Only two years 
later, a mob in Georgia lynched Leo Frank, a Jewish factory 
supervisor in Atlanta who was falsely accused of murdering a 
thirteen-year-old female employee.
This notorious lynching was spurred on by much anti-Jewish 
agitation and sparked great fear among American Jews in the 
early 20th century.
The ADL is the preeminent U.S. organization that combats 
anti-Semitism, all forms of bigotry, and discrimination and 
helps promote harmonious relations among diverse religious, 
ethnic, and racial groups. The ADL’s mission is to “stop the 
defamation of the Jewish people and to secure justice and fair 
treatment to all citizens alike.” National headquarters are in 
New York City, along with many regional and local offices 
throughout the United States. The ADL also has offices outside 
the United States, including in Israel.
The League has led state and national efforts to deter and 
combat hate-motivated crimes. In 1981, it developed model 
hate crime statutes that have subsequently been adopted by 
most state governments and many municipalities throughout 
the United States. The League has also been at the forefront to 
develop sentencing options for youths who commit bias crimes. 
The ADL provides training on issues related to hate crimes to 
agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation as well as to state 
and local law enforcement agencies. The organization publishes 
an extensive number of materials on human relations, diversity, 
and intergroup relations. Audits of Anti-Semitic Incidents is the 
most comprehensive nongovernmental annual report docu-
menting anti-Jewish attacks on individuals and property in the 
United States. The Web site contains a survey of anti-Jewish 
and racist hate groups. LEARN (Law Enforcement Agency 

	
Profiles	
159
Research Network) provides a wide variety of materials for 
police and other law enforcement officials.
Asian Americans Advancing Justice (AAJC)
Founded in 1991, Asian Americans Advancing Justice works to 
advance the human and civil rights of Asian Americans, and to 
build and promote a fair and equitable society for all.
AAJC is a leading advocate for the Asian American com-
munity covering a wide variety of issues: affirmative action, 
anti-Asian violence prevention/race relations, census, immi-
grant rights, immigration, fair and equal access to justice in the 
courts, language access, television diversity, and voting rights. 
The organization has affiliate groups in Los Angeles, San Fran-
cisco, and Chicago and is committed to building an inclusive 
society, combating hate crimes, and promoting social under-
standing between diverse racial and ethnic groups.
Brudnick Center on Violence and Conflict
The Brudnick Center for the Study of Violence and Conflict at 
Northeastern University “seeks solutions to problems of hostil-
ity and hatred arising from inter-group conflict and differences. 
In order to achieve this mission, the center initiates research 
projects and educational endeavors in the area of intergroup 
conflict and violence (e.g., intergroup tensions and violence 
in the schools, state-sponsored terrorism, hate crimes, interna-
tional conflict and warfare, hate speech on campus, skinhead 
activity, religious persecution, organized hate groups). It also 
brings together faculty from different disciplines to foster col-
laborations between academicians and practitioners in order to 
share knowledge and develop solutions to the global challenges 
of security and sustainability.”
The center serves as a repository of information about vio-
lence and conflict. The Northeastern faculty and students seek 
to generate and evaluate practical interventions for the purpose 
of reducing harmful forms of violence and conflict throughout 
society.

160	
Hate Crimes
The center assists faculty and students in articulating indi-
vidual and collective projects, applying for appropriate support 
through federal agencies and private foundations, carrying on 
research projects and disseminating research findings. Faculty 
members communicate their research findings to a broad audi-
ence by writing for major newspapers as well as academic jour-
nals and books. In addition, the center holds conferences and 
events on campus in order to bring together researchers and 
practitioners from around the country as well as relevant parts 
of the world.
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS)
The Bureau of Justice Statistics was first established on Decem-
ber  27, 1979, under the Justice Systems Improvement Act 
of 1979, Public Law 96–157 (the 1979 Amendment to the 
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, Public 
Law 90–351). The BJS mission is to collect, analyze, publish, 
and disseminate information on crime, criminal offenders, vic-
tims of crime, and the operation of justice systems at all levels 
of government. These data are critical to federal, state, and local 
policymakers in combating crime and ensuring that justice is 
both efficient and evenhanded.
The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) is a component of the 
Office of Justice Programs in the U.S. Department of Justice.
The Hate Crime Statistics Act (28 U.S.C. § 534) defines 
hate crimes as “crimes that manifest evidence of prejudice 
based on race, gender or gender identity, religion, disability, 
sexual orientation, or ethnicity.” The National Crime Victim-
ization Survey (NCVS) measures crimes perceived by victims 
to be motivated by an offender’s bias against them for belong-
ing to or being associated with a group largely identified by 
these characteristics. For a crime to be classified as a hate crime 
in the NCVS, the victim must report at least one of three types 
of evidence that the act was motivated by hate: the offender 
used hate language, the offender left behind hate symbols, or 
police investigators confirmed that the incident was hate crime.

	
Profiles	
161
The BJS, the NCVS, and the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports 
(UCR) Hate Crime Statistics Program are the principal sources 
of annual information on hate crime in the United States and 
use the definition of hate crime provided in the Hate Crime 
Statistics Act.
Committee against Anti-Asian Violence (CAAAV)
Founded in 1986, this New York–based community orga-
nization is committed to building the capacity of poor and 
low-income Asian immigrant communities to join other strug-
gles for racial, economic, women’s, and environmental justice. 
The organization addresses issues of police brutality, housing, 
welfare, immigration, labor, public education, and especially, 
issues related to anti-Asian violence.
The organization arose out of concern about the growth 
in anti-Asian violence culminating in the murder of Vincent 
Chin in 1982 by auto workers who felt Asians were jeopardiz-
ing their jobs.
Among its accomplishments are the following:
•	 The CAAAV pressured the city to allocate $14 million to 
build parks and open green space accessible to Chinatown 
and Lower East Side residents along the East River water-
front, rather than the original plan of high-end stores and 
private developments.
•	 It organized the Southeast Asian community in the Bronx 
to challenge the failed Welfare to Workfare programs.
•	 It advocated for the rights of street vendors in Chinatown 
that were targeted during former NYC Mayor Giuliani’s 
Quality of Life campaign.
•	 It worked in a city-wide coalition that pushed Mayor 
Bloomberg to sign an Executive Order providing language 
access for immigrant New Yorkers.
•	 It coordinated almost a thousand volunteers and members 
as first responders in Chinatown following Hurricane Sandy.

162	
Hate Crimes
Disability Law Center
The Disability Law Center (DLC) is a private, nonprofit orga-
nization responsible for providing protection and advocacy for 
the rights of Massachusetts residents with disabilities. DLC 
receives federal, state, and private funding but is not part of 
the state or federal government. The organization provides 
information, referral, technical assistance, and representation 
regarding legal rights and services for people with disabilities.
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
As part of its responsibility to uphold the civil rights of the 
American people, the FBI takes a number of steps to combat 
the problem of hate crimes:
•	 The FBI is the sole investigative force for criminal violations 
of federal civil rights statutes.
•	 Cold Case Initiative: In 2007, the FBI announced renewed 
focus on racially motivated killings from the civil rights era, 
involving FBI agents from more than a dozen field offices 
who—with the assistance of our law enforcement partners, 
community leaders, and the media—identified cases and 
then began tracking down witnesses and locating family 
members, pursuing leads, reviewing law enforcement re-
cords and other documents, and seeking closure for fam-
ily members. As reported in the October  2012 Attorney 
General’s Fourth Annual Report to Congress Pursuant to 
the Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crime Act of 2007, 
investigations into 92 of the 112 cold cases identified have 
been concluded (in most of these 92 cases, the subjects are 
deceased). The initiative has, so far, resulted in one success-
ful federal prosecution and one successful state prosecution.
•	 Law Enforcement Support: The FBI works closely with 
state/local authorities on investigations, even when federal 
charges are not brought. FBI resources, forensic expertise, 
and experience in identification and proof of hate-based 

	
Profiles	
163
motivations often provide an invaluable complement to local 
law enforcement. Many cases are also prosecuted under state 
statutes such as murder, arson, or more recent local ethnic 
intimidation laws. Once the state prosecution begins, the 
Department of Justice monitors the proceedings in order to 
ensure that the federal interest is vindicated and the law is 
applied equally among the 95 U.S. Judicial Districts.
•	 The FBI forwards completed reports to U.S. attorneys and 
the Civil Rights Division at the Department of Justice, 
which decide whether a federal prosecution is warranted. 
They may move forward, for example, if local authorities are 
unwilling or unable to prosecute a crime of bias.
•	 Hate crimes directed at the U.S. government or the Ameri-
can population may be investigated as acts of domestic ter-
rorism. Incidents involving hate groups are also investigated 
as domestic terrorism (the FBI’s Civil Rights Program can-
not investigate groups, only individuals).
Gonzaga University Institute for Hate Studies
Founded in 1997 in response to some racist incidents on the 
Gonzaga University campus, the institute is an academic orga-
nization devoted to combating hate through research, educa-
tion, and advocacy.
“The Gonzaga Institute for Hate Studies advances the inter-
disciplinary field of Hate Studies and disseminates new theo-
ries, models, and discoveries about hate.
As a working definition, Hate Studies inquire into “the 
human capacity to define, and then dehumanize or demonize, 
an ‘other,’ and the processes that inform and give expression to, 
or can curtail, control, or combat, that capacity.”
In furtherance of its mission, the Institute for Hate Studies
•	 publishes the Journal of Hate Studies;
•	 convenes the International Conference on Hate Studies;
•	 hosts the annual Take Action Against Hate Banquet;

164	
Hate Crimes
•	 presents the annual Eva Lassman Take Action Against Hate 
Awards;
•	 coordinates educational events;
•	 fosters interdisciplinary courses and course materials on the 
study of hate;
•	 conducts interdisciplinary research on hate and directly re-
lated social problems;
•	 consults with and provides research findings, data, and cur-
ricular innovations to interested schools, organizations, and 
agencies;
•	 provides graduate and undergraduate level research awards 
in hate studies;
•	 maintains a Web site, listserv, and social networking sites on 
hate studies;
•	 advocates for the field of hate studies and encourages in-
creased discussion about hate across disciplines;
•	 answers inquiries from the media, government, and govern-
mental organizations; and
•	 serves as a central address for those interested in better un-
derstanding hatred.
As part of a Jesuit institution located in Spokane, Washington, 
the Institute for Hate Studies advances the social justice mis-
sion of the University as well as its commitments to academic 
excellence, diversity, global engagement, and peace-building.
Institute for the Study of Global Antisemitism  
and Policy (ISGAP)
Founded in 2004, ISGAP is the first interdisciplinary research 
center based in North America dedicated to the study of 
anti-Semitism, as well as other forms of prejudice, includ-
ing racism, as it relates to policy, in the age of globalization. 
Through the examination of anti-Semitism and policy, ISGAP 
disseminates analytical and scholarly material to help combat 
hatred and promote understanding.

	
Profiles	
165
The Institute encourages, develops, and supports interdisci-
plinary research; promotes relations among scholars, the public 
at large, leaders, and government officials. A key goal of ISGAP is 
to promote excellence in research and to develop accessible social 
scientific understanding. Attention is placed on policy analysis 
and consultation in local, national, and international contexts.
ISGAP organizes research projects, seminars, public meetings, 
conferences, and events, and publishes periodicals, reports, and 
scholarly articles.
The institute is a nonpartisan organization that encourages 
dialogue among all peoples and worldviews and is dedicated to 
the promotion of justice, understanding, respect, and harmony 
in a rapidly globalizing world.
International Association of Jewish Lawyers  
and Jurists (IAJLJ)
Founded in 1969, IAJLJ was organized to combat terrorism, 
Holocaust denial and anti-Semitism. The organization contrib-
utes toward the establishment of an international legal order 
based on the rule of law, promoting the principles of equality, 
and the right of all states and people to live in peace. IAJLJ 
enhances the study of and research into the source of Jewish 
law with reference to the legal concepts of other nations and 
fosters the study of legal problems of special interest to Jew-
ish communities within the framework of international and 
domestic law. The organization publishes a quarterly print and 
online journal which has a worldwide circulation.
Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCHR)
The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights is a 
coalition of more than 200 national organizations to promote 
and protect the civil and human rights of all persons in the 
United States. The Leadership Conference, a 501(c)(4) organi-
zation, engages in legislative advocacy. It was founded in 1950 
and has coordinated national lobbying efforts on behalf of 
every major civil rights law since 1957.

166	
Hate Crimes
The Leadership Conference Education Fund helps promote 
federal policies that protect the civil and human rights of all 
Americans. The Education Fund’s campaigns empower and 
mobilize advocates around the country to push for progressive 
change. This special fund was founded in 1969 as the educa-
tion and research arm of The Leadership Conference.
Confronting the New Faces of Hate: Hate Crimes in America 
published in 2009 is an update of the 2004 report, Cause for 
Concern. Sadly, five years later, the problem of hate crimes con-
tinues to be a significant national concern. The purpose of this 
report is to highlight the need for a coordinated response by 
every sector of society to eradicate this problem. The report is 
freely available online at http://www.protectcivilrights.org/pdf/
reports/hatecrimes/lccref_hate_crimes_report.pdf
Matthew Shepard Foundation
The Matthew Shepard Foundation was founded by Dennis and 
Judy Shepard in memory of their 21-year old son, Matthew, 
who was murdered in an antigay hate crime in Wyoming in 
October 1998.
Created to honor Matthew in a manner that was appropriate 
to his dreams, beliefs, and aspirations, the foundation seeks to 
“Replace Hate with Understanding, Compassion, and Accep-
tance” through its varied educational, outreach, and advocacy 
programs and by continuing to tell Matthew’s story.
The foundation supports schools and theatre companies 
producing “The Laramie Project,” a spoken-word play that tells 
Matt’s story and the community’s reaction to his murder. The 
foundation provides educational and technical support for put-
ting on the play, and where it can, provides on-the-ground assis-
tance to augment the productions with community forums.
The Shepard Foundation provides online resources and a 
blogging platform for youth who are struggling to deal with 
coming out, family acceptance, bullying and harassment, or 
faith issues. Through a Web site called Matthew’s Place, the 
foundation is particularly focused on helping youth who live 

	
Profiles	
167
in rural areas who have few in-person resources to which they 
can turn. The foundation frequently hears from teenagers and 
young adults who are grateful for their work.
The foundation advocates for full equality for all lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and transgender Americans and actively supports 
legislation in support of this community.
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data (NACJD)
NACJD, a part of the Inter-University Consortium for Politi-
cal and Social Research (ICPSR) at the University of Michigan, 
designed a resource guide for Web users to learn about the FBI’s 
Uniform Crime Reporting Program and to connect to other 
related information sources.
With this guide, first time users or experienced analysts can
•	 find general information about the Uniform Crime Report-
ing Program;
•	 connect to other Uniform Crime Reporting Program and 
related sites;
•	 find hate-crime data about crimes that manifest evidence 
of prejudice based on race, religion, sexual orientation, eth-
nicity, and mental or physical disabilities. The FBI began 
to collect this data under the Hate Crime Statistics Act of 
1990. Information contained in the data includes the num-
ber of victims and offenders involved in each hate crime 
incident, type of victims, bias motivation, offense type, and 
location type.
National Center for Victims of Crime (NCVC)
The National Center for Victims of Crime’s vision emerged 
from one family’s tragedy: in 1985, Ala Isham and Alexan-
der Auersperg established the National Center for Victims 
of Crime, originally the Sunny Von Bulow National Victim 
Advocacy Center. Motivated by their mother’s victimization 
and their family’s traumatic experience with the criminal justice 

168	
Hate Crimes
system, the founders believed it was fundamentally wrong that 
crime victims were often shut out of and “revictimized” by the 
very system that was supposed to help them. They wanted to 
redefine what justice for crime victims means by giving them a 
voice in the criminal justice system.
Since those early days, the NCVC has become the nation’s 
leading resource and advocacy organization for victims of all 
types of crime and for the people who serve them.
NCVC is in contact with elected officials, policymakers, 
business leaders, law enforcement officers, judges, media rep-
resentatives, educators, and health care providers to help them 
understand that justice for victims involves more than holding 
offenders accountable for their crimes. It involves providing 
victims full participation in the criminal justice process and 
the means to overcome the physical, emotional, and financial 
consequences of crime.
The NCVC offers hate crime information and Web links.
National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs (NCAVP)
Founded in 1995, the National Coalition of Anti-Violence 
Programs (NCAVP) is the only national coalition dedicated 
to reducing violence and its impacts on lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, queer, and HIV-affected (LGBTQH) communi-
ties in the United States. NCAVP currently brings together 
LGBT antiviolence programs in cities and regions across the 
United States and in Montreal, Quebec and Toronto, Ontario.
NCAVP works to research and document bias and hate 
crimes, domestic violence in LGBT relationships, sexual 
assault and abuse, “pick-up” crimes, and other characteristic 
forms of violence affecting LGBT individuals, and is dedicated 
to helping local communities establish, promote, and expand 
antiviolence education, prevention, organizing, advocacy, and 
direct services.
NCAVP helps promote policies that assist victims of vio-
lence, addresses the perpetrators of violence, and tries to posi-
tively change the social atmosphere to reduce this violence.

	
Profiles	
169
Through its Violence Response Initiative, NCAVP also 
provides direct response to critical incidents of anti-LGBT 
violence around the country and assists local communities, 
survivors, and families in coping with incidents. In addition, 
the NCAVP provides support to local communities seeking to 
create long-term responses to violence through technical assis-
tance, guidance, and information and materials-sharing with 
the goal of creating more local anti-violence programs across 
the country.
Since 1998, NCAVP has compiled the only national survey 
report analyzing thousands of same-gender domestic violence 
incidents documented by its members each year. This report 
has had an important impact in the domestic violence ser-
vice community, where it has helped garner more attention to 
same-gender domestic violence issues and needs.
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF)
The NGLTF is the leading civil rights organization for lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and transgender rights. Founded in New York in 
1973, the organization combats antigay violence and job dis-
crimination and lobbies for gay rights legislation. In 1984 the 
NGLTF published the first national study focusing exclusively 
on antigay violence. Two years earlier the task force created 
an antiviolence project to promote an official response to vio-
lence and harassment perpetrated against individuals because 
of their sexual orientation. The NGLTF’s publications include 
Hate Crimes Map, a unique source indicating the extent of hate 
crime laws covering sexual orientation in all 50 states, press 
releases, and other materials concerning local and federal hate 
crimes legislation.
New York City Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence  
Project (AVP)
Founded in New York City in 1980, this pioneering orga-
nization was organized in response to antigay neighbor-
hood violence and the lack of response from the local police. 

170	
Hate Crimes
Currently, the AVP serves lesbian, gay, transgender, bisexual, 
and HIV-positive victims of violence, and others affected by 
violence, by providing free and confidential services. Although 
this organization primarily focuses on antigay violence in New 
York City, the AVP serves as a national clearinghouse for sta-
tistics and information on hate crimes motivated by sexual 
orientation throughout the United States. AVP remained an 
all-volunteer organization until 1984, when the first full-time 
executive director was hired. With a full-time staff, AVP was 
able to broaden its services to provide professional counseling 
to survivors of hate violence, intimate partner violence, sexual 
violence, and HIV-related violence. Currently, AVP provides 
free and confidential assistance to thousands of lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, queer, and HIV-affected (LGBTQH) 
people each year from all five boroughs of New York City. 
A  member of the National Coalition of Anti-Violence Pro-
grams (see entry earlier) the AVP compiles and distributes an 
annual hate crimes report through its Web site.
Not in Our Town (NIOT)
Not in Our Town (NIOT) is a movement to stop hate, address 
bullying, and build safe, inclusive communities for all. NIOT 
Our Town films, new media, and organizing tools help local 
leaders build vibrant, diverse cities and towns, where everyone 
can participate. Their approach is based on the premise that 
real change takes place at the local level and focus on solutions 
to inspire and empower communities to create a world where:
NIOT.org offers films and tools to use in communities or 
schools.
*	 100+ short films that can spark community dialogue
*	 50+ school films with accompanying lesson plans and activ-
ity guides
*	 Sample materials from towns which have stood up—and 
worked to prevent hate and intolerance in their communities

	
Profiles	
171
*	 Special video collections include what to do when a hate 
group comes to town, how to address hate on your campus, 
and how to start an anti-bullying campaign.
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency  
Prevention (OJJDP)
Charged by Congress to meet the challenge of juveniles in cri-
sis, OJJDP collaborates with professionals from diverse disci-
plines to improve juvenile justice policies and practices.
OJJDP, a component of the Office of Justice Programs, U.S. 
Department of Justice, accomplishes its mission by supporting 
states, local communities, and tribal jurisdictions in their efforts 
to develop and implement effective programs for juveniles. The 
office strives to strengthen the juvenile justice system’s efforts to 
protect public safety, hold offenders accountable, and provide 
services that address the needs of youth and their families.
Through its components, OJJDP sponsors research, pro-
gram, and training initiatives; develops priorities and goals and 
sets policies to guide federal juvenile justice issues; disseminates 
information about juvenile justice issues; and awards funds to 
states to support local programming.
Healing the Hate: A National Hate Crime Prevention Curric-
ulum for Middle Schools is designed for middle-school teachers 
and other professionals who work with youth. This curricu-
lum addresses the extent of hate crime in America and instructs 
youth in strategies that are proving effective in reducing hate 
crimes, which are motivated by the offender’s bias against race, 
religion, ethnic/national origin, or sexual orientation.
Police Executive Research Foundation (PERF)
The Police Executive Research Forum (PERF) is an indepen-
dent research organization that focuses on critical issues in 
policing. Since its founding in 1976, PERF has identified best 
practices on fundamental issues such as reducing police use of 
force; developing community policing and problem-oriented 

172	
Hate Crimes
policing, using technologies to deliver police services to the 
community, and evaluating crime reduction strategies.
PERF strives to advance professionalism in policing and to 
improve the delivery of police services through the exercise of 
strong national leadership, public debate of police and criminal 
justice issues, and research and policy development.
The organization has been advocating hate-crime data col-
lection since 1987, when it became one of the first national 
police associations to endorse the Hate Crime Statistics Act.
Simon Wiesenthal Center
Founded in 1977, the Simon Wiesenthal Center is an inter-
national institute for Holocaust remembrance and the defense 
of human rights for Jewish people and other groups. Head-
quartered in Los Angeles, the center’s mandate combines 
social action, public outreach, scholarship, education, and 
media projects. The organization also maintains offices in New 
York, Toronto, Miami, Jerusalem, Paris, and Buenos Aires. 
The Wiesenthal Center monitors the activities of hate groups, 
publicizes the existence of violent hate Web sites, assists in the 
prosecution of Nazi war criminals, and has offered monetary 
rewards for information leading to the prosecution of hate 
crime perpetrators. The Task Force against Hate and Terrorism, 
established in 1991, helps combat Holocaust denial and edu-
cates students and teachers about anti-Jewish and other forms 
of bigotry. Located in New York and Los Angeles, the Museum 
of Tolerance is a hands-on experiential museum that focuses on 
two themes in its exhibits: racism and prejudice in the United 
States and the history of the Holocaust. The Wiesenthal Center 
publishes Response, a quarterly newsletter sent to supporters.
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC)
Founded in 1971 by Morris Dees and Joe Levin, two south-
ern lawyers, the SPLC monitors hate activity across the United 
States, promotes tolerance education, and litigates against 
violent racist groups. Located in Montgomery, Alabama, the 
center’s Civil Rights Memorial commemorates 40 individuals 

	
Profiles	
173
who died during the civil rights era. Since 1979, the SPLC has 
helped victims of racist violence sue for monetary damages by 
bringing lawsuits against white supremacist organizations. As 
the result of a 1990 civil suit in response to the killing of Mulug-
eta Seraw, an Ethiopian student in Oregon, SPLC attorneys 
won $12.5 million in damages from Tom Metzger and his rac-
ist organization, White Aryan Resistance. In September 2000, 
an Idaho jury awarded a $6.3 million judgment against the 
racist group Aryan Nations for assaulting a Native American 
woman and her son near their compound. The SPLC staff and 
Alabama headquarters require highest level security because of 
constant death threats against the organization, including the 
attempted of murder of Morris Dees.
The SPLC sued the organization on the victims’ behalf 
and effectively bankrupted the largest neo-Nazi organization 
in the United States. The SPLC’s publications include Intelli-
gence Report, an award-winning quarterly magazine providing 
extensive coverage of racist and violent hate groups and indi-
viduals, and Teaching Tolerance, a semiannual journal aimed at 
educators to promote positive intergroup relations. The Web 
site publishes a regularly updated list of hate crime incidents 
around the country, which they kindly allowed the editor to 
adapt for the Chronology chapter of this book.
Stephen Roth Institute for the Study of Contemporary 
Anti-Semitism and Racism
The Stephen Roth Institute for the Study of Contemporary 
Anti-Semitism and Racism undertakes academic research and 
provides a forum for discussion of issues related to anti-Semitism 
and racism, their history, and their social, institutional, and 
cultural settings. The focus of the institute is the social and 
political manifestations of these phenomena since the end of 
World War II.
To that end, the institute does the following:
•	 Undertakes research projects on aspects of anti-Semitism and 
racism, adopting an interdisciplinary approach that draws on 

174	
Hate Crimes
the skills and resources of various departments at Tel Aviv 
University (TAU)
•	 Organizes international conferences and workshops, both 
independently and in cooperation with academic institu-
tions within and outside Israel
•	 Hosts visiting scholars and distinguished academic lecturers 
from outside Israel for extended periods
•	 Publishes an annual survey of anti-Semitic trends through-
out the world in cooperation with TAU’s Kantor Center for 
the Study of European Jewry. The annual report is based 
on an authoritative database of anti-Semitic manifestations 
worldwide that is accessible through the Internet
•	 Provides support for graduate students from a variety of 
faculties and departments at TAU whose research projects 
focus on various aspects of anti-Semitism or racism
•	 Acts as a resource center for persons interested in this sub-
ject, both within Israel and outside
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
The Civil Rights Act of 1957 created the U.S. Commission on 
Civil Rights. Since then, Congress has reauthorized or extended 
the legislation creating the Commission several times; the last 
reauthorization was in 1994 by the Civil Rights Commission 
Amendments Act of 1994.
Established as an independent, bipartisan, fact-finding fed-
eral agency, their mission is to inform the development of 
national civil rights policy and enhance enforcement of federal 
civil rights laws. They pursue this mission by studying alleged 
deprivations of voting rights and alleged discrimination based 
on race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, or national origin, 
or in the administration of justice. The commission plays a vital 
role in advancing civil rights through objective and compre-
hensive investigation, research, and analysis on issues of fun-
damental concern to the federal government and the public.

	
Profiles	
175
Vidal Sassoon International Center for  
the Study of Antisemitism
The Vidal Sassoon International Center (SICSA) was estab-
lished in 1982 as an interdisciplinary research center dedicated 
to an independent, nonpolitical approach to the accumulation 
and dissemination of knowledge necessary for understand-
ing the phenomenon of anti-Semitism. The center engages in 
research on anti-Semitism throughout the ages, focusing on 
relations between Jews and non-Jews, particularly in situations 
of tension and crisis. The Felix Posen Bibliographic Project on 
anti-Semitism comprises online databases containing about 
50,000 items. New material is added on a regular basis. The 
full-texts of many reports are freely accessible from this site.


177
5	
Data and Documents
This chapter contains both documents and primary source 
material on hate crimes, important resources for students and 
others researching this topic. The FBI Web site provides an 
overview of this agency’s mandate to investigate and prosecute 
hate crimes. The excerpted reports, Hate on the Internet and 
Vulnerable to Hate, document hate speech and violence affect-
ing the most vulnerable segments of society—children and the 
homeless. The NCAVP annual report is the most comprehen-
sive survey of hate violence inflicted on members of the LGBT 
community. The New York State model hate crimes policy sug-
gests important guidelines for law enforcement officials. The 
other documents contain the text of federal statutes on hate 
crime violence and prevention. Finally, two speeches demon-
strate the concern of major American political figures: Senator 
Kennedy’s speech about the importance of hate crime legisla-
tion and President Barack Obama hailing the passage of the 
Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crime law, historic 
legislation expanding government actions over bias-motivated 
crime.
A protester displays a placard during a rally at the Philippine Department 
of Foreign Affairs to demand justice for the killing of Filipino transgender 
Jeffrey “Jennifer” Laude, with a U.S. marine as a possible suspect, on Oc-
tober 15, 2014, at suburban Pasay city, south of Manila, Philippines. The 
activists demanded that Washington hand over the marine implicated in 
Laude’s murder, which the demonstrators labeled a hate crime. (AP Photo/
Bullit Marquez)

178	
Hate Crimes
Hate Crime Overview
Since the initial enactment of federal legislation on hate crimes, the 
FBI has been designated as the official U.S. government agency to 
collect and analyze hate crimes statistics. This overview, published 
on the FBI Web site, details the FBI’s jurisdiction of nationwide 
hate crime incidents.
Investigating hate crime is the number one priority of our 
Civil Rights Program. Why? Not only because hate crime has 
a devastating impact on families and communities, but also 
because groups that preach hatred and intolerance plant the 
seeds of terrorism here in our country.
Defining a Hate Crime
A hate crime is a traditional offense like murder, arson, or 
vandalism with an added element of bias. For the purposes 
of collecting statistics, Congress has defined a hate crime as 
a “criminal offense against a person or property motivated in 
whole or in part by an offender’s bias against a race, religion, 
disability, ethnic origin or sexual orientation.” Hate itself is 
not a crime—and the FBI is mindful of protecting freedom of 
speech and other civil liberties.
History
The FBI investigated what are now called hate crimes as far 
back as World War I. Our role increased following the passage 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Before then, the federal gov-
ernment took the position that protection of civil rights was a 
local function, not a federal one. However, the murders of civil 
rights workers Michael Schwerner, Andrew Goodman, and 
James Chaney, near Philadelphia, Mississippi, in June  1964 
provided the impetus for a visible and sustained federal effort 
to protect and foster civil rights for African Americans. MIB-
URN, as the case was called (it stood for Mississippi Burning), 
became the largest federal investigation ever conducted in Mis-
sissippi. On October 20, 1967, seven men were convicted of 
conspiring to violate the constitutional rights of the slain civil 

	
Data and Documents	
179
rights workers. All seven were sentenced to prison terms rang-
ing from three to ten years.
FBI Jurisdiction
A hate crime is not a distinct federal offense. However, the fed-
eral government can and does investigate and prosecute crimes 
of bias as civil rights violations, which do fall under its juris-
diction. These efforts serve as a backstop for state and local 
authorities, which handle the vast majority of hate crime cases. 
A 1994 federal law also increased penalties for offenses proven 
to be hate crimes.
In 2009, the passage of a new law—the first significant expan-
sion of federal criminal civil rights law since the mid-1990s—
gave the federal government the authority to prosecute violent 
hate crimes, including violence and attempted violence directed 
at the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender community, to 
the fullest extent of its jurisdiction. The Matthew Shepard 
and James Byrd, Jr., Hate Crimes Prevention Act also provides 
funding and technical assistance to state, local, and tribal juris-
dictions to help them to more effectively investigate, prosecute, 
and prevent hate crimes.
The FBI’s Role
As part of its responsibility to uphold the civil rights of the 
American people, the FBI takes a number of steps to combat 
the problem of hate crimes:
•	 Investigative Activities: The FBI is the sole investigative 
force for criminal violations of federal civil rights statutes. 
In 2012, we initiated 200 hate crime investigations, many 
jointly with our state and local law enforcement partners.
•	 Cold Case Initiative: In 2007, we announced this renewed 
focus on racially-motivated killings from the civil rights 
era, involving FBI agents from more than a dozen field 
offices who—with the assistance of our law enforcement 
partners, community leaders, and the media—identified 

180	
Hate Crimes
cases and then began tracking down witnesses and locating 
family members, pursuing leads, reviewing law enforce-
ment records and other documents, and seeking closure for 
family members. As reported in the October 2012 Attor-
ney General’s Fourth Annual Report to Congress Pursuant 
to the Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crime Act of 
2007, investigations into 92 of the 112 cold cases identi-
fied have been concluded (in most of these 92 cases, the 
subjects are deceased). The initiative has, so far, resulted in 
one successful federal prosecution and one successful state 
prosecution.
•	 Law Enforcement Support: The FBI works closely with 
state/local authorities on investigations, even when federal 
charges are not brought. FBI resources, forensic expertise, 
and experience in identification and proof of hate-based 
motivations often provide an invaluable complement to local 
law enforcement. Many cases are also prosecuted under state 
statutes such as murder, arson, or more recent local ethnic 
intimidation laws. Once the state prosecution begins, the 
Department of Justice monitors the proceedings in order to 
ensure that the federal interest is vindicated and the law is 
applied equally among the 95 U.S. Judicial Districts.
•	 The FBI forwards completed reports to U.S. Attorneys and 
the Civil Rights Division at the Department of Justice, 
which decide whether a federal prosecution is warranted. 
They may move forward, for example, if local authorities are 
unwilling or unable to prosecute a crime of bias.
•	 Hate crimes directed at the U.S. government or the Ameri-
can population may be investigated as acts of domestic ter-
rorism. Incidents involving hate groups are also investigated 
as domestic terrorism (the FBI’s Civil Rights Program can-
not investigate groups, only individuals).
•	 Hate Crimes Working Groups (HCWGs): The majority of 
the FBI’s field offices participate in local Hate Crime Work-
ing Groups. These Working Groups combine community 

	
Data and Documents	
181
and law enforcement resources to develop strategies to 
address local hate crime problems.
•	 Public Outreach: The FBI has forged partnerships nation-
ally and locally with many civil rights organizations to 
establish rapport, share information, address concerns, and 
cooperate in solving problems. These groups include such 
organizations as the NAACP, the Southern Poverty Law 
Center, the Anti-Defamation League, the National Asian 
Pacific American Legal Consortium, the National Organi-
zation for Women, the Human Rights Campaign, and the 
National Disability Rights Network.
•	 Training: The FBI conducts hundreds of operational sem-
inars, workshops, and training sessions annually for local 
law enforcement, minority and religious organizations, and 
community groups to promote cooperation and reduce civil 
rights abuses. Each year, the FBI also provides hate crimes 
training for new agents, hundreds of current agents, and 
thousands of police officers worldwide.
How Hate Crimes Are Investigated and Prosecuted
•	 The FBI initiates a hate crime investigation when an allega-
tion is received from a reliable source. Most complaints are 
received from the victim, a witness, or a third party. Many 
cases are also initiated by media reports, community group 
complaints, referrals from Department of Justice or U.S. 
Attorneys, and congressional inquiries.
•	 Under guidelines developed in conjunction with the Depart-
ment of Justice, once a complaint is received, the FBI will deter-
mine if the matter warrants a preliminary or full investigation.
•	 Once a case is opened, a logical investigation is conducted 
within a reasonable period of time.
Source: Hate Crime Overview. Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
Available online at http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/
civilrights/hate_crimes/overview.

182	
Hate Crimes
Investigation of Hate Crimes Model Policy
This policy is aimed at New York State law enforcement officials to 
acquaint them with how to identify hate crimes and also how to 
assist victims and their communities.
I. Purpose
This policy is designed to assist employees in identifying and 
investigating hate crimes and assisting victimized individuals 
and communities. A swift and strong response by law enforce-
ment can help stabilize and calm the community as well as aid 
in a victim’s recovery.
II. Policy
Any acts or threats of violence, property damage, harassment, 
intimidation, or other crimes motivated by hate and bias and 
designed to infringe upon the rights of individuals are viewed 
very seriously by this agency and will be given high priority. 
This agency shall employ necessary resources and vigorous law 
enforcement action to identify and arrest hate crime perpetra-
tors. Also, recognizing the particular fears and distress typically 
suffered by victims, the potential for reprisal and escalation of 
violence, and the far-reaching negative consequences of these 
crimes on the community, this agency shall be mindful of and 
responsive to the security concerns of victims and their families.
III. Definitions
A.	 New York State Penal Law §485.05 Hate crimes.
1.	 A person commits a hate crime when he or she commits 
a specified offense and either:
(a)	 intentionally selects the person against whom the 
offense is committed or intended to be committed 
in whole or in substantial part because of a belief 
or perception regarding the race, color, national 
origin, ancestry, gender, religion, religious practice, 
age, disability or sexual orientation of a person, 

	
Data and Documents	
183
regardless of whether the belief or perception is 
correct, or
(b)	 intentionally commits the act or acts constituting the 
offense in whole or in substantial part because of a 
belief or perception regarding the race, color, national 
origin, ancestry, gender, religion, religious practice, 
age, disability or sexual orientation of a person, regard-
less of whether the belief or perception is correct.
2.	 Proof of race, color, national origin, ancestry, gender,  
religion, religious practice, age, disability or sexual orien-
tation of the defendant, the victim or of both the defend-
ant and the victim does not, by itself, constitute legally 
sufficient evidence satisfying the people’s burden under 
paragraph (a) or (b) of subdivision one of this section.
For purposes of this section:
(a)	 the term “age” means sixty years old or more;
(b)	 the term “disability” means a physical or mental impair-
ment that substantially limits a major life activity.
The crimes that can be charged under the Hate Crime stat-
ute are listed in attachment A.
B.	 Penal Law § 240.31 Aggravated harassment in the first 
degree.
A person is guilty of aggravated harassment in the first degree 
when with intent to harass, annoy, threaten or alarm another 
person, because of a belief or perception regarding such per-
son’s race, color, national origin, ancestry, gender, religion, 
religious practice, age, disability or sexual orientation, regard-
less of whether the belief or perception is correct, he or she:
1.	 Damages premises primarily used for religious pur-
poses, or acquired pursuant to section six of the 
religious corporation law and maintained for pur-
poses of religious instruction, and the damage to 
the premises exceeds fifty dollars; or

184	
Hate Crimes
2.	 Commits the crime of aggravated harassment in 
the second degree in the manner proscribed by the 
provisions of subdivision three of section 240.30 of 
this article and has been previously convicted of the 
crime of aggravated harassment in the second degree 
for the commission of conduct proscribed by the 
provisions of subdivision three of section 240.30 or 
he or she has been previously convicted of the crime 
of aggravated harassment in the first degree within 
the preceding ten years; or
3.	 Etches, paints, draws upon or otherwise places a 
swastika, commonly exhibited as the emblem of 
Nazi Germany, on any building or other real prop-
erty, public or private, owned by any person, firm 
or corporation or any public agency or instrumen-
tality, without express permission of the owner or 
operator of such building or real property;
4.	 Sets on fire a cross in public view; or
5.	 Etches, paints, draws upon or otherwise places or 
displays a noose, commonly exhibited as a sym-
bol of racism and intimidation, on any building or 
other real property, public or private, owned by any 
person, firm or corporation or any public agency or 
instrumentality, without express permission of the 
owner or operator of such building or real property.
Aggravated harassment in the first degree is a class E felony.
C.	 Penal Law § 240.30(3) Aggravated harassment in the sec-
ond degree.
A person is guilty of aggravated harassment in the first 
degree when with intent to harass, annoy, threaten or alarm 
another person, he or she:
(3) Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise subjects another 
person to physical contact, or attempts or threat-
ens to do the same because of a belief or percep-
tion regarding such person’s race, color, national 

	
Data and Documents	
185
origin, ancestry, gender, religion, religious practice, 
age, disability or sexual orientation, regardless of 
whether the belief or perception is correct.
Aggravated harassment in the second degree is a class A 
misdemeanor.
The additional crimes that can be charged under the Hate 
Crime statute are listed in Attachment A.
IV. Procedures
A.	 Goals
1.	 Officers shall conduct a thorough and complete inves-
tigation in all suspected and confirmed hate crime inci-
dents and assist the local prosecutor.
2.	 Officers should make every effort to become familiar 
with organized hate groups operating in the communi-
ty and police contacts should be documented.
B.	 Initial Response Procedures
Initial responding officers at the scene of a suspected hate 
crime shall take preliminary actions deemed necessary, 
including, but not limited to, the following:
1.	 Secure the scene. Steps should be taken so that the ini-
tial situation does not escalate. This includes but is not 
limited to:
a.	 Stabilizing injured victims and requesting medical aid.
b.	 Providing protection to victims and witnesses by in-
creased police presence.
c.	 Protect the crime scene and have technician collect 
and photograph physical evidence such as hate lit-
erature, spray paint cans, and symbolic objects used 
by hate groups, such as swastikas and crosses.
2.	 Identify criminal evidence on the victim if applicable.
3.	 Request the assistance of a translator or counselor when 
necessary.

186	
Hate Crimes
4.	 Request the assistance of an investigator and supervisor.
5.	 Conduct a preliminary investigation and record infor-
mation on;
a.	 the identity of suspected perpetrators,
b.	 the identity of witnesses, including those no longer 
at the scene,
c.	 prior bias-motivated occurrences in the immediate 
area or against the same victim. (check with Crime 
Analyst, NYSIC (518) 786–2100 and/or Regional 
Crime Analysis Center if one exists),
d.	 statements made by suspects; exact language is 
critical.
6.	 Arrest suspected perpetrators if probable cause exists.
a.	 Conduct interview and attempt to establish motive
b.	 Consult with prosecutor if there is a question as to 
proper criminal charges
7.	 Take measures to ensure that necessary preliminary ac-
tions have been taken and brief the responding supervi-
sor as to those action
During your investigation, look for possible signs that the 
incident may be a hate crime:
•	
The motivation of the perpetrator or lack of motive.
•	
Statements made by the perpetrator.
•	
The presence of multiple perpetrators.
•	
The display of offensive symbols, words or acts.
•	
Was any hate literature found in the possession of 
the suspect?
•	
Is the victim the only person of a particular group at 
a park or facility?
•	
Is the victim from a different racial, ethnic, religious 
group than the perpetrator?
•	
The absence of any motive. The brutal nature of 
a particular incident could denote a hate crime, 

	
Data and Documents	
187
particularly when the perpetrator and victim don’t 
know each other.
•	
The perpetrator’s perception of the victim, whether 
accurate or not.
•	
The date, time or circumstances of the occurrence, 
such as on a religious holiday, or an event occurring 
at a gathering of a group of people affiliated by eth-
nicity, religion, sexual orientation, etc.
•	
Multiple incidents occurring in a short time peri-
od and all the victims were of the same identifiable 
group.
•	
Were the real intentions of the perpetrator racial, 
color, religious or ethnic oriented, or were there 
other reasons such as pranks, unrelated vandalism, 
or a dispute arising out of a non-bias related disa-
greement?
•	
Incident occurred in proximity to an establishment 
that could be associated with one of the protected 
classes.
•	
The perpetrator targeted a particular portion of the 
victim’s body; i.e. Sikh victims forcibly having his 
hair cut, or a victim targeted for his/her sexual ori-
entation being attacked near or around his or her 
genitalia.
•	
The victim’s perception that he/she was selected 
because they are a member of an identifiable group.
8.	 The mere mention of a bias remark does not make an 
incident bias motivated, just as the absence of a remark 
does not make an incident without bias. Even the mere 
perception that the incident may be motivated by bias 
shall necessitate a notification to a patrol supervisor.
9.	 Be cognizant of dual motivation by some suspects. Ex-
ample: A suspect may be looking to commit robberies 
but specifically targets elderly victims.

188	
Hate Crimes
10.	Note that an attack against a transgender victim could 
be covered under sexual orientation or gender.
C.	 Supervisory Responsibilities
The supervisor shall confer with the initial responding 
officer(s), take measures to ensure that necessary preliminary 
actions have been taken, and make appropriate departmen-
tal notifications as necessary. The supervisor shall request 
any appropriate additional personnel necessary to accom-
plish the following:
1.	 Provide immediate assistance to the crime victim.
a.	 Express the law enforcement agency’s official posi-
tion on the importance of these cases, and describe 
the measures that will be taken to apprehend the 
perpetrators.
b.	 Express the department’s interest in protecting vic-
tims’ anonymity whenever possible.
c.	 Allow the victim a period in which to express his 
or her immediate concerns and express his or her 
feelings.
d.	 Communicate with concerned community-based 
organizations, civic groups, and religious institu-
tions regarding the suspected or confirmed bias in-
cident.
e.	 Identify individuals or agencies that may provide 
support and assistance. These may include family 
members or close acquaintances, a family clergy-
man or departmental chaplain, as well as commu-
nity service agencies that provide victim assistance, 
shelter, food, clothing, child care, or other related 
services. Provide information regarding New York 
State Crime Victims Board (Attachment B).
f.	 Tell the victim about the probable sequence of 
events in the investigation and prosecution.
g.	 Explain security measures and precautions to the 
victim.

	
Data and Documents	
189
2.	 Ensure that officers and investigator conduct a thor-
ough preliminary investigation.
3.	 Ensure that all relevant facts are documented on an in-
cident or arrest report or both and make an initial deter-
mination as to whether the incident should be classified 
as a hate crime.
4.	 Notify other appropriate personnel in the chain of com-
mand, depending on the nature and seriousness of the 
offense and its potential inflammatory and related im-
pact on the community.
5.	 Take preventive measures to ensure the safety of the 
victim.
D.	 Investigators’ Responsibilities
In responding to the scene of an alleged hate crime, inves-
tigators shall assume control of the follow-up investigation 
to include the following:
1.	 Ensure that the scene is properly protected, preserved, 
and processed and that all physical evidence of the in-
cident is removed as soon as possible after the offense 
is documented. If evidence of an inflammatory nature 
cannot be physically removed (e.g., painted words or 
signs on a wall), the owner of the property shall be con-
tacted to do all that is possible to ensure that the graffiti 
is removed as soon as possible. The officer or investiga-
tor shall follow-up to ensure that this is accomplished in 
a timely manner.
2.	 Conduct a comprehensive interview with all victims 
and witnesses (and depose) at the scene, or as soon as 
possible thereafter, and canvass the neighborhood for 
additional sources of information.
3.	 Work closely with the prosecutor’s office to ensure that 
a legally adequate case is developed for prosecution.
4.	 Coordinate the investigation with agency, state, and re-
gional crime analysis centers. These sources shall pro-
vide the investigative officer with an analysis of any  

190	
Hate Crimes
patterns, organized hate groups, and suspects potential-
ly involved in the offense.
5.	 Coordinate the investigation with other units of the 
agency and with outside agencies where appropriate.
6.	 Maintain contact with the initial responding officer and 
keep him or her apprised of the status of the case.
7.	 Recommend to Commanding Officer whether the inci-
dent should be classified as a hate crime.
8.	 Investigative officers shall take steps to ensure that 
appropriate assistance is being provided to hate crime 
victims, to include the following measures:
a.	 Contact the victim periodically to determine 
whether he or she is receiving adequate and appro-
priate assistance.
b.	 Provide ongoing information to the victim about 
the status of the criminal investigation.
c.	 Attempt, whenever possible, to conduct all inter-
views with victims at their convenience and mini-
mize, to the degree possible, interactions in which 
victims have to relate the incident.
E.	 Recommended Steps When Suspect is Not in Custody or 
Has Not Been Identified
a.	 Coordinate investigation with other department units.
b.	 Work with Analyst or Regional Crime Analysis Center 
to research leads and prepare bulletins.
c.	 Conduct extensive canvass and distribute bulletins in 
area of the incident.
d.	 Debrief individuals arrested in the area.
e.	 Work with media to attempt to garner witnesses and 
investigative leads.
f.	 Follow-up leads in timely manner.
F.	 Incident Report Preparation

	
Data and Documents	
191
Incident reports should clearly indicate the following 
information:
•	
Offense—Hate Crime designated Penal Law
•	
Victim age, gender, race, and ethnicity (when vic-
tim(s) is an individual(s))
•	
Offender age, gender, race, and ethnicity (when 
available)
The narrative portion of the Incident report should docu-
ment that the victim(s) was intentionally selected or that 
the act was intentionally committed because of a belief or 
perception regarding such victim’s race, color, national ori-
gin, ancestry, gender, religion, religious practice, age, disa-
bility, or sexual orientation. The specific bias motivation of 
the perpetrator should be documented (Ex: selected victim 
because he was Hispanic, Jewish, Muslim, etc. . .)
Source: New York Association of Chiefs of Police. Available on-
line at http://www.nychiefs.org/ModelPolicies/MPTC_Hate_
Crimes_Model_Policy.pdf Used by permission of New York 
Association of Chiefs of Police, Inc.
Hate on the Internet
Written by the Anti-Defamation League and funded by the U.S. 
Department of Justice and U.S. Department of Education, this 
excerpt from the Hate on the Internet manual aims to “provide 
families and educators with useful information about hate on the 
internet and to provide strategies to help prepare children for the 
hate they may encounter as they navigate the World Wide Web.”
II. Defining the Problem: The Internet as a Tool for Hate
The Emergence of Hate Speech Online
By using any of the many search engines available through the 
World Wide Web, an Internet search of the words “Ku Klux Klan”  

192	
Hate Crimes
will produce an extensive list of Web sites promoting hate. 
These sites are readily accessible to the approximately 160 mil-
lion Americans, including significant numbers of impres-
sionable children and youth, who today use the Internet.
Even before the birth of the World Wide Web, media-savvy 
leaders of some organized hate groups recognized the potential 
of technology to disseminate their messages and further their 
goals. In the 1980s, Louis Beam, a leader of the Ku Klux Klan, 
and neo-Nazi publisher, George Dietz, collaborated to create a 
computerized bulletin board accessible to anyone with a com-
puter, phone line, and modem. The bulletin board, “Aryan 
Nation Liberty Net,” was subscription-based and designed to 
recruit young people, raise money, and incite hatred against the 
“enemies” of white supremacy.
In the early 1990s, many bigots united in organized online 
discussion groups called USENETs. USENET newsgroups 
were similar to the “Aryan Nation Liberty Net” but were more 
easily accessible to anyone with Internet access. USENETs 
were free and provided a venue for participants to write, read, 
and respond to messages of hate.
The evolution of the Internet into the World Wide Web, 
with its easily accessible and inviting graphic interface, has pro-
vided people, including extremists, with new ways to commu-
nicate with each other and with a vast new potential audience, 
using not only words, but also pictures, graphics, sound, and 
animation.
Don Black, a former Klan leader and convicted felon who 
learned to use computers while incarcerated, is attributed 
with creating one of the earliest hate sites, Stormfront, in 1995 
(McKelvey, 2001). Since its creation, Stormfront has served as a 
veritable supermarket of online hate, stocking its shelves with 
materials that promote anti-Semitism and racism. Stormfront 
is among the most visited hate sites on the Internet, claiming 
upwards of five million visits to the site over the past decade. 
When first created, the site contained links to a scant hand-
ful of other Web sites with similar messages of hate. Today, 

	
Data and Documents	
193
Stormfront provides links to hundreds of white supremacist 
sites, and hundreds of other sites are easily found online.
Who Is Spreading Hate Online?
A wide variety of people with bigoted ideologies, including 
Holocaust deniers, “Identity” adherents, Ku Klux Klan mem-
bers, and virulent homophobes, use the Internet to spread their 
views.
Extremists Seeking Credibility
A common rationale among extremists is to use the Web to 
build increased respectability and mainstream acceptance 
of their ideas. Such groups typically characterize themselves 
as legitimate activists who have been unfairly denied main-
stream attention. For example, David Duke, former leader of 
the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, veils an ideology of white 
supremacy behind misleading rhetoric of “white rights.” By 
couching bigotry in pseudo-scientific and sociological terms, 
Duke articulates a subtle but virulent brand of racism that 
exploits race-related issues such as illegal immigration and 
affirmative action. Other examples of Web sites designed to 
increase the respectability of extremist groups include the 
Council of Conservative Citizens and American Renaissance, 
which sponsor both a monthly print publication by the same 
name and a Web site.
Holocaust Deniers
Holocaust denial is a propaganda movement that seeks to deny 
the reality of the Holocaust, the systematic mass murder of six 
million Jews and millions of others deemed “inferior” by the 
Nazi regime in Europe during World War II. Misrepresenting 
their propaganda as “historical revisionism,” Holocaust deniers 
attempt to disseminate their extremist ideas by offering unsup-
ported arguments against the established historical facts of the 
Holocaust. Their beliefs include accusations that Jews have 

194	
Hate Crimes
falsified and exaggerated the tragic events of the Holocaust 
in order to exploit non-Jewish guilt. Holocaust denial groups 
have posted thousands of Web pages, filled with distortions and 
fabrications, designed to reinforce negative stereotypes such as 
the contention that Jews maintain control of academia and 
the media. Among the most visited sites promoting Holocaust 
denial are the Institute for Historical Review, Bradley Smith 
and his Committee for Open Debate of the Holocaust (whose 
efforts focus largely on U.S. college campuses), and sites spon-
sored by Ahmed Rami, Ernst Zundel, and David Irving.
Identity Adherents
The Identity Church, a pseudo-theological movement that pro-
motes racism and anti-Semitism, emerged in the U.S. during the 
late 1970s and early 1980s. Proponents of this movement use 
inflammatory and degrading language to promote hate against 
many groups of people, including Jews, African Americans, and 
other people of color. Identity organizations that have a notable 
presence on the Internet include Aryan Nations, the Posse Comi-
tatus, the Church of New Israel, America’s Promise Ministries, 
Scriptures for America, and the 11th Hour Remnant Messenger.
Ku Klux Klan Members
Although the Ku Klux Klan has undergone many permuta-
tions throughout its violent 130-year existence, the group is 
currently fragmented. The Internet is providing a means for 
the group’s various factions to gain strength. Web sites of these 
factions share many commonalities, including information on 
upcoming rallies, explanations of customs (such as cross burn-
ing), and spurious accounts of Klan history. The American 
Knights and the Imperial Klans of America are two factions 
with a significant online presence.
Neo-Nazis
Numerous groups and individuals have created and maintain 
Web sites promoting the anti-Semitic, racist ideas of Adolf 

	
Data and Documents	
195
Hitler’s Nazi party. The National Alliance, one of the largest 
and most active neo-Nazi organizations in the United States 
today, was founded by William Pierce, author of The Turner 
Diaries. The stated mission of this group is “to build a better 
world and a better race” and to create “a new government . . .  
answerable to White people only” (Extremism in America, 
2001). When Pierce died in July  2002, leadership for this 
group was transferred to Erich Gliebe, who recently expressed 
his admiration for both domestic and international terrorist 
groups. Though Gliebe does not necessarily agree with their 
political views, he praised the Islamic terrorists who attacked 
the United States on September 11, 2001, describing them as 
“serious, patient, and organized, and they had the discipline to 
keep their mouths shut so as not to leak any information about 
what they were planning” (Extremism in America, 2001).
The National Alliance Web site features transcripts from 
a weekly anti-Semitic radio broadcast, online access to many 
articles from the group’s National Vanguard magazine, and a 
catalog of books with over six hundred titles. The National 
Alliance has recently focused most of its attention on recruit-
ing young racists through the online marketing of white power 
music. In recent years, dozens of violent crimes, including 
murders, bombings, and robberies, have been either traced to 
National Alliance members or appear to have been inspired 
by neo-Nazi propaganda. Other neo-Nazis groups and indi-
viduals with a significant online presence include the National 
Socialist Movement, Matt Koehl, and Gerhard Lauck. In 
Germany, where distribution of hate literature is now illegal, 
Lauck has successfully used the Internet to sidestep national 
laws and widely distribute his literature and ideas throughout 
the country.
Racist Skinheads
Racist skinhead groups share common hateful beliefs and pro-
mote these beliefs with others. Skinheads typically align them-
selves with the perception of strength, group belonging and 
superiority promoted by the white power movement. A major 

196	
Hate Crimes
aspect of racist skinhead life is devotion to musical groups who 
record rock music with hateful lyrics. Skinheads have effec-
tively combined bigotry-laced hard rock and the Internet as 
a main propaganda weapon and means of attracting young 
recruits. Resistance Records, owned by the National Alliance, 
is a multi-million dollar enterprise that uses its Web site to 
market white power rock CDs by groups such as Angry Aryans, 
and subscriptions to Resistance magazine—the Rolling Stone of 
the hate movement. Other notable racist skinhead Web sites 
include those of the Hammerskin Nation, Plunder & Pillage, 
and Panzerfaust Records.
Westboro Baptist Church
Incorporated in 1967 as a not-for-profit organization, the 
Westboro Baptist Church (WBC) describes itself as an “Old 
School (or Primitive)” Baptist Church. Promoting virulent 
homophobia, the WBC claims responsibility for staging tens 
of thousands of protest rallies across the U.S. and abroad. The 
WBC Web site is devoted to spreading hate against people who 
are gay through homophobic language and ideas, photos and 
other graphics, and a variety of documents that support their 
position that the United States is “doomed” because of support 
and tolerance for gay Americans.
World Church of the Creator (WCOTC)
The World Church of the Creator is one of the fastest-growing 
hate groups in the U.S. today. The group’s primary goals, 
articulated in their motto, “RaHoWa” (Racial Holy War) and 
their belief system, Creativity, is the “survival, expansion, and 
advancement of [the] White Race exclusively” (Extremism in 
America, 2001). Creators, as group members call themselves, do 
not align themselves with any religious beliefs, instead placing 
race as the ultimate issue influencing all realms of life. The hatred 
of WCOTC members is directed toward many groups, includ-
ing mainstream Christians, African Americans and other people 

	
Data and Documents	
197
of color, and Jews, who are particularly vilified. The WCOTC 
Web site is extensive, frequently updated, and designed to make 
membership easy. Visitors to the site are provided with a mem-
bership form, a list of local “churches,” and a detailed manual 
that explains the group’s beliefs and practices, including such 
topics as planning WCOTC wedding ceremonies and dealing 
with law enforcement. The group also sponsors more than thirty 
other affiliated Web sites and distributes propaganda through 
extensive online mailing lists, bulletin boards, and chat rooms. 
A “Comedy” section of the WCOTC Web site includes pic-
tures, jokes, and free downloadable racist video games targeted 
toward teens.
How Do Children Encounter Hate Online?
Today, children and youth regularly use the Internet for school-
work, entertainment, and socializing. A report based on a 1999 
national survey on parents and their children and the Internet 
(Children, Families and the Internet, 2000) conducted by Grun-
wald Associates, in collaboration with the National School Board 
s Foundation, reported that 25.4  million children ages 2–17 
access the Internet in the U.S. on a regular basis, as illustrated in 
the chart to the right. This number is an approximate 40-percent 
increase since the previous year. These children may encounter 
hate on the Internet in a variety of ways, including online bul-
letin boards, chat rooms, Web sites, and USENET newsgroups.
The USENET, an Internet communication system that con-
tains thousands of public discussion groups, attracts hundreds 
of thousands of participants each day, both active (those who 
write) and passive (those who simply read postings). News-
groups have been compared to community bulletin boards, 
providing another forum for extremists to debate and discuss 
their ideas and to insult, harass, and threaten the targets of 
their hatred.
It should be noted that while some USENET newsgroups 
are devoted specifically to white supremacy, most are concerned 

198	
Hate Crimes
with mainstream, legitimate topics. A common tactic of online 
bigots is to post messages promoting their beliefs on multiple 
mainstream newsgroups with the hope of attracting new sup-
porters. Some groups, including the National Alliance, have 
engaged in this strategy for many years, often tailoring their 
messages to the particular interests of the newsgroup where 
they are posting. For example, for a newsgroup focusing on 
food, extremists have posted messages promoting the “kosher 
tax,” a falsehood which suggests that standards required of ven-
dors to maintain compliance with kosher food standards result 
in increased food prices for all consumers.
The strategies employed by hate groups have been expanded 
to Web-based bulletin board systems, particularly those hosted 
by legitimate companies such as CNN, America Online, and 
Yahoo! People who visit such bulletin boards, expecting to 
find rational, informative conversations on topics of mutual 
interest, instead can encounter disturbing messages posted by 
extremists.
Chat Rooms
“Chat” rooms provide opportunities for multiple computer 
users from diverse geographic locations to engage in simulta-
neous real-time online communication. Once a chat has been 
initiated, participants can join the conversation by typing text 
on their home computers and sending it via their modem. 
Entered text appears almost instantaneously on the monitors of 
all other participants in the chat room. In many respects, chat 
rooms are similar to conference calls. Many hate group extrem-
ists, including white supremacists such as WCOTC leader Matt 
Hale, regularly host chat sessions in order to interact with their 
supporters. As with USENET newsgroups, extremists also try 
to enter mainstream chat rooms in search of new recruits.
Instant Messaging
Instant messaging allows an Internet user to engage in a private 
chat room with another person or persons with access to the 

	
Data and Documents	
199
same instant messaging system. Typically, the instant messag-
ing system alerts the user when someone on the user’s private 
list is online. The user can then initiate a chat session with that 
particular individual. Instant messaging resembles a traditional 
telephone conversation between two people.
Computer users with online access can add anyone on the 
same instant messaging system to their private list. Unsuspect-
ing users, including children, can easily be added to the instant 
messaging lists of white supremacists or other hate groups. The 
following is an account of the experience of one 11-year-old 
Jewish boy (Lieberman, 1999):
Out of the blue, someone asked if my grandparents were 
one of the Six Million. I responded, ‘No, they survived.’ 
The next statement that appeared on my computer 
screen was, ‘Oh—that’s too bad.’ The remark puzzled 
me. I then asked what was meant by that statement. The 
person wrote, ‘Any Jew that survived was a mistake—and 
now—you’re here.’ I got very scared and shut down my 
computer.
E-mail
E-mail can easily and inexpensively be used to spread hate 
propaganda. Extensive mailing lists may be purchased for an 
established fee, or can be readily created using one of a number 
of free online directories. Large-scale e-mail mailings are free 
of the typical postal fees and materials costs associated with 
traditional mass postal mailings. Without ever revealing their 
identities, enterprising groups and individuals are now able to 
mass-mail unsolicited hate materials to tens of thousands of 
people.
Hateful e-mail can also be directed at a single, specific target. 
When the 11-year-old described earlier turned his computer 
back on, he found hundreds of anti-Semitic e-mail messages in 
his mailbox from “Adolph Jr.” with the subject “Jewish exter-
mination part two.”

200	
Hate Crimes
The World Wide Web
Though purveyors of hate make use of all the communica-
tion tools the Internet provides, Web site development is their 
forum of choice. Bigots, promoting their messages of hate on 
bulletin boards, in chat rooms, via instant messages, or with 
e-mail, often encourage their readers to gain additional infor-
mation by visiting their Web site.
In addition to the World Wide Web’s multimedia capabil-
ities and popularity with Internet users, the Web also allows 
bigots to present their messages of hate without mediation. 
Although civil rights activists may critique a group’s manifes-
toes in USENET newsgroups and other interactive forums, 
hate groups are under no obligation to publish these differing 
perspectives on their Web sites. When children visit a hate site, 
they see only the opinions of the individuals creating that site, 
often presented as hard fact. Other points of view that may 
discredit or disagree with those opinions can only be accessed 
through additional online research.
Although the ability to assess the accuracy and reliability of 
online information is now a vital skill for children and youth, 
the nature of the Internet can make it difficult for people to 
evaluate the credibility of organizations sponsoring Web sites. 
Both the reputable and the disreputable are on the Web, and 
many Web users lack the experience, knowledge, and skills 
to distinguish between them. Increasingly, Web development 
tools have made it easier for members of hate groups to create 
sites that visually resemble those of reputable organizations. 
Consequently, these groups can easily portray themselves as 
legitimate voices of authority.
Generally, people locate specific Web sites in one of three 
ways: by connecting from another site via a link, through Web 
directories, and by using one of a number of online search 
engines. If children follow links from legitimate sites, they are 
unlikely to end up at a hate site without being aware of the 
nature of the site. Mainstream sites rarely link to hate sites, 
and those that do, typically do so in an educational context, so 

	
Data and Documents	
201
readers understand that if they click on the link, they will be 
taken to an extremist site.
Web directories, which contain categorized lists of specific 
sites and their Web addresses, rarely provide descriptions about 
the sponsors or content of listed sites. While some directories 
accurately classify hate sites as such, others describe these sites 
using some of the misleading terms that extremists themselves 
employ, such as “White Pride” and “Racialist.” In one leading 
Web directory, students can find Holocaust denial sites under 
the term “Revisionism,” the same euphemism that Holocaust 
deniers use to infer legitimacy for their beliefs. Some Web 
directories have separate versions which include only those 
sites that are appropriate for children, such as Yahooligans by 
Yahoo! These child-friendly directories are designed to be free 
of addresses for hate sites and other inappropriate content.
While many Web directories provide useful information 
for identifying hate sites, most search engines do not. Search 
engines, unlike Web directories, provide users with listings that 
are based on a computer algorithm, without the added bene-
fit of human assessment and evaluation. Search engines tend 
to classify Web sites on the basis of how sites describe them-
selves. Although search engines are indispensable for conduct-
ing online research, providing extensive listings of Web sites 
associated with a particular term, children need instruction 
to prepare them for the possibility of encountering hate and 
misinformation while conducting online searches. Many hate 
sites purposefully describe themselves in misleading terms so 
that search engines will include their sites in search results for 
legitimate, benign terms, such as “Civil War” or “Holocaust 
history.”
[. . .]
Can Hate on the Internet Be Eliminated?
Technologically and legally, it is likely that removing hate 
speech from the Internet is almost impossible. Decentralized 
by design, the Internet is a worldwide network that consists 

202	
Hate Crimes
of thousands of computers with high-speed connections. 
Often described as an “information superhighway,” the Inter-
net crosses international borders, has thousands of unpoliced 
on-ramps, and has no uniform rules of the road. Because the 
Internet is global, the laws of the most permissive country have 
historically set the tone. In general, it is the United States, with 
its cherished right of free speech, that tends to govern the free-
doms afforded online speech. U.S. citizens must often strug-
gle to reconcile their belief in the Constitutional right of free 
speech with the recognition that the Constitution provides the 
same rights to all, including hate groups. The protection of 
these freedoms results in an environment where legitimate dia-
logue exists alongside hate. A number of people with extremist 
views from other countries exploit these American freedoms 
and store their hate sites on computers in the U.S., thus avoid-
ing more stringent laws in their home countries.
The First Amendment shields the majority of hate speech 
from government regulation. Unless blanket statements of 
hate, such as “I hate Blacks,” contain specific threats, they are 
protected under the First Amendment. This is true even if 
such statements mention specific names and cause distress to 
those individuals. Additionally, in a 1997 Supreme Court deci-
sion, Reno v. ACLU1, lawmakers clarified that traditional First 
Amendment protection of free speech did extend to speech on 
the Internet.
The First Amendment does not protect all speech. Speech 
that is threatening or harassing, for example, may be legally 
actionable. Threats are generally defined as an individual’s dec-
laration of intent to hurt another person. Threatening speech 
is by far the most likely type of unprotected hate speech to 
be prosecuted. To be prosecuted, threats must be believable 
and directed at a specific person, organization or institution. 
Courts will look at the context in which a statement was made 
to determine if it is threatening. Prosecution of threatening 
speech is one measure that has led to some success in the battle 
against hate on the Internet.

	
Data and Documents	
203
The nature of the Internet, however, complicates the prose-
cution of threatening hate speech. By using any one of a num-
ber of services that provide almost complete anonymity, people 
intent on promoting bigotry may send repeated emails to a 
person without revealing their identity. A prosecutable message 
may easily and anonymously be transmitted to multiple com-
puters in other countries, even if both the sender and the recip-
ient of the message live in the United States. It is not unusual 
for foreign companies, responsible for computers that are used 
to transmit such messages, to refuse to provide information to 
law enforcement agencies in the United States. For example, 
in the incident described earlier in this publication, in which 
an 11-year-old Jewish child received multiple e-mail messages 
from “Adolph, Jr.,” many of the messages contained death 
threats. The Internet Service Provider used to transmit these 
messages from the Netherlands refused to respond to inquiries 
about the incident, and authorities were unable to determine 
the source of the messages. Even when Internet Service Provid-
ers want to help investigators, they may be unable to provide 
the information necessary to identify the culprit. Such compa-
nies keep logs of the activities on their computers for a limited 
time only. If an investigation begins even a week after a poten-
tially criminal message was sent, the relevant records may have 
already been deleted.
Though most of the thousands of Internet Service Provid-
ers that exist in the United States do not regulate hate speech 
per se, some contractually prohibit users from sending bigoted 
messages on their services, even when that speech is legally per-
missible. Such prohibitions do not violate the First Amend-
ment because they are stipulations of private contracts with 
users and do not involve government action. The effectiveness 
of this strategy is very limited, however, as subscribers who lose 
their Internet accounts for contract violation may easily sign 
up with another service that has more permissive regulations. 
Furthermore, many companies that provide Internet service in 
the United States have little incentive to regulate the speech of 

204	
Hate Crimes
their users because the Telecommunications Act of 1996 spe-
cifically states that Internet Service Providers cannot be held 
criminally liable for the speech of subscribers.
Source: Hate on the Internet: A Response Guide for Educators and 
Families. Washington, DC: Partners Against Hate, 2003.
Hate Violence in 2013
Published by the National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs 
(NCAVP), a major national coalition that monitors hate crimes 
against the LGBT community, this excerpt from their 2013 report in-
cludes a statistical summary and analysis of these crimes. The NCAVP 
claims their reporting “represents the most in-depth information 
to date on anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected hate violence available 
throughout the U.S. including: detailed demographic information on 
survivors and victims of violence of these crimes.” The FBI statistics 
are not as comprehensive nor are they as intently analyzed.
Executive Summary
In 2013 overall reports of anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected hate 
violence and anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected homicides stayed 
relatively consistent to 2012, with slight decreases. NCAVP’s 
2013 hate violence report continues to document multi-year 
trends revealing that anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected hate vio-
lence disproportionately impacts transgender women, LGBTQ 
and HIV-affected communities of color, transgender people, 
and transgender people of color. Also consistent with previous 
years, White gay cisgender1 men represented the largest group of 
hate violence survivors and victims in 2013, showing that hate 
violence remains a pervasive and persistent issue for all LGBTQ 
1Cisgender is a term used to identify individuals whose gender identity and gender 
expression matches the sex they were assigned at birth. NCAVP replaced the term 
non-transgender with “cisgender” in the 2012 report in order for the report lan-
guage to reflect contemporary language used in the LGBTQ community.

	
Data and Documents	
205
and HIV-affected people. These findings continue to shed light 
on the importance of violence prevention initiatives, strategic 
responses to violence, research, and accurate reporting of hate 
violence as it affects LGBTQ and HIV-affected communities.
Key Findings
Reported Incidents
In 2013, reports of anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected hate vio-
lence stayed relatively consistent with 2012, with a slight .74% 
decrease (2,016 total reports in 2012, and 2,001 total reports 
in 2013). However, for NCAVP member organizations that 
reported data both in 2012 and 2013, the number of incidents 
actually increased. NCAVP member organization Sean’s Last 
Wish reported data in 2012 and not in 2013, while the Civil 
Rights Commission of Puerto Rico reported for the first time 
in 2013. Total number of incidents, disregarding the data from 
Sean’s Last Wish in 2012 and by the Civil Rights Commission 
of Puerto Rico in 2013, increased by 3%, from 1,926 incidents 
in 2012 to 1,984 incidents in 2013. In addition, 2013 also 
saw an increase in the severity of hate violence incidents, with 
substantial increases in the number of hate violence incidents 
involving physical and sexual violence.
Hate Violence Homicides
In 2013, anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected homicides decreased 
by 28% from 2012 (25 hate violence homicides in 2012 to 18 
hate violence homicides in 2013). While NCAVP documented 
a decrease in homicides in 2013, the total homicides for 2013 
remains amongst the highest ever recorded by NCAVP. Severe 
violence against people of color, transgender, and gender 
non-conforming LGBTQ and HIV-affected people remains 
alarmingly high. 89% of all homicide victims in 2013 were 
people of color, yet LGBTQ and HIV-affected people of color 
only represented 55% of total survivors and victims. The over-
whelming majority of homicide victims (78%) were Black and 

206	
Hate Crimes
African American, 11% of homicide victims were Latin@, and 
11% of homicide victims were White. More than half (72%) 
of victims were transgender women, while 67% of homicide 
victims were transgender women of color, yet transgender 
survivors and victims only represent 13% of total reports to 
NCAVP, highlighting a disproportionate impact of homicide 
against transgender people. 28% of homicide victims were 
men, all of whom identified as gay.
Most Impacted Communities
Transgender women survivors were:
•	 4 times more likely to experience police violence compared 
to overall survivors.
•	 6 times more likely to experience physical violence when 
interacting with the police compared to overall survivors.
•	 2 times more likely to experience discrimination and 1.8 
times more likely to experience harassment compared to 
overall survivors, and 1.5 times more likely to experience 
threats and intimidation compared to overall survivors.
•	 1.8 times more likely to experience sexual violence when 
compared to overall survivors.
Transgender survivors were:
•	 3.7 times more likely to experience police violence com-
pared to cisgender survivors and victims.
•	 7 times more likely to experience physical violence when 
interacting with the police compared to cisgender survivors 
and victims.
•	 1.8 times more likely to experience discrimination com-
pared to cisgender survivors and victims.
•	 1.4 times more likely to experience threats and intimidation 
compared to cisgender survivors and victims.

	
Data and Documents	
207
•	 1.5 times more likely to experience harassment when com-
pared to cisgender survivors.
•	 1.7 times more likely to experience sexual violence when 
compared to cisgender survivors.
Transgender people of color survivors were:
•	 2.7 times more likely to experience police violence and 6 
times more likely to experience physical violence from the 
police compared to White cisgender survivors and victims.
•	 1.5 times more likely to experience discrimination, 1.5 times 
more likely to experience threats and intimidation, and 1.5 
times more likely to experience sexual violence compared to 
White cisgender survivors and victims.
•	 1.8 times more likely to experience hate violence in shelters.
Transgender men survivors were:
•	 1.6 times more likely to experience violence from the police 
and 5.2 times more likely to experience physical violence 
perpetrated by the police.
•	 1.5 times more likely to experience injuries as a result of hate 
violence and 4.3 times more likely to be the target of hate 
violence in shelters when compared with other survivors.
LGBTQ and HIV-affected undocumented survivors were:
•	 1.7 times more likely to report to the police and 1.4 times 
more likely to experience police violence.
•	 3.4 times more likely to experience sexual violence and 3.5 
times more likely to experience any physical violence.
•	 2.0 times more likely to experience injury as a result of 
hate violence and 1.7 times more likely to require medical 
attention.

208	
Hate Crimes
LGBTQ and HIV-affected people of color survivors were:
•	 1.5 times more likely to experience physical violence com-
pared to White LGBTQ survivors and were 1.4 times more 
likely to experience violence in the street or a public area.
•	 1.7 times more likely to experience hate violence at the 
workplace when compared to other survivors.
•	 1.7 times more likely to be injured and 2.0 times more likely 
to require medical attention as a result of hate violence when 
compared with other survivors.
LGBTQ and HIV-affected Black survivors were:
•	 1.4 times more likely to experience any physical violence, 
2.0 times more likely to experience threats and intimidation, 
and 1.4 times more likely to be harassed in public areas.
•	 1.4 times more likely to be injured and 2.0 times more likely 
to require medical attention.
LGBTQ and HIV-affected Latin@ survivors were:
•	 1.7 times more likely to experience discrimination, and 1.5 
times more likely to be injured.
•	 1.5 times more likely to experience police violence, and 1.9 
times more likely to report to the police.
•	 2.1 times more likely to experience hate violence incidents 
at the workplace.
Gay men survivors were:
•	 1.4 times more likely to report to the police.
•	 1.4 times more likely to experience physical violence.
•	 1.6 times more likely to experience hate violence incidents 
in public areas.

	
Data and Documents	
209
•	 1.4 times more likely to experience injury as a result of hate vi-
olence and 1.7 times more likely to require medical attention.
Lesbian survivors were:
•	 1.4 times more likely to experience discrimination and 
harassment.
•	 1.2 times more likely to experience sexual violence, and 1.8 
times more likely to experience violence in the workplace
Cisgender women survivors were:
•	 1.6 times more likely to experience sexual violence and 1.6 
times more likely to experience hate violence in the workplace.
Hate Violence Survivor and Victim Demographics
In 2013, gay survivors and victims represented the highest per-
centage of total reports (50%). This is consistent with 2012’s 
findings, where gay survivors represented 45% of overall victims 
and survivors. Lesbian survivors represented 19% of survivors 
in 2013, a decrease from 2012’s findings (21%). Heterosex-
ual survivors represented 14% of survivors in 2013, a decrease 
from 18% in 2012.2 Bisexual survivors represented 9% of sur-
vivors in 2013, consistent with 2012 (9%). Men accounted 
for 37% of total hate violence survivors, an increase from 
2012 (30%). Women represented the second highest (24%) 
gender identity category in 2013, with a slight decrease from 
2012 (25%). Transgender survivors represented 13% of survi-
vors, a significant increase from 2012 (11%). There was also 
an absolute increase in the number of transgender survivors 
who reported to NCAVP in 2013, from 305 in 2012 to 344 
2Within NCAVP’s data‚ “heterosexual” includes multiple identities and most likely 
represents more transgender people than within heterosexual communities in the 
United States.

210	
Hate Crimes
individual survivors in 2013 which represents a 12.79% change 
from 2012. 8% of survivors were undocumented immigrants.
Police Response
Only 45% of survivors reported their incidents to the police, 
a slight decrease from 2012 (56%). 32% of survivors reported 
hostile attitudes from the police in 2013, an increase from 2012 
(27%). Of the survivors who interacted with the police and 
experienced hostility and police misconduct, 55% reported 
being unjustly arrested by the police, consistent with data from 
2012 (57%). Excessive force accounted for 28% of police mis-
conduct, which is exactly consistent with 2012 (28%). Entrap-
ment accounted for 8% of police misconduct, down from 12% 
in 2012. Police raids accounted for 8% of police misconduct, a 
large increase from 2012 (3%).
Police Classification
In 2013, 24% of hate violence incidents reported to the police were 
classified as bias crimes, a substantial decrease from 2012 (77%).
Recommendations for Policymakers and Funders
End the Root Causes of Anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected 
Violence through Ending Poverty and Anti-LGBTQ and 
HIV-affected Discrimination.
•	 Federal, state, and local governments should pass 
non-discrimination laws such as the Employment Non- 
Discrimination Act, the Repeal HIV Discrimination Act, 
and enact policies that protect LGBTQ and HIV-affected 
communities from discrimination based on sexual orienta-
tion, gender identity, gender expression, and HIV-status.
•	 Federal, state, and local governments should end laws and 
policies which criminalize homelessness, HIV status, partic-
ipation in sex work, and drug possession to increase safety 
for the most severely impacted LGBTQ and HIV-affected 
survivors and victims of hate violence.

	
Data and Documents	
211
•	 Policymakers and legislators should pass laws and policies 
to address LGBTQ and HIV-affected youth experiences of 
bullying, harassment, and violence in schools, foster care, 
family court, shelters, and the juvenile justice system by 
passing an LGBTQ-inclusive Runaway and Homeless Youth 
Act, funding trainers familiar to work with these agencies on 
LGBTQ and HIV-affected cultural competency trainings, 
and support restorative justice models in schools.
•	 Policymakers and law enforcement should end policies 
which profile and police people engaged in survival crimes, 
and support harm reduction services to support people 
engaged in survival crimes.
•	 The United States Interagency Council on Homelessness 
should establish an LGBTQ and HIV-affected specific research 
agenda to research policies and programs to address hate vio-
lence against LGBTQ and HIV-affected homeless people.
•	 Federal and state policymakers should raise the minimum 
wage to increase low-income and low-wage workers to be 
able to meet basic needs and increase their safety.
End the Homophobic, Transphobic, and Biphobic Culture 
That Fuels Violence.
•	 Policymakers and funders should support public education 
and awareness campaigns to reduce and end homophobia, 
biphobia, and transphobia.
•	 Policymakers and public figures should promote safety 
for LGBTQ and HIV-affected people by denouncing 
homophobic, biphobic, and transphobic statements, laws, 
and programs.
•	 Policymakers should prohibit offenders of anti-LGBTQ and 
HIV-affected hate violence from using “Gay and Transgen-
der panic” defenses.
•	 Policymakers should support alternative sentencing pro-
grams including individual and group intervention programs, 

212	
Hate Crimes
community service with LGBTQ and HIV-affected organi-
zations, and LGBTQ and HIV-affected antiviolence edu-
cation programs to encourage behavior change for hate 
violence offenders.
•	 Federal, state, and local governments should reduce report-
ing barriers for LGBTQ and HIV-affected survivors includ-
ing removing laws and policies that prevent survivors from 
accessing law enforcement.
•	 Federal, state, and local governments should mandate train-
ings that increase first responders’ and non-LGBTQ and 
HIV-affected direct service providers’ knowledge and com-
petency on serving LGBTQ and HIV-affected survivors of 
violence.
•	 Federal, state, and local governments should pass laws and 
policies that prevent LGBTQ and HIV-affected students 
from experiencing bullying, harassment, and violence in 
schools such as the Student Non-Discrimination Act and 
the Safe Schools Improvement Act.
End Police Profiling and Police Violence against  
LGBTQ and HIV-affected People.
•	 Federal, state, and local governments should enact polices 
that prohibit police profiling such as the federal End Racial 
Profiling Ban that includes provisions on sexual orientation, 
gender identity, gender expression, immigration status, 
housing status, and race.
•	 Policymakers should ensure that police officers are investi-
gated and held accountable for homophobic, biphobic, and 
transphobic harassment and violence.
•	 Federal, state, and local governments should enact humane, 
LGBTQ-inclusive immigration reform policies which create 
a pathway to residency and citizenship for undocumented 
immigrants and end “enforcement-only” policies such as 
the Secure Communities (S-Comm), and 287(g) programs, 

	
Data and Documents	
213
while expanding Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals 
(DACA) to include adult immigrants.
•	 The Center for Disease Control and the Department of 
Justice should issue guidance condemning reliance on the 
use of condoms as evidence of prostitution law violations 
to improve the public safety and public health of LGBTQ 
and HIV-affected people. State and local law enforcement 
agencies should prohibit the use of condoms as evidence of 
prostitution law violations.
•	 Local law enforcement agencies should prohibit policing 
protocols and practices that use searches to assign gender for 
detainees.
•	 Policymakers should enact policies that address homopho-
bic, transphobic, and biphobic violence within jails, deten-
tion centers, and prisons.
•	 Policymakers should continue to implement the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act (PREA) in immigration detention 
centers.
Collect Data and Expand Research on LGBTQ and 
HIV-affected Communities Overall, Particularly  
Data and Research on LGBTQ and HIV-affected  
Communities’ Experiences of Violence.
•	 Federal, state, and local governments should collect and ana-
lyze data that includes sexual orientation and gender iden-
tity, whenever any demographic information is requested, to 
more effectively analyze data on LGBTQ and HIV-affected 
hate violence survivors and victims.
•	 Federal surveys that collect data on incidents of violence, 
including the FBI’s Uniform Crime Report and the United 
States Department of Justice’s National Crime Victimiza-
tion Survey, should include questions regarding the sex-
ual orientation and gender identity of both survivors and 
offenders.

214	
Hate Crimes
Increase Funding for LGBTQ and HIV-affected 
Anti-violence Support and Prevention.
•	 Policymakers and funders should support research on effec-
tive LGBTQ and HIV-affected hate violence prevention 
strategies and models.
•	 Federal, state, and local governments should fund pro-
grams that increase government support for LGBTQ and 
HIV-affected anti-violence programs, by including LGBTQ 
and HIV-affected specific funding in all federal, state, and 
local anti-violence funding streams.
•	 Federal, state, and local governments should recognize that 
violence against LGBTQ and HIV-affected people, partic-
ularly transgender communities of color, as a public health 
crisis and support initiatives to prevent this violence.
•	 Public and private funders should support programs that pro-
vide training and technical assistance on serving LGBTQ and 
HIV-affected survivors of violence to anti-violence grantees.
•	 Public and private funders should support community-based 
hate violence prevention initiatives to target programming 
within communities that are disproportionately affected by 
violence or underreporting their incidents of violence.
•	 Private funders including foundations, corporate donors, 
and individual donors should fund strategies to support 
LGBTQ and HIV-affected survivors separate from the 
criminal legal system including community accountability 
and transformative justice.
•	 Public and private funders should fund data collection and 
research on LGBTQ and HIV-affected communities’ expe-
riences of violence.
Introduction
The 2013 LGBTQ and HIV-affected hate violence report high-
lights annual and multi-year trends grounded in contempo-
rary research to give policymakers, LGBTQ and HIV-affected 

	
Data and Documents	
215
communities, and anti-violence practitioners a wide-ranging 
viewpoint on the current dynamics of homophobic, biphobic, 
and transphobic hate violence. It represents the most in-depth 
information to date on anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected hate 
violence available throughout the U.S. including: detailed 
demographic information on survivors and victims of violence, 
information on hate violence offenders, and data on police and 
medical response to anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected incidents 
of violence. Data on LGBTQ and HIV-affected communities 
in the United States is extremely limited, making it challenging 
for NCAVP to compare its data on LGBTQ and HIV-affected 
survivors to data on overall LGBTQ and HIV-affected commu-
nities. Current data that exists suggests that between 20–25% 
of lesbian and gay people experience hate crimes within their 
lifetimes.3 Unfortunately, data on the prevalence of hate vio-
lence against queer, bisexual, transgender, and HIV-affected 
people is virtually non-existent. The U.S. Census and the 
American Community Survey, the main data collection sur-
veys for the federal government, and the National Crime Vic-
timization Survey, the federal survey on violence in the U.S., 
contains no questions on sexual orientation or gender identity. 
The only comparable data to NCAVP’s hate violence report 
is the “Hate Crime Statistics” report annually released by the 
FBI’s Criminal Justice Information Services Division. This 
report documents hate crimes motivated by bias against sexual 
orientation that local law enforcement agencies report to the 
FBI annually, although only 13.3% of the 13,022 participating 
law enforcement agencies reported hate crime data to the FBI 
in 2012. The FBI is currently working to collect information 
on hate crimes data motivated on the basis of gender identity 
in accordance with the Matthew Shepard, James Byrd Jr. Hate 
Crime Prevention Act, but this information is not currently 
3Hate Crime Victimization Among Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Adults: Prevalence, 
Psychological Correlates, and Methodological Issues http://psychology.ucdavis.edu/
rainbow/html/violence.PDF

216	
Hate Crimes
published.4 In 2013 NCAVP documented over 600 more 
survivors and victims of hate violence than the FBI in 2012 
(1,376 survivors and victims compared to 2,001 survivors and 
victims).5 While the FBI tracks hate crimes and NCAVP tracks 
hate violence including incidents that may not be reported to 
law enforcement or incidents that law enforcement may not 
classify as a hate crime, NCAVP still finds the stark difference 
between these incidents disconcerting.
In January, 2013 the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention (CDC) released a report titled: “The National Intimate 
Partner Violence and Sexual Violence Survey (NISVS): 2010 
findings on Victimization by Sexual Orientation.”6 This ground-
breaking report is the first nationally representative prevalence 
estimate of sexual violence, stalking, and intimate partner vio-
lence among those who identify as lesbian, gay, or bisexual in 
the United States. In many instances of stalking, intimate part-
ner violence, and specifically sexual violence against LGBTQ 
and HIV-affected communities, anti-LGBTQ bias is utilized. 
In this study, participants were asked to identify their sexual 
orientation and/or gender identity. Transgender and gender 
non-conforming people were not represented in the NISVS 
findings because the sample size was too small and based on 
self-reporting. This suggests the need for more explicit inclu-
sion of gender identity and expression in future studies; specif-
ically the inclusion of gender identity and sexual orientation in 
national surveys, like the FBI’s Uniform Crime Report and the 
Department of Justice’s National Crime Victimization Survey, 
that collect data on hate crimes and hate violence. The study 
4FBI Criminal Justice Information Services Division 2011 Hate Crimes Report. 
Accessed from http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/hate-crime/2010/tables/table-
4-offenses-offense-type-by-bias-motivation-2010.xls on April, 4 2014.
5Ibid.
6Centers For Disease Control and Prevention. The National Intimate Partner and 
Sexual Violence Survey: 2010 Findings on Victimization by Sexual Orientation. 
Accessed from http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/nisvs_sofindings.pdf on 
April 4th, 2013.

	
Data and Documents	
217
highlights that the lifetime prevalence of rape by any offender 
against bisexual women was 46.1%, 13.1% for lesbian women 
and 17.4% for heterosexual women.7 In addition, 1 in 3 bisex-
ual women (36.6%) have experienced stalking victimization 
during their lifetime.8 NCAVP welcomes the increased federal 
attention on the experiences of LGBTQ and HIV-affected sur-
vivors and victims and that federal data collection systems are 
becoming increasingly more inclusive.
Despite this groundbreaking progress, the lack of compre-
hensive data about LGBTQ and HIV-affected communities 
and violence results in policymakers, advocates, practitioners, 
and LGBTQ and HIV-affected communities having less infor-
mation on the dynamics of anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected 
hate violence. This reduces LGBTQ and HIV-affected com-
munities’ ability to create programs that increase safety and 
support for LGBTQ and HIV-affected survivors and limits 
LGBTQ and HIV-affected anti-violence programs’ ability 
to measure and evaluate the impact of their programs. Pro-
grams experience challenges measuring their impact without 
this prevalence data because they cannot compare and contrast 
their programmatic rates of violence with overall rates of hate 
violence for LGBTQ and HIV-affected communities. It also 
affects anti-violence programs’ ability to tailor programming to 
the communities who are most severely impacted by violence.
Recognizing the unique and critical role that NCAVP’s hate 
violence report serves, NCAVP continually strives to ensure 
that this report is accessible to multiple audiences, reflects the 
current lived experiences of LGBTQ and HIV-affected com-
munities, and provides practical tools to assist anti-violence 
programs and policymakers working to end anti-LGBTQ and 
HIV-affected hate violence. In 2013 NCAVP continued the 
data enhancement project, which originally started in 2010. 
7Ibid.
8Ibid.

218	
Hate Crimes
This project allowed NCAVP to highlight the specific impact 
of hate violence and intimate partner violence on transgender 
communities and LGBTQ and HIV-affected communities of 
color, among many other communities, within our annual 
reports. In addition, in 2013 NCAVP collected data on the 
socioeconomic condition of survivors, and plans to publish 
this data in 2014 reports. NCAVP, in 2013, increased the 
amount of variables and person-level analysis compared to pre-
vious years and continues to create new analytical categories to 
understand the intersections of identity and hate violence. The 
increasing severity of hate violence LGBTQ and HIV-affected 
communities face only reinforces NCAVP’s need to find new 
ways to document and analyze hate violence to support critical 
legislative, policy, and cultural change.
Gender Identity of Offenders
In 2013, male offenders were the majority of the perpetrators of 
hate violence, representing 72.45% of reports of hate violence 
offenders, a large increase from 2012 (43.49%). Women made 
up 18.25% of offenders, an increase from 2012 (9.52%). These 
increases in the number of male and female perpetrators are 
due to the decrease in the reporting of the number of offenders 
identified as cisgender, although it would be safe to assume 
that a large majority of those offenders identified as men and 
women are also cisgender individuals. Transgender, intersex, 
and other self-identified offenders account for less than 1% of 
offenders in instances of hate violence. These findings suggest, 
similar to age, that offenders are more likely to target people 
of the same identity they hold, except for hate violence inci-
dents involving transgender survivors, who usually identify the 
person who acted violently against them as cisgender. This is 
the second year that NCAVP has collected this data, and we 
believe that the data, while reflecting the survivors and victims’ 
perceptions, is more accurate for men and cisgender offenders 
than for other gender identities. This data gives policymakers 

	
Data and Documents	
219
and practitioners important information on the need to target 
hate violence prevention programs towards cisgender men.
Racial and Ethnic Identity of Offenders
In 2013 most instances of hate violence against LGBTQ and 
HIV-affected communities (39.09%) were committed by 
offenders perceived to be White by survivors, while in 2012 
White offenders accounted for 27.30% of total offenders. 
Black and Latina@ offenders account for 34.14% and 20.68% 
of offenders respectively. In 2012 Black offenders were identi-
fied in 40.7% of incidents while Latin@ offenders accounted 
for 25.11% of overall offenders. In 3.68% of hate violence inci-
dents, the perpetrators were not identified as clearly belonging 
to a particular ethnic or racial category and were identified as 
“self-identified or other” by survivors which is consistent with 
data from 2012. Asian/Pacific Islander, Arab/Middle Eastern 
and Native American offenders make up a combined total of 
less than 3% of offender racial identities. It is important to 
note that offender race is based on the survivor’s perception 
of the offenders’ racial identity, and data in this category often 
does not show any particular trends from one year to the next.
Age of Offenders
In 2013 30.70% of offenders were between 19–29, a decrease 
from 2012 (45.5%). Ages 30–39 and 40–49 both represent 
12.60% of reports, which represents a decrease for both age 
categories from 18.67% and 14.79% respectively. The number 
of youth offenders, between the ages of 15–18 also decreased 
from 13.12% in 2012 to 10.46% in 2013. In contrast, the 
number of offenders over the age of 50 increased sharply from 
accounting approximately 7% of offenders in 2012 to more 
than 9% in 2013. The range of reported ages of offenders mir-
rors that of LGBTQ and HIV-affected survivors of hate vio-
lence, suggesting that offenders are likely to be close in age with 
the survivors. This data also shows the need for hate violence 

220	
Hate Crimes
prevention strategies and LGBTQ and HIV-affected education 
programs targeted at youth and young adults.
Total Number of Offenders
In 2013 68.75% of survivors were attacked by one offender, 
a slight increase from 2012 (62.80%). Also in 2013, 23.08% 
of survivors reported 2–5 offenders, which is fairly consistent 
with 2012 (18.90%), and only 2.40% of survivors reported 
10 or more offenders, a large decrease from 2012 (16.10%). 
Furthermore, 5.77% of survivors reported 6–9 offenders, 
which is an increase from 2012 (2.20%). The increase in mul-
tiple offenders is likely reflecting more accurate reporting by 
NCAVP members. NCAVP members often observe that more 
than other types of violence, hate violence is more likely to 
involve group violence. Scholars observe that hate violence is 
often fueled by a sense of peer approval,9 which increases the 
amounts of offenders. Anti-LGBTQ and HIV-affected group 
violence may be particularly common due to a need on the 
part of offenders to assert their heterosexuality in front of their 
peers. This “peer mentality” can make hate violence incidents 
more severe and in some cases more deadly.10
Offender Relationships
Data collected by NCAVP from 2013 indicates that in 46.95% 
of cases of hate violence, the offender was someone whom the 
survivor already knew, which contradicts the popular belief 
that hate violence is usually perpetrated by strangers.
In 2013, landlords, tenants, and neighbors represented the 
most common category of known offenders (25.83%), a slight 
increase from 2012 (24.26%). Employers and co-workers rep-
resent 15.53% of known offenders, which is consistent with 
9“Hate Crimes: Characteristics of Incidents, Victims, and Offenders,” McDevitt, J., 
et al. Accessed from: http://www.sagepub.com/upm-data/14238_Chapter6.pdf on 
April 16, 2014.
10Ibid.

	
Data and Documents	
221
2012 when 15.99% of known offenders were employees and 
co-workers. Relatives and family represent 14.95% of known 
offenders, another increase from 2012 (13.74%). Within 
known offenders, other relationships represented 14.37% of 
total reports, a slight increase from 2012 (11.78%), which indi-
cates that these categories are not exhaustive. Acquaintances 
and friends represent 9.87% of known offenders, remaining 
fairly consistent with 2012 data (8.98%). The police and other 
law enforcement combined represent less than 2% of hate 
violence offenders, a notable decrease from the previous year 
(6.45%). Ex-lovers, ex-partners, lovers and partners, service 
providers, roommates, and first responders each represent 5% 
or less of known offenders.
These findings reflect the diversity of hate violence offenders 
showing that LGBTQ and HIV-affected people experience hate 
violence from a range of people in their lives, from landlords, 
from employers, within families, and from law enforcement. 
The increase in hate violence from employers, co-workers, and 
landlords points to the need for non-discrimination policies for 
LGBTQ and HIV-affected people to prevent workplace and hous-
ing based hate violence. For some LGBTQ and HIV-affected, 
communities, the pervasive experiences of hate violence and dis-
crimination can result in long-term economic consequences.
In 2013, 87.34% of unknown offenders were strangers, 
an increase from 2012 (73.01%). Only 9.90% of unknown 
offenders were police, a significant decrease from 2012 
(23.93%). In 1.25% of cases where the offender was indi-
cated as unknown, the violence was reported to be related 
to pick-up/hook-up violence which remains consistent with 
2012 (1.53%). To address pick-up/hook-up related hate vio-
lence, the Buckeye Region Anti-Violence Organization, New 
York City Anti-Violence Project, and other NCAVP members 
are engaged in targeted outreach through online dating and 
hook-up sites. First responders, other unknown relationships, 
and other law enforcement combined made up less than 1% of 
total unknown offenders.

222	
Hate Crimes
Source: National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs. Les-
bian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and HIV-Affected 
Hate Violence in 2013: 2014 Release Edition. New York: 
NCAVP. Available online at http://www.avp.org/storage/docu-
ments/2013_ncavp_hvreport_final.pdf Used by permission of 
the National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs.
Vulnerable to Hate: A Survey of Hate Crimes 
Committed against Homeless People in 2013
Published by the National Coalition for the Homeless in June 2014, 
this excerpt “has the main objective of educating lawmakers, advo-
cates, and the general public about the problem of hate crimes and 
violence against homeless people. The hope is to instigate change 
and ensure protection of civil rights for everyone, regardless of their 
economic circumstances or housing status.”
Executive Summary
In the past 15 years (1999–2013), the National Coalition for 
the Homeless (NCH) has documented 1,437 acts of violence 
against homeless individuals by housed perpetrators. These 
crimes are believed to have been motivated by the perpetrators’ 
biases against homeless individuals or by their ability to target 
homeless people with relative ease. VULNERABLE TO HATE: 
A Survey of Hate Crimes Committed against Homeless People in 
2013 is the 15th annual report documenting violence against 
people experiencing homelessness, including an array of atroci-
ties from murder to beatings, rapes, and even mutilation.
NCH found startling data in the number and severity of attacks. 
However, the reports also acknowledge that, since the homeless 
community is treated so poorly in our society, many more attacks 
go unreported. Hate crimes against the homeless community are 
part of an issue that is in growing need of public attention.
Over the last 15 years, NCH has determined the following:
•	 1,437 reported acts of violence have been committed against 
homeless individuals.

	
Data and Documents	
223
•	 375 of the victims have lost their lives as a result of the 
attacks.
•	 Reported violence has occurred in 47 states, Puerto Rico, 
and Washington, DC.
•	 Perpetrators of these attacks were generally male and under 
the age 30; most commonly they were teenage boys.
Specifically, in 2013:
•	 85% of all perpetrators were under the age of 30.
•	 93% of all perpetrators were male.
•	 65% of all victims were 40 years old or older.
•	 90% of all victims were male.
•	 18 of the 109 attacks resulted in death.
VULNERABLE TO HATE: A Survey of Hate Crimes Com-
mitted against Homeless People in 2013 documents the known 
cases of violence against individuals experiencing homelessness 
by housed individuals in 2013. The report includes descrip-
tions of the cases, current and pending legislation that would 
help protect homeless people, and recommendations for advo-
cates to help prevent violence against homeless individuals.
Purpose Statement
The main objective of this report is to educate lawmakers, 
advocates, and the general public about hate crimes and vio-
lence against homeless people, in order to bring about change 
and ensure the protection of civil rights for everyone, regard-
less of economic circumstances or housing status. As part of 
its mission, the NCH is committed to creating the systemic 
and attitudinal changes necessary to end homelessness. A large 
component of these changes must include the societal guar-
antee of safety and protection, as well as a commitment by 
lawmakers to combat hate crimes and other violent acts against 
people who experience homelessness.

224	
Hate Crimes
Methodology
The data on violent acts committed against the homeless pop-
ulation was gathered from a variety of sources. A number of 
narratives were taken from published national and local news 
reports. Homeless advocates and local service providers across 
the country provided information about incidents in their local 
communities. Lastly, this report relied on the voices of home-
less persons and formerly homeless people, who self-reported 
incidents they experienced first-hand.
Every reported incident was subject to a rigorous factcheck-
ing process, designed to evaluate and verify the accuracy of 
the reported events. This process entailed multiple follow-up 
discussions with those closely involved with the incident. 
Cross-comparisons were also made with other news sources 
reporting the incident.
While the motive for each attack was not always evident from 
the information available, in many cases, there was confirmation 
that these violent acts were perpetrated because of a bias against 
the victim based his or her housing status. Other attacks were 
deemed opportunistic, and committed merely because the home-
less person, due to the nature of homelessness, was in a vulnerable 
position that turned him or her into an easy target. Only attacks 
perpetrated by housed individuals against un-housed individuals 
were evaluated. Crimes committed by homeless people against 
other homeless persons were excluded from this report.
Although the NCH has made every effort to verify the facts 
regarding each incident included in this report, new informa-
tion about cases may become available after its publication. For 
this reason, the NCH constantly researches and reviews all facts 
related to the included data. As additional evidence emerges 
about prior, new, or previously unknown cases, it is the policy 
of NCH to adjust tabulations based on the new information.
Now and Then: Hate Crimes against the  
Homeless 1999–2013
The FBI does not currently recognize a protected status for 
people experiencing homelessness. Over the past 15  years, 

	
Data and Documents	
225
the NCH has recorded 1,437 incidents of crimes commit-
ted against this unprotected group. In 2013 alone, the NCH 
became aware of 109 attacks, 18 of which resulted in death. 
While this report provides alarming statistics, it is important 
to note that people experiencing homelessness are often treated 
so poorly by society that attacks are forgotten or unreported.
In this country, hate crimes are committed against a group of 
vulnerable people who are at constant risk because they live in 
public spaces. Many of our local communities do not have shel-
ter space or adequate affordable housing to meet their needs. 
According to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, on a single night in 2013 there were 610,042 
homeless people in the United States, including 387,845 who 
were homeless as individuals and 222,197 who were homeless 
in families.
Violence against the homeless by housed individuals is an 
alarming trend that has often increased from year to year and 
certainly has not decreased in occurrence from 1999 to 2013. 
In 2013, the same number of fatal attacks (18) occurred as in 
2012 and 30 percent more nonlethal attacks were committed.
This reality worsens when one considers the fact that many 
violent acts against homeless populations go unreported and 
therefore, the true number of incidents is likely to be substan-
tially higher.
Source: Stoops, Michael. Vulnerable to Hate: A Survey of Hate 
Crimes & Violence Committed against Homeless People in 
2013. Washington, DC: National Coalition for the Homeless, 
2014. Used by permission of the National Coalition for the 
Homeless.
Kennedy Introduces the Hate Crimes Amendment
This speech in defense of hate crime statutes was given by the late 
Senator Edward Kennedy, who cosponsored the initial legislation 
that later culminated in the Matthew Shepard hate crimes law.
I’d like to speak for a moment regarding the Hate Crimes 
Amendment—at a time when our ideals are under attack by 

226	
Hate Crimes
terrorists in other lands, it is more important than ever to 
demonstrate that we practice what we preach, and that we are 
doing all we can to root out the bigotry and prejudice in our 
own country that leads to violence here at home. Now more 
than ever, we need to act against hate crimes and send a strong 
message here at home and around the world that we will not 
tolerate crimes fueled by hate.
Since the September  11th attacks, we’ve seen a shame-
ful increase in the number of hate crimes committed against 
Muslims, Sikhs, and Americans of Middle Eastern descent. 
Congress has done much to respond to the vicious attacks of 
September 11th. We’re doing all that we can to strengthen our 
defenses against hate that comes from abroad. We’ve spent bil-
lions of dollars in the War on Terrorism to ensure that interna-
tional terrorist organizations such as al’ Qaeda are not able to 
carry out attacks within the United States. There is no reason 
why Congress should not act to strengthen our defenses against 
hate that occurs here at home.
In Iraq and Afghanistan, our soldiers are fighting for free-
dom and liberty—they are on the front line fighting against 
evil and hate. We owe it to our troops to uphold those same 
principles here at home.
Hate crimes are a form of domestic terrorism. They send the 
poisonous message that some Americans deserve to be victim-
ized solely because of who they are. Like other acts of terrorism, 
hate crimes have an impact far greater than the impact on the 
individual victims. They are crimes against entire communities, 
against the whole nation, and against the fundamental ideals 
on which America was founded. They are a violation of all our 
country stands for.
We’re united in our effort to root out the cells of hatred 
around the world. We should not turn a blind eye to acts of 
hatred and terrorism here at home. We should not shrink 
now from our role as the beacon of liberty to the rest of the 
world. The national interest in condemning bias-motivated 
violence in the United States is strong, and so is our interest 

	
Data and Documents	
227
in condemning bias-motivated violence occurring world-wide. 
When the Senate approves this amendment, we will send a 
message about freedom and equality that will resonate around 
the world.
Mr. President, hate crimes violate everything our country 
stands for. They send the poisonous message that some Amer-
icans deserve to be victimized solely because of who they 
are. These are crimes committed against entire communities, 
against the nation as a whole and the very ideals on which our 
country was founded.
The time has come to stand up for the victims of these sense-
less acts of violence—victims like Matthew Shepard, for whom 
this bill is named, and who died a horrible death in 1998 at the 
hands of two men who singled him out because of his sexual 
orientation. Nine years after Matthew’s death—nine years—we 
still haven’t gotten it done. How long are we going to wait?
Senator Smith and I urge your support of this bipartisan bill. 
The House has come through on their side and passed the bill. 
Now it’s time for the Senate to do the same. This year, we can 
get it done. We came close twice before. In 2000 and 2002, 
a majority of Senators voted to pass this legislation. In 2004, 
we had 65 votes for the bill and it was adopted as part of the 
Defense Authorization Bill. But—that time—it was stripped 
out in conference.
The President has threatened to veto this legislation, but we 
can’t let that threat stop us from doing the right thing. Let’s dis-
play the same kind of courage that came from David Ritcheson, 
a victim of a brutal hate crime that scarred him both physically 
and emotionally. This spring, David testified before the House 
Judiciary Committee. He courageously described the horrific 
attack against him the year before—after what had been an 
enjoyable evening with other high school students near his 
home in Spring, Texas.
Later in the evening however, two persons attacked him 
and one attempted to carve a swastika into his chest. He was 
viciously beaten and burned with cigarettes, while his attackers 

228	
Hate Crimes
screamed terrible epithets at him. He lay unconscious on the 
ground for 9 hours, and remained in a coma for several weeks. 
After a very difficult recovery, David became a courageous and 
determined advocate. Tragically, though, this life-changing 
experience exacted its toll on David and recently, he took his 
own life. He had tried so hard to look forward, but he was still 
haunted by this brutal experience.
My deepest sympathy and condolences go out to David’s 
family and friends coping with this tragic loss. David’s death 
shows us that these crimes have a profound psychological 
impact. We must do all we can to let victims know they are not 
to blame for this brutality, that their lives are equally valued. 
We can’t wait any longer to act.
Our amendment is supported by a broad coalition of 210 
law enforcement, civic, disability, religious and civil rights 
groups, including the International Association of Chiefs of 
Police, the Anti-Defamation League, the Interfaith Alliance, the 
National Sheriff’s Association, the Human Rights Campaign, 
the National District Attorneys Association and the Leader-
ship Conference on Civil Rights. All these diverse groups have 
come together to say now is the time for us to take action to 
protect our fellow citizens from the brutality of hate-motivated 
violence. They support this legislation, because they know it is 
a balanced and sensible approach that will bring greater pro-
tection to our citizens along with much needed resources to 
improve local and state law enforcement.
Our bill corrects two major deficiencies in current law. 
Excessive restrictions require proof that victims were attacked 
because they were engaged in certain “federally protected activ-
ities.” And the scope of the law is limited, covering hate crimes 
based on race, religion, or ethnic background alone.
The federally protected activity requirement is outdated, 
unwise and unnecessary, particularly when we consider the 
unjust outcomes of this requirement. Hate crimes now occur in 
a variety of circumstances, and citizens are often targeted during 
routine activities that should be protected. All victims should 

	
Data and Documents	
229
be protected—and it’s simply wrong that a hate crime—like 
the one against David Ritcheson—can’t be prosecuted federally 
because it happened in a private home.
The bill also recognizes that some hate crimes are committed 
against people because of their sexual orientation, their gender, 
their gender identity, or their disability. Passing this bill will 
send a loud and clear message. All hate crimes will face federal 
prosecution. Action is long overdue. There are too many stories 
and too many victims.
We must do all we can to end these senseless crimes, and 
I urge my colleagues to support cloture on this amendment 
and to support its passage as an amendment to the DOD 
authorization bill.
Source: Kennedy, Ted. “The Matthew Shepard Act.” Congres-
sional Record, 110th Congress. Senate, September 25, 2007. 
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, S12026.
Obama on the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. 
Hate Crimes Prevention Act
After Congress passed the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. 
Hate Crimes Prevention Act in 2009, President Obama spoke of 
the historic nature of this new law.
Hello, everybody. Good to see you. Yes. Thank you so much, 
and welcome to the White House. There are several people here 
that I want to just make mention of because they helped to 
make today possible: we’ve got Attorney General Eric Holder 
and the Department of Justice crowd; a champion of this leg-
islation and a great Speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi; my 
dear friend, senior Senator from the great State of Illinois, 
Dick Durbin; the outstanding chairman of Armed Services, 
Carl Levin; Senator Arlen Specter; chairman of the Judiciary 
Committee in the House, Representative John Conyers; Rep-
resentative Barney Frank; Representative Tammy Baldwin; 
Representative Jerry Nadler; Representative Jared Polis; all the 
Members of Congress who are here today. We thank you.

230	
Hate Crimes
Mr. David Bohnett and Mr. Tom Gregory and the David 
Bohnett Foundation—they are partners for this reception—thank 
you so much, guys, for helping to host this; and finally and most 
importantly, because these were really the spearheads of this 
effort, Dennis, Judy, and Logan Shepard, as well as Betty Byrd 
Boatner and Louvon Harris, sisters of James Byrd, Jr. To all the 
activists, all the organizers, all the people who helped make this 
day happen, thank you for your years of advocacy and activism, 
pushing and protesting that made this victory possible.
You know, as a nation we’ve come far on the journey towards 
a more perfect union. And today, we’ve taken another step for-
ward. This afternoon, I signed into law the Matthew Shepard 
and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act.
This is the culmination of a struggle that has lasted more 
than a decade. Time and again, we faced opposition. Time and 
again, the measure was defeated or delayed. Time and again, 
we’ve been reminded of the difficulty of building a nation in 
which we’re all free to live and love as we see fit. But the cause 
endured and the struggle continued, waged by the family of 
Matthew Shepard, by the family of James Byrd, by folks who 
held vigils and led marches, by those who rallied and organized 
and refused to give up, by the late Senator Ted Kennedy who 
fought so hard for this legislation and all who toiled for years 
to reach this day.
Now, you understand that we must stand against crimes that 
are meant not only to break bones, but to break spirits, not 
only to inflict harm, but to instill fear. You understand that 
the rights afforded every citizen under our Constitution mean 
nothing if we do not protect those rights, both from unjust 
laws and violent acts. And you understand how necessary this 
law continues to be.
In the most recent year for which we have data, the FBI 
reported roughly 7,600 hate crimes in this country. Over the 
past 10  years, there were more than 12,000 reported hate 
crimes based on sexual orientation alone. And we will never 
know how many incidents were never reported at all.

	
Data and Documents	
231
And that’s why, through this law, we will strengthen the pro-
tections against crimes based on the color of your skin, the 
faith in your heart, or the place of your birth. We will finally 
add Federal protections against crimes based on gender, dis-
ability, gender identity, or sexual orientation. And prosecutors 
will have new tools to work with States in order to prosecute to 
the fullest those who would perpetrate such crimes, because no 
one in America should ever be afraid to walk down the street 
holding the hands of the person they love. No one in America 
should be forced to look over their shoulder because of who 
they are or because they live with a disability.
At root, this isn’t just about our laws; this is about who we are 
as a people. This is about whether we value one another, whether 
we embrace our differences rather than allowing them to become 
a source of animus. It’s hard for any of us to imagine the mindset 
of someone who would kidnap a young man and beat him to 
within an inch of his life, tie him to a fence, and leave him for 
dead. It’s hard for any of us to imagine the twisted mentality of 
those who’d offer a neighbor a ride home, attack him, chain him 
to the back of a truck, and drag him for miles until he finally died.
But we sense where such cruelty begins: the moment we fail 
to see in another our common humanity, the very moment when 
we fail to recognize in a person the same fears and hopes, the same 
passions and imperfections, the same dreams that we all share.
We have for centuries strived to live up to our founding ideal 
of a nation where all are free and equal and able to pursue 
their own version of happiness. Through conflict and tumult, 
through the morass of hatred and prejudice, through periods 
of division and discord we have endured and grown stronger 
and fairer and freer. And at every turn, we’ve made progress 
not only by changing laws but by changing hearts, by our will-
ingness to walk in another’s shoes, by our capacity to love and 
accept even in the face of rage and bigotry.
In April of 1968, just 1 week after the assassination of Mar-
tin Luther King, as our Nation mourned in grief and shud-
dered in anger, President Lyndon Johnson signed landmark 

232	
Hate Crimes
civil rights legislation. This was the first time we enshrined into 
law Federal protections against crimes motivated by religious 
or racial hatred, the law on which we build today.
As he signed his name, at a difficult moment for our coun-
try, President Johnson said that through this law “the bells of 
freedom ring out a little louder.” That is the promise of Amer-
ica. Over the sound of hatred and chaos, over the din of grief 
and anger, we can still hear those ideals, even when they are 
faint, even when some would try to drown them out. At our 
best we seek to make sure those ideals can be heard and felt 
by Americans everywhere. That work did not end in 1968. It 
certainly does not end today. But because of the efforts of the 
folks in this room, particularly those family members who are 
standing behind me, we can be proud that that bell rings even 
louder now and each day grows louder still.
So thank you very much. God bless you, and God bless the 
United States of America.
Source: Barack Obama: “Remarks on the Enactment of the 
Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention 
Act,” October 28, 2009. Online by Gerhard Peters and John 
T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project. http://www.presi-
dency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=86813.
Federal Hate Crimes Laws
The two following documents are taken from the U.S. Code: the 
first states the federal government’s jurisdiction over hate crimes; 
the second document asserts the government mandate to support 
educational efforts and training in the elementary and secondary 
schools to prevent hate crimes.
18 U.S. Code § 249—Hate Crime Acts
(a)	 In General.—
(1)  Offenses involving actual or perceived race, color, reli-
gion, or national origin.—

	
Data and Documents	
233
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, will-
fully causes bodily injury to any person or, through the use 
of fire, a firearm, a dangerous weapon, or an explosive or 
incendiary device, attempts to cause bodily injury to any 
person, because of the actual or perceived race, color, reli-
gion, or national origin of any person—
(A)  shall be imprisoned not more than 10 years, fined in 
accordance with this title, or both; and
(B)  shall be imprisoned for any term of years or for life, 
fined in accordance with this title, or both, if—
(i)	 death results from the offense; or
(ii)	the offense includes kidnapping or an attempt to 
kidnap, aggravated sexual abuse or an attempt to 
commit aggravated sexual abuse, or an attempt 
to kill.
(2)  Offenses involving actual or perceived religion, nation-
al origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or 
disability.—
(A)  In general.— Whoever, whether or not acting under 
color of law, in any circumstance described in subpar-
agraph (B) or paragraph (3), willfully causes bodily in-
jury to any person or, through the use of fire, a firearm, 
a dangerous weapon, or an explosive or incendiary de-
vice, attempts to cause bodily injury to any person, 
because of the actual or perceived religion, national 
origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or 
disability of any person—
(i)	 shall be imprisoned not more than 10 years, fined in 
accordance with this title, or both; and
(ii)	shall be imprisoned for any term of years or for life, 
fined in accordance with this title, or both, if—
(I)	 death results from the offense; or
(II)	the offense includes kidnapping or an attempt to 
kidnap, aggravated sexual abuse or an attempt to 

234	
Hate Crimes
commit aggravated sexual abuse, or an attempt 
to kill.
(B)  Circumstances described.— For purposes of subpara-
graph (A), the circumstances described in this subpar-
agraph are that—
(i)	 the conduct described in subparagraph (A) occurs 
during the course of, or as the result of, the travel of 
the defendant or the victim—
(I)	 across a State line or national border; or
(II)	using a channel, facility, or instrumentality of inter-
state or foreign commerce;
(ii)	the defendant uses a channel, facility, or instrumen-
tality of interstate or foreign commerce in connec-
tion with the conduct described in subparagraph 
(A);
(iii)	in connection with the conduct described in sub-
paragraph (A), the defendant employs a firearm, 
dangerous weapon, explosive or incendiary device, 
or other weapon that has traveled in interstate or 
foreign commerce; or
(iv)	the conduct described in subparagraph (A)—
(I)	 interferes with commercial or other economic activ-
ity in which the victim is engaged at the time of the 
conduct; or
(II)	otherwise affects interstate or foreign commerce.
(3)  Offenses occurring in the special maritime or terri-
torial jurisdiction of the united states.—Whoever, 
within the special maritime or territorial jurisdiction 
of the United States, engages in conduct described in 
paragraph (1) or in paragraph (2)(A) (without regard 
to whether that conduct occurred in a circumstance 
described in paragraph (2)(B)) shall be subject to the 
same penalties as prescribed in those paragraphs.

	
Data and Documents	
235
(4)  Guidelines.—All prosecutions conducted by the 
United States under this section shall be undertaken 
pursuant to guidelines issued by the Attorney Gen-
eral, or the designee of the Attorney General, to be 
included in the United States Attorneys’ Manual that 
shall establish neutral and objective criteria for deter-
mining whether a crime was committed because of 
the actual or perceived status of any person.
(b)	Certification Requirement.—
(1)  In general.— No prosecution of any offense described 
in this subsection may be undertaken by the United 
States, except under the certification in writing of the 
Attorney General, or a designee, that—
(A)  the State does not have jurisdiction;
(B)  the State has requested that the Federal Govern-
ment assume jurisdiction;
(C)  the verdict or sentence obtained pursuant to State 
charges left demonstratively unvindicated the 
Federal interest in eradicating bias-motivated vio-
lence; or
(D)	a prosecution by the United States is in the public 
interest and necessary to secure substantial justice.
(2)  Rule of construction.— Nothing in this subsection 
shall be construed to limit the authority of Federal 
officers, or a Federal grand jury, to investigate possible 
violations of this section.
(c)	 Definitions.— In this section—
(1)  the term “bodily injury” has the meaning given such 
term in section 1365 (h)(4) of this title, but does not 
include solely emotional or psychological harm to the 
victim;
(2)  the term “explosive or incendiary device” has the meaning  
given such term in section 232 of this title;

236	
Hate Crimes
(3)  the term “firearm” has the meaning given such term in 
section 921 (a) of this title;
(4)  the term “gender identity” means actual or perceived 
gender-related characteristics; and
(5)  the term “State” includes the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico, and any other territory or possession of 
the United States.
(d)	Statute of Limitations.—
(1)  Offenses not resulting in death.— Except as pro-
vided in paragraph (2), no person shall be prosecuted, 
tried, or punished for any offense under this section 
unless the indictment for such offense is found, or the 
information for such offense is instituted, not later 
than 7 years after the date on which the offense was 
committed.
(2)  Death resulting offenses.— An indictment or infor-
mation alleging that an offense under this section 
resulted in death may be found or instituted at any 
time without limitation.
20 U.S. Code § 7133—Hate Crime Prevention
(a)	 Grant authorization
From funds made available to carry out this subpart under 
section 7103 (2) of this title the Secretary may make grants 
to local educational agencies and community-based orga-
nizations for the purpose of providing assistance to locali-
ties most directly affected by hate crimes.
(b)	Use of funds
(1)  Program development
Grants under this section may be used to improve elemen-
tary and secondary educational efforts, including—
(A)  development of education and training programs 
designed to prevent and to reduce the incidence of 
crimes and conflicts motivated by hate;

	
Data and Documents	
237
(B)  development of curricula for the purpose of im-
proving conflict or dispute resolution skills of stu-
dents, teachers, and administrators;
(C)  development and acquisition of equipment and in-
structional materials to meet the needs of, or other-
wise be part of, hate crime or conflict programs; and
(D)  professional training and development for teachers 
and administrators on the causes, effects, and reso-
lutions of hate crimes or hate-based conflicts.
(2)  Application
In order to be eligible to receive a grant under this section 
for any fiscal year, a local educational agency, or a local ed-
ucational agency in conjunction with a community-based 
organization, shall submit an application to the Secretary 
in such form and containing such information as the Sec-
retary may reasonably require.
(3)  Requirements
Each application under paragraph (2) shall include—
(A)  a request for funds for the purpose described in this 
section;
(B)  a description of the schools and communities to be 
served by the grants; and
(C)  assurances that Federal funds received under this 
section shall be used to supplement, and not sup-
plant, non-Federal funds.
(4)  Comprehensive plan
Each application shall include a comprehensive plan that 
contains—
(A)  a description of the hate crime or conflict problems 
within the schools or the community targeted for 
assistance;
(B)  a description of the program to be developed or 
augmented by such Federal and matching funds;

238	
Hate Crimes
(C)  assurances that such program or activity shall be 
administered by or under the supervision of the 
applicant;
(D)  procedures for the proper and efficient administra-
tion of such program; and
(E)  fiscal control and fund accounting procedures as 
may be necessary to ensure prudent use, proper 
disbursement, and accurate accounting of funds 
received under this section.
(c)	 Award of grants
(1)  Selection of recipients
The Secretary shall consider the incidence of crimes and 
conflicts motivated by bias in the targeted schools and 
communities in awarding grants under this section.
(2)  Geographic distribution
The Secretary shall attempt, to the extent practicable, to 
achieve an equitable geographic distribution of grant awards.
(3)  Dissemination of information
The Secretary shall attempt, to the extent practicable, to 
make available information regarding successful hate crime 
prevention programs, including programs established or 
expanded with grants under this section.
(d)	Reports
The Secretary shall submit to Congress a report every 
2 years that shall contain a detailed statement regarding 
grants and awards, activities of grant recipients, and an 
evaluation of programs established under this section.
Source: U.S. Code. http://uscode.house.gov/.

This page intentionally left blank


241
6	
Resources for  
Further Research
Since the publication of the first edition of this book, the litera-
ture on hate crimes has burgeoned, making it difficult to compile 
a comprehensive listing even for materials published since 1999. 
Since many books on this topic often provide important and, 
occasionally, unique historical and analytical information not eas-
ily accessible elsewhere, this list includes many previously listed 
titles in addition to the many recent new books. Most of the mag-
azine and journal citations, however, cover material published 
from 1999 through 2014. The following list is necessarily selec-
tive and will provide the student and researcher with annotated 
citations to significant and diverse publications on the topic.
Books
Allport, Gordon. The Nature of Prejudice. Menlo Park, CA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1979 (originally published in 1954).
A pioneering work by a Harvard psychologist on the 
social and psychological nature of bigotry.
Barkun, Michael. Religion and the Racist Right: The Origins of 
the Christian Identity Movement. Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1994.
From left, Judy Shepard, cofounder of Matthew Shepard Foundation, and 
Ellen Kahn, Director of Children, Youth and Families Program at Human 
Rights Campaign (HRC), speak on stage at HRC’s Time to Thrive Confer-
ence, on February, 14, 2014, in Las Vegas. (AP Photo for Human Rights 
Campaign/Jeff Bottari)

242	
Hate Crimes
A survey and analysis of the Christian Identity move-
ment, a racist and anti-Jewish ideology whose adherents 
claim is a religion.
Bell, Jeannine. Policing Hatred: Law Enforcement, Civil Rights 
and Hate Crime. New York: New York University Press, 2002.
This ethnographic study analyzes the way law enforce-
ment officers enforce hate crime laws and discusses the 
societal impacts of their efforts.
Bellant, Russ. Old Nazis, the New Right and the Republican 
Party. Boston: South End, 1991.
A disturbing investigation of the heretofore unknown ties of 
former Nazis who immigrated to this country after World 
War II and established ties to mainstream political groups.
Blee, Kathleen. Inside Organized Racism: Women in the Hate 
Movement. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002.
Author of an earlier work on women in the Ku Klux Klan 
(see later), University of Pittsburgh sociology professor 
Kathleen Blee provides unique insight on women involved 
in contemporary violently racist movements. After inter-
viewing a few dozen participants over a two-year period, she 
learned that the common stereotype of these women—poor, 
uneducated, raised in abusive families, and mainly recruited 
by boyfriends or husbands—was not usually true.
Blee, Kathleen. Women of the Klan: Racism and Gender in the 
1920s. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.
This historical volume examines the involvement of 
women in the most notorious racist organization in the 
United States. The author interviewed many former 
members living in the Midwest and learned that some of 
these women were involved with women’s suffrage and 
other progressive movements.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
243
Bussey, Jennifer A. Hate Crimes. Detroit: Greenhaven Press, 
2007.
This anthology of essays on hate crimes contains a large 
number of primary documents—including speeches, court 
cases, personal reflections, and newspaper accounts—that 
discuss this topic from earlier times to the present. The 
essays by historians and contemporary scholars add useful 
background information.
Chanes, Jerome A. Antisemitism: A Reference Handbook. Santa 
Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2004.
This volume surveys the historical, political and sociological 
manifestations of anti-Jewish prejudice and violence in more 
than fifty countries. The work includes an extensive intro-
ductory essay, a chronology of significant events, movements 
and legislation, print and nonprint surveys of the topic, and 
a list of organizations combating this age-old hatred. Chanes, 
a U.S. Jewish communal leader, also discusses governmental, 
judicial and other efforts to counteract anti-Semitism.
Cleary, Edward J. Beyond the Burning Cross: The First Amend-
ment and the Landmark R.A.V. Case. New York: Random 
House, 1994.
This work offers an extensive discussion of the legal ram-
ifications of the Supreme Court case involving a hate 
crime in St. Paul, Minnesota, in 1992.
Coates, James. Armed and Dangerous: The Rise of the Survivalist 
Right. New York: Hill and Wang, 1995.
An investigative reporter for the Chicago Tribune, Coates 
has written an informative survey of the main organiza-
tions and individuals on the violent wing of the extreme 
political right in the United States. A preface to this edition 
updates events since its initial publication in 1987. Espe-
cially noteworthy is the bibliographic notes section, which 

244	
Hate Crimes
provides access to a wide variety of relevant newspaper and 
magazine articles and books published in the 1980s.
Comstock, Gary David. Violence against Lesbians and Gay Men. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1991.
This study provides statistical data on the extent of antigay 
violence nationwide and offers a theoretical framework to 
examine its origins. The book includes a chapter on police 
violence and empirical data on perpetrators. Also contains 
extensive footnotes and a bibliography.
Dees, Morris, and Steve Fiffer. Hate on Trial: The Case against 
America’s Most Dangerous Neo-Nazi. New York: Villard Books, 
1993.
The story of the lawsuit brought by a founder of the 
Southern Poverty Law Center against Tom Metzger, a 
neo-Nazi, who instigated the murder of an Ethiopian 
student in Portland, Oregon. Metzger and his skinhead 
group were required to pay a multimillion-dollar settle-
ment to the family of the murdered African immigrant.
Dees, Morris, and Steve Fiffer. A Lawyer’s Journey: The Morris 
Dees Story. Chicago: American Bar Association, 2001.
Originally published in 1991 as A Season for Justice. This 
volume brings Dees’s autobiography up to date as of 2001 
and includes new material on Dees’s most recent legal vic-
tory over the Aryan Nations in Idaho.
Dobratz, Betty A., and Stephanie L. Shanks-Meile. White 
Power, White Pride: The White Separatist Movement in the United 
States. New York: Twayne, 1997.
This work examines the white separatist movement 
through extensive interviews with more than 100 active 
participants. The authors attended rallies and other 
gatherings to chronicle the history and strategies of the 
movement.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
245
Dray, Philip. At the Hands of Persons Unknown: the Lynching of 
Black America. New York: Modern Library, 2003.
This history of lynching in America describes its preva-
lence in the southern United States, and discusses the cru-
sade by both black and white Americans to eliminate this 
murderous problem.
Dyer, Joel. Harvest of Rage: Why the Oklahoma City Bombing Is 
Only the Beginning. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997.
Dyer surveys the rise of violent antigovernment and 
extremist hate groups to better understand the attitudes 
that resulted in the horrific bombing of the federal build-
ing in Oklahoma City in 1995 which killed168 people.
Ezekiel, Raphael S. The Racist Mind: Portraits of American 
Neo-Nazis and Klansmen. New York: Vintage, 1995.
A former senior research scientist at the Harvard School 
of Public Health, Ezekiel spent four years conducting 
extensive interviews with members of a neo-Nazi group 
and leaders of racist organizations in order to understand 
the origin of their views.
Ferrell, Claudine L. Nightmare and Dream: Anti-Lynching in 
Congress, 1917–1922. New York: Garland, 1986.
Originally a doctoral dissertation, this work surveys legis-
lative initiatives in Congress to end the wave of southern 
lynchings during the early part of the 20th century.
Flint, Colin, ed. Spaces of Hate: Geographies of Discrimination 
and Intolerance in the U.S.A. New York: Routledge, 2004.
This anthology provides a geographic perspective on 
hate-motivated activity. The authors are primarily social 
science professors who adapt postmodern concepts 
and jargon—critical race, postcolonial, and whiteness 
theories—to analyze hate crimes and other types of 
bigotry.

246	
Hate Crimes
Foster, Arnold. Square One. New York: Donald I. Fine, 1988.
A memoir by the former general counsel of the 
Anti-Defamation League describes his lifelong battle 
against anti-Semitism and his concern for the welfare and 
rights of the Jewish people.
Foxman, Abraham H. and Christopher Wolf. Viral Hate: 
Containing Its Spread on the Internet. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2013.
This book discusses the anonymous nature of the Internet 
and how it helps spread bigotry, bullying, and other hate-
ful and violent activities. The book recommends steps for 
establishing legal policies to control this problem.
Gaylin, Willard. Hatred: The Psychological Descent into Violence. 
New York: Public Affairs, 2003.
Gaylin, a psychoanalyst and author of more than a dozen 
works, debunks the widespread “therapeutic trivializa-
tion of morality.” In this brilliant and thought-provoking 
critique, he condemns societal attitudes that attempt 
to excuse the murderous actions of terrorists and bigots 
because of their alleged grievances or family background.
Gerstenfeld, Phyllis B., and Diana R. Grant. Crimes of Hate:  
Selected Readings. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2004.
This anthology includes essays from a variety of academic 
fields, including criminology, sociology, psychology, and 
political science.
Gerstenfeld, Phyllis B., and Diana R. Grant. Hate Crimes: 
Causes, Controls and Controversies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications, 2013.
Designed as a college textbook with exercises and discus-
sion questions, this third edition is a companion volume to 
Crimes of Hate: Selected Readings (see above) that provides 

	
Resources for Further Research 	
247
an overview of the history and effectiveness of hate crime 
legislation, the activities of violent hate groups, and the 
international dimensions of the problem. Well-organized 
and well-designed, this volume serves as an excellent primer.
Greene, Melissa Fay. The Temple Bombing. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1996.
Engaging and well written, this work chronicles the bomb-
ing of the oldest synagogue in Atlanta on October 12, 
1958. The author did an enormous amount of research to 
recount the worst anti-Jewish incident in southern history 
since the lynching of Leo Frank in 1915.
Hall, Patricia Wong, and Victor M. Hwang. Anti-Asian Vio-
lence in North America: Asian-American and Asian Canadian 
Reflections on Hate, Healing and Resistance. Walnut Creek, CA: 
AltaMira Press, 2001.
This anthology discusses a variety of problems affecting 
North Americans of Asian ancestry, including civil rights, 
ethnic identity, and, especially, hate crimes, economic 
scapegoating, and Internet racism. An introductory essay 
briefly surveys the history of anti-Asian violence in the 
United States and Canada and includes a directory of 
organizations (such as Asian, Jewish, and antiracist) that 
combat racial bigotry and intolerance.
Hamm, Mark S. American Skinheads: The Criminology and 
Control of Hate Crime. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1993.
This volume examines the social and psychological dimen-
sions of the skinhead movement and, through interviews 
with some members, analyzes its development. According 
to the author, “Not all acts of terrorism can be considered 
hate crimes, and hate crimes are not necessarily terrorism 
unless such prejudiced violence has a political or social 
underpinning.”

248	
Hate Crimes
Hamm, Mark S. Hate Crime: International Perspectives on 
Causes and Control. Highland Heights, KY: Academy of Crim-
inal Justice Sciences, Northern Kentucky University; and Cin-
cinnati, OH: Anderson, 1994.
Hamm, Mark S. In Bad Company: America’s Terrorist Under-
ground. Boston: Northeastern University Press, 2002.
Hamm, a professor of criminology at Indiana State Univer-
sity, provides an exhaustive survey of the Aryan Republic 
Army, a little-known paramilitary radical right-wing gang 
associated with Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh.
Hate Groups: Opposing Viewpoints. Compiled by Mary E. Wil-
liams, book ed. Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven, 2004.
This anthology primarily consists of previously published 
articles from magazines, books, newspaper articles, and 
columns; a list of organizations; and a bibliography.
Hentoff, Nat. Free Speech for Me—But Not for Thee: How the 
American Left and Right Relentlessly Censor Each Other. New 
York: HarperCollins, 1992.
Hentoff, a prolific writer on civil liberties, presents an 
absolutist interpretation of the First Amendment to the 
U.S. Constitution.
Herek, Gregory M., and Kevin T. Berrill. Hate Crimes: Con-
fronting Violence against Lesbians and Gay Men. Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage Publications, 1992.
The first major monograph on antigay violence in the 
United States, this anthology includes an overview of the 
topic, essays on perpetrators and victims, and suggestions 
for public policy responses. Data and analysis from the 
first national study conducted by the National Gay and 
Lesbian Task Force in 1984 are presented.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
249
Jacobs, James B., and Kimberly Potter. Hate Crimes: Crimi-
nal Law and Identity Politics. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1998.
Jacobs, a New York University law professor and pre-
eminent critic of hate crimes legislation, along with his 
coauthor, argue that these laws are both subjective and 
unnecessary and also infringe on basic First Amendment 
rights. An important critical contribution to the hate 
crimes debate.
Jenness, Valerie, and Kendal Broad. Hate Crimes: New Social 
Movements and the Politics of Violence. New York: Aldine de 
Gruyter, 1997.
This work examines why bias-motivated violence has 
recently become a serious issue and the reason some 
minority constituencies have been categorized as victims 
while others have gone relatively unnoticed. A sociopolit-
ical analysis, the book also discusses the response to vio-
lence against gays and women.
Jenness, Valerie, Kendal Broad, and Ryken Grattet. Making 
Hate a Crime: From Social Movement Concept to Law Enforce-
ment. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2004.
The authors analyze, from a sociological perspective, 
the symbolic importance of hate crime laws but also 
raise questions about their effectiveness in combating 
hate-motivated violence.
Jimenez, Stephen. The Book of Matt: Hidden Truths about the 
Murder of Matthew Shepard. Hanover, New Hampshire: Steer-
forth Press, 2013.
The savage murder of Matthew Shepard, a gay 21-year-
old Wyoming college student in 1998, galvanized many 
Americans—both gay and straight—to publicly confront 

250	
Hate Crimes
the extreme hate and violence directed against the gay 
community. Jimenez had questions about the nature of the 
crime and over the course of a thirteen-year investigation 
traveled to twenty states and Washington, D.C. to inter-
view more than a hundred sources. His exhaustive inves-
tigation also plunged him into the violent underworld of 
drug trafficking. Jimenez wanted to find out—what he 
claimed was the untold story—about the circumstances 
behind this brutal murder. The author’s conclusion was 
that it was a drug-related and not an anti-gay crime. His 
book quickly evoked furious reactions from many critics 
who claimed the book tried to whitewash anti-gay vio-
lence. Jimenez, who also happens to be gay, unapologet-
ically defended his thesis and the importance of finding 
the facts behind this violent and terrible crime.
Johnson, Sandra E. Standing on the Ground: A Triumph over Hate 
Crime in the Deep South. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2002.
A poignant journalistic account of a 1995 racist arson 
attack on the St. John Baptist Church in Dixiana, South 
Carolina, and the valiant work of two women—Barbara 
Simmons, an African American, and Ammie Murray, a 
white—to rebuild the church.
Kelly, Robert J., ed. Bias Crime: American Law Enforcement and 
Legal Responses. Chicago: Office of International Criminal Jus-
tice, University of Illinois at Chicago, 1993.
This anthology covers various methods used by police and 
other law enforcement officials to prosecute violent hate 
crimes. Although much of the material covers the mid- to 
late 1980s, it still provides a useful overview for govern-
ment attorneys, prosecutors, and other public officials.
King, Joyce. Hate Crime: The Story of a Dragging in Jasper, Texas. 
New York: Knopf, 2003.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
251
Written by a Dallas-based broadcast journalist, this vol-
ume recounts the savage racist murder of James Byrd Jr., an 
African American, on June 7, 1998. The author describes 
the background of the three white murderers, who met 
while in a Texas prison. (See also Temple-Raston.)
Kotlowitz, Alex. The Other Side of the River: A Story of Two 
Towns, a Death, and America’s Dilemma. New York: Nan A. 
Talese/Doubleday, 1998.
When the Coast Guard pulled the body of Eric McGin-
nis, a black teenager, out of southwestern Michigan’s 
St. Joseph’s River in May 1991, the mostly white residents 
of St. Joseph assumed the drowning was accidental. But 
African Americans in Benton Harbor, a mostly black town 
on the other side of the river, believed that whites chased 
him into the water for dating a white girl and that the 
crime was covered up by the white-dominated St. Joseph 
police force. Written by the author of the award-winning 
book There Are No Children Here, this work deals bril-
liantly with how differing perceptions of events are fil-
tered through one’s racial background.
Kressel, Neil J. Mass Hate: The Global Rise of Genocide and Terror. 
New York: Westview Press, 2002.
Written by a psychology professor and licensed psychol-
ogist, this work is a revised and updated edition of his 
earlier 1996 volume. Kressel surveys the horrors of mass 
slaughter and genocide throughout the twentieth century 
and the alarming rise of Islamic terrorism.
Lamy, Philip. Millennium Rage. New York: Plenum Press, 1996.
This work discusses the growth of extreme right-wing 
groups and militias as the year 2000 approached. The 
author, a professor at Castleton State College in Vermont, 
examines the growth of this movement and its influence.

252	
Hate Crimes
Langer, Elinor. A Hundred Little Hitlers: The Death of a Black 
Man, the Trial of a White Racist and the Rise of the Neo-Nazi 
Movement in America. New York: Henry Holt, 2003.
A thoroughly researched study of the skinhead murder 
of an Ethiopian immigrant, Mulugeta Seraw, in Portland, 
Oregon, on November 13, 1988. The author interviewed 
the murderers and discusses the successful Southern Pov-
erty Law Center lawsuit against their organization, White 
Aryan Resistance.
Lawrence, Frederick M. Punishing Hate: Bias Crimes under Amer-
ican Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002.
Lawrence, formerly a Boston University law school pro-
fessor and former Brandeis University president, examines 
the legal basis for hate crime statutes and strongly advo-
cates for the enactment of these laws. Some legislators and 
legal scholars have praised this volume as a landmark con-
tribution in support of these criminal laws.
Levin, Jack, and Jack McDevitt. Hate Crimes Revisited. Boul-
der, CO: Westview Press, 2002.
This volume updates the authors’ earlier 1993 volume, 
with special emphasis on the impact of the 9/11 Arab ter-
rorist attack.
MacLean, Nancy. Behind the Mask of Chivalry: The Making 
of the Second Ku Klux Klan. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1994.
This work discusses the rebirth of the KKK, its attitude 
toward white women, blacks, Catholics, Jews, and immi-
grants, and how it foments terror through lynching and 
other violent crimes.
Marcus, Kenneth L. Jewish Identity and Civil Rights in America. 
New York: Cambridge University Press, New York, 2010.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
253
This book discusses the complex legal and policy issues 
involved with civil rights protections for Jewish students. 
Written by a former staff director at the U.S. Commission 
on Civil Rights, this volume examines the extent of the 
problem and suggests some solutions.
Martinez, Thomas, with John Guinther. Brotherhood of Mur-
der. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988.
A first-person account by a former member of the 
neo-Nazi group The Order. After Martinez revealed the 
organization’s activities to federal law enforcement agen-
cies, his ex-comrades threatened his life.
Metress, Christopher, ed. The Lynching of Emmett Till: 
A  Documentary Narrative. Charlottesville, VA: University of 
Virginia, 2002.
Containing more than one hundred documents, this 
work includes news accounts, memoirs and literary works 
about the murder of fourteen-year-old Emmett Till on 
August 28, 1955. (See also Whitfield.)
Michael, George. Confronting Right-Wing Extremism and Ter-
rorism in the U.S.A. New York: Routledge, 2003.
An expansion of a doctoral dissertation, this work surveys 
the rise of the far right since 1990. It includes interviews 
with some of the far right’s leaders and also with former 
government officials and human rights activists.
Neiwart, David A. Death on the Fourth of July: The Story of a 
Killing, a Trial, and Hate Crime in America. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2004.
On July 4, 2000, a group of drunken white males—who 
dressed like skinheads—yelled racial epithets at some 
Asian Americans shopping at a convenience store in 
Ocean Shores, Washington. A violent fight erupted and 

254	
Hate Crimes
one of the white men was fatally stabbed. Written by a 
freelance journalist, this work reports the details of the 
murder and examines the broader social and legal issues 
surrounding hate crimes.
Newton, Michael and Judy, eds. Ku Klux Klan: An Encyclope-
dia. New York: Garland, 1991.
Probably the only event worth commemorating on the 
125th anniversary of the “world’s oldest, most persistent 
terrorist organization” is the publication of this useful 
reference source. Meticulous and diligent researchers, the 
Newtons have compiled an essential guide for students 
and researchers.
Newton, Michael and Judy, eds. Racial and Religious Violence in 
America: A Chronology. New York: Garland, 1991.
An outstanding reference source, this work provides a 
unique chronology of many bias-motivated violent inci-
dents throughout U.S. history.
Perry, Barbara. Hate and Bias Crime: A  Reader. New York: 
Routledge, 2003.
This anthology examines hate groups and hate crimes 
from a wide range of academic disciplines, including 
sociology, criminology and criminal justice, psychology 
and social psychology, political science and law.
Perry, Barbara. Hate Crimes. New York: Praeger, 2009.
This five-volume set addresses the wide variety and inci-
dence of hate crimes, exposing their impacts on individ-
ual communities and society. The contributing authors 
to this extensive anthology discuss online hate crimes, 
hate-based music, anti-Latino hostilities, school-based 
anti-hate initiatives, and legislative, educational, social 

	
Resources for Further Research 	
255
policy, and community organizational responses to the 
various forms of hate crime, among other topics.
Perry, Barbara. In the Name of Hate: Understanding Hate Crimes. 
New York: Routledge, 2001.
The author, a former professor of criminology at North-
ern Arizona University, uses a theoretical framework 
called “structured action theory” to analyze hate crimes. 
Her analysis contends that hate crime is an “instrument 
that defends the gendered and racialized social ordering of 
American culture.”
Perry, Barbara. Silent Victims: Hate Crimes against Native Amer-
icans. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2008.
This book contends that hate crimes against Native Amer-
icans are common but mostly go unreported. The author 
interviewed almost 300 individuals and recorded their 
accounts of bias-related crimes directed against Native 
Americans.
Quarles, Chester L. Ku Klux Klan and Related American Racial-
ist and Antisemitic Organizations: A History and Analysis. Jeffer-
son, NC: McFarland, 1999.
Quarles, a professor of political science at the University 
of Mississippi, describes the membership, ideology, and 
philosophy of this notorious hate group, including its for-
merly secret oaths.
Ridgeway, James. Blood in the Face: The Ku Klux Klan, Aryan 
Nations, Nazi Skinheads, and the Rise of a New White Culture. 
New York: Thunder’s Mouth Press, 1995.
In this updated second edition, a former Village Voice jour-
nalist surveys the rise of violent racist groups throughout 
the country. The book is well illustrated with photographs 

256	
Hate Crimes
and artwork; especially noteworthy is a chart showing the 
interrelationships among the various groups and individ-
uals. The author has filmed a documentary in conjunc-
tion with this work.
Robins, Robert S., and Jerrold M. Post. Political Paranoia: 
The Psychopolitics of Hatred. New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1997.
Written by a political scientist and psychiatrist, this work 
surveys the phenomenon of the paranoid personality and 
how it generates various political and social movements. 
Hitler, Stalin, Christian Identity, and the Nation of Islam 
are some of the topics discussed in this wide-ranging work.
Sargent, Lyman Tower, ed. Extremism in America: A Reader. 
New York: New York University Press, 1995.
This unique anthology contains the actual texts of the 
hard-to-locate publications, articles, and tracts issued 
from both ends of the political spectrum—the far left and 
the far right. The work is conveniently organized by topic, 
including race, gender, economics, and education.
Sherry, Mark. Disability Hate Crimes: Does Anyone Really Hate 
Disabled People? Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2010.
The author, a University of Toledo professor, focuses 
on disability hate crimes in the United Kingdom where 
these violent acts have received much British governmen-
tal attention for some time. Only recently have U.S. law 
enforcement agencies recognized that crimes against the 
disabled warrant special attention and need to be recorded 
in separate statistical categories of bias-motivated crimes.
Sims, Patsy. The Klan. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 
1996.
A survey of the history and recent activities of this notorious 
organization based on interviews with current members.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
257
Smith, Brent L. Terrorism in America: Pipe Bombs and Pipe 
Dreams. New York: State University of New York Press, 1994.
The author, a professor of criminal justice and sociology 
at the University of Alabama, provides empirical data and 
analysis on left-wing and right-wing terrorist groups in 
the United States.
Stanton, Bill. Klanwatch: Bringing the Ku Klux Klan to Justice. 
New York: Grove Weidenfeld, 1991.
The former director of the Southern Poverty Law Cen-
ter’s Klanwatch project chronicles the history of the orga-
nization’s “multi-pronged anti-Klan program,” which 
included filing lawsuits, publishing educational materials, 
and monitoring the activities of the KKK. Engagingly 
written, the book contains several photographs.
Swigonski, Mary E., et al. From Hate Crimes to Human Rights: 
A Tribute to Matthew Shepard. Binghamton, NY: Harrington 
Park Press, 2001.
Originally published as an issue of the Journal of Gay and 
Lesbian Social Service (vol.  3, no.1/2, 2001), this sepa-
rately published monograph covers a wide variety of gay- 
and lesbian-related topics, including hate crimes.
Temple-Raston, Dina. A Death in Texas: A Story of Race, Mur-
der, and a Small Town’s Struggle for Redemption. New York: 
Henry Holt, 2003.
Similar to the Joyce King book (see above), this work 
describes the brutal lynching of James Byrd Jr., an African 
American, by three white racists, on June 7, 1998. The 
author interviewed law enforcement and townspeople in 
the small Texas town of Jasper, where this internationally 
reported crime occurred.
Tunnell, Kenneth D. Political Crime in Contemporary America: 
A Critical Approach. New York: Garland Publishing, 1993.

258	
Hate Crimes
This volume contains a chapter by Wayman C. Mullins, 
editor of the Journal of Police and Criminal Psychology, 
entitled “Hate Crime and the Far Right.”
Vollers, Maryanne. Ghosts of Mississippi: The Murder of Medgar 
Evers, the Trials of Byron De La Beckwith, and the Haunting of 
the New South. Boston: Little Brown, 1995.
Vollers provides background to the murder conviction of 
a white supremacist in the 1963 murder of Medgar Evers, 
leader of the National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People (NAACP). After two mistrials, Beck-
with was convicted in 1992.
Wade, Wyn Craig. The Fiery Cross: The Ku Klux Klan in Amer-
ica. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987.
A journalistic history, this work traces the activities and 
influence of the KKK throughout U.S. history.
Walker, Samuel. Hate Speech: The History of an American Con-
troversy. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1994.
The author, a professor of criminal justice at the Univer-
sity of Nebraska at Omaha, surveys the history of hate 
speech from the 1920s to the present and the varying 
views of organizations about suppressing such speech, 
from the American Civil Liberties Union to the American 
Jewish Committee and the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP).
Whitfield, Stephen J. A Death in the Delta: The Story of Emmett 
Till. New York: Free Press, 1988.
This meritorious work deserves wider recognition. The 
book recounts the story of a black teenager who was mur-
dered in Money, Mississippi, in 1955 for allegedly whis-
tling at a white female. Many historians view this incident 

	
Resources for Further Research 	
259
as the beginning of the modern civil rights movement. 
(See also Metress.)
Wolfe, Zachary J. Hate Crimes Law. Eagan, Michigan: Thom-
son Reuters, 2014+
This annual updated publication covers constitutional 
issues related to federal hate crime statutes, federal crim-
inal civil rights statutes used to prosecute hate crimes, 
federal sentencing issues, state criminal law, and also dis-
cusses potential areas for constitutional challenges.
Articles
Abrams, Kathryn. “Fighting Fire with Fire: Rethinking the 
Role of Disgust in Hate Crimes.” California Law Review 90, 
no. 5 (October 2002): 1423–1465.
Abrams analyzes the community-based responses to hate 
crimes in the United States and the role of disgust as a 
response to hate crimes.
“Accused Killer of Three Is Linked to Racist Writing.” New York 
Times, March 3, 2000, A12.
A black man accused of killing three people and wounding 
two in a shooting rampage in Wilkinsburg, Pennsylvania, 
had antiwhite writings in his apartment and singled out 
whites during the attack.
Alter, Jonathan. “A  Question of Anti-Semitism.” Newsweek, 
October 7, 2002, 45.
Alter, a Newsweek editor, analyzes how anti-Israel campus 
politics, along with other such political activities through-
out the world, may help encourage the dangerous percep-
tions of some Palestinian Arabs who want to destroy the 
state of Israel.

260	
Hate Crimes
“Although Scapegoated, Muslims, Sikhs and Arabs Are Pa-
triotic, Integrated—and Growing.” Time, October  1, 2001, 
72–75.
This essay discusses the scapegoating of some non-Christian 
Americans following the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
Anderson, James F., et al. “Preventing Hate Crime and Profil-
ing Hate Crime Offenders.” Western Journal of Black Studies 
(Fall 2002): 140–149.
Proposes methods for preventing hate crimes and profil-
ing hate crime offenders in the United States and suggests 
educational campaigns in cultural diversity awareness and 
racial tolerance.
“Anti-Semitism: An Enduring Virus.” The Economist, Novem-
ber 22, 2003, 44.
This editorial analyzes the rise of anti-Jewish incidents 
and observes that many Jews in Israel and throughout the 
world feel that this alarming phenomenon is not incited 
by the conflict with Palestinian Arabs. Instead, the con-
flict is used as a “convenient excuse for the anti-Semites.”
“Black, Jewish Congress Members Condemn Rash of Hate 
Crimes.” Jet, August 16, 1999, 4.
This article looks at a petition denouncing an outbreak 
of hate crimes, including the firebombing of three syn-
agogues in California, that was signed by 55 black and 
Jewish members of Congress.
Bragg, Rick. “In One Last Trial, Alabama Faces Old Wound.” 
New York Times, May 12, 2002, A1.
Bragg discusses the pending murder trial of Bobby Frank 
Cherry for his role in the bombing death of four girls at 
the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Ala-
bama, in 1963.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
261
Carless, Will. “Family of a Murdered Immigrant Was in Cri-
sis,” New York Times, April 6, 2012, 11.
Shaima Alawadi, an Iraqi-born mother of five, was found 
bludgeoned to death with a threatening note near her 
bed, which was assumed to be a hate crime. But court 
documents revealed that there were several family crises 
including possible divorce and a daughter resisting an 
arranged marriage. Authorities were investigating the pos-
sible involvement of her family in the murder.
Clemetson, Lynette. “The New Victims of Hate.” Newsweek, 
November 6, 2000, 61.
Clemetson discusses the increase in violent attacks against 
Asian-Americans and their reluctance to report these 
crimes.
Clemetson, Lynette. “A Slaying in 1982 Maintains Its Grip on 
Asian-Americans.” New York Times, June 18, 2002, A1.
This front page article focuses on the commemoration of 
the June 19, 1982, killing of Chinese American Vincent 
Chin in Detroit, Michigan, and the crime’s profound 
impact on Asian American politics and identity.
Clines, Francis X. “Slaying of a Gay Black Spurs Call for Jus-
tice.” New York Times, July 13, 2000, A16.
Clines covers the demonstrations held in Fairmont, West 
Virginia—a state with no hate crime law—following the 
murder of Arthur Warren, an African American gay man.
Cloud, John. “Is Hate on the Rise?” Time, July 19, 1999, 33.
Although many hate groups have not achieved great 
financial or political power, some experts believe 
hate-motivated violence is on the rise, in part because 
these groups are using powerful new tools like the Internet 
to attract new followers. Rabbi Abraham Cooper of the 

262	
Hate Crimes
Simon Wiesenthal Center notes that many racist organiz-
ers know they will never have a mass movement, but with 
the help of the Internet, they will be able to recruit people 
who are ready to violently act out their beliefs.
Dao, James. “Indictment Makes Start at Lifting a 40-Year-Old 
Cloud over a Mississippi County.” New York Times, January 8, 
2005, A11.
After a Mississippi prosecutor gathered new criminal evi-
dence, Edgar Ray Killen, a former leader of the local Ku 
Klux Klan chapter, is charged with the murder of three 
civil rights workers, Andrew Goodman, Michael H. 
Schwerner and James E. Chaney, in Philadelphia, Missis-
sippi in 1964. Killen was originally charged with federal 
civil rights violations in 1967 but the jury was deadlocked 
and he was released from prison.
Decter, Midge. “Crimes du Jour: Hate Crime Laws.” National 
Review, September 13, 1999, 22–24.
A well-known conservative author claims that many peo-
ple who once advocated leniency toward certain crimes on 
grounds of the mental or emotional state of the offender 
now support stern laws against hate crimes.
Dees, Morris S. “Hate Crimes Address, September 22, 1999.” 
Vital Speeches of the Day, February 1, 2000, 247–252.
In an address to Eureka College in Eureka, Illinois, the 
director of the Southern Poverty Law Center discusses 
cases of discrimination that have involved the Ku Klux 
Klan and skinheads.
Dinnerstein, Leonard. “Is There a New Anti-Semitism in the 
United States?” Society, January/February 2004, 53–58.
Professor Dinnerstein, who has written widely about the his-
tory of anti-Jewish attitudes and incidents in the United States 
analyzes the current political climate for American Jews.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
263
Duimovich, Samuel. “A Critique of the Hate Crime Preven-
tion Act Regarding Its Protection of Gays and Lesbians (and 
How a Private Right Could Fix It).” Southern California Review 
of Law and Social Justice 23.2 (2014): 295–327.
According to the FBI, hate crimes based on sexual ori-
entation have not seen a credible drop in incidents since 
sexual orientation was included as a protected class. This 
article analyzes the weaknesses in the Hate Crime Preven-
tion Act to show why it is not as effective as it could be in 
preventing hate crimes.
Duncan, D., and M. Hatzenbuehler. (2014). “Lesbian, Gay, 
Bisexual, and Transgender Hate Crimes and Suicidality among 
a Population-Based Sample of Sexual-Minority Adolescents in 
Boston.” American Journal of Public Health, 104(2), 272–278.
This journal article examined whether past-year suicidality 
among sexual-minority adolescents was more common in 
neighborhoods with a higher prevalence of hate crimes target-
ing lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) individu-
als. Participants’ data came from a racially/ethnically diverse 
population-based sample of ninth- through twelfth-grade 
public school students in Boston, Massachusetts.
Egan, Timothy. “A Racist Attack, a Town Plagued.” New York 
Times, October 15, 2000, 24.
Egan explores issues of racial hatred in relation to man-
slaughter charges facing Asian American Min Duc Hong 
for the death of Christopher Kinison in Ocean Shores, 
Washington, on July 4, 2000.
Elder, Larry. “When the Bad Guy Is Black.” Human Events, 
March 31, 2000, 13.
Elder criticizes the double standard of mass media regard-
ing hate crimes in the United States in the case of Ronald 
Taylor, an African American who deliberately shot and 
killed whites.

264	
Hate Crimes
Feder, Don. “Hate-Crime Laws Penalize Ideas in Name of Tol-
erance.” Human Events, September 3, 1999, 10.
A conservative columnist questions the legal basis for 
enforcement of hate crimes legislation.
Feder, Don. “Hate Crimes’ Laws Would Criminalize Thought.” 
Human Events, August 26, 2002, 18.
This essay questions the philosophical basis of hate 
crime laws.
Firestone, David. “Trial in Gay Killing Opens; Conspiracy of 
Hate Is Cited.” New York Times, August 4, 1999, A8.
Firestone looks at Charles Monroe Butler Jr., who admit-
ted to conspiring to kill Billy Jack Gaither, a gay man, and 
rejected a plea agreement for the murder case.
Fries, Jacob H. “Complaints of Anti-Arab Bias Crimes Dip, but 
Concerns Linger.” New York Times, December 22, 2001, B8.
Fries reports on the decrease in the number of hate crimes 
committed against Arab Americans and Muslims in the 
United States as of December 2001, three months after 
the terrorist attacks in September of that year.
Gill, Aisha K., and Hannah Mason-Bish. “Addressing Violence 
against Women as a Form of Hate Crime: Limitations and Pos-
sibilities.” Feminist Review 105 (2013): 1–20.
The potential benefits and limitations of extending the 
provisions of the British hate crime legislation to violence 
against women (VAW) are explored. Results of a survey 
of stakeholders working in the VAW sector indicate that 
they favored an inclusion of a gender category in hate 
crime legislation that would challenge incorrect assump-
tions and problematic stereotypes.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
265
Goodstein, Laurie, and Gustav Niebuhr. “Attacks and Harass-
ment of Arab-Americans Increase.” New York Times, September 
14, 2001, A14.
Goodstein and Niebuhr report that although President 
Bush condemned attacks against Muslim and Arab Amer-
icans, harassment and violent attacks continued to take 
place in several parts of the United States.
Goodstein, Laurie, and Tamar Lewin. “Victims of Mistaken 
Identity, Sikhs Pay a Price for Turbans.” New York Times,  
September 19, 2001, A1.
Goodstein and Lewin look at the murder of Balbir Singh 
Sodhi, a turban-wearing Sikh who was murdered in Mesa, 
Arizona, and his co-religionists, who experienced harass-
ment and physical attacks throughout the United States.
Gootman, Elissa. “Hate Motives Are Argued in Beating of 
Mexicans.” New York Times, August 3, 2001, B5.
Gootman discusses an attack on Mexican immigrant day 
laborers in Suffolk County, New York.
“Guilty Plea Is Entered for Anti-Semitic Acts.” New York Times, 
March 18, 2001, 19.
An article about Alex James Curtis, a 25-year-old publisher 
of a white supremacist Internet newsletter, who pleaded 
guilty to civil rights violations for threatening Rep. Bob 
Filner (D-CA), a Jewish congressman, and other officials 
and vandalizing two synagogues. Under the plea agree-
ment, he would serve no more than three years in prison.
Hammer, Joshua. “The ‘Gay Panic’ Defense.” Newsweek, No-
vember 8, 1999, 40–42.
Hammer reports on the start of the Laramie, Wyoming, 
murder trial of Aaron McKinney in the October 1998 

266	
Hate Crimes
death of Matthew Shepard, to which accomplice Russell 
Henderson had previously pleaded guilty.
Hardi, Joel. “P.R. 101: Don’t Joke About Hate Crimes.” Chron-
icle of Higher Education, May 26, 2000, A12.
Article on a comment made by the University of Iowa’s 
vice president for university relations, Ann Rhodes, which 
was interpreted as biased.
Harris, Hamil R. “Ex-Klansman Found Guilty of 1963 Church 
Bombing.” The New Crisis, July–August 2001, 7–9.
This article examines the criminal case against Thomas 
E. Blanton, found guilty nearly 40 years later of a 1963 
church bombing in Alabama that claimed the lives of four 
African American children.
“Hate Crimes Up against Muslims.” New York Times, Novem-
ber 26, 2002, A16.
A report on the findings of the Federal Bureau of Inves-
tigation on the increase in 2001 of hate crimes in the 
United States against Muslims and people who are or 
appear to be of Middle Eastern descent.
“Hatred Unexplained.” The Economist, July 10, 1999, 2.
This article discusses the three-day, two-state shooting 
spree that began on July  2, 1999, by 21-year-old uni-
versity student and member of the World Church of the 
Creator Benjamin Smith, who killed an African American 
and a Korean and injured nine Jews, blacks, and Asians.
Hemingway, Mark. “The Media’s Double Standard.” The Weekly 
Standard, August 19, 2013, 9–10.
The relative lack of media reaction to the shooting by gay 
rights supporter Floyd Lee Corkins at the headquarters of 

	
Resources for Further Research 	
267
the anti–same sex marriage group, the Family Research 
Council, indicates a media double standard on hate crimes.
Herek, Gregory M., et  al. “Victim Experiences in Hate 
Crimes Based on Sexual Orientation.” Journal of Social Issues, 
June 2002, 319–340.
Using interview data from a sample of 450 lesbian, gay, 
and bisexual adults, this article discusses the varieties 
of victim experiences. An important factor on deciding 
whether to report antigay crimes was the fear that the per-
petrator would not be punished.
Horowitz, Craig. “The Return of Anti-Semitism.” New York, 
December 15, 2003, 28–33.
The author discusses the alarming increase in anti-Jewish 
incidents and hostile rhetoric around the world.
Husselbee, L. Paul, and Larry Elliott. “Looking beyond Hate: 
How National and Regional Newspapers Framed Hate Crimes 
in Jasper, Texas, and Laramie, Wyoming.” Journalism & Mass 
Communication Quarterly, Winter 2002, 833–853.
The article examines two infamous and nationally 
reported hate crimes directed against an African Ameri-
can and a gay student.
Hutchinson, Earl Ofari. “The Price of Black Silence on Certain 
Hate Crimes.” Christian Science Monitor, March 8, 2000, 9.
Hutchinson discusses the racially motivated shootings in 
Pennsylvania of five white men by one black man. The 
author claims that black leaders and organizations should 
have quickly condemned the shootings.
Janofsky, Michael. “Gay Man’s Death Led to Epiphany for 
Wyoming Officer.” New York Times, September 30, 2000, A9.

268	
Hate Crimes
A profile of David S. O’Malley, commander of the inves-
tigations unit of the Laramie, Wyoming, police depart-
ment, who discusses how the murder of Matthew Shepard 
led to his campaign for national hate crimes legislation.
Janofsky, Michael. “Parents of Gay Obtain Mercy for His 
Killer.” New York Times, November 5, 1999, A1.
A front page article about the parents of murdered gay 
Wyoming student Matthew Shepard, who requested that 
Aaron McKinney be spared the death sentence.
Jenness, Valerie. “Managing Differences and Making Legis-
lation: Social Movements and the Racialization, Sexualiza-
tion, and Gendering of Federal Hate Crime Law in the U.S., 
1985–1998.” Social Problems, November 1999, 548–571.
A sociological analysis of the emergence and evolution of 
federal hate crime laws, including the Hate Crimes Statis-
tics Act, the Violence against Women Act, and the Hate 
Crimes Sentencing Enhancement Act.
Justice and the Suffolk County Police, New York Times,  
September 26, 2011, 28.
Discusses charges that the Suffolk County, New York 
police tolerate hate crimes against undocumented aliens.
Kim, Richard. “The Truth about Hate Crimes Laws.” Nation, 
July 12, 1999, 20.
The author believes that national lesbian and gay orga-
nizations are expending too much effort trying to pass 
hate crime laws. Instead, he advocates local community 
organizing and forming coalitions with other minority 
advocacy groups.
Lappin, Shalom. “Israel and the New Anti-Semitism.” Dissent, 
Spring 2003, 18–24.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
269
A prolific analyst notes that although much of the criticism 
directed against Israel since September 2000 is legitimate, 
the growing antagonism stems in part from strong hostility 
to the existence of a Jewish state and also a widespread Euro-
pean attitude that Israel is no longer a nation of victims.
Lee, Felicia R. “ABC News Revisits Student’s Killing and An-
gers Some Gays.” New York Times, November 26, 2004, A33.
The ABC news program 20/20 claims in an investigative 
report that the widely publicized murder of Matthew 
Shepard, a Wyoming gay student, was not a hate crime 
but a botched robbery committed by men high on drugs.
Lee, Stephen. “U.S. Intervention in the Middle East, the ‘War 
on Terror’ and Domestic Hate Crimes: An Amerasia Journal 
Chronology.” Amerasia Journal 27/28, no. 3/1 (2001/2002): 
295–319.
Lee presents a chronology of domestic hate crimes since 
the terrorist attack on September 11, 2001, and the U.S. 
war against the Taliban-ruled Afghanistan.
Leo, John. “Faking the Hate.” U.S. News  & World Report, 
June 5, 2000, 22.
This essay discusses fraudulent reports of race and gender 
crimes on college campuses in the United States, includ-
ing alleged hate crimes at the University of Massachusetts 
and other institutions that were revealed to be hoaxes.
Leo, John. “Not Fit to Print?” U.S. News  & World Report, 
April 16, 2001, 14.
Jesse Dirkhising, a 13-year-old Arkansas boy, was drugged, 
tied to a bed, raped, tortured, and suffocated in Septem-
ber 1999 by two gay men. The columnist claims this story 
received far less media attention than the Matthew Shep-
ard murder.

270	
Hate Crimes
McCarty, James F. “Jury Finds 16 Amish Guilty in Beard-cutting 
Attacks.” Christian Century, October 17, 2012, p.18.
Details about the conviction of the U.S. Amish bishop 
who, along with his family members assaulted and cut the 
beards of members of a neighboring Amish community 
outside of Cleveland.
McNeil, Donald G. “France Vows Harsh Action after More 
Synagogues Burn.” New York Times, April 2, 2002, A3.
Article about the alarming increase of anti-Jewish vio-
lence in France. Among other incidents, a gunman fired 
at a kosher butcher shop, vandals set fire to a Strasbourg 
synagogue, and hooded men crashed a car into a Lyon 
synagogue.
McPhail, Beverly A. “Gender-Bias Hate Crimes.” Trauma, 
Violence & Abuse, April 2002, 125–144.
The author, a doctoral student at the University of Texas 
School of Social Work, surveys the history of the initial 
exclusion, then inclusion, of gender in the hate crime laws 
and also discusses its implications for social work research, 
practice, and policy.
McPhail, Beverly A. “Hating Hate: Policy Implications of Hate 
Crime Legislation.” Social Service Review, December  2000, 
635–653.
McPhail believes it is important for social workers to be 
actively involved in the debate about hate crime laws.
Michaelson, Jay. “Can Suicide Be a Hate Crime.” Newsweek, 
March 19, 2012, 17.
Discusses the trial of Dharun Ravi, a college student on trial 
for a hate crime and invasion of privacy related to the suicide 
of fellow student Tyler Clementi, who committed suicide 
after a video posted by Ravi depicted him in a gay sex act.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
271
Mikton, Christopher et al. “Systematic Review of the Effec-
tiveness of Interventions to Prevent and Respond to Violence 
against Persons with Disabilities.” Journal of Interpersonal Vio-
lence November 2014, 3207–3226
Persons with disabilities make up some 15 percent of 
the world’s population and are at higher risk of vio-
lence. Yet there is currently no systematic review of 
the effectiveness of interventions to prevent violence 
against them. The aim of this review was to systemati-
cally search for, appraise the quality of, and synthesize 
the evidence for the effectiveness of interventions to 
prevent and mitigate the consequences of all the main 
forms of interpersonal violence against people with all 
types of disabilities.
Milloy, Ross E. “Texas Senate Passes Hate Crimes Bill that 
Bush’s Allies Killed.” New York Times, May 8, 2001, A16.
Texas legislators passed the James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes 
Act with provisions to include crimes against gays and 
lesbians.
Mitchell, Corrie. “FBI Widens List of Groups Subject to Hate 
Crimes.” Christian Century, July 10, 2013, 17–18.
On June 5, 2013, the FBI widened its tracking of hate 
crimes to a larger number of ethnic and religious groups 
including Arab Americans, Orthodox Christians, Bud-
dhists, Hindus, Sikhs, Mormons and Jehovah’s Witnesses.
“More Insulted and Attacked after Sept. 11.” New York Times, 
March 11, 2002, A12.
A report on the increasing number of attacks on South 
Asian immigrants in the United States after the Sep-
tember  11, 2001, tragedy, based on information from 
a survey by the National Asian Pacific American Legal 
Consortium.

272	
Hate Crimes
Murphy, Dean E. “Survey Finds an Increase in Anti-Semitic 
Incidents.” New York Times, March 21, 2001, B2.
A survey by the Anti-Defamation League shows that 
anti-Jewish incidents in New York City rose by about 
49 percent in 2000, an increase the group said might be a 
spillover from the conflict in the Middle East.
Murphy, Dean E. “Three Are Charged in Death of Man 
Who Dressed Like a Woman.” New York Times, October 19, 
2002, A11.
Reports on the hate crime charges filed against several 
men for the death of Eddie Araujo, a transgendered man, 
in Newark, California.
Newman, Maria. “Victims of Hate Crime Calls High Court 
Ruling a ‘Slap in the Face.’ ” New York Times, June 27, 2000, B5.
Newman discusses the effect of the U.S. Supreme Court’s 
decision to reverse a New Jersey lower court decision on a 
hate crimes case.
Niebuhr, Gustav. “Abhorring Terror at an Ohio Mosque.” New 
York Times, September 22, 2001, A11.
Niebuhr examines a story of forgiveness by the worship-
pers at a Parma, Ohio, mosque. After a perpetrator delib-
erately crashed his car into the mosque, the imam and the 
congregants forgave him for his violent attack.
Nieves, Evelyn. “Slain Arab-American May Have Been 
Hate-Crime Victim.” New York Times, October 6, 2001, A8.
Nieves looks at the case of Abdo Ali Ahmed, a Yemeni 
Muslim who was murdered in his Reedley, California, 
grocery store. No money was stolen during the crime.
Noelle, Monique. “The Ripple Effect of the Matthew Shep-
ard Murder: Impact on the Assumptive Worlds of Members of 

	
Resources for Further Research 	
273
the Targeted Group.” American Behavioral Scientist, September 
2002, 27–51.
This research article investigates the psychological impact 
of the Shepard murder, a widely publicized antigay hate 
crime in 1998, on nonvictims who are also gay.
Nolan III, James J., et al. “The Hate Crime Statistics Act of 
1990: Developing a Method for Measuring the Occurrence 
of Hate Violence.” American Behavioral Scientist, Septem-
ber 2002, 136–154.
A report on the Hate Crime Statistics Act of 1990, which 
helped establish the mechanisms for identifying and collect-
ing data on the occurrence of hate crimes in this country.
Poussaint, Alvin F. “They Hate. They Kill. Are They Insane?” 
New York Times, August 26, 1999, A17.
Harvard Medical School psychiatrist Poussaint urges the 
American Psychiatric Association to designate extreme 
racism as a mental health problem and advocates that cli-
nicians use guidelines for recognizing delusional racism.
Pruzan, Adam. “What Is a Hate Crime? Media Bias in Cover-
age.” The American Enterprise, January/February 2000, 10.
The author compares and contrasts the coverage in the New 
York Times of a gun attack at the North Valley Jewish Com-
munity Center in Los Angeles, California, and of the mur-
der of seven people at a Baptist church in Fort Worth, Texas.
Rabinowitz, Dorothy. “The Hate-Crimes Bandwagon.” Wall 
Street Journal, June 27, 2000, A30.
This WSJ columnist and editor raises questions about the 
politicization of hate crimes legislation.
“Report Calls for Better Prevention for Hate Crimes.” National 
Catholic Reporter, November 29, 2002, 9.

274	
Hate Crimes
This article discusses a Human Rights Watch report issued 
on November 14, 2002, which called for better preven-
tion of hate crimes.
Rose, Suzanna M., and Mindy B. Mechanic. “Psychological 
Distress, Crime Features, and Help-Seeking Behaviors Related 
to Homophobic Bias Incidents.” American Behavioral Scientist, 
September 2002, 14–27.
A psychological study of victims of antigay hate incidents.
Rutenberg, Jim. “Against Hate Crimes.” New York Times, Jan-
uary 10, 2001, E10.
The reporter covers the decision by MTV to preempt all 
of its regular programming for 17-and-a-half hours—with 
no commercial interruptions—as it scrolls the names of 
victims of hate crimes and recounts the stories behind the 
crimes.
Santora, Marc. “Woman Is Charged with Murder as a Hate 
Crime in a Fatal Subway Push.” New York Times, December 30, 
2012, 15.
This article reports on the arrest of Erika Menendez who 
was charged with second-degree murder for pushing 
Sunando Sen, a 46  year-old Indian immigrant, onto a 
New York City subway track because she believed him to 
be a Hindu or Muslim.
Saulny, Susan. “Man Who Killed Two outside Gay Bar Re-
mains Mentally Ill, a Jury Finds.” New York Times, June 14, 
2001, B8.
Saulny reports a ruling by a New York State Supreme 
Court jury that Ronald K. Crumpley, who shot and killed 
two people and wounded six others outside a Greenwich 
Village gay bar in 1980, was still mentally ill.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
275
Sherry, Mark. “Hate Crimes against Disabled People.” Social 
Alternatives, October 2000, 23–30.
This article examines underreported hate crimes directed 
against the disabled. The author claims these incidents 
often go unrecognized because the crime is often referred 
to as “abuse” or “neglect” and such “euphemisms deny the 
validity” of its magnitude.
Sterngold, James. “Supremacist Who Killed Postal Worker 
Avoids Death Sentence.” New York Times, January  24, 
2001, A13.
The author looks at Buford O. Furrow, who sprayed auto-
matic gunfire in a Los Angeles Jewish community center 
filled with children in 1999, then confessed to murdering 
a Filipino letter carrier. Furrow planned to plead guilty to 
sixteen felony counts in return for a sentence that would 
allow him to avoid the death penalty.
“Student Accused of Sending Hate E-Mails.” New York Times, 
October 3, 1999, 50.
A report on a Bridgewater-Raritan High School stu-
dent in New Jersey who was charged with sending 108 
racially-charged e-mail hate messages.
Sullivan, Andrew. “What’s So Bad about Hate?” New York 
Times Magazine, September 26, 1999, 50.
Sullivan, the former editor of the New Republic analyzes 
the complex legal and philosophical issues of hate speech 
and hate crime.
Tatchell, Peter. “Why Can Blacks Bash Gays?” New Statesman, 
October 14, 2002, 14–15.
This British magazine discusses the homophobic lyrics 
found in the song “Chi Chi Man,” performed by the 

276	
Hate Crimes
Jamaican music group TOK and hate crimes and violence 
against gay people.
Tavernise, Sabrina. “Bomb Attack Shows That Russia Hasn’t 
Rooted Out Anti-Semitism.” New York Times, June 1, 2002, A1.
Tavernise notes that despite the efforts of President Vlad-
imir Putin to eradicate anti-Jewish attitudes resulting in 
frequent violence directed at Russian Jews, it is still pres-
ent at the local level and among ordinary Russians.
Tavernise, Sabrina. “Russian Parliament Passes a Hate-Crime 
Bill Backed by Putin.” New York Times, June 28, 2002, A9.
Tavernise reports on a Kremlin-backed bill that was passed 
by the lower house of the Russian Parliament to fight hate 
crimes and attacks by fascist groups.
“Texas: Man Executed for Hate Crime.” New York Times, Sep-
tember 22, 2011, 22.
Lawrence Russell Brewer, a white racist gang member, was 
executed for the dragging death of James Byrd Jr., a black 
man from east Texas. Mr. Byrd was chained to the back 
of a pickup truck in 1998 in one of the most brutal hate 
crimes in recent Texas history. Defense attorney attempts 
to forestall the execution were unsuccessful.
Thomas, Jo. “New Face of Terror Crimes: ‘Lone Wolf’ Weaned 
on Hate.” New York Times, August 16, 1999, A1.
Thomas reports that, after examining recent hate crimes— 
including bombings, shootings, and robberies—federal 
and state investigators have determined that no evidence 
exists of an organized coordination among violent right- 
wing groups and individuals against racial and religious 
minorities.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
277
Tsesis, Alexander. “Contextualizing Bias Crimes: A Social and 
Theoretical Perspectives.” Law & Social Inquiry, Winter 2003, 
315–340.
An analysis of the arguments supporting hate crimes leg-
islation and a review of Punishing Hate: Bias Crimes under 
American Law, by Frederick M. Lawrence.
“Two Attacked at Mosque.” New York Times, March  18, 
2001, 19.
A report about two Muslim men who were injured, one 
critically, when they were attacked outside a Sparks, 
Nevada, mosque in what the police called a possible 
hate crime. An Associated Press story published in the 
March  21, 2001, issue of the Las Vegas Review Jour-
nal notes that police investigators later claimed it was a 
“robbery-motivated assault,” not a hate crime.
“United States: Suspect in Murder of Lesbian Hikers Appre-
hended after Six Years.” Off Our Backs, May/June2002, 7.
This issue of Off Our Backs reports on the apprehension 
of Darrel David Rice for the murder of lesbian hikers and 
also discusses hate crimes directed against lesbians.
Watts, Meredith W. “Aggressive Youth Cultures and Hate 
Crime: Skinheads and Xenophobic Youth in Germany.” Amer-
ican Behavioral Scientist, December 2001, 600–616.
Watts notes that bias crime in Germany increased dra-
matically after unification in 1990 and remained at a 
relatively high level for the rest of the decade. Hatred 
of foreigners and other targeted groups not only seems 
linked to violent elements of youth culture but appears to 
be stimulated by local and international right-wing and 
fascist networks.

278	
Hate Crimes
Williams, Timothy. “The Hated and the Hater: Both Touched 
by Crime.” New York Times, July 19, 2001, 15.
Believing that a few South Asian men were Arabs and 
enraged by the 9/11 terrorist attacks, Mark Anthony 
Stroman killed Vasudev Patel, a Hindu Indian immigrant, 
and Waqar Hasan, a Pakistani Muslim in a series of mur-
derous attacks in Arizona.
Wisse, Ruth R. “On Ignoring Anti-Semitism.” Commentary, 
October 2002, 26–33.
Harvard professor Ruth Wisse warns about the dangers of 
ignoring anti-Jewish attitudes and violence and the tragic 
historical consequences.
Wistrich, Robert S. “The Old-New Anti-Semitism.” National 
Interest, Summer 2003, 59–70.
A distinguished historian and academic adviser to the 
British television documentary The Longest Hatred, 
Wistrich analyzes the current resurgence of anti-Jewish 
hatred throughout the world.
Wu, Frank H. “Why Vincent Chin Matters.” New York Times, 
June 23, 2012, 19.
Two white auto workers killed Vincent Chin on June 23, 
1982 because they thought he was Japanese, even though 
he was Chinese, because they attributed their economic 
plight to the success of the Japanese auto industry at 
that time.
Wypijewski, Joann. “The Myth of Matthew.” The Nation,  
October 28, 2013, 6–8.
This article reviews The Book of Matt, which charges that 
Matthew Shepard was killed in a drug deal gone awry and 
was not, as widely believed, an antigay murder.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
279
Reports
The U.S. government, state and municipal entities, and many pri-
vate organizations publish reports and documents on hate crimes, 
hate groups, and the growth of bigotry throughout the country. The 
following selections include some major and important publica-
tions issued in the past few decades. Since many government and 
other documents have been digitized it is most advisable to use the 
Internet when starting your search.
U.S. Government Documents and Reports
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, 108th 
Congress, 1st Session (Superintendent of Documents no. 
Y1.1/8: 108–249). Condemning Bigotry and Violence against 
Arab-Americans, Muslim-Americans, South Asian-Americans, 
and Sikh-Americans: Report, September 3, 2003.
This report provides background about the discrimina-
tory backlash crimes in the wake of the September 11, 
2001, terrorist attacks and contains the text of a congres-
sional resolution deploring the harassment and violence 
committed against the abovementioned groups and urg-
ing law enforcement authorities to vigorously prosecute 
these crimes.
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, 106th Con-
gress, 1st session (Superintendent of Documents no. Y4.J89/1: 
106/47). Hate Crimes Violence: (Hearing) August 4, 1999.
This hearing considered the passage of the Hate Crimes 
Prevention Act of 1999 to expand federal jurisdiction 
over bias-motivated crimes. The witnesses included Fred-
erick M. Lawrence, professor of Law at Boston Univer-
sity; Reuben Greenberg, chief of police of Charleston, 
South Carolina; an assault victim; and the mother of a 
murdered victim.

280	
Hate Crimes
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, 105th 
Congress, 1st session (Superintendent of Documents no.: 
Y4.J89/1:105/4). Implementation of the Church Arson Preven-
tion Act of 1996: Hearing, March 19, 1997.
This hearing examined how federal agencies implemented 
this act, including the provisions that clarified and 
expanded the jurisdiction of U.S. federal law enforcement 
over offenses involving religious property destruction. 
Witnesses included Patricia C. Glenn, national coordina-
tor of the Church Burning Response Team of the U.S. 
Department of Justice; Harold McDougall, an official 
with the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People (NAACP); and Elder T. Myers, a pastor 
in a South Carolina church. The report of the hearing 
also includes the Center for Democratic Renewal’s docu-
ment issued in March 1997, “Fourth Wave: A Continu-
ing Conspiracy to Burn Black Churches.”
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, 100th 
Congress, 2nd session (Superintendent of Documents no.:Y4.
J89/1:100/144). Racially Motivated Violence: Hearings, May 11 
and July 12, 1988.
This hearing considered legislation to establish the Com-
mission on Racially Motivated Violence. The hearing 
also examined the prevalence of and responses to acts of 
violence against members of minority groups and sur-
veyed the history of racial prejudice in the United States 
and the increase of racial tensions in colleges and uni-
versities. Witnesses included Rev. C. T. Vivian, chairman 
of the Center for Democratic Renewal; Benjamin L. 
Hooks, executive director of the National Association of 
the Advancement of Colored People; Douglas Seymour, 
an undercover police agent who infiltrated the Ku Klux 
Klan in California; and Reginald Wilson, director of 
the Office of Minority Concerns, American Council on 
Education.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
281
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcom-
mittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights, 100th Congress, 1st 
session (Superintendent of Documents no.: Y4.J89/1:100/116). 
Anti-Asian Violence: Oversight Hearing, November 10, 1987.
This hearing examined the causes of and possible responses 
to recent violent acts committed against Asians and Asian 
Americans. Witnesses included Rep. Norman Y. Mineta 
(D-CA); Rep. Robert T. Matsui (D-CA); Floyd D. Shi-
nomura of the Japanese American Citizens League; James 
C. Tso, president of the Organization of Chinese Ameri-
cans; and Arthur Soong, president of the Asian American 
Legal Defense and Education Fund. The report includes 
a compilation of articles from 1983 to 1987 on violence 
against Asian immigrants and Asian Americans in Mas-
sachusetts and a February 1987 report issued by the Los 
Angeles County Commission on Human Relations on 
ethnic- and religious-motivated violence in that region.
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcom-
mittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights, 103rd Congress, 1st 
session (Superintendent of Documents no.: Y4.J 89/1:103/51). 
Crimes of Violence Motivated by Gender: Hearing, November 16, 
1993.
The hearing examined proposed legislation that would 
make crimes of violence motivated by gender actionable 
under civil rights and hate crimes laws.
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcom-
mittee on Crime and Criminal Justice, 102nd Congress, 2nd 
session (Superintendent of Documents no.: Y4.J 89/1:102/80). 
Bias Crimes: Hearing, May 11, 1992.
This hearing focused on crimes motivated by prejudice 
against the racial, ethnic, religious, or sexual orientation of 
the victim. The witnesses discussed the Hate Crimes Sen-
tencing Act of 1992, which directs the U.S. Sentencing 

282	
Hate Crimes
Commission to revise sentencing guidelines to increase 
penalties for hate crimes. Witnesses included Rabbi Mel-
vin Burg, whose Los Angeles synagogue was vandalized; 
Charles J. Hynes, district attorney of Kings County, 
Brooklyn, New York; and Gary Stoops of the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation. Other witnesses represented 
Asian American, Jewish, and gay and women’s rights orga-
nizations. The hearing report includes the article “Sticks 
and Stones Can Put You in Jail, but Can Words Increase 
Your Sentence? Constitutional and Policy Dilemmas for 
Ethnic Intimidation Laws,” by Professor Susan Gellman, 
published in the UCLA Law Review, December 1991 (see 
Anti-Gay Violence: Hearings, October 9, 1986 entry).
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcom-
mittee on Crime and Criminal Justice, 102nd Congress, 2nd 
session (Superintendent of Documents no.: Y4:J89/1:102/64). 
Hate Crimes Sentencing Enhancement Act of 1992: Hearing, 
July 29, 1992.
This hearing examined the use of penalty enhancement 
for hate crimes and the implications on the constitution-
ality of hate crime laws following the June 1992 Supreme 
Court decision R. A. V. v. City of St. Paul, which struck 
down a Minnesota hate crime statute. The following wit-
nesses offered varied views on the constitutionality of the 
proposed legislation: Laurence H. Tribe, a professor at 
Harvard University Law School; Floyd Abrams, a promi-
nent constitutional law attorney; Robert S. Peck, legisla-
tive counsel of the American Civil Liberties Union; and 
Susan Gellman, assistant public defender, Ohio Public 
Defender Commission.
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Sub-
committee on Criminal Justice, 99th Congress, 2nd session 

	
Resources for Further Research 	
283
(Superintendent of Documents no.: Y4.J89/1:99/132). Anti-Gay 
Violence: Hearing, October 9, 1986.
This hearing examined the problem of violence against 
gay men and lesbians. The report includes descriptions 
of violent acts, the nature and extent of the violence, and 
surveys of cultural and social prejudicial attitudes toward 
gay people. Rep. Barney Frank (D-MA) presented a state-
ment and participated in interviewing witnesses, who 
included Kevin Berrill, director of the Violence Project 
of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force; Dr. Gregory 
M. Herek, a psychology professor; and Robert J. John-
ston, chief of the New York City Police Department. In 
addition, some gay victims of violence told of their own 
experiences.
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcom-
mittee on Criminal Justice, 99th Congress, 1st session (Su-
perintendent of Documents no.: Y4.J89/1:99/134). Crimes 
against Religious Practices and Property: Hearings, May 16 and 
June 19, 1985.
These hearings considered a bill to establish federal pen-
alties for damaging any religious building or cemetery 
or intimidating any person in the exercise of religious 
beliefs. Witnesses included Victoria Toensing, deputy 
assistant attorney general, who objected to the proposed 
legislation and advocated state, not federal, prosecution 
of such crimes. Richard Foltin, associate legal director of 
the American Jewish Committee, testified in support of 
the legislation.
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommit-
tee on Criminal Justice, 99th Congress, 2nd session (Superinten-
dent of Documents no.: Y4.J89/1:99/135). Ethnically Motivated 
Violence against Arab-Americans: Hearing, July 16, 1986.

284	
Hate Crimes
This hearing examined reports of harassment and violence 
directed against Arab Americans in the United States. Wit-
nesses included Oliver B. Revell III, the executive assistant 
director of the FBI; David Sadd, executive director of the 
National Association of Arab Americans; and David M. 
Gordis, executive vice president of the American Jewish 
Committee. The report included testimony of Rep. Mary 
Oakar (D-OH) and Rep. Nick Joe Rahall (D-WV).
U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcom-
mittee on Criminal Justice, 99th Congress, 1st session (Super-
intendent of Documents no.: Y4.J89/1:99/137). Hate Crime 
Statistics Act: Hearing, March 21, 1985.
The first congressional hearing held to discuss passage 
of a law requiring the U.S. Justice Department to col-
lect and publish statistics on crimes motivated by racial, 
ethnic, or religious prejudice. Witnesses in support 
of this legislation included Elaine Jones of the Legal, 
Defense, and Education Fund of the National Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP); 
Jerome Bakst of the Anti-Defamation League of B’nai 
B’rith; and Rep. Mario Biaggi (D-NY). Opponents of 
the legislation discussed the anticipated difficulties of 
determining the motivation for certain crimes and the 
problems of incorporating these statistics into the Uni-
form Crime Reporting program administered by the 
U.S. Department of Justice. These witnesses included 
William M. Baker, assistant director of the Office of 
Congressional and Public Affairs of the FBI, and Steven 
R. Schlesinger, director of the Bureau of Justice Statis-
tics. Other witnesses included Rep. Norman Y. Mineta 
(D-CA) and Rep. Barbara B. Kennelly (D-CT), who 
testified on crimes of violence against members of eth-
nic, racial, and religious minorities.
U.S. Congress, House Committee on National Security, 104th 
Congress, 2nd session (Superintendent of Documents no.: 

	
Resources for Further Research 	
285
Y4.Se2/1 A:995–96). Extremist Activity in the Military: Hear-
ing, June 25, 1996.
This hearing examined the participation of current or for-
mer U.S. Army personnel in antigovernment hate groups 
and militia organizations. It also studied the murder of an 
African American couple in Fayetteville, North Carolina, 
by soldiers of the 82nd Airborne Division based at Fort 
Bragg, who were affiliated with white supremacist groups.
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 104th 
Congress, 2nd session (Superintendent of Documents no.: 
Y4.J 89/2:S.hrg.104–851). Church Burnings: Hearing, June 27, 
1996, on the Federal Response to Recent Incidents of Church 
Burnings in Predominantly Black Churches across the South.
This hearing surveyed the rash of arson against black 
churches and acts of violence against other houses of wor-
ship. It also examined the federal investigation and prose-
cution of the perpetrators and the financial support given 
to assist in rebuilding the burned buildings.
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 106th Con-
gress, 1st session (Superintendent of Documents no.: Y4.J89/2: 
106–517). Combating Hate Crimes: Promoting a Responsive and 
Responsible Role for the Federal Government, May 11, 1999.
This hearing discussed the passage of the Hate Crimes 
Prevention Act of 1999 to expand federal jurisdiction of 
bias-motivated crimes related to interstate commerce. The 
witnesses offered different opinions on the constitutional-
ity and desirability of this proposed legislation.
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 104th 
Congress, 2nd session (Superintendent of Documents no. 
Y4.J89/2:S.hrg 104–842). Combating Violence against Women: 
Hearing, May 15, 1996.
This hearing examined the implementation of the Vio-
lence against Women Act (VAWA) of 1994, providing 

286	
Hate Crimes
protection for women against violent crime. Witnesses 
included Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchinson (R-TX); U.S. 
Attorney General Janet Reno; Kathryn J. Rogers, exec-
utive director of the National Organization for Women 
(NOW) Legal Defense and Education Fund; and Denise 
Brown, director of the Nicole Brown Simpson Charitable 
Foundation.
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 106th 
Congress, 1st session (Superintendent of Documents no.: 
Y4.J89/2: 106–803). Hate Crime on the Internet, September 14, 
1999.
This hearing explored the issues related to the use of the 
Internet to promote prejudice and bias-motivated crimes. 
The witnesses included Rabbi Abraham Cooper, the asso-
ciate director of the Simon Wiesenthal Center; Howard 
Berkowitz, the national chairman of the Anti-Defamation 
League; and Joseph T. Roy, an official of the Southern 
Poverty Law Center.
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 100th 
Congress, 2nd session (Superintendent of Documents no.: 
Y4.J89/2:S.hrg.100–1069). Hate Crime Statistics Act of 1988: 
Hearing, June 21, 1988.
This hearing considered the proposed legislation to require 
the U.S. Department of Justice to collect and publish 
statistics on crimes motivated by racial, ethnic, or reli-
gious prejudice. The witnesses endorsing the legislation 
included Alan M. Schwartz, director of the Research and 
Evaluation Department of the Anti-Defamation League 
of B’nai B’rith; Patricia Clark, director of the Klanwatch 
project of the Southern Poverty Law Center; Joan C. 
Weiss, executive director of the National Institute against 
Prejudice and Violence; William Yoshino, midwestern 
region director of the Japanese American Citizens League; 

	
Resources for Further Research 	
287
and Kevin Berrill, director of the Anti-Violence Project of 
the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 105th 
Congress, 2nd session (Superintendent of Documents no.: 
Y4.J89/2: 105–904). Hate Crimes Prevention Act of 1998: 
Hearing July 8, 1998.
This hearing discussed proposed legislation to expand the 
federal jurisdiction to allow the prosecution of crimes 
motivated by prejudice against a victim’s sexual orienta-
tion, gender, or disability and to eliminate the stipula-
tion that victims must be engaged in a federally protected 
activity in order to have federal prosecution.
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 103rd 
Congress, 2nd session (Superintendent of Documents no.: Y4. 
J 89/2: S.hrg. 103–1078). Hate Crimes Statistics Act: Hearing, 
June 28, 1994.
This hearing reviewed the implementation of the Hate 
Crime Statistics Act of 1990, requiring that the FBI collect 
and publish statistics on crimes motivated by racial, ethnic, 
or religious prejudice. The report also examined educational 
efforts of private organizations to promote tolerance and to 
prevent hate crimes. One witness was Steven Spielberg, the 
acclaimed motion picture director and producer, who dis-
cussed his perspectives on the making of the award-winning 
movie Schindler’s List and its educational value. Other wit-
nesses included Robert Machleder, chairman of the New 
York Regional Board of the Anti-Defamation League; Sara 
Bullard, education director of the Southern Poverty Law 
Center; and Deedee Corradini, mayor of Salt Lake City, 
Utah, representing the U.S. Conference of Mayors.
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 104th 
Congress, 2nd session (Superintendent of Documents no.: 

288	
Hate Crimes
Y4.J89/2: S.hrg. 104–845). Reauthorization of the Hate Crime 
Statistics Act: Hearing, March 19, 1996.
This hearing considered amending the Hate Crime Sta-
tistics Act of 1990 to permanently reauthorize the FBI 
programs to collect and publish statistics on crimes moti-
vated by race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, disability, 
or religious prejudice. The witnesses included Charles 
W. Archer, assistant director of the FBI’s Criminal Jus-
tice Information Services Division; Emanuel Cleaver II, 
mayor of Kansas City, Missouri, who represented the 
U.S. Conference of Mayors; Stephen Arent, vice chair-
man of the National Civil Rights Committee of the 
Anti-Defamation League; and Karen M. Lawson, exec-
utive director of the Leadership Conference Education 
Fund. The report includes the FBI document “Summary 
Reporting System: National Incident-Based Reporting 
System; Hate Crime Data Collection Guidelines” and the 
1994 Covington and Burlington law firm report “D.C. 
Bias-Related Crime Act: An Unused Weapon against 
Violent Crime,” prepared for the National Asian Pacific 
American Bar Association.
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 102nd 
Congress, 1st session (Superintendent of Documents no. Y4.
J89/2:S.hrg. 102–369). Violence against Women: Victims of the 
System; Hearing, April 9, 1991.
This hearing considered the Violence against Women Act 
of 1991, in particular to amend various acts to revise and 
expand protections against rape and other violent crime. 
The witnesses included Bonnie J. Campbell, attorney 
general of Iowa; Roland W. Burris, attorney general of 
Illinois; and Cass R. Sunstein, a professor at the Univer-
sity of Chicago Law School. The subsequent document 
includes a committee staff report entitled “Violence 
against Women: The Increase of Rape in America, 1990,” 
with tables and graphs.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
289
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Subcom-
mittee on the Constitution, 102nd Congress, 2nd session (Su-
perintendent of Documents no.: Y4.J89/2: S.hrg. 102–1131). 
Hate Crimes Statistics Act: Hearing, August 5, 1992.
This hearing reviewed the implementation of the Hate 
Crime Statistics Act of 1990 by the FBI, state crime 
reporting agencies, and local law enforcement agencies 
under the direction of the U.S. Department of Justice. 
Witnesses included G. Norman Christensen, assistant 
director of the Criminal Justice Information Services 
Division of the FBI; Jack McDevitt, coauthor of Hate 
Crimes; and Elsie L. Scott, deputy commissioner of train-
ing for the New York City Police Department, represent-
ing the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement 
Executives. Also called to speak were Harold Gershow-
itz, chairman of the Chicago Regional Board of the 
Anti-Defamation League; and Elizabeth R. Ouyang, staff 
attorney for the Asian American Legal Defense and Edu-
cation Fund, who expressed concern about the possible 
underreporting of hate crimes against Asian Americans. 
This report also included the FBI document “Hate Crime 
Data Collection Guidelines: Uniform Crime Reporting” 
and the 1991 annual report issued by the Massachusetts 
Executive Office of Public Safety, entitled “Hate Crime/
Hate Incidents in Massachusetts.”
U.S. Congress. Senate. Subcommittee on Constitution, Civil 
Rights and Human Rights; Committee on the Judiciary. Hate 
Crimes and the Threat of Domestic Extremism, September  19, 
2012.
This hearing was inspired by congressional concerns that 
not enough was being done to combat the threat of violent 
domestic extremists or to protect the vulnerable commu-
nities that extremists may target. According to the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics, there were an estimated 195,000 hate 
crimes per year between 2003 and 2009.

290	
Hate Crimes
U.S. Congress. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary. The Mat-
thew Shepard Hate Crimes Prevention Act of 2009, June  25, 
2009. (SuDoc no. Y4.J89/2:S.HRG.111–464)
Hearing to consider S. 909, the Matthew Shepard Hate 
Crimes Prevention Act of 2009, to establish certain hate 
crimes as new Federal offenses, and to authorize the 
Department of Justice to make grants to State, local, 
and tribal governments to investigate and prosecute hate 
crimes, including crimes manifesting prejudice based on 
gender or gender identity and hate crimes affecting juve-
niles. Includes supplementary material: American-Arab 
Anti-Discrimination Committee; “Report on Hate 
Crimes and Discrimination Against Arab Americans: 
2003–2007”; Leadership Conference on Civil Rights 
Education Fund; “Confronting the New Faces of Hate: 
Hate Crimes in America”, 2009; Parshall, Craig L.; “Tyr-
anny over the Mind: A Legal and Policy Analysis of H.R. 
1592 and S. 1105 (Hate Crimes Legislation)”, May 14, 
2007; Southern Poverty Law Center Intelligence Project; 
“Terror from the Right: 75 Plots, Conspiracies and Racist 
Rampages Since Oklahoma City.
U.S. Congress. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Jena 6 and 
the Role of Federal Intervention in Hate Crimes and Race-Related 
Violence in Public Schools, October 16, 2007. (Sudoc Number: 
Y4.J89/1:110–162)
Hearing to examine role of Federal intervention in racially 
motivated incidents in public schools, in light of recent 
events in Jena, Louisiana, in which racial tensions among 
high school students led to hate crimes and violence that 
resulted in disproportionate punishments among black 
and white students.
U.S. Congress. Joint Commissions and Temporary Commit-
tees. Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe. Hate 
Crimes, November 6, 2007. (Sudoc Number: Y4.SE2:H28)

	
Resources for Further Research 	
291
A transcript of Commission on Security and Coopera-
tion in Europe briefing on combating hate crimes and 
discrimination in Europe and Russia.
U.S. Congress. Senate. Subcommittee on Crime and Drugs; 
Committee on the Judiciary. Crimes Against America’s Homeless: 
Is the Violence Growing?, September 29, 2010. (Sudoc Number: 
Y4.J89/2:S.HRG.111–915)
Hearing before the Subcomittee on Crime and Drugs to 
examine trends in violent crimes against the homeless. 
According to HUD’s latest report to Congress, approx-
imately 640,000 persons were homeless on any given 
night in 2009, and roughly 1.5 million people, or one 
out of every 200 Americans, spent at least one night in 
a shelter during 2009. According to National Coalition 
for the Homeless numbers, bias-motivated crimes against 
the homeless are pervasive and growing. The previous year 
was the deadliest one for attacks on homeless people.
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance. A 
Policymaker’s Guide to Hate Crimes, 1997.
This report surveys the scope and nature of hate crimes 
and the response to the problem by federal, state, and 
local government agencies.
U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
Hate Crime Statistics. An annual report mandated by the Hate 
Crime Statistics Act of 1990.
The FBI is the major U.S. government agency collecting, 
tabulating, and publishing official data on the extent of 
hate crimes nationwide.
U.S. Department of Justice. Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
Hate Crime Data Collection Guidelines and Training Man-
ual, 2015. http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/hate-crime- 
data-collection-guidelines-and-training-manual.pdf

292	
Hate Crimes
The official U.S. government guidelines for defining 
groups vulnerable to hate crime victimization and also 
discusses the techniques of training law enforcement offi-
cials for analyzing and investigating these crimes.
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Remarks at the 
Dedication of Mount Zion A.M.E. Church in Greeleyville, 
South Carolina, June 17, 1996: 1038–1042.
The text of remarks by President Bill Clinton in which 
he promises to prosecute those responsible for the church 
burnings and to assist communities in rebuilding their 
houses of worship.
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Statement on the 
Attack on Jewish Students in Brooklyn, New York, March 2, 
1994, March 7, 1994: 418.
The text of a statement in which President Bill Clinton 
condemns the shooting incident directed against Hasidic 
Jewish students riding across the Brooklyn Bridge.
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Statement on 
Hate Crimes Legislation, October 18, 1999: 2024–2025.
The text of a statement given by President Bill Clinton 
on October 13, 1999, which deals with the hate crimes 
legislation.
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Letter to the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives on the Proposed “Hate 
Crimes Prevention Act,” July 17, 2000: 1627.
The text of a letter given by President Bill Clinton on 
July 12, 2000, which deals with the proposed Hate Crimes  
Prevention Act.
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Statement on 
Senate Action on Hate Crimes Legislation, June  26, 2000: 
1416–1418.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
293
The text of a statement given by President Bill Clinton on 
June 20, 2000.
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Remarks on Pro-
posed Hate Crimes Legislation, May 1, 2000: 920–923.
The text of remarks given by President Bill Clinton on 
April 25, 2000.
Organization Reports
Nongovernmental organizations and associations have published 
important studies on hate crimes and extremist organizations. 
Since the last edition of this book, many of these publications are 
available electronically on various organizations’ Web sites.
Anti-Defamation League (ADL), http://www.adl.org
The Anti-Defamation League, the oldest Jewish civil and 
human rights organization in the U.S., offers an extensive 
number of publications on its Web site. These publications 
cover anti-Semitism, racism, homophobia, interethnic and 
intergroup relations, hate groups, law enforcement activi-
ties to combat hate crimes, among many other topics.
International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP), http://
www.theiacp.org/
The IACP has published many useful publications on 
hate crimes covering many topics including a guide for 
law enforcement officers involved in the investigation and 
prevention of these crimes.
Nonprint Resources
In recent years, a growing amount of material on hate crimes has 
been appearing in nonprint format, including videos, films, tele-
vision, and the Internet. This section includes information about 
some useful and informative sources. The availability of these vid-
eos constantly changes so please check the Internet to find the cur-
rent distributor.

294	
Hate Crimes
Anti-Gay Hate Crimes
Media Type: DVD
Running Time: 50 minutes
Release Date: 2008
Distributor: New Video Group
Originally broadcast on the A& E television network, this 
documentary surveys the activities of the most vocal groups 
opposed to the so-called “homosexual agenda”.
Assault on Gay America: The Life and Death of Billy Jack 
Gaither
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 60 minutes
Release Date: 2000
In February 1999, in Sylacauga, Alabama, Billy Jack Gaither 
was murdered by a white supremacist who later testified that 
he killed the thirty-year-old computer programmer because 
he was “queer.” This film explores the roots of homophobia 
in the United States and examines how these beliefs and 
fears contribute to the recent rise in violence against gays 
and lesbians.
Beyond Hate
Media Type: DVD
Running Time: 91 minutes
Release Date: 2013
Originally aired on PBS in 1991, Bill Moyers examines the 
origins and dimensions of hate through the eyes of world 
leaders, human rights activists, Arabs and Israelis, high 
school students, youth gangs, and U.S. white supremacist 
groups.
Boys Don’t Cry
Media Type: DVD

	
Resources for Further Research 	
295
Running Time: 208 minutes
Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment
Release Date: 2010
This major Hollywood movie depicts the true story of a 
transgendered youth living as a man in rural Nebraska who 
assumes the name Brandon Teena and is later murdered.
The Brandon Teena Story
Media Type: DVD
Running Time: 88 minutes
Release Date: 2008
Distributor: New Video Group
A true story about transgendered teen Brandon Teena and 
the hostile reaction he received in a Nebraska town. Teena ar-
rived in rural Falls City, Nebraska, in 1993, where he found 
new friends. Three weeks later, he was raped and beaten by 
these friends, who had discovered that Brandon was actu-
ally a woman. The film was named best documentary at the 
1998 Berlin Film Festival and the 1998 Vancouver Film Fes-
tival and was the inspiration of the Oscar-winning movie 
Boys Don’t Cry.
Brotherhood of Hate
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 52 minutes
Release Date: 2000
This film documents one family’s legacy of hate, showing how 
it was handed down from one generation to the next. It is the 
story of eight brothers raised to be white supremacist warriors.
Bum Hunting
Media Type: DVD and videodisc
Running Time: 12 minutes
Release Date: 2006

296	
Hate Crimes
This short film documents a disturbing trend of teenage vi-
olence directed at homeless people.
Hate across America
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 50 minutes
Release Date: 1996
This film surveys the history of violent hate crimes, from the 
murder of three civil rights workers in Mississippi in 1964 
to the present day.
Hate Crime
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 58 minutes
Release Date: 1999
This film highlights two communities that are having some 
success in solving the problem of hate crimes. Following 
the burning of African American churches in South Caro-
lina, law enforcement officials arrested members of the Ku 
Klux Klan (KKK). One of the black churches filed a lawsuit 
against the KKK and won a $38 million judgment against 
the Klan from a racially mixed jury. The second case features 
a high school class on tolerance, developed by teacher Joe 
Moros, that has changed the social climate at San Clemente 
High School in California, where tensions among whites, 
Hispanics, blacks, and Asian Americans led to brutal vio-
lence and killing in the 1990s.
Hate Groups USA
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 48 minutes
Release Date: 1999
Originally a BBC broadcast entitled The Heart of Darkness, 
this documentary contains interviews with some leading 

	
Resources for Further Research 	
297
racist leaders as well as government officials and civil rights 
leaders who try to combat their hateful activities.
Hate.com: Extremists on the Internet
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 42 minutes
Release Date: 2000
This documentary discusses the use of the Internet to spread 
messages of hate and violence and contains segments on the 
leaders of racist movements, including Don Black, founder 
of Stormfront; Matt Hale, founder of the World Church 
of the Creator; Richard Butler, founder of Aryan Nations 
and Christian Identity; and Dr. William Pierce, founder of 
the National Alliance and author of The Turner Diaries. The 
film also profiles so-called lone wolves—individuals appar-
ently without organizational support who perpetrated vio-
lent hate crimes—including Timothy McVeigh, Benjamin 
Smith, the lynchers of James Byrd Jr., and others.
Journey to a Hate-Free Millennium: Stories of Compassion 
and Hope
Media Type: DVD
Running Time: 78 minutes
Release Date: 2000
This film discusses some infamous hate crimes in the United 
States. Victims as well as students, teachers, celebrities, and 
others affected by these incidents are interviewed.
Last Lynching
Media Type: DVD and videodisc
Running Time: 44 minutes
Release Date: 2009
Explores the history of lynching, including a school-
teacher whose grandfather witnessed the lynching of five 

298	
Hate Crimes
African-Americans in 1916 and law student and later Con-
gressman Artur Davis who helped prosecute the KKK for a 
1981 lynching in Mobile, Alabama.
Licensed to Kill
Media Type: DVD
Running Time: 77 minutes
Release Date: 2007
Rarely seen videotaped interviews with the men who have 
beaten and killed gay people. Including news reports and 
police files. Originally broadcast on PBS in 1998.
The Matthew Shepard Story: Death in the High Desert
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 46 minutes
Release Date: 2001
This film discusses the events surrounding the murder of 
Matthew Shepard (1976–1998), who was murdered in 
Laramie, Wyoming, because he was gay. The video includes 
profiles of the murderers and excerpts from their confes-
sions. It also explores the impact on the community and the 
legal issues concerning a fair trial for the accused murderers.
Responding to Hate Crimes: A Roll Call Training Video for 
Police Officers
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 20 minutes
Release Date: 2000
Cost: Contact Bureau of Justice Assistance
This video explains the differences between a hate incident 
and a hate crime and how law enforcement officials should 
address community concerns.

	
Resources for Further Research 	
299
Shadow of Hate
Media Type:
Running Time: 40 minutes
Release Date: 2012
An historical overview of religious, ethnic, and racial intol-
erance in the United States.
South
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 70 minutes
Release Date: 1999
Director Chantal Akerman changed the focus of this film, 
originally intended as a documentary on the American 
South, to examine the gruesome lynching of James Byrd Jr., 
an African American, in Jasper, Texas.
Two Spirits
Media Type: DVD
Running Time: 51 minutes
Release Date: 2009
This movie examines the role of two-spirit people in the Na-
vajo culture. Fred Martinez, a nadleehi or a” male-bodied 
person with a feminine essence” was murdered in a hate 
crime at the age of sixteen. This film examines the views of 
Native Americans on gender and sexuality.
Two Towns of Jasper
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 90 minutes
Release Date: 2007
This video examines the different reactions in the white and 
black communities to the lynching of James Byrd Jr., an 

300	
Hate Crimes
African American, by three white men in Jasper, Texas in 
1998.
Understanding Hate Crimes
Media Type: VHS
Running Time: 47 minutes
Release Date: 2000
A dramatization of the impact on a community after a ju-
nior high school student is abducted and beaten to death for 
being gay. While fellow students prepare a memorial service 
for the boy they hardly knew, they begin to question the 
forces that led to the murder. Comments from a variety of 
professionals are interspersed throughout.
Antibias Videos
The Anti-Defamation League (ADL) is one of the largest pro-
ducers and distributors of human relations materials, including 
videos, books, teachers’ discussion guides, and classroom pro-
gram activities.
Several dozen ADL videos are easily accessible on YouTube 
(https://www.youtube.com/user/ADLNational) and the ADL 
Web site (http://www.adl.org). These videos cover a wide range 
of topics including hate crimes, interfaith and intergroup rela-
tions, promoting tolerance, combatting racism, anti-Semitism 
and homophobia, Israel and the Middle East, among many 
other subjects. These videos are aimed at students, teachers, 
community groups, church and synagogues, social workers 
among other professionals.

This page intentionally left blank


303
7	
Chronology
Because the number of individual violent hate crimes commit-
ted in the United States during the past few decades is too large 
to include in a single list, the following chronology is neces-
sarily selective. Although most of the cited incidents occurred 
in the United States a few hate crimes committed outside the 
country were included to demonstrate that the problem is 
worldwide. Individual victims from various racial, religious, 
and sexual minority groups are cited in this chapter, which 
explains why a broad range of human and civil rights groups 
and ethnic defense organizations have been galvanized to pro-
mote anti-hate crimes legislation to deter bias incidents. The 
chronology also contains notable events in the legislative and 
judicial history of hate crimes laws.
The chronology begins in 1955, the year Emmett Till was 
lynched in Mississippi, an event many historians consider the 
beginning of the modern civil rights movement. In the spring of 
2004, the U.S. Department of Justice reopened this historic case 
to investigate new information about other possible perpetrators.
Many of the listed crimes committed before 1979 have been 
adapted from the outstanding reference work Racial and Reli-
gious Violence in the United States: A Chronology (New York: 
Garland, 1991) by Michael and Judy Ann Newton. Recent 
On September 25, 2014, protestors gathered in Philadelphia’s John F. Kennedy 
Plaza, also known as Love Park, to demonstrate  support for adding sexual ori-
entation to Pennsylvania’s hate crime law. The renewed call for the legislation 
came in response to the September 11 beating of a gay couple that left two 
local men with injuries requiring hospitalization. (AP Photo/Matt Rourke)

304	
Hate Crimes
material has been adapted from the invaluable “Hate Incidents” 
webpage compiled by Michelle Bramblett which is posted on 
the Southern Poverty Law Center Web site.
1955
May 7  The Reverend George W. Lee, an official of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), 
is shot and killed on a highway in Belzoni, Mississippi.
August 13  Lamar Smith, a vocal supporter for black voter 
registration, is shot and killed on the lawn of the county court-
house in Brookhaven, Mississippi.
August 28  Emmett Till, a fourteen-year-old black boy, is kid-
napped, shot, and drowned in a river near Money, Mississippi, 
for allegedly whistling at a white man’s wife. His killers are 
acquitted after a controversial trial. This notorious incident is 
often considered the catalyst for the modern civil rights move-
ment. Two books published in 2002 and 2003 and a television 
documentary reveal possibly new information on this case.
October 22  John Reese, a 16-year-old African American, is 
killed and two other black youths are wounded by white gun-
men at a café in Mayflower, Texas. The attack is one of several 
violent incidents aimed at discouraging the black community 
from building a new school.
1956
January 30  A bomb explodes at the Montgomery, Alabama, 
home of the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr.
February  3–4  The admission of black student Autherine 
Lucy to the University of Alabama sparks a riot from local Ku 
Klux Klan (KKK) members and white students. Another riot 
occurs on February 6, which led university administrators to 
suspend and later expel Lucy from the university. In April 1988, 
the university revoked her expulsion and she re-enrolled. More 
than 35 years later, Autherine Lucy received an MA degree in 
elementary education at the University of Alabama.

	
Chronology	
305
April 11  Six Klan members assault singer Nat “King” Cole 
during a performance at the Birmingham, Alabama, municipal 
auditorium.
1957
January 23  Willie Edwards, a black truck driver, is abducted 
by Klan members in Montgomery, Alabama. They accuse Ed-
wards of attacking white women and force him at gunpoint to 
leap from a river bridge. His death, considered accidental until 
1976, is charged as a homicide when a Klan member confesses 
to the crime. Three other Klan members are indicted, but the 
charges are dismissed when the prosecution fails to prove that 
the cause of Edwards’s death was drowning. In 1998 Montgom-
ery district attorney Ellen Brooks orders an exhumation, and 
the coroner finds the death was indeed caused by drowning.
1958
March 16  The Jewish Community Center in Nashville, Ten-
nessee, is dynamited.
June 29  A black miner removes a package of dynamite from 
a Baptist church in Birmingham, Alabama, whose pastor is 
civil rights leader Reverend F. L. Shuttlesworth. The dynamite 
explodes in the street, breaking windows in a four-block area.
July 7  An early morning explosion damages the home of the 
Reverend Warren Carr, the white chairman of the Durham, 
North Carolina, Human Relations Committee, a local group 
devoted to improving racial relationships.
August  24–25  Two formerly all-white schools in Deep 
Creek, North Carolina, are destroyed by fire after they were 
scheduled to be integrated.
October 12  The Temple, a synagogue in Atlanta, is bombed 
at 3:30 a.m., causing an estimated $200,000 in damage. The 
blast tears an eighteen-square-foot hole in a side entrance of the 
building and shatters windows of a nearby building and apart-
ment house. Twenty minutes after the blast, a caller says it was 

306	
Hate Crimes
the “last empty building I’ll blow up in Atlanta.” The bomb-
ings and phone calls parallel similar attacks on synagogues in 
Miami and Jacksonville, Florida, and Birmingham, Alabama, 
during this time.
1959
April 25  Mack Parker, a black truck driver, is taken from 
his jail cell, where he was being held for suspected rape, and is 
lynched by a mob of whites in Poplarville, Mississippi. An area 
prosecutor refuses to accept evidence by the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) naming several of the lynchers. When the 
state trooper who arrested Parker offers his gun to the husband 
of the rape victim so that he can shoot Parker, the husband re-
fuses because his wife’s description of the perpetrator is unclear.
1960
January 7–8  Teenage vandals are arrested in a wave of anti-Jewish 
vandalism at synagogues and other buildings in New York, Phil-
adelphia, Chicago, Boston, and more than a dozen other cities.
April 23  William Moore, a northern white civil rights advo-
cate, is shot and killed in Attalla, Alabama, during a one-man 
civil rights march from Tennessee to Mississippi. On April 27, 
a local white man is charged with the murder.
1961
September 25  Herbert Lee, a cotton farmer and black voter 
registration organizer, is shot and killed by E. H. Hurst in the 
town of Liberty, Mississippi. Hurst, a white neighbor and state 
legislator, is never brought to trial.
1962
April  9  Roman Ducksworth, a black soldier, is shot and 
killed by a white policeman for refusing to sit in the back of a 
bus in Taylorsville, Mississippi.

	
Chronology	
307
1963
June 8  The county sheriff and police chief of Winona, Mis-
sissippi, and three other whites are indicted on federal charges 
of brutalizing black prisoners.
June 12  Medgar Evers, a black NAACP leader, is killed by 
a sniper in the driveway of his home in Jackson, Mississippi. 
The FBI finds that the murderer is Byron De La Beckwith, 
a member of the Ku Klux Klan and White Citizens’ Coun-
cil. However, two trials for the murder result in hung juries. 
In 1967 Beckwith runs for governor of Mississippi with the 
backing of the Klan. After prosecutors try Beckwith a third 
time, he is convicted on February  5, 1994, and sentenced 
to life imprisonment at the Central Mississippi Correctional 
Facility.
September 4  The home of Arthur Shores, a black attorney 
in Birmingham, Alabama, is bombed a second time, touch-
ing off a riot that results in one death and 18 injuries. On the 
same day, 125 members of the National States Rights Party, a 
neo-Nazi racist organization, scuffle with police outside a re-
cently integrated school.
September 15  A bomb explodes at the Sixteenth Street Bap-
tist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, during Sunday services. 
Four black girls are killed: Addie Mae Collins, Cynthia Wes-
ley, Carole Robertson, and Denise McNair. Another person is 
blinded. African Americans riot in response to the explosion. 
Alabama state troopers, under the command of Al Lingo, a 
“good friend” of the Klan, try to disperse the rioters. During 
the outbreak, a police officer kills Johnny Robinson, a black 
youth. Another black youth, 13-year-old Virgil Ware, is also 
fatally shot by two white youths.
1964
January 31  Louis Allen, a witness to the 1961 murder of 
Herbert Lee, is shot and killed in the front yard of his home in 
Liberty, Mississippi.

308	
Hate Crimes
April 7  The Reverend Bruce Klunder, a white minister from 
Cleveland, Ohio, is crushed to death by a bulldozer while pro-
testing the construction of a segregated school.
May 2  Henry Dee and Charlie Moore, two African Amer-
ican teenagers, are abducted by Klan members in Meadville, 
Mississippi. Two months later, their bodies are pulled from a 
nearby river. Although murder charges are filed against two Ku 
Klux Klan members, the charges are later dismissed.
June 10  A white mob hurling bricks and sulfuric acid breaks 
through police lines to attack black demonstrators in St. Au-
gustine, Florida. Police use tear gas to disperse the rioters.
June  21  Civil rights workers Michael Schwerner, James 
Chaney, and Andrew Goodman are arrested for allegedly speed-
ing in Philadelphia, Mississippi. They are released to a waiting 
group of Klan members, who murder the men on a rural road 
and bury them in an earthen dam. On August 4, their bodies 
are recovered. Although the state of Mississippi refuses to file 
murder charges, the seven Klan members are later convicted of 
federal civil rights violations.
June 25  A black church in Longdale, Mississippi, is damaged 
by a firebomb.
June 26  Arsonists burn a black church in Clinton, Mississippi.
July 6  Two black churches in Raleigh, Mississippi, are burned 
to the ground.
July 10  Three rabbis active in black voter registration pro-
grams in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, are assaulted with metal 
clubs. On August 8, two white men plead guilty to the attacks, 
pay $500 fines, and receive 90-day suspended sentences.
July 11  Klan members in Colbert, Georgia, ambush a carload 
of black army reserve officers returning home from summer 
training exercises. Lt. Col. Lemuel Penn is killed by shotgun 
blasts; his companions escape unharmed. Two Klan members 
are acquitted of murder charges, but both are later sentenced to 
prison for federal civil rights violations.

	
Chronology	
309
1965
February 10  Deputies armed with electric prods force civil 
rights marchers out of Selma, Alabama, leaving them stranded 
more than a mile from town.
February 17  A voter registration headquarters is set on fire 
by Ku Klux Klan members in Laurel, Mississippi.
February 18  Jimmy Lee Jackson, a black civil rights worker, 
is beaten and fatally shot in Marion, Alabama, when state law 
enforcement officers attack about 400 black demonstrators. 
While Jackson lies in a Selma, Alabama, hospital, police serve 
him an arrest warrant. He dies on February 26.
March 9  In Selma, Alabama, violent racists attack the Rev-
erend James Reeb, a Boston minister active in the civil rights 
movement. He is fatally beaten. The defendants are acquitted 
by a jury that had earlier discussed their verdict with Sheriff 
Jim Clark, a professed racist.
March 21  A desegregated cafe is firebombed in Vicksburg, 
Mississippi.
March  25  Viola Liuzzo, a white civil rights worker from  
Detroit, is ambushed and killed by Klan members in Lowndes-
boro, Alabama.
March 29  Members of the Klan hurl a tear gas grenade at 
blacks in Bogalusa, Louisiana.
May 13  An African American church in Oxford, Alabama, 
is bombed.
May 17  A gas station and a motel owned by vocal Klan op-
ponents are bombed in Laurel, Mississippi.
June 2  Oneal Moore and Creed Rogers, two black sheriff’s 
deputies, are ambushed while on patrol in Bogalusa, Louisiana; 
Rogers is wounded, and Moore is fatally injured. On June 5, 
gunshots are fired at the home of the law enforcement official in-
vestigating the murder. Although Klan member Ray McElveen 
was arrested for the murder, he was released a few weeks later 
because local authorities claimed not to have enough evidence 

310	
Hate Crimes
for a trial. Since that time, no one has been arrested or pros-
ecuted for these crimes. In June 2002, 100 people gathered 
in Moore’s hometown to honor his memory and his surviving 
partner, Creed Rogers, who was then eighty years old. In 2007, 
David “Creed” Rogers passed away without ever learning who 
killed his partner. In 2009, the case was re-opened by the Cold 
Case Initiative.
June  16  Klan members shoot at a black-owned nightclub 
and also at the state vice president of the NAACP in separate 
incidents in Laurel, Mississippi.
July 1  In Laurel, Mississippi, Klansmen burn the headquar-
ters of a civil rights organization and thirteen homes occupied 
by civil rights workers.
July 15  Willie Brewster, a black man, is shot and killed in 
Anniston, Alabama, by night riders following a rally organized 
by the National States Rights Party.
July 16  While police stand and watch, white mobs attack 
black protesters in Bogalusa, Louisiana. After the seventh as-
sault, police arrest two white attackers. On July  17, whites 
spray water and hurl rocks and bottles at black demonstrators. 
In Greensboro, Alabama, about 75 black demonstrators are at-
tacked by a white mob armed with clubs, hammers, and rubber 
hoses. Seventeen demonstrators require hospitalization.
July 18  An African American church in Elmwood, Alabama, 
is burned. Arsonists also burn two black churches in Greens-
boro, Alabama. The Imperial Wizard of the Klan, Sam Bowers, 
boasts that the Klan is responsible for more than 16 arson fires 
in Laurel, Mississippi.
July 27  Two black homes are firebombed in Ferriday, Loui-
siana. The office of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) is 
firebombed in New Orleans, Louisiana.
July  31  The headquarters of the Council of Federated  
Organizations, in Columbia, Mississippi, is damaged by fire 
and subjected to gunfire in a predawn attack.
August 20  Jonathan Daniels, a white seminary student on leave 
from the Episcopal Theological School in Cambridge, Massachusetts, 

	
Chronology	
311
is shot and killed by a part-time deputy sheriff and Klan member 
in Hayneville, Alabama. Robert F. Morrisoe, a Catholic priest from 
Chicago, is also seriously wounded in the same attack.
August 23  The Reverend Donald A. Thompson, a Unitar-
ian minister who is involved in civil rights work in Jackson,  
Mississippi, is seriously wounded in an ambush.
August  26  At a rally in Plymouth, North Carolina, Klan 
members beat 27 black protesters.
August 27  George Metcalfe, an NAACP official, is maimed 
when a bomb explodes in his car in Natchez, Mississippi.  
Although FBI agents find Klan members responsible, no one is 
prosecuted for the explosion.
September 26  A black church in Jones County, Mississippi, 
is burned by arsonists.
October 4  In Crawfordsville, Georgia, the Grand Dragon of 
the KKK assaults a black demonstrator.
November 18  Gunshots are fired at four civil rights workers 
in Victoria, Virginia, injuring one person.
November 29  Three persons are injured from a car bomb 
planted near a black-owned grocery store in Vicksburg, Missis-
sippi, close to the site of a local civil rights meeting.
December  15  Lee Culbreath, a black newspaper carrier, 
is shot and killed by two white men in Hamburg, Arkansas.  
Police charge two Klan members with the murder.
December 31  A store owned by John Nosser—the mayor 
of Natchez, Mississippi, and a vocal opponent of the Klan—is 
destroyed by arson.
1966
January 2  An African American church in Newton, Georgia, 
is burned. Anonymous callers threaten the life of the local sher-
iff if he investigates the incident.
January 3  Samuel Younge Jr., a black college student, is shot 
and killed in Tuskegee, Alabama, for trying to use a “whites 
only” restroom.

312	
Hate Crimes
January 10  After volunteering to pay the poll taxes for black 
voters, civil rights activist Vernon Dahmer is fatally burned in 
a firebomb attack in his Hattiesburg, Mississippi, home. Impe-
rial Wizard Sam Bowers of the Ku Klux Klan is to be tried four 
times for the murder; the trials resulted in deadlocked juries. 
On August 21, 1998, a multiracial jury convicted Bowers of 
murder and arson.
January 30  The Atlanta-based Southern Regional Council 
issues a report stating that southern whites had killed a total 
of fourteen blacks and civil rights workers in 1965 and three 
blacks thus far in 1966.
February  24  A  recently integrated high school in Elba,  
Alabama, is damaged by two dynamite blasts.
April  2  Bombs explode at two swimming pools in Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana, that were scheduled to be integrated facilities.
April 9  Bombs destroy a black church in Ernul, North Carolina.
June 6  Civil rights worker James Meredith is wounded by 
three gunshots during a one-person “march against fear” in 
Hernando, Mississippi. The hospital treating Meredith receives 
threats from a caller describing himself as a Klan member.
June  10  Ben White, an elderly black man, is kidnapped, 
shot, and killed in Natchez, Mississippi, by Klan members who 
believe the murder will attract the Reverend Martin Luther 
King Jr. to the area. The Klan members are acquitted of murder 
charges on December 9, 1967. White’s relatives file a civil suit 
for wrongful death and win more than $1 million in damages 
on November 13, 1968. The defendant, Ernest Avants, avoided 
paying any money by placing his assets in his first wife’s name.
June 17  News reporters covering a civil rights rally in Green-
wood, Mississippi, escape injury after two poisonous snakes are 
tossed into their vehicle.
June 21  Civil rights marchers are assaulted by white mobs in 
Philadelphia, Mississippi, while police watch.

	
Chronology	
313
June 24  A mob of whites pelt the Reverend Martin Luther 
King Jr. and other demonstrators with eggs and missiles in 
Philadelphia, Mississippi. Arsonists destroy a Catholic church 
in Carthage, Mississippi.
July 1  Klan members bomb a store in Milwaukee, Wiscon-
sin, owned by the former president of the Wisconsin Civil 
Rights Congress.
July 3  Klan members pelt police with stones in Lebanon, 
Ohio, after two Klan members are arrested for violating the 
state’s antimask law.
July 10  Two whites are arrested after firing a submachine gun 
at a federal officer and two civil rights workers outside an Afri-
can American church in Grenada, Mississippi.
July 18  Jeering whites assault civil rights marchers in Jack-
sonville, Florida.
July  20  A  black-owned store in Jacksonville, Florida, is 
firebombed.
July 28  Following a rally of the National States Rights Party, 
white gangs invade a black neighborhood in Baltimore, Mary-
land. Three members are charged with inciting a riot and are 
sentenced to a two-year prison term.
July 30  Charles Triggs, a black bricklayer, is shot and killed 
by two white gunmen in Bogalusa, Louisiana.
July 31  White mobs stone a civil rights procession led by 
the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. in Chicago. Fifty-four 
persons are injured, including two police officers.
September 12–13  A mob of almost 400 whites riot in Gre-
nada, Mississippi, in opposition to school integration. Police 
stand by while blacks and news reporters are beaten with ax 
handles, chains, and steel pipes. Two black youths are hospital-
ized with serious injuries.
September 24  Arsonists destroy the Cleveland, Ohio, home 
of the Reverend John Compton, a black minister.

314	
Hate Crimes
October 5  A black church in Richmond, Virginia, is bombed.
November 8  Violent incidents against blacks participating 
in local elections occur in Lowndes County, Alabama, and in 
Amite County, Mississippi.
November 20  James Motley, a black man, is beaten to death 
in a jail cell in Wetumpka, Alabama. A  jury acquits Sheriff 
Harvey Conner of murder on April 12, 1967.
1967
January 10  Vandals desecrate more than 100 graves at two 
Jewish cemeteries in New Orleans, Louisiana.
April 25  Bombs damage the home of the mother of Judge 
Frank Johnson in Birmingham, Alabama. Judge Johnson, a 
vocal opponent of the Ku Klux Klan, had issued several deci-
sions in support of school integration.
May 14  A black-owned home in a predominantly white sub-
urb of Cleveland, Ohio, is bombed.
July  18  FBI agents arrest 12 whites, including at least 
seven Klan members, for violent racist acts committed over 
a 21-month period in Rowan and Cabarrus counties, North 
Carolina. In a separate incident in Greensboro, North Caro-
lina, two Klan members are jailed for a cross burning.
August 28  White mobs shouting “We want slaves!” and “Get 
yourself a nigger!” stone NAACP demonstrators in Milwau-
kee, Wisconsin. Marchers are again attacked the next day and 
the local NAACP Freedom House is destroyed by arsonists. 
Milwaukee Mayor Henry Maier issues a proclamation banning 
evening demonstrations and rallies.
September  18  Temple Beth Israel in Jackson, Mississippi, 
is bombed. As FBI agents pursue suspects, their vehicle is 
rammed from the rear by a carload of armed Klan members.
October 6  Snipers fire into the home of an NAACP worker 
in Carthage, Mississippi.

	
Chronology	
315
November 21  The home of Rabbi Perry Nussbaum in Jack-
son, Mississippi, is bombed. Nussbaum and his wife, Arene, 
narrowly escape death.
1968
February 8  Three black students—Henry E. Smith, Delano 
H. Middleton, and Samuel Hammond Jr.—are killed and at 
least 34 others are wounded when state police fire on rioters at 
South Carolina State College in Orangeburg. Campus unrest 
began when college demonstrators started picketing a segre-
gated local bowling alley.
April 4  The Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. is assassinated 
by a sniper on the eve of a scheduled protest demonstration in 
support of sanitation workers in Memphis, Tennessee. Rioting 
erupts in more than 125 U.S. cities over the next week, leaving 
46 persons dead, 2,600 injured, and 21,270 arrested. Damage 
from arson and vandalism is estimated at $45 million.
August 14  The church of the Reverend A. D. King is bombed 
in Louisville, Kentucky.
August 16–17  Two white men murder the black female pro-
prietor of a tavern in Cincinnati, Ohio. A riot erupts, and one 
black youth is critically shot while stoning police cars.
November 25  A Hebrew school in the Bronx, New York, is 
damaged in a suspicious fire. It is the 10th attack on Jewish 
institutions in New York City in the past three months.
November 27  The Yeshiva of Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn, 
New York, is destroyed in a fire. Four teenagers under 16 years 
old are charged with arson. Mayor John Lindsay announces a 
six-point program for more police surveillance at religious in-
stitutions and the creation of a special arson squad.
December 24  Gunshots are fired into the home of a black 
Office of Economic Opportunity administrator in Monroe, 
Louisiana. Although a Ku Klux Klan member is arrested, he is 
set free in February 1969.

316	
Hate Crimes
1970
January 19  Fire damages a Bronx, New York, synagogue that 
had been vandalized four times in the past year.
January 28  Vandals paint swastikas and start a fire at the In-
tervale Jewish Center in the Bronx, New York.
March 3  A mob of whites attack school buses carrying black 
students to recently integrated schools in Lamar, South Caro-
lina. Three rioters are convicted on February 17, 1971.
August  30  Ten buses scheduled for use in desegregating 
schools in Pontiac, Michigan, are bombed. Six members of the 
Ku Klux Klan are arrested, including Robert Miles, a major 
national neo-Nazi leader. September 10. A bomb with more 
than a dozen sticks of dynamite is found under a Jacksonville, 
Florida, school bus and defused.
1973
September 16  Ku Klux Klan member Byron De La Beck-
with is arrested; firearms and a time bomb are found in his 
automobile. Beckwith was planning a raid on the home of A. I. 
Botnick, a New Orleans Jewish leader. The Louisiana Klan 
conducts a fund-raising campaign for Beckwith’s legal defense, 
and he is acquitted of all charges on January 16, 1974.
October 2  Evelyn Walker, a white woman, is doused with gas-
oline and burned to death by black youths after her car breaks 
down in a black neighborhood in Boston, Massachusetts.
October 6  Kirk Miller, a white cab driver, is the victim of a 
racially motivated murder in Boston.
October  19  Members of the San Francisco–based Black 
Muslim splinter group the Death Angels assault white victims 
Richard and Quita Hague with machetes, killing Quita Hague 
and leaving her husband severely injured. Members of this vio-
lent group reportedly earn their “angel wings” by killing white 
men and women. The killings begin in October and continue 
for about six months, resulting in the deaths of 14 men and 
women and leaving seven wounded. (The case was nicknamed 

	
Chronology	
317
“Zebra” because a special police task force used the last radio 
frequency, Z, for communication.)
October 29  Frances Rose, a white woman, is shot and killed 
in another “Zebra” killing in San Francisco, California. Jessie 
Cooks, a member of the Death Angels, is arrested near the 
scene and sentenced to life in prison for the murder.
November 21  The Sephardic Institute for Advanced Learn-
ing in New York City is badly damaged and one employee is 
killed during an arson attack. In the previous few months, five 
synagogues were damaged in arson attacks in the Flatbush sec-
tion of Brooklyn.
November 26  The Reverend Edward Pace, a black minister 
in Gadsden, Alabama, is shot and killed in his home. Bruce 
Botsford, a Klan member, is convicted of second degree mur-
der by an all-white, all-male jury on March 9, 1974 and sen-
tenced to 30 years in prison.
1974
January 28  Death Angel members kill Tana White and Jane 
Holly in random, racially motivated attacks in the San Fran-
cisco, California, area.
April 14  Ward Anderson and Terry White are shot by Death 
Angel gunmen at a San Francisco bus stop.
April 19  Frank Carlson, a white grocer, is murdered and his 
wife is beaten and raped by an African American who claims to 
be one of the “Zebra” killers. Police arrest seven Death Angel sus-
pects on May 1; four are convicted and sentenced to life in prison.
July 27  Shootings are reported during a local Klan recruiting 
drive in Kokomo, Indiana.
August 16  Judge Arthur Gamble, who signed the murder in-
dictments against three Klan members involved in the murder 
of white civil rights activist Viola Liuzzo on March 25, 1965, is 
injured by a car bomb in Greenville, Alabama.
September 19  Dr. Charles Glatt, who worked for the city of 
Dayton, Ohio, to prepare school desegregation plans, is shot 

318	
Hate Crimes
and killed at work. Police arrest Neal Bradley Long, who had 
been linked to a series of racially motivated murders of seven 
local blacks since 1972.
November 11  In the Boro Park section of Brooklyn, New 
York, two synagogues, a Jewish school, and the homes of two 
Hasidic Jews are firebombed.
1976
February 26  Four members of the Ku Klux Klan are indicted 
for the murder of Willie Edwards in Montgomery, Alabama, 
in 1957 (see 1957: January 23). The judge later dismissed the 
charges. Diane Alexander, the widow of Henry Alexander, who 
was accused of the crime but never tried, said her husband con-
fessed to the murder before his death in 1992. Mrs. Alexander 
wrote a letter of apology to Sarah Salter, Mr. Edwards’s widow, 
who then lived in Buffalo, New York, and met her in person on 
September 4, 1993, to express her remorse.
April 6  In Boston, Massachusetts, Theodore Landsmark, a 
black attorney, is attacked by a white youth who attempted 
to stab him with the staff of an American flag. The Pulitzer 
Prize–winning photograph of this incident is published in 
newspapers around the world.
September  8  White youths shouting racial epithets ran-
domly attack blacks and Hispanics in Washington Square Park 
in Greenwich Village, New York. Marcus Mota is killed, and 
several others are injured. Five youths are sentenced to prison 
terms ranging from three to twenty-five years.
1977
February  14  Fred Cowan, a professed hater of Jews and 
blacks and member of the racist National States Rights Party, 
kills six persons—Frederick Holmes, Joseph E. Hicks, James 
Greene, Pariyarathu Varghese, Allen McCleod, and Joseph 
Russo—and wounds five others before committing suicide in 
New Rochelle, New York. His victims were three blacks, an 

	
Chronology	
319
Asian Indian immigrant, and two whites, including a police-
man. He was previously suspended from work after a conflict 
with a Jewish supervisor.
April 15–17  In a series of violent incidents in Elwood, In-
diana, Klan members burn crosses and scatter garbage on the 
lawns of local residents. The mayor’s home is also sprayed with 
shotgun pellets.
1978
April  28  Roy Keith Palmer, seventeen, pleaded guilty to 
burning down two black churches in Wilkes County, Georgia, 
in December 1977. At Palmer’s sentencing, a black deacon and 
a minister from the destroyed churches asks that the defendant 
be treated leniently for the crime.
August 7  Alphonse Manning and Toni Schwenn, an inter-
racial couple, are killed by Joseph Paul Franklin, in Madison, 
Wisconsin. Franklin is a former member of the Ku Klux Klan 
and the American Nazi Party.
September 5  A white youth wearing a Nazi armband fires on 
black picnickers in Jonesville, North Carolina, killing one man 
and wounding three. A second victim dies on September 7. 
The gunman commits suicide.
October 8  A sniper, later believed to be Joseph Paul Frank-
lin, kills Gerald Gordon while he is leaving a bar mitzvah in 
Richmond Heights, a suburb of St. Louis, Missouri.
November  18  Former Klan member Robert Chambliss is 
convicted of murder in the bombing of the Sixteenth Street 
Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, on September 15, 
1963, which killed four black girls.
1979
December  The Anti-Defamation League (ADL) issues its 
first Audit of Anti-Semitic Incidents.
October 21  Jessie Taylor and Marion Bresette, an interracial 
couple, are shot and killed in a parking lot in Oklahoma City. 

320	
Hate Crimes
Joseph Paul Franklin is later charged in the case, but the indict-
ments are dismissed in 1983.
1980
January 8  Joseph Paul Franklin kills Larry E. Reese, an Afri-
can American man, at a local fast-food restaurant in Indianap-
olis, Indiana.
August 19  Joseph Paul Franklin, a former member of the 
Ku Klux Klan and American Nazi Party, murders David Mar-
tin and Theodore Fields, two black men who were jogging 
alongside two white women in a park in Salt Lake City, Utah. 
Franklin was later connected to other crimes, including the 
bombing of Beth Shalom synagogue in Chattanooga, Tennes-
see, on July 29, 1977; the shooting of former National Urban 
League director Vernon Jordan on May 29, 1980; the murders 
of Darrell Lane and Dante Evans Brown in a vacant lot in Cin-
cinnati, Ohio, on June 6, 1980; and the murders of Kathleen 
Mikula and Arthur Smothers in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, on 
June 15, 1980. Franklin was reportedly involved in the slaying 
of twenty-one people who were either interracial couples or 
Jews. He was on death row for 15 years in a Missouri prison 
and was executed by lethal injection on November 20, 2013.
1981
The Anti-Defamation League drafts the first model hate-crime 
legislation.
1982
June 19  Vincent Chin, a young Chinese American, is bru-
tally murdered in Detroit by unemployed autoworkers, who 
apparently believed he was Japanese. The case receives national 
attention when the judge places the assailants on probation 
and requires them each to pay only a $3,000 fine.

	
Chronology	
321
1984
The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force issues its first report 
on antigay violence in the United States.
June 18  Alan Berg, a popular Denver, Colorado, radio talk 
show host, is murdered in a machine-gun attack in the drive-
way of his home. His assailants are members of a neo-Nazi 
group.
1985
March 21  The U.S. House of Representatives Committee on 
the Judiciary holds its first congressional hearing to discuss the 
passage of a law to require the U.S. Justice Department to col-
lect and publish statistics on hate crimes.
December 24  Charles Goldmark, a Seattle, Washington, at-
torney, is brutally murdered by a drifter named David Lewis 
Rice, who had close ties with racist and anti-Jewish groups. 
Rice thought that Goldmark, a prominent liberal lawyer, 
“looked Jewish.”
1986
July 16  The U.S. House of Representatives Committee on 
the Judiciary holds hearings to examine reports of harassment 
and violence directed against Arab Americans.
October 9  The U.S. House of Representatives Committee 
on the Judiciary holds hearings to examine the problem of vio-
lence against gay men and lesbians.
December  20  A  gang of white teenagers in the Howard 
Beach section of Queens, New York, attack Michael Griffith, 
an African American who was passing through their neighbor-
hood. They beat him and then chase him to his death on a 
nearby highway. His stepfather, Cedric Sandiford, is also se-
verely beaten.

322	
Hate Crimes
1987
November 10  The U.S. House of Representatives Commit-
tee on the Judiciary holds hearings on the causes of and pos-
sible responses to recent violent acts committed against Asians 
and Asian Americans.
1988
May 11–July 12  The U.S. House of Representatives Com-
mittee on the Judiciary holds hearings to consider legislation 
to establish a Commission on Racially Motivated Violence and 
to examine the prevalence of violence against members of mi-
nority groups.
May  15  Eighteen-year-old Richard Lee Bednarski and his 
friends look for gay men to harass in Dallas, Texas. Bednarski 
kills 34-year-old Tommy Trimble and twenty-seven-year old 
Lloyd Griffin in a gruesome murder. He was found guilty, but 
Judge Jack Hampton said that killing gays was not a serious 
crime and gave the defendant a lenient sentence for the mur-
ders. His remarks stirred a major controversy, and Hampton 
was censured by his judicial colleagues. He was later defeated 
for reelection in December 1992.
June 21  The U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary holds 
hearings to consider proposed legislation to require the U.S. 
Justice Department to collect and publish statistics on hate 
crimes.
1989
January 17  Patrick Purdy enters an elementary school yard 
in Stockton, California, and fires 105 rounds from an AK-47, 
killing three Cambodian girls (Ram Chun, Sokhim An, and 
Oeun Lim); a Cambodian boy (Rathanan Or); and a Vietnam-
ese girl (Thuy Tran). The gunman also wounds thirty others, 
including a teacher, and then kills himself. The 24-year-old 
Purdy had an obsessive hatred of Cambodians, Indians, Paki-
stanis, and especially Vietnamese.

	
Chronology	
323
July 29  Two brothers in Raleigh, North Carolina, beat to 
death Ming Hai “Jim” Loo, a 24-year-old Chinese American. 
Witnesses told police that the men thought Loo was Vietnam-
ese. They apparently sought revenge for their brother who 
served in the U.S. military in Vietnam and never returned.
August 23  A white gang armed with baseball bats and guns 
attack four black youths on a street in Bensonhurst, a neigh-
borhood in Brooklyn, New York. Yusuf Hawkins is beaten and 
shot to death in the attack. Seven suspects are arrested.
November  5  A  memorial sculpture made of black gran-
ite is dedicated on the grounds of the Southern Poverty Law 
Center in Montgomery, Alabama. Designed by Maya Lin, 
who also created the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washing-
ton, D.C., the sculpture commemorates the more than forty 
people—black and white; men, women, and children—who 
were killed during the civil rights movement. More than 600 
relatives of the victims attend the dedication.
1990
January 21  James Zappalorti, a gay Vietnam war veteran, is 
brutally murdered in Staten Island, New York, by two teenagers.
March 15  Henry Lau, a thirty-one-year-old Chinese immi-
grant, is fatally stabbed on a New York City subway train. Prior 
to the stabbing, the assailant called Lau an “egg roll.”
April  23  President George H. W. Bush signs into law the 
Hate Crime Statistics Act, which mandates the FBI to compile 
annual statistics on hate crimes throughout the United States.
August  9  Two skinheads shouting “white power” murder 
Hung Truong, a 15-year-old Vietnamese youth, in Houston.
1991
March  3  Rodney King, an African American motorist, is 
beaten by four white Los Angeles police officers after he is 
stopped for speeding. When police finally reach the car, they 
deliver more than 50 baton blows and six kicks to King in two 

324	
Hate Crimes
minutes, resulting in 11 skull fractures as well as brain and 
kidney damage. The incident is captured on videotape by a 
bystander and gains national media attention.
August 19  A Hasidic Jewish driver is involved in a traffic acci-
dent in Brooklyn, New York, that kills Gavin Cato, a seven-year-
old African American. Following the accident, black youths 
murder Yankel Rosenbaum, a visiting Australian Jewish scholar. 
During three days of rioting in the Crown Heights section of 
Brooklyn, crowds roam the streets, yelling, “Get the Jews.”
1992
April 29  A jury in suburban Simi Valley, California, acquits 
four white Los Angeles police officers on all but one charge 
stemming from the beating of black motorist Rodney King in 
March 1991.
April 30–May 3  Following the controversial jury verdict in 
the Rodney King case, the south central section of Los Ange-
les is engulfed in widespread burning, looting, and violence. 
Fifty-eight people are killed in the rioting, 2,383 are injured, 
and damage estimates range as high as $1 billion. According to 
Yumi Park, former director of the Korean American Grocers 
Association, 800 Korean-owned establishments are damaged  
in the rioting. Tensions between African Americans and  
Korean Americans had risen following the November 15, 1991, 
trial of Soon Ja Du, a Korean grocer who had shot to death a 
15-year-old black girl, Latasha Harlins. Even though the grocer 
was convicted of manslaughter, the judge had refused to send 
her to prison.
May 11  The U.S. House of Representatives Committee on 
the Judiciary holds hearings on crimes motivated by prejudice 
against the racial, ethnic, religious, or sexual orientation of the 
victim.
June 22  In the case of R. A.V. v. City of St. Paul, the U.S.  
Supreme Court strikes down a hate-crime ordinance in St. Paul, 
Minnesota.

	
Chronology	
325
July 29  The U.S. House of Representatives Committee on 
the Judiciary holds hearings on the use of penalty enhance-
ment for hate crimes and also examines the implications of the 
June 22, 1992, U.S. Supreme Court decision.
August 5  The U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary reviews 
implementation of the Hate Crime Statistics Act of 1990 by the 
FBI, state crime reporting agencies, and local law enforcement 
agencies under the direction of the U.S. Department of Justice.
August 18  Luyen Phan Nguyen, a 19-year-old premed stu-
dent at the University of Miami, is beaten to death by five 
men in Coral Springs, Florida, who made disparaging remarks 
about his Vietnamese ancestry.
October 27  Seaman Allen R. Schindler, serving on a U.S. 
Navy ship, is brutally murdered by shipmates outside a military 
base in Sasebo, Japan, after they learn of his homosexuality. One 
assailant later pleads guilty to murder and his accomplice re-
ceives a lighter sentence for cooperating with investigators. The 
cable station Lifetime airs Any Mother’s Son in August 1997, a 
docudrama based on the murder.
1993
January 4  The FBI releases its first official report containing 
nationwide hate crime statistics for 1991.
June  11  The U.S. Supreme Court unanimously upholds 
Wisconsin’s penalty enhancement hate crimes statute in the 
case Wisconsin v. Mitchell.
November 16  The U.S. House of Representatives Commit-
tee on the Judiciary discusses proposed legislation that would 
make crimes of violence motivated by gender actionable under 
civil rights and hate crime laws.
December 7  Colin Ferguson, a black Jamaican immigrant, 
murders Mi Kyung Kim, James Gorycki, Dennis McCarthy, 
Marita Theresa Magtoto, Amy Federici, and Richard Nettleton 
on the Long Island Rail Road. He had previously written notes 
expressing hatred of Asians and whites.

326	
Hate Crimes
1994
February 5  In his third and decisive trial in Jackson, Missis-
sippi, Byron De La Beckwith is found guilty by a jury of eight 
blacks and four whites of murdering Medgar Evers on June 12, 
1963. (See 1963: June 1 and September 16)
March 1  Rashid Baz, a Lebanese immigrant, shoots at a van 
carrying 15 Hasidic Jewish students over the Brooklyn Bridge. 
One student, Aaron Halberstam, is killed; another, Nachum 
Sasonkin, is severely injured. The murderer once vowed to “kill 
all Jews.”
April  National Asian Pacific American Legal Consortium is-
sues its first Audit of Violence against Asian Pacific Americans.
September 1  A mosque in Yuba City, California, is gutted in 
a suspected anti-Muslim arson case.
September 13  The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforce-
ment Act directs the U.S. Sentencing Commission to devise 
sentencing guidelines to incorporate a federal sentence en-
hancement for hate crimes. The Violence against Women Act 
(Title IV of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement 
Act of 1994) provides civil rights remedies for gender-motivated 
violence, explicitly stating that all “persons within the United 
States shall have the right to be free from crimes of violence 
motivated by gender.”(42 United States Code 13981)
1995
December  7  African Americans Michael Jones and Jackie 
Burden are murdered in a random shooting by soldiers from 
Fort Bragg, North Carolina, who are affiliated with white su-
premacist groups.
December 8  During several weeks, picketers demanded that 
Freddy’s Fashion Mart, a store in Harlem, should be owned by 
blacks, and they made antiwhite and anti-Jewish statements 
during their protests. Roland Smith, who had previously 
picketed the Jewish-owned store, enters the store, shoots four 

	
Chronology	
327
people, and then douses the premises with lighter fluid. The 
ensuing blaze kills seven people: Garnette Ramautar, Mayra 
Rentas, Cynthia Martinez, Angelina Marrero, Luz Ramos, Ka-
reem Brunner, and Olga Garcia. Smith also dies in the blaze.
1996
January  29  Thien Minh Ly, a 24-year-old Vietnamese- 
American, is kicked, stomped, and stabbed more than a dozen 
times on a tennis court in Tustin, California, in a racially moti-
vated attack by white skinheads.
June 25  The U.S. House of Representatives Committee on 
National Security holds hearings on the participation of cur-
rent or former U.S. military personnel in antigovernment or 
racist hate groups.
June 27  The U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary holds 
hearings on the rash of arsons directed against black churches 
and other acts of violence against houses of worship.
1997
February 23  Ali Abu Kamal, a 69-year-old Palestinian Arab 
teacher who arrived in the United States in December 1996, 
opens fire on the 86th floor observation deck of the Empire 
State Building in New York City, killing Chris Burmeister, a 
Danish tourist, and wounding six others before taking his own 
life. In a pouch around Abu Kamal’s neck, police found a letter 
stating his intention to kill as many “Zionists” as possible in 
their “den” in New York City.
November 18  Oumar Dia, an immigrant from Mauritania, 
is murdered at a Denver, Colorado, bus stop by Nathan Thill, 
a skinhead who later said he hated blacks. (Dia, a black Afri-
can, had fled his native country because he was persecuted by 
Arabs.) Jeannie VanVelkinburgh, a white woman who comes 
to his aid, is also shot and is consequently paralyzed from the 
waist down. Thill pleads guilty to first-degree murder and is 

328	
Hate Crimes
serving a life sentence plus 32 years. His accomplice, Jeremiah 
Barnum, also pleads guilty as an accessory to the murder and is 
sentenced to 12 years.
1998
February 23  Members of the New Order, a neo-Nazi group, 
are arrested in their homes in southern Illinois, where police 
find guns, pipe bombs, and hand grenades. The FBI says the 
suspects were plotting to bomb the Southern Poverty Law 
Center in Montgomery, Alabama, and the Simon Wiesenthal 
Center, the New York headquarters of the Anti-Defamation 
League. Authorities learned of the plot when the suspects at-
tempted to recruit a man who then became a federal informant. 
Also on this date, in the largest hate crime judgment in Illinois 
history, a jury awards $6 million to the family of Ricardo Ar-
royo of Waukegan, Illinois, who died from injuries inflicted by 
another motorist. After Arroyo’s and the other motorist’s cars 
collide, the assailant kicks Arroyo in the stomach three times 
and shouts at him, “Mexicans, go back to Mexico!”
March 13  Brian Wilmes falls into a coma after being beaten 
outside a San Francisco, California, gay bar by an attacker who 
uttered antigay slurs. In November 1998, a municipal court 
judge rules that the alleged assailant, Edgard Mora, must stand 
trial for murder with a hate crime enhancement penalty.
April 5  Five white men in Orange County, California, are 
beaten by five Iranian males attending an Iranian New Year’s 
party. The Iranian men jump the victims—whose names were 
not released by police—from behind, yelling, “What are you 
white guys doing here?” A witness captures the attack on video-
tape; the footage shows one of the perpetrators kicking a victim 
with steel-toed boots.
April 14  In Biddeford, Maine, Anthony Cabana is sent to 
jail for threatening to “snap” a woman’s neck. He is reportedly 
the first person ever charged in Maine with a gender-based hate 
crime.

	
Chronology	
329
April 27  Steven Goedereis, a gay man, is brutally beaten to 
death in West Palm Beach, Florida, by two teenagers, Bryan 
Donahue and William Dodge, who were angered by an al-
legedly sexually suggestive comment Goedereis made to them.
May  9  In Rutherfordton, North Carolina, two men with 
Ku Klux Klan ties attack Isaiah Edgerton, his wife, and their 
two-year-old daughter in their home. The men, both in their 
twenties, are charged with a hate crime. Police suspect that the 
local chapter of the American Knights of the KKK ordered the 
shooting.
May 20  A cross is burned in front of a Jewish family’s home 
in Huntington Beach, California. It is the second anti-Jewish 
crime committed against the family; in an earlier incident, 
someone stamped a swastika on their front lawn.
June 7  James Byrd Jr., a 49-year-old black man, is chained to 
a pickup truck in Jasper, Texas, and dragged along an asphalt 
road for almost two miles. His head, neck, and right arm are 
later found on the road. His attackers, who claimed member-
ship in the white supremacist group Aryan Nations, report-
edly said to Byrd, “We’re starting the Turner Diaries early.” This 
book, widely disseminated among white racists and neo-Nazis, 
advocates the murder of African Americans and Jews. President 
Bill Clinton issues a statement condemning the grisly murder.
September 20  In the South Ozone Park neighborhood of 
Queens, New York, Rishi Maharaj, the 21  year-old son of 
Trinidadian immigrants of Indian descent, is beaten by three 
young men who utter anti-Indian slurs. He suffers severe head 
trauma, facial fractures, and other injuries. The Queens district 
attorney condemns the incident as an unprovoked hate crime 
and charges the assailants with attempted murder.
October 6  Matthew Shepard, a gay college student in Lara-
mie, Wyoming, is tied to a fence and savagely beaten with a 
gun by two men he met in a bar. Left for dead, he is found by a 
passerby 18 hours later. He remained in a coma for several days 
and died October 12. His funeral is protested by the Reverend 

330	
Hate Crimes
Fred Phelps and his followers from the Westboro Baptist 
Church in Topeka, Kansas, who carry signs saying “God hates 
fags” and “Fags deserve to die.”
October 12–15  President Clinton condemns the murder of 
Matthew Shepard; the U.S. House of Representatives passes a 
resolution condemning the murder as a hate crime.
1999
February  19  In Sylacauga, Alabama, Billy Jack Gaither is 
bludgeoned to death with an ax handle and his body is burned. 
Steven Eric Mullins and Charles Monroe Butler murdered 
Gaither because he allegedly propositioned the two men.
May 16  James Longenbach deliberately drives his car into 
Austin Hansen-Tyler and Dontrell Langston, two African 
American teenagers who are riding bicycles in Kenosha, Wis-
consin. Longenbach was sentenced to 176 years in prison for 
this racially motivated hate crime.
June 18  Congregation B’nai Israel and Knesset Israel Torah 
Center in Sacramento and Congregation Beth Shalom in 
Carmichael, California, are set ablaze, causing an estimated 
$3 million in damage.
July 1  Gary Matson and Winfield Scott Mowder, a gay cou-
ple, are shot to death in their Happy Valley home, outside Red-
ding, California, in an antigay hate crime.
July  2–4  Benjamin Nathaniel Smith, a 21-year-old white 
supremacist involved with the World Church of the Creator, 
goes on a murderous rampage in Illinois and Indiana, killing 
Ricky Birdsong, a black coach at Northwestern University, and 
Won-Joon Yoon, a graduate student at Indiana University. He 
also shot at Orthodox Jews, African Americans, and Asians, 
leaving nine people injured. He shoots and kills himself in  
Indiana during a car chase with local police.
August 10  Buford O. Furrow Jr., a self-professed white su-
premacist, shoots and wounds five people at the North Valley 

	
Chronology	
331
Jewish Community Center in Los Angeles and murders Joseph 
Santos Ileto, a Filipino-American postal worker.
2000
April 28  Richard Baumhammers, a white immigration attor-
ney who professed hatred of minorities, murders Anil Thakur 
and paralyzes Sandip Patel at the India Grocers store in Pitts-
burgh. He begins his rampage by killing Anita Gordon, a Jew-
ish neighbor, and later goes to a Chinese restaurant and kills 
Thao Q. Pham and Ji-Ye Sun. His last victim is Garry Lee, a 
25-year-old African American. On May 11, 2001, a jury delib-
erated for three hours and convicted Baumhammers of killing 
five people and paralyzing a sixth. He was on death row in a 
Pennsylvania prison for more than a decade but Pennsylvania 
governor Tom Wolf issued a moratorium on state executions 
during February 2015.
May  17  Thirty-seven years after the crime, Thomas Blan-
ton Jr. and Bobby Frank Cherry are charged with planting a 
bomb at the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Montgomery, 
Alabama, that killed four black schoolgirls. They are both later 
sentenced to life imprisonment for the murders by mixed-race 
juries. (See 1963: September)
2001
April 19  Leo V. Felton and Erica Chase, members of a white 
supremacist group, are arrested for passing counterfeit money 
in Boston and are later indicted for plotting to blow up major 
Jewish and African American monuments in the Boston area. 
(They were also plotting the assassinations of Steven Spielberg 
and Jesse Jackson.) On July 26, 2003, Felton is convicted and 
sentenced to twenty years in prison; Chase, who is repentant, 
receives a five year sentence. The Boston Globe (November 3, 
2002) publishes a feature story revealing that Felton had a 
black father and a white mother.

332	
Hate Crimes
September  12  Three hundred men and women chanting 
“U.S.A., U.S.A.” try to storm a mosque in the Chicago suburb 
of Bridgeview, Illinois. More than 100 police restrain the dem-
onstrators and arrest three people.
September 15  Balbir Singh Sodhi, a Sikh gas station owner, 
is murdered by Frank Roque in Mesa, Arizona, who vows ven-
geance for the September 11 terrorist attacks.
September  30  Swaran Kaur Bhullar, a Sikh woman, is 
stabbed twice in the head by two men when she stops her car at 
a red light in San Diego. The attackers, who are never caught, 
probably assumed she was a Muslim.
December  11  Federal prosecutors charge Irv Rubin, the 
head of the Jewish Defense League, and his associate Earl Kru-
gel with plotting to blow up the King Fahd Mosque in Culver 
City, California, and bomb the office of Congressman Darrell 
Issa (R-CA), a Lebanese American. Rubin reportedly commits 
suicide in prison in November 2002.
2002
May 18  Stephen J. Kinney attacks a group of three Chinese 
families at Harrah’s casino in Lake Tahoe, Nevada, shouting ra-
cial epithets and injuring three people. Kinney is charged with 
aggravated assault and committing a hate crime. The sentence 
will be suspended for three years, however, if Kinney completes 
56 hours of community service with the Chinese Historical 
Society and pays the costs of the prosecution in this case.
August 10  Mizanor Rahman, a 37-year-old Bangladeshi pho-
tojournalist, is beaten to death in his Brooklyn neighborhood. 
Although Michael Gabriel, the inspector with the New York 
City Police Department, reportedly says the murder may have 
been motivated by racial bias, no hate crime statute is invoked 
against the murderers, Rafael Santos and Hardy Marston.
November 11  Mohammed Sakawat Hossain, a 19-year-old 
Bangladeshi immigrant, is beaten to death in his Brooklyn 
neighborhood by Javier Amigan and Charles Durante. Police 

	
Chronology	
333
do not charge the perpetrators with a hate crime, but some 
members of the Bangladeshi community feel the attack is ra-
cially motivated. Dr. Iftekhar Ahmed Chowdhury, a Bangla-
deshi diplomat, joins with community leaders, charging that 
this incident, along with the August 10, 2002, murder of  
Mizanor Rahman (see August 10, above), are hate crimes.
2003
March 27  James Tyler Williams, the killer of gay couple Gary 
Matson and Winfield Scott Mowder (see 1999: July 1), is sen-
tenced to 29 years to life in prison for the murders. Williams 
also receives a 19-year sentence for the firebombing of three 
Sacramento-area synagogues (see 1999: June 18). His brother, 
Benjamin Williams, who is an accomplice, commits suicide in 
his Shasta County jail cell on November 17, 2002. Benjamin 
Williams reportedly says that the murder of the gay couple was 
“God’s will.”
May 1  The Carbondale Islamic Center near Southern Illinois 
University is spray-painted with graffiti in English and Hindi. 
The FBI investigates the vandalism as a hate crime.
May  1  Sen. Edward Kennedy (D-MA) and Sen. Gordon 
Smith (R-OR) reintroduce the Local Law Enforcement En-
hancement Act, formerly called the Hate Crimes Prevention 
Act, which died in congressional committee in 2001. This leg-
islation, which has 49 cosponsors, provides additional federal 
support to local law enforcement agencies to prosecute hate 
crimes. The law would also add sexual orientation, gender, and 
disability as hate crime categories; current statutes cover only 
race, national origin, and religion.
May 11  Sakia Gunn, 15, is fatally stabbed in the chest at a 
bus stop in Newark, New Jersey. She and her two friends were 
being harassed by three men and attempted to rebuff their ad-
vances by claiming to be lesbians.
June 11  A jury finds Aaron Price, a 19-year-old sophomore 
at Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia, guilty of aggravated 

334	
Hate Crimes
assault and aggravated battery in the November 3, 2002, beat-
ing of his fellow student Gregory Love in a dorm shower. Price, 
who thought that Love was gay and was making a pass at him, 
attacked Love with a baseball bat. Price receives ten years on 
each count, to be served concurrently. Price is acquitted of a 
hate crime after prosecutors fail to convince jurors that his ac-
tions were motivated by antigay feelings. Love testified that he 
was not gay. This trial is the first case involving Georgia’s re-
cently passed hate crimes enhancement penalty statute.
November 13  An arson fire destroys the CANDLES Holo-
caust Museum in Terre Haute, Indiana. (CANDLES stands for 
Children of Auschwitz Nazi Deadly Experiments Survivors.) 
The museum was founded in 1995 by Holocaust survivor Eva 
Kor and housed artifacts from Auschwitz and documents re-
lating to Dr. Josef Mengele, the infamous Nazi doctor who ex-
perimented on human beings. “Remember Timothy McVeigh” 
is scrawled on a nearby wall. McVeigh, the Oklahoma City 
bomber, was executed at a prison near Terre Haute.
December 17  Raussi Uthman, a U.S. citizen born to Pal-
estinian parents, is convicted of hate crimes for burglarizing 
and burning down Temple Beth El in Syracuse, New York, on 
October 13, 2000. He is sentenced to 25 years in prison for 
the fire, which caused more than $700,000 in damage but no 
injuries. His accomplice, Ahed Shehadeh, is sentenced to five 
years for aiding and abetting the arson.
2004
April  5  The library of the United Talmud Torah elemen-
tary school in Montreal is firebombed. Sleiman Elmerhebi, is 
charged with throwing six kerosene canisters, which destroyed 
the library. In December  2004, Sleiman Elmerhebi pleaded 
guilty and was later sentenced to forty months in prison; his 
mother Rouba Elmerhebi Fahd was found to be an accessory 
after the fact. Judge Robert Marchi, of Quebec Court, ruled 
that his mother tried to arrange for her son to fly to Brazil 

	
Chronology	
335
to avoid prosecution for torching the United Talmud Torah 
school, causing $500,000 in damage. The judge sentenced the 
woman to one year’s probation, acknowledging that a mother 
might act in such a way for her child. But he noted his disap-
pointment that Rouba Elmerhebi Fahd had shown no remorse 
for her son’s criminal act.
June 9  Brian Williamson, a leading gay rights activist in Ja-
maica, is murdered in his home in the capital city of Kingston. 
A crowd soon gathered outside the murder scene and chanted, 
“boom, bye bye,” a lyric from a popular Jamaican song advo-
cating the murder of gay people.
June 22  A California judge declared a mistrial for the three 
men accused of the brutal murder of seventeen year-old Eddie 
Araujo, a transgendered male, in Newark, California, on Oc-
tober 4, 2002. The jury was deadlocked but prosecutors plan 
again to try the accused men for first degree murder.
September  2  Thousands of demonstrators in Kathmandu, 
Nepal riot, burn down a mosque, and attack local Muslims 
after 12 Nepalese hostages are executed in Iraq.
September 29  Fanny Ann Eddy, the 30-year-old founder of 
the Sierra Leone Lesbian and Gay Association, is found dead in 
her office in the capital, Freetown. According to the organiza-
tion Human Rights Watch, she had been repeatedly raped and 
stabbed, and her neck was broken.
November 2  Theo Van Gogh, a Dutch filmmaker who pro-
duced a controversial movie on the treatment of Muslim women, 
was murdered while cycling through Amsterdam. Police later ar-
rested a 26-year-old man who had dual Dutch–Moroccan nation-
ality and was suspected of having links to radical Islamic groups. 
The murder evoked a furious backlash among some Dutch cit-
izens and several mosques were burned down in the following 
weeks. In retaliation, a few Dutch churches were later destroyed.
November 26  The ABC television newsmagazine program 
20/20 features an investigative report claiming that the mur-
der of Matthew Shepard, a gay Wyoming college student (see 

336	
Hate Crimes
1998: October 6), was not a hate crime, but a botched robbery 
committed by men high on drugs. Some gay rights organiza-
tions denounce the show and question the veracity and motives 
of the perpetrators who were interviewed on the show from 
their prison cells.
December  20  The Mississippi Religious Leadership Con-
ference offers a $100,000 reward for information leading 
to the arrest and conviction of the murderers of three civil 
rights workers—James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Mi-
chael Schwerner—killed in Philadelphia, Mississippi on 
June 21, 1964.
2005
January  15  In Jersey City, New Jersey, four Copt Chris-
tians immigrants from Egypt—Hossam Armanious, his wife, 
Amal Garas, and their daughters, Sylvia and Monica—are 
murdered in their home. The killings enrage Copts in Jersey 
City—a community with a large Egyptian Copt and Muslim 
population—who blame the local Egyptian Muslims for the 
crime. Many Copts fled Egypt because of religious persecution.
March 11  A Santa Fe, New Mexico, grand jury issued in-
dictments against six men in the severe beating of 21-year-old 
James Maestas, a gay man, outside a local hotel on February 27. 
His companion, 23-year-old Joshua Stockham, received minor 
injuries. The perpetrators reportedly shouted antigay epithets 
during the assault. New Mexico Attorney General Patricia 
Madrid announced that the accused perpetrators would be 
prosecuted under the state hate crimes penalty enhancement 
statute—the first such prosecution since the law went into ef-
fect in July 2003.
2006
June 1  Donna Jean Hubbard, a Fresno, California high school 
teacher was charged with a hate crime more than a year after 

	
Chronology	
337
she allegedly pushed a Jewish woman to the ground, pulled her 
hair, kicked her and told her, “You should have burned in the 
oven with the rest of the Jews.” Asked whether the hate crime 
case is unusual to the district, Fresno Unified School District 
spokeswoman replied that “to my knowledge”—in 30 years—
“I’ve never encountered a case like this.”
2007
January 11  Four black girls in Portland, Oregon—Chelsea 
Rivers,14, Rinita Low and Brianna Streeter, both 13 and Mary 
Michelle Blackshear, 16—were charged with robbery, in-
timidation and assault for allegedly attacking and robbing a 
16-year-old white girl because of her race.
January  27  In Elk Creek, California, Christopher Wayne 
Fisher, 22, was charged with battery with serious injury and 
threatening with intent to terrorize for punching Gaurav 
Kumar Sharma and yelling racial slurs when Sharma’s father 
began to speak in his native language, Punjabi.
February 1  Eric Hunt, 22, attacked Holocaust survivor and 
Nobel Laureate Elie Wiesel in a San Francisco elevator. A jury 
later found Hunt guilty of one felony charge with a hate crime 
allegation. He was also convicted of two misdemeanor counts, 
one for battery and one for elder abuse.
February  16  Patrick John Dizon Solis, 22, and Michael 
Douglas Rama, 24, were charged in Fullerton, California with 
committing hate crimes as well as civil rights violations for al-
legedly beating disabled men who were in their care.
March 14  William David Brown Jr., 20, and Joseph Bearden, 
21, murdered Ryan Keith Skipper, a gay man in Wahneta, Flor-
ida. Filmmakers Vicki Nantz and Mary Meeks produced and 
filmed a documentary about Skipper’s murder titled Accessory 
to Murder: Our Culture’s Complicity in the Death of Ryan Skip-
per, which was shown during the Tampa International Gay and 
Lesbian Film Festival in January 2008.

338	
Hate Crimes
April 3  Jacob Albert Laskey, of Springfield, Ore., was sen-
tenced to serve 11 years and three months in federal prison for 
his role in the October 25, 2002, racially motivated attack on 
Temple Beth Israel, in Eugene, Ore. In August 2006, Laskey 
pleaded guilty to conspiracy to deprive individuals of their civil 
rights, damaging religious property, solicitation to murder wit-
nesses, soliciting a bomb threat against the federal courthouse 
in Eugene, among other charges.
April 23  James Anthony McGillis, 18, was charged with po-
tential felony aggravated assault as a hate crime after he and an-
other person allegedly beat a man with a baseball bat in Provo, 
Utah, because the victim is a member of the Church of Jesus 
Christ of Latter-day Saints.
July 6  A Bosnian American immigrant family was the victim 
of a hate crime in Sarasota, Florida. Although Hasib Sejfovic, 
his wife and two children fled to the United States to escape 
the 1992–1995 Serbian–Bosnian war, criminals burned down 
their Florida home and spray painted anti-Islamic slurs on the 
outside and inside of the house.
September 1  Sean MacArthur, 20, Nicholas James, 18, David 
Townsend, 21, and Adam Casey, 24, all of Baileyville, Maine 
were charged with assault in connection with an attack on two 
Native American youths in this rural Maine community.
September 8  Philip Hale, 18, and an unidentified male were 
arrested in Antioch, California in connection with an assault 
on a deaf person at a party. The two are said to have taunted 
and mimicked a group of deaf partygoers before allegedly 
attacking one of them with a brick, a stick, and a hoe. The 
23-year-old male victim sustained minor injuries after being 
struck in the head.
2008
January  3  Jared Horne, a self-described drug addict, and 
Anthony “Tony” Cascio, 21, were charged with attempted 

	
Chronology	
339
second-degree murder and a hate crime in the Monroe Louisi-
ana Fourth Judicial District Court in connection to an unpro-
voked assault on a homeless black man, Walter Ford. Mr. Ford 
was beaten and stabbed after he asked Horne and Cascio for 
money and was then assaulted because of his race.
February 9  Swastikas were spray-painted on a mosque and 
Molotov cocktails were thrown at the building in Columbia, 
Tennessee. Michael Golden, 23, Eric Baker, 32, and Jonathan 
Stone, 19, were arrested on federal charges of unlawful pos-
session of a destructive device and state charges of arson of a 
religious building.
February  15  Early in the morning a non-student was as-
saulted on North Broad St. on Temple University’s Main Cam-
pus in Philadelphia. The assault included anti-Jewish language 
aimed at the student who was seriously injured. The assailants 
were all Temple University students and were suspended in 
connection with the incident.
March 18  Hussein Ali, 19, was charged with grand larceny 
as a hate crime and aggravated harassment after he allegedly 
yanked a skullcap off a rabbi’s head in Brooklyn, New York and 
shouted an Arabic phrase for “God is great.”
April 10  Caleb Lussier, 21, was sentenced to 14 years in fed-
eral prison after he pleaded guilty to third-degree arson and 
committing a hate crime for setting fire to Christ Episcopal 
Church in May 2006 and to New Testament Church in Plym-
outh, Massachusetts, in December 2005.
May 3  A group approaches two teens in a park in Gilbert, 
Arizona and asks if they are Mormon. When the teens reply 
yes, the group begins to shoot them with a pellet gun and to 
beat them, yelling anti-Mormon slurs during the assault. One 
of the Mormon teens is taken to the hospital.
June 9  Mahmoud Alkhazaleh, 53, was charged with a hate 
crime, aggravated battery and vehicle invasion in Chicago after 
he and his three sons allegedly pulled a white man out of a car, 

340	
Hate Crimes
hit him and called the white man, a “blue-eyed devil.” His sons, 
Ala Alkhazaleh, 27; Ali Alkhazaleh, 23; and Ahmad Alkhazaleh, 
20, were charged with aggravated battery and vehicle invasion.
July 12  Pichardo Dearmas, 49, was charged with assault with 
prejudice in Miami Beach, Florida, for allegedly slapping Rabbi 
Abraham S. Mann while making a racist remark against Jews.
August 15  A Plymouth County, Massachusetts grand jury 
indicted seven people charged in connection with a racial beat-
ing of a black man in Marshfield. Plymouth County District 
Attorney Timothy Cruz says the court action shows that racism 
“will not be tolerated and that those charged will be held ac-
countable for their actions.”
September 9  Steven Sandstrom, 23, and Gary L. Eye, 22, 
both of Kansas City, Missouri were sentenced to multiple life 
sentences for the racially-motivated murder of William L. 
McCay, an African American, on March 9, 2005.
October 1  Muhidin Mumin, a 42-year-old Somali Muslim 
man, was fatally beaten in a downtown alley in Rochester, 
Minnesota. Adam Brandrup and Joshua Lee, both 25, were 
charged with second-degree unintentional murder, classified by 
police as a bias crime. In April 2012, Brandrup was sentenced 
to five years in prison.
November  5  Prosecutors said Thomas Gleason, Benjamin 
Haskell and Michael Jacques burned down the predominantly 
black Macedonia Church of God in Christ in Springfield, Mas-
sachusetts, hours after Obama was elected as the nation’s first 
black president. Thomas Gleason was ordered to pay $1.7 mil-
lion in restitution and sentenced to four and a half years in 
prison. He expressed remorse for what prosecutors called a 
racially-motivated crime. His companions were sentenced to 9 
and 14 years. All three perpetrators are white.
2009
March 2  Thanh Hong, a Vietnamese American student at 
the University of California at Santa Barbara, and his Asian 

	
Chronology	
341
American friend walked in front of the Pi Kappa Alpha frater-
nity house when four men emerged from inside the fraternity 
house, approached Thanh and his friend, and began yelling 
racial epithets at them. They punched Thanh’s friend in the 
face, and then attacked Thanh, who suffered a facial laceration 
requiring several stitches and his friend suffered a concussion 
resulting in partial memory loss.
July  22  Three men were sentenced to prison after being 
convicted in July of committing a hate crime in connection 
with the July 4, 2008, beating of a black man in Boise, Idaho. 
Michael Bullard, 23, was sentenced to more than four years, 
Richard Armstrong, 24, to more than three years and James 
Whitewater, 23, to a year and a half. Evidence revealed that 
the three men using racial slurs ambushed, chased and beat 
a 24-year-old African American man as he walked out of a 
Wal-Mart store in Nampa, Idaho. Witnesses testified that Bul-
lard, Armstrong and Whitewater all participated in the assault, 
while a fourth person, a girlfriend of one of the defendants, 
held their belongings and cheered them on.
2010
April 20  Rocks with derogatory messages about Mormons 
were thrown through windows at the Church of Jesus Christ of 
Latter-day Saints in Idaho Falls, Idaho.
October 14  A federal jury in Scranton, Pa., convicted Bran-
don Piekarsky and Derrick Donchak, both of Shenandoah, Pa., 
of a hate crime arising out of the fatal beating of Luis Ramirez on 
July 12, 2008. The jury found the defendants guilty of violating 
the criminal component of the federal Fair Housing Act, which 
makes it a crime to use a person’s race, national origin or eth-
nicity as a basis to interfere, with violence or threats of violence, 
with a person’s right to live where he chooses to live. During the 
trial, the jury heard evidence from multiple eyewitnesses that 
the defendants, aided and abetted each other and some of their 
friends in fatally beating Luis Ramirez because he was Latino 
and because they did not want Latinos living in Shenandoah.

342	
Hate Crimes
2011
September 27  Sean Popejoy, 20, was sentenced to four years 
in prison for his part in a 2010 racially motivated attack where 
Popejoy was a passenger in a truck that rammed a car with five 
Latino men inside, forcing it to overturn and burn, injuring all 
the men in Harrison, Arkansas. Popejoy was the first person 
convicted under the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate 
Crimes Prevention Act of 2009.
September 30  Francisco Vasquez, 34, and Anthony Gonza-
les, 19, were convicted of a hate crime and attempted murder 
in San Fernando, California for yelling a racial slur and open-
ing fire on two black men in May 2010.
September 30  Thomas Frank Ross, a 19-year-old student at 
the University of Colorado in Boulder, was arrested on suspi-
cion of second-degree assault and bias-motivated crime after 
allegedly making derogatory remarks about Asian food, then 
breaking the nose of a half-Asian student who objected.
2012
January 2  Luis Alberto Gonzalez, 50, was charged with two 
counts of second-degree attempted murder and one count of 
falsely reporting a crime for allegedly trying to run down two 
black men and then falsely claiming they tried to rob him on 
January 2, in Hialeah, Florida.
January 16  A Hillard, Ohio residence occupied by the son 
of an Egyptian native was set afire. The house had been painted 
with anti- Arab and anti-Islamic slurs several months earlier.
January 24  Paul Beebe, 27, and Jesse Sanford, 25, were both 
sentenced to prison for branding a swastika on the arm of dis-
abled Navajo man in Santa Fe, New Mexico in 2010. Beebe 
was sentenced to 8 1/2 years in prison followed by three years’ 
supervised release and Sanford was sentenced to five years in 
prison followed by three years’ supervised release.
February  17  Chad Martin Jurjaks was sentenced to 16 
months in prison on two counts of hate crime battery for 

	
Chronology	
343
attacking two Latino men outside a convenience store in Costa 
Mesa, California in March 2011.
March 3  Ray Lazier Lengend was charged with one count 
of arson as a hate crime, four counts of arson and five counts 
of criminal possession of a weapon for allegedly firebombing a 
convenience store, two residences in Elmont Queens, a home 
in Nassau County and an Islamic center on New Year’s Day.
March 4  Aakash Dalal, 19, was arrested in connection with 
the Jan. 3 firebombing of a synagogue in Paramus and the Jan-
uary 11 firebombing of a synagogue in Rutherford, New Jersey. 
An indictment accuses Dalal of bias intimidation at a May-
wood synagogue, criminal mischief for allegedly spray-painting 
anti-Semitic graffiti on a Hackensack synagogue, three counts 
of conspiracy to commit aggravated arson, two counts of ag-
gravated arson, three counts of bias intimidation, possession 
of a destructive device, a Molotov cocktail, attempted arson, 
hindering apprehension and terrorism, the report said.
March 27  Ivan Alquicira, a 19-year-old Los Angeles Latino 
man, was charged with three counts of assault with a deadly 
weapon, two counts of making terrorist threats and enhance-
ments for hate crimes, gang involvement and firearms pos-
session after he allegedly yelled racial epithets and pointed a 
shotgun at three black people on the street.
April 29  In Oakland, California, Brandy Martell, a 37-year-
old transgender woman, was fatally shot in a car parked in an 
area frequented by transgender women.
May  15  Myles Burton, 21, a former basketball player at  
Elmhurst College in Illinois, was convicted of a felony hate 
crime for etching the letters “KKK” and racist remarks on the 
home of the school’s only black dorm supervisor in November.
May 22  In Nyack, New York, a Latino man was allegedly 
attacked by a black man who made anti-Latino remarks while 
wielding a baseball bat. Wendy Jean, 17, was charged with fel-
ony assault as a hate crime and fourth-degree criminal posses-
sion of a weapon.

344	
Hate Crimes
June 5  Nicholas Velasquez, 29, was charged with elder abuse 
and committing a hate crime after allegedly yelling “I  hate 
white people” while punching a woman in a wheelchair.
June 12  A storage building in Dearborn, Michigan owned 
by the American Muslim Center was set afire and graffiti that 
included the word “Arabs” was found at the scene.
June 21  Javier Correa was charged with interfering with the 
religious freedom of members of a mosque in Murfreesboro, 
Tennessee by threatening to use force against them when he 
allegedly left a racist message threatening to bomb the building 
in 2011. Correa was also charged with threatening to use an 
explosive device to interfere.
June 27  Jeremiah Leo ‘Smurf’ Hernandez, 33, was sentenced 
to 11 years in prison for his role in a March 2011 cross burning 
near a black teen’s residence in San Luis Obispo, California.
July 12  Two white teens, ages 17 and 16, were charged with 
committing a hate crime, aggravated unlawful restraint, in-
timidation, aggravated battery and battery in connection with 
a December 2011 incident in Chicago. The teenagers, along 
with Matthew Herrmann, 18, allegedly put a noose around a 
black high school student’s neck, threatened him with a knife 
and used racial slurs while holding him captive.
July 14  A white man armed with a steak knife allegedly burst 
into an apartment, screamed anti-Latino epithets and struck a 
child in the face in Congers, New York. Thomas Cheviot, 53, 
was charged with three counts of first- degree burglary, assault 
on a child less than 11 as a hate crime, assault as a hate crime, 
criminal possession of a weapon, resisting arrest and endanger-
ing the welfare of a child.
July 25  Five people allegedly yelled racial epithets, destroyed 
property and shot paintballs at campers at a Jewish summer 
camp in Waymart, Pennsylvania several times in July. Mark 
Trail, 21; Tyler Spencer and Cassandra Robertson, both 18; 
and two juveniles face numerous charges including ethnic in-
timidation, terroristic threats and riot.

	
Chronology	
345
August 5  Wade Michael Page, a white supremacist and U.S. 
Army veteran, fatally shot six people and wounded four oth-
ers at a Sikh Temple in Oak Creek, Wisconsin. Page took his 
life by shooting himself in the head after he was shot in the 
stomach by a responding police officer. Apart from the shooter, 
all of the dead were members of the Sikh faith. The incident 
drew responses from President Barack Obama ordered Amer-
ican flags flown at half-staff and Indian Prime Minister Man-
mohan Singh, himself a Sikh. The six victims killed included 
one woman: Paramjit Kaur, 41; and five men: Satwant Singh 
Kaleka, 65, the founder of this Sikh temple (gurdwara; Prakash 
Singh, 39, an assistant priest; Sita Singh, 41; Ranjit Singh, 49; 
and Suveg Singh, 83. All of the male victims wore turbans as 
part of their Sikh faith Four of the victims were Indian nation-
als, while the rest were Americans.
August 23  A reported self-proclaimed white supremacist al-
legedly yelled “white pride,” threatened to kill an 18-year-old 
Native American and his two cousins and then punched the 
teen in Shasta, California. The man allegedly later threatened 
the teen’s mother with a gun.
September 19  A U.S. congressional hearing addressed hate 
crimes in response to the tragic murder of Sikh worshippers in 
Wisconsin, before the Senate Judiciary Committee’s Subcom-
mittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights and Human Rights 
convened by Senator Dick Durbin.
October 3  The Wynne School Board has expelled two junior 
varsity football players who were accused of placing a noose 
around the neck of a black student. The board met in execu-
tive session Wednesday and decided to expel the two students 
for the rest of the semester. Family members have said the 
white students placed a noose around the 14-year-old black 
student’s neck.
October  12  A  white Bay City, Michigan man has been 
charged with committing a hate crime in the racially motivated 
beating of a black man. The intimidation charge carries up to 
two years in prison.

346	
Hate Crimes
October 17  A Utah man was arrested for assaulting two peo-
ple after finding them in a same-sex romantic encounter. Sum-
mit County deputies say they responded to reports of a fight in 
Kamas on Wednesday evening. They found three people with 
cuts and bruises, and ended up arresting 40-year-old Travis 
Gentry on suspicion of a hate crime assault.
December  14  Ventura County sheriff’s deputies in Upper 
Ojai, California said they arrested four people Wednesday in 
connection with hate crimes that occurred three months ago 
at two campgrounds in Rose Valley. Authorities also arrested 
a suspect in September, about two weeks after the incident. 
Detectives said they also seized a large quantity of illegal 
ammunition.
December 18  Federal agents on Tuesday arrested a Ware-
town man and an East Windsor man, both purported to be 
white supremacists, and charged them with hate crimes in con-
nection with an attack on three Egyptian men in Sayreville, 
New Jersey. They were picked up by FBI agents after being 
charged in an indictment handed down by a federal grand jury 
sitting in Newark.
2013
January 4  A Mississippi man pleaded guilty Thursday to a 
federal hate crime charge in connection with a group of young 
men and teenagers who carried out racial attacks against Afri-
can Americans in 2011.
January 6  Two men who were with a female friend outside a 
bar in St. Charles, Illinois were allegedly attacked by a woman 
and two men who called the victims antigay slurs during the 
attack. On Jan. 28, Christopher M. Miner, 30, and Stephan C. 
Bolt and Susan V. Patton, both 31, were charged with aggra-
vated battery, battery, mob action, and hate crimes.
February 21  A black student at Full Sail University in Win-
ter Park, Florida was allegedly stabbed in the neck by another 

	
Chronology	
347
student who yelled racial slurs. Xavier Nunez, 29, was charged 
with aggravated battery with a deadly weapon.
March  10  Clayton Daniel Garzon, 19, brutally beat and 
shouted antigay slurs at Lawrence “Mikey” Partida outside a 
house party in Davis, California. In March 2014, Garzon was 
sentenced to a five-year prison sentence.
August 15  Islan Nettles, a 21-year-old transgender woman, 
was beaten, allegedly by a man shouting antigay slurs in Harlem, 
New York. Nettles died of her injuries on Aug. 23. A 20-year-
old man was arrested in connection with the incident.
September 17  Antonio Lanier, 23, was charged with aggra-
vated harassment and assault as a hate crime for allegedly par-
ticipating in the Aug. 14 beating of two Manhattan men who 
were holding hands on the street.
October 26  Dylan Grall, 23, was arrested on battery and hate 
crime charges in Madison, Wisconsin for allegedly punching 
two men who were speaking Hebrew. Grail allegedly thought 
the men were speaking Spanish and yelled at them to speak in 
English.
October 30  Jamie Hebert, 20, pled guilty to second-degree 
battery and to violating Louisiana’s hate crime statute for shout-
ing antigay slurs and punching a man who was holding hands 
with another man in the French Quarter in February 2013. 
Hebert was sentenced to two years on the battery charge and 
three years on the hate crime charge but the sentences were sus-
pended. Instead, Hebert will spend three years on probation.
November 1  Tavares Spencer, 16, was convicted of attempted 
first-degree felony murder, attempted second-degree murder 
and robbery for the April shooting of a transgender man in 
Tampa, Florida.
November 8  Eric Hyland and Hayden Grom, both 19, were 
charged with ethnic intimidation, criminal mischief and disor-
derly conduct after they allegedly spray-painted anti-Semitic, 
sexual and graphic words and images on 12 cars, a dumpster 

348	
Hate Crimes
and a garage near a predominantly Jewish fraternity at Penn 
State University.
December  9  Justin Baker, 25, pleaded guilty to violating 
the civil rights of students of a Jewish school for defacing the 
school’s Torah scroll and prayer books before a January 2013 
worship service held at a Jackson, Tenn., hotel where Baker was 
working as a security guard.
December  23  In Turlock, California, two men allegedly 
called a black woman a racial epithet while beating her uncon-
scious in a bar. Eddie Taylor, 53, and Eddie Taylor Jr., 25, were 
charged with aggravated assault and a hate crime.
2014
January 6  A 35-year-old New York man has been charged 
with hate crimes in connection with seven “knockout” assaults, 
including attacks on two elderly women and a mother walking 
with her daughter. Barry Baldwin, a Brooklyn resident, was 
charged with six counts of assault as a hate crime, six counts 
of aggravated harassment as a hate crime, and other crimes for 
a spate of attacks between November 9 and December 27 in 
predominantly Jewish sections of Brooklyn.
March  11  In Portland, Oregon, white supremacist Holly 
Ann Grigsby pled guilty to racketeering in connection with 
a 2011 road trip that allegedly culminated in the murders of 
four people. Grigsby and her boyfriend, fellow white suprema-
cist David Pedersen, allegedly killed Pedersen’s father and step 
mother, a black man and a 19-year-old stranger who was sin-
gled out because they thought he was Jewish.
March 25  White supremacist Billy James Hammett, 30, was 
sentenced to 87 months in prison for a 2011 racially motivated 
attack against a white man and a black woman in Marysville, 
California. Hammett was also ordered to pay $175 in restitu-
tion and serve three years of supervised release following his 
prison sentence.

	
Chronology	
349
April 9  A 16-year-old black Detroit youth was charged with 
assault and a hate crime for allegedly brutally beating a white 
motorist who stopped to help a boy he accidentally hit with his 
pickup truck.
April 13  Frazier Glenn Miller, a neo-Nazi and former Ku 
Klux Klan member, killed three people at the Jewish Com-
munity Center of Greater Kansas City and Village Shalom, a 
Jewish retirement community, both located Overland, Kansas.
The victims were a 14-year-old boy, Reat Griffin Underwood, 
and his 69-year-old grandfather, Dr. William Lewis Corporon, 
were killed at the Jewish Community Center. Both were Chris-
tians and attendants at the United Methodist Church of the 
Resurrection A  53-year-old woman, Terri LaManno, also 
a Christian was killed at the parking lot of Village Shalom, 
where her mother resides. LaManno was also a Christian who 
attended St. Peter’s Catholic Church in Kansas City. Only one 
person targeted by gunfire was Jewish.
April 15  Perry Germano, 50, was charged with attempted 
assault, aggravated harassment, and menacing in an April  7 
assault on a 15-year-old girl riding a New York City bus. He 
allegedly made statements attacking Islam, spat on the girl, and 
threatened to punch her.
May 1  Anthony Merrell Tyler, 33, pleaded guilty to violating 
the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Preven-
tion Act for his role in a racially motivated attack (see 2014; 
March 25) in Marysville, California.
May 2  Former New York City police officer Michael Seti-
awan, 36, was arrested for spray-painting anti-Semitic graffiti 
on 15 vehicles and four buildings near a synagogue and Jewish 
school.
May 8  Two Montgomery County, Maryland high school stu-
dents, ages 16 and 17, were charged with hate crimes and van-
dalism for allegedly painting anti-Semitic graffiti on the sign of 
a synagogue; an anti-Jewish slur and swastika on two buses at a 

350	
Hate Crimes
child care facility; and a swastika and a SS Nazi symbol on the 
windshield of a car at a nearby residence.
June 13  Bernhard Laufer, awaiting trial for attempted mur-
der at a mosque in 2012, was arrested on charges of threatening 
to kill leaders of a Muslim civil rights organization, the Council 
on American-Islamic Relations.
June 15  Michael Phillips, 36, was sentenced to 28 months in 
prison after pleading guilty to assault with a dangerous weapon, 
enhanced as a hate crime, for pistol-whipping a transgender 
woman in January in Washington, DC.
June 19  David Malcolm Strickland, 27, was charged with 
capital murder, aggravated assault with a weapon, and aggra-
vated sexual assault in Heliotes, Texas, for the 2012 attack 
on a 19-year-old lesbian, Mollie Olgin, because of her sexual 
orientation.
2015
February 5  Two men were arrested for the hate-crime assault 
of a transgender woman who, with the help of dozens of sup-
porters, took her case this week to the Spokane City Council 
in the state of Washington. Adam R. Flippen, 45, faces charges 
of second-degree assault and malicious harassment. Marc A. 
Fessler, 42, is charged with one count of malicious harassment, 
a felony hate crime charge in Washington State. The victim, 
Jacina Scamahorn, who is homeless, told investigators she was 
on a public sidewalk when two men began making negative, 
unsolicited comments about her gender identity. Scamahorn 
said she was punched in the face and kicked, causing a black-
ened eye and broken facial bones.
June 17  Six women and three men were shot dead at the 
Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, 
South Carolina. Among the victims was the Reverend Clem-
enta Pinckney, 41, who was also a South Carolina state senator.  
The others were Tywanza Sanders, 26, Sharonda Singleton, 45, 
DePayne Middleton, 49, Cynthia Hurd, 54, Myra Thompson, 

	
Chronology	
351
59, Ethel Lee Lance, 70, Daniel Simmons, 76, and Susie Jack-
son, 87. The gunman was a 21-year-old white supremacist 
Dylann S. Roof, who reportedly shouted racial epithets before 
opening fire inside this historic black church that traces its 
roots to the slave-holding days before the Civil War.

This page intentionally left blank

353
Glossary
American Indian or Alaska Native:  A person having origins 
in any of the original peoples of North and South America 
(including Central America) and who maintains tribal affili-
ation or community attachment. This category includes per-
sons from the following tribal affiliations: Navajo, Blackfeet, 
Inupiat, Yup’ik, or Central American Indian groups or South 
American Indian groups.
Anti-Semitism:  The “longest hatred” in human history has 
been defined in many ways to describe prejudice, discrimina-
tion and violence aimed at Jewish people. Anti-Semitism may 
denote hatred against Jews because of their religious beliefs, 
their group membership (ethnicity) and sometimes the erro-
neous belief that Jews are a “race.” The term is a misnomer 
because “Semitic” refers to a language group and not a religious 
or ethnic identity; the term is exclusively used about Jews and 
not Arabs or others who speak Semitic languages.
Arab:  A person having origins, and/or ancestry, in any of 
the Arabic speaking peoples of Lebanon, Syria, Palestine, Jor-
dan, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Oman, United Arab Emirates, 
Qatar, Bahrain, Kuwait, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Comoros, Alge-
ria, Morocco, Sudan, Djibouti, Mauritania, and Somalia.
Asian American:  According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 
this demographic category includes Americans of Chinese, 
Filipino, Japanese, Asian Indian, Korean, Vietnamese, Cam-
bodian, Hmong, Laotian, Thai, Bangladeshi, Burmese, Indo-
nesian, Pakistani, Sri Lankan, Amerasian, or Eurasian descent.

354	
Glossary
Bias Crime:  See “hate crime.”
Black or African American:  A person having origins in any 
of the black racial groups of Africa, according to the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) category definitions on race 
and ethnicity.
Disability:  An individual with a disability is defined by the 
Americans with Disability Act (ADA) as a person who has a 
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or 
more major life activities, a person who has a history or record 
of such an impairment, or a person who is perceived by others 
as having such an impairment. The ADA does not specifically 
name all of the impairments that are covered.
Disability bias:  A preformed negative opinion or attitude 
toward a group of persons based on their physical or mental 
impairments, whether such disability is temporary or perma-
nent, congenital or acquired by heredity, accident, injury, ad-
vanced age, or illness.
Gay:  The adjective used to describe people whose emo-
tional, romantic, and/or physical attraction is to people of the 
same sex. The term “lesbian” is often the preferred term for 
women. Individuals who are gay need not have had any sexual 
experience—the attraction determines orientation.
Gender Identity:  A person’s internal sense of being male, fe-
male, or a combination of both; this sense of a person’s gender 
may be different from the person’s gender as determined at birth.
Hate Crime:  A criminal offense that is motivated, in whole 
or in part, by the offender’s bias(es) against a race, religion, dis-
ability, sexual orientation, ethnicity, gender, or gender identity. 
Also known as a “bias crime.”
Hate Crime victimization:  Refers to a single victim or 
household that experienced a criminal incident believed by 
the victim to be motivated by prejudice based on race, gen-
der or gender identity, religion, disability, sexual orientation, 
or ethnicity.

	
Glossary	
355
Hate Group:  An organization whose primary purpose is to 
promote animosity, hostility, and malice against persons of or 
with a race, religion, disability, sexual orientation, ethnicity, 
gender, or gender identity which differs from that of the mem-
bers of the organization (e.g., the Ku Klux Klan, American 
Nazi Party, Nation of Islam).
Hispanic or Latino:  A person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto 
Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture 
or origin, regardless of race. Includes people from Hispanic or 
Latino groups such as: Dominican Republic; Central Ameri-
can (excludes Mexican) Costa Rican, Guatemalan, Honduran, 
Nicaraguan, Panamanian, Salvadoran, Other Central Ameri-
can; South America and South American. Argentinian, Boliv-
ian, Chilean, Columbian, Ecuadorian, Paraguayan, Peruvian, 
Uruguayan, Venezuelan, Other South American; Spaniard
Homophobia:  An aversion to lesbian or gay people that 
often manifests itself in the form of prejudice and bias.
Homosexual:  An outdated clinical term, which is now con-
sidered derogatory, as opposed to the preferred terms, “gay” 
and “lesbian.”
Islamophobia:  The term was first introduced as a concept in 
a 1991 Runnymede Trust Report (an independent “race equal-
ity” British think tank) and defined as “unfounded hostility 
towards Muslims, and therefore fear or dislike of all or most 
Muslims.” The term was coined in the context of attitudes to-
ward Muslims in the UK in particular and Europe in general, 
and formulated based on the more common “xenophobia” 
framework.
LGBT:  An acronym for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgen-
der which refers to these individuals collectively.
Lynching:  The term is derived from the vigilante justice 
practiced by Captain William Lynch and his neighbors in 
Pittsylvania County, Virginia in the late 18th century. In the 
19th century, lynching was usually associated with hanging but 

356	
Glossary
also feathering, burning and killing, among other violent ac-
tivities which were mostly directed against African Americans.
National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS):   The 
NIBRS is an incident-based reporting system in which agen-
cies collect data on each single crime occurrence. NIBRS data 
come from local, state, and federal automated records’ systems.
Sikh:  A person who follows the monotheistic religion 
founded by Guru Nanak in the Punjab region of South Asia. 
Sikhs follow the teachings of 10 gurus; study from the religion’s 
primary sacred text (i.e., the Guru Granth Sahib) and worship 
in Gurdwaras. Some members of the Sikh faith may be distin-
guished by the dastarr (Sikh turban) and five religious articles: 
kesh (unshorn hair, including a beard), kanga (wooden comb), 
kara (steel bracelet), kachera (short trousers), and kirpan (reli-
gious sword).
Transgender:   A general term for people whose gender 
identity and/or gender expression differs from what is con-
ventionally associated with the sex they were assigned at birth. 
A transgender man is a person who was born as a biological 
female but identifies and lives as a man, also known as a trans 
man; a transgender woman was born as a biological male but 
identifies and lives as a woman, also known as a trans woman.
Undocumented Immigrant:  A person who is residing in the 
United States without the permission of the U.S. government. 
Undocumented immigrants enter the United States either il-
legally, without being inspected by an immigration officer or 
by using false documents, or legally, with a temporary visa and 
then remain in the United States after the visa has expired. The 
term “illegal alien” is considered pejorative.

357
Index
advocates of hate crime 
­legislation, 4 – 5
African Americans, 46 – 51, 
354
church arsons and, 47 – 48
examples of hate crimes 
against, 48 – 51
hate crime statistics, 46
police officer murders of 
unarmed, 47
violent rampages against, 
5 – 6, 46 – 47
Ahmed, Abdo Ali, 77
Alaska Native, 353. See also 
Native Americans
Alden, Matt, 127
Al-Suwaij, Zainab, 135 – 136
American Civil Liberties 
Union (ACLU), 121
American Indian, 353. 
See also Native Americans
American Islamic Congress 
(AIC), 83, 135, 155 – 157
American Jewish Committee 
(AJC), 82, 157
American Knights, 194
American Renaissance, 193
Americans with disabilities, 
58 – 59
Angry Aryans, 196
Anti-Arson Act, 1982, 9
Anti-Defamation League 
(ADL), 6 – 7, 11, 22, 
30 – 31, 60 – 61, 81, 84, 
97, 120, 158 – 159
Audit of Anti-Semitic 
­Incidents, 60
FBI and, 181
Hate on the Internet 
­manual, 191 – 204
Anti-Hispanic Immigrant 
Hate Crimes (Stacey, 
Carbone-Lopez, and 
­Rosenfeld), 112 – 115
anti-Semitism, 59, 108 – 110, 
353
Apprendi, Charles C., Jr., 23
Apprendi v. New Jersey, 23 – 24
Arab Americans, 76 – 84, 353
Islamophobia and, 83 – 84
sympathetic reactions to, 
80 – 83
violent incidents against, 
77 – 80, 87 – 88

358	
Index
“Aryan Nation Liberty Net,” 
192
Ashcroft, John, 74
Asian Americans
defined, 353
hate crimes against, 51 – 54
Asian Americans Advancing 
Justice (AAJC), 54, 159
Asian Exclusion Act, 1924, 52
Assessing the Validity of Hate 
Crime Reporting: An 
Analysis of NIBRS Data 
(online report), 40 – 41
Bailey, Alonzo, 46
Baldwin, James, 19
Barclay, Elwood, 24
Barclay v. Florida, 24 – 25
Baumhammers, Richard, 53
Baz, Rashid, 63
Beam, Louis, 192
beaner hopping, 104
Bednarski, Richard Lee, 71
Beirich, Heidi, 137
Bellingham Riots, 117
Berg, Alan, 3
Berlet, Chip, 136 – 137
Bhalerao, Saurabh, 54
bias-motivated crimes, 5 – 6. 
See also hate crime
before hate crime laws, 44 – 45
bigot, 5
bigotry, 5
forms of, 88
Billings, Dwight, 138
bin Laden, Osama, 4, 55, 56
Black. See African Americans
Black, Don, 192
Black Liberation Army, 24
Blalock, H. M., 113
Blee, Kathleen M., 138
Bleier, Dylan, 127
Boston Globe, 97
Boys Don’t Cry (film), 69
“A Boys Life: For Matthew 
Shepard’s Killers What 
Does It Take to Be a 
Man?” (Wypijewski), 123
Brenner, Claudia, 71
Bronski, Michael, 98, 
120 – 124
Brooks, Gwendolyn, 19
Brudnick Center on Violence 
and Conflict, 159 – 160
Bryant, Carolyn, 18, 19
Bryant, Roy, 18, 19
Buckeye Region Anti-Vio-
lence Organization (BRA-
VO), 70
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, 
and Firearms (ATF), 8
Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS), 21, 43, 160 – 161
Burnett, Burke, 73
Bush, George H. W., 79
Bush, George W., 20, 56, 81
Byrd, James F., Jr., 3, 4, 47, 99
Campus Hate Crimes Right 
to Know Act, 1997, 16
Carbone-Lopez, Kristin, 98, 
112 – 115, 117

	
Index	
359
Carr, Stephen Ray, 71
Cato, Gavin, 62
Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC), 
216
Chaney, James, 178
Chapa, Kristene, 73
chat rooms, online hate and 
children in, 198
Chaudhry, Tahir H., 82
Cheney, James E., 7
children, online hate and, 
197 – 201
chat rooms and, 198
e-mail and, 199
encounter methods, 
197 – 198
instant messaging and, 
198 – 199
World Wide Web and, 
200 – 201
Chin, Vincent, 3, 4, 52 – 53
Chinese Exclusion Act, 
1882, 52
Chung, Cecilia, 69
Church Arson Prevention 
Act, 1996, 11, 13 – 15, 
100
Church of the National 
Knights, 49
Civil Rights Act
of 1866, 5
of 1875, 5
of 1968, 7 – 8
Civil Rights Remedy provi-
sion, 13
classification errors, 40 – 41
Clinton, Bill, 47, 99
Cochran, Floyd, 139 – 140
Committee against 
­Anti-Asian Violence 
(CAAAV), 161
Committee for Open Debate 
of the Holocaust, 194
Community Relations 
­Service (CRS), 20, 22
Concerned Women of Amer-
ica, 120
Constitutional Frame for 
Hate-Crime Laws: First 
Amendment Protections 
(Lieberman), 106
Contemporary Anti-Semi-
tism in American Higher 
Education (Marcus), 
108 – 111
Conyers, John, Jr., 13, 14
Cooksey, John, 55
Cooper, Abraham, 140 – 141
Corporon, William Lewis, 65
Council of Conservative 
Citizens, 193
Crime in the United States 
(FBI), 104 – 105
Criminal Justice Information 
Services Division’s Advi-
sory Policy Board, 11 – 12
cross burnings, 9, 25 – 26, 49
Cunningham, Patrick, 78
“Curry in a Hurry” (restau-
rant), 78
Curtiss-Lusher, Barry, 43

360	
Index
Davis, Gregory K., 49
Death in the Delta, 19
Dees, Morris Seligman, 
141 – 142
Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS), 113
Department of Housing and 
Urban Development 
(HUD), 22
Department of Religion at 
Trinity University, 98
Dietz, George, 192
disability, 58 – 59, 354
disability bias, 354
Disability Law Center 
(DLC), 162
Dodd, Christopher, 19
DuBois, W. E. B., 51
Duke, David, 193
Dunn, Kerri, 128
Eckhardt, Aaron, 70
e-mail, online hate and, 199
Emerson, Steven, 142 – 143
Emmett Till Unsolved Civil 
Rights Crime Act, 2007, 
18 – 20, 180
Enforcement Act, 1870, 5
Enright, Michael, 80
executive branch hate crime 
legislation, 20 – 22
Expanding Federal Hate-
Crime Protection (Lieb-
erman), 107
extremists, online use by, 193
Eye, Gary L., 48
Faircloth, Lauch, 14
Farrakhan, Louis, 64
Federal Bureau of Investiga-
tion (FBI), 4, 8, 11, 21, 
76, 162 – 163
cold case initiative, 179 – 180
hate crime investigation 
process, 181
Hate Crime Working 
Groups and, 180 – 181
as investigative force, 179
jurisdiction of, 179
law enforcement support 
and, 180
public outreach and, 181
role of, 179 – 181
training and, 181
Federal Commission on 
Wartime Relocation and 
Internment of Civilians, 52
Federal Explosives Statute, 8 – 9
federal hate crime laws, 
232 – 238
Felber, Jessica, 110 – 111
Flanagan, Timothy, 49
Focus on the Family, 120
Foxman, Abraham H., 43
Frank, Leo, 59
Franklin, Charles D., 77
Fumento, Michael, 48
Furrow, Buford O., Jr., 64
gay, defined, 354
Gay and Lesbian Alliance 
against Defamation 
(GLAAD), 68 – 69

	
Index	
361
gay bashing, 67
Gellman, Susan, 37
gender identity, 354
gender-based crimes, 7
Gerstenfeld, Phyllis B., 
67 – 68, 87, 143
Giuliani, Rudolph, 81
Gliebe, Erich, 195
Goldstein, Robert, 78
Gonzaga University Insti-
tute for Hate Studies, 
163 – 164
Goodman, Andrew, 7, 178
Gordon, Anita, 53
Greenawalt, Kent, 4 – 5
Griffin, Lloyd, 71
gurdwara, 56, 107, 118
Halberstam, Aaron, 63
Hale, Matt, 198
Hamm, Mark S., 143 – 144
Hammerskin Nation, 196
Hammerskins, 119
hate crime
chronology, 303 – 351
defined, 4, 12, 178
essays (See hate crime 
essays)
examples of, 3 – 4
federal laws, 232 – 238
forms of, 4
harm caused by, 5
history, 178 – 179
hoaxes, 44
on Internet (See Hate on the 
Internet (ADL))
investigation of, model 
policy, 182 – 191
by jurisdiction, 11
legislation (See hate crime 
legislation)
overview, 178
perpetrators of, described, 
88
resources (See resources, 
hate crime)
against selected groups 
(See hate crimes against 
selected groups)
hate crime essays, 97 – 129
Anti-Hispanic Immigrant 
Hate Crimes (Stacey, 
Carbone-Lopez, and 
­Rosenfeld), 112 – 115
Constitutional Frame for 
Hate-Crime Laws: First 
Amendment Protections 
(Lieberman), 106
Contemporary Anti-Semi-
tism in American Higher 
Education (Marcus), 
108 – 111
Expanding Federal Hate-
Crime Protection (Lieb-
erman), 107
Hate Crime Hoaxes on 
College and University 
Campuses (Thorne), 
125 – 129
Hate Crimes against Sikh 
Americans (Singh), 
117 – 120

362	
Index
Hate Crimes and the 
LGBT Community 
(Bronski), 120 – 124
Law vs. Violent Bigotry: 
The Case for Strong 
Hate Crime Laws in 
the ­United States, The 
­(Lieberman), 103 – 108
overview of, 97 – 98
Punish Crime, Not Thought 
Crime (Jacoby), 98 – 102
Punishing Bias-Motivated 
Violence (Lieberman), 
104 – 106
Hate Crime Hoaxes on 
College and University 
Campuses (Thorne), 
125 – 129
hate crime legislation, 5 – 32
advocates of, 4 – 5
arguments invoked against, 
38 – 39
Campus Hate Crimes 
Right to Know Act, 
1997, 16
Church Arson Prevention 
Act, 1996, 13 – 15
Civil Rights Act, 1968, 7 – 8
critics of (See hate crime 
legislation, critics of)
debates over, 86 – 87
Emmett Till Unsolved Civil 
Rights Crime Act, 2007, 
18 – 20
executive branch of U.S. 
government, 20 – 22
Federal Explosives Statute, 
8 – 9
Hate Crime Statistics Act, 
9 – 12
Hate Crimes Sentencing 
Enhancement Act, 12
history of, 5 – 7
Local Law Enforcement 
Enhancement Act, 16
Matthew Shepard and 
James Byrd Jr. Hate 
Crime Prevention Act, 
2009, 16 – 18
proponents of, 39 – 40
for religious vandalism 
cases, 8
sociological/criminological 
consequences of, 38
at state level, 30 – 32
U.S. Armed Forces and, 15
U.S. Supreme Court deci-
sions regarding, 23 – 29
Violence against Women 
Act, 1994, 12 – 13
hate crime legislation, critics 
of, 37 – 44
methodology used and, 
40 – 44
overview of, 37 – 39
underreporting and,  
42 – 44
Hate Crime Statistics, 1990: 
A Resource Book (Bureau 
of Investigation), 10
hate crime statistics, accuracy 
of, 40 – 41

	
Index	
363
Hate Crime Statistics Act 
(HCSA), 9 – 12, 46, 58, 
65, 86 – 87, 100, 105
Hate Crime Statistics,1992 
(U.S. Department of 
Justice), 10
hate crime victimization, 354
Hate Crime Working Groups 
(HCWGs), 180 – 181
hate crimes against selected 
groups, 45 – 85
African Americans, 46 – 51
Americans with disabilities, 
58 – 59
Arab/Muslim Americans, 
76 – 84
Asian Americans, 51 – 54
Jewish Americans, 59 – 65
lesbians, gay men, bisexu-
als, transgendered people, 
65 – 76 (See also Hate Vi-
olence in 2013 (NCAVP 
report))
Native Americans, 84 – 85
overview of, 45 – 46
Sikhs, 54 – 58
Hate Crimes against Sikh 
Americans (Singh), 
117 – 120
Hate Crimes Amendment, 
Kennedy introduction of, 
225 – 229
Hate Crimes and the LGBT 
Community (Bronski), 
120 – 124
Hate Crimes Sentencing 
Enhancement Act, 12, 
74, 100
hate group, 355
Hate on the Internet (ADL), 
191 – 204
children and, 197 – 201
eliminating, 201 – 204
extremists and, 193
hate speech online, 
191 – 193
Holocaust deniers and, 
193 – 194
Identity Church and, 194
Ku Klux Klan and, 194
neo-Nazi organizations 
and, 194 – 195
skinhead groups and, 
195 – 196
Westboro Baptist Church 
and, 196
World Church of the Crea-
tor and, 196 – 197
hate speech online, 191 – 193
hate violence homicides, 
2013, 205
Hate Violence in 2013 
(NCAVP report), 
204 – 221
age of offenders, 219 – 220
communities most impact-
ed, 206 – 209
executive report, 204 – 205
gender identity of offend-
ers, 218 – 219
homicides, 205 – 206
introduction, 214 – 218

364	
Index
number of offenders, 220
offender relationships, 
220 – 221
police classification, 210
police response, 210
racial/ethnic identity of 
offenders, 219
recommendations, for pol-
icymakers and funders, 
210 – 214
reported incidents, 205
survivor and victim demo-
graphics, 209 – 210
hate violence survivors, 2013, 
206 – 209
cisgender women, 209
gay men, 208 – 209
lesbian, 209
LGBTQ/HIV-affected 
Black, 208
LGBTQ/HIV-affected 
Latin, 208
LGBTQ/HIV-affected 
people of color, 208
LGBTQ/HIV-affected 
undocumented, 207
transgender, 206 – 207
transgender men, 207
transgender people of color, 
207
transgender women, 206
“Healing the Hate” (OJJDP), 
22
Helvey, Terry, 72
Henderson, Russell, 123
Henderson, Wade, 100
Herek, Gregory M., 
144 – 145
Hernandez, Genesis, 127
Herrick, James, 78
Higham, John, 60
Higher Education Act, 1965, 
16
Hispanic, defined, 355
HIV-affected hate violence, 
204. See also Hate Vio-
lence in 2013 (NCAVP 
report)
hoaxes, hate crime, 44
Holder, Eric, 119
Holocaust deniers, online use 
by, 193 – 194
homophobia, 355
homosexual, 355
Hoover, Reynold N., 8
Hulshof, Kenny, 19
Human Rights Campaign 
(HRC), 75 – 76, 181
Human Rights Watch, 78, 81
Hyde, Henry, 14
Identity Church, 194
Iganski, Paul, 145 – 146
Ileto, Joseph, 64
Imperial Klans of America, 
194
incidents reported to UCR 
Program, 10
instant messaging, online 
hate and, 198 – 199
Institute for Historical 
­Review, 194

	
Index	
365
Institute for the Study of 
Global Antisemitism 
and Policy (ISGAP), 
164 – 165
Intelligence Report (Southern 
Poverty Law Center), 43
Interagency Initiative on 
Hate Crimes, 20
International Association 
of Jewish Lawyers and 
Jurists (IAJLJ), 165
International Institute of Is-
lamic Thought (IIIT), 84
Internet Service Provider, 
hate speech regulation 
and, 203 – 204
investigation of hate crimes, 
model policy, 182 – 191
definitions, 182 – 185
policy, 182
procedures, 185 – 191
purpose, 182
Irving, David, 194
Islamophobia, 83 – 84, 355
Israel Apartheid Week, 110
Jacobs, James B., 5, 37 – 38, 
146
Jacoby, Jeff, 97, 98 – 102
Jacques, Michael, 48 – 49
Jenness, Valerie, 74, 146 – 147
Jewish Americans, 59 – 65
Jewish Anti-Defamation 
League (ADL). See 
Anti-Defamation League 
(ADL)
Johns, Stephen T., 64
Johnson, Brice, 74
Jones, James F., 126
Kaleka, Satwant Singh, 56
Kaur, Paramjit, 56
Keisling, Mara, 70
Keller, Robert, 50
Kennedy, Edward, 14, 16
Kennedy, Ted, 99, 225 – 229
Khalsa, Rajinder Singh, 55
Khan, M. A. Muqtedar, 83
Kibelstis, Teresa Eileen, 67
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 61
Know-Nothing Party, 45
Koehl, Matt, 195
Krochmaluk, Eric, 58
Ku Klux Klan (KKK), 4, 46, 
192, 194
Ku Klux Klan Act, 1871, 5
Labbe, Richard, 53
LaManno, Terri, 65
Lane, Wes, 46
Lanker-Simons, Meghan, 
127
Latino, defined, 355
Lauck, Gerhard, 195
Law vs. Violent Bigotry: The 
Case for Strong Hate 
Crime Laws in the Unit-
ed States, The (Lieber-
man), 103 – 108
Lawrence, Frederick, 41
Leadership Conference, 54
Leadership Conference 

366	
Index
on Civil and Human 
Rights (LCCHR), 100, 
165 – 166
Leahy, Patrick, 19
Lee, Garry, 53
lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, 
transgendered people 
(LGBT), 65 – 76. See also 
Hate Violence in 2013 
(NCAVP report)
community, major violence 
against, 71 – 76
hate crime statistics, 75 – 76
NCAVP hate crime statis-
tics, 68
police distrust by, 67
reported crimes against, 
65 – 66, 67 – 68, 74 – 75
study on antigay violence, 66
transgender victims, 68 – 71
underreporting of crimes 
against, 66 – 67, 75
vicious nature of attacks 
against, 67
Levin, Brian, 147
Levin, Jack, 147 – 148
Levitas, Daniel, 148
Lewis, John, 19
LGBT. See lesbians, gay men, 
bisexuals, transgendered 
people (LGBT)
Lieberman, Michael, 97, 
103 – 108, 148 – 149
Linn, Randolph, 80
Local Law Enforcement 
­Enhancement Act, 16
location designations, 11
London, Ivan “Rusty,” 49
Longest Hatred, The (docu-
mentary series), 59
Look magazine, 19
Louis D. Brandeis Center for 
Human Rights Under 
Law, 97
Love, Gregory, 72
Lucero, Marcelo, 104
lynching, 355 – 356
Lyons, Matthew N., 136
Maissy, Brian, 110 – 111
Malkin, Michelle, 129
Marcus, Kenneth L., 97, 
108 – 111, 149 – 150
Matney, Quinn, 127
Matson, Gary, 72
Matthew Shepard and James 
Byrd Jr. Hate Crime 
Prevention Act, 2009, 11, 
16 – 18, 47, 75, 98 – 99, 
107, 123, 179
Obama speech on, 
229 – 232
Matthew Shepard Founda-
tion, 166 – 167
McCay, William L., 48
McKenna, Claremont, 128
McKinney, Aaron, 123
McNair, Denise, 48
Michigan Muslim Commu-
nity Council, 82
Milam, J. W., 18, 19
Miller, Frazier Glenn, 65

	
Index	
367
Morrison, Toni, 19
Mowder, Winfield Scott, 72
Muhammad, Abdur-Rah-
man, 84
Muslim Americans, 76 – 84
Islamophobia and, 83 – 84
sympathetic reactions to, 
80 – 83
violent incidents against, 
77 – 80, 87 – 88
Narasaki, Karen K., 150 – 151
National Alliance, 195, 196
National Archive of Criminal 
Justice Data (NACJD), 
167
National Asian Pacific Amer-
ican Legal Consortium 
(NAPALC), 54, 181
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored 
People (NAACP), 120, 
181
National Association of 
Scholars, 98
National Center for Trans-
gender Equality, 70
National Center for Vic-
tims of Crime (NCVC), 
167 – 168
National Church Arson Task 
Force (NCATF), 14, 15, 
47
National Coalition for the 
Homeless (NCH), 
222 – 225
National Coalition of 
Anti-Violence Pro-
grams (NCAVP), 66, 
68, 168 – 169. See also 
Hate Violence in 2013 
(NCAVP report)
National Crime Statistics-­
Exchange (NCS-X), 21
National Crime Victimiza-
tion Survey, 44
National Defense Authoriza-
tion Act, 15
National Disability Rights 
Network, 181
National Gay and Lesbian 
Task Force (NGLTF), 66, 
84, 169
National Incident Based Re-
porting System (NIBRS), 
21, 356
“The National Intimate 
Partner Violence and 
Sexual Violence Survey 
(NISVS): 2010 findings 
on Victimization by Sex-
ual Orientation” (CDC), 
216
National Organization for 
Women, 181
National Rebuilding Initia-
tive, 22
National Socialist Movement, 
195
Native Americans, 84 – 85
Nava, Francisco, 128
Nelson, Lemrick, 63

368	
Index
neo-Nazi organizations, on-
line use by, 194 – 195
neo-Nazis, 3
New York City Gay and 
Lesbian Anti-Violence 
Project (AVP), 169 – 170
Newsweek, 43
nonviolent crimes, as hate 
crimes, 4
Not in Our Town (NIOT), 
170 – 171
Oak Creek Massacre, 119
Obama, Barack, 16, 51, 
98 – 99, 123
on Matthew Shepard and 
James Byrd Jr. Hate 
Crime Prevention Act, 
2009, 229 – 232
Obama, Michelle, 119
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 105
offenders, 10
age of, 219 – 220
gender identity of, 
218 – 219
number of, 220
racial/ethnic identity of, 
219
relationships of, to victims, 
220 – 221
offenses reported to UCR 
Program, 10
Office of Juvenile Justice and 
Delinquency Prevention 
(OJJDP), 22, 171
Olgin, Mollie, 73
online hate speech, 191 – 193
O’Rourke, Thomas, 3
Orwell, George, 102
Page, Wade Michael, 56, 
118 – 119
Panzerfaust Records, 196
Patel, Sandip, 53
Paul, Ron, 19
Peace and Innovation Lab, 
Stanford University, 57
Pence, Mike, 121 – 122
Pennell, Alexandra, 127
Perkins, Johnathan, 127, 129
Perry, Barbara, 84, 85, 
151 – 152
Pew Research Center, 12
Phagan, Mary, 59
Pham, Thao Q., 53
Phetakoune, Thung, 53
Pierce, William, 195
Plunder & Pillage, 196
Police Executive Research 
Forum (PERF), 171 – 172
Potok, Mark, 43, 152
Potter, Kimberly A., 38
Price, Aaron, 72
Proffit, Nicholas T., 79
Punish Crime, Not Thought 
Crime (Jacoby), 98 – 102
Punishing Bias-Motivated 
Violence (Lieberman), 
104 – 106
Queers for Economic Justice, 
121

	
Index	
369
Rahman, Mizanor, 53
Rami, Ahmed, 194
R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 
25 – 26
“Reconsidering Hate: Pol-
icy and Politics at the 
Intersection”  
(Whitlock), 124
Rehnquist, William, 28 – 29
religions, identifying, 11 – 12
religious vandalism legisla-
tion, 8
Reno v. ACLU, 202
Resistance magazine, 196
Resistance Records, 196
resources, hate crime
articles, 259 – 278
books, 241 – 259
nonprint, 293 – 300
organization reports, 293
U.S. government reports, 
279 – 293
Rice, Condoleezza, 48
Rice, Darrell David, 74
Robida, Jacob D., 73
Rock Springs, Wyoming 
massacre, 52
Roque, Frank Silva, 54 – 55, 
118
Rosenbaum, Yankel, 63
Rosenfeld, Richard, 98, 
112 – 115, 117
Rossman-Benjamin, Tammi, 
110
Rothstein, Barbara, 78
Rusin, David J., 83 – 84
Samuels, Jocelyn, 49
sanctuary policies, 115
Sandstrom, Steven, 48
Sarlo, Phillip, 71
Sasonkin, Nachum, 63
Scalia, Antonin B., 25 – 26
Schindler, Allen, 72
Schneerson, Menachem M., 
62
Schwerner, Michael, 7, 178
Sean’s Last Wish, 205
Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 82
Serling, Rod, 19
Shepard, Matthew, 3, 4, 31, 
71, 98, 99, 122 – 123
Shepard-Byrd Act. See Mat-
thew Shepard and James 
Byrd Jr. Hate Crime 
Prevention Act, 2009
Sidhi, Surinder Singh, 55
Sikh American Legal Defense 
and Education Fund 
(SALDEF), 57
Sikh Coalition, 98, 118
Sikhs
defined, 356
violence against, 54 – 58, 77
Simon Wiesenthal Center, 
172
Singh, Gurcharan, 55
Singh, Jasmir, 55
Singh, Jiwan, 56
Singh, Prakash, 56
Singh, Ranjit, 56
Singh, Simran Jeet, 98, 
117 – 120

370	
Index
Singh, Sita, 56
Singh, Suveg, 56
Sixteenth Street Baptist 
Church bombing, 48
skinhead groups, online use 
by, 195 – 196
Smith, Bradley, 194
Smith, Gerald L. K., 59
Smith, Gordon, 16
Smith, Roland, 64
sociological/criminological 
consequences of hate 
crime legislation, 38
Sodhi, Balbir Singh, 3, 4, 54, 
118
Southern Poverty Law Center 
(SPLC), 24, 43, 137, 
172 – 173, 181
Stacey, Michele, 98, 
112 – 115, 117
Stafford, Timothy, 49
state hate crime legislation, 
30 – 32
Steinberg, Darrell, 57
Stephen Roth Institute for 
the Study of Contempo-
rary Anti-Semitism and 
Racism, 173 – 174
Stern, Kenneth S., 152 – 153
Stevens, John Paul, 23 – 24
Stonewall riot, 67
Stormfront (hate site), 
192 – 193
Strickland, David Malcolm, 
73
Strott, Bradley Kent, 79 – 80
Summers, Larry, 82
Sun, Ji-Ye, 53
Supreme Court. See U.S. 
­Supreme Court decisions
Sylvia Rivera Law Project, 121
Taylor, Michael, 71
Tedford, Anthony Lee, 46
Teena, Brandon, 69
Telecommunications Act, 
1996, 204
Thakur, Anil, 53
Thind, Bhagat Singh, 117
Thorne, Ashley, 98, 125 – 129
thought crime, 102
threatening speech, prosecu-
tion of, 202 – 203
threats, defined, 202
Till, Emmett, 18 – 20
Torres, Brenda, 73
transgender, defined, 356
Transgender Law Center, 69
transgender victims, 68 – 71
GLADD definition of, 
68 – 69
in Ohio, 70 – 71
violence against, 69 – 70
Trible, Tommy, 71
Turner Diaries, The (Pierce), 
195
underreporting of hate 
crimes, 42 – 44
Underwood, Reat Griffin, 65
undocumented immigrant, 
356

	
Index	
371
Uniform Crime Reporting 
(UCR) Program, 9 – 10, 43
Hate Crime Statistics Pro-
gram, 10 – 11
Uniform Crime Reports, 113
United States v. Morrison, 13
United States vs. Bhagat Singh 
Thind, 117
U.S. Armed Forces, hate 
crime prevention and, 15
U.S. Census Bureau, 12
U.S. Commission on Civil 
Rights, 174
U.S. Department of Educa-
tion, 16, 22
Office for Civil Rights, 
108 – 111
U.S. Department of Justice 
(DOJ), 7, 9, 17, 18, 22
Community Relations 
Service, 20, 22
Interagency Initiative on 
Hate Crimes, 20
U.S. Department of the 
Treasury, 8, 22
U.S. Sentencing Commis-
sion, 12
U.S. Supreme Court deci-
sions, 23 – 29
Apprendi v. New Jersey, 
23 – 24
Barclay v. Florida, 24 – 25
R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 
25 – 26
Wisconsin v. Mitchell, 
26 – 29
USA Today, 48
USENETs, 192, 197
Vessal, Daniel, 61
victims, 10
African American, 46
relationships of offenders 
to, 220 – 221
reporting of hate crimes by, 
42
transgender, 68 – 71
Vidal Sassoon International 
Center for the Study of 
Antisemitism (SICSA), 
175
Viktora, Robert A., 25
Violence against Women Act 
(VAWA), 1994, 12 – 13, 
100
Violence against Women 
Civil Rights Restoration 
Act, 13
Violent Crime Control and 
Law Enforcement Act, 
1994, 11, 12
Virginia v. Black, 26
von Brunn, James W., 64
VULNERABLE TO HATE: 
A Survey of Hate Crimes 
Committed against 
Homeless People in 2013 
(NCH), 222 – 225
“Walk of Acceptance,” 82
Wall Street Journal, 48
Wang, Lu-in, 153 – 154

372	
Index
Wassmuth, Bill, 154 – 155
Watson, Tom, 59
“We are Not the Enemy: 
Hate Crimes Against 
­Arabs, Muslims, and 
Those Perceived to be 
Arab or Muslim After 
September 11” (Human 
Rights Watch), 81
Westboro Baptist Church 
(WBC), 196
Westmoreland, Lynn, 19
white supremacists, 3
Whitlock, Kay, 124
Williams, Benjamin, 72
Williams, James Tyler, 72
Williams, Julianne Marie, 74
Winans, Laura, 74
Wisconsin v. Mitchell, 26 – 29, 
106
World Church of the Creator 
(WCOTC), 196 – 197
World Wide Web, online 
hate and, 200 – 201
Wright, Rebecca, 71
Wypijewski, JoAnn, 123
Zaleta, James, 80
Zappalorti, James, 71 – 72
Zionist Organization of 
America (ZOA), 109
Zundel, Ernst, 194

About the Author
Donald Altschiller is a librarian at Boston University. He has 
written eight reference books and his articles have been pub-
lished in the Wall Street Journal, Chronicle of Higher Education, 
the Boston Globe, and the Los Angeles Times. His most recent 
book is Animal-Assisted Therapy published by Greenwood, and 
he has written two earlier editions of Hate Crimes: A Reference 
Handbook. Altschiller has contributed essays to almost a dozen 
encyclopedias, including The Historical Encyclopedia of World 
Slavery and the Encyclopedia of the American Civil War, both 
published by ABC-CLIO. He regularly reviews reference books 
for library journals and was a longtime contributor to the ALA 
online Guide to Reference Sources.

