Having Thought
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Having Thought
Essays in the metaphysics of mind
John Haugeland
harvard university press
Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England
1998
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 by John Haugeland
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Haugeland, John, 1945–
Having thought : essays in the metaphysics of mind / John Haugeland.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-674-38233-1 (alk. paper)
1. Philosophy of mind.
I. Title.
BD418.3.H38
1998
128’.2—dc21
97–44542
Book design and typesetting by John Haugeland;
body set in Adobe Jenson 12 on 13 by 25.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Should ever one see more deeply than others,
it’s for being stood on the shoulders by giants.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Contents
Toward a New Existentialism
1
Mind
1 The Nature and Plausibility of Cognitivism
9
2 Understanding Natural Language
47
3 Hume on Personal Identity
63
Matter
4 Analog and Analog
75
5 Weak Supervenience
89
6 Ontological Supervenience
109
Meaning
7 The Intentionality All-Stars
127
8 Representational Genera
171
9 Mind Embodied and Embedded
207
Truth
10 Objective Perception
241
11 Pattern and Being
267
12 Understanding: Dennett and Searle
291
13 Truth and Rule-Following
305
Acknowledgments
363
Bibliography
367
Index
379
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Having Thought
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

introduction
Toward a New
Existentialism
Understanding—making sense of things—is the mark of the
mental. This is not to deny that intentionality, rationality, objective
knowledge, or self-consciousness might also be marks of the mental,
but only to put the emphasis more nearly where it belongs. For, in my
view, each of these latter, properly understood, presupposes under-
standing and is impossible without it. Understanding is always “of”
something—objects, in a broad sense—but this of-ness is not the
same as that of beliefs and desires. Thus, understanding is not the
same as knowledge, a special kind of knowledge, or even a complex
structure or totality of knowledge. Rather, understanding is a funda-
mentally distinct phenomenon, without which there could be no
knowledge or mind at all. It needs, therefore, a different discussion—
a discussion which, as it seems to me, has been missing in philosophy.
Understanding is the mark of the human. This is a better way to
make the point, and for two reasons. On the one hand, understanding
is not exclusively mental but is essentially corporeal and worldly as well;
but, on the other, it is exclusively (and universally) human. Accord-
ingly, intentionality, rationality, objective knowledge, and self-con-
sciousness, properly understood, are likewise exclusively human. By
‘human’, I don’t mean speciﬁc to homo sapiens. Humanity is not a
zoological classiﬁcation, but a more recent social and historical phe-
nomenon—one which happens, however, so far as we know, to be
limited to homo sapiens.
It is, of course, tendentious to deny intentionality and rationality to
other mammals (never mind to prehistoric homo sapiens). That there
is a difference in kind, not merely in degree, between the “cognitive”
capacities of people and those of other mammals strikes me as so
obvious as to need no argument; and I will offer none. No doubt,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2
H av i n g  Though t
there are senses in which many animals can be said to “know”, “want”,
and even “understand” things around them; but these are not the
same as the senses in which people can be said to know, want, and
understand things. Classing these uncritically together is as great an
obstacle to insight as was classing whales with ﬁsh or the sun with the
planets. Disputing the terms in which to express this is pointless.
More interesting is the question of what distinguishes people from
non-people: what—if anything—is the root or essence of their dis-
tinctiveness. Many answers have been offered, from being made in
God’s image, or having rational or immortal souls, to the capacity for
language, culture, and/or free recognition of normative constraints. In
my view, the last of these comes closest—indeed, is exactly right,
given a certain reading of “free recognition”. Again, however, I do not
undertake to defend this alternative against others, but at most to
begin to articulate it.
Existential commitment is the mark of the human. This is an even
better way to make the basic point, for, as it seems to me, human
understanding is itself made possible by the distinctive sort of com-
mitment that I call existential. It is the capacity for this sort of commit-
ment that I am inclined to think is relatively recent—almost certainly
more recent than language, and perhaps more recent than cities and
writing. Like city-building and writing, the possibility of existential
commitment is part of a cultural heritage (not just a biological or
“natural” capacity). But, though and as culturally born and harbored,
it is precisely a capacity for individual freedom: the freedom, namely, to
take responsibility for the norms and skills in terms of which one
copes with things. The ability to take such responsibility, to commit, is,
as I attempt to show, the condition of the possibility of understand-
ing, hence of knowing, objects.
These ideas are not new. They are announced, if not emphasized,
in Kuhn (1962/70), and developed further, though rather differently,
by Heidegger (1927/62). What I mean by ‘existential commitment’ is
closely related, so I believe, to what Heidegger meant by ‘authentic
care’, and also (albeit less closely) to what Kierkegaard meant by ‘faith’
and Nietzsche by ‘autonomy’. A philosophy of mind and of science in
which these essentially human capacities are restored to center stage is
what I mean by “a new existentialism”. But the point is not limited to
intellectual pursuits. The general form of free human commitment—
or care or faith—is love. Thus, best of all:
Love is the mark of the human.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Towar d  a new  exi st e n t i a l i s m
3
The thirteen essays collected here, spanning some two decades,
are all about understanding and intelligibility in one way or another,
often several. They are arranged, roughly by topic, under four heads:
Mind, Matter, Meaning, and Truth. As it turns out, this arrangement
is also roughly chronological.
Under the ﬁrst head, Mind, stand three essays from the late seven-
ties, two about cognitive science (or artiﬁcial intelligence) and one
about Hume. “The Nature and Plausibility of Cognitivism” (1978) is
concerned with understanding in two complementary ways. How, on
the one hand, can the mind itself be understood scientiﬁcally—in
particular, what is the structure of the scientiﬁc understanding sought
in cognitive science? And how, on the other hand, could a mind, so
understood, itself be an understander? The main conclusions (which I
still take to be basically correct, even if, in retrospect, awkwardly
developed) are: ﬁrst, that, though the character of the explanatory
grasp sought in cognitive science is scientiﬁcally unprecedented, it is
nevertheless perfectly legitimate; but, second, that the systems so in-
telligible are themselves incapable of understanding anything.
“Understanding Natural Language” (1979) pursues the latter
theme, arguing that, even in the special case of understanding prose—
a case particularly congenial to ai—no system lacking a sense of itself
as “somebody” with a complete life of its own (and about which it
particularly cares) can possibly be adequate as a model of human
understanding. I call this cared-about wholeness “existential holism”,
and offer a number of examples to illustrate its importance to ordi-
nary language ability.
“Hume on Personal Identity” (~1977), the oldest and shortest essay
in the volume, is also about the wholeness (or unity) of the self, but in
the limited context of an exegesis of Hume’s recantation of his own
earlier account in the appendix to the Treatise.
The essays under the second head, Matter, address putative
constraints on the intelligibility of mind in nature—particularly in its
relation to the material or physical. “Analog and Analog” (1981) con-
siders and rejects the too-common thesis that any analog system (for
instance, a brain) can be digitally simulated to any desired degree of
precision. The principal contribution is an analysis of the notions of
digital and (especially) analog devices, in terms of which the thesis can
so much as be responsibly confronted.
“Weak Supervenience” (1982) challenges that version of superven-
ience-based materialism that is equivalent to token identity theory,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

4
H av i n g Though t
and proposes a substitute “weaker” version (now usually called “global
supervenience”). The paper ﬁrst rebuts Davidson’s alleged proof of the
token identity of mental with physical events; then shows that weak
supervenience does not entail token identities; and, ﬁnally, presents
some examples meant to suggest that token identity theory is in fact
rather implausible.
“Ontological Supervenience” (1984) extends that implausibility
argument (in a somewhat irreverent tone) by articulating and under-
mining a handful of seldom-explicitly-stated “intuitive” considerations
that might seem to support a materialist identity theory.
Under the third head, Meaning, the chapters are at ﬁrst glance
more diverse; but they are all concerned with that relationship, what-
ever it may be, between us and the world, in terms of which we can be
said to have minds and be intelligent at all. “The Intentionality All-
Stars” (1990) uses the various positions on a baseball team as a whim-
sical metaphor to sort and relate the most common contemporary
approaches to the old problem of intentionality. Three positions are
examined and contrasted in particular detail: (i) the idea that inten-
tionality resides primarily in language-like internal representations, in
virtue of the processes that use and modify them; (ii) the view that
intentionality resides primarily in situated agents, in virtue of the
patterns of interactions between such agents and their environments;
and (iii) the suggestion that intentionality resides primarily in the
social practices of a community, in virtue of the instituted norms
sustaining and governing those practices.
At the time of that writing (as late as 1988), I attributed this third
suggestion to Heidegger, Dewey, Sellars, and Brandom (among oth-
ers); and I cautiously endorsed it myself. It now seems to me that the
attribution to Heidegger (at least) was quite mistaken; and, what’s
more, my own view is now signiﬁcantly changed (though I still think
mine and Heidegger’s are a lot alike).* There’s no denying that social
institution and its norms have been critical to the emergence and
maintenance of human culture; and, so, to that extent, they have also
been prerequisite to what I now regard as essential to genuine inten-
tionality: human understanding and commitment. (There is, to be
* In my “Heidegger on Being a Person” (1982), on which the relevant section of the
All-Stars was originally based, I attributed to Heidegger and tacitly endorsed
the thesis or “slogan”: All constitution is institution. (18) I now repudiate both the
attribution and the endorsement; Brandom, however, still embraces the idea.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Towar d  a new  exi st e n t i a l i s m
5
sure, an intentionality-like phenomenon for which social norms alone
are sufﬁcient, much as there is one for which biological-functional
norms sufﬁce.) But existential commitment is crucially not social; and,
as such, it makes possible a kind of normativity that goes beyond
anything merely instituted. (See especially chapter 13 below.)
“Representational Genera” (1989), perhaps the most disheveled
piece in the volume, undertakes to distinguish qualitatively different
kinds of representation—not just species, but genera—on the basis of
the characteristic structure of what they represent. The motive for the
project, at best partially realized, is to ask and determine what might
be distinctive of so-called distributed representations (the kind that,
apparently, would be easiest to implement in networks of neurons).
Along the way, however, a lot of effort is expended in setting up an
approach to the problem, and illustrating it in terms of the more
familiar cases of symbolic and pictorial representations.
“Mind Embodied and Embedded” (1995) argues, from principles of
intelligibility drawn from systems theory, that the customary divisions
between mind and body and between mind and world may be mis-
placed, in a way that more hinders insight than promotes it. The
suggestion is that trying to understand the structure and functions
underlying intelligence in terms of interactions across mind/world
and mind/body “interfaces” might be like trying to understand the
operation of an electronic circuit in terms of divisions that arbitrarily
cut across its electronic components. That is, mind, body, and world
might not be the right “components” in terms of which to understand
the operations of intelligence. Meaning may be as much a corporeal
and worldly phenomenon as it is “mental”.
The four essays under the fourth head, Truth, have more in
common than do those under any of the earlier heads. All four are
concerned with the possibility of objectivity, and they all approach it in
terms of an idea of constitution grounded in commitment. “Objective
Perception” (1996—though written several years earlier) argues that,
in order to specify the object of human perception—a kind of objectiv-
ity not available to animals—the object itself must be constituted in
terms of constitutive standards to which the perceiver is antecedently
committed. It is also argued that such commitment does not (at least
not in principle) require language.
“Pattern and Being” (1993) brings that same point about constitu-
tion to bear on Dennett’s “mild realism”, as propounded in his “Real
Patterns” (1991), arguing that his central discussion of patterns is con-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

6
H av i n g  Though t
fused unless a systematic distinction is drawn between two different
levels of patterns, both of which are required for the reality (or being)
of entities, in the sense he intends. Once that distinction is in place,
moreover, his trademark notion of a “stance” can be made consider-
ably clearer, and the intentional stance, in particular, can be divided
into two distinct versions: a weaker one for animals and computers,
and a stronger one for people—only the latter of which involves un-
derstanding, and thus has properly to do with intentionality.
“Understanding: Dennett and Searle” (1994) undertakes the un-
likely task of reconciling Dennett and Searle on the prerequisites for
genuine intentionality, by agreeing with each on a number of his most
cherished views, while disagreeing with each (sometimes both) about
a few points that strike me crucial. The pivotal issue is understanding
(as distinct from mere knowing or believing), which, as I read them,
neither Dennett nor Searle seriously addresses, and, without which,
neither of their accounts of intentionality can be adequate. In the
course of the discussion, I defend a sort of compromise on the dis-
puted cases of animals and ai systems, by assigning them together to a
new category—systems with ersatz intentionality—thereby preserv-
ing the best intuitions on both sides.
“Truth and Rule-Following” (new in this volume) is the longest
and most difﬁcult chapter. The aim is to spell out more thoroughly
the fundamental ideas of constitution, commitment, and objective
understanding introduced in the preceding three chapters, and to
show how they enable a new account of truth in terms of beholden-
ness to objects. The principal innovations are an explicit distinction
between norms of proper performance (such as might be socially
instituted) and those of objective correctness, and the concept of an
excluded zone—which shows for the ﬁrst time how empirical behold-
enness is concretely possible. Interesting corollaries include: (i) a
distinctive exposition of the interdependence of objectivity with sub-
jectivity, via the free commitment to standards that grounds objective
constraints; (ii) an alternative to coherence theories of truth that are
based on the so-called principle of charity; and thus (iii) a potential
rehabilitation of the notion of disparate conceptual schemes—or, as it
is better to say, of “constituted domains of objects”.
The basic Kantian/Heideggerian conclusion can be summed up
this way: the constituted objective world and the free constituting
subject are intelligible only as two sides of one coin.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

ch a pt e r  o n e
The Nature and Plausibility
of Cognitivism
Cognitivism in psychology and philosophy is roughly the position
that intelligent behavior can be explained (only) by appeal to internal
“cognitive processes”—that is, rational thought in a broad sense. Sec-
tions 1 to 5 attempt to explicate in detail the nature of the scientiﬁc
enterprise that this intuition has inspired. That enterprise is distinc-
tive in at least three ways: it relies on a style of explanation which is
different from that of mathematical physics, in such a way that it is
not basically concerned with quantitative equational laws; the states
and processes with which it deals are interpreted, in the sense that
they are regarded as meaningful or representational; and it is not
committed to reductionism, but is open to reduction in a form differ-
ent from that encountered in other sciences. Spelling these points out
makes it clear that the cognitivist study of the mind can be rigorous
and empirical, despite its unprecedented theoretical form. The philo-
sophical explication has another advantage as well: it provides a much
needed framework for articulating questions about whether the cog-
nitivist approach is right or wrong. The last three sections take that
advantage of the account, and address several such questions, pro and
con.
1 Systematic explanation
From time to time, the ills of psychology are laid to a misguided effort
to emulate physics and chemistry. Whether the study of people is
inherently “humanistic” and “soft” (Hudson 1972), or whether states
described in terms of their signiﬁcance necessarily escape the net of
physical law (Davidson 1970/80, 1973/80), the implication is that
psychology cannot live up to the standards of rigorous science, and
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 0
H av i n g  Though t
perhaps cannot be a science at all. But science itself often leaves be-
hind efforts to say what it can and cannot be. The cognitive approach
to psychology offers, I think, a science of a distinctive form, and
thereby sidesteps many philosophical objections—including those
born of a dazzled preoccupation with physics. In my ﬁrst ﬁve sections
I will try to characterize that form.
Science in general is an endeavor to understand what occurs in the
world; hence explanation, which is essentially a means to understand-
ing, has a pivotal importance. Scientiﬁc explanations differ from com-
mon sense explanations at least in being more explicit, more precise,
more general, and more deliberately integrated with one another.
Without attempting a full analysis, we can notice several broad char-
acteristics which all scientiﬁc explanations share. They depend on
specifying a range of features which are exhibited in, or deﬁnable for, a
variety of concrete situations. They depend on knowing or hypothe-
sizing certain regularities or relationships which always obtain in situ-
ations exhibiting the speciﬁed features. And they depend on our
being able to see (understand), for particular cases, that since the
speciﬁed features are deployed together in way X, the known regulari-
ties or relationships guarantee that Y. We then say that Y has been
explained through an appeal to (or in terms of) the general regularities
and the particular deployment of the features. The regularities and
deployment appealed to have been presupposed by the explanation,
and not themselves explained—though either might be explained, in
turn, through appeal to further presuppositions.
Philosophers have coined the term deductive-nomological for explana-
tions in which the presupposed regularities are formulated as laws
(Greek: nomos), and for which the guarantee that Y will occur is
formulated as a deductive argument from the laws plus statements
describing the deployment X. (Hempel and Oppenheim 1949) It can
be maintained that all scientiﬁc explanations are deductive-nomologi-
cal, though in many cases that requires a counterintuitive strain on
the notion of “law”. So to avoid confusion I will introduce some more
restricted terminology, and at the same time illustrate several different
ways in which the foregoing schematic remarks get ﬂeshed out.
The most familiar scientiﬁc explanations come from classical me-
chanics. The situational features on which they depend include
masses, inertial moments, distances, angles, durations, velocities, en-
ergies, and so on—all of which are quantitative, variable magnitudes.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
11
The known regularities or relationships are expressed as equations
(algebraic, vectorial, differential, or whatever) relating the values of
various variables in any given situation: F = ma = dp/dt, for instance.
Usually some of the equations are designated laws and the others
deﬁnitions, but there’s a well known trade-off in which are which.
Equations are conveniently manipulable and combinable in ways that
preserve equality; that is, other equations can be mathematically de-
rived from them. The standard form of an explanation in mechanics is
such a derivation, given speciﬁed deployments of masses, forces, and
what have you. (See Newton’s derivations of Kepler’s laws.) It is the
derived equational relationships which are explained (or sometimes
the actual values of some of the variables so related, determined by
plugging in the known values of others).
I use derivational-nomological for this special case form of deductive-
nomological explanation—where the distinction of the special case is
that the presupposed regularities are expressed as equational relation-
ships among quantitative variables, and the deduction is a mathemati-
cal derivation of other such equations (and then, perhaps, computing
some of the values). Besides mechanics, ﬁelds as diverse as optics,
thermodynamics, and macro-economics commonly involve deriva-
tional-nomological explanations.
But what is important here is that there are other forms or styles of
explanation, even in advanced sciences. I will delineate (only) two
such distinct styles, though I will not claim that the distinctions are
sharp. The claim is rather that interesting differences can be charac-
terized among prime examples, despite the fact that intermediate
cases blur the boundaries. Only one of these further styles is relevant
to cognitive psychology; I delineate them both because they are super-
ﬁcially similar, and easily confused. Thus explicitly distinguishing
them permits a closer focus on the one we want. These distinctions
are independent of anything peculiar to psychology, and I will draw
them that way ﬁrst, to keep separate issues as clear as possible
Imagine explaining to someone how a ﬁber-optics bundle can take
any image that is projected on one end and transmit it to the other
end. I think most people would come to understand the phenome-
non, given the following points. (If I am right, then readers unfamiliar
with ﬁber optics should nevertheless be able to follow the example.)
1 The bundles are composed of many long thin ﬁbers, which
are closely packed side by side, and arranged in such a way
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 2
H av i n g Though t
that each one remains in the same position relative to the
others along the whole length of the bundle;
2 each ﬁber is a leak-proof conduit for light—that is, whatever
light goes in one end of a ﬁber comes out the other end of the
same ﬁber;
3 a projected image can be regarded as an array of closely
packed dots of light, differing in brightness and color; and
4 since each end of each ﬁber is like a dot, projecting an image
on one end of the bundle will make the other end light up
with dots of the same brightness and color in the same rela-
tive positions—thus preserving the image.
Clearly that was not a derivational-nomological explanation. One
could, with effort, recast it as a logical deduction, but I think it would
lose more perspicuity that it would gain. (Diagrams would help much
more.) If we do not try to force it into a preconceived mold of scien-
tiﬁc explanations, several distinctive aspects stand out as noteworthy.
First, what is explained is a disposition or ability of a kind of object
(compare Cummins 1975). Second, the explanation makes appeals
(presuppositions) of two basic sorts: that the kind of object in ques-
tion has a certain form or structure (compare Putnam 1975b, 1973),
and that whatever is formed or structured in that way has certain
dispositions or abilities. (The object is a bundle of “parallel” ﬁbers,
and each ﬁber is able to conduct light without leaking.) Third, any
object structured in the presupposed way, out of things with the
presupposed abilities, would have the overall ability being explained.
That is, it doesn’t matter how or why the ﬁbers are arranged as they
are, or how or why they conduct light; these are simply presupposed,
and they are sufﬁcient to explain the ability to transmit images.
I call explanations of this style morphological, where the distinguish-
ing marks of the style are that an ability is explained through appeal
to a speciﬁed structure and to speciﬁed abilities of whatever is so
structured. (These speciﬁcations implicitly determine the “kind” of
object to which the explanation applies.) In science, morphological
explanations are often called “models” (which in this sense amount to
speciﬁcations of structure), but that term is both too broad and too
narrow for our purposes. Logicians have a different use for it, and few
would call the ﬁber-optics account a model.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
13
On the other hand, the account of how dna can replicate itself is
called a model—the double-helix model—and it is morphological.
Simplistically put, the structure is two adjacent strands of sites, with
each site uniquely mated to a complementary one in the other strand.
And the sites have the ability to split up with their mates and latch
onto an exactly similar new one, selected from a supply which hap-
pens to be ﬂoating around loose. This process starts at one end of the
double strand, and by the time it reaches the other end there are two
double strands, each an exact replica of the original. At the opposite
extreme of sophistication, an explanation of how cups are able to hold
coffee is also morphological. The speciﬁed structure is little more than
shape, and the speciﬁed abilities of what is so structured amount to
rigidity, insolubility, and the like.
Now consider a case that is subtly but importantly different: an
explanation of how an automobile engine works. As with morpholog-
ical explanations, this one appeals to a speciﬁed structure, and to
speciﬁed abilities or dispositions of what is so structured. But in
addition, and so important as to dominate the account, it requires
speciﬁcation of a complexly organized pattern of interdependent in-
teractions. The various parts of an engine do many different things, so
to speak “working together” or “cooperating” in an organized way, to
produce an effect quite unlike what any of them could do alone.
I reserve the term systematic for explanations of this style, where the
distinction from morphological explanation is the additional element
of organized cooperative interaction. Strictly, it is again an ability or
disposition which gets explained, but the ordinary expression “how it
works” often gives a richer feel for what’s at stake. A consequence of
this deﬁnition is that objects with abilities that get systematically
explained must be composed of distinct parts, because specifying in-
teractions is crucial to the explanation, and interactions require dis-
tinct interactors. Let a system be any object with an ability that is
explained systematically, and functional components be the distinct parts
whose interactions are cited in the explanation. In a system, the speci-
ﬁed structure is essentially the arrangement of functional components
such that they will interact as speciﬁed; and the speciﬁed abilities of
the components are almost entirely the abilities so to interact, in the
environment created by their neighboring components. Note that
what counts as a system, and as its functional components, is relative
to what explanation is being offered. Other examples of systems
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

14
H av i n g Though t
(relative to the obvious explanations) are radios, common mouse-
traps, and (disregarding some messiness) many portions of complex
organisms.
Fiber-optics bundles and dna molecules are deceptively similar to
systems, because they have clearly distinct components, each of which
contributes to the overall ability by performing its own little assigned
“job”. But the jobs are not interdependent; it is not through coopera-
tive interaction that the image transmission or replication is achieved,
but only an orderly summation of the two-cents’ worth from each
separate ﬁber or site. In an engine, the carburetor, distributor, spark
plugs, and so forth, do not each deliver a portion of the engine’s
turning, in the way that each site or ﬁber contributes a portion of the
replication or image. The job metaphor can be expanded to further
illustrate the difference. In old-fashioned plantation harvesting, each
laborer picked a portion of the crop (say one row), and when each was
done, it was all done. But at a bureaucratic corporation like General
Motors, comparatively few workers actually assemble automobiles;
the others make parts, maintain the factories, come up with new
designs, write paychecks, and so on. All of these tasks are prerequisite
to continued production, but only indirectly, through a complex pat-
tern of interdependencies. A system is like a bureaucratic corporation,
with components playing many different roles, most contributing to
the ﬁnal outcome only indirectly, via the organized interactions.
I have described three different styles of explanation, each of which
can be scientiﬁcally rigorous and respectable. They are all abstract or
formal, in that they all abstract certain features and regularities from a
variety of concrete situations, and then show how the resulting forms
make certain properties or events intelligible in all such situations.
But they differ notably in the nature of the abstract forms they specify,
at least in clear cases. Only the derivational-nomological style puts an
explicit emphasis on equations of the sort that we usually associate
with scientiﬁc laws. But I shall claim that only the systematic style is
directly relevant to cognitive psychology. The the charge of slavishly
imitating mathematical physics does not apply to cognitivism, and it
doesn’t matter that quantitative equational laws of behavior seem to
be few and far between. Many of the points I have made have been
made before,1 but no one, to my knowledge, has previously distin-
guished morphological and systematic explanation. The importance
of that distinction will emerge in section 4.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
15
2 Systematic reduction
Traditional philosophical concerns for the unity of science and for the
metaphysical doctrine of materialism (the doctrine that everything is
“ultimately just” matter in motion) customarily lead to questions
about scientiﬁc reduction. Psychological concepts and theories are
prime targets for such questions because they are not, at ﬁrst glance,
materialistic. This is not the place for a full discussion of the problem
of reduction, but my position about the nature of cognitivism will
have several speciﬁc implications which should be pointed out. Some
of these derive from the suggestion that cognitivist explanation is
systematic, and those can be considered independently of issues pecu-
liar to psychology.
An aspect common to all explanations discussed in the last section
(indeed, to all explanations) is that they presuppose some things in
the course of explaining others. More particularly, they presuppose
certain speciﬁed general regularities, which are appealed to, but not
themselves explained. But such regularities often can be explained, by
appeal to others that are more basic. Such further explanation is
reduction, though obviously it counts as reduction only relative to the
explanations whose presupposed regularities are being explained.
This is a fairly broad deﬁnition of reduction, and includes cases which
aren’t very exciting in form. Thus Newton’s derivation of Kepler’s laws
counts as a reduction of Kepler’s explanations of planetary positions.
A more famous reduction in classical physics, and one with a more
interesting form, was that of thermodynamics to statistical mechanics.
In outline, the values of the variables occurring in the equations of
thermodynamic theory were found (or hypothesized) to correlate
with quantities deﬁnable statistically in terms of the mechanical vari-
ables for groups of molecules. For example, the absolute temperature
of a region was found to be proportional to the average kinetic energy
of the molecules in that region. Such correlations are expressed in
speciﬁc equations called “bridge equations”. It then turned out that
the laws of thermodynamics could be mathematically derived from
the laws of mechanics, some plausible statistical assumptions, and
these bridge equations. The effect was to explain the regularities
which were presupposed by thermodynamic explanations—in other
words, to reduce thermodynamics.
Reductive explanations which explain the equational laws pre-
supposed by derivational-nomological explanations I call nomological
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

16
H av i n g Though t
reductions. Note that the deﬁnition refers to the style of explanation
being reduced, not to the style of the reducing explanation. The re-
duction of thermodynamics is often cited as a paradigm of scientiﬁc
reduction, as if all others should have a similar structure. But a mo-
ment’s reﬂection shows that this structure only makes sense if the
explanation being reduced in derivational-nomological; otherwise
there would be no equational laws to derive, and probably no quanti-
tative variables to occur in bridge equations.
The regularities presupposed by morphological and systematic ex-
planations are mainly the speciﬁed dispositions or abilities of what-
ever is structured in the speciﬁed way. Hence, morphological and
systematic reductions (which are pretty similar) are explanations of those
abilities. Such reducing explanations can themselves be of various
styles. Thus an explanation of how thin glass ﬁbers can be light con-
duits would be, I think, borderline between morphological and deri-
vational-nomological. But the explanation of how dna sites can do
the things appealed to in the replication explanation is fairly complex
and, for all I know, systematic.
In explaining a system, almost all the abilities presupposed are
abilities of individual components to interact with certain neighboring
components in speciﬁed ways. Since intricate, interdependent organi-
zation is the hallmark of systems, the abilities demanded of individual
components are often enough themselves rather sophisticated and
specialized. Conversely, since systems typically have abilities strikingly
different from those of any of their separate components, systematic
organization is a common source of sophisticated and specialized
abilities. These considerations together suggest that very elaborate
systems could be expected to have smaller systems as functional com-
ponents. And frequently they do—sometimes with numerous levels of
systems within systems. For example, the distributor system of a car is
a component in the (larger) ignition system, which, in turn, is a com-
ponent in the complete engine system. Such a multilevel structure of
nested systems is a systematic hierarchy. (See Simon 1969/81 for further
discussion of hierarchical organization.)
So a systematic reduction of the highest system in a systematic
hierarchy would involve systematic explanations of the speciﬁed inter-
active abilities of its functional components; and perhaps likewise for
reductions of those, and so on. Only at the lowest level would system-
atic reductions be a different style of explanation (typically morpho-
logical; compare the explanation of a crankshaft or piston to that of a
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
17
coffee cup). Since any scientiﬁc reduction is also a scientiﬁc explana-
tion, it will explicitly presuppose certain regularities, which can be
enquired after in turn. At any given time, however, some regularities
will not be explainable. Modern wisdom has it that in the golden age
these will include only the “fundamental” laws of physics, all others
being reducible to them (perhaps through many stages of reduction).
A sequence of reductions taking the presuppositions of an explana-
tion all the way to physics is a complete reduction. A complete reduction
of psychology is one of the traditional dreams of uniﬁed science.
A common misconception is that reductions supplant the explana-
tions they reduce—that is, render them superﬂuous. This is not so.
Consider the ﬁber optics reduction. There could be any number of
different explanations for why different kinds of ﬁbers can conduct
light; thus glass threads, with variable index of refraction versus ra-
dius, would call for a different explanation than would hollow silver
tubes. But those are irrelevant to the explanation of how the bundle
transmits images. The latter takes light conduction in the ﬁbers for
granted and goes on to tell us something new. This something new
would be lost if we settled exclusively for explanations of light conduc-
tivity; and on the other hand, it would not be lost (given the original
morphological explanation) even if light conductivity were totally in-
explicable. The two explanations are independent, even though one is
of the presuppositions of the other (compare Putnam 1973).
The main point of this section has been that reductions, like expla-
nations, are not all alike. Hence, the reduction of thermodynamics
cannot serve as a universal paradigm, despite its ubiquitous use as an
example. In particular, if I am right that cognitivist explanation is
systematic, then any reduction of cognitivism would be systematic
reduction (a point to be taken up further in section 5). This means at
least that cognitivists are not interested in “psycho-physical bridge”
equations (pace Fodor 1974/81), nor are they worried if none are possi-
ble (pace Davidson 1970/80).
3 Intentional interpretation
Because the study of the mind presents special scientiﬁc difﬁculties all
of its own, I have so far mentioned psychology only incidentally. At
the heart of these special difﬁculties is the problem of “signiﬁcance” or
“meaningfulness”. Large portions of human behavior, preeminently
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 8
H av i n g Though t
linguistic behavior, are meaningful on the face of it, and a larger
portion still is “rational” or “intelligent” in a way that involves signiﬁ-
cance at least indirectly. Yet meaningfulness is a slippery notion to pin
down empirically, and there are conceptual difﬁculties in connecting
“meanings” with the physical order of cause and effect. So serious are
the problems that some investigators have even tried to study behav-
ior entirely without regard to its signiﬁcance—but their achievements
have been narrow and limited. Cognitivism, on the other hand, gives
the meanings of various states and processes a central importance. In
this section, I will show how that can be compatible with the rigorous
demands of empirical science.
I take my cue from the pioneering work of Quine (1960) and the
reﬁnements it has inspired.2 His original concern was the translation
of utterances in totally alien languages; since cognitivism’s topic is
broader, we generalize “translation” to “intentional interpretation” and
“utterance” to “quasilinguistic representation”. These must now be
explicated.
Suppose we come upon an unfamiliar object—a “black box”—
which someone tells us plays chess. What evidence would it take to
convince us that the claim was empirically justiﬁed? It is neither nec-
essary nor sufﬁcient that it produce tokens of symbols in some stan-
dard chess notation (let alone, physically move the pieces of a chess
set). It is not sufﬁcient because the object might produce standard
symbols but only in random order. And it is not necessary, because
the object might play brilliant chess, but represent moves in some
oddball notation.
So it is up to the person who claims that it plays chess to tell us
how it represents moves. More particularly, we must know what in its
behavior is to count as its making a move, and how to tell what move
that is. Further, we must know what effects on it count as opponents’
moves, and how to tell what moves they count as. Succinctly: we must
know what its inputs and outputs are, and how to interpret them.
Note that the inputs and outputs must be of some antecedently rec-
ognizable or identiﬁable types, and the interpretations of them must
be according to some antecedently speciﬁable regular scheme; other-
wise, we will suspect that the “interpretation” is being made up along
the way, so as to make things come out right.
Of course, simply specifying the interpretation does not convince
us that the object really plays chess. For that we would need to watch
it play a few games—perhaps with several opponents, so we’re sure
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
19
there’s no trick. What will count as success in this test? First, each
output that the object produces must turn out, under the speciﬁed
interpretation, to be a legal move for the board position as it stands at
that time. Second, depending on how strictly we distinguish blunder-
ing from playing, the moves must be to some extent plausible (the
hypothesis is only that it plays, not that it plays well). If the object
passes this test in a sufﬁcient variety of cases, we will be empirically
convinced that it is indeed a chess player.
Further, when the object passes the test, the original interpretation
scheme is shown to be not merely gratuitous. This is important be-
cause, in themselves, interpretation schemes are a dime a dozen. With
a little ingenuity, one can stipulate all kinds of bizarre “meanings” for
the behavior of all kinds of objects; and insofar as they are just stipula-
tions, there can be no empirical argument about whether one is any
better than another. How would you test, for example, the claims that
producing marks shaped like ‘q–b2’ represented (meant)
1 one (or another) particular chess move,
2 the solution of a logic problem, or
3 a scurrilous remark about the Queen of England and the
Bishop of Canterbury?
Nothing observable about those marks in themselves favors one ren-
dition over another. But one can further observe when and where the
marks are produced, in relation to others produced by the same ob-
ject, and in relation to the object’s inputs. If those relationships form a
pattern, such that under one interpretation the observed outputs con-
sistently make reasonable sense in the context of the other observed
inputs and outputs, while under another interpretation they don’t,
then the ﬁrst interpretation scheme as a whole is observably “better”
(more convincing) than the second. In our example, the pattern
amounts to playing legal and plausible chess games, time after time.
None (or at most very few) of the countless other conceivable inter-
pretations of the same marks would make such sense of the observed
pattern, so the given interpretation is empirically preferable.
The problem now is to generalize the points made about this spe-
ciﬁc example. I believe there are principled limits to how precisely
such a generalization can be stated; but let us proceed with a few
deﬁnitions, relying on intuitions and examples to keep them clear.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

20
H av i n g Though t
1 A set of types is uniquely determinable relative to a speciﬁed
range of phenomena iff
i) for almost every phenomenon in that range one can un-
equivocally determine whether it is a token (instance) of
one of the types, and if so, which one; and
ii) no phenomenon is ever a token of more than one type.3
2 An articulated typology (relative to a range of phenomena) is an
ordered pair of uniquely determinable sets of types such that
i) tokens of types in the second set (complete types) are com-
posed of one or more tokens of types in the ﬁrst (simple
types); and
ii) no token of a simple type ever actually occurs in the speci-
ﬁed range of phenomena except as a component of a com-
plete type.
For example, suppose a sheet of paper has a chess game recorded on it
in standard notation (and has no other markings but doodles). Then
relative to the marks on that page, the typographic characters used in
chess notation are the simple types of an articulated typology, and the
sequences of characters that would canonically represent moves (plus
odds and ends) are the complete types. Note that deﬁnitions of com-
plete types may include speciﬁcations of the order in which they are
composed of simple types, and that in general this order need not be
merely serial.
3 An intentional interpretation of an articulated typology is
i) a regular general scheme for determining what any token
of a complete type means or represents such that
ii) the determination is made entirely in terms of
(a) how it is composed of tokens of simple types; and
(b) some stipulations about (“deﬁnitions of”) the simple
types.
4 A quasilinguistic representation is a token of a complete type
from an intentionally interpreted articulated typology.4
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
2 1
Obviously, the identity of a quasilinguistic representation is relative to
the speciﬁed typology and interpretation, and hence also to a speciﬁed
range of phenomena. The complete types in the chess notation typol-
ogy are quasilinguistic representations (of moves), relative to the
chess interpretation.
I am unable to deﬁne either “mean” or “represent”, nor say in gen-
eral what kinds of stipulations about simple types (3-ii-b, earlier) are
appropriate. In practice, however, it is not hard to give clear inten-
tional interpretations; there are two common ways of doing it. The
ﬁrst is translation into some language or notation that we, the inter-
preters, already understand. Thus a manual might be provided for
translating some strange chess notation into the standard one. The
second is giving an “intended interpretation”, in roughly the logicians’
sense. Thus, a function can be deﬁned from a subset of the simple
types onto some domain—say, chess pieces and board squares; then
the meanings of tokens of complete types (for example, what moves
they represent) are speciﬁed recursively in terms of this function, plus
the roles of other simple types (such as punctuation) characterized
implicitly by the recursion.
Deﬁnitions 1 to 4 were all preparatory for the following:
5 An object is interpreted as an intentional black box (an ibb) just
in case
i) an intentionally interpreted articulated typology is speci-
ﬁed relative to the causal inﬂuences of its environment on
it—the resulting quasilinguistic representations being
inputs;
ii) likewise for outputs, relative to its causal inﬂuences on its
environment; and
iii) it is shown empirically that under the interpretations the
actual outputs consistently make reasonable sense in the
context (pattern) of actual prior inputs and other actual
outputs.
One important complication with this should be spelled out explic-
itly. Since the inputs and outputs “make sense” in virtue of a pattern
they exhibit—a pattern that is extended in time—an ibb interpreta-
tion can also attribute enduring intentional “states” (and changes
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

22
H av i n g Though t
therein) to an object. For instance, a blind chess player (person or
machine) must keep track of, or “remember” the current position,
updating it after each move; and any player will continuously “know”
the rules, “desire” to win, and so on. In some cases, an input/output
pattern can be so complicated that no sense can be made of it at all
without attributing a rich (though slowly varying) “inner life” of be-
liefs and desires. It is important to realize, however, that this is “inner”
only in the sense of an interpolation in the (external) input/output
pattern—nothing is being said about the actual innards of the object.
Sometimes it will be convenient to use the term ‘ibb’ on the as-
sumption that such an interpretation can be given, even though the
speciﬁcs are not known. The chess-player example with which this
section began is an ibb; so are adding machines, logic-problem solvers,
automated disease diagnosticians, and (applying the deﬁnitions fairly
ﬂexibly) normal people.
There are three problems with this deﬁnition that need immediate
comment. First, “making reasonable sense” under an interpretation is
not deﬁned—and I doubt that it can be. Again, however, it is seldom
hard to recognize in practice. Often, explicit conditions can be stated
for making sense about certain problem domains or subject matters;
these I call cogency conditions. For the chess player, the cogency condi-
tion was outputting legal and plausible moves in the context created
by the previous moves. For interpreting an object as an adding ma-
chine, the condition is giving correct sums of the inputs; for a medical
diagnostician it is giving good diagnoses relative to the symptoms
provided. For reasons beyond the scope of this discussion, I don’t
think any effort to articulate completely general cogency conditions
can succeed (though various authors have tried, at least for interpret-
ing creatures as language users5). But it doesn’t matter much in actual
ﬁeld or laboratory work, because by and large everyone can agree on
what does and doesn’t make sense.
Second, if one is knee-jerk liberal about what makes reasonable
sense, then all kinds of objects can be trivially interpreted as ibbs.
Thus a ﬂipped coin might be interpreted as a yes-no decision maker
for complex issues tapped on it in Morse code.6 I will assume that
such cases can be ignored.
Third, and most serious, the requirement that inputs and outputs
be quasilinguistic representations appears to rule out many percep-
tions and actions. In at least some cases, this problem can be handled
indirectly. Suppose an alleged chess player used no notation at all, but
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
23
had a tv camera aimed at the board and a mechanical arm which
physically moved the pieces. The problem of showing that this device
indeed plays chess is essentially the same as before. It must consis-
tently make legal and plausible moves. This succeeds, I think, because
we can give quasilinguistic descriptions of what it “looks” at and what
it does, such that if they were the inputs and outputs, the object
would count as an ibb. In such cases we can enlarge our interpretation
and say that the object perceives and acts “under those descriptions”
(sees that …, intends that …, and so on), and regard the descriptions
as inputs and outputs. Where this strategy won’t work, my deﬁnition
won’t apply.
In this section I have addressed the question how meaningfulness
or signiﬁcance can be dealt with empirically. In brief, the idea is that
although meaningfulness is not an intrinsic property of behavior that
can be observed or measured, it is a characteristic that can be attrib-
uted in an empirically justiﬁed interpretation, if the behavior is part of
an overall pattern that makes sense (for instance, by satisfying speci-
ﬁed cogency conditions). In effect, the relationships among the inputs
and outputs are the only relevant observational data; their intrinsic
properties are entirely beside the point, so long as the relationships
obtain. But the fact that they have some characteristics or other,
independent of the interpretation (that is, they are causal interactions
with the environment), means that there is no mystery about how
states with signiﬁcance “connect” with the rest of nature (Davidson
1970). The upshot is that a psychological theory need not in principle
ignore meaningfulness in order to maintain its credentials as empiri-
cal and scientiﬁc.
4 Information processing systems
The last section showed only that there is an empirically legitimate
way to talk about signiﬁcances in scientiﬁc theories. It did not say
anything about what kind of scientiﬁc account might deal with phe-
nomena in terms of their meanings. To put it another way, we saw
only how the notion of ibb could have empirical content, not how
anything could be explained. Yet an ibb always manages to produce
reasonable outputs, given its inputs; and that’s a fairly remarkable
ability, which cries out for explanation. There may be many ways to
explain such an ability, but two in particular are relevant to cognitiv-
ism. One will be the subject of this section, and the other of the next.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 4
H av i n g  Though t
If one can systematically explain how an ibb works, without “de-
interpreting” it, it is an information processing system (an ips). By “with-
out de-interpreting”, I mean explaining its input/output ability in
terms of how it would be characterized under the intentional inter-
pretation, regardless of whatever other descriptions might be available
for the same input and output behavior. For example, if our chess
player is an ips, that means there is a systematic explanation of how it
manages to come up with legal and plausible moves as such, regardless
of how it manages to press certain type bars against paper, light cer-
tain lights, or do whatever it does that gets interpreted as those
moves.
In a systematic explanation, the ability in question is understood as
resulting from the organized, cooperative interactions of various dis-
tinct functional components, plus their separate abilities. Further,
whatever result it is that the object is able to yield (in this case the ibb
outputs), is typically delivered directly by some one or few of the
functional components. Now, since we’re not de-interpreting, those
few components which directly deliver the outputs of the ips must
have among their presupposed abilities the ability to produce the
outputs as interpreted. But if attributing this ability to those compo-
nents is to be empirically defensible, then they must be ibbs them-
selves. Hence the effects on them by their functional neighbors in the
system (the interactions appealed to in the explanation) must be their
ibb inputs, which means that they too are dealt with as interpreted.
But since these inputs are at the same time the effects delivered by
other components, those other components must be able to deliver
effects (outputs) under an interpretation. Consequently, they also—
and by the same argument, all the functional components of an ips—
must be ibbs.
Moreover, all the interpretations of the component ibbs must be, in
a sense, the same as that of the overall ibb (= the ips). The sense is
that they must all pertain to the same subject matter or problem. This
actually follows from the preceding argument, but an example will
make it obvious. Assuming that the chess playing ibb is an ips, we
would expect its component ibbs to generate possible moves, evaluate
board positions, decide which lines of play to investigate further, or
some such. These not only all have to do with chess, but in any given
case they all have to do with the same partially ﬁnished game of chess.
By contrast, components interpreted as generating football plays,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
25
evaluating jockeys, or deciding to pull trump could have no part in
explaining how a chess player works.
Still, the sense in which the interpretations have to be the same is
limited. First, of course, the types which get interpreted can vary
throughout; they might be keyboard characters in one case, electric
pulses in another, and so forth. More important, the internal “dis-
course” among component ibbs can be in a richer “vocabulary” than
that used in the overall inputs and outputs. Thus, chess-player inputs
and outputs include little more than announcements of actual moves,
but the components might be engaged in setting goals, weighing op-
tions, deciding which pieces are especially valuable, and so on. Even
so, they all still pertain to the chess game, which is the important
point. (The importance will become clearer in section 5).
It is natural in a certain way to seek a systematic explanation of an
ibb’s input/output ability. Seeing this is to appreciate one of the essen-
tial motivations of cognitivism. The relevant ability of an ibb is to
produce reasonable outputs relative to whatever inputs it happens to
get from within a wide range of possibilities. In a broad sense of the
term, we can think of the actual inputs as posing “problems”, which
the ibb is then able to solve. Now only certain outputs would count as
reasonable solutions to any given problem, and those are the ones for
which some kind of reasonable argument or rationale can be given.
(Cogency conditions are typically spelled out as a relevant rationale
for certain outputs as opposed to others, given the inputs.) An argu-
ment or rationale for a solution to a problem amounts to a decompo-
sition of the problem into easier subproblems, plus an account of how
all the subsolutions combine to yield a solution of the overall problem.
(How “easy” the subproblems have to be is, of course, relative to the
context in which the rationale is required.) The point is that the
separate ibb components of the ips can be regarded as solving the
easier subproblems, and their interactions as providing the combina-
tion necessary for coming up with the overall solution. The inter-
actions in general must be organized and “cooperative” (that is,
systematic) because rational considerations and relationships gener-
ally “combine” in complexly interdependent and interlocking ways.
(This is why the systematic/morphological distinction is important.)
So, the interacting components of an ips “work out”, in effect, an
explicit rationale for whatever output they collectively produce. And
that’s the explanation for how they manage to come up with reason-
able outputs; they, so to speak, “reason it through”. This also is the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

26
H av i n g Though t
fundamental ideal of cognitive psychology: intelligent behavior is to
be explained by appeal to internal cognitive processes—meaning,
essentially, processes interpretable as working out a rationale. Cogni-
tivism, then, can be summed up in a slogan: the mind is to be under-
stood as an information processing system.7
This suggestion rests on two innovative cornerstones, compared to
older notions about what psychology should look like as a science.
The ﬁrst is that psychological explanation should be systematic, not
derivational-nomological; hence, that psychology is not primarily in-
terested in quantitative, equational laws, and that psychological theo-
ries will not look much like those in physics. The second is that
intentional interpretation gives an empirically legitimate (testable)
way of talking and theorizing about phenomena regarded as meaning-
ful; hence, that psychology does not have to choose between the
supposedly disreputable method of introspection, and a crippling
conﬁnement to purely behavioral description. Together they add up
to an exciting and promising new approach to the study of the mind.
5 Intentional reduction
The abilities of component ibbs are merely presupposed by an ips
explanation. That explanation can be systematically reduced—in the
sense of section 2—by turning one’s attention to explaining those
component abilities. If it happens that the components are themselves
ipss, then reduction can proceed a step by appealing to the organized
interactions and abilities of still smaller component ibbs, and so on.
An extension of the argument in the last section shows that all the ibb
components at all the levels in such a hierarchy must be interpreted as
having the same subject matter; for example, all their inputs and
outputs pertain to the same game of chess, or whatever.
Obviously, then, a complete reduction to physics (or electronics or
physiology) would have to involve some further kind of step; that is,
eventually the abilities of component ibbs would have to be explained
in some other way than as ipss. By deﬁnition, ips explanation does
not involve de-interpretation. Explanation of an ibb’s input/output
ability that does involve de-interpretation I call explanation by instan-
tiation. We shall see that instantiation has two importantly distinct
forms.
An object of the sort computer engineers call an ‘and-gate’ is a
simple ibb. It has two or more input wires, and a complete input type
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
27
is (for example) a distribution of positive and negative voltages among
those wires. It has one output wire, and is constructed electronically
to put a positive voltage in this wire if and only if all the input voltages
are positive; otherwise it puts out a negative voltage. Now the cogency
condition for a proposition conjoiner is that it give the truth-value
‘true’ if and only if all the conjoined propositions are true; otherwise it
gives ‘false’. Since this truth function for ‘and’ is isomorphic to the
electrical behavior of the object (taking positive voltage as ‘true’ and
negative as ‘false’), the object can be interpreted as an and-gate.
But to explain how the object manages to satisfy the prescribed
cogency conditions, one would not look for component ibbs inter-
pretable as “reasoning the problem through”. Rather, one would de-
interpret and explain the electrical behavior in terms of the electric
circuitry and components. The electrical circuit might well be a sys-
tem, but it would not be an ips. Since the ﬁrst step of the explanation
is de-interpretation, it is an explanation by instantiation; I call it
physical instantiation because the remainder of it is expressed in physical
terms.
Not all instantiations, however, are physical instantiations. For ex-
ample, computer-based chess players are generally written in a pro-
gramming language called lisp, in which the inputs and outputs of
program components are interpreted as operations on complex lists.
So interpreted, these components are ibbs, but their subject matter is
not chess. What happens, however, is that the input/output con-
straints (cogency conditions) on the lowest level components in the
chess related hierarchy are isomorphic to the constraints on ibbs built
up in lisp.8 Thus, the required abilities of bottom-level chess player
components can be explained by de-interpreting (or re-interpreting)
them as ibbs solving problems about list-structures—ibbs which can
then be understood as ipss working through the rationale for the lisp
problem. This, too, is reduction by instantiation, but I call it inten-
tional instantiation, because the redescribed ability is still an ibb ability,
just about a different subject matter.
Actually, in a complete reduction of a fancy computer program,
there can be several stages of intentional instantiation. Thus, lisp
languages are generally written (compiled) in still more basic lan-
guages—say, ones in which the only ibb abilities are number-crunch-
ing and inequality testing (the conditional branch). The last
intentional instantiation is in a primitive “machine language”, so-
called because that is the one which is ﬁnally reduced by physical
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 8
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
instantiation. The real genius of computer science has been to design
ever more sophisticated languages which can be compiled or inten-
tionally instantiated in cruder existing languages. If it weren’t for
intentional instantiations, machines built of ﬂip-ﬂops and the like
would hardly be candidates for artiﬁcial intelligence.
It is easy to confuse the maneuver of explaining an ibb by inten-
tional instantiation with that of explaining it as an ips. The essential
difference is the re-interpretation—or, intuitively, the change in sub-
ject matter. Since I have already used “change of level” to describe the
move from ips to its separate components, I will use “change of dimen-
sion” to describe the move of de-/reinterpretation involved in an in-
stantiation. One can think of the many dimensions in a sophisticated
system as forming a hierarchy, but dimension hierarchies should not
be confused with the earlier level hierarchies. There can be different
level hierarchies on different dimensions, but they are orthogonal
rather than sequential. That is, it’s a mistake to think of the lowest
level on one dimension as a higher level than the highest level on a
lower dimension. Thus, an and-gate is not a higher level component
than a disk memory; they are components on different dimensions,
and hence incomparable as to level.
In this section, I have outlined what a reduction of cognitive psy-
chology to the relevant physical dimension theory would look like. I
have not argued that cognitivism is committed to such reducibility. It
would be theoretically consistent to maintain that, at some bottom
level, the presupposed ibb abilities were simply not explainable (much
as physics cannot explain its fundamental laws). Nevertheless, I sus-
pect that many investigators would strongly resist such a suggestion,
and would feel their work was not done until the reduction was
complete.
6 Fallacious supporting arguments
In sections 1 through 5, I have given a general characterization of the
cognitivist approach to psychology, and its possible reduction. In so
doing, I have shown how it is innovatively different from earlier ap-
proaches more captivated by the image of physics, and how it can be
unimpeachably rigorous and empirical all the same. However, it
seems to me that the eventual success of this program, for all its
attractiveness, is still very much in doubt. In the remaining three
sections, I hope to make clear my reasons for caution—taking as
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
29
much advantage as possible from the explicit characterization just
completed. I will begin in this section by pointing out the ﬂaws in two
seductive general arguments to the effect that some cognitivist theory
or other must be right.
The ﬁrst argument is directed more speciﬁcally at the systematicity
cornerstone, though as we have seen, the two cornerstone innovations
go hand in hand (see the end of section 4). It goes like this. We know
that the nervous system is composed of numerous distinct and highly
organized “functional components”—namely neurons; and (assuming
materialism) there is every reason to believe that the human ibb is
somehow instantiated in the nervous system. So, all that remains to
be found are how the neurons are grouped into higher level compo-
nents, how the ﬁrst instantiation proceeds, how the lowest compo-
nents on that dimension are grouped into higher components, what
the next instantiation is, and so on. That is, we need only “build back
up” the intentional and systematic reductions described in sections 2
and 5, until we reach the overall ibb. That’s an enormous task, of
course, but since we know there are organized components at the
bottom, we know in principle it can be done.
Formally this argument is circular. The reductions mentioned in
describing the “building back up” presuppose the very systematicity
that the argument is supposed to prove. But the idea behind the
reasoning is so attractive that it is tempting to think that the circular-
ity is an artifact of the formulation, and that a better version could be
found. To see that this is not so, we must expose in detail the real
basis of the formal circularity.
As we observed in section 1, scientiﬁc explanation is essentially a
route to understanding; and the understanding is achieved in part
through specifying certain features and regularities that are common
to the range of situations where that kind of explanation applies. The
demands of rigor and explicitness that distinguish some explanations
as scientiﬁc require that the features and regularities speciﬁed “encom-
pass” or “encapsulate” every consideration that is relevant to under-
standing the phenomenon being explained. In a way, the explanatory
insight derives precisely from the realization that these few speciﬁc
features and regularities are all you need to know, in order to be sure
that phenomenon Y will occur; everything else is extraneous. Thus,
the beauty of Newton’s mechanics is that a few quantitative magni-
tudes and equational laws encapsulate everything that is relevant to
the motions of a great many bodies. For example, the colors, textures,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

30
H av i n g  Though t
personalities, and so on of the planets can all safely be ignored in
predicting and understanding their positions as a function of time.
In a systematic explanation, a comparable encapsulation is achieved
in the speciﬁcation of a few determinate modes of interaction among a
few distinct components with particular speciﬁed abilities. Indeed,
ﬁnding interfaces among portions of an object, such that this kind of
encapsulation is possible, is the fundamental principle of individua-
tion of functional components—and hence a sine-qua-non of system-
atic explanation. For example, dividing the interior of a radio (or
engine) into adjacent one-millimeter cubes would not be a decompo-
sition into functional components; and the reason is exactly that the
resulting “interfaces” would not yield any evidence of encapsulating
what’s relevant into a few highly speciﬁc interactions and abilities. By
contrast, a resistor can be a functional component, because (almost)
nothing about it matters except the way it resists the ﬂow of electricity
from one of its leads to the other. (Compare Simon 1969/81 on “partial
decomposability”; and Marr 1977 on type-1 versus type-2 theories.)
So if neurons are to be functional components in a system, some
speciﬁc few of their countless physical, chemical, and biological
interactions must encapsulate all that is relevant to understanding
whatever ability of that system is being explained. This is not at all
guaranteed by the fact that cell membranes provide an anatomically
conspicuous gerrymandering of the brain. More important, however,
even if neurons were components in some system, that still would not
guarantee the possibility of “building back up”. Not every contiguous
collection of components constitutes a single component in a higher-
level system; consolidation into a single higher component requires a
further encapsulation of what’s relevant into a few speciﬁc abilities
and interactions—usually different in kind from those of any of the
smaller components. Thus the tuner, pre-amp, and power amp of a
radio have very narrowly speciﬁed abilities and interactions, compared
to those of some arbitrary connected collection of resistors, capacitors,
and transistors. The bare existence of functionally organized neurons
would not guarantee that such higher-level consolidations were possi-
ble. Moreover, this failure of a guarantee would occur again and again
at every level on every dimension. There is no way to know whether
these explanatory consolidations from below are possible without
already knowing whether the corresponding systematic explanations
and reductions from above are possible—which is just the original
circularity.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
31
The second argument I will refute starts from the top rather than
the bottom and is directed primarily at the intentional interpretation
cornerstone, with its associated idea of “working out the rationale”.
Formally this argument amounts to the challenge: What else could it
be? But it is much more persuasive than that brazen rendition sug-
gests. If one disregarded the intentional interpretation of any sophisti-
cated ibb, it would be quite incredible to suggest that there was some
elegant relation between the particular set of inﬂuences from the envi-
ronment that we call inputs, and the particular set of inﬂuences on the
environment that we call outputs. The relevant actual pattern can
hardly even be described except in some way that is tantamount to
specifying the cogency conditions which the object in fact meets. But
since what we observe is that the object consistently meets these
otherwise quite peculiar conditions, and since the conditions them-
selves are typically made explicit by spelling out some rationale, what
else could explain the observations than that the object works the
rationale out? How else would it happen to come upon those particu-
lar outputs time after time?
To show that a “what else could it be?” argument is inconclusive,
one need only come up with a conceivably viable alternative. One need
not make a case that the alternative is in fact more probable, just that
it’s viable. I will try to construct such an alternative, drawing on recent
neurophysiological speculations about holographic arrangements and
processes. Fairly detailed hypothetical models have been proposed for
how holograms might be realized in neural structures; and there is
some empirical evidence that some neurons behave in ways that
would ﬁt the models.9
Optical holograms are photographs of interference patterns, which
look kind of like the surface of a pond that has just had a lot of
pebbles thrown in it. But they have some interesting properties. First,
they are prepared from the light bouncing off an ordinary object, and
can subsequently be used to reconstruct a full three-dimensional
image of that object. Second, the whole image can be reconstructed
from any large enough portion of the hologram. (That is, there’s no
saying which portion of the hologram “encodes” which portion of the
image.) Third, a number of objects can be separately recorded on the
same hologram, and there’s no saying which portion records which
object. Fourth, if a hologram of an arbitrary scene is suitably illumi-
nated with the light from a reference object, bright spots will appear
indicating (virtually instantaneously) the presence and location of any
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

32
H aving Thought
occurrences of the reference object in the scene (and dimmer spots
indicate “similar” objects). So some neurophysiological holographic
encoding might account for a number of perplexing features of visual
recall and recognition, including their speed, some of their invari-
ances, and the fact that they are only slightly impaired by large lesions
in relevant areas of the brain.
What matters to us is that a pattern-recognizer based on these
principles would not (or need not) be an ips. There are not distinct
functional components whose relevant interactions are conﬁned to
intentionally interpreted articulated typologies. That is, there is noth-
ing going on which can be regarded as “working out a rationale” with
quasilinguistic representations. By contrast a typical computer-based
pattern-recognizer is an ips. Thus, searching for discontinuities in
luminance gradients, proposing that they are edges, checking for con-
nexity among proposed edges, hypothesizing invisible edges so as to
complete coherent objects, and so on are all rational procedures rela-
tive to the “problem” of identifying objects.10
The neurophysiologists cited have rightly conﬁned their specula-
tions to recognition and recall processes, because there one at least has
shreds of evidence to work with.11 We, however, who are answering a
“what-else-could-it-be?” argument, needn’t be so circumspect.
Another interesting property of optical holograms is that if a holo-
gram of two objects is illuminated with the light from one of them, an
image of the other (absent) object appears. Thus such a hologram can
be regarded as a kind of “associator” of (not ideas, but) visual patterns.
So imagine a set of such associated patterns, in which the ﬁrst mem-
ber of each is a common important substructure in chess positions,
and the other is one or two moves which are generally powerful or
dangerous around such structures. It seems to me that a set-up like
that could be a nearly instantaneous “plausible-move generator” for
chess positions in general. In fact, it would mesh nicely with some of
what is known about how human chess players perceive the board and
their options.12 Implementation of such a device by optical means
might well be impossible; but it is worth pointing out how much
more general the neural medium (potentially) is. In the ﬁrst place,
transforms other than the Fourier transform could be implemented
just as easily—including, perhaps, “custom” transforms for particular
problems. Second, n-dimensional transforms are easily possible.
Third, since neurons are connected “point-to-point”, even the analog
of an ordinary hologram wouldn’t have to be arrayed as a surface—
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
33
physically, the “dots” could be distributed ad libitum, making possible
all kinds of mingling and interaction among distinct “images”. I have
no clear idea what difference any of this would make; but it seems
likely that the differences could be substantial. And, after all, the
capabilities of regular holograms would have been difﬁcult to visualize
not so long ago.
Again, the point is that no “plausible-move generator” based on
principles anything like this speculation would be an ips. Nothing in
it would “reason through” the move and counter-move alternatives
that rationalize any move it proposed. Yet a chess player is a paradigm
of what the “what-else-could-it-be” argument should apply to. (It’s no
accident that chess players are the most common ips example.) I
therefore take that argument to be refuted. I am not envisioning, of
course, that humans (chess players included) engage in no cognitive
“reasoning a problem through”; introspection, for all its ills, is enough
to scotch that. But cognitive psychology is exciting and important for
the unobvious thesis that cognitive information processing can ex-
plain much more than deliberate cogitation and reasoning; and for
that larger thesis, the argument considered is inconclusive.
This last observation should put the whole present section in per-
spective. All I claim is that a few commonplace assumptions will not
sufﬁce to demonstrate that cognitivism is the right approach to psy-
chology. That should offend no one, since it only means that the
position is not trivial and obvious—as clearly it isn’t.
7 Potentially serious hurdles
In this section, I want to mention three issues which it seems to me
may be serious hurdles for cognitivism—serious in the sense of being
equally hard to duck or get over. They are: moods, skills, and under-
standing. I cannot prove that cognitivist accounts of these phenomena
are impossible. My aim is rather to show that such accounts are going
to be required if cognitivism is to succeed, and that it’s dubious
whether they will be possible.
7.1 Moods
I will try to illustrate the nature of the difﬁculty with moods by
contrasting it with another, which is superﬁcially similar, but more
plausibly duckable. There is a long and tortured tradition in philoso-
phy for distinguishing two kinds of mental phenomena: roughly,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

3 4
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
cognitive or intellectual states versus felt qualities or the purely sensu-
ous given.13 Paradigm “felt qualities” would be pains or mere aware-
nesses of present red (not categorized or conceptualized as such).
Several recent articles have argued that such states have some kind of
determinate immediate character which is independent of any inter-
pretation and/or any role in a systematic organization.14 It would
follow that they do not accord with the cognitivist notion of a mental
state or process.
But without even taking sides on the particular issue, I think we
can see that it doesn’t matter much to cognitivism—which is, after all,
only a theory of cognitive states and processes. In other words, if felt
qualities are fundamentally different, so be it; explaining them is
somebody else’s business. This amounts to a kind of “segregation” of
psychological phenomena, along roughly traditional lines. Such segre-
gation can be legitimate (not a fudge) given one important assump-
tion. Segregated noncognitive states can be effective in determining
intelligent behavior only insofar as they somehow generate quasilin-
guistic representations (“red there now”, “left foot hurts”) which can
be accepted as inputs by the cognitive ips. This assumption is plausible
enough for felt qualities, and perhaps for some other states as well. I
have in mind the much disputed mental images.15 Since any cognitiv-
ist theory must include some mechanism for getting from retinal
images to cognitive descriptions of what is seen, I don’t see why that
same mechanism couldn’t also take inputs from some precognitive
visual “tape recorder”—perhaps one with adjustments for orientation,
size, and location. Then playbacks from the recorder would have
whatever nondiscursive, image-y quality perception has, and cognitiv-
ism would be unrufﬂed. Finally, it may even be that some emotions
(such as gratitude and regret) can be accommodated with a standard
elaboration of this same segregation strategy—roughly, by treating
them as compound states, with a cognitive (representational, proposi-
tional) component, and a separate noncognitive (qualitative, feeling)
component.
But I am much less sanguine about a similar segregation for
moods. The difference is that moods are pervasive and all-encompass-
ing in a way that felt qualities and images are not. The change from
being cheerful to being melancholy is much more thorough and far-
reaching than that from having a painless foot to having a foot that
hurts. Not only does your foot seem different, but everything you
encounter seems different. The whole world and everything in it, past,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
35
present, and future, becomes grayer, duller, less livable. Minor irrita-
tions and failings are more conspicuous and less remediable; ordinary
things are no longer fun, lovely, or pleasing. If melancholy were an
input representation (“melancholy here now”) it would have to ac-
company and infect every other input, and transform the meanings of
them all. But moods not only affect how things look, they affect how
one thinks. What seems reasonable when you’re cheerful seems fool-
ish when you’re melancholy, and vice versa. Likelihoods and improba-
bilities invert, as do what seems relevant to an issue and what seems
beside the point.
Moods come upon us, but they are neither direct observations nor
inferences. Many things affect our moods, but our moods also affect
how things affect us; and in neither case is it quasilinguistic or ratio-
nal. We do not state or believe our moods, or justify them on the basis
of evidence or goals; they are just the way things are. In sum: moods
permeate and affect all kinds of cognitive states and processes, and
yet, on the face of it, they don’t seem at all cognitive themselves. That
suggests, at least until someone shows otherwise, that moods can
neither be segregated from the explanation of cognition nor incorpo-
rated in a cognitivist explanation.
7.2 Skills
The second hurdle I want to mention concerns skills. I see three
prima facie (not conclusive) reasons for doubting that the etiology of
skillful behavior is cognitive. First, with rare exceptions, articulateness
about a skill, no matter how detailed nor in what specialized quasilin-
guistic notation, is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for having it; it
always takes practice, and often expert examples and talent (≠ intelli-
gence). Even a Rhodes scholar could not learn to play good ping pong
just from listening to thousands of detailed lectures about it; and even
a Rhodes scholar ping-pong champion might be hard pressed to give a
single detailed lecture on the subject. Second, a person who is acquir-
ing or upgrading a skill may deliberately and thoughtfully try to exe-
cute certain maneuvers, but the thought and deliberation cease at just
about the time the maneuvers become skillful and “natural”; the ex-
pert doesn’t have to think about it. Third, skillful activity is faster
than thought. Not only do skilled typists and pianists not have to
think about what they’re doing with their ﬁngers; they can’t. If they
turn their attention to their ﬁngers, as a novice must, their perfor-
mance slows down and becomes clumsy, rather like a novice’s.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

36
H av i n g Though t
A cognitivist can explain these phenomena away by postulating
some “unconscious” information processing which is somehow more
efﬁcient than, and immiscible with, that conscious thinking which is
archetypically cognitive. But Dreyfus (1972/92, 106) asks an interest-
ing pointed question about this ploy, in the special case of chess skills.
It is known that intermediate, advanced and great chess players are
alike in consciously considering on the order of a hundred plays in
thinking out a move. They differ in their “skill in problem conception”
(de Groot 1965)—that is, in preselecting which moves to think about.
Now the rationales for these good preselections would be enormously
long if they were spelled out (many thousands of plays). It’s possible
that players have some marvelously efﬁcient unconscious information
processor which works through these rationales; but if so, then why
would anyone with such a splendid unconscious ever bother to delib-
erate consciously and tediously over a hundred plays? The implication
is that the skillful preselection and the tedious cogitation differ not
just in efﬁciency and consciousness, but in kind, and that neither
could adequately substitute for the other. I think it would take power-
ful arguments (or prejudices) to outweigh this natural construal of
the evidence—and only slightly less so in the case of skills in general.
But so what? If skillful behavior has to be explained in some non-
cognitivist way—call it X (maybe something to do with holo-
grams)—then why not employ the segregation strategy introduced
above for felt qualities and images? I think the danger here is not that
the segregation strategy wouldn’t work, but that it might work too
well. “Skill” is such a broad and versatile notion that all kinds of
things might fall under it. For example, the ability to act appropriately
and adroitly in various social situations is a sort of skill, as is the art of
conversation, and even everyday pattern recognition; moreover, these
are like our earlier examples in that, to whatever degree one has
mastered the skill, one needn’t think about it to exercise it. But if very
many such things turned out to be explainable in way X, rather than
as the abilities of an ips, then cognitive psychology would narrow
dramatically in scope and interest. In the worst case, little would
remain to call “cognitive” except conscious deliberation and reason-
ing—and that’s hardly news.
7.3 Understanding
The third hurdle I want to raise for cognitivism is understanding; but
this needs immediate qualiﬁcation. In one sense, ipss undoubtedly
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
37
can understand, because computers programmed to be ipss can do it.
We could build a chess player for example, that “understands” entered
moves in any of three notations. What that means is that it responds
appropriately (sensibly) to inputs in any of those forms. This is the
same sense in which existing programs “understand” selected English
sentences about colored blocks,16 airline reservations, and what not.
Such usage is perfectly legitimate, but it’s not all there is to under-
standing.
There is another notion of understanding, which, for convenience,
I will call insight into why certain responses make sense, or are reason-
able. As any teacher of arithmetic or logic knows, many students can
learn the routines for getting the right answers, without the slightest
insight into what’s going on. And when original scientists struggle to
ﬁnd new and better theories, they grope for new insights into the
phenomena, or new accounts that “make sense”. Whether or not a
new account, perhaps expressed in an unprecedented formulation,
makes sense or is intelligible, is something which great scientists (and
then their colleagues) can just tell. Of course, whether an account is
scientiﬁcally acceptable also depends on how well it accords with
observations; but that does not determine whether it makes sense in
the ﬁrst place—both are necessary in science. The ability to tell when
a whole account, a whole way of putting things, makes sense, is what I
mean by insight.
The intelligibility of the whole account (or way of talking) then
determines which particular utterances make sense, and what sense
they make. Thus it is only because quantum mechanics is an intelligi-
ble theory that one can make sense of talking about the wavelength of
a particular electron (but not about the rest mass of a photon). And
this brings us back to the conditions on interpreting something as an
ibb. The testable requirement is that individual outputs make sense in
the context of prior inputs and other outputs. But what determines
which outputs would and would not make sense in which contexts?
That is, what determines which overall patterns render their constitu-
ents intelligible under an interpretation, or which input/output con-
straints count as cogency conditions? I have said that in appropriate
circumstances, people can “just tell”; they can come to understand
insightfully.
This is not to say that insight is itself some impenetrable mystery,
which we are forever barred from explaining. But once we appreciate
that it is a genuine problem we can ask whether an ips explanation
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

38
H av i n g  Though t
could account for it. Now, we can understand how an ips comes up
with the reasonable outputs that it does, because we know how it
works; in particular, we know that it works through a rationale for
each output, and we know that it makes sense to say this of it because
each of its interacting component ibbs consistently accords with cer-
tain cogency conditions. If we did not have that kind of story to tell,
then we would have no ips explanation of the overall ibb’s abilities.
So if an ips explanation is to account for an object’s having insight,
then there must be a rationale for the insightful outputs. More specif-
ically, if the insight is that certain new constraints constitute a kind of
cogency, then there must be a rationale, according to the kind of
cogency that the object and its components already exhibit, for why
the new conditions count as cogency conditions. It seems to me that
there could be such a rationale only if the new conditions were equiv-
alent to, or a special case of, the established ones. For example, there
could be no rationale according to chess-player cogency conditions for
why adding-machine outputs make sense, or vice versa. If this is right,
then an ips with general insight into what makes sense would itself
have to operate according to some cogency conditions that are ulti-
mately general (so that the others which it recognizes could be given
rationales as special cases).
There are two reasons to doubt that human insight can be ex-
plained that way. First, there is a sense in which it would preclude any
radically new ways of understanding things; all new developments
would have to be specializations of the antecedent general conditions.
But I think the invention, say, of derivational-nomological explana-
tion (around the time of Galileo) did constitute a radical advance in
ways of understanding, in just the sense that the cogency of the new
accounts could not be defended with a rationale which was cogent by
prior standards. Medieval Aristotelians had explained (and under-
stood) the motions of various kinds of bodies in terms of their efforts
to get where they belonged, and their thwarting of each other’s efforts.
Galileo, Kepler, Newton, et al, didn’t simply add to or modify those
views. They invented a totally new way of talking about what hap-
pens, and a new way of rendering it intelligible; mathematical rela-
tionships and operations deﬁned on universal measurable magnitudes
became the illuminating considerations, rather than the goals and
strivings of earth, air, ﬁre, and water. I don’t think a medieval ips
could have come to understand the new theory unless it had had it
latently “built-in” all along. The same would be true of every ips child
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
39
who comes eventually to understand science, the arts, politics, and
so on.
The second doubt has to do with this latent building-in—essen-
tially, the ultimate general cogency conditions. We really have no
reason to believe that there is any ﬁnal characterization of what it is to
make sense, except that it would facilitate a tidy account of intelli-
gence. Barrels of philosophical ink have been spilt in the search for it,
but so far without success. People who regularly make convergent
decisions about the reasonableness of theories and interpretations
don’t explicitly work through rationales for their judgments. So we’re
back to postulating some mysterious and magniﬁcent unconscious
ips. But once we admit that the phenomenon of insight is simply
mysterious and unexplainable at present, then all we have to go on are
the prima facie indications that ips explanation is inadequate to the
task.
It seems to me, however, that there is yet a deeper side to this:
understanding pertains not primarily to symbols or rules for manipu-
lating them, but to the world and living in it. Linguistic articulation
can be a vehicle for such understanding; and perhaps articulateness is
prerequisite to any elaborate understanding. But cases where facility
with the symbols is plausibly sufﬁcient—like well-deﬁned games,
mathematics, and ai “micro-worlds”—are very peculiar, and (I think)
parasitic. Paradigms of understanding are rather our everyday insights
into friends and loved ones, our sensitive appreciation of stories and
dramas, our intelligent handling of paraphernalia and institutions. It
is far from clear that these are governed by fully explicable rules at all.
Our talk of them is sensible because we know what we are talking
about, and not just because the talk itself exhibits some formal regu-
larities (though that too is doubtless essential).
When the rationalists took cognition as the essence of being
human (res cogitans), they meant especially theoretical cognition, as in
mathematics and mathematical physics. The understanding mani-
fested in arts and crafts was not, in their view, a different phenome-
non, but just imperfect theory, sullied by obscurity and confusion.
Cognitivism is heir to this tradition: to be intelligent is to be able to
manipulate (according to rational rules) “clear and distinct” quasilin-
guistic representations—only now they’re sullied by omissions, prob-
abilities, and heuristics. Deported from the immortal soul, however,
they forfeit their original epistemic anchorage in the honesty of God
and the natural light of reason. So, bereft of credentials from above,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

40
H av i n g Though t
the distinction of certain procedures as “reasonable” ﬂoats adrift,
unless it can otherwise be explained. Evolution comes vaguely to
mind, but much more needs to be said. My own hunch is that the
intelligibility of rational “theorizing” is a derivative special case of an
antecedent, atheoretical, intelligent practice—a prior “grasp” of how
to get along in a multifarious existence. If articulate theory is one
developed derivative, there can be others: the appreciation of ﬁne art, a
subtle sense of personality, the “mastery of metaphor” (Aristotle),
even creativity and wisdom. We will understand understanding when
we understand its many forms, primordial and reﬁned. In the econ-
omy of understanding, words are merely money.
In this section I have raised three issues which it seems to me
cognitivists must face, and which it is not yet clear they can handle. It
is of course possible that successful treatments will eventually be
found. On the other hand, if the approach is doomed to failure, I
suspect that these are tips of some of the icebergs on which it will
founder.
8 The state of the art
Needless to say, the eventual fate of cognitive psychology will be
settled empirically—not by armchair philosophizing. But the way in
which experimental results bear on scientiﬁc theories, let alone whole
approaches to the form that such theories take, is seldom straightfor-
ward. In this concluding section, I will venture a few general points
about cognitivism and its relation to empirical observations.
It is illustrative to begin with cognitive simulation, a sub-discipline
where cognitive psychology overlaps with artiﬁcial intelligence. A gen-
eration ago, the prospect of building intelligent computers inspired a
lot of enthusiasm and brilliant work; but everyone must agree that
results to date fall well short of early expectations. General problem
solving programs have long since hit a plateau. Mechanical language
translation has proven so elusive and frustrating that even military
funding has dwindled. Advances in pattern recognition are painfully
small, and mainly conﬁned to contrived special “universes”. Even game
playing, a relative bright spot, is a disappointment against once conﬁ-
dent hopes and predictions. About the only thing which exceeds orig-
inal forecasts is the amount of computing power which has become
available—and yet it isn’t enough. Does all this constitute an empiri-
cal refutation of the possibility of artiﬁcial intelligence? Not at all.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
41
Perhaps the lesson is just that the problem was initially underesti-
mated; soberer judges are now gratiﬁed by smaller steps in a longer
trek, and disillusioned pessimists may still be exposed as carpenters
who blamed their tools. On the other hand, if there were indeed
something fundamentally misguided about the whole project, then
recurrent bottlenecks and modest sparse successes are just what you
would expect. The empirical record is simply ambiguous, and the real
problem is to wrest from it whatever morals it does hold, as clearly
and as helpfully as possible.
Cognitive simulation is not merely an incidental offshoot of cogni-
tive psychology. It is a powerful and important research tool, because
it provides a new and unprecedented empirical testing ground. Any
ips, or at least any one which is reducible to some level or dimension
on which component input/output functions are expressible mathe-
matically, can in principle be simulated on a computer. That means
that simulations can function as concrete checks on whether particu-
lar proposed ipss in fact have the abilities that they are supposed to
explain. This is valuable when the proposed explanations are so com-
plex that it is otherwise practically impossible to determine whether
the things would actually work as claimed. In effect, the computer
makes it feasible for cognitivist theories to be more intricate and
complicated than their predecessors could be in the past, and still
remain under detailed empirical control.
By the same token, however, computer simulation serves as the
front line where fundamental difﬁculties not resolvable by further
complication would ﬁrst show themselves. This is not to say that
psychological experiments, and programmatic theories formulated
with their guidance, are beside the point; quite the contrary, they form
an essential high-level ingredient in the whole endeavor. But if one
were genuinely to entertain the hypothesis that cognitivism is miscon-
ceived, then the stumbling blocks empirically discovered by cognitive
simulationists would be the ﬁrst place to look for clues as to what
went wrong. How else than by struggling to build chess players could
we have found out so deﬁnitively that the skill of deciding which
moves to consider is not a simple matter of a few readily ascertained
heuristics? What laboratory experiment could have shown more
clearly than the mechanical translation effort that the hardest thing to
account for in linguistic performance is understanding what the dis-
course is all about?
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

42
H av i n g  Though t
If cognitivism proves to be the wrong approach after all (that’s still
a big ‘if’, of course), then the genius who makes the next basic break-
through in psychology will probably take his or her cue from difﬁcul-
ties like these. Empirical indications of what cannot be done often
pave the way for major scientiﬁc progress—think of efforts to weigh
phlogiston, to build a perpetual motion machine, or to measure the
speed of the Earth through the luminiferous aether.
A sense of history can give us perspective in another way. Until the
rise of cognitivism, behaviorism reigned almost unchallenged in
American psychology departments. It could boast established experi-
mental methods, mountains of well-conﬁrmed and universally ac-
cepted results, specialty journals carrying detailed technical reports,
and a coherent “philosophy” within which it all ﬁt together and
seemed inevitably right. In short, it had all the institutional earmarks
of an advanced and thriving science. In retrospect, however, behavior-
ism seems to have made little positive contribution to our under-
standing of the human psyche, and to be hopelessly inadequate to the
task.
Kuhn’s notion of a scientiﬁc paradigm (1962/70) can be extended
in a way that sheds light on a situation like this. A paradigm is a major
scientiﬁc triumph, so impressive in breaking new ground, and yet so
pregnant with unfulﬁlled possibilities, that a technical research tra-
dition coalesces around it as a model. Thus the achievements of
Thorndike and Pavlov inspired a vigorous and sophisticated investiga-
tion of the conditioning of birds, dogs, and rats—and also of people,
to the extent that they are similar. But most of the interesting and
important aspects of intelligent behavior, exhibited especially by hu-
mans, turn out to involve processes qualitatively different from those
discovered by Thorndike, Pavlov, and their followers. So when behav-
iorism was taken as an approach to psychology in general, its para-
digm became a kind of impostor; experiments, concepts, and methods
which were genuinely illuminating in a limited domain posed as the
model for illumination in a quite different domain, where they had
virtually no demonstrated credentials, and really didn’t belong.
Cognitivism is a natural development from behaviorism. It retains
the same commitment to publicly observable and veriﬁable data, the
same rejection of posits and postulates that cannot be treated experi-
mentally, and the same ideal of psychology as a natural science. Its
advantage is having shown, via the systematicity and intentional inter-
pretation “cornerstones”, how to make good empirical sense of mean-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
43
ingful or rational internal processes—which gives it a much richer
and more powerful explanatory framework. And not surprisingly, it
has now acquired the institutional earmarks of an advanced and thriv-
ing science. But cognitive psychology too can be accused of having an
impostor paradigm. The concrete achievements which inspire the no-
tion of ips explanation, and prove it to have application in the real
world, come originally and almost entirely from the ﬁelds of computer
science and automatic data processing. The few cases in which people
explicitly and deliberately work through a rationale do suggest an
analogy; but so did cases in which people responded to conditioning.
Like their predecessors, cognitivists have made undeniably impor-
tant and lasting discoveries. But also as before, these discoveries are
conspicuously narrow, even small, compared to the depth and scope
of psychology’s pretheoretic purview. The brilliance of what has been
done can blind us to the darkness that surrounds it, and it is worth
recalling how many shadows cognitivism has not (yet) illuminated.
How is it, for example, that we recognize familiar faces, let alone the
lives reﬂected in them, or the greatness of Rembrandt’s portrayals.
How do we understand conversational English, let alone metaphors,
jokes, Aristotle, or Albee? What is common sense, let alone creativity,
wit, or good taste? What happens when we fall asleep, let alone fall
under a spell, fall apart, or fall in love? What are personality and
character, let alone identity crises, schizophrenia, the experience of
enlightenment, or moral integrity? We turn to psychology if we think
these questions have scientiﬁc answers; and if we shouldn’t, why
shouldn’t we? Cognitivists are as vague and impressionistic on such
issues as psychological theorists have always been. Of course, they too
can buy time with the old refrain: “be patient, we’re only just begin-
ning (though so-and-so’s preliminary results are already encourag-
ing)”. Promissory notes are legitimate currency in vigorous sciences,
but too much deﬁcit spending only fuels inﬂation.
The human spirit is its own greatest mystery. Perhaps the idea of
an information processing system is at last the key to unlocking it; or
perhaps the programmable computer is as shallow an analogy as the
trainable pigeon—the conditional branch as psychologically sterile as
the conditioned reﬂex. There is no way to tell yet, but we should be as
ready to follow up on partial failures as we are on partial successes.
The clues could be anywhere.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

44
H av i n g  Though t
Notes:
1 For instance, Cummins 1975; Putnam 1973; Dennett 1971/78;
Simon 1969/81; and Fodor 1965
2 For instance, Davidson 1970/80, 1973/84; and Harman 1973; and
compare Sellars 1954/63; Dennett 1971/78; and McCarthy 1979.
3 Compare Goodman 1968, chapter 4; Quine 1960, section 18.
4 Compare “structured description”, Pylyshyn 1978.
5 For instance, Wilson 1959; Quine 1960, chapter 2; Lewis 1974/83;
Grandy 1973; and Davidson 1973/84.
6 Compare McCarthy 1979 on thermostats.
7 For readers familiar with the work of Quine, I would like to clear
up what I think is a common misunderstanding. Quine is a be-
haviorist of sorts, and he sometimes seems to defend that on the
basis of his doctrine of the indeterminacy of translation (Quine
1960, chapter 2). Thus, it’s natural to suppose that cognitivism is
as opposed to the latter doctrine as it is to behaviorism. It isn’t. In
the terminology of this paper, Quine’s claim is the following. For
any ibb, there are many different intentional interpretations of the
same input/output typologies, which are all equally “good” by any
empirical tests; that is, they are all such that the outputs consis-
tently make reasonable sense in context. Hence, one’s “translation”
of the inputs and outputs is empirically indeterminate, as least
among these options. Now, it might seem that if the ibb were an
ips, and if one knew what it was “thinking” (its internal cognitive
processes), then one could determine what its outputs really
meant, and thereby undercut the indeterminacy. But if Quine is
right in his original claim (and I take no stand on that), then it
applies to the interpretations of the component ibbs as well. Thus
the indeterminacy, rather than being undercut, is just carried in-
ward; in Quine’s terms, all the translations are “relative to a trans-
lation manual”. That would no more rule out cognitivism than it
would linguistics.
8 Strictly, the required relation between the two sets of constraints
is weaker than isomorphism. It sufﬁces if every input/output
pattern which would satisfy the explained constraints on the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The nature and pl ausibility of c o gnitivism
45
lower dimension would also satisfy the cogency conditions on the
interpretation being reduced (the constraints on the upper
dimension). This amounts to saying that the instantiation can
explain more than the ibb ability in question—for example, not
only how it manages to play chess, but also why it always neglects
certain options.
9 For introductions to holograms and some of their interesting
properties, see Leith and Upatnieks 1965; Herriott 1968; Gabor
1969; Firth 1972; and Cathey 1974. For further speculations about
their capabilities, see van Heerden 1968; Pribram 1971, 1974;
Pribram et al 1974; and Pollen and Taylor 1974. For hypothetical
models of holograms realized in neurons, see Kabrisky 1966;
Baron 1970; and Cavanagh 1972. For evidence that some neurons
may actually behave in the required ways, see Campbell 1974; and
Pollen and Taylor 1974; and compare Erickson 1974.
10 For some proposals of ips-based pattern recognizers, see Minsky
and Papert 1972; and Waltz 1972.
11 See Yevick 1975, however, for a mathematician’s tentative proposal
of a holographically based logic.
12 De Groot 1965; Hearst 1967; Frey and Adesman 1976.
13 See Sellars 1956/63 for a discussion of this distinction in the
context of a different issue.
14 Shoemaker 1975 and Block and Fodor 1972; but see also Dennett
1978a/78.
15 See, for instance, Shepard and Metzler 1971; Pylyshyn 1973, 1978;
Paivio 1975; Kosslyn and Pomerantz 1977; Dennett 1978b/78.
16 See Winograd 1972, for example; and compare Greeno 1977.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

c h a pt e r  t wo
Understanding
Natural Language
The trouble with artiﬁcial intelligence is that computers don’t give a
damn. Or so I will argue by considering the special case of under-
standing natural language. Linguistic facility is an appropriate trial for
ai because input and output can be handled conveniently with a
teletype, because understanding a text requires understanding its
topic (which is unrestricted), and because there is the following test
for success: does the text enable the candidate to answer those ques-
tions it would enable competenthuman users of the language to an-
swer? The thesis will not be that (human-like) intelligence cannot be
achieved artiﬁcially, but that there are identiﬁable conditions on
achieving it. This point is as much about language and understanding
as about artiﬁcial intelligence. I will express it by distinguishing four
different phenomena that may be called holism; that is, four ways in
which brief segments of text cannot be understood in isolation or on a
one-by-one basis.
1 Holism of intentional interpretation
Consider how one might empirically defend the claim that a given
(strange) object plays chess. Clearly, it is neither necessary nor sufﬁ-
cient that the object use any familiar chess notation (or pieces); for it
might play brilliant chess in some alien notation, or it might produce
chess salad in what appeared to be standard notation. Rather, what
the defense must do is, roughly:
1 give systematic criteria for (physically identifying the object’s
inputs and outputs;
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

4 8
H av i n g  Though t
2 provide a systematic way of interpreting them as various
moves (such as a manual for translating them into standard
notation); and then
3 let some skeptics play chess with it.
The third condition bears all the empirical weight, for satisfying it
amounts to public observation that the object really does play chess.
More speciﬁcally, the skeptics see that, as interpreted, it makes a
sensible (legal and plausible) move in each position it faces. And
eventually, induction convinces them that it would do so in any posi-
tion. Notice that, de facto, the object is also being construed as
“remembering” (or “knowing”) the current position, “trying” to make
good moves, “realizing” that rooks outrank pawns, and even “wanting”
to win. All these interpretations and construals constitute collectively
an intentional interpretation.
Intentional interpretation is essentially holistic. It is supported em-
pirically only by observing that its object makes generally “sensible”
outputs, given the circumstances. But the relevant circumstances are
ﬁxed by the object’s prior inputs and other outputs, as interpreted.
Thus, each observation distributes its support over a whole range of
speciﬁc interpretations, no one of which is supported apart from the
others. For example, a chess move is legal and plausible only relative to
the board position, which is itself just the result of the previous
moves. So one output can be construed sensibly as a certain queen
move, only if that other was a certain knight move, still another a
certain bishop move, and so on.1
This is the holism of intentional interpretation; and it is all too familiar
to philosophers. Intentional interpretation is tantamount to Quine’s
radical translation—including, as Davidson emphasizes, the attribu-
tion of beliefs and desires. The condition that outputs be sensible (in
the light of prior inputs and other outputs) is just whatever the ill-
named principle of charity is supposed to capture. I have reviewed it
here only to distinguish it from what follows.
2 Common-sense holism
Years ago, Yehoshua Bar-Hillel pointed out that disambiguating “The
box was in the pen” requires common-sense knowledge about boxes
and pens. He had in mind knowledge of typical sizes, which would
ordinarily decide between the alternatives ‘playpen’ and ‘fountain
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Under standi ng  nat ura l  l a n g uag e
49
pen’.2 In a similar vein, it takes common sense to determine the ante-
cedent of the pronoun in: “I left my raincoat in the bathtub, because it
was still wet.” More subtly, common sense informs our appreciation of
the ﬁnal verb of: “Though his blouse draped stylishly, the toreador’s
pants seemed painted on.”
Straightforward questioning immediately exposes any misunder-
standing. Was the bathtub wet? Was there paint on his pants? And
the issue isn’t just academic; a system designed to translate natural
languages must be able to answer such questions. For instance, the
correct and incorrect readings of our three examples have different
translations into either French or German—so the system has to
choose. What’s so daunting about this, from the designer’s point of
view, is that one never knows which little fact is going to be relevant
next—which common-sense tidbit will make the next disambigua-
tion obvious. In effect, the whole of common sense is potentially rele-
vant at any point. This feature of natural-language understanding I
call common-sense holism; its scope and importance was ﬁrst fully dem-
onstrated in artiﬁcial intelligence work.
The difference between common-sense holism and the holism of
intentional interpretation is easily obscured by vague formulas like:
the meaning of an utterance is determinate only relative to all of the
utterer’s beliefs, desires, and speech dispositions. This covers both
holisms, but only at the price of covering up a crucial distinction. The
holism of intentional interpretation is prior holism, in the sense that
it’s already accommodated before the interpretation of ongoing dis-
course. An interpreter ﬁrst ﬁnds an over-all scheme that works, and
then can interpret each new utterance separately as it comes. For ex-
ample, once a holistic chess-player interpretation has been worked
out, its holism can be ignored—moves can perfectly well be translated
one by one.3 By contrast, common-sense holism is real-time holism—
it is freshly relevant to each new sentence, and it can never be ignored.
Even if a perfect dictionary and grammar were available, sentences like
our three examples would still have to be disambiguated in real time,
by some appeal to common sense.
The point can be put another way. Prior holism is compatible with
the formalist ideal of semantic atomism: the meaning of a sentence is
determined by the meanings of its meaningful components, plus their
mode of composition. This ideal is (nearly) achieved by chess nota-
tions, formal logics, and most programming languages; but it is only
grossly approximated by English—assuming that meaning is what
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

50
H av i n g Though t
one grasps in understanding a sentence, and that words and idioms
are the meaningful components.4 Real-time holism is precisely
incompatible with semantic atomism: understanding a sentence
requires more that a grammar and a dictionary—namely, common
sense.5
The nature of common-sense holism is brought into sharper relief
by current efforts to deal with it—those in artiﬁcial intelligence being
the most concentrated and sophisticated. The hard problem, it turns
out, is not simply the enormous volume of common knowledge, but
rather storing it so that it can be efﬁciently accessed and used. Obvi-
ously, it is quite impractical to check every available fact for possible
relevance, every time some question comes up. So the task is to design
a system that will quickly home in on genuinely relevant consider-
ations, while ignoring nearly everything else. This is the “memory-
organization” or “knowledge-representation” problem; what makes it
hard is the quixotic way that odd little facts turn up as germane.
Most contemporary systems employ some variant of the following
idea: facts pertaining to the same subject are stored together
(“linked”) in structured clusters, which are themselves linked in larger
structures, according as their subjects are related.6 
We can think of these clusters as concepts, so long as we remember
that they are much more elaborate and rich than traditional de-
ﬁnitions—even contextual deﬁnitions. For example, the concept of
‘monkey’ would include not only that they are primates of a certain
sort, but also a lot of incidental information like where they come
from, what they eat, how organ grinders use them, and what the big
one at the zoo throws at spectators. It’s more like an encyclopedia
than a dictionary entry.
Three points will clarify how this is supposed to work. First, much
of the speciﬁcation of each concept lies in its explicit links or cross
references to other concepts, in an over-all conceptual superstructure.
For instance, part of the monkey concept would be an “is-a” link to
the primate concept, which has in turn an is-a link to the mammal
concept, and so on. So, the monkey, rat, and cow concepts can effec-
tively share generic information about mammals. Second, entries in a
concept can have modalities, like ‘necessarily’, ‘typically’, ‘occasionally’,
or even ‘only when …’. The “typically” mode is particularly useful,
because it supplies many common-sense assumptions or “default as-
signments”. For example, if monkeys typically like bananas, the sys-
tem can “assume” that any given monkey will like bananas (pending
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Under standi ng  nat ura l  l a n g uag e
51
information to the contrary). Third, concepts often have open spaces
or “slots” waiting (or demanding) to be ﬁlled up in stipulated ways.
Thus, the concept of eating would have spaces for the eater and the
eaten, it being stipulated that the eater be animate, and the eaten
(typically) be food.
A system based on such concepts copes with common-sense ho-
lism as follows. First, a dictionary routine calls the various concepts
associated with the words in a given sentence, subject to constraints
provided by a syntactical analyzer. Hence, only the information coded
in (or closely linked to) these concepts is actually accessed—passing
over the presumably irrelevant bulk. The the system applies this in-
formation to any ambiguities by looking for a combination of con-
cepts (from the supplied pool) which ﬁt each other’s open spaces in all
the stipulated ways. So, for Bar-Hillel’s example, the system might call
four concepts: one each for ‘box’ and ‘is in’, and two for ‘pen’. The
“is-in” concept would have two spaces, with the stipulation that what
ﬁlls the ﬁrst be smaller than what ﬁlls the second. Alerted by this
requirement, the system promptly checks the “typical-size” informa-
tion under the other concepts, and correctly eliminates ‘fountain pen’.
An essentially similar procedure will disambiguate the pronouns in
sentences like: “The monkeys ate the bananas because they were hun-
gry” or “… because they were ripe”. (Wilks 1974, 19)
The other two examples, however, are tougher. Both raincoats and
bathtubs typically get wet, so that won’t decide which was wet when I
left my coat in the tub. People opt for the coat, because being wet is an
understandable (if eccentric) reason for leaving a coat in a tub,
whereas the tub’s being wet would be no (sane) reason to leave a coat
in it. But where is this information to be coded? It hardly seems that
concepts for ‘raincoat’, ‘bathtub’, or ‘is wet’, no matter how encyclope-
dic, would indicate when it’s sensible to put a raincoat in a bathtub.
This suggests that common sense can be organized only partially
according to subject matter. Much of what we recognize as making
sense is not about some topic for which we have a word or idiom, but
rather about some (possibly unique) circumstance or episode, which a
longer fragment leads us to visualize. Introspectively, it seems that we
imagine ourselves into the case, and then decide from within it what’s
plausible. Of course, how this is done is just the problem.
The ambiguity of ‘painted-on pants’ is both similar and different.
Again, we imagine the sort of attire being described; but the correct
reading is obviously a metaphor—namely, for ‘skin tight’, which is
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

52
H av i n g  Though t
both coordinated and appropriately contrasted with the stylishly
draped blouse. Most approaches to metaphor, however, assume that
metaphorical readings aren’t attempted unless there is something
anomalous about the literal reading (as in “He is the cream on my
peaches”, or “… faster than greased lightning”). But, in this case, there
is nothing anomalous about pants with paint on them—they would
even clash with ‘stylish’, explaining the conjunction ‘Though …’. On
that reading, however, the sentence would be silly, whereas the meta-
phor is so apt that most people don’t even notice the alternative.
These examples are meant only to illustrate the subtlety of com-
mon sense. They show that no obvious or crude representation will
capture it, and suggest that a sophisticated, cross-referenced encyclo-
pedia may not sufﬁce either. On the other hand, they don’t reveal
much about what’s left out, nor (by the same token) whether that will
be programmable when we know what it is. The real nature of com-
mon sense is still a wide-open question.
3 Situation holism
Correct understanding of a sentence depends not only on general
common sense, but also on understanding the speciﬁc situation(s) to
which it pertains. I don’t have in mind the familiar point about de-
scriptions and indexicals, that only the “context” determines which
table is “the table” or “this table”, and so on. Much more interesting is
the situation-dependence of examples like Bar-Hillel’s. Dreyfus (1972/
92) points out that
in spite of our general knowledge about the relative sizes of pens
and boxes, we might interpret “The box is in the pen”, when
whispered in a James Bond movie, as meaning just the opposite
of what it means at home or on the farm.
(216)
This is not just a problem about exotic contexts, where normal expec-
tations might fail; both of the following are normal.
When Daddy came home, the boys stopped their cowboy game.
They put away their guns and ran out back to the car.
When the police drove up, the boys called off their robbery
attempt. They put away their guns and ran out back to the car.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Under standi ng  nat ura l  l a n g uag e
5 3
The second sentence is not exactly ambiguous, but it means different
things in the two situations. For instance, did the boys put their guns
“away” in a toy chest or in their pockets? (It makes a difference in
German: einräumen versus einstecken.) Could ‘ran’ be paraphrased by
‘ﬂed’?
So far, the role of “situation sense” seems comparable to that of
common sense, though more local and speciﬁc. A fundamental differ-
ence appears, however, as soon as the stories get interesting enough to
involve an interplay of several situations. A middle-eastern folk tale
gives a brief example.
One evening, the Khoja looked down into a well, and was star-
tled to ﬁnd the moon shining up at him. It won’t help anyone
down there, he thought, and quickly he fetched a hook on a
rope. But when he threw it in, the hook snagged on a hidden
rock. The Khoja pulled and pulled and pulled. Then suddenly it
broke loose, and he went right on his back with a thump. From
where he lay, however, he could see the moon, ﬁnally back in the
sky where it belonged—and he was proud of the good job he
had done.
The heart of this story is a trade-off between two situations: the real
one and the one in the Khoja’s imagination. The narrative jumps back
and forth between them; and it is up to the reader to keep them
straight, and also to keep track of their interaction and development.
In the ﬁrst sentence, for example, the embedded clauses “the Khoja
found the moon” and “it shined up at him”, are clearly about the
epistemic situation, despite their grammar. One must understand this
at the outset, to appreciate the Khoja’s progressive misperceptions,
and thus his eventual pride. A trickier shift occurs in the clause “It
won’t help anyone down there …”, which must mean “while it’s down
there” (not “anyone who is down there”). In other words, it’s an implicit
hypothetical which refers us to yet another situation: a counterfactual
one in which people are left in darkness while the moon is still in the
well. This too is essential to understanding the pride.7
The important point is how little of this is explicit in the text. The
clauses as written exhibit what can be called “situational ambiguity”.
It’s as if the implied situations functioned as modalizers or implicit
propositional operators for the expressed clauses. (The point is not to
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

54
H av i n g Though t
propose a logic, let alone a model theory, but only to suggest what
might be a helpful analogy.) Thus the clause “the Khoja found the
moon” would have not only the modality “the Khoja thought that …”
but also the modality “while looking into the well …”. The latter is a
crucial qualiﬁcation, for it (along with common sense) is what forces
the former.
Given this way of putting it, two things stand out. First, rather
than a ﬁxed, lexically speciﬁed set of possible modalities, there are
indeﬁnitely many of them, more or less like sentences (or indeed,
whole passages). Second, many of these have to be supplied (or in-
ferred) by the reader—often, as in the last example, on the basis of
others already supplied. That is, to understand the text, the reader
must provide for each clause a number of these generalized or “situa-
tional” modalities, and must do so largely on the basis of some over-all
situational or modal coherence. This demand for over-all coher-
ence—that all the various “situations” (with respect to which clauses
are understood) should ﬁt together in an intelligible way—is what I
call situation holism. It is a general feature of natural-language text, and
coping with it is a prerequisite to reading.
Situation holism is especially characteristic of longer texts. We had
a brief sample in our folk tale; but it really comes into its own in the
forms of dialectic, characterization, and plot. Mystery novels, for ex-
ample, are built around the challenge of situation holism when pivotal
cues are deliberately scattered and ambiguous. Translators (who read
the book ﬁrst, naturally) must be very sensitive to such matters—to
use ‘ran’ or ‘ﬂew’ instead of ‘ﬂed’, for instance—on pain of spoiling the
suspense. But only the over-all plot determines just which words need
to be handled carefully, not to mention how to handle them. En-
grossed readers, in the meantime, are alert to the same issues in a
complementary way. This is situation holism full-ﬂedged.8
4 Digression: hermeneutics
Hermeneutics, in the classical (nineteenth-century) sense, is the “sci-
ence” of textual interpretation—that is, exegesis. It is often described
as holistic, on something like the following grounds: the meanings of
particular passages, doctrines, and specialized (“technical”) terms, are
only apparent in the context of the whole; yet the whole (treatise, life’s
work, or genre) is composed entirely of particular passages, containing
the various doctrines and special terms. So the interpreter must work
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Under standi ng  nat ura l  l a n g uag e
5 5
back and forth among part, subpart, and whole, bootstrapping each
insight on one level into new insights on the others, until a satisfac-
tory over-all understanding is achieved.
Hermeneutics is like intentional interpretation, insofar as the
point is to translate bafﬂing expressions into others more familiar or
more intelligible. And the constraint on adequacy is again that the
text, as construed, make a maximum of sense. But in exegesis, sensi-
bleness is not so easy to determine as it is, say, in translating chess
notations. For each sentence will have various presuppositions or facts
taken for granted, and will make sense only in the light of these. Part
of the interpreter’s task, in determining what the text means, is to
ferret such assumptions out and make them explicit. So hermeneutic
interpretation must deal explicitly with common-sense holism
(though it may be “common” only to the initiated few). But the para-
mount concern in formal exegesis is exposing the overall structure and
purport of the original. A construal cannot stand unless it renders
sensible the progression and development of arguments, examples,
incidents, and the like. But this is just situation holism, made more
articulate. Thus, I don’t think the holism of classical hermeneutics is
different from the three kinds so far discussed, but is instead a sophis-
ticated combination of them all.9
5 Existential holism
In the section on intentional interpretation, we noticed how naturally
we construe chess-playing computers as “trying” to make good moves,
and “wanting” to win. At the same time, however, I think we also all
feel that the machines don’t “really care” whether they win, or how
they play—that somehow the game doesn’t “matter” to them at all.
What’s behind these conﬂicting intuitions? It may seem at ﬁrst that
what machines lack is a reason to win: some larger goal that winning
would subserve. But this only puts off the problem; for we then ask
whether they “really care” about the larger goal. And until this ques-
tion is answered, nothing has been—just as we now don’t suppose
pawns matter to computers, even though they subserve the larger goal
of winning.
Apparently something else must be involved to make the whole
hierarchy of goals worth while—something that itself doesn’t need a
reason, but, so to speak, “matters for its own sake”. We get a hint of
what this might be, by asking why chess games matter to people
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

56
H av i n g  Though t
(when they do). There are many variations, of course, but here are
some typical reasons:
1 public recognition and esteem, which generates and supports
self-esteem (compare the loser’s embarrassment or loss of
face);
2 pride and self-respect at some difﬁcult achievement—like
ﬁnally earning a master rating (compare the loser’s frustration
and self-disappointment); or
3 proving one’s prowess or (as it were) “masculinity” (compare
the loser’s self-doubt and fear of inadequacy).
What these have in common is that the player’s self-image or sense of
identity is at stake. This concern with “who one is” is at least one issue
that plausibly matters for its own sake. Machines (at present) lack any
personality and, hence, any possibility of personal involvement; so (on
these grounds) nothing can really matter to them.10
The point is more consequential for language understanding than
for formal activities like chess playing, which are largely separable
from the rest of life. A friend of mine tells a story about the time she
kept a white rat as a pet. It was usually tame enough to follow at her
heels around campus; but one day, frightened by a dog, it ran so far up
her pantleg that any movement might have crushed it. So, very sheep-
ishly, she let down her jeans, gently liberated her quivering rodent,
and won a round of applause from delighted passersby. Now, many
people ﬁnd this anecdote amusing, and the relevant question is: Why?
Much of it, surely, is that we identify with the young heroine and
share in her embarrassment—being relieved, at the same time, that it
didn’t happen to us.
Embarrassment, however, (and relief) can be experienced only by a
being that has some sense of itself—a sense that is important to it and
can be awkwardly compromised on occasion. Hence, only such a
being could, as we do, ﬁnd this story amusing. It might be argued,
however, that “emotional” reactions, like embarrassment and bemuse-
ment, should be sharply distinguished from purely “cognitive” under-
standing. Nobody, after all, expects a mechanical chess player to enjoy
the game or to be thrilled by it. But that distinction cannot be main-
tained for users of natural language. Translators, for instance, must
choose words carefully to retain the character of an amusing original.
To take just one example from the preceding story, German has
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Under standi ng  nat ura l  l a n g uag e
57
several “equivalents” for ‘sheepish’, with connotations, respectively, of
being simple, stupid, or bashful. Only by appreciating the embarrass-
ing nature of the incident, could a translator make the right choice.
A different perspective is illustrated by the time Ralph asked his
new friend, Lucifer: “Why, when you’re so brilliant, beautiful, and
everything, did you ever get kicked out of heaven?” Rather than an-
swer right away, Lucifer suggested a little game: “I’ll sit up here on this
rock,” he said, “and you just carry on with all that wonderful praise
you were giving me.” Well, Ralph went along for a while; but as the
hours passed, it began to get tiresome. So ﬁnally he said: “Look, why
don’t we just add a little variety to this game, say, by taking turns?”
“Ahh …,” sighed Lucifer, “that’s all I said, that’s all I said.”11
Here, even more than Ralph’s embarrassment, we enjoy the adroit
way that Lucifer turns the crime of the ages into a little faux pas,
blown out of proportion by God’s inﬁnite vanity. But why is that
funny? Part of it has to be that we all know what guilt and shame are
like, and how we try to escape them with impossible rationaliza-
tions—this being a grand case on both counts. It’s not the psychology
of guilt that we know, but the tension of actually facing it and (some-
times) trying not to face it. And actually feeling guilty is certainly not
just a cognitive state, like believing one did wrong, and disapproving;
nor is it that, with some unpleasant sensation added on. It is at least
to sense oneself as diminished by one’s act—to be reduced in worth or
exposed as less worthy than had seemed.
Crime and Punishment, too, is “about” guilt, but it isn’t especially
funny. The novel is powerful and didactic: the reader’s experience of
guilt is not simply drawn upon, but engaged and challenged. We enter
into Raskolnikov’s (and Dostoyevsky’s) struggle with the very natures
of guilt, personal responsibility, and freedom—and in so doing, we
grow as persons. This response, too, is a kind of understanding, and
asking questions is a fairly effective test for it. Moreover, at least some
of those questions will have to be answered in the course of producing
an adequate translation.
One ﬁnal example will demonstrate the range of the phenomenon
I’m pointing at, and also illustrate a different way in which the reader’s
personal involvement can be essential. It is a fable of Aesop’s.
One day, a farmer’s son accidentally stepped on a snake, and was
fatally bitten. Enraged, the father chased the snake with an axe,
and managed to cut off its tail; and thereupon, the snake nearly
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

58
H av i n g  Though t
ruined the farm by biting all the animals. Well, the farmer
thought it over, and ﬁnally took the snake some sweetmeats,
saying: “I can understand your anger, and surely you can under-
stand mine. But now that we are even, let’s forgive, forget, and be
friends again.” “No, no,” said the snake, “take away your gifts.
You can never forget your dead son, nor I my missing tail.”
Obviously, this story has a “moral”, which a reader must “get” in order
to understand it.
The problem is not simply to make the moral explicit, for then it
would be more direct and effective to substitute a non-allegorical
paraphrase.
A child is like a part of oneself, such as a limb. The similarities
include:
i) losing one is very bad;
ii) if you lose one, you can never get it back;
iii) they have no adequate substitutes; and thus
iv) they are literally priceless.
Therefore, to regard trading losses of them as a “fair exchange”,
or “getting even”, is to be a fool.
But this is just a list of platitudes. It’s not that it misrepresents the
moral, but that it lacks it altogether—it is utterly ﬂat and lifeless. By
comparison, Aesop’s version “lives”, because we as readers identify
with the farmer. Hence, we too are brought up short by the serpent’s
rebuke; and that makes us look at ourselves.
 The terrifying thing about losing, say, one’s legs is not the event
itself, or the pain, but rather the thought of being a legless cripple for
all the rest of one’s life. It’s the same with losing a son, right? Wrong!
Many a parent indeed would joyously give both legs to have back a
little girl or boy who is gone. Children can well mean more to who
one is and the meaning of one’s life than even one’s own limbs. So who
are you, and what is your life? The folly—what the fable is really
“about”—is not knowing.12
A single act cannot be embarrassing, shameful, irresponsible, or
foolish in isolation, but only as an event in the biography of a whole,
historical, individual—a person whose personality it reﬂects and
whose self-understanding it threatens. Only a being that cares about
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Under standi ng  nat ura l  l a n g uag e
5 9
who it is, as some sort of enduring whole, can care about guilt or folly,
self-respect or achievement, life or death. And only such a being can
read. This holism, now not even apparently in the text, but manifestly
in the reader, I call (with due trepidation) existential holism. It is essen-
tial, I submit, to understanding the meaning of any text that (in a
familiar sense) has any meaning. If situation holism is the foundation
of plot, existential holism is the foundation of literature.
In the context of artiﬁcial intelligence, however, there remains an
important question as to whether this sets the standard too high—
whether it falls into what Papert somewhere calls “the human/
superhuman fallacy”, or Dennett “the Einstein-Shakespeare gambit”.
Wouldn’t it be impressive enough, the reasoning goes, if a machine
could understand everyday English, even if it couldn’t appreciate liter-
ature? Sure, it would be impressive. But beyond that there are three
replies. First, if we could articulate some ceiling of “ordinariness” be-
yond which machines can’t pass, or can’t pass unless they meet some
further special condition, that would be scientiﬁcally interesting and
important. Second, billions of people can read—really read—and for
most of the others it’s presumably a socio-historical tragedy that they
can’t. Existential holism is not a condition just on creative genius.
Finally, and most important, there is no reason whatsoever to believe
there is a difference in kind between understanding everyday dis-
course and appreciating literature. Apart from a few highly restricted
domains, like playing chess, analyzing mass spectra, or making airline
reservations, the most ordinary conversations are fraught with life and
all its meanings.
6 Conclusion
Considering the progress and prospects of artiﬁcial intelligence can be
a peculiarly concrete and powerful way of thinking about our own
spiritual nature. As such, it is a comrade of the philosophy of mind
(some authors see ai as allied to epistemology, which strikes me as
perverse). Here, we have distinguished four phenomena, each with a
claim to the title ‘holism’—not to trade on or enhance any mystery in
the term, but rather, I would hope, the opposite. The aim has not
been to show that artiﬁcial intelligence is impossible (though it is, you
know) but to clarify some of what its achievement would involve, in
the speciﬁc area of natural language understanding. This area is not so
limited as it seems, since—as each of the four holisms testiﬁes—
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

60
H av i n g  Though t
understanding a text involves understanding what the text is “about”.
The holisms, as presented, increase in difﬁculty relative to current ai
techniques; and my own inclination (it’s hardly more than that) is to
regard the last, existential holism, as the most fundamental of the
four. Hence my opening remark: the trouble with artiﬁcial intelligence
is that computers don’t give a damn.
Notes:
1 A different argument for a similar conclusion depends on assum-
ing that the inputs and outputs are semantically compound.
Then, since each compound will in general share components
with many others, their respective interpretations (in terms of
their compositions) will be interdependent. Thus the (semantic)
role of ‘p’ in ‘p–k4’ must be systematically related to its role in
‘p–r3’, and so on. The argument in the text, however, is more
fundamental. There are fewer than two thousand possible chess
moves. (Gardner 1979, 25–26, gives the ﬁgure 1840; but he ne-
glects castling and pawn promotion.) These could be represented
unambiguously by arbitrary numerals, or even simple symbols;
yet interpreting an object using such a system would still be holis-
tic, for the earlier reasons.
2 Bar-Hillel 1964, 158–159 (quoted in Dreyfus 1972/92, 215).
3 Cryptography is comparable: code cracking is holistic, but once it
succeeds, deciphering goes along on a message-by-message basis.
4 Hilary Putnam, 1975, argues that there is more to meaning than
what competent speakers understand; but his point is orthogonal
to mine.
5 It is difﬁcult to say what signiﬁcance this has (if any) for formal
semantics. The most common tactic is to relegate matters of real-
time holism to “pragmatics”, and apply the semantic theory itself
only to idealized “deep structures” (in which ambiguities of sense,
pronoun binding, case, mood, scope, and the like. are not al-
lowed—thus saving atomism … perhaps). A protective quaran-
tine for semantics may or may not work out, but earlier
experience with syntax hardly bodes well.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Under standi ng  nat ura l  l a n g uag e
61
6 See, for example, Minsky 1974; Wilks 1974; Schank and Abelson
1975; and Bobrow and Winograd 1977.
7 There are also a number of “background counterfactuals” involved
in understanding what happens. Thus, a reader should be able to
say what would have happened if the hook hadn’t caught on the
rock, or if it hadn’t broken loose. Anyone who couldn’t answer,
wouldn’t really “have” it.
8 In ai, work on this problem has only just begun. See, for instance,
Rumelhart 1975; Wilensky 1978; and de Beaugrande and Colby
1979; compare also Lewis 1979/83.
9 It can be argued (though not here) that genuine radical transla-
tion is less like the interpretation of a chess player than like a
hermeneutic investigation of a whole culture—including (so far
as possible) an “interpretation” of its practices, institutions, and
artifacts. For a good account of what hermeneutics has become in
the twentieth century (very roughly, it adds my fourth holism),
see Taylor 1971.
10 There are many problems in this vicinity. For instance, people
(but not machines) play chess for fun; and, within limits, winning
is more fun. It’s very hard, however, to say what fun is, or get any
grip on what it would be for a machine actually to have fun. One
might try to connect it with the foregoing, and say (in a tired
European tone of voice) that fun is merely a temporary diversion
from the oppressive burden of self-understanding. But that isn’t
very persuasive.
11 This is a (no doubt garbled) version of a story I heard years ago,
attributed to the movie Bedazzled.
12 Rumelhart (1975) analyzes a different version of this story in
terms of an interesting “story grammar”, loosely analogous to
sentential grammar. Signiﬁcantly, however, he addresses only
the continuity of the story and never touches on its moral or
meaning.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

ch a pt e r  t h r e e
Hume on
Personal Identity
In memory of H. Paul Grice
In the appendix to his Treatise of Human Nature, Hume admits that
upon a more strict review of the section concerning personal
identity, I ﬁnd myself involved in such a labyrinth, that, I must
confess, I neither know how to correct my former opinions, nor
how to render them consistent.
(1739/1888, 633)
Commentators, however, have found it less than obvious what the
labyrinth or inconsistency is. I shall offer what I think is a new inter-
pretation, and attempt to show how the problem is genuinely rooted
in Hume’s overall philosophical enterprise.
The original account of personal identity (251–263), with which
Hume was later dissatisﬁed, pertains both to our idea of the self, and
to the self in fact; and it has a negative and a positive aspect in each
case. Negatively, we have no real idea of an identical and simple self
(because “there is no impression constant and invariable” 251); and
positively: “The identity which we ascribe to the mind of man, is only
a ﬁctitious one, and of like kind with that which we ascribe to vegeta-
bles and animal bodies”. (259) Thus, negatively, there is no real or
substantial self, but, positively, only a “bundle or collection of different
perceptions”.
According to Hume’s doctrine of ﬁctitious identity, whenever the
transitions among the ideas of several distinct objects are so smooth
and easy as to be barely perceptible—that is, when they “feel” (al-
most) the same as no transition at all—then the mind confounds a
survey of those distinct objects with a survey of one object continuing
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

64
H av i n g  Though t
the same. This happens when the objects in question are strongly
interrelated by resemblance, contiguity, and/or causation—which he
calls “the uniting principles of the ideal world” whose “very essence …
consists in their producing an easy transition of ideas”. (260) For
example, what we regard as a single enduring cabbage is really a collec-
tion of distinct parts and stages; but they are so interrelated in the
above three ways that we don’t notice the transitions in thinking of
them, and hence don’t notice their distinctness.
This is a mistake, he says, but it is not due to mere inadvertence or
inattention. Rather, the similarity (resemblance) in feeling between
considering a strictly identical object and considering a suitably re-
lated succession generates a positive propensity (which can itself be
felt) to make the confusion.1 Hence, simply pointing it out and expos-
ing it will not make it go away. Instead, the propensity will most likely
be appeased by an invention of some permanent “substance” or some
mysterious “real connection” among the distinct parts—thereby en-
shrining the mistake in a ﬁction. But even if we avoid that, we still feel
the propensity, and so are never really rid of the issue.
A parallel account is supposed to work for personal identity, except
that contiguity is not an important factor. The various perceptions
which we suppose constitute one mind are in fact quite distinct; but
we invent an enduring “self” to appease our propensity to confuse a
survey of them with a survey of one object. A survey of one person’s
perceptions “feels like” a survey of a single thing because those percep-
tions are so thoroughly interrelated by resemblance and causation.
For instance, impressions both cause and resemble ideas and memo-
ries; and all the other operations of the mind (habits, associations,
propensities, feignings) are at least causal.
Already there is an apparent difﬁculty.2 If the self is itself just an
invention, then what is it that does the inventing? It seems that
Hume’s active causal story requires at least a non-ﬁctional agent. But
that misconstrues the basic nature of the account. Hume is not trying
to give any ultimate explanation of why things are the way they are
(that’s what he eschews), but only to describe them in a coherent and
illuminating way.
To explain the ultimate causes of our mental actions is impossi-
ble. ’Tis sufﬁcient, if we can give any satisfactory account of
them from experience and analogy. 
(22)
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Hume on personal identity
65
Presumably, the model for this program was Newton’s physics, which
illuminatingly described dynamic phenomena, while conspicuously
not explaining why, say, F = ma or masses mutually attract.
Hume, likewise, need not “frame hypotheses”—which is what
positing an agent would amount to. A pure description of causal
processes (without “occult powers”) is just as coherent for the mental
realm as for the natural. To say that the mind has a propensity to
produce a certain idea in certain circumstances, is only to say that in
those circumstances that idea reliably appears in the mental bundle.
Such a regularity is quite observable, and can be described causally
like any other. The word ‘mind’ no more has to name a presupposed
agent here than does the word ‘gravity’ in Newton’s theory; and it is
perfectly consistent to say that when we do take it as naming an agent
(that is, a substantial self), then we are only generating a ﬁction.3
This interpretation also dispels another criticism: that Hume gave
an incorrect analysis of the concept of identity.4 It is beside the point
to object that ‘identical’ doesn’t “really mean” either ‘invariable and
uninterrupted’ or ‘ideally related succession’—just as it would have
been inappropriate to complain that ‘fall down’ doesn’t really mean
‘accelerate under the force of Earth’s gravitation’. Conceptual analysis
is not the issue; adequately characterizing what actually happens is.
Our chief business, then, must be to prove [that is, to show],
that all objects, to which we ascribe identity, without observing
their invariableness and uninterruptedness, are such as consist
of a succession of related objects.
(255)
Commentaries on Hume’s own account of his problem are more
helpful, but still not satisfactory. According to Kemp Smith, it is
“reﬂecting on the train of past perceptions” which Hume can neither
explain nor do without. (1941, 557) Reﬂection is indeed essential, for it
is only in the course of considering (other) perceptions that thought
could easily and smoothly transit among ideas of them. And Hume
will have trouble accounting for this, if only because his treatment of
the “of-ness” (intentionality) of perceptions is impoverished in gen-
eral. The most he can say is that perceptions are caused by and
resemble what they are perceptions of. But then an idea of an impres-
sion of an apple would stand in essentially the same relation to that
impression as would an idea (which sprang from it) of the apple itself.
Hume, of course, rejects any “philosopher’s distinction” between
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

66
H av i n g Though t
objects and perceptions, and takes the hard line that “we never can
conceive anything but perceptions”.5 But that’s just the problem: if all
thought is of perceptions, then how is reﬂective thought different
from any other thought? The distinction has collapsed.
On the other hand, this does not seem to be the problem that
motivated the appendix. In the ﬁrst place, it’s not clear why collapsing
all thought into reﬂection would cause any particular trouble for the
account of personal identity; and second, although Hume could easily
have articulated the above question, he in fact never even hints at it.
MacNabb suggests that the difﬁculty is not reﬂective thought in
general, but speciﬁcally thought which reﬂects on itself.
If the self is only a relational unity of perceptions, … that inner
awareness of our own being, of which Berkeley speaks, remains
unaccounted for; … [W]hat is it for a perception to be aware of
itself as a member of that relational unity of perceptions we call
a mind?
(1952/66, 151–152)
The point is, how could any perception P count as awareness of my
self, as opposed to mere awareness of some self or other, unless that
bundle of perceptions which P is “of” includes P itself?
Though it’s probably true that Hume could not account for this (is
P to be caused by and/or resemble itself?), it again seems to expose
only the lack of an adequate theory of intentionality. The only part of
MacNabb’s point that pertains directly to personal identity is the
need for self-referential perception—a bugaboo that is peculiar to the
twentieth century (and even we don’t rule it out altogether). More-
over, not only does Hume not mention any “inner awareness of our
own being” in the appendix, but he is in fact explicitly content to ﬁnd
personal identity in reﬂection on past perceptions. (635)
To judge from the text, what Hume himself despairs of explaining
is the “principle of connexion” which “unites” our perceptions, or
“binds them together” into selves. This becomes an issue because of
the argument that each perception is a distinct existence, neither
depending on nor having any real connections with anything else.
Perceptions satisfy, for what it’s worth, the classical deﬁnition of a
substance: something that can exist entirely by itself. (233) In particu-
lar, they don’t have to be in anyone’s mind.
Now as every perception is distinguishable from another, and
may be considered as separately existent; it evidently follows
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Hu m e on per s onal i de n t i t y
67
that there is no absurdity in separating any particular perception
from the mind; that is, in breaking off all its relations with that
connected mass of perceptions, which constitute a thinking
being.
(207)
There are, it turns out, a few “experiments” which convince us that
perceptions don’t happen to exist apart from minds (210–11)—but the
suggestion is not absurd.
So there are all these conceivably free-ﬂoating perceptions in the
world, and the problem is to say what connects them into the bundles
that constitute various selves. Or rather, it is to say what makes us
attribute to certain groups of them the connectedness or unity of single
selves—for there are no real connections, and the self is just a ﬁction.
But that is precisely what the original account, based on resemblance,
causation, and the resulting easy transitions, was addressed to. The
question is: what went wrong?
Notice ﬁrst that resemblance alone is neither necessary nor sufﬁ-
cient for allocating two perceptions to the same bundle. Napoleon’s
ideas of water and Waterloo probably weren’t much alike, and we
needn’t imagine any graduated series of resembling intermediaries
between them. Conversely, two people viewing the same apple from
the same angle might have very similar perceptions. So causal rela-
tions are in each case at least necessary.6
That would be neither a difﬁcult nor an implausible outcome, were
it not for Hume’s distinctive treatment of causality. He holds that the
mind never perceives any real connection between cause and effect,
and hence has no real idea of such a connection. Rather, impressions
of the two are so constantly conjoined that the mind forms the habit
of thinking of one when it thinks of the other, and of believing in one
(an enlivened idea) when it has an impression of the other. Moreover,
our (mistaken) idea of the necessity in causality derives not from any
sense impression, but instead from an impression of reﬂection:
namely, a feeling of the aforesaid habit or determination of the mind.
Right away, such an account makes one suspicious, since it seems
to be explaining the phenomenon of causality in general in terms of
certain special cases (determinations of the mind are causal). More-
over, it seems to explain the phenomenon by, in effect, explaining it
away. But if mental causation is the foundation of the account, must
not it at least be real? Again, the answer is that Hume’s intent is not
ultimate explanation, but only illuminating general description.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

68
H av i n g  Though t
The uniting principle among our internal perceptions is as
unintelligible as that among external objects, and is not known
to us any other way than by experience [, which] … never gives
us any insight into the internal structure or operating principle
of objects, but only accustoms the mind to pass from one to
another.
(169)
In other words, he accords his own scientiﬁc (“mechanical”) theory
of the operation of the mind the same character and status he accords
to ordinary scientiﬁc (mechanical) theories of physical objects. Those
theories are fundamentally causal, and Hume has no cavil about that;
why shouldn’t his own theory be causal too? To be consistent, he need
only allow that his own attributions of causal connection (including
those connections which he says lead to the attribution of causal
connection in general) come about in the same manner as any other
causal attributions. That is, just as the attribution of physical causes
manifests a certain observable, describable, regular pattern (among
perceptions), so the attribution of mental causes manifests the same
pattern. In the latter case, the pattern among perceptions is, so to
speak, “second order”, but it is formally the same (equally observable)
pattern, nonetheless. As to why these second-order patterns exist,
that’s just as inexplicable as why the ﬁrst-order ones do—why masses
gravitate, for instance. They do; and that’s all an empirical scientist
can say.
In the appendix, however, Hume complains that he cannot render
his principles consistent after all; and, in particular, he cannot account
for those which “unite our successive perceptions in our thought or
consciousness”. (636) The problem, I shall argue, is not that the ac-
count of causation (including mental causation) is by itself incoherent
or circular, but rather that it is incompatible with the account of
personal identity in terms of (mental causation). In a nutshell, the
question of personal identity is how we can allocate all the conceivably
free-ﬂoating perceptions into various personal bundles, given that the
prerequisite pattern of constant conjunctions constitutive of mental
causation presupposes a prior bundling.
Consider the (temporally ordered) set of all the perceptions there
ever were, and think back to the time when billiards was ﬁrst in-
vented. That was the time when impressions of billiard ball impacts
and rebounds ﬁrst entered the overall set of perceptions; and such
impressions have been constantly conjoined ever since. Soon thereaf-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Hume on personal identity
69
ter, ideas of impacts, in the mind of Smith, became constantly (habitu-
ally) conjoined with ideas of rebounds, also in the mind of Smith. That
is, the causal mechanisms of Smith’s imagination have started work-
ing in the way Hume describes. This has not yet happened, however,
in the mind of Jones, who is stupid, let alone Robinson, who had to
leave after the ﬁrst collision. In other words, in the unallocated, overall
set of everyone’s perceptions, there simply is no constant conjunction of
impact ideas with rebound ideas—Jones’s slowness and Robinson’s in-
experience interject counter-instances which destroy the pattern (and
other neophytes do the same, throughout history). 
Suppose the (serially ordered) letter tokens in a text were “distinct
existences”, having no “real connection” to each other, or to anything
else; still, it seems, they would “hang together” as a single novel,
because they exhibit a coherent overall pattern—legibility, say. Now
imagine “shufﬂing” the tokens from all the novels there ever were,
preserving the serial ordering for each, but randomly interspersing its
tokens among all the others. What results is not a more complicated
or higher-order pattern, but illegible chaos—alphabet salad. There-
fore commercial printers don’t intersperse texts, but rely on a form of
spatial contiguity to indicate which tokens belong together in the
same book.7 Hume, however, denies that contiguity is a factor in
assorting perceptions (260), and wants the coherent patterns (mental
causation) to do the whole job. Unfortunately, there are no coherent
patterns unless the perceptions are already sorted—all he has is per-
ception salad.
This construal of Hume’s problem suggests several replies. First, if
it’s a matter of theoretical circularity—he can’t account for personal
identity until he’s accounted for mental causation, and vice versa—
then why not do both at once, ﬁtting the data “holistically”? Thus, a
given assortment into bundles, and a given discovery of constant con-
junctions within them, would mutually support each other, and the
theory as a whole. But this is fundamentally wrong: the set of all
perceptions is not, for Hume, a data-set to which he (or some ho-
muncular observer) is trying to accommodate a theory. Rather, he is
proposing a kind of quasi-mechanical model for what this set is like,
and how it grows. The trouble is: one part of the model (the negative
account of personal identity) denies the set a feature (it isn’t really
bound or apportioned into bundles at all) which another part of the
model (the account of mental causation) requires (at least the patterns
must be real). This, in turn, undermines the positive account of our
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

70
H av i n g Though t
idea of personal identity—which requires mental causation (both in
constituting the ersatz unity of the mind, and in generating the ﬁc-
tional idea). The model fails because it is internally incoherent, not
because some “data” don’t support it.
Stroud suggests that Hume can escape the dilemma “by appealing
to the undeniable fact” that perceptions just do come in separate bun-
dles: “the only ‘data’ available to a person for the formation of his ideas
and beliefs are his own perceptions”.8 (1977, 136) This is enough to get
the rest of Hume’s account off the ground. The trouble, Stroud con-
cludes, is rather “that it leaves completely unintelligible and mysteri-
ous the fact that those ‘data’ are as they are”. Hume cannot explain
“[w]hat accounts for the fact that one cannot survey in the same way
all the perceptions that there are”. (138)
But a mystery never fazed Hume; he thought all science ultimately
rested on inexplicable basic facts. So there must, at least, be more to it
than that. I think it is that Hume’s account not only doesn’t explain
personal bundling, but that, when pushed to the limit, it doesn’t even
allow for it. And that doesn’t just leave the model without a founda-
tion, but brings it crashing down on itself. If Hume could have said
that individual selves were “real”, then he could have maintained that
all causation, including mental causation, and speciﬁcally the genera-
tion of our ideas of causation and identity, amounted to no more than
an (unexplained) pattern in each person’s perceptions. Or, if he could
have said that perceptions were “really connected”, then he could have
maintained that the self is no more than a connected bundle of such
perceptions (with certain patterns in it) and proceeded as before.
Did our perceptions either inhere in something simple and indi-
vidual, or did the mind perceive some real connexion among
them, there wou’d be no difﬁculty in the case.
(636)
But the doctrine that perceptions are distinct existences precludes
either move.
If perceptions are distinct existences, they form a whole only by
being connected together. But no connections among distinct
existences are ever discoverable by human understanding. (635)
Thus, there is no principle of sorting perceptions into personal bun-
dles; and without such sorting, the observable patterns, on which
everything is supposed to rest, simply do not exist.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Hu m e on per s onal i de n t i t y
7 1
Holding both that perceptions are distinct existences, and that real
connections among them are never discoverable, renders the account
of personal identity, and with it Hume’s entire empiricist “science of
man”, incoherent. This is what I take him to have meant when he
summed up:
In short there are two principles, which I cannot render consis-
tent; nor is it in my power to renounce either of them, viz. that
all our perceptions are distinct existences, and that the mind never
perceives any real connexion among distinct existences.
(636)
Notes:
1 There is some question of what Hume takes the survey of a
strictly identical object to be (or feel like), since he doesn’t allow
that there are any—at least not any that endure. Perhaps a con-
tinuing reﬂective survey of a single (ﬂeeting) perception provides
the necessary point of comparison.
2 See, for instance, Price 1940/65. In my 1977 manuscript, I also cite
Strawson in this connection; but I am now (1997) unable to re-
cover the reference.
3 Husserl is said to have regarded Hume as the ﬁrst descriptive
phenomenologist; perhaps this is what he had in mind.
4 See, for instance, Price 1940/65 and Penelhum 1955/65.
5 At least he does in the section: “Of scepticism with regard to the
senses”—see especially pages 215–218.
6 Conceivably, all perceptions could come with little “signatures” on
them, which were the same for two perceptions just in case those
perceptions belonged to the same person. In that case, resem-
blance (in respect of signature) would be both necessary and
sufﬁcient for allocation to the same bundle. But Hume makes no
such suggestion; and we can well imagine his empiricist ridicule
of the idea, had someone else ventured it.
7 In principle, the tokens could be interspersed, so long as each
book had its own distinctive typeface (see preceding footnote).
8 Stroud cites an earlier version of the present paper in setting up
his point.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Matter
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

ch a pt e r  f o u r
Analog and
Analog
When I began this paper (years ago) my concern was with the grand-
sounding claim that any analog computer can be digitally simulated to
any desired degree of precision. Along the way, however, I found the
deﬁnitions of ‘digital’ and ‘analog’ to be tricky and interesting in their
own right, and they now comprise the bulk of the paper. But the
original issue returns at the end, and its resolution involves distin-
guishing stricter and broader senses of ‘analog’—hence my curious
title.
1 Digital
Deﬁnitions of terms like ‘analog’ and ‘digital’ are guided ﬁrst by para-
digm cases, and intuitions about what these cases have in common. In
the ﬁnal analysis, however, a deﬁnition should be more than merely
adequate to the intuitive data. It should show that the cases cited are
instances of a theoretically interesting general kind, and it should
emphasize the fundamental basis of that theoretical interest. An ideal
deﬁnition makes manifest why the term in question is worth deﬁning.
This ideal is easier to approach for ‘digital’ than for ‘analog’.
Standard examples of digital devices include Arabic numerals, aba-
cuses, alphabets, electrical switches, musical notation, poker chips,
and (digital) computers.1 What is important and distinctive about
these cases? Several common features stand out.
1 Flawless copying (and preservation) are quite feasible. For
instance, no copy of a Rembrandt painting is aesthetically
equal to the original, and the paintings themselves are slowly
deteriorating. By contrast, there are millions of perfect copies
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

76
H av i n g Though t
of (most of) Shakespeare’s sonnets, and the sonnets them-
selves are not deteriorating. The difference is that a sonnet is
determined by a sequence of letters, and letters are easy to
reproduce—because modest smudges and squiggles don’t
matter. The same goes for musical scores, stacks of poker
chips, and so on.
2 Interesting cases tend to be complex—that is, composites
formed in standard ways from a kit of standard components,
like molecules from atoms. Complexity can also be diachro-
nic, in which case the standard components are actually stan-
dard steps or “moves” constituting a sequential pattern. For
example, digits of only ten standard kinds sufﬁce, with a sign
and decimal point, for writing any Arabic numeral; moreover,
a sequence of steps of a few standard sorts will sufﬁce for any
multiplication in this notation. Likewise, the most elaborate
switching networks can be built with the simplest relays; and
all classical symphonies are scored with the same handful of
basic symbols.
3 There can be exactly equivalent structures in different media.
Thus, the sonnets could be printed in italics, chiseled in
stone, stamped in Braille, or transmitted in Morse code—and
nothing would be lost. The same computer program can run
on vacuum-tube or solid-state hardware; poker chips can be
plastic disks, dried beans, or matchsticks.
I call these features copyability, complexity, and medium independence,
respectively. The question is: What do they all presuppose? Out of
what deep root do they all grow?
All digital devices involve some form of writing and then reading
various tokens of various types. That is, there are procedures for pro-
ducing tokens, given the types that they are supposed to be, and
procedures for telling or determining the types of given tokens. For
example, penciling on white paper a particular inscription of the letter
‘A’ is a way of writing a token of that alphabetic type, which can then
be read by eye. But also, rotating a switch to a speciﬁed click-stop is a
way of “writing” a token of that setting (type); and that token can then
be “read” by determining which of the connected circuits will now
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Analo g  and analo g
77
conduct electricity. These examples emphasize that the tokens don’t
have to be symbols (that is, represent or mean anything), and that
writing and reading are here generalized to cover whatever it takes to
produce and reidentify the relevant tokens.
But what makes the device digital is something more speciﬁc about
the write and read procedures: they must be “positive” and “reliable”.
A positive procedure is one which can succeed absolutely and without
qualiﬁcation—that is, not merely to a high degree, with astonishing
precision, or almost entirely, but perfectly, one hundred percent!
Clearly, whether something is a positive procedure depends on what
counts as success. Parking the car in the garage (in the normal man-
ner) is a positive procedure, if getting it all the way in is all it takes to
succeed; but if complete success requires getting it exactly centered
between the walls, then no parking procedure will be positive. There
is no positive procedure for cutting a six-foot board, but there are
plenty for cutting boards six feet, plus or minus an inch. The ‘can
succeed’ means feasibly, and that will depend on the technology and
resources available. But we needn’t worry about the limits of feasibil-
ity, because we care only about procedures that are also reliable—ones
which, under suitable conditions, can be counted on to succeed virtu-
ally every time. With the available technology and resources, reliable
procedures are in a sense “easy”, or at least established and routine.
What counts as success for write and read procedures? Evidently
that the write procedure actually produce a token of the type re-
quired, and that the read procedure correctly identify the type of the
token supplied. But these are not independent, since usually the pro-
cedures themselves jointly function as a working deﬁnition of the
types—what counts as an inscription of the letter ‘A’ is determined by
what writers produce as one and readers recognize as one. The impor-
tant constraint is that these be the same, or rather that whatever the
writers produce be correctly recognized by the readers, and nothing
else be recognized by the readers at all. In other words, the require-
ment really applies to the composite procedures for the write-read
“round-trip”, plus a speciﬁcation of suitable environmental conditions;
and there is a kind of trade-off in how stringent the various parts need
to be. Thus if the write procedures are very precise, and the suitable
conditions provide a very clean, noise-free environment, then the read
procedures can get away with being fairly lax; and so on.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

78
H av i n g Though t
So we can deﬁne a digital device as:
1 a set of types,
2 a set of feasible procedures for writing and reading tokens of
those types, and
3 a speciﬁcation of suitable operating conditions, such that
4 under those conditions, the procedures for the write-read
cycle are positive and reliable.
Note that the success condition, that written tokens be correctly read
as written (and nothing else be read), indirectly requires that no token
in fact be a token of more than one type. That is, the types are dis-
joint, and hence the relation ‘are-of-the-same-type’ is an equivalence
relation.
Now that the deﬁnition has been given, I want to make ﬁve follow-
up points, which should explain it a little further and reveal more of
the motivations behind it. First, the copyability feature of digital
devices is easily accounted for; indeed, the deﬁnition itself is not far
from being a fuller statement of what that feature is. The original can
be read positively and reliably; and these readings (type identiﬁca-
tions) can simply function directly as the speciﬁcations to the write
procedures for a new round of tokens. The new tokens can also be
read positively and reliably, and hence they are exactly the same as
(type identical to) the originals—that is, a perfect copy.
Second, (non-degenerate) digitalness is not ubiquitous. One often
hears that a system is digital only relative to a description; and too
often it is inferred that any object can be construed as any digital
system, relative to some outlandish (but true) description. Being digi-
tal, however, is no more “relative” than being a fugue or an ampliﬁer.
True, the types and procedures (like the musical theme, or the input
and output ports) must be speciﬁed before the deﬁnition applies; but
whether there is such a speciﬁcation according to which the deﬁnition
is in fact satisﬁed is not at all relative or trivial or automatic.
Third, my deﬁnition differs from Nelson Goodman’s (by which it
was largely inspired) in two signiﬁcant ways. He says, in effect, that a
disjoint set of types is digital just in case
for any candidate token, and for at least one of any pair of types
(in the set), it is theoretically possible to determine that the
candidate is not a token of that type.2
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Analo g  and  analo g
7 9
In other words, for any candidate token, all but at most one of the
types can be positively ruled out (by some theoretically possible
method)—no token is ever equivocal between two distinct types.
This is most easily explained with examples. Suppose that tokens
are penciled line-segments less than a foot long; let Lx be the length of
segment x (in inches), and let n be an integer. Then we can specify
four different systems in terms of the following four conditions on
two line segments being tokens of the same type:
1 Lx = Ly (any difference in length is a difference in type);
2 n < Lx, Ly < n+1 (segments are of the same type if their
lengths fall between the same consecutive inch-marks);
3 n+ ½ < Lx, Ly < n+1 (as above, except that segments
between any inch-mark and the next higher half-inch-mark
are ill-formed—that is, not tokens of any type); and
4 Lx = Ly = n (any difference in length is a difference in type,
except that only segments of exactly integral lengths are ac-
ceptable—all others are ill-formed).
The ﬁrst system is not digital because, no matter what (theoretically
possible) method of measurement you used, there would be indeﬁ-
nitely many types to which any given token might belong, for all you
could tell. Similarly for the second, except that the problem cases are
only the segments very close to integral length, and there are only two
types you can’t rule out. The third system is a paradigm case of a
digital device (assuming you can measure to within a quarter inch).
The last case is the troublemaker; it is digital by Goodman’s crite-
rion, but it doesn’t have the copyability feature—and that for two
reasons. First, even if there were any tokens, they couldn’t be recog-
nized as such, as opposed to ill-formed scribbles (noise); and second,
duplicate tokens could never be produced at all (except by miraculous
accident). Both defects are remedied by requiring that the write-read
cycle be positive (and reliable).
The second difference between my deﬁnition and Goodman’s was
hinted at in the remark about a stringency trade-off. It is common
digital electronics practice to build pulse detectors that ﬂip “high” on
signals over about two and a half volts, ﬂopping “low” on smaller
signals. Since this is a sharp threshold, and not even very consistent
from unit to unit or moment to moment, these detectors cannot
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

80
H av i n g  Though t
deﬁne a digital token-scheme, by Goodman’s lights. What saves the
day for engineers is that pulse generators produce only signals very
close to zero and ﬁve volts respectively, and the whole apparatus can
be well shielded against static, so the detectors never actually get
confused. Again focusing on the write-read cycle in the ambient con-
ditions is the deﬁnitional remedy. But I think a broader point can be
made. In making his determinations “theoretically possible”, without
mentioning the determination procedures, let alone the production
procedures or the working conditions, Goodman betrays a mathema-
tician’s distaste for the nitty-gritty of practical devices. But digital, like
accurate, economical, or heavy-duty, is a mundane engineering notion,
root and branch. It only makes sense as a practical means to cope with
the vagaries and vicissitudes, the noise and drift, of earthly existence.
The deﬁnition should reﬂect this character.
My fourth follow-up is a reply to David Lewis, and some com-
ments on complexity. Lewis offers a counterexample to Goodman,
which, if it worked at all, would work against my deﬁnition as well.3
Imagine representing numerical values with a variable resistance—a
setting of 137 ohms represents 137, and so on. And suppose the vari-
able resistor is constructed with a rotary switch and a lot of discrete
one-ohm resistors, such that the 137th switch position connects 137
resistors in series, for a 137-ohm total. This, says Lewis, is analog
representation (hence, not digital), just as if the variable resistor were
a sliding contact moving smoothly along a wire with uniform resis-
tance per unit length. But, since the switch has click-stops, he claims
it would be (mis-)classiﬁed as digital by Goodman.
I think the case is underdescribed. Assuming the representations
are to be read with an ohmmeter, then we need to know how accurate
the meter is, how precise and stable the one-ohm resistors are, and the
total number of switch positions. If there are a thousand positions,
and the meter and resistors are good only to one percent, then
(whether it’s analog or not) the device surely isn’t digital; but it satis-
ﬁes neither Goodman’s conditions nor mine. On the other hand, if
there are only two hundred positions, and the meter and resistors are
good to one part in a thousand, then it satisﬁes both Goodman’s
conditions and mine. But I think it’s clearly digital—just as digital as
a stack of silver dollars, even when the croupier “counts” them by
height.
Lewis, however, has another point in mind. He notes (326) “the
many combinations of values” that are possible when several variables
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Analo g  and  analo g
8 1
are used together. For instance, a bank of six switches, each with only
ten positions, could represent any integer up to a million, even with
crude equipment. This is a special case of the complexity feature;
Lewis calls it ‘multidigitality’, and proposes it as an additional condi-
tion on digital representation. To evaluate this proposal, we should
see how the multidigitality (complexity) condition relates to the other
conditions, whether Goodman’s or mine.
Consider two similar systems for representing wagers in a poker
game. Each uses different colored tokens for different denominations,
red and blue being worth ten and a hundred times more than white,
respectively. But in one system the tokens are standard colored disks
(“chips”), while in the other they are measured volumes of colored
sand—one tablespoonful corresponding to one chip, say. Though
both systems are multidigital in Lewis’s sense, the complexity is silly
and useless in the sand case. For suppose players can measure volumes
to within two percent, and imagine trying to bet 325 units. It’s crazy!
The expected error on the blue sand (the grains that stick to the
spoon) is more valuable than the entire ﬁve spoonsful of white sand.
A stack of three blue chips, on the other hand, can be counted posi-
tively and reliably (no residual error at all); so the white chips are not
overwhelmed, and remain perfectly signiﬁcant.
Lewis, of course, would not deem poker sand digital, any more
than I would; his multidigitality is a further condition, not an alterna-
tive. What the example shows is rather that multidigitality only pays
off in systems that are already digital in my sense—the sense in which
poker chips would still be digital even if they were all one color. I take
the lesson to be that my deﬁnition has already captured the basic
phenomenon, and that complex systems are just an important special
case, which the underlying digitalness makes feasible. I see the com-
plexity feature not as essential to being digital, but (if anything) vice
versa.
In considering complex types, it is essential that not only their
constituent atomic types be digital, but also their modes of combina-
tion. For instance, the power of Arabic numerals depends not only on
the reliable positive procedures for (writing and reading) individual
digit tokens, but just as much on the reliable positive procedures for
concatenating them left to right, and so on. In effect, syntactical struc-
tures must themselves be digital types. And this point applies equally
to diachronic complexity: each individual step (transformation, move)
must be a token of a type in a set whose members’ tokens can be
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

82
H av i n g  Though t
produced and recognized reliably and positively. The types in this set
might be identiﬁed with executable instructions, as in computer lan-
guages, or with permissive rules, as in logical deductions or formal
games like chess and checkers. It should be clear that complexity in
digital devices goes far beyond arithmetic (or poker chip) multidigi-
tality, and that the crucial dependence on reliable positive procedures
rises dramatically with intricacy and elaborateness.
My ﬁfth follow-up point is really just a footnote to the preceding.
In digital devices, the main thing is eliminating confusion over the
type of any token; and a primary motivation (payoff) for this is the
ability to keep great complexity manageable and reliable. In such cases
it is generally the complexity itself—that is, the structure, form or
pattern of the complex tokens and processes—which really matters;
the digital atomic tokens are merely means to this larger end. Hence
any digital atomic tokens which will admit of a corresponding variety
of digital combinations and transformations would do as well. Since
all the relevant structure is digital, the substitute will be not just
similar in form but exactly isomorphic. (The sonnets can be spelled
perfectly in Morse code, and so on.) The very features which make
reproduction reliable and positive also make formal transubstantia-
tion reliable and positive. Digital devices are precisely those in which
complex form is reliably and positively abstractable from matter—
hence the medium-independence feature.
2 Analog
‘Analog’ can be understood in broader and narrower senses; but even
in the latter, analog devices comprise a motley crew. I am not at all
conﬁdent that a satisfactory general deﬁnition is possible—which
amounts, I suppose, to doubting whether they are a well-deﬁned nat-
ural kind. Standard examples of analog devices include slide rules,
scale models, rheostats, photographs, linear ampliﬁers, string models
of railroad networks, loudspeakers, and electronic analog computers.
As before, we can try to extract some salient common features from
these varied cases; three stand out.
1 Variations are smooth or continuous, without “gaps”. There
are no click-stops, or forbidden intermediate positions on a
slide rule or a rheostat; photographs have (in principle) a
continuous gray-scale, varying with two continuous position
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Analo g  and  analo g
83
dimensions. This is everybody’s aboriginal intuitive idea of
analog systems; unlike switches, abacuses, or alphabetic in-
scriptions, every setting or shape (within the relevant range)
is allowed—nothing is ill-formed.
2 Within the relevant range, every difference makes a differ-
ence. The smallest rotation of a rheostat counts as changing
the setting (a little); slight bending alters loudspeaker output;
a photographic copy isn't perfect if it's slightly fuzzier, slightly
darker, or slightly more contrasty. This is the complement of
the previous feature: not only are all variations allowed, but
they all matter (again unlike switches, abacuses, and letters).
In general, however, the smaller the difference, the less it
matters.
3 Nevertheless, only certain “dimensions” of variation are rele-
vant. Slide rules can be made indifferently of metal or bam-
boo, and their color and weight don’t (strictly) matter. The
thickness of the paper and even the chemistry of the emul-
sion are irrelevant to a photograph as such—assuming they
don’t affect the distribution of gray levels.
I call these the smoothness, sensitivity, and dimensionality features, respec-
tively.
Though it need not (for any theoretical reason) be the best ap-
proach, we can pattern the deﬁnition of ‘analog’ after that of ‘digital’.
That is, we start with a set of types, and consider the procedures for
producing and reidentifying tokens of those types. For analog devices,
the procedures for the write-read cycle are approximation procedures—
that is, ones which can “come close” to perfect success. More speciﬁ-
cally, there is some notion of margin of error (degree of deviation from
perfect success) such that:
1 the smaller this margin is set, the harder it is to stay within it;
2 available procedures can (reliably) stay within a pretty small
margin;
3 there is no limit to how small a margin better (future, more
expensive) procedures may be able to stay within;4 but
4 the margin can never be zero—perfect procedures are impos-
sible.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

84
H av i n g  Though t
So all ordinary (and extraordinary) procedures for parking the car
right in the center of the garage, cutting six-foot boards, measuring
out three tablespoons of blue sand, and copying photographs, are
approximation procedures. But there are no approximation proce-
dures for raising the dead, writing poetry, winning at roulette, or
counting small piles of poker chips. Approximation procedures are, in
a clear sense, the antithesis of positive procedures; the two are exclu-
sive, but of course not exhaustive. There is no need to write out the
deﬁnition of analog device—it is the same as for digital, except with
‘approximation’ substituted for ‘positive’ (and a margin of error in-
cluded in the speciﬁed conditions).
The follow-up points again tell the story. First, Goodman says a
scheme is analog if dense—that is, if between any two types there is a
third. (See pages 160 and 136.) The main difﬁculty is that ‘between’ is
not well-deﬁned for all cases that seem clearly analog. What, for
instance, is “between” a photograph of Roosevelt and one of
Churchill? Yet it is easy to set resolution and linearity limits such that
copying photographs is an approximation procedure. Similar observa-
tions apply to scale models.
Second, Lewis suggests that analog representation is representa-
tion in terms of magnitudes that are primitive or almost primitive in
some good reconstruction of the language of physics. (324–25) He
mentions only representations of numbers, and it isn't clear how he
would generalize his criterion to non-numerical representations (to
portraits, for instance), or to non-representational analog devices. But
more to the point, I see no reason why we could not have analog
representation of numbers by, say, hue (as in multiple pH paper or
various ﬂame-tests) or even by bacterial growth rate (say, in a model
of a resource-limited chain reaction); yet surely neither of these is
“almost primitive” (whatever exactly that means).5
Third, it seems to me that there is an important digital-like charac-
ter to all the standard analog devices—speciﬁcally in the dimensional-
ity feature. Speaking freely for a moment, the essential point about
(atomic) digital types is that there tend to be relatively few of them,
and they are all clearly distinct and separated. Though the types of
analog schemes are themselves not like this (they “blend smoothly”
into one another), the dimensions along which they vary are relatively
few and clearly distinct. Thus for photographs there are exactly three
orthogonal dimensions: horizontal, vertical, and gray scale. A string
model of a rail network has exactly one string piece for each rail link
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Analo g  and  analo g
85
and exactly one knot for each junction (none of which blend to-
gether). But the best example is a regular analog computer with its
electronic adders, integrators, multipliers, inverters, and the like, each
as discrete and determinate in type as any mathematical symbol, and
their circuit connections as well-deﬁned as the formation of any equa-
tion. Indeed, though the state and adjustment types of an analog
computer are analog, the set-up types are perfectly digital—the com-
ponent identiﬁcations and interconnections are positive and reliable.
This “second-order” digitalness of analog devices is important in
two ways. First, it is, at least roughly, a necessary condition for the
write and read procedures to be approximation procedures in complex
systems. In one-dimensional devices, like rheostats and slide rules, it
sufﬁces to say that between any distinct types there lies a third. But in
multidimensional cases, where betweenness is not in general well
deﬁned, it is crucial to have the determinate set of independent di-
mensions such that a copy which is close on each dimension is ipso
facto close overall—hence the intelligible importance of resolution in
photocopying, of precision components in analog computers, and so
on. This is what gives approximation its sense.
It is also what gives digital simulation its grip, and for essentially
the same reason. Everybody knows that photographs can be “digi-
tized” by dividing the area into equally spaced dots, and the gray scale
into equally spaced shades; the ﬁneness of the spacings determines the
quality of the digitizing, just as the smallness of the error margins
determines the closeness of the approximation. Likewise when a digi-
tal computer program simulates an analog computer, the values of all
the ﬁxed components and the initial values of all the variables are
stored in speciﬁed registers, and then successive variable values are
computed incrementally, using interaction equations determined by
the circuit structure. And the accuracy of the simulation is controlled
(primarily) by the number of bits in all those registers, and the ﬁne-
ness of the time increment. If the system were not second-order digi-
tal, such simulation could not get off the ground: there would be no
particular set of variables and parameters to digitize in speciﬁed regis-
ters (let alone equations for computing their interactions).
My fourth follow-up point, then, is the original sixty-four-dollar
question. Is every analog device second-order digital? Or, is it really
true that any analog device can in principle be digitally simulated to
any desired degree of precision? To the extent that the suggestions in
the previous three paragraphs hold up, the answers would appear to
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

86
H av i n g  Though t
be ‘yes’. Being second-order digital is equally the general condition for
the possibility of write-read approximation procedures and of digital
simulation techniques; and approximation procedures for the write-
read cycle are criterial for analog devices.
They are criterial, that is, for analog devices in the narrow sense—
that's all we've discussed so far. But the universal digital simulability
claim is often made in a more sweeping tone, as if it applied to every-
thing. Are there systems, perhaps “analog” in some broader sense,
which are not second-order digital, and not necessarily digitally simu-
lable (to whatever desired precision, and so on)? There are, of course,
all manner of mongrel devices, analog in some respects or parts, digi-
tal in others; but these present no greater obstacle to simulation than
purebred devices. If we think of digital devices as clean and resilient,
and analog ones as messy and touchy (with the mongrels in be-
tween?), then the question becomes: Can there be systems even mess-
ier and touchier than pure analog—second-order messy, as it were?
I don't see why not. Consider the metabolic system of the rat,
tokens of which are often used as “analogs” of our own metabolism, to
predict the effects of fancy drugs, and the like. Now, some general
metabolic relationships are known, and quite a few more speciﬁc local
mechanisms are understood. But these by no means provide a com-
plete description, in terms of which responses to strange chemicals
can conﬁdently be predicted. The millions of delicate hormonal
balances, catalytic reactions, surface effects, and immunological re-
sponses, all interdependent in a biochemical frenzy of staggering pro-
portions, can be catastrophically disrupted by the most peculiar of
“side-effects”. A minute occurrence on one side of a tiny membrane
can have vastly different consequences from the same occurrence on
the other side—and every rat contains billions of membranes.
There is essentially no way to gain detailed, quantitative control
over such a mess—no hope of delineating a set of “state-variables”
which fully characterize it at a time. Risky as long-term predictions
are, I think it safe to announce that there will never be a digital
simulation of human physiology reliable enough to supplant (or even
challenge) biological and clinical testing of new drugs. And the rea-
son, basically, is that metabolic systems are not second-order digital.
Accordingly, there is also no specifying the “grain” or “resolution” of an
approximation procedure for biochemical duplication of, say, healthy
rats; there are no relevant dimensions along which such speciﬁcations
could make sense.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Analo g  and  analo g
8 7
Fifth and ﬁnal follow-up point: “But isn’t physics second-order
digital? What about digital simulation at the level of atoms and mole-
cules (quarks and leptons, … whatever)?” I have two different replies
to this question. In the ﬁrst place, the idea is absolutely preposterous.
Remember how impressed you were when you ﬁrst heard that a com-
puter with the capacity of the human brain would be the size of Texas
and twenty stories high?6 Well, the fastest and largest state-of-the-art
computers today can be overwhelmed by the problem of digitally
simulating a single large organic molecule (atom for atom); and there
are more molecules in a human body than there would be pocket
calculators, if the entire Earth were packed solid with them.7 But
simulating the molecules individually wouldn’t scratch the surface:
when their interactions are included, the required computations go up
combinatorially!
But second, and more to the point, switching to the atomic level
changes the subject. When the claim is made that photographs, linear
ampliﬁers, and analog computers can be digitally simulated to any
desired precision, that has nothing to do with fundamental physics; it
would not matter if physicists had found swirling vortices in the
plenum, or inﬁnitely many inﬁnitesimal monads. The digital simula-
bility of analog devices is a claim about macroscopic phenomena. The
range and variety of circumstances in which it holds is truly astonish-
ing and important (the scientiﬁc revolution depended on it); but it is
also important that such simulability (that is, second-order digital-
ness) is not universal. This second important fact is completely missed
and covered up by the careless shift in topic to micro-physics.
3 Conclusion
‘Digital’ and ‘analog’ (in the narrow or strict sense) are both best
understood in terms of the kind of practical procedures employed for
the writing and reading of tokens of allowed types—these being posi-
tive and approximation procedures, respectively. And, sticking to the
narrow sense, it is plausibly the case that any analog device can (in
principle) be digitally simulated to any desired precision. But there are
other cases which, though they do not ﬁt this strict mold, still seem to
be “analog” in some broader sense; and for at least some of these, the
digital simulability claim is wildly implausible.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

88
H av i n g  Though t
Notes:
1 I resort to the noncommittal “devices” because anything more
speciﬁc seems wrong; thus (as the above list shows) not every-
thing digital is a representation, a process, a computer, a machine,
or what have you. Indeed, even the implication of plan or contriv-
ance in ‘device’ should be ignored, for some biological systems
might be digital.
2 Goodman 1968, 136–37 and 161. This is a paraphrase into my
terminology of his deﬁnition of “syntactic ﬁnite differentiation”,
which is his essential condition for being a digital scheme, which
has similar conditions imposed on its semantics (152 and 161). I
ignore the latter because in my view digital devices are not neces-
sarily representational or symbolic.
3 Lewis 1971, 322. He actually offers two counterexamples, but they
are based on the same idea; so I consider only the simpler one.
4 Quantum-mechanical limits are almost always distracting and
boring; so let’s ignore them.
5 Ned Block and Jerry Fodor make essentially this point in an old
(circa 1971) manuscript which, so far as I know, has never been
published.
6 I've forgotten where I heard this, or how long ago; and Lord
knows how the calculation was made. But I've never forgotten the
image.
7 180 lb = 5 × 1028 hydrogen masses; the volume of the Earth is
7 × 1025 cubic inches.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

ch a pt e r  ﬁv e
Weak 
Supervenience
I shall argue against token identity theory, not by defending either
dualism or type identity theory, but rather by promoting a variety of
physicalist monism—“weak supervenience” I call it—which is so
weak that it entails no kind of identity theory, and yet preserves a
suitable “primacy” for the physical. The argument proceeds in three
broad stages. The ﬁrst (sections 1 and 2) is a rebuttal of Davidson’s
inﬂuential argument in favor of token identities of mental and physi-
cal events. The second stage (sections 3 and 4) is a demonstration that
physicalism without identity theory is a coherent position. And the
third (sections 5 and 6) is a series of examples, designed to show how
implausible token identity theory is, once one appreciates what it
claims vis-à-vis the alternative.
1 The argument for anomalous monism
I begin with Davidson’s (1970/80) argument not merely because of its
wide inﬂuence, but (mainly) because the points to be raised will be
important in the remainder of the paper, and are also of some interest
in themselves. Davidson considers only events, and his aim is to show
that every mental event is also a physical event. He relies on an
intuitive test for whether an event is mental or physical: mental events
are just those which are describable in mental terminology, and physi-
cal events are those describable in physical terminology. This test is
only intuitive, both because the respective kinds of terminology are
not precisely deﬁned, and because the conditions on describability in a
given terminology are not fully speciﬁed. The latter is more serious
than it seems, because all the conditions that ﬁrst come to mind turn
out to be way too inclusive, which could trivialize the result (for
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

9 0
H av i n g Though t
instance, if all events counted as physical, by deﬁnition). Still, the test
is reasonable on an intuitive level, and it sufﬁces for present purposes.
The fact that the test is description-relative, however, is important
to the argument; for subsumption under scientiﬁc laws is also descrip-
tion-relative, and everything turns on that connection. A law (what-
ever else it is) is a statement, in the terminology of the relevant
science, to the effect that all events (say) of such and such a sort are
thus and so. But an event will be of the speciﬁed sort just in case it
satisﬁes the description in the expression of the law. So, if it could be
shown that all events in a certain class must be subsumption instances
of the laws of physics, and hence must have descriptions in the termi-
nology of physics, then it would have been shown that all those events
are physical events—by the given intuitive test. This essentially is
Davidson’ s strategy.
There is one more preliminary: the distinction between “strict
laws” and mere “practical lore”. A strict law is a member of a closed,
comprehensive system of laws, each of which is perfectly precise,
explicit, and exception-free. In other words, there is nothing hedged,
or approximate, or incomplete about systems of strict laws—they say
everything there is to say about their domain, and they say it exactly.
Practical lore, by contrast, is little more than a compendium of rules
of thumb—rough generalizations which are only loosely related to
one another, are by no means comprehensive, and are always padded
with escape clauses like “more or less”, “by and large”, or “other things
being equal”. There are, of course, intermediate gradations, including
most of science; and it may well be that nothing we now know how to
say is a genuine strict law. Davidson holds, however, that mathemati-
cal physics provides the paradigm of what strict laws should look like;
and it is, moreover, our only viable candidate for being on the track of
some. That is, we have reason to believe that the laws of “ultimate”
physics will be strict laws, and no reason to believe that there will be
any other strict laws.
With this groundwork laid, Davidson can state three plausible
premises from which his conclusion seems to follow directly.
1 (At least many) mental events are causally related to other
events.
2 Any two events related as cause and effect must be subsum-
able under a strict law—that is, they must have descriptions
under which they instantiate such a law.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Weak s u perveni en c e
9 1
3 Strict laws can be framed only in the terminology of (ulti-
mate) physics—which, in particular, will not include any
“mental” terms.
The argument is this: from 1 and 2, (at least many) mental events
must have descriptions under which they instantiate strict laws; and
from 3, these descriptions will have to be in the terms of ultimate
physics. Thus, by the original observation that physical events are just
those describable in physical terms, (at least many) mental events are
also physical events. Though he declines to argue for it, Davidson in
fact admits to the view that all mental events enter into causal rela-
tions, and hence are all physical. Since it will simplify exposition, and
make no other difference to what follows, we will henceforth stick to
this stronger, unqualiﬁed view.
Davidson calls his position anomalous monism—“monism” because
it entails that every event is a physical event (though some may be
mental events as well); but “anomalous” because it entails—in premise
3—that no strict laws can be framed in mental terminology (mental
events, described as such are “lawless”). The idea is that, although men-
tal event predicates and physical event predicates range over the same
domain of events, the (actual and possible) extensions of the former
are so gerrymandered with respect to those of the latter, that no strict
generalizations can be expressed in terms of them. Essentially the
same view is also often called token identity theory, in contrast to the
older type identity theory. (See, for instance, Fodor 1974/81.) The claim
is that each separate, particular mental event (“token”) that actually
occurs is numerically identical to some particular physical event
(token); but the “kinds” or “types” intended by mental event predi-
cates are not nomologically or necessarily equivalent to any kinds or
types intended by physical event predicates (no matter how complex).
2 Robust versus mathematical events
One might, of course, dispute any of Davidson’s premises; the third is
particularly controversial. I want to focus, instead, however, on the
use of the term ‘event’, which is, I believe, equivocal between the ﬁrst
two premises.
In ordinary usage, an event is an occurrence or happening which is
somehow noteworthy, important, or conspicuous. Thus we speak of
“current events”, the “main event” of the evening, an “eventful day”,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

9 2
H av i n g Though t
and so on. This isn’t terribly precise; and besides, what counts as
“noteworthy” is very much a function of the situation and interests at
hand—the slightest twitch could be a crucial turning point, in the
right circumstances. Clearly, no airtight set of necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions is forthcoming for this notion; but the following should do
for our purposes.
An event is a relatively abrupt change in the state or course of
things, which therefore stands out against a local background of
things proceeding smoothly, or without interruption.
So, in this sense, the switch tripping and the light coming on are both
events, as are decisions and sudden realizations, battles and billiard
ball collisions. But the Mississippi River continuing to ﬂow quietly as
usual (past Memphis at noon) is not an event; nor is it an event that
the moon stays in orbit at midnight, or that the light stays off at some
moment when no one touches the switch. So long as nothing “hap-
pens” to a billiard ball, it remains “uneventfully” on course.
Most of physics has nothing to say about events in this ordinary
sense. To be sure, one can use, say, classical mechanics to predict the
occurrence of an eclipse, or the results of a billiard ball collision. But
such events are not the subject matter of the theory; none of the
variables in any of Newton’s laws ever takes an eclipse or a collision as
its value. Rather, the values of these variables are always the magni-
tudes of the various relevant quantitative physical variables and
parameters (forces, masses, distances, and so on); and the laws simply
state that certain mathematical relationships invariably obtain among
these magnitudes—no matter what (if anything) “happens”. Events
like eclipses and collisions can be predicted on this basis, even though
the laws say nothing about them, just because their occurrences hap-
pen to be perspicuously correlated with certain conjunctions of the
quantitative values.
Nevertheless, the traditional view in philosophy has always been
that science is concerned with the causal relations among events; and
so, to accommodate that view, another sense of “event” has been ex-
torted from English.
An event is an instantaneous valuation of the applicable physical
variables at a point (or, perhaps, in a region).
So in this sense, the velocity of the Mississippi at Memphis at noon
(that is, the velocity’s being such and such) is an event; likewise, the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Weak s u perveni en c e
93
mass, momentum, and average temperature of the moon at midnight
are events, and its traversing a kilometer in a second is an inﬁnite set
of such events—or, alternatively, a single complex event. By deﬁni-
tion, these are the “events” which are related by the laws of physics;
but, on the face of it, they bear little resemblance to what are called
‘events’ in the more ordinary usage described above. To avoid confu-
sion, I will call events in the ordinary sense (where something “hap-
pens”) robust events, in contrast to the sense just described, which I
call mathematical events. The laws of physics relate mathematical
events, but they do not apply (at least not directly) to robust events.1
Likewise, we may distinguish a special usage of “cause” to go with
strict laws and mathematical events; instead of the robust “instigator”
or “bringer about” (the explosion caused the shock wave which caused
the avalanche), we have the “cause” as the mathematically sufﬁcient
condition, given the laws (the state of a closed system at t causes its
state at t+∆t). Finally, the term ‘physical’ itself plays a double role. It
can be used strictly for that pertaining to the theoretical science of
physics—in which case, physical events are mathematical events char-
acterized in the same terms that appear in the laws of mathematical
physics. But at least as often, ‘physical’ is used as a sort of catch-all
term for everything contingent and “substantive” which isn’t expressly
set aside in some special category like the mental, the functional, the
ethical, or what have you; here we ﬁnd also the “merely” physical, or
that pertaining to “mere things”. Though explosions and avalanches
(and mouth movements and arms going up) may not be the stuff of
mathematical physics, they are surely physical events in this larger and
more amorphous sense, which is also widely used in philosophy. The
point is that the terms ‘event’, ‘cause’, and even ‘physical’ must be
handled just as carefully as the term ‘law’ in arguments about physics
and physicalism.
With this in mind, consider what ‘event’ means in Davidson’s argu-
ment. To support his ﬁrst premise, that mental events are causally
related to other events, he gives a common sense example:
[I]f someone sank the Bismarck, then various mental events such
as perceivings, notings, calculations, judgements, decisions, in-
tentional actions, and changes of belief played a causal role in
the sinking of the Bismarck.
(208)
These, obviously, are events (and causal roles) in the robust, rather
than the mathematical sense. But the second premise states that
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

9 4
H av i n g Though t
events related as cause and effect must be subsumable under a strict
law, and strict laws apply only to mathematical events (and causation).
Thus, it seems that ‘event’ is used in two different ways in the two
premises; and, if so, the argument equivocates, and is invalid.
It might be replied that “really” all events are mathematical
events—robust events are just very complex mathematical events—so
there is no equivocation. To assume at the outset that mental events
are mathematical events, however, is tantamount to assuming the
conclusion; for mathematical events were essentially invented to be
whatever events mathematical physics talks about. A safer reply (be-
cause it will always work against any charge of equivocation) is to say
that the term ‘event’ is used generically—it denotes on each occasion
everything which is an event in either sense. This strategy builds the
implicit assumption of univocality into the premises. For Davidson’s
argument, the second premise would end up shouldering the entire
burden; for it would then say, in effect, that robust events are mathe-
matical events. Though this would remove any question of a logical
ﬂaw, it would raise questions about the exposition. Davidson gives no
indication that he means ‘event’ in this curious generic way, nor that
he means the second premise to conﬂate the speciﬁc senses; and he
offers not a word of support for the second premise—suggesting that
he does not regard it as the crucial move.*
3 Supervenience without token identity
Problems with the argument notwithstanding, Davidson’s conclusion
remains attractive; for it seems a last safe haven for physicalism, given
the sorry fate of various deﬁnitional and nomological reductions.
Even if there is no systematic way to line up mental predicates (kinds,
types) with physical counterparts, still each mental individual (token)
has got to be identical with some physical individual—on a one-by-
one basis. The situation is reassuringly asymmetrical, since though
every mental individual is physical, not every physical individual is
mental. And it preserves our inchoate but compelling sense that the
universe is basically physical—if you took away all the atoms, nothing
would be left behind. The question is: Can this intuition of “the
primacy of the physical” be preserved with any position weaker than
* Regarding the argument in this section, see the appendix (added in 1997).
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Weak s u perveni en c e
9 5
the token-identity thesis? I will try to show, in this section and the
next, that such a position can be deﬁned and that it is logically tenable
(coherent).
The initial clue comes from a passage of Davidson’s.
Although the position I describe denies there are psycho-physi-
cal laws, it is consistent with the view that mental characteristics
are in some sense dependent, or supervenient, on physical char-
acteristics. Such supervenience might be taken to mean that
there cannot be two events alike in all physical respects but
differing in some mental respect, or that an object cannot alter
in some mental respect without altering in some physical re-
spect.
(214)
The problem with this passage as it stands is that, in characterizing
supervenience, it takes the token-identity thesis for granted. Thus it
says, if two events are alike physically, then they (the very same two
events) cannot differ mentally; again, it is one and the same object
that cannot alter mentally without altering physically.
Kim (1978, 1979) gives an explicit deﬁnition of ‘supervenience’ (with
Davidson’s remarks clearly in mind), but he makes the same assump-
tion.2
A family of properties M is supervenient upon a family of proper-
ties N with respect to a domain D just in case, for any two objects
in the domain D, if they diverge in the family M then necessarily
they diverge in the family N; that is to say, for any x and y in D if
x and y are indiscernible with respect to the properties in the
family N, then necessarily x and y are indiscernible with respect
to the properties in M.
(1979, 41)
The properties in M and N are understood to be properties of the
same individuals, from the same domain D—which is all the token-
identity thesis requires.
Supervenience, however, can (and thus should) be deﬁned without
building in token identities. The central intuition is that “ﬁxing” the
physical ﬁxes everything, or that nothing could have been otherwise
without something physical having been otherwise. There is no rea-
son whatsoever to tie this intuition down to any particular domain of
individuals; that is, expressing the intuition need not at all be conﬁned
to the form: “For each individual, it could not …” The idea that ﬁxing
the physical ﬁxes everything need not be broken down on an individ-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

9 6
H av i n g Though t
ual-by-individual basis—it can be, so to speak, “world-wide”. Just as
objectors to so-called type-identity theories urge that physics need
not capture how the mental is “carved up” into kinds, I urge that it
need not capture how the mental is “carved up” into individuals. The
essential constraint is on sets of truths, without regard to how (or even
whether) those truths are decomposed into properties of individuals.
So removing the offending references to individuals (other than the
whole world), Davidson can be paraphrased roughly as follows.
It could not have been the case that the world was just as it is in
all physical respects, but different in some mental respect; or, the
world cannot alter in some mental respect without altering in
some physical respect.
To formulate an analogous paraphrase of Kim, we consider languages
whose sentences are evaluated at possible worlds in set W, and deﬁne
discernibility this way.
Two worlds in W are discernible with language L just in case there
is a sentence of L which is true at one, and not true at the other.
Then weak supervenience—that is, supervenience that does not (ex-
plicitly) entail the token-identity thesis—can be deﬁned as a relation
between two languages (relative to a set of possible worlds).
K weakly supervenes on L (relative to W) just in case any two
worlds in W discernible with K are discernible with L.
There is no mention here of the individuals (if any) in the domains of
K and L. (Notice also that the modality in Kim’s deﬁnition has been
absorbed into the quantiﬁcation over possible worlds.)
It remains to be shown that weak supervenience does not entail the
token-identity thesis implicitly; that is, that it is consistent to afﬁrm the
one while denying the other.
4 Weak supervenience and token identity
To show that weak supervenience is compatible with the denial of the
token-identity thesis, it sufﬁces to produce one consistent model in
which the former holds and the latter is false. For this purpose, let the
possible worlds in W be inﬁnite white sheets of paper, each with a ﬁnite
number of non-intersecting “loops” inscribed on it in black—where a
loop is a simple closed curve (ﬁgure) with a ﬁnite perimeter. For sim-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Weak s u perveni en c e
97
plicity, we suppose that polar coordinates are deﬁned for each world;
that is, the center, the unit of radius, and the directions north and positive
rotation are determined. Relative to these worlds, we consider two
languages, each a ﬁrst-order theory with identity.
The arrow language has in its domain (that is, the objects it is
intended to talk about) the real numbers and the “arrows”. An arrow is
a ray, starting from the center of the world, and extending in a straight
line without limit. There are three primitive predicates in the arrow
language.
Sxyz =df x is the sum of y and z.
Pxyz =df x is the product of y and z.
Barv =df a is an arrow v revolutions from north and black at 
radius r.
With these resources, various functions and relations (including
numerical inequalities) can be deﬁned; and the existence of certain
ﬁgures (for instance, circles concentric with the universe) can be as-
serted indirectly. However, inﬁnite expressions (such as inﬁnite sums)
are not allowed; so trigonometric functions, in particular, cannot be
deﬁned.
The loop language has in its domain only the loops. It has any
number of primitive predicates, of which the following ﬁve are to be
taken as typical.
Cx =df x is circular.
Qx =df x is square.
Exy =df x encloses y.
Lxy =df x is larger (in area) than y.
Mxy =df x and y are geometrically similar (in shape).
In case there is doubt about which other predicates are relevantly
“like” these, then restrict the language to these only.
The loop language supervenes on the arrow language. If there is so
much as one point which is black in one world, and white in another,
then those two worlds are discriminable with the arrow language; but
any two worlds discriminable with the loop language would have to
differ at least that much. However, the token-identity thesis is false
relative to these two languages; for the sets of objects describable in
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

9 8
H av i n g Though t
them (their respective sets of “tokens”) are completely disjoint. Hence,
supervenience does not entail token identities.
The foregoing counterexample depends on the token-domains
which were stipulated when the arrow and loop languages were de-
ﬁned; and it might be thought that those stipulations were artiﬁcially
narrow. Perhaps, for purposes of token-identity theory, the domain of
a language should be closed under compounding—that is, it should
contain all compounds or complexes of its members. Such enrich-
ment would make no difference to the present case, however; for
whatever a “compound” is, it must at least be the (mereological) sum of
its components, and no loop is the sum of any set of arrows and/or
numbers. A different suggestion is that the domain contain every
individual whose existence could be “required” by a sentence of the
language. Thus, though there is no way to say explicitly in the arrow
language that there is a circle of radius r concentric with the world,
this can be “said implicitly” with the following sentence.
(∃r)(∀v)(∃a) Barv.
But this strategy will not work in general. For instance, it takes trigo-
nometric functions to describe a square in polar coordinates, and
these functions are unavailable within the resources of the arrow lan-
guage; hence no sentence of the arrow language can require the exist-
ence of any square—not to mention irregular loops shaped, say, like
amoebas.
Does this merely show that the arrow language is too impover-
ished? If the full resources of classical mathematics were added, then,
of course, it would be possible not only to assert the existence of
squares (and many other ﬁgures) but also to describe them in glorious
detail, and prove all kinds of theorems about them. But that is beside
the point in the present context. We are concerned with what superve-
nience entails, and the arrow language is already rich enough for the
loop language to be supervenient on it. The whole aim of the exercise
is to show what a weak constraint (weak) supervenience is; and, to-
ward that end, we want to impoverish the “subvenient” language as
much as we can get away with. Of course, this particular example only
works because we know that arrows and loops are both identical to
(sums of) sets of points—that is, to the individuals in the domain of
some “point language”, on which the loop and arrow languages both
supervene. But there is no reason to suppose that there must always
be such a third language, whenever one language supervenes on an-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Weak s u perveni en c e
9 9
other. We have only chosen such a case here, because it makes the
proof that supervenience does not entail token-identities so straight-
forward.
A much more important question is whether this weak constraint
is strong enough to capture our intuitions, ill-formed and elusive
though they be, about the “primacy of the physical”. One signiﬁcant
factor which has not been addressed is the special “comprehensive-
ness” of physical laws. So far, weak supervenience requires that the
terminology in which these laws are expressed be descriptively sufﬁcient
to “ﬁx” the world at a time (in the sense that the world could not have
been different without there having been a difference describable in
these terms). But the laws themselves are comprehensive in a further
sense: roughly, they are sufﬁcient to “ﬁx” the progressive alteration or
development of the world through time—at least insofar as it is ﬁxed at
all (that is, not random). If we believed in strict determinism, we
would say:
The history of the world could not have been different (physi-
cally) at one moment, unless it had been different (physically) at
each moment.
The apparent failure of physical determinism, however, makes the
relevant special authority of the physical more difﬁcult to express. The
basic idea seems to be that all the alternatives that are left fundamen-
tally undetermined by physics (such as quantum indeterminacies) are
genuinely undetermined—that is, nothing else determines them in lieu
of physical factors.
We attempt to capture this idea with a notion of “nomological”
supervenience. Let W be the set of instantaneous possible worlds (pos-
sible world “slices”), and H be the set of possible histories, each of which
is a function from the real numbers of some ﬁnite interval into W.
Intuitively, a possible history is the world developing over a ﬁnite time
period from a certain starting condition; and the point is that only
some possible histories will be “allowed” by any set of laws which
govern how the world changes. Consider two languages, each associ-
ated with a set of such laws (expressed in the terms of that language);
then:
K is nomologically supervenient on L (relative to H) just in case
every member of H disallowed by the laws of K is also disal-
lowed by the laws of L.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 00
H av i n g Though t
That is, no alternative possible histories allowed by physics are ruled
out by any other laws. Note that nomological supervenience does not
entail weak supervenience, because there might be two members of W
which were descriptively discriminable with K and not with L, but
which were, so to speak, equivalent with regard to all the laws of K—
that is, for any history where one is allowed, there is an exactly similar
history in which the other is allowed.
The punch line is that even the conjunction of weak and nomolog-
ical supervenience is insufﬁcient to entail the token-identity thesis—
as a simple modiﬁcation of our earlier example will show. Add a time
parameter to each of the nonarithmetic predicates in the loop and
arrow languages, and promulgate the following law in the arrow
language:
(∃ω)(∀a,r,v,v',t,t'){(Barvt & v'–v = ω(t'– t)) ⊃(∃a')Ba'rv't'}
In effect, this says that the whole world rotates with constant angular
velocity, ω. There might be any number of laws expressed in the loop
language, of which the following is typical:
(∀x,y){(∃t)Exyt ⊃(∀t)Exyt}
(That is, if x ever encloses y, then it always does.) The new loop
language is nomologically supervenient on the new arrow language—
indeed, the latter is strictly deterministic—and yet the token identity
thesis fails, just as before.
Quite a different philosophical question remains about relying on
the notion of supervenience to characterize the special status of the
physical. What is the sense of “possible” in which the worlds in W are
possible worlds? If it meant just logical possibility, then we would know
at the outset that the mental is not supervenient on the physical; for
example, it would not be contradictory to hold that there are some
nonphysical angels whose attitudes are discriminable in mental terms.
On the other hand, we must be careful not to equate possibility with
physical possibility in too restrictive a sense, on pain of trivializing the
thesis. The answer is not to look for some “neutral but natural” sense
of “possibility” with the aid of which supervenience can be deﬁned,
but rather to turn it around and regard the thesis of supervenience as
a contribution to our understanding of genuine possibility. Thus, we
let the possible worlds in W be all those which are physically possible,
in the weakest sense—no physical laws are violated, but there might
be all manner of nonphysical angels, and so on, about which these
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Weak s u perveni en c e
1 01
laws say nothing. Then, the thesis that the mental supervenes on the
physical amounts to a further culling of this set; it says that some of
these worlds are not really possible after all, because they still do not
bear a close enough relation to the physical. Supervenience provides a
way of tightening the grip that the physical has on the possible, with-
out having to say that only propositions expressible in the language of
physics can be true, or that only individuals in the domain of physics
can exist.
5 Wave hits: a simple example
So far, I have argued two points: (i) that Davidson is unconvincing in
his “proof” that every mental event (token) is also a physical event
(token); and (ii) that it is coherent to deny the token-identity thesis,
while still maintaining the supervenience of the mental on the physi-
cal. These are ﬂank attacks on the token-identity thesis, meant to sap
its defenders of their will to resist. I have yet to confront the thesis
directly, and give positive reasons to believe that it is, in fact, false.
The strategy in this ﬁnal phase is to examine a selection of cases in a
way which, I hope, exhibits the gross implausibility of token identity
theory—now that we have seen that supervenience can be maintained
independently. Let’s begin with a case that has nothing to do with the
mental.
Suppose that you and I each make a crisp, single-crested wave,
starting from opposite ends of a swimming pool. These radiate out-
ward from us, progressively bobbing tiny corks which are strewn
across the surface of the water. Each “wave-hit” on a cork—or to be
more precise, each passage of a wave crest under the center of gravity
of a cork—is an uncomplicated robust event. The basic question is:
With which mathematical event could such a robust wave-hit be iden-
tical? The serious difﬁculty of this question, however, is most conspic-
uous in a slightly trickier variation. Whenever your wave and mine hit
the same cork at the same time, then there are two quite distinct
(though spatio-temporally coincident) robust events. At the level of
description of wave-hits, there is yours and there is mine, and (at that
level of description) these are not the same. Hence, if each is identical
to a mathematical event, then these must be distinct mathematical
events (since identity is transitive).
What’s the most likely candidate for a mathematical event—an
event describable in the language of ultimate physics—which is iden-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 02
H av i n g Though t
tical to one of our wave-hits? Presumably, it’s some complex of enor-
mously many (perhaps inﬁnitely many) instantaneous positions and
velocities of water molecules, at the relevant place and time. (We
needn’t worry about the fuzziness of the vicinity, since there are
harder problems.) Which instantaneous positions and velocities are
to be included in this complex? If only one robust wave-hit were
involved, we might be tempted to duck the nitty-gritty details, and
grandly include all the molecular events in the relevant vicinity. But
such cavalier indiscriminateness is manifestly impossible when there
are two coincident events which must be kept distinct. Of course,
distinct complexes can have constituents in common; but it would be
a clear cheat to make much of that in the present case. Your wave-hit,
and mine are not mostly the same event, differing only on some
peripheral technicality. At the level of description of waves hitting
corks, these are quite distinct events, with entirely different causal
histories, and correspondingly different counterfactual properties. So,
though they might have some common micro-physical components,
they had better be largely disjoint.
When we turn up our microscope, however, and look at the posi-
tions and velocities of the water molecules, there isn’t a trace of either
wave-hit to be found anywhere. The individual molecules are racing
around in all directions, crashing into and careening past one another
at speeds far greater than that of any water ﬂow or wave propagation.
When the water moves macroscopically, there is just a slight statistical
imbalance in the frenetic turmoil at the molecular level. Crudely, we
might picture such an imbalance as 1001 molecules going up (at a
certain moment) for every 999 going down. Put this way, it is pain-
fully obvious that you can’t ask which of those 1001 rising molecules is
“the unbalanced one”. Or (what comes to the same thing) if the ratio
is 1002 to 998 when two waves coincide, there is no allocating one
particular molecule to each wave (and 1998 others to the normal ther-
mal chaos. None of the particular positions or velocities at the molecu-
lar level is determinately a constituent of one wave-hit (or the other,
or neither)—though each makes a tiny contribution to the overall
effect.
In other words, there is no “complex” of such microscopic mathe-
matical events which is literally identical to any robust wave-hit. Wave-
hits simply don’t “hang together” as determinate individuals (no mat-
ter how “complex”) at the level of particle physics.3 My conclusion,
then, is that the individuals or tokens of which our sentences are true
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Weak s u perveni en c e
1 03
are just as “relative” to the level of description as are the kinds or types
into which those sentences sort them. The world does not come
metaphysically individuated, any more than it comes metaphysically
categorized, prior to and independent of any speciﬁc descriptive re-
sources—which is not to say that these individuals (and categories)
aren’t perfectly genuine and objective, once the language is speciﬁed;
nor is it to say that the languages themselves are in any sense arbitrary.
It is only to say that the individuals we can discuss in one way of
talking need not be identiﬁed with the individuals we can discuss in
another way of talking, even if the latter way of talking is somehow
“basic and comprehensive”. That is, we need another way of account-
ing for the basicness and comprehensiveness of physics than the iden-
tity theory.
6 The mental as supervenient
The relations between robust water-wave phenomena and the phe-
nomena of ultimate physics are about as uncluttered and well-under-
stood as relations to ultimate physics are likely to get. This is in stark
contrast to the case with mental phenomena. There are three reasons
for beginning with the simpler case. First, it makes it obvious that
objecting to the identity theory—even token identity theory—does
not require any peculiar or controversial metaphysical categories;
there is nothing scientiﬁcally intractable, let alone metaphysically
spooky, about water waves. In other words, the problem lies with
expressing the primacy of the physical in terms of identities, and not
with the (various) extraordinary properties of the mental. Second, it
would be bizarre to maintain that, although identity theory fails for
ordinary undulatory phenomena, it nevertheless holds for the mental.
Typically, in fact, mental phenomena are cast as the last holdouts
against a clean sweep for physicalism—making their capitulation
seem both more important and more inevitable. The wave example
and the deﬁnition of weak supervenience combine to remove that
pressure. Third, the very simplicity of the example makes it easy to see
how it works. It turns on the interplay of two factors: (i) the “swamp-
ing” of macro-individuals by all the irrelevant micro-turmoil; and (ii)
the “coincidence” of all the candidate constituents of distinct macro-
individuals. We can now be on the lookout for a comparable interplay
in more difﬁcult cases.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 04
H av i n g Though t
Thus, if the physiological is an intervening level between the men-
tal and the (strictly) physical, then there might well be such an argu-
ment against mental/physiological event identities. Given the passing
of the neat wet-ﬂip-ﬂops view of brain functioning, there is less reason
to suppose that the metabolic constituents of mental events can be
identiﬁed in the midst of all the irrelevant physiological housekeeping;
and there is more reason to suppose that distinct mental events will
each “supervene on” (the activity in) extended brain regions, which
may largely, or even entirely coincide. I will not pursue this point,
however.
Rather, I will adapt an example of Dennett’s (1977/78, 107) to make
an even stronger point. In the spirit of Lettvin’s remark, that the
information processing model in psychology is “the only straw ﬂoat-
ing”, assume that the mind can be understood as roughly analogous to
a computer chess-player; and consider such a chess-player which
works on the following general principles.
1 It has a number of heuristics for evaluating any given chess
position as it stands (that is, without look-ahead).
2 It can construct a tree of possible future positions from any
given position, using the heuristics to prune unpromising
branches.
3 It can choose a “best” move in any position, by evaluating the
ultimate positions in the (pruned) tree, and then mini-max-
ing back to the current options.
Such a machine will not only play chess, but play with a recognizable
style, which might naturally be described in intentional terms.
1 It “thinks” it should get its queen out early.
2 It “prefers” a free-swinging, wide open game.
3 It tends to “choose” an aggressive posture over a defensive one.
Dennett’s point is that intentional descriptions, such as these, are
based on the machine’s overall behavior, and need carry no speciﬁc
implications at all about the content of any internal representational
structures.
That is, though there are data structures in the machine interpret-
able as expressing various facts and goals about the game—say, that
bishops are three times as valuable as pawns, or that mobility and
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Weak s u perveni en c e
1 05
center control are about equally important—there are no data struc-
tures even remotely interpretable as: “It’s good to get the queen out
early,” or “The best defense is a good offense.” Instead, the characteris-
tics noted in 1 to 3 “emerge” as “net” attitudes from the collective action
of all the different detailed heuristics, without themselves being
expressed internally at all.
Suppose now that three coefﬁcients in the machine’s evaluation
heuristics are adjusted slightly (either by us or by its own “learning”
routines).
1 Knights are boosted in value relative to bishops.
2 Pawn coordination gets more weight vis-à-vis piece mobility.
3 The value of linking rooks is reduced a little.
It is entirely possible that these three adjustments together (but no
two of them without the third) would result in the reversal of each of
the preceding emergent attitudes. That is, after the adjustments, the
machine thinks its queen should be held back, prefers a tight, close
game, and tends to emphasize defense over offense. It seems to me
that each reversal of attitude is plausibly regarded as a distinct event at
the intentional attribution level of description; but at the level of
internal information processing, there is no distinguishing which
“micro-events” (coefﬁcient adjustments) are constituents of which at-
titude changes. In other words, intentional level events attributable on
the basis of external behavior need not be identical with information
processing events (no matter how complex)—even if they supervene
on them. Needless to say, relations between the mental and any “in-
formation processing level” in people are likely to be rather messier
than this (assuming a level like the latter can be discriminated at all—
compare Dreyfus 1979, chapter 4). And, of course, computational or
information processing models are widely regarded as the last best
hope for any clean, general science of psychology. The only point here,
however, is that even if psychology were in that good a shape, it would
be no salvation for the identity theory.
I have argued that Davidson has failed to demonstrate the token
identity thesis (because he equivocates on the term ‘event’); that the
primacy of the physical can be captured by the notion of weak superve-
nience, which does not entail the token identity thesis; and that several
examples render the token identity thesis very implausible in fact. I do
not claim that these examples (the wave-hits, and the chess-player
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 06
H av i n g  Though t
attitudes) confute the token identity thesis by themselves, because
there is too much room for philosophical maneuvering by desperate
defenders. The earlier sections are meant to show that desperate de-
fense is not worth the effort, since physicalism doesn’t hang on it; and
in that context, the examples may be persuasive. The overall point is
not that there is anything special about the mental, which exempts it
from the comprehensive claims of the physical, but rather that these
claims can be expressed without recourse to the notion of identity,
and that there are reasons to prefer doing so.
Appendix (added 1997)
The charge in section 2 that Davidson equivocates on the word ‘event’
is unjust. For he certainly could, and surely did, mean to use it in what
I go on to call a “generic” sense. My observation that this effectively
puts the entire burden of the argument on the principle of causality
(his premise 2) remains correct. But Davidson is forthright in saying
that he is simply going to rely on this principle without defending it;
so his argument as it stands is unexceptionable.
I still believe that the distinction between mathematical and robust
events is important and to the point in bringing out the strength and
implausibility of that premise; but a revised version of this paper
would need to argue against the causal principle more directly. (The
examples in sections 5 and 6 can be seen as illustrations of what’s
wrong with it.)
Notes:
1 I admit to some uncertainty about particle physics. Disintegra-
tions, annihilations, and quantum jumps are perfectly robust
events, despite their tiny scale, and they seem more central to
quantum mechanics than eclipses, collisions, and so on, do to
classical mechanics. Still, such events are at most a part of the
subject matter even of micro-physics; wave equations and the like
relate only mathematical events, and, of course, most of the mo-
tions and interactions of these particles are described by more or
less classical equations of motion and electrodynamics.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Weak s u perveni en c e
1 07
2 Kim takes his deﬁnition to be a development of Hare’s (1952)
usage; but Hare points out (in conversation) that it is not. His
concern was that an evaluative judgment, such as deeming some-
thing “good”, involves an element of personal commendation or
commitment, which is over and above describing the object’s ac-
tual properties. There is never an inconsistency or contradiction,
he says, in conceding an object’s factual characteristics, while de-
clining to commend it. There would be, however, another kind of
“inconsistency” in commending one object and refusing to com-
mend another, while agreeing that the two objects are just alike
descriptively. This is the sense in which, for Hare, evaluative judg-
ments supervene on descriptive judgments. Nevertheless, despite
Hare’s prior claim on this term, I will follow in general the usage
of Davidson and Kim.
3 It might be supposed that the language or level of description
with which we refer to robust wave-hits is not itself sufﬁciently
well-deﬁned or scientiﬁcally respectable for the token identity
theorist to have to worry about it. But the only consistent way to
maintain this line is to be an “eliminative materialist” about wave-
hits (that is, there “really” aren’t any such events), which is just the
sort of desperation maneuver that I hope to show unnecessary.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

ch a pt e r  s i x
Ontological
Supervenience
1 Background
A couple of years ago I wrote and published a paper entitled “Weak
Supervenience” (1982). Unbeknownst to me, several of the important
theses in that paper had been clearly stated some years earlier in a pair
of joint articles by Geoffrey Hellman and Frank Thompson (1975 and
1977). Better late than never, I would now like to acknowledge their
priority, and apologize for not having done so sooner. Further, now
that I am apprised of their pioneering work, I would like to take up
explicitly certain additional issues that they raise.
Hellman and Thompson (and I) seek to articulate the basic intu-
ition of physicalist materialism in a way that does not imply too
much; in particular, we all want to avoid any formulation that entails
traditional reductionism. They propose a conjunction of two distinct
theses, which they call the principles of physical determination, and
physical exhaustion, respectively. Physical determination is quite similar
to what I (later) called “weak supervenience”; and despite various
differences, I am (not surprisingly) largely sympathetic.1 The principle
of physical exhaustion, on the other hand, has no analog in my paper;
and, moreover, I am not very sympathetic. So that’s what I want to
discuss.
A little history ﬁrst. Many recent authors have rejected so-called
“type-type” identity theory (and the closely related reductionism), on
the dual grounds that it is implausibly strong, and that it is not
necessary for materialism. All that’s needed, they say, is a weaker
“token-token” identity theory. The idea is this: even if psychological
(or whatever) types (kinds, properties) cannot be identiﬁed (or nomo-
logically correlated) with physical types, still individual psychological
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 1 0
H av i n g Though t
tokens (particular events, states, and so on), might be identiﬁable with
individual physical tokens, on a one-by-one basis; and that would
sufﬁce for a materialist metaphysics.
The question now is whether even token identity theory might be
too strong, and unnecessary for materialism. I think it is, and that the
determination/supervenience principle is sufﬁcient by itself. That
principle may be roughly paraphrased as follows:
The world could not have been different in any respect, without
having been different in some strictly physical respect—that is,
in some respect describable in a canonical language of physics.
The thing to notice is that this makes no mention of any particular
individuals (other than the whole universe); hence, unlike earlier deﬁ-
nitions,2 it doesn’t explicitly presuppose token identities. The main
thrust of my paper was to argue that supervenience and identity
theory are in fact independent, and that the latter is probably false.
Hellman and Thompson agree about the independence,3 and they are
also dissatisﬁed with common versions of the identity thesis. But,
rather than reject identities, they propose a new and signiﬁcantly
more sophisticated theory.
2 Hellman and Thompson’s physicalism
Many philosophers, myself included, had been content to regard as
physical any entity of which some “suitable” physical predicate is
true—leaving it for another day to say just which predicates those are.
Hellman and Thompson have a similar intuition, but a much better
strategy. They begin only with “basic” physical predicates—like: ‘x is a
neutrino’, ‘x is an electromagnetic ﬁeld’, ‘x is gravitationally attracting
y’, and so on. They assume that positive instances of basic predicates
are uncontroversially physical, and that collectively these constitute
the whole physical universe. We are still not told just which predicates
are “basic“; but they are clearly less problematic than “suitable” predi-
cates in general. In fact, as near as I understand it, the single predicate,
‘x has non-zero mass-energy’, would sufﬁce, according to contempo-
rary physics.
In any case, the essential innovation lies in what comes next: using
the calculus of individuals (that is, of parts and wholes) to construct all
physical entities out of positive instances of basic predicates. First, the
physical universe is deﬁned as the fusion (that is, the sum or spatio-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O ntolo gical supervenience
111
temporal agglomeration) of all those instances; then all and only phys-
ical entities are parts (spatio-temporal portions) of that universe. The
point of fusing and then repartitioning the universe is that there are
no constraints on the “boundaries” of the new parts. They may be
arbitrarily (perhaps inﬁnitely) complex and bizarre; and they need not
be deﬁnable, implicitly or explicitly, in any particular language.
Those arbitrary parts of the physical universe are the physical “to-
kens” for Hellman and Thompson’s identity theory. Since there are
almost certainly more such tokens than there are predicates in any
(ﬁnitistic) language, they provide not only a better speciﬁed physical
basis than before, but also a larger one. The principle of physical
exhaustion, however, is not quite the same as the token-identity the-
sis, for it also delimits abstract entities—namely, to what I will call
“physically based” sets. These are just the sets appearing in a set-
theoretic hierarchy, all of whose ur-elements (ultimate individuals)
are physical tokens.4 Thus, all that really exist, according to Hellman
and Thompson, are physical tokens and physically based sets.
This is manifestly a superior formulation of the identity thesis,
both sharper and weaker than its antecedents; and it makes a tidy
companion for the determination/supervenience principle. The ques-
tion remains: does that principle want a companion? That is, in our
effort to articulate our somewhat inchoate sense of materialism, is
there reason to augment physical determination with physical exhaus-
tion? I don’t think so—though, I confess, it’s not altogether clear to
me how best to argue the point.
3 Reasons to be materialists
A plausible beginning is to ask why we want to be materialists in the
ﬁrst place. Then we could consider which (if either) candidate princi-
ple satisﬁes those original motivations. The common rationales for
materialism, it turns out, are a surprisingly mixed bag; and that fact
alone may make a modest catalog of them worthwhile. I have distin-
guished six loose categories, which I will list, and then brieﬂy com-
ment on.
1 The call of the one. Some folks take seriously a so-called “unity
of science”. Now, if this unity is supposed to be an established fact
that needs explanation, then I simply don’t see it. If, on the other
hand, it’s proposed as a desideratum or goal, then we can wish its
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 1 2
H av i n g Though t
seekers all luck and happiness; but their fondest hopes are hardly a
reason for adopting materialism. In fact, I think, only people who are
materialists already are inclined to hope for a “uniﬁcation” of science;
and all they really mean by it is that their materialism would be
vindicated.5
A different unity issue, however, is more interesting. Without lin-
gering over details, we may roughly categorize entities three ways:
(i) those which (almost) everyone agrees are physical; (ii) those which
are disputed; and (iii) those which (almost) everyone agrees are not
physical. The third category includes numbers, sets, Platonic forms,
and the like—that is, eternal or even necessary entities, in the sense that
means not subject to generation, variation, or decay. By contrast, the
ﬁrst two categories comprise the temporal or contingent—that is, enti-
ties that we might generically call “occurrences” subject to generation,
variation, and decay. Now this temporal/atemporal contrast is quite
signiﬁcant, metaphysically; and it puts all the disputed cases on the
same side as the clearly material. To take a pertinent example, beliefs
and feelings are like mountains and molecules (and unlike numbers
and sets) in being temporal, contingent occurrences. The same could
be said of institutions, moral actions, and what have you.
Now this, plausibly, is a fact to be explained; and materialism might
be brought forward as the explanation. What is the principle of unity
of the temporal/contingent? Matter! Cutely: if we ask, with Kant,
why time is the form of both inner and outer sense, we can answer,
contra Descartes (not to mention Kant), that time (not space) is the
essence of matter—and everything (sensible) is material.
2 Seductive analogy. A novel, or even a drawing, can be ﬁlled
with courage, conﬂict, pathos; it can break new artistic ground, while
excitement and beauty leap from every page. Yet, in some sense, each
copy is “nothing but” ink and paper; vaporize that paper, and you have
eliminated that copy—snuffed it right out of being. Eliminate all the
copies, and (in one way or another) you eliminate the work. Now,
aren’t people (and cultures and whatever else) just like that—vaporize
their material embodiment and you snuff them out entirely? Sounds
right to me.
3 The way the wind blows (“progress”). Negatively: many
opponents of materialism seem like die-hard stragglers, clinging des-
perately to some old system that’s hit the metaphysical skids. More
positively: science marches on. First they decided the stars are just
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O ntolo gical supervenience
113
(ordinary) matter; then came the synthesis of urea, the theory of
evolution, the double helix, … and now the avant garde want to talk to
their computers. Again and again, it looks as if matter in motion wins
out—with nothing else needed. And, naturally, we’d all rather be
winners than die-hard stragglers.
4 Fear of darkness. Denizens of the mental, some say, are unclear,
shadowy, elusive, and generally spooky—hence ontologically suspect.
Not quibbling over the premise, we may inquire about the inference:
why can’t dark, slippery things be real? Well, it is a venerable (if pecu-
liar and not always acknowledged) principle of metaphysics that: To be
is to be intelligible.6 It’s hard to know what to make of that. It seems
presumptuous on the face of it (in the absence of intelligent creation);
but I’ll still bet its root runs under a lot of philosophical dirt.
Be that as it may, the argument from mere spooklessness to materi-
alism can go several ways. One line has it that understanding is the
product of explanation, and that the only really clear explanations we
have are in the physical sciences. So, unless the other sciences start
shaping up, their domains had better identify with the physical, on
pain of gloomy non-being. A different tack maintains that intelligibil-
ity presupposes cognitive meaningfulness, which in turn always rests
on objective observation. Then, supposing that only material objects
(states, events, and so on) can be observed objectively, only they can
be intelligible, hence real.
5 The Scrooge instinct. How many’s the poor son gone to debt
and ruin for frittering his metaphysical accounts? In principle, of
course, Ockham’s famous razor, “Don’t multiply entities beyond
necessity”, gets its edge from Beetle Bailey’s more incisive “Don’t do
anything beyond necessity”. But in practical New England, the moral is
keenly economical: “In all commitments, be as frugal as possible—
nay, even parsimonious. Buy a basic physics if you must, but avoid
every frilly extravagance. And never, never squander your precious
ﬂuids in proﬂigate hypostasis!”
I have occasionally wondered what makes ontology so expensive, or
what limits our budget, or, indeed, what exactly we are spending.
Having dwelt more summers in the southwest than the northeast, I
feel no great longing for desert landscapes; and frankly, Ockham’s
razor cuts little ice out there anyway. Perhaps, however, I can abide a
prudent California compromise: We shall assume no entity before its
time.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 14
H av i n g Though t
6 Law and order. Physics strives (and promises) to be strict; that is,
to provide a closed, comprehensive system of exception-free laws.7 In
other words, setting aside any implications about other domains,
physics takes care of its own very nicely, thank you. At the appropriate
level of description, physical phenomena can be fully explained physi-
cally. This promise, in turn, fuels a standard criticism of interaction-
ism: if physical phenomena are already fully explicable in their own
terms, then how can anything non-physical (anything mental, for
example) make any difference to them? Only, it seems, by breaking
the laws of physics. Moreover, the mental had better be able to affect
the physical (for instance, in deliberate action), or it won’t be much
use. Unfortunately, therefore, the price tag on having mental entities
be both non-physical and effective appears to be the internal strictness
of physics itself. That’ll never sell in Boston.
4 Why these aren’t reasons for identity theory
That completes my little catalog of rationales for materialism; need-
less to say, some considerations impress me more than others. Now
we can return to the problem of formulation. In particular, do these
motivations support the identity theory, in addition to the principle of
physical determination? It’s easiest just to go through the list again in
order.
1 Call of the one. Explaining the unity of the temporal/contin-
gent is a tantalizing metaphysical prize, and a big plus for materialism.
But what exactly in materialism promises us this prize? It seems to me
that the principle of physical determination says it explicitly. For that
principle addresses precisely whatever could have been different: in other
words, essentially the temporal/contingent. And it is all and only this
category that the principle ties down to the physical—thereby expli-
cating the unity of the category, via the common supervenience on
matter (as described in canonical physics).
I don’t see that physical exhaustion would add anything to the
foregoing; but it might offer an alternative account. For it entails that
every entity is either a physical token or a set, and that division could
plausibly be aligned with the temporal/atemporal distinction. Saying
that temporal occurrences are all and only physical tokens would
explain both the unity of the category, and also its connection with
time (since physical tokens are spatio-temporal fragments of the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O ntolo gical supervenience
115
universe). It’s less obvious, however, how well this strategy accommo-
dates temporal events, processes, and states. They would have to be
identiﬁed with physical tokens (not sets), on pain of undermining the
point; and that seems likely to cause problems.
In passing, I should warn against an attractive simpliﬁcation. It’s
tempting to reformulate supervenience in terms of possible changes:
The world could not change (become different) in any respect
without changing in some (canonically describable) physical
respect.8
Unfortunately, there are clear counterexamples. Thus, a person can
change from married to single, or an item can change from your
property to mine, at the stroke of midnight, when some prior legal
decree takes effect—there being no physical change at that time, save,
so to speak, the ticking of the clock. Of course, what the materialist
wants to insist upon is physical changes back when the decree was
promulgated (as well as many others during the evolution of matri-
monial, proprietary institutions, and so on). Consequently, the gen-
eral statement of supervenience must be made “world-wide” through
time as well as at each instant; hence, the looser formulation in terms
of how the world (in toto) could have been different.
2 Seductive analogy. As everyone knows, the painting/story anal-
ogy is vulnerable to a dismissive ploy: there’s no real pathos in the
story—the story is just pathetic. By the same token, there are no real
stories, but only story-like inscriptions; and, according to some
philosopher-like organisms, “real” mental entities can likewise be
eliminated. I, however, ﬁnd that all arch and boring.
So, suppose we take the analogy at face value: what does it really
suggest? Well, basically, if you disintegrate enough material struc-
tures, you can wipe out lots of other entities as well. But which entities
are liable to such extinction? Not, presumably, numbers, sets, and
Platonic forms; in fact, potential victims seem limited exactly to the
temporal/contingent—that is, to the very entities that supervenience
binds to the physical. Indeed, the impossibility of any temporal realm
at all without a physical realm is just a coarser way of expressing the
intuition behind the principle of physical determination.
3 How the wind blows. Marching with the winds of science won’t
help here until we have an independent argument about what scien-
tiﬁc successes entail. Achievements like synthetic urea and statistical
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 16
H av i n g Though t
thermodynamics are awkwardly strong, if taken as a basis for induc-
tion—for they are reductions, and we’ve given up trying to generalize
that. On the other hand, instances like the theory of evolution and
functional psychology (if that counts as a success) are metaphysically
ambiguous. At most they show that it’s only “because” matter got
arranged as it did, that there exist life forms, minds, and so on. In
other words, if certain material structures vanished or fell apart, vari-
ous lives and thoughts would go with them. But that doesn’t imply
that each particular mental (or biological) occurrence is identical with
some particular material structure. Instead, the conclusion is simply
that disintegrating enough material structures will wipe out lots of
other entities—which is what we just discussed.
4 Fear of darkness. Consider denizen of darkness, D, seeking
materialist sanctuary from crusading scotophobes. Now, classical
type-reduction of D-kind would indeed ﬂood them all with the pro-
phylactic light of physics. But materialists no longer offer reduction
carte blanche; some petitioners must settle for less. Is there safety in
physical determination? Well, it forces D to hew the physical line
rather closely; for D could not have been different, without the physi-
cal world having been different as well—and, this goes, of course, for
each possible difference in D. That sufﬁces, I think, to rule out de-
mons, ghosts, disembodied spirits, magical auras, and miscellaneous
other sleazy shades—without necessarily eliminating thoughts, feel-
ings, customs, institutions, and the like. On the other hand, it must
be confessed that determination throws no particular light on the
entities it spares; supervenience may thin the ranks of the immaterial,
but it doesn’t illuminate the remainder.
What about physical exhaustion? Being identical to some arbitrary
fragment of the physical universe won’t render D, qua D, a whit more
intelligible either. And, remember, the exhaustion principle does not
imply that D has any other identifying description than qua D; in
particular, even if D is exhausted by the physical, it need not be
describable in the language of physics. In other words, neither materi-
alist clause (short of reductionism) guarantees the physical intelligibility
of all that is. And, in that case, identity theory ﬁlls no gap left open by
supervenience.
5 Scrooge. Beetle Bailey’s razor cuts both ways. To be sure, one
corollary is: “Don’t multiply entities beyond necessity.” But another,
just as sound and important reads: “Don’t multiply principles beyond
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O ntolo gical supervenience
117
necessity.” The difﬁculty with each lies in deciding what’s “beyond
necessity”. A spendthrift’s need is a skinﬂint’s poison. I have been
urging that identity theory is not necessary for an intuitively satisfying
materialism. And one of my claims is that mere parsimony in the
entity account is, by itself, no reason at all to impose shotgun unions
with the physical.
6 Law and Order. This argument must be handled carefully. To
say that the motion of a certain molecule is “fully” explicable physi-
cally is to say that all the physical forces on it determine its motion
completely: no other forces are needed or allowed. But that doesn’t
rule out other explanations. The very same molecule might be lodged
in my thumbnail, and might therefore rise three feet because I decide to
raise my hand. The strictness of physics does not forbid such explana-
tions; it only forbids that any decision contribute an additional force
on any molecule. In other words, the psychological explanation is not
allowed to interfere with or modify the physical one—but only to
supplement it, by providing another point of view.
Consider, in a similar spirit, the punctuation mark printed at the
end of this very sentence token. It’s a little blob of ink; and the forces
exerted on it by nearby paper ﬁbers fully explain its present spatial
location (in some reference frame). But one can also explain why that
period is where it is by citing its terminal juxtaposition to a declarative
inscription (which reﬂects my reasons for putting it there). Both of
these explanations are perfectly correct; they are nowhere near equiva-
lent; and they are not competitors. Strict completeness means only that
physics brooks no intrusions on its own turf; it does not mean that
physics is the only explanatory game in town (or the only good one, or
the only one we really need).
What does this tell us about the mental? If physics is complete in
its own terms, then there could have been no difference in the mental
(that made any difference to the physical), without there being con-
comitant differences in the physical itself (that sufﬁced to explain
everything, at the level of particles, ﬁelds, forces, and whatnot). But
this is just a special case of the principle of physical determination (by
strict physics); physical exhaustion is beside the point.
One might, however press a stronger interpretation. It’s not just
that there must be some “concomitant” physical difference or other;
but rather, there must be some physical difference that makes the same
difference—causes the same effects. Then add some hocus pocus
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 1 8
H av i n g Though t
about causal roles being nature’s ownmost principle of individuation,
and token identities spill right out. But hold ﬁre.
For each physical effect (each molecular motion, for instance), pre-
cisely described in the language of physics, there must be a strict
physical account, expressed in that same language. But a decision to
act (say, to raise my hand) “involves” untold numbers of molecular
motions in and around my body. The strictness of physics in no way
requires that these can be sorted into:
1 the effective cause, as an integral unit (a complex physical
token, identical to my decision);
2 the relevant effect, as an integral unit (a complex physical
token, identical to my act); and
3 the innocent bystanders (such as my blood circulation, the
thermal vibrations in my thumbnail, protein synthesis in my
cortex, and so on).
Yet, each of these distinctions is necessary to the token identity thesis:
they are practically a statement of it, for the case at hand.
The point is not that the “boundaries” of decisions and actions are
micro-physically fuzzy, indescribable, or even negotiable. Rather,
there are no such boundaries at all: decisions are not distinguishable
(even in principle) as separate individuals at the level of micro-physics.
Or, at any rate, the strictness of physics does not entail that they are.
So, again I conclude that a familiar rationale for materialism supports
the determination/supervenience principle, but not identity theory or
physical exhaustion.
5 Other explanatory wills-o’-the-wisp
There can, of course, be independent arguments for holding the iden-
tity thesis (over and above supervenience), even apart from the gen-
eral reasons for materialism. I will consider two. First, one might
suppose that the principle of physical exhaustion is needed to explain
why the mental (and whatever else) is determined by the physical. But
no such explanation is forthcoming: the two principles are, as Hell-
man and Thompson point out, quite independent. Supervenience is a
relation between bodies of truths or facts; and, as such, it makes a
strong claim on the expressive power of the “subvening” language—
theoretical physics, presumably. Physical exhaustion, on the other
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O ntolo gical supervenience
119
hand, makes only a minimal claim on physics: a handful of “basic”
predicates are required, but beyond that, the relevant theory could be
very weak and inexpressive.
In the meantime, it would be peculiar to ring in a whole new
principle merely to explain an already established one. In other words,
if there are further grounds for identity theory, well and good (let them
justify it). But, if not, then supervenience is evidently all the material-
ist metaphysics we need. It can perfectly well be a “principle” all by
itself: exhaustion is no more fundamental that it is, and would add no
useful support.
The second argument is trickier. Physical determination (even
conjoined with strict physics) seems quite compatible with parallel-
ism, epiphenomenalism, and similar ghosts of philosophy past.
Doesn’t it take identity theory to stuff these back into their graves?
Naturally, I doubt it. Let’s consider a couple of other hypotheses at
the same time:
1 Once every few millennia, the universe pauses—stops stock
still—for about ten minutes, and then resumes its motion
exactly as it had been going; this last occurred just before
William of Ockham was born.
2 Each sub-atomic particle actually has its own rich and unique
personality, which it expresses in deep, fervent conversations
with its neighbors. Unfortunately, radical translation is of no
avail, because the particles’ quantum-mechanical behavior is
never affected—except in statistical indeterminacies.
These hypotheses have much in common with parallelism and
epiphenomenalism; in particular, they are scientiﬁcally unmotivated,
magically undetectable, and thoroughly bizarre. In my estimate, that
is enough to damn them already. But, we can make a gesture of
principled generalization, by articulating a new corollary (hitherto un-
noticed, I think) to Bailey’s razor: “Don’t get weird beyond necessity.”
Needless to mention, this corollary (like Ockham’s before it) is essen-
tially a dialectical foil, useful mainly for transferring burdens of proof
to other people.
Identity theory looks, at ﬁrst, like a happier, more positive answer.
With it, parallelism and epiphenomenalism come out not merely
peculiar and unproven: instead, they are contrary to the principle of
physical exhaustion—a genuine no-no. Appearances, however, can be
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 20
H av i n g  Though t
deceiving. For, suppose we change the example to a (roughly)
Spinozistic monism.
There is really only one substance, God, but He has inﬁnitely
many attributes, each of which is complete and inﬁnite, and
corresponds perfectly with each of the others; two of God’s
attributes are mind and matter.
Thus, when we speak of physical tokens, we are speaking of God—
speciﬁcally of His modes under the attribute matter. Likewise, when
we speak of anything else, we are also speaking of God—the very same
God. In other words, no matter what we talk about, it is ontologically
the same thing as (identical to) what we talk about when we talk
about physical tokens. Of course, unlike Hellman and Thompson’s,
Spinoza’s system is symmetrical: it entails mental exhaustion as well.
The point is that brilliantly kooky metaphysics knows no bounds.
(If the seventeenth century doesn’t persuade you, try the nineteenth.)
I don’t think any deﬁnitive principle will ever sufﬁce to rule out all and
only those systems that are currently embarrassing. In other words, I
expect that we will need our new corollary to handle arbitrarily many
peculiar schemes that are compatible with supervenience, physical
exhaustion, or what have you. And, if that’s the case, then dismissing
an odd fraction of them seems tenuous grounds for identity theory
after all.
6 Physical exhaustion as hylomorphism
At this juncture, I would like to switch gears, and discuss the princi-
ple of physical exhaustion more directly. It rests fundamentally on two
“modes of composition”: spatio-temporal fusion and set abstraction.
These are both ways of getting new entities out of whatever ones you
already have; thus, for many collections of things, you can form their
sum, and/or the set containing them as members. Moreover, accord-
ing to Hellman and Thompson, these are the only modes of composi-
tion that have ontological import. Any other purported “compound”
either doesn’t really exist, or is equivalent to one of these (that is, a
physical token or a set).
One is entitled to wonder how fusion and set abstraction got such
exclusive rights. I suspect it goes back to the Greek preference for
permanence, and the resulting approach to the problem of change.
Forms (or essences) are top dog: eternal, hence incorruptible. Mani-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O ntolo gical supervenience
12 1
festly, however, ordinary things decay; so they can’t be pure form. The
solution is to introduce another factor, matter, that ﬂeshes out forms
to constitute temporal entities. Matter as such is also permanent, in
that it is conserved; but it has no intelligible features either to keep or
lose. Rather, all change is localized in the way form and matter go
together—which matter has which form is a function of time.
The philosopher’s weakness is to generalize. We know that, in
addition to ordinary things, there can be unmaterialized forms (hipp-
pogriffs, for instance); but, there is no uninformed matter. So …
everything is either a pure form, or some hunk of informed matter.
Hellman and Thompson’s principle of physical exhaustion is, I think,
just this generalized hylomorphism in modern (mathematical) garb.
Sets are the (more comprehensive and precise) replacement for time-
less forms; and arbitrary portions of physically occupied space-time
are the (more comprehensive and precise) replacement for hunks of
informed matter. (Mass-energy may even do for “raw” matter.)
The fatal ﬂaw in hylomorphism is that it leaves too little room for
distinctions: being concrete, individual, temporal (contingent), and
material are all lumped together. That is, all and only material entities
are particular, temporal concreta—everything else is an abstract, eter-
nal kind. Moreover, there is only one possible relation between the
two sides: inhesion (instantiation, set membership). And, ﬁnally, the
modes of composition are asymmetrical: you can go horizontally or
up, but not down. That is, you can take an arbitrary bunch of material
individuals and fuse them into a new one; or, you can abstract away
from—rise above—all their materiality, to get a pure form (set); and,
with modern apparatus, you can abstract a still “higher” set from an
arbitrary bunch of sets. What you can’t do is go the other way, and
make matter out of forms—once eternal, always eternal. The result is
a rigid hierarchy, with all temporal individuals exactly on a par at the
bottom.
Consider a story and its various “tokens”. Written tokens are par-
ticular inscriptions—temporal individuals, plausibly identiﬁable with
hunks of ink. (I will ignore oral tokens, recitations; they only make
the case harder.) But what about the story itself, of which these are
tokens? If we call it a “type”, we still have to explain what that means.
In some sense, a story-type is composed or “made up” of its tokens: it
has its being in and through them—without them it wouldn’t exist at
all. Is it made up, however, by either fusion or set abstraction? Not
that I can see.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 22
H av i n g Though t
Try fusion. The story itself is just a larger and more scattered
fraction of the physical universe—a bigger hunk of ink. It follows,
presumably, that story types have mass and volume, which is startling,
but perhaps not insufferable. More serious is collapsing the token/
type relation into the part/whole relation: tokens (for instance, cop-
ies) of a story become, precisely, portions of it. That makes them
comparable to, say, chapters, which (on this view) are also spatio-
temporal portions of the whole. But, on the face of it, the chapter/
story relation is completely different from the copy/story relation;
they’re not even similar. As if that weren’t enough: in case there were
only one copy of a story extant, the type and its token would be
identical—which is surely unacceptable.
So, try set abstraction. That makes story-types like timeless kinds,
which sounds congenial at ﬁrst. But, on reﬂection, it seems to me
incontestable that stories are temporal, contingent individuals. In the ﬁrst
place, they come into existence at some time, they evolve, they
migrate, and sometimes they die out (possibly leaving progeny): this is
not the habit of timeless kinds.
Second, stories are related as individuals, not as subvarieties, to the
obvious species and genera of literature. Thus, in the sequence “Fido,
spaniel, dog, mammal, …” we recognize the ﬁrst step as different from
the others. Fido is not a narrower classiﬁcation than spaniels, but an
item classiﬁed. Likewise, in the sequence “‘The Sour Grapes’, fable,
allegory, ﬁction, …”, “The Sour Grapes” is not a narrower classiﬁca-
tion than the others, but an item classiﬁed—that is, an individual.
Hence, there seems as little hope for collapsing token/type into in-
stance/kind or member/set as into part/whole. That’s why I say
there’s too little room for distinctions.
Consider another homespun example. Take any dozen people from
anywhere in history. There is a unique physical entity that is their
fusion (or the fusion of their bodies, anyway); and there is a unique
timeless entity that is the set containing exactly them. But suppose
that a certain twelve people are friends with a common hobby, and
they decide to form a club. Again, in some sense, a club is composed or
“made up” of its members. But I take it as obvious, without further
argument, that a club is identical neither to the set of its members,
nor to the fusion of their bodies. Evidently, we need some other
way(s) of composing new entities than the two allowed by the princi-
ple of physical exhaustion.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O ntolo gical supervenience
123
“Evidently”, I hedge, because, as is well known, set theory is a
boundless playground for those willing to invent astonishing interpre-
tations for otherwise ordinary terms; indeed, the integers are a
boundless playground for the truly open minded. Who knows what
gawdawful set (or number) is identical (by somebody’s lights) with
“The Sour Grapes” or the Pittsburgh Quilters’ Triangle? Who knows
how predicates like ‘is a temporal individual’ might be construed so as
to apply to them? And who cares? If preserving the principle of physi-
cal exhaustion is the primary motivation for such gymnastics, then I
just don’t feel the urge. Indeed, in such cases, I am sorely tempted to
quote again our new corollary to Bailey: “Don’t get weird beyond
necessity!”
Notes:
1 Hellman and Thompson actually distinguish three variants of the
determination principle; weak supervenience is similar to the one
they call “determination of truth”. That’s the only version I will be
concerned with here, and also, apparently, the one of which they
are most conﬁdent.
2 For instance, Davidson 1970/80, and Kim 1978 and 1979.
3 See their remark about parallelism (1975, 561).
4 This includes “pure” set theory (hence classical mathematics, as
reconstructed therein), since the null set is a subset of the set of
physical tokens.
5 See, for instance, the last sentence of their 1975.
6 Not usually a biconditional—but maybe sometimes (Meinong?).
7 These phrases are taken from Davidson 1970/80.
8 See my initial paraphrase of Davidson (in my 1982, page 97 = page
96 in this volume); and compare Quine on “difference in the world”
and change (1978, 162). I am indebted to Joe Camp for a conversa-
tion during the course of which the point of this paragraph
emerged.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Meaning
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

ch a pt e r  s ev e n
The Intentionality
All-Stars
All-star conundrum: How do you handle a hot Pirate with three balls
on him? Metaphysical answer: You walk him intentionally, and pitch
to the Padre.1 The philosophical credentials of this strategy are impec-
cable; for, even though Hobbes was prepared to argue “I walk, there-
fore I am”, Descartes held out for the more explicit “I walk intentionally,
…”2 His point, of course, was that, unlike mere corporeal walking,
intending is a kind of cognition—it has, in his terms, not only formal
but also objective reality. And this ostensibly distinctive character of
cognitions has remained a topic of investigation ever since—though
now under the title intentionality.3 Remarkably, however, neither
Hobbes nor Descartes nor, indeed, any of their successors has ever
noticed the signiﬁcance of baseball for the alternatives and their expli-
cation. I shall attempt to remedy this startling omission.
1 Warm up
Intentionality is hard to get a glove on. It is often glossed as that
character of some things (items, events, states, …) that they are “of”,
are “about”, or “represent” others. Thus, my belief that Babe Ruth
built Yankee Stadium is about Babe Ruth and Yankee Stadium, or
(better) it represents the one’s having built the other. Much the same
can be said for hopes and fears, wonderings and intendings, even
perceptions and actions. My wanting to get some popcorn, my in-
tending to get some popcorn, and my going to get some popcorn are
all “about” my getting some popcorn. In a different terminology, to
have intentionality is to have (semantic) content: the content of my
belief is that Ruth built the stadium, the content of my intention (or
action) is to get some popcorn. Note that something’s content is not
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 2 8
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
the same as what it is about or represents, but rather determines what
it is about or represents; thus, if two things have the same content,
then what they are about or represent is the same, but not vice versa.4
On the face of it, intentionality is (sometimes) a relation between
whatever has the intentionality (for instance, a belief) and whatever it
represents or is about (for instance, some state of affairs). But as a
relation, it has the serious peculiarity that its second relatum need not
exist. For instance, my belief that Babe Ruth built Yankee Stadium
could be just as intentional (with the very same content), even if Ruth
had never lived or hadn’t built a stadium; similarly, I might go to get
some popcorn, yet not get any. But how can a “relation” not be to
anything? This peculiarity betrays another: if it’s not the case that
Ruth built the stadium, or I get the popcorn, then something’s
faulty—in that beliefs are not “supposed to” be false, or actions fail-
ures. In other words, the fallibility of intentionality reveals that it is
not merely a factual, but also a normative relation.
At least as important, entities having intentionality are (some-
times) thereby related to one another. I might believe that Ruth built
the stadium because I believe that the greatest Yankee built it, and that
Ruth was the greatest Yankee; I go to get the popcorn because I want
to, and see nothing to stop me. Yet the force of this “because” is also
peculiar, in that it purports simultaneously to explain and to justify.
The double purport is reﬂected in the double sense in the “reason” one
does something. On the one hand, it must be normative, since my
reasons for coming to believe or act, can always be criticized according
to how good or valid they are. On the other hand, it must be causal,
since I can have a reason to believe or do something, and do so, yet
not for that reason—it’s not the having of that reason that leads to my
belief or action.5 The difference between such a case and the usual one
must be the absence of a causal relation. But how can a relation be
both causal and normative?
Evidently, the most sporting question about intentionality is not
“What is its deﬁnition?” but rather “How can there be any?” More
speciﬁcally, given the vapid materialism now generally conceded
(roughly: without any matter, there wouldn’t be anything else contin-
gent either), how can it be that any part or feature of the universe
represents or is a reason for another? How can there be norms among
the atoms in the void? How, in short, is intentionality compatible with
materialism? This question is posed not as a dilemma, but as a chal-
lenge. We shall assume both that materialism is compatible with
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
129
everything there is, and that there is intentionality; the aim is not to
doubt or debunk, but to understand.
Cognitions, perceptions, and actions are not the only phenomena
that exhibit intentionality. A line in a song, or on a plaque, can say
that Babe Ruth built Yankee Stadium; and, if so, it has essentially the
same content as my belief. Clearly, sentences, formulae, and public
symbols of all sorts can have intentional contents, including a great
deal of overlap with the possible contents of thoughts. Intentionality,
however, is not all created equal. At least some outward symbols (for
instance, a secret signal that you and I explicitly agree on) have their
intentionality only derivatively—that is, by inheriting it from some-
thing else that has that same content already (such as the stipulation
in our agreement). And, indeed, the latter might also have its content
only derivatively, from something else again; but, obviously, that can’t
go on forever.
Derivative intentionality, like an image in a photocopy, must derive
eventually from something that is not similarly derivative; that is, at
least some intentionality must be original (nonderivative). And clearly
then, this original intentionality is the primary metaphysical problem;
for the possibility of delegating content, once there is some to dele-
gate, is surely less puzzling than how there can be any in the ﬁrst
place. Now, it is sometimes maintained that all and only mental inten-
tionality is original—hence, that all public symbols have their con-
tents only derivatively. But this further claim is controversial and calls
for a separate argument; it does not follow directly from the uncon-
troversial thesis that at least some intentionality must be original.6
In the good old days, a philosopher might hold that mental entities
are somehow ontologically distinctive (modes of a special substance,
say), and then maintain that an essential part of that distinction lies in
their having original intentionality as an intrinsic property. Thus, just
as material entities have mass and extension intrinsically, so mental
entities have content—that’s simply the way God made them (end of
discussion). In the present context, this is like trying to score a run
without rounding the bases; and the effect of vapid materialism is to
throw it out at ﬁrst. But throwing it out does raise a problem.
Whether or not “original intentionality”, “intrinsic property”, and
“matter” ever hang separately, it is at least clear that they don’t hang
together: no single patch of matter can, purely in virtue of its own
physical structure, and regardless of the rest of the universe, mean
exactly one thing. For instance, if some cyanide molecules in the Crab
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

130
H av i n g Though t
Nebula should happen to trace out the shape of the letters ‘Hank
Aaron’, they would not name the homer Hammer (or even be the
letters ‘Hank Aaron’). Hence, vapid materialism seems to imply that
the intentionality of any individual state or occurrence always de-
pends on some larger pattern into which it ﬁts—which is, of course,
the principle of vapid holism. And, so long as the formulation of this
principle remains carefully evasive, most contemporary philosophers
would accept it. 
The Crab Nebula example harbors a further lesson; for there
might well occur, somewhere in the vast reaches of galactic dust, an
arbitrarily large and enduring pattern of apparently sensible “text” or
“behavior”. Still, if that pattern comes about entirely by accident, a
mere cosmic coincidence, then no part of it can have any more content
than an isolated ﬂash of ‘Hank Aaron’. So vapid holism must require
not merely that some “larger pattern” occur, but also that it not be just
an accident. But whether something is accidental or not is relative to a
level of description, and the possibility of some kind of account.7
Thus, in terms of physics and a prior conﬁguration, the positions of
the dust particles might not be accidental at all; yet it could still be a
complete coincidence if those positions happened to yield some higher-
level pattern. Vapid holism requires that the larger pattern itself not be
an accident—that is, at the very level at which it is describable as that
pattern.
If vapid holism is to be the key to intentionality, the nonaccidental
“larger pattern” must be speciﬁed more fully; and this fuller speciﬁca-
tion, moreover, should account for the peculiarity of intentionality as
a relation, for its normative force, and for what differentiates original
intentionality from derivative. Even with all these stipulations, how-
ever, there remain a number of distinct candidates—alternative speci-
ﬁcations of the relevant “whole”. And differences among them, it
seems to me, are characteristic of differing basic approaches to inten-
tionality.8 I propose, therefore, to outline and compare several of the
main positions, and to name some of their foremost defenders—to
choose, in effect, an All-Star Team for the intentionality league. Need-
less to warn, the brief sketches I will offer verge on caricatures, in
comparison with the positions actually held by the named players; but
that is the price of mapping a real ﬁeld.
To begin with the obvious: I’m pitching, and you’re catching. That
is, we and our teammates are the ﬁelding team; and, though our
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
13 1
positions are all different, we are alike in collectively facing a line-up of
truly phenomenal (not merely sensational) all-star batters—which
implies (though the fact is seldom noticed) that our common game
plan is phenomenology. Actually, since time is limited, we shall discuss
mainly the inﬁeld; but the rest of the team deserves a quick survey,
both for completeness and for perspective. Roughly, the difference
between inﬁelders and outﬁelders is that inﬁelders have (various)
spelled-out proposals about how holism renders intentionality com-
patible with vapid materialism; that is, they offer positive accounts of
whatever “larger pattern” makes original intentionality possible. Out-
ﬁelders, on the other hand, try (in various ways) to dismiss the
issue—generally by blaming Descartes for philosophy’s misplaced
presumptions, and remanding any remainder to biology. 
So, on the intentionality team, Richard Rorty and Jacques Derrida
are out in left ﬁeld. They both play pretty deep, Derrida perhaps
closer to the foul line. The position in a nutshell: talk about mentality
and intentionality is just that: talk. “Intentional idioms” may, as a way
of talking, sometimes be useful or entertaining; but that gives them
no more claim on our allegiance than talk of sakes or goblins. What’s
worse, they’re out of date: now that the intellectual high culture is over
its infatuation with transcendence and the a priori, intentionality can
slip quietly into the social-history curriculum, alongside transubstan-
tiation, noumenal selves, and the divine right of kings. 
Next, in maximum possible contrast to Rorty and Derrida, we ﬁnd
John Searle covering right ﬁeld, maintaining that there really are men-
tal brain-states, and that intentionality is what distinguishes them.
When pressed for details about what this (material) intentionality
consists in, however, he doesn’t get far beyond calling it an occult
power hitter—some mysterious causal property which biochemists
are going to have to unravel (much as they did photosynthesis).9
Finally, way out on the warning track in center ﬁeld, B.F. Skinner is
up against the wall defending the view that science can explain behav-
ior without reference to intentionality, and that therefore there is no
reason to posit intentional states or entities. Hence, their status is like
that of the crystal spheres or the luminiferous aether: unnecessary
inventions of a naive and false scientiﬁc theory.
So much for the outﬁeld.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

132
H av i n g Though t
2 First base
Naturally, everyone is dying to ask: Who’s on ﬁrst? Well, think of it as
the position just inﬁeld from Searle’s. We would expect to hear, then,
that original intentionality is the province exclusively of contentful
internal (mental) states; but we would expect, in addition, a worked-
out account of just what it is about these states that makes them
contentful. Such a position can be called “neo-Cartesianism”; but its
place in the all-star defense is better expressed by right-wing phenome-
nology. Stellar players at this position surely include Jerry Fodor,
Hartry Field, and the philosophical foundations of cognitive sci-
ence—as expounded, for instance, by Zenon Pylyshyn.10
Here is the basic idea: separate mental states have their contents in
virtue of their systematic relations to one another. That is, the “larger
pattern” of all vapid holism is further speciﬁed by right-wing phenom-
enology as a pattern of interrelations among discrete internal states.
Moreover, since the intentionality of these states presupposes the pat-
tern of relations among them, they must themselves be tokens, in the
following strong sense: each state (and relation) has a determinate
identity independent of its content—it is a concrete internal item
(feature, conﬁguration, …) that is uniquely characterizable in nonin-
tentional terms. Inasmuch as these tokens have contents, they are also
symbols.
The required congruence between symbols and tokens can be
spelled out more fully. Let a description or speciﬁcation be semantic if
framed in intentional terms, formal if framed in nonintentional terms
(at some appropriate level),11 local if meant to apply only to the given
system, and loose if sensitive to context, subject to retroactive adjust-
ment, and only approximate. Then, ﬁrst, for each particular symbol
there is a particular token with which it is numerically identical, and
vice versa; that is, symbols and tokens are the very same entities, but
identiﬁed semantically and formally, respectively. Second, there is at
least a loose and local general formal speciﬁcation of which entities are
tokens (hence symbols). And third, at least loosely and locally, the
semantics of the symbols is a systematic function of their formal
character as tokens. The ﬁrst clause is sometimes called “token-token
identity theory”. The other two are a very watered down version of
“type-type identity theory”.12 Their conjunction, needless to say, is
vapid reductionism.13 The relation of natural dialect semantics to
phonology is a familiar vapid reduction.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
13 3
Because the inner states are independent tokens, specifying their
symbolic contents can be regarded as interpreting them (in roughly the
philosophical linguists’ sense—that is, radical translation). Accord-
ingly, the problem of how their contents depend on patterns among
them can be approached in terms of constraints on viable interpreta-
tions. Speaking very broadly, an interpretation must always assign
contents in such a way that the patterns turn out to be “appropriate”
in the light of those contents. What does this mean?
The underlying intuition (though not the actual account) is remi-
niscent of the resemblance theory of pictorial representation. On that
view, an individual dot can represent a certain freckle on the Queen’s
nose, but only in virtue of its (spatial) relations to all the other dots
making up the whole picture; and these relations, moreover, must be
such that all the dots together somehow visibly “resemble” Her Maj-
esty’s face. Likewise, ﬁrst-base-men assign contents to individual to-
kens in virtue of their relations to one another in an overall pattern,
which must in turn bear some relation to the world; obviously, how-
ever, these interrelations won’t be merely spatial, and the relation to
the world won’t be pictorial resemblance.
Imagine trying to interpret some ancient inscriptions; and consider
a certain hypothesis according to which they are an astronomical
treatise, detailing various eclipses, equinoxes, and planetary motions,
as well as theories to explain them. How do we evaluate such an
hypothesis? Well, in the ﬁrst place, the text (as translated) had better
be internally coherent. If a passage is construed as a question and a
response, then the latter should turn out, by and large, to be a plausi-
ble answer to the former; if a passage is construed as adducing consid-
erations, then they ought, by and large, to be relevant; if a passage is
construed as an argument, then the conclusion ought, by and large, to
follow from the premises; and so on. Likewise, in longer segments, the
discourse should develop reasonably and hang together as a consistent
and sensible treatment of its topic. Such relations among interpreted
tokens are broadly “rational”.
Second, the claims and presuppositions of the proposed transla-
tion ought, by and large, to cohere “externally” with the world. Thus if
eclipses, planetary motions, and the like, occurred just as the descrip-
tions say they did, and as the questions and inferences presuppose,
and so on, then that supports the interpretive hypothesis; but if the
(alleged) discussions bear no sensible relation to actual events, then
there is reason to suspect a mistranslation. Of course, the standard is
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

13 4
H av i n g Though t
not perfection: “by and large” implies only “at least in most of the most
obvious cases”. Thus, it would be excusable to omit an occasional
eclipse, and perhaps even all eclipses visible only elsewhere on the
globe; but if the interpreted text got nearly everything wrong, includ-
ing the manifest and commonplace, that would undermine not so
much the author’s credibility as the translator’s.
Apparently, then, the ﬁrst-base counterpart of intrapictorial spatial
relations is intrasystematic rationality, and the counterpart of resem-
blance is truth. Though these considerations have been only roughly
indicated, they are familiar enough, and can summed up in a conve-
nient maxim.
Principle of interpretation: the tokens, as situated, should
turn out, as interpreted, to make good sense, by and large.14
A token’s “situation” is meant to include both its internal context (the
other tokens) and the external circumstances of its utterance (the
world). And “making good sense by and large” subsumes both internal
and external coherence—that is, both by-and-large rationality and
by-and-large truth.
Rationality and truth are normative constraints, and on two differ-
ent levels. First, interpretation is supposed to construe the tokens as
making sense overall; and second, the tokens themselves are supposed
to make sense, as construed. In other words, not only is interpretation
as such norm governed, but it also imputes these norms to what it
interprets. But how can norms be attributed? That is, when a token
fails to make sense as interpreted, how can we ever say that it is the
token itself that is faulty, and not just the assignment of its content
(the interpretation)? Predictably, the answer to this question invokes
holism; less predictably, perhaps, it therefore presupposes a vapid reduc-
tion—that is, a (loosely and locally) systematic function from token
types to contents.
What makes any holism nontrivial is the simultaneous imposition
of two independent constraints. Thus it is easy to assign contents that
make sense overall (just assign the contents of War and Peace, regard-
less of the token types); likewise, it is easy to assign contents systemat-
ically (just equate each type of token with an arbitrary English word,
regardless of sense). What’s hard is an assignment that’s simulta-
neously sensible and systematic. Suppose, for example, that you’re
struggling with some alien text, and you could improve the sense by
reinterpreting a few tokens. The trouble is, systematicity would then
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
135
oblige you also to reinterpret other tokens of the same types; and
those changes might or might not make sense, in their contexts. Of
course, sometimes you can make excuses, or accommodate by making
still further changes, and so on. Such juggling of readings to make
maximum sense overall is what holism is all about; but it is nontrivial
only if systematicity supplies an independent constraint. This is why
holistic interpretation requires an objective pattern in the tokens being
interpreted—thus a vapid reduction.
Whenever there are two independent constraints, they can con-
ﬂict. Now, if they conﬂict grossly (nothing comes close to satisfying
them both), then interpretation simply fails. But if you can almost
satisfy both, then you get a viable interpretation with a few anoma-
lies—a few tokens that “ought” to be different than they are. Some-
times these are just bad data, and can be discarded. But, in more
interesting cases, a persistent anomalous theme will be coherently
interwoven with text that is otherwise not anomalous. For instance,
claims about a “thunderbolt hurler” might occur, quite rationally, in
various otherwise sensible discussions of the weather, sports, crops,
marriages, eclipses, and what have you. Undeniably, these symbols
belong in the text and are interpreted correctly—systematicity and
internal coherence both support them—yet they are faulty (false).
Since the “fault” is not in the interpretation (it’s as good as can be), it
must lie in the very pattern being interpreted. That is, it lies in the
tokens themselves—and often in quite particular ones. It’s like ﬁnding
a ﬂaw in a crystal; only, since the “regularity” which the ﬂaw violates is
normative, so is the violation. This is how the norms of interpretation
devolve onto the interpreted tokens. 
What’s more, these normative constraints on the symbols them-
selves illuminate the peculiar character of intentionality as a “relation”.
For, if I believe that Mighty Casey built Yankee Stadium, precisely
what’s wrong is that there was no Mighty Casey (hence no such state
of affairs); the relata that my belief should have had are missing. In
general, norms can apply even when they are not satisﬁed; and that’s
why symbols can have the same content even when they’re faulty, and
why intentionality can be “relational” even without one of its relata.
Put rather crudely, the peculiarity of intentionality as a relation is a
special case of the peculiarity of normative rules that they are “made
to be broken”.
As a neo-Cartesian account of intentional content, however, the
“principle of interpretation”, even understood normatively, is (so far)
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

136
H av i n g Though t
radically incomplete. For, in the ﬁrst place, it cannot distinguish be-
tween the intentionality of text (inscriptions found in the desert) and
that of real live cognitions. And second, even in the case of cognitions,
the principle offers no basis for saying why, or even whether, interpre-
tation means exposing (discovering) norms and contents that are al-
ready there, rather than imposing (stipulating) them by ﬁat. Both of
these shortcomings point to the same omission: there is no account of
the difference between original and derivative intentionality. That is
to say, the holistic pattern of interrelationships among internal tokens,
upon which the entire ﬁrst-base position rests, has not yet been char-
acterized in a way strong enough to support these distinctions—
something more is needed.
And right-wing phenomenology is ready with an answer: the rest
of the needed pattern lies in appropriate interactions among the inter-
preted tokens. That is, the relevant pattern includes not only static
but also dynamic (causal) relations among the inner symbols. Of
course, even ancient ink marks interact slightly (gravity, chemical dif-
fusion, and the like), but not in any way that reﬂects what they mean.
In a mind, on the other hand, inner symbols (thoughts) are constantly
interacting in regular ways that are directly and systematically appro-
priate to their contents—in the course of reasoning, problem solving,
decision making, and so on. In effect, the norms of internal coherence
apply to the symbols not only synchronically, from one part of the text
to another, but also diachronically, as the symbol structures evolve
rationally through time.
To take a trivial example, if you write the premises of a syllogism
on a piece of paper, nothing much happens; but if you get them into
somebody’s thoughts, a conclusion is likely to be drawn—not just any
new notion, but (by and large) a semantically valid consequence. The
only way for that conclusion to appear on a page (other than by
accident) would be for someone to write it there—the tokens and
paper themselves do nothing. But inside a person, the regular causal
interactions among the tokens (internal “processes”) systematically
maintain and develop the pattern in virtue of which they can be
interpreted as symbols. This causal structure is what accounts for the
fact that the neo-Cartesian pattern is not an accident, and thus for the
fact that rational conclusions can be generated without intervention
from an outside agency. And that is precisely what inclines us to say
that people understand the tokens occurring in them, whereas paper
is utterly oblivious. 
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
13 7
Call such semantically appropriate symbolic dynamism semantic
activity, in contrast to the semantic inertness of, say, sentence inscrip-
tions on a page. Clearly, semantic activity is a global property of
“systems” of interacting tokens, together with the processes or primi-
tive operations through which they interact. Hence, the principle of
interpretation is not superceded by semantic activity, but instead en-
riched, in that the “contexts” of tokens now include also their temporal
situations in the endless work and play of thought. Likewise, the
pattern of interrelations among tokens that constitutes the essential
ﬁrst-base speciﬁcation of vapid holism is not superceded, but simply
acquires a new dimension, in patterns of interaction.
Clearly, semantic activity differentiates decisively between cogni-
tions and mere inscriptions. It also provides a basis for saying that the
intentionality of text is imposed, whereas that of thought is merely
exposed by interpretation. For, the origin of the content assigned is
plausibly identiﬁed with the source of the orderly pattern on which
that assignment rests. But in the case of inert text, any interpretable
(hence nonaccidental) pattern must derive from some external
source—which plausibly, then, is responsible for its content. Semanti-
cally active thoughts, on the other hand, maintain their interpretable
pattern all by themselves; no outside source is implicated in the pat-
tern, hence none in the content. Thus semantic activity is also the
foundation of the neo-Cartesian account of the distinction between
original and derivative intentionality.
It remains to ask: How is semantic activity possible? If this cannot
be answered, then there is no neo-Cartesian account of how inten-
tionality is compatible with vapid materialism after all. Semantic ac-
tivity is materially possible precisely in case rational thought processes
can also be speciﬁed as formal operations—in effect, vapidly reduced.
Such speciﬁcation is possible in general if internal symbols and inter-
nal operations are semantically articulated—that is, systematically com-
posed of atomic symbols and operations, such that the content and
validity of the composites is structurally determined by that of their
components. The relevant formal level, therefore, is not physical but
syntactical, and hence also digital. Vapid reduction to syntactical opera-
tions and operands sufﬁces for materialism, however, because we
know independently how to reduce these to physics—or, at any rate,
how to “implement” them in physical systems. An implementation of
a semantically interpreted active syntactical system is, in the broadest
and most proper sense, a (digital) computer. In other words, semantic
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

138
H av i n g Though t
activity is possible if thinking is an internal computational process
conducted, so to speak, in a “language of thought”.15 This is why artiﬁcial
intelligence and cognitive science belong at ﬁrst base.
Our basic outline of right-wing phenomenology is now complete;
but, before continuing around the inﬁeld, one further set of issues
should at least be acknowledged. In specifying what is required for
original intentionality, we have said nothing about minimum degrees
or kinds of content or interaction; yet it seems clear that overly sim-
ple-minded systems are not “minded” at all—even if they satisfy all
the above characterizations. Arguably, for instance, the symbols in
most ordinary computers, including sophisticated “expert systems”,
are only derivatively intentional, even though they are semantically
articulated and interactive, maintaining quite sensible patterns nonac-
cidentally. It is tempting, therefore, to introduce some further thresh-
old in what or how the system thinks. Thus, it might be said that a
system cannot have original intentionality unless it can think about
itself and its own thoughts, or about the thoughts of others, or about
the difference between truth and error, or about norms and values as
such, or about life and death, or whatever. I shall not afﬁrm or deny
any of these, but observe only that semantic activity seems more
fundamental, since: ﬁrst, these special contents are all equally possible
in inert text, whereas semantic activity is not; and second, special
contents, unlike semantic activity, do not help explain nonaccidental-
ness or the difference between imposing and exposing intentionality.
3 Second base
Second-base-men, obviously, play just inﬁeld from Skinner; and neo-
behaviorist is really a happier epithet than “mid-ﬁeld phenomenologist”
(though strictly either is correct). Whatever we call them, the all-star
cast must include W.V.O. Quine, Daniel Dennett, and Robert Stal-
naker.16 Naturally, neo-behaviorists are suspicious of determinate
(concrete) mental states; but, unlike paleo-behaviorists, they take in-
tentional ascription very seriously. Characteristically, they treat an in-
tentional system purely as a “black box”; and they specify the larger
pattern of vapid holism as a pattern in the interactions between the
system and its environment. These interactions, however, are not con-
ceived merely as physical stimuli and responses, but rather as percep-
tions and actions—that is, intentionally.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
13 9
As we have seen, when a single token is considered in isolation,
there is no determining whether it is a symbol—or, if so, of what.
Likewise at second base: if a single environmental interaction is con-
sidered in isolation, there is no determining whether it is a perceiving
or doing—or, if so, of what. Suppose some photons land on my retina
or my earlobe. Do I perceive anything? What? Suppose my body
moves or changes shape. Am I doing anything? What? The holist
response, of course, is to consider such interactions not in isolation,
but in the context of one another, ﬁnding a pattern among a subset of
them, in virtue of which these make sense as contentful.
How can such a pattern be nonaccidental? Imagine a blind chess
player, exchanging moves verbally. Her environmental interactions are
richly patterned in a way that makes sense of them as perceptions and
actions—namely, as moves in a particular on-going chess game. For
that sense not to be a mirage, however, it cannot be just a coincidence
that her exchanges are so patterned. What does this presuppose?
Well, she must at least “remember” the developing current position
from move to move (or, conceivably, the history of prior moves); for
otherwise the continued legality of her moves would be unaccount-
able. Similarly, the pattern may also presuppose that she forms strate-
gic goals and plans, discerns options, foresees consequences, and
makes choices in the light of them. Finally, inasmuch as she is not
“hard wired” for chess, she must be understood as having come to
know about the game and to want to win.
Thus, neo-behaviorists can and must ascribe content not only to
overt environmental interactions, but also to relatively enduring states
of the interacting agent—states which are therefore cognitive—and
perhaps also to events that are changes in those states. Perceptions
and actions are thus only a portion of the whole into which particular
ascriptions must ﬁt. But they are a privileged portion, in three related
respects. First, the entire holistic ascription depends exclusively on the
pattern exhibited in perceptions and actions; intervening cognitive
states and events are themselves ascribed only on the basis of that
pattern, and contribute no additional constraint. Second, it is only
perceptions and actions for which, at second base, a vapid reduction
must be possible; that is, only these must be identical to determinate
entities that are uniquely identiﬁable in formal terms, in a way that
systematically determines content (at least loosely and locally).
Hence, third, this privileged subpattern alone must support the inde-
pendent systematicity constraint that is required lest holism be trivial.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

140
H av i n g Though t
By contrast, ascribed cognitive states need not even be token-iden-
tical to states that are individually concrete and formally characteriza-
ble; it need not be possible to “individuate” them in any terms other
than intentional. Beliefs and desires, hopes and fears are ascribed en
masse to an agent as a whole, not severally to its internal parts. Accord-
ingly, mid-ﬁeld phenomenology also does not treat cognitions as
semantically articulated internal symbols, and cannot understand
thinking as a computational process deﬁned over a syntactical lan-
guage of thought, after the manner of classical artiﬁcial intelligence.
On the other hand, however, neo-behaviorism is entirely compatible,
in a way that right-wing phenomenology could never be, with parallel
or neurologically inspired cognitive models based on “distributed
representations”.17
What is meant by saying that cognitions are “states of the whole”?
Well, ﬁrst, they are not localized—as are, for instance, (the state of
having) a broken leg, a full stomach, or a tattooed shoulder. That is
not to deny that cognitions might be collectively localized, say in the
brain, but only to deny that they are individually and distinctly local-
ized—as would be multiple fractures or multiple tattoos. Well, then,
are cognitive states more like the being-warmed-up of an engine or
the being-dehydrated of a plant? These are not localized in speciﬁc
parts. But that’s only because they are uniformly exhibited in and
diffused throughout all the parts; cognitive states are not thus uni-
formly exhibited and diffused throughout a cognitive system. Per-
haps, then, they are more like states of the economy. Growth,
inﬂation, and unemployment are neither localized in individual trans-
actions and relationships, nor evenly diffused throughout them. Still,
they are basically just averages or sums of similar conditions that are
localizable; a cognitive system’s beliefs and desires are in no sense
averages or sums of the beliefs and desires of its parts.
A more promising analogy would be the state of an engine that is
running (idling), and thus ready to deliver power at the touch of a
pedal, or the state of a battleship that is on “red alert”, and thus ready
to respond at the slightest provocation. These too are global states,
but they are not simply diffused throughout or averaged over the
various parts; rather, they are overall states that depend on a richly
integrated system of complexly interlocking capacities and activities.
Following up the analogy would suggest that, at second base, cogni-
tive states have the metaphysical status of dispositions—roughly on a
par, that is, with irritability, patriotism, or a natural aptitude for base-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
141
ball. I believe this is fundamentally correct; but it must be dissociated
immediately from all so-called “dispositional analyses”. For the latter
were essentially atomist and reductionist in tendency: A’s believing
that p was to be analyzed as A’s having a complex disposition, which A
could have regardless of any others, and which could be speciﬁed in
principle entirely in nonintentional terms. Holist neo-behaviorism
shares neither of those forlorn ideals, but only the idea that states
intervening between perception and action can be understood as glo-
bal states of the whole system, on the model of dispositions.
In a cognitive system, these disposition-like states must be elabo-
rately interrelated both causally and rationally. Suppose Pete Rose
wants to hit a long ﬂy, because he wants to drive in runs, and believes
he will drive in runs if he hits a long ﬂy. That ‘because’ is both rational
and causal: Rose both should want to hit a ﬂy for the given reason, and
actually does. But how is this possible, if the states are not identiﬁed
with formally determinate internal tokens, and cannot even be indi-
viduated except in intentional terms? Has vapid materialism been
abandoned to some peculiar intentional species of causation? I don’t
see why. Suppose company X out-earns company Y “because” it intro-
duces a proﬁtable new product, or suppose the Pirates win the World
Series “because” they out-hustle the Orioles. In both cases the ‘be-
cause’ is causal, yet in neither case could the cause or the effect be
individuated physically.18 Perhaps in some sense the causes are speciﬁ-
cally “economic” or “sporting”; but not in any sense that is inimical to
materialism. For states of a system to be intentional, the causal rela-
tions connecting them to one another and to certain environmental
interactions must account for the fact that the latter consistently
make sense as contentful perceptions and actions. It is an empirical
question whether unarticulated states of a material system can indeed
be so causally structured (that is, whether perception and action are
in fact possible without a language of thought); but, if they can, there
is no conceptual barrier to ascribing them as cognitive and rational.
Ascription is like interpretation in that the overall pattern must, as
construed, be somehow appropriate. But, since the primary pattern is
not a corpus of syntactical tokens, but a “biography” of environmental
interactions, the primary appropriateness must be different as well.
Imagine a mouse circling a box of cereal, pushing on it here and there,
gnawing at its edges, climbing atop it via the soup cans, and so on—
until it gets in. We inevitably ascribe perceptions, actions, and even
intervening states: we say the mouse is hungry, can smell the cereal,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

142
H av i n g Though t
and is trying to get into the box so that it can eat. But these ascrip-
tions are not at all like translations: intentionality is manifest in
behavioral tokens not as the “reasonable sense” of a text, but as the
competence of an agent. Hence, the primary normative standard is not
truth but success; and the rational relations among ascribed states are
not primarily logical, but instrumental—oriented as means and ends,
not evidence and conclusions. Truth, of course, is not irrelevant, but
just secondary: true beliefs are preferred in the ﬁrst instance as reliable
guides to action. A purely passive observer (theoretician) is unintelli-
gible at second base.
The holistic constraints that govern ascription, holding it all
together, can again be summed up in a convenient maxim—roughly
analogous to the principle of interpretation.
Principle of ascription: Ascribe perceptions, actions, and
intervening cognitions so as to maximize a system’s overall man-
ifest competence. 
The point, in other words, is to “rationalize” the system’s behavior,
relative to its circumstances, by interpolating just the right mental
structure to do the job—ascribing it, however, only to the system as
an unanalysed black box, without any implications about what’s “in-
side”. Beliefs, considerations, subgoals, inferential steps, and the like,
are not themselves systematically rooted in patterns of independently
identiﬁable tokens, but only indirectly supported by their causal/
rational role in competent environmental interaction. Thus, neo-be-
haviorist cognitive states are not internal in the literal neo-Cartesian
sense of having determinate locations inside the system; but they
might be deemed “internal” in another sense, in that they intervene
between perception and action.
Because second base does not rely on formally determinate inner
tokens, it faces a special problem: how much cognition should be as-
cribed? This will be clearer if we digress brieﬂy to see why the same
problem does not arise at ﬁrst base. Given a determinate cognitive
“text” to which interpretation is beholden, there is a clear basis for
attributing explicit (or “core”) beliefs, desires, and so on: the system
explicitly has those cognitive states that are formally tokened in it, and
no others. Then, with respect these, it is possible to attribute further
cognitions that are only implicit or tacit. Implicit thoughts are ones
that are not held explicitly, but are implied by explicit thoughts via
implications that the system could follow. For instance, I may want to
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
14 3
hit a home run, and believe that home runs embarrass pitchers, both
explicitly, but without explicitly making the connection; then I want
to embarrass the pitcher, but only implicitly. Tacit cognitions are those
evinced in the cognitive behavior of the system, quite apart from
whether they are held explicitly or implicitly. Thus, a system might
simply be constructed so as to infer according to modus ponens, or to
infer always from big bared teeth to danger; then, even though it
doesn’t contain any symbols that express or imply the corresponding
rules, it accepts them tacitly.
Neo-behaviorists, by contrast, cannot draw these distinctions, be-
cause they do not claim that any cognitive states are ever formally
tokened. At second base, all ascribed cognitions are merely “evinced”
in behavior; so, in effect, they would all count as purely “tacit”. Unfor-
tunately, in the absence of any antecedent delineation of behavior and
of evincing, there is no upper bound on what to ascribe. The difﬁculty
can be more vividly presented by switching from mouse psychology to 
Mousetrap psychology: The trap wants to kill mice, and it
believes it can whenever one nibbles the bait. Further, whenever it
feels its trigger move, it comes to believe a mouse is nibbling. It
now so feels, and straightway it acts.
Painstaking observation reveals that the trap, as construed, has mostly
true beliefs and reliable perceptions; moreover, it acts on them consis-
tently and rationally, achieving its goals with enviable success. And,
while we’re at it, why not ascribe to the cheese, in virtue of its canny
silence and redolence, a subtle knowledge of mouse temptations—not
to mention of acoustics and chemical diffusion? Now a mid-ﬁeld
phenomenologist could try to maintain that such ascriptions are per-
fectly legitimate—though not very interesting, since mousetraps and
cheese are such “simple” black boxes. But that just drops the ball.
Intentionality is worth considering in the ﬁrst place only because it
seems so intimately involved in our own intelligence and cognition;
perhaps we can share these qualities to some extent with mice, but
any account that fails to rule out mousetraps and cheese ipso facto fails
to capture whatever it is we’re interested in.
There is a tension in the ascription principle itself. On the one
hand, we want to ascribe as much capacity to the system as we can.
For instance, if the dolphins really are scheming and communicating
in sophisticated ways, we’ll be missing something if we fail to ﬁgure it
out. This is the point of maximizing the system’s manifest competence.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

144
H av i n g Though t
On the other hand, the mousetrap and cheese examples suggest that
we should ascribe no more capacity than we have to; if there is no
countervailing minimizing constraint, ascription runs gratuitously
rampant. This is the point of maximizing (only) the system’s manifest
competence. In sum, it is equally a mistake to elevate a mousetrap to
the cognitive level of a mouse, or reduce a mouse to that of a trap; they
are objectively different, and we require a principled way of marking
that difference.
Consider Supertrap, an anti-rodent system with a more versatile
repertoire. For instance, when a mouse is soaked with gasoline, Su-
pertrap strikes a match; when a mouse is in a blender, Supertrap trips
the switch; when a mouse is in the batter’s box, Supertrap throws a
bean ball; and, of course, when a mouse nibbles the bait, Supertrap
snaps shut. These habits betray a common malevolent thread that is
generalizable by (and only by) ascribing one persistent goal: dead mice.
Without malice aforethought, it would be just a grisly (and incredi-
ble) coincidence that each gesture happened to be potentially lethal,
not to mention exquisitely timed so as to realize that potential. How
do you suppose Supertrap would behave if a mouse took refuge under
the tires of a truck, or huddled in an empty light socket? The obvious
conjectures project not from previous bodily motions, but from previ-
ous results. In other words, the projectable pattern in Supertrap’s
behavior can be characterized only in terms of what he is up to—
what he is doing.
Of course, the case had better be more complicated than this. How,
for instance, does Supertrap know where his little victim is hiding?
Perhaps sometimes he looks it in the eye, while other times he hears a
squeak or notices a careless tail. Just as diverse routes to a common
result support the ascription of actions, so diverse routes from a com-
mon source support the ascription of perceptions.19 Similarly, inter-
vening cognitive ascriptions are better supported insofar as they ﬁgure
in diverse rationalizations, combined with various others. Thus, just
as murderous intent helps to explain several proclivities, in conjunc-
tion with sundry beliefs about gasoline, blenders, and the like, so also
those beliefs should work together with other goals in other accounts:
how Supertrap starts a bonﬁre or makes a milk shake, say. Still subtler
combinations explain why he declines to harm cats and barn owls,
even when they nibble the bait or reek of gas. Call such intricate
complicity of rationalizations semantic intrigue; it marks the difference
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
14 5
between merely gratuitous ascriptions and those that are genuinely
required to maximize manifest competence.
Ascription, like interpretation, is a way of discerning order (non-
randomness) that would otherwise go unnoticed, or be indescribable.
The discovered pattern, of course, need not be perfect; but “ﬂaws” are
identiﬁable as such only against the backdrop of a pattern that is
largely clear and reliable. (There are no ﬂaws in chaos.) Accordingly,
semantic intrigue—the interpolated pattern found in competently
non-random behavior—makes possible the ascription of (scattered)
errors. Suppose I jiggle a mousetrap’s trigger with a feather, and it
snaps shut. Shall we say it tried to kill “that mouse”; believed the
unobvious dictum “Crush a feather, kill a mouse”; or merely took the
opportunity for some target practice? None of these makes any more
sense than the rest of mousetrap psychology. But if we switch to
Supertrap, and if we have independent evidence that he expects some
sneaky mice to don owl disguises, knows where they might get the
feathers, and so on, then there could be enough intricacy to justify
attributing some (particular) error. Thus, as with interpretation, the
norms governing ascription devolve onto the states ascribed.
Although we have based neo-behaviorist cognitive ascriptions on a
system’s overall pattern of environmental interactions, we have so far
neglected the very special case of linguistic perception and action. All
actions as such have content: what the agent is doing in behaving that
way. But some actions, including especially speech acts, also have
content of another sort: what the agent means by doing them. In his
pioneering second-base account of such meaning, Grice (1957) shows
how it is derivative from the intentionality of the agent’s prior cognitive
states (particularly in how the agent intends witnesses to respond).
Even in the case of actions with antecedently standardized meanings
(such as utterances in public languages), that meaningfulness is un-
derstood as ultimately derivative from the intentionality of agents,
though in a more complex way, involving cooperation, agreement, and
common expectations.
Standardly, of course, agents say only what they believe (as mani-
fested also in their other dispositions to behave), request only what
they want, promise only what they intend, and so on. These are the
familiar “sincerity conditions” on illocutionary acts; and abiding by
them, by and large, is a precondition on treating the behavior in
question as linguistic. And there are corresponding conditions on
treating responses as linguistic perceptions—as understanding what
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

14 6
H av i n g Though t
somebody says. Accordingly, from the perspective of neo-behaviorist
constraints on intentional ascription, the Grice/Austin/Searle analy-
ses of relations between cognitions and speech acts function as partic-
ularly sophisticated forms of discernible semantic intrigue.
The very fact that insincerity is possible, however, shows that lin-
guistic and nonlinguistic dispositions are distinct and can diverge;
indeed, there are many sources of discrepancy besides insincerity—
such as lack of self-knowledge, psychological repression, logical or
linguistic errors, unexamined slogans, and so on. Further, the lan-
guage faculty itself is, of necessity, highly developed and specialized
(perhaps even a separate “module” in the architecture of the mind20);
and this raises tantalizing possibilities. There could, for instance, be
cognitive states of a distinctive sort that are already formulated ver-
bally within the linguistic faculty—verbal cognitions, we might call
them. And dispositions speciﬁc to these states might interact among
themselves in a way that is relatively divorced from the agent’s other
dispositions, and more narrowly “logical”. Thus, we could imagine the
agent engaging in private verbal ratiocination, drawing silent verbal
conclusions, and so on, in an internal monologue of arbitrary com-
plexity; and the conclusions of these deliberations would be ready for
immediate linguistic expression, in a way that ordinary (that is, unfor-
mulated) cognitions are not. On the other hand, those same verbal
conclusions would not affect nonlinguistic behavior, except insofar as
they inﬂuence ordinary dispositions outside the language faculty—
presumably through a process like that involved in understanding the
speech of others.
Neo-behaviorist verbal cognitions are in some respects like neo-
Cartesian explicit cognitions; in particular, they are semantically artic-
ulated and directly expressible, without additional processing. Never-
theless, the two notions are profoundly different. Explicit internal
symbol manipulations at ﬁrst base are the primary medium of cogni-
tion. As such, they must also be the immediate cognitive products of
perceptual transduction, and the ﬁnal cognitive causes of voluntary
action. Moreover, they are essentially the same in linguistic and non-
liguistic creatures, and essentially the same in linguistic and nonlin-
guistic transactions in creatures capable of both. Verbal cognitions at
second base, by contrast, are fundamentally parasitic. They arise only
in linguistic creatures, and only in their specialized linguistic faculty;
accordingly, they are not involved in most perception, action, or cog-
nition, but only in a peculiar special case.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
147
Though the peculiarity of verbal cognitions raises special prob-
lems, particularly in how they are related to “ordinary” cognitions, it is
also their principal theoretical attraction. Thus Dennett takes advan-
tage of the distinction between two kinds of cognition to account for
the difference between merely coming to believe or desire, and “mak-
ing up one’s mind”; and he suggests that the same division might form
the basis of an account of self-deception and weakness of the will.
Stalnaker makes a roughly similar appeal to account for the difference
between the sense in which rational agents believe all tautologies, and
the sense in which they do not. Finally, a second-base-man might well
draw on the same distinction to differentiate between what Dreyfus
calls intuitive “zeroing in” and explicit “counting out” (for instance, in
the course of deciding on a chess move).21
4 Shortstop
Wittgenstein might have been a shortstop.
5 Third base
At third base, social practices are the bottom line; so the position is
most naturally called neo-pragmatism, though team organization again
supports the clumsier “left-wing (that is, socialist) phenomenology”.
The all-stars include at least Martin Heidegger, Wilfrid Sellars, and
Robert Brandom.22 When these leftists ﬂesh out the skeleton of vapid
holism, the fundamental pattern becomes a culture or way of life, with
all its institutions, artifacts, and mores. The idea is that contentful
tokens, like ritual objects, customary performances, and tools, occupy
determinate niches within the social fabric—and these niches “deﬁne”
them as what they are. Only in virtue of such culturally instituted
roles can tokens have contents at all. 
Imagine a community of versatile and interactive creatures, not
otherwise speciﬁed except that they are conformists. Conformism here
means not just imitativeness (monkey see, monkey do), but also cen-
soriousness—that is, a positive tendency to see that one’s neighbors
do likewise, and to suppress variation. This is to be thought of as a
complicated second-order disposition, which the creatures have by
nature (“wired in”). It presupposes innate capacities to react differen-
tially (via sensory discrimination, say), to adapt behaviorally (that is,
to learn, as in conditioning or habit formation), and to inﬂuence the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

14 8
H av i n g Though t
adaptations of others (by setting an example, reinforcing, punishing,
and such like). But conformism does not presuppose thought, reason-
ing, language, or any other cognitive faculty; the creatures do not in
the ﬁrst instance conform or censure wittingly or because they want
to (except “tacitly”)—they are simply built that way.
Censoriousness, despite the term, is not only negative: we adjust
the behavior of children and fellows with smiles and strokes as well as
frowns and blows. Censoring behavior is not in the ﬁrst instance
voluntary, nor is voluntary behavior particularly its object: involuntary
“body language” is an effective means of shaping behavior, and is itself
largely so shaped. What in general counts as censorious acceptance
and rejection? Whatever community members do that promotes con-
formism: if they smile at conforming performances, and smiles pro-
mote repetition, if they ﬁre electric shocks at those who err, and these
shocks discourage aberration, then smiles and shocks are devices of
censorship. And who are the members of this community? The mem-
bers are basically whoever is brought into conformity with the rest of
the group, and thereupon participates in the censoring of others.23
Conformism—imitativeness and censoriousness together—is a
causal interactive process that results in more or less permanent
changes in the behavioral dispositions of its participants. Without
such a process, there can be no community, no social practices, and no
neo-pragmatist account of intentionality.
The net effect of conformism is a systematic peer pressure within
the community, which can be conceived as a kind of mutual attraction
among the behavioral dispositions of the different community mem-
bers. Under its inﬂuence, these dispositions draw “closer” to each
other, in the sense that they become more similar; that is, the commu-
nity members tend to act alike, in like circumstances. The result is
analogous to that of gregariousness in range animals: given only their
tendency to aggregate, they will tend also to form and maintain dis-
tinct herds. Other factors (including chance) will determine how
many herds form, of what sizes, and where; gregariousness deter-
mines only that there will be herds—distinguishable, reidentiﬁable
clusters of animals, separated by clear gaps where there are no animals
(save the odd stray). 
When behavioral dispositions aggregate under the force of con-
formism, it isn’t herds that coalesce, but norms. Other factors (includ-
ing chance) will determine the number of norms, how narrow (strict)
they are, and where they are in the “space” of feasible behavior;
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
149
conformism determines only that there will be norms—distinct,
enduring clusters of dispositions in behavioral feasibility space, sepa-
rated in that space by clear gaps where there are no dispositions (save
the odd stray). Like herds, norms are a kind of “emergent” entity, with
an identity and life of their own, over and above that of their constitu-
ents. Thus, young animals replace the old, thereby enabling a single
herd to outlast many generations; likewise, though each individual’s
dispositions eventually pass away, they beget their successors in
conformist youth, and thereby are the norms handed down to the
generations.
The community-wide classes of similar dispositions that coalesce
under the force of conformism can be called “norms”—and not just
collections or kinds—precisely because they themselves set the stan-
dard for that very censoriousness by which they are generated and
maintained. The censure attendant on deviation automatically gives
these standards (the extant classes themselves) a de facto normative
force. Out-of-step behavior is not just atypical, but abnormal and
unacceptable; it is what one is “not supposed to” do, and in that sense
improper. Norm-governed proprieties can be commissive or permis-
sive, either to do something or not to do it (that is, must, may, must
not, and need not). We sometimes also call norms practices or customs,
depending on context. Abiding by a norm or custom (engaging in a
practice) is behaving in the manner required by that norm, and not
merely by coincidence, but as the exercise of the dispositions fostered
by that norm.
Abiding by norms is not the same as following explicit rules. When
a cook follows an unfamiliar recipe step by step, or a youngster builds
a kit by carefully following the instructions, two things are required.
First, the rule to be followed must be explicitly formulated in some
code or language; and the rule follower must read the formulated rule
and do what it says to do because that’s what it says (that is, if you
changed the formulation, so that the rule said to do something else,
then the follower would do that instead). But conformists need not
read a formulated rule (indeed, they need not be able to read at all) in
order to abide reliably by elaborate norms; they simply acquire the
relevant complexes of dispositions from their fellows (via imitation
and positive and negative censoriousness), and then behave as they are
disposed. Accordingly, as far as neo-pragmatism is concerned, formu-
lating the norms explicitly as rules need not even be possible in prin-
ciple. The distinction between norm-abiding and rule-following is
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 50
H av i n g Though t
important at third base, since the aim is to explain the possibility of
the latter (as a special case of language use) in terms of the former.24
On the other hand, norm-abiding is also more than mere causal
regularity. This is not to say that it is irregular or uncaused, but rather
to insist that it has a signiﬁcantly different status as normal. We can
see the difference in two ways. First, when a laboratory specimen
behaves in accord with some regularity, it does not do so “because of”
the regularity; the regularity does not lead to or guide the behavior in
any way, but merely shows up in it. By contrast, when community
members behave normally, how they behave is in general directly
accountable to what’s normal in their community; their dispositions
have been inculcated and shaped according to those norms, and their
behavior continues to be monitored for compliance. Second, if a spec-
imen deviates from some alleged regularity, then either the regularity
is defective, or else it is only statistical and has exceptions; but the
specimen itself is in no sense “wrong”. By contrast, behavior deviating
from communal norms is wrong in the clear and speciﬁc sense that it is
subject to censure from others; abnormal behavior is not acceptable
within the community.25
Finally, conformist norms should not be confused with conven-
tions, in David Lewis’s (1969) sense. Roughly, a convention is an “as-if”
agreement, in which the parties have settled on a certain arranged
behavior pattern, for mutual beneﬁt. The origins of these conven-
tional arrangements are not addressed by the account; but their per-
sistence is explained by showing how, for each individual, it is rational
to go along with whatever arrangements are already in place. The
difference between norms and conventions lies in this explanatory
appeal: conformism does not presuppose any prior beliefs or prefer-
ences on the part of individual conformists, and hence the persistence
of norms cannot be explained in terms of agents’ interest maximiza-
tion or rational choice. Indeed, norms need not be, or even seem to be,
in any way beneﬁcial either to the individuals or to the group; the
mechanism of conformism is completely blind to the character or
merits of the norms engendered. This is not to deny, of course, that
beneﬁcial (or at least nonharmful) norms may be more likely to form
or persist; but, if so, that will reﬂect the inﬂuence of additional fac-
tors—it is not built into the normalizing process itself.
Metaphysically, conformism works like the mechanism of inherit-
ance and natural selection: it not only engenders order and structure
in a domain that is otherwise comparatively amorphous, but it engen-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
151
ders a new kind of order. The order and structure in organisms and
ecologies is not only greater than that in the primordial soup, but also
of a fundamentally unprecedented kind—made possible by the dis-
tinctive mechanism of biological evolution. Likewise, the order and
structure in cultural institutions and practices is not only vastly
greater than any in genetic or adaptive ethology, but of a new and
different kind—made possible by the distinctive mechanism of social
conformism (and pruned, no doubt, by “cultural evolution”). In the
latter case, like the former, whole new categories of phenomena
emerge, including, according to left-wing phenomenology, social
norms and original intentionality. To say that biological and social
categories are “emergent” is not to say, of course, that they are incom-
patible with vapid materialism or exempt from the laws of nature.
Quite the contrary: it is only because conformism is itself in some
sense a “causal” process that the emergent social pattern is nonacci-
dental in the sense required for intentionality.
We may call the overall pattern of a community’s norms and prac-
tices its common (shared, public) way of life. Unlike a scatter of herds,
a way of life is highly integrated and structured, in that the norms
which make it up are intricately interdependent. The basic reason is
that, strictly speaking, what get normalized are not behaviors them-
selves but dispositions to behave in certain ways in certain circum-
stances. Thus, norms have a kind of “if-then” character, connecting
sorts of circumstance to sorts of behavior. And therefore, the con-
forming community (in the differential responses of normal behavior
and normal censorship) must effectively categorize both behaviors
and behavioral circumstances into various distinct sorts. The public
way of life institutes these connections and sorts.26
Imagine, for instance, that the rules of chess were not explicitly
codiﬁed, but observed only as a body of conformist norms—“how
one acts” when one plays chess. So, it is proper (socially acceptable) to
move the king in any direction, but only one square at a time. For this
to be a norm, players and teacher/censors must be able to “tell” (that
is, respond differentially to) which piece is the king, what are the
squares, what counts as a move, and so on; thus, the presupposed
sorting of circumstances is effectively a sorting of items, features, and
events within those circumstances. Meanwhile, according to other
norms, the king must be protected when threatened, cannot be ex-
posed to capture, can castle under certain conditions, and so on; and,
crucially, for all of these norms, it’s the same instituted sort (“king”)
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 52
H av i n g Though t
that’s involved. Hence, the norms themselves are interdependent via
depending on the same sorting of circumstances (items, features, …).
Let’s call an instituted sort that is involved in many interrelated norms
a role—the role of the king in chess, for instance. Many such roles are
simultaneously instituted by the norms of chess behavior; and, in
consequence, the roles too are interrelated by those norms. Obviously,
in fact, all the norms and roles of chess are bound up in a complex and
highly interdependent structure.27
Neo-pragmatists have often made these points in terms of the tools
and paraphernalia of everyday life; but the upshot is the same. Ham-
mers, nails, boards, and brackets, screwdrivers, screws, and glue are all
bound up in a (large) nexus of interlocking roles, instituted by the
norms of carpentry practice. And, as with a king in chess (or any-
where else28), what it is to be a screwdriver is essentially determined
by its instituted role. What a screwdriver is for is turning screws. This
does not mean just that it is of a suitable size and shape for turning
screws, but rather that this is how it is supposed to be used. Of
course, screwdrivers have ancillary roles (opening paint cans, and the
like); but not everything you could do with one (even do well) would
count as proper use. Stabbing laboratory mice, for instance, or carving
your initials in the bleachers, would be a misuse or abuse of a screw-
driver—no matter how clever or successful the endeavor. This ques-
tion of propriety, I think, is what separates human use of tools from
the uses animals sometimes make of handy objects. A monkey might
be both clever and successful at getting some bananas with a stick, but
in no sense is that what the stick is properly “for”; equivalently, a
monkey could not abuse a stick, no matter what it did.29
In saying that tools are deﬁned by their instituted roles, we imply
that they are deﬁned, at least in part, by their (instituted) relations to
other role-deﬁned paraphernalia; what it is to be an arrow is nonsense
apart from what it is to be a bow, and vice versa. Bows as such are
“objectively” related to arrows, via the communal norms; shooting
arrows is what they’re for. Thus, when a bow is used to shoot an arrow,
the relation between them is not only factual (causal/explanatory),
but also and simultaneously normative (that’s how they are supposed
to be used). What’s more, the normative “relation” obtains even in the
absence of the second relatum: my bow is still “for” shooting arrows,
even when my quiver is empty. Needless to belabor, instituted rela-
tions among public paraphernalia are the third-base archetype of all
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
153
intentionality. Linguistic devices are thereby included too, as a (very)
special case. Dewey put the point colorfully and succinctly.
As to be a tool … is to have and to endow with meaning,
language, being the tool of tools, is the cherishing mother of all
signiﬁcance.
(1925/29, 154)
It remains to ask what distinguishes linguistic from other tools (that
is, the speciﬁc difference of the special case), and how the intentional-
ity of paraphernalia connects with that of cognition.
Linguistic tools—words and sentences, for instance—must be ut-
tered to be used; in the ﬁrst place and mostly, they occur only in
utterances.30 The term ‘utterance’ is ambiguous between the produc-
ing and the product—that is, between the uttering of the word tokens
and the word tokens thus uttered. The former is a using of the lin-
guistic tools; the latter are the tools thus used. In the case of speech
(which is the more basic), this distinction can be elusive, since the
tokens used are as ephemeral as the using of them; but written tokens,
being more durable, are clearly distinct from the writing of them, and
thereby clarify the distinction. In either case, it is these tokens pro-
duced that are the tokens of linguistic types; they are therefore also
the tokens that have proper linguistic uses in relevant circumstances,
hence play linguistic roles and serve as the primary bearers of seman-
tic content.
Linguistic tools are distinctive in being essentially double-use tools:
they have two (different but connected) uses in the uttering and in the
responding thereto. It’s not just that, like tandem bicycles, linguistic
tools typically have two users, or that, like army pocket knives, they
are multi-purpose. Rather, the basic point of linguistic tools is to
connect the two uses: utterances are “meant” to be responded to, and
the responses are to them as uttered. Both uses, of course, are gov-
erned by norms; and it is in the relationships between the respective
proprieties of utterance and response, as situated, that the connec-
tions reside. To take the most rudimentary illustration: when the
policeman directs trafﬁc, it is proper for him to direct you on your
way when and only when it is fair and safe for you to go; and it is
proper for you (and, similarly, the other drivers) to go when and as he
directs, and not otherwise. What’s more, such proper adjustment and
distribution of further proprieties is precisely what the policeman’s
gestures are for. How can this observation be generalized?
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 54
H av i n g Though t
As with norm-governed behavior in general, the proper use of
linguistic tools is conditioned on the circumstances: what would be
proper in one situation would not in another. Obviously, for instance,
the propriety of saying “Look, there’s a ﬁre engine” is closely associated
with the visible presence of a ﬁre engine. Norm-relevant circum-
stances, however, include more than what is presently manifest. Thus,
in chess, the propriety of castling is contingent not only on the present
conﬁguration of pieces, but also on whether that king has previously
moved; we can say that when the king ﬁrst moves, its “status” changes:
it is no longer eligible to castle. Similarly in baseball, the batter always
has a status (called the “count”), reﬂecting how many previous pitches
have been balls and strikes; and various proprieties (for various play-
ers) depend on the current count. Other pertinent statuses include
place in the batting order, the number of outs so far, what inning it is,
the score, and so on. Some statuses attach to individual players, others
to teams or equipment, still others to the game in progress. More
generally, a status is a propriety-determining, variable condition that is
not manifest; hence, norm-relevant circumstances include not only
the manifest characteristics and conﬁgurations of present items, but
also their normative statuses
By leftist lights, the primary utterance use of linguistic tools is to
affect the current normative circumstances, including the statuses of
both utterer and audience. This is the generalization of saying they
are “double-use” tools; for the use in proper response is precisely in
behaving according to the new proprieties implicit in the affected
statuses. Many ways in which language is used primarily to affect
status and propriety are familiar and banal: promises, vows, offers,
commands, requests, questions, and the like, are clearly means for
altering and otherwise managing various proprieties. If I make a
promise, I am committed to keeping it; and those to whom I make it
are entitled to count on my keeping it. This means not merely that
they may act in ways that will be proper only if I do what I promise,
but that they may do so “on my account”; that is, if I fail, I am
responsible not simply for breaking the promise itself, but also for the
resulting improprieties of those who counted on me—they are enti-
tled to defer that blame to me. Neo-pragmatism must offer compara-
ble normative analyses of all other speech acts, including, in particular,
factual assertion.
So: asserting that p is committing yourself to showing that p, if
called upon, and entitling your hearer to pass along to you any call to
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
155
show that p; that is, your hearer may act in a way that incurs a
commitment to show that p, and defer that commitment to you.
Thus, suppose it is proper to lock the door only if you can show that
all the children are in. Then, if I say that all the children are in, you
can lock the door “on my account”: if someone challenges you to show
that all the children are in, you can call upon me to discharge that
commitment; and if I cannot (maybe one of the children got locked
out), then you can defer the blame (negative censure) to me. Conspic-
uous among the things that the hearer can do on the asserter’s account
is make further assertions. Trivially, for instance, you could relay to a
third party that the children are all in, deferring to me if challenged to
show it. But further, if someone else has said that the adults are all in,
then you could assert that everybody is in, accepting responsibility for
the propriety of the inference, but deferring me and that third party
for the premises.31
This can elaborate practically without bounds—with much con-
versation directly depending on and affecting only the rest of the
conversation. Thus, many, perhaps most, linguistic moves are purely
intralinguistic, in the following sense: their propriety is secured entirely
by current circumstances resulting from prior linguistic utterances,
and they affect exclusively circumstances determining the propriety of
subsequent utterances.32 This is why, at third base, language is so
readily comparable to a game. For, the point of moves or plays in a
game, like speech acts, is precisely to affect normative circum-
stances—that is, to make a difference to what’s proper. Further, as far
as the game itself is concerned, moves are always “intrasystematic” in
the above sense: their propriety depends only on circumstances
within the game (resulting, typically, from previous moves), and they
affect only circumstances within the game (determining the propriety
of subsequent moves). Crucially, however—for this is the essential
difference between language and games—not all linguistic moves are
intralinguistic. That is, some utterances depend directly for their pro-
priety on nonlinguistic circumstances, and/or directly affect the pro-
priety of nonlinguistic actions. Observation statements and promises
are obvious cases in point.
At third base, as at ﬁrst base, the primary bearers of content are
semantically articulated symbols, occurring in appropriate dynamic
patterns, and vapid-reducible to distinct and determinate formal to-
kens.33 Third-base tokens, however, are external, not internal, to the
systems that use them; and the holistic pattern in which they occur
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 56
H av i n g Though t
includes far more than just their relations to one another—indeed, it
includes in principle all the interdependent relationships instituted by
the way of life of which they are a part. Roughly speaking, intralin-
guistic proprieties involving these tokens correspond to internal co-
herence within a text (rationality in the broad sense), and linguistic
proprieties involving extralinguistic circumstances correspond to ex-
ternal coherence with the world (including truth and other satisfac-
tion conditions). Publicly instituted by all these norms are such
relationships as that between (tokens of) “Babe Ruth built Yankee
Stadium” and the indicated state of affairs, as well as that between
‘Babe Ruth’ and the man himself—relationships which, though more
complicated in many respects, are metaphysically of a piece with the
instituted relationship between bows and arrows, or bats and balls.
Normative statuses are by nature not manifest properties; accord-
ingly, community members must effectively “keep track” of them, lest
they be lost and cease to exist. In particular, if the point of language is
to be served, interlocutors must keep track of everyone’s conversa-
tional status—including especially their own. Thus, if it is to amount
to anything for me to undertake, by saying that p, a commitment to
show that p, then I, as well as anyone who is thereby entitled to call on
me, had better keep track of that commitment; otherwise, it would be
for nought. And these retained statuses are then the cornerstone for a
third-base account of cognitive states—such as believing that p.34 We
cannot here pursue the development of that account, but merely men-
tion two noteworthy consequences. First, approaching cognition from
a basis in conversational status has the merit of making it unsurpris-
ing that psychological states so closely parallel possible speech acts,
not only in content but also in “force”—beliefs to assertions, inten-
tions to promises, wonderings to questions, and so on. And, second,
founding cognition thus in language renders its intentionality incon-
testably derivative. At third base, the instituted intentionality of public
symbols is original intentionality. The extant normative order in the
communal pattern is sui generis and self-sustaining, via the mechanism
of conformism; it is the fountainhead of all intentionality, public and
private. Thus, insofar as this order is imposed on the behavior or
states of individual community members in such a way as to confer
intentionality also on them, that resulting private intentionality is
derivative.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
157
6 Wrap up
Neo-Cartesians differ radically from neo-behaviorists and neo-prag-
matists alike in maintaining that original intentionality is internal—
that is, essentially a property of vapid-reducible explicit cognitions,
each of which is identical to a formally determinate internal token.
Hence, they naturally embrace a semantically articulated language of
thought, and account for the possibility of semantic activity in terms
of computational processes deﬁned over expressions in this language.
It is, of course, this character that makes right-wing phenomenology
so intimately compatible with “classical” artiﬁcial intelligence and cog-
nitive science, and so completely incompatible with the newer “distrib-
uted representation” models (with which the center and left are
entirely comfortable).
Second-base-men are properly distinguished from their teammates
on either side by an account of original intentionality that is basically
nonlinguistic. Accordingly, intentional ascription is nothing like trans-
lation, the ascribed intentional states themselves are not semantically
articulated, and the contents of those states need not be exactly ex-
pressible in any symbolic system. The fundamental normative consid-
erations, therefore, are not the language-based notions of truth and
logical inference, but the action-based notions of success and effective
means to ends. Acting competently in the environment takes the place
of saying (perhaps only in the language of thought) reasonable things
about it as the basic mark of systems with intentionality.
Left-wing phenomenology is primarily distinctive in making origi-
nal intentionality essentially a social institution—part of a way of life
engendered and maintained by communal conformism. Hence, on the
one hand, linguistic and other behavioral norms can be seen as funda-
mentally kindred, the familiar parallels between language and tools
and between language and games are naturally accommodated, and
the phenomenon of intentionality itself is assimilated to a broader
range of instituted structures and relationships. On the other hand,
however, the account is conﬁned exclusively to social beings: the left,
unlike either the center or the right, differentiates in principle be-
tween people and all other known creatures or systems—it leaves no
room whatever for original intentionality in any animals, (asocial)
robots, or even isolated (unsocialized) human beings.
All three positions agree that intentionality is a normative notion;
but they differ subtly on the basic character of the norms. At ﬁrst and
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 58
H av i n g Though t
second base, the relevant norms “devolve upon” intentional states
along with their intentionality. Now, inasmuch as that intentionality
is original, so also are the norms: they too are exposed, discovered as
belonging to the systems themselves, and not merely imposed, tacked
on at the will and convenience of the observer. Nevertheless, these
norms remain “external” to the systems in another sense: they do not
bring about the actual normality of the states to which they apply—
the states are not as they should be because that’s how they should be.
In this regard, they are like norms of proper functioning in biological
systems. Thus, the liver is supposed to secrete bile; if it doesn’t, it’s not
just atypical but malfunctioning and defective. But livers do not se-
crete bile because they’re supposed to; the propriety of it has no effect
on the actual secretions. Likewise, the intentional norms at ﬁrst and
second base prescribe how the systems are supposed to be (irrational-
ity is a defect), but have no part in actualizing what they prescribe. At
third base, on the other hand, the norms as such—the extant classes
of shared dispositions—causally engender and foster further normal
dispositions and behavior, via the mechanism of conformism. We talk
and act, work and play as we do because that’s how it’s normally done in
our community. Thus, neo-pragmatist social behavior is norm-gov-
erned (guided and directed) in a way in which neo-Cartesian cogni-
tions and neo-behaviorist interactions are not. To put it another way,
leftist norms are, at least tacitly, understood and appreciated as norms
by the creatures who abide by them. 
This, moreover, is why there is nothing at third base corresponding
to the principles of interpretation and ascription. At the ﬁrst two
bases, all that distinguishes a pattern (of token deployments or envi-
ronmental interactions, respectively) as speciﬁcally intentional is that
it can be “mapped onto” our own rational thought or behavior. The
point is not that the intentionality of the observed system is supplied
by us, or derived from our own, but rather that the only standard of
what to count as intentional is comparison with ourselves. In other
words, to claim that a system has intentional states is just to claim
that there is such a mapping—a systematic interpretation or ascrip-
tion, depending on what pattern is being mapped. But at third base,
the pattern that supports intentionality is distinguished not by its
likeness to anything about us, but by its distinctive ontological foun-
dation in social conformism. The institution, via this process, of
intentional relationships among sorted items is perfectly describable
and intelligible quite apart from any possible or actual mapping onto
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
159
our own norms and practices. Hence, no corresponding principle is
required.35
The three positions also have interestingly different implications
concerning the unity and nature of the self. A neo-Cartesian self, like
its celebrated forebear, is essentially a thinking thing. The unity of the
set of cognitions it comprises is fundamentally determined by the
scope of their automatic rational interactions, or, equivalently, by the
scope of the automatic cognitive processes acting over them. In effect,
the self is a maximal set of cognitive states (tokens) that are directly
accessible to one another in cognitive processing. Thus, we could
understand two or more selves inhabiting the same “hardware” by
assuming that their cognitions are suitably isolated from one another;
and we could understand a single self spread over several hardware
units by assuming that cognitions from all the units are mutually
accessible in the course of thinking. Somewhat more complicated
structures are manageable, if we imagine maximal sets of semi-auton-
omous “modules” that are tightly coupled within themselves and
loosely coupled among themselves. But it is also easy to imagine ram-
bling networks of interconnected structures, with various degrees of
local and global coupling, and no well-deﬁned boundaries anywhere;
in such cases, the notion of an individual cognitive system—a self—
loses its grip.
A neo-behaviorist self, by contrast, is essentially a rational agent;
hence, its fundamental unity is that of a body of environmental inter-
actions that can be rendered intelligible as competent by the interpo-
lation of a coherent set of intervening cognitions. This makes it more
difﬁcult, though not impossible, to sort out multiple selves sharing
hardware, or single selves in scattered hardware. Much more interest-
ing, however, is the qualitative differentiation between two levels or
kinds of mental life, within a single agent, that is made possible by the
distinction between ordinary and verbal cognition. For it is tempting
to suggest that the “higher” verbal level coincides, at least approxi-
mately, with that special conscious self that we often suppose distin-
guishes us from other creatures. The attraction is not merely that
there are two different levels to work with, but also that certain famil-
iar characteristics of consciousness seem to fall naturally out of the
account. Thus, compared to the “unconscious processing” that must
somehow be involved in ordinary skillful behavior, conscious thinking
is conspicuously laborious and slow—not a lot faster than talking, in
fact. What’s more, it is about as difﬁcult to entertain consciously two
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

160
H av i n g Though t
distinct trains of thought at the same time as it is to engage in two
distinct conversations at once; consciousness is in some sense a linear
or serial process, in contrast to the many simultaneous cognitions that
are manifest, say, in driving a car or throwing out a base runner.
Finally and notoriously, of course, conscious deliberation seems verbal
to introspection—so much so that philosophers and poets have since
antiquity assimilated thought to “inner dialog”.36
A neo-pragmatist self is essentially a member of a conforming
community; hence, it’s unity is determined in the ﬁrst place by the
scope of effective imitation and censoriousness. Thus, to take a
homely example, two hands belong to the same child just in case, if
either is out of line, it sufﬁces to slap either as a response; both hands
are then part of a single “unit of accountability”—a single self, from
the point of view of conformism. It is also this self-unit that comes
to play miscellaneous social roles, and to which cognitive and other
statuses attach. The mechanism of conformism, however, harbors
implicitly the resources for a further understanding of selfhood.
Members of the community are, of course, not only normatively cen-
sored, but also (eventually and in general) the censors; and this raises
the prospect of self-censorship. Primitively, we might imagine some
creature actually slapping itself after misbehaving, thereby learning
from its mistake; but that would soon give way to private self-ﬂagella-
tion (remorse), and even anticipatory criticism, thereby forestalling
misdeeds. Moreover, as the demands of diverse norms and commit-
ments come into conﬂict, as inevitably some must, these too become
accessible to critical scrutiny and adjudication. All of which suggests a
foundation, unmatched at ﬁrst or second base, for the possibility of
moral choice, with regard not only to particular actions, but also to
enduring personal roles and values. Thus, the unit of public account-
ability could “take over” its life, as a unit of personal responsibility and
resolve—an owned self.37
Before concluding, we should pause to consider whether our three
positions might be compatible. On the face or it, the answer is no.
Insofar as each position puts forward a different fundamental pat-
tern—among internal tokens, environmental interactions, or social
institutions—as the pattern upon which original intentionality de-
pends, they are not compatible at all, but mutually exclusive. There
are, however, several conciliatory avenues that might mitigate or even
eliminate intramural conﬂict. The double-play option, for instance,
simply divides the spoils: teammates agree that there is more than one
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
161
kind of original intentionality, each depending on its own underlying
pattern. Thus, we might imagine a neo-behaviorist and a neo-prag-
matist agreeing that animals and people share a certain primitive sort
of intentionality (second-base pattern), and yet also that a qualita-
tively “higher” intentionality is possible only for conformists with a
culture and language (third-base pattern). Questions could be raised,
of course, about what the two sorts of intentionality had to do with
one another—why, in particular, both were sorts of intentionality—but
perhaps there would be enough similarities to justify the common
term.
Other olive branches exploit the fact that, although the three posi-
tions are directly incompatible, their respective essential patterns are
not. Hence, any player has the ﬁelder’s choice option of admitting the
existence, and even the profound importance, of either or both of the
other patterns, while still insisting that only his own favorite is the
foundation of original intentionality. In other words, one pattern is
accorded a necessary but subsidiary role in the implementation or
genesis of another, which alone has metaphysical pride of place. For
instance, a second- or third-base-man might concede that the internal
ﬁrst-base pattern is needed to explain how sophisticated behavioral
dispositions are physically achievable—yet maintain that only the
resulting interactive or social pattern can account for intentionality. It
seems to me that Dennett dallies with this particular compromise,
especially when he talks about “sub-personal cognitive psychology”, or
the brain as a “syntactic engine”.38 Finally, the most radical ecumenist
is the utility inﬁelder, who points out that, inasmuch as the patterns
themselves are mutually consistent, any two or even all three of them
could be combined into a single more encompassing pattern. The
suggestion would be that none of the three “subpatterns” alone is
sufﬁcient for original intentionality, but only a larger pattern of which
they are portions. Thus, someone could maintain that the neo-behav-
iorists’ environmental interactions must be integrated with the neo-
Cartesians’ token interactions in order to account simultaneously for
external and internal coherence. Fodor may be moving in this direc-
tion, and I suspect that Donald Davidson and David Lewis could be
read similarly (Davidson, indeed, might want to combine all three
patterns).
It is not my purpose here, however, to home in on the best account
of intentionality, but only to sketch some contemporary positions and
moves, placing them within a ballpark that shows both what they
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

162
H av i n g Though t
have in common and where they differ. Still, in closing, I must ac-
knowledge one glaring omission. Counting you and me (catching and
pitching), we’ve been through the entire defensive line-up; that is,
we’ve considered how each position is defended vis-à-vis those phe-
nomenal hitters at the plate. But all defensive positions are alike in
confronting intentionality only from the outside—in the “third per-
son”, as it were. Some philosophers, however, have maintained that
the phenomenology of original intentionality, along with conscious-
ness and associated phenomena, is possible only from the inside—
only as actually experienced, in the “ﬁrst person”. Clearly, however, the
offensive side of the game requires entirely different strategies and
considerations; hence, we must leave to another occasion the question
made famous by Tom Nagel (1974): What is it like to be at bat?
Notes:
1 For those unfortunate readers unfamiliar with American baseball,
I should perhaps mention that in the annual baseball All-Star
Game, star players from the Pittsburgh Pirates and the San
Diego Padres play as teammates (for the National League). Gen-
erally, the opposing pitcher (from the American League) would
try to avoid giving a batter a free “base on balls” (also called a
“walk”); but in certain threatening situations, especially when the
current batter is on a “hot streak”, then that batter is “walked”
intentionally.
2 This exchange between Hobbes and Descartes occurs in objec-
tion 2, from the third set of objections (written by Hobbes) to
Descartes’s Meditations, and Descartes’s reply thereto (1641/1984,
122–124). I have taken certain liberties with the actual texts, in
view of well-known doctrines from the Meditations, and purposes
of my own.
3 Actually, the term ‘intentional’ (with more or less this sense)
antedates Descartes, in scholastic metaphysics; but only much
later was it reintroduced into modern philosophical vocabulary
by Brentano 1874, and into the English language, by Chisholm
1957 and 1960. (The latter volume contains translations of several
relevant chapter-length excerpts from Brentano.) 
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
163
4 In recent years there have been numerous arguments to the effect
that content (by itself) can’t really determine extension after all—
with attendant discussion of what to do about that. Putnam 1975
(“twin Earth”) got a lot of it started; Dennett 1982/87 includes a
useful survey. In my view, however, these issues won’t matter in
the present context; so I shan’t mention them again.
5 The thesis that reasons must be understood also as causes is
argued in Davidson 1963/80. Davidson considers especially rea-
sons for action; but the point generalizes.
6 The distinction I draw between original and derivative intentional-
ity should not be confused with a similar distinction that Searle
1980 draws between intrinsic and observer-relative intentionality.
According to Searle, mental structures or states have intentional-
ity “intrinsically”, as a causal consequence of the physical/chemi-
cal properties of the brain—much as other structures or states
might have wetness or the ability to photosynthesize. But this is a
substantive metaphysical claim, with it is possible to disagree (see,
for example, Dennett 1987a/87). According to my distinction, on
the other hand, intentionality is original just in case it isn’t deriva-
tive (namely, from the intentionality of something else with the
same content). So, on pain of circularity or inﬁnite regress, some
intentionality has to be original—whether as intrinsic intentional-
ity in Searle’s speciﬁc sense, or in some other way. That is, it is not
a substantive thesis to claim that if there is any intentionality,
some of it must be original; hence, the interesting question is not
whether there is any original intentionality, but how. In effect,
this paper is an exploration of three different ways in which we
might understand original intentionality (none of them the same
as Searle’s). (Incidentally, I know that Searle and I were discuss-
ing our respective distinctions as early as summer 1979; but I do
not remember which, if either, inﬂuenced the other.) Block 1986
introduces yet another pair of terms, autonomous versus inherited
meaning; however, he also seems to build into his understanding
of the terminology a substantive view of how original intentional-
ity (in my sense) is possible—namely, as conceptual roles in a
language of thought. But no particular theory, Searle’s or Block’s
or any other (my own included), is built into the original/deriva-
tive distinction.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

164
H av i n g Though t
7 For discussion of the “relativity” of accidentalness, see Dennett
1984, especially chapter 6, section 3, and the sources cited there.
8 Note in passing that the variations on holism to be discussed here
are all varieties of what I called “prior holism”—in contrast to
“real time holism”—in my 1979 (= chapter 2 of this volume).
9 Obviously, my swift remarks about the outﬁeld positions are far
worse as caricatures than even the oversimpliﬁed sketches I will
offer for the inﬁeld; and these few wisecracks about Searle are
perhaps the least just of all. They may not be entirely unfair with
regard to Searle 1980; but his 1983 offers a much richer and more
complicated view. In particular, his insistence in the latter that
intentionality is possible only in the context of both a network of
other intentional (mental) states and a background of non-inten-
tional (but still mental) capacities and habits, strikes me as a
major advance; I ﬁnd it difﬁcult, however, to reconcile this with
the idea of “intrinsic” intentionality (which he retains). I am also
impressed by the following passage:
The actual performance in which the speech act is made will
involve the production (or use or presentation) of some
physical entity, such as noises made through the mouth or
marks on paper. Beliefs, fears, hopes, and desires on the
other hand are intrinsically Intentional. To characterize
them as beliefs, fears, hopes, and desires is already to ascribe
Intentionality to them. But speech acts have a physical level
of realization, qua speech acts, that is not intrinsically Inten-
tional. There is nothing intrinsically Intentional about the
products of the utterance act, that is, the noises that come
out of my mouth or the marks that I make on paper.
(1983, 27)
This does not quite say, but certainly suggests that, according to
Searle, mental states do not have a physical level of realization, qua
mental states, that is not intrinsically Intentional (though he em-
phasizes elsewhere, for instance on page 265, that mental states
are physically realized). I’m not entirely sure what this means (a
lot turns on that “qua”), but it is remarkably like the second-base
claim that it need not be possible to individuate cognitive states in
any terms other than intentional. Alas, Searle does not explicitly
defend either a ﬁrst- or second-base (or any other) account of
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
165
what it is about certain physically realized states in virtue of
which they (unlike most others) can have original intentionality;
and that, ﬁnally, is why he’s in the outﬁeld.
10 See, for example, Fodor 1975 and 1981, Field 1978, and Pylyshyn
1984; a number of other prominent philosophers of psychology
could be counted at least as ﬁrst-base sympathizers, including, I
think, Ned Block, Rob Cummins, Gilbert Harman, and Bill
Lycan.
11 In my 1985 I used ‘formal’ in a more restrictive sense than this; the
present broader sense follows Fodor 1980/81 (and is, incidentally,
reminiscent of Descartes’s much older usage).
12 On the distinction between token-token and type-type identities,
see Davidson 1970/80 and Block and Fodor 1972 (the terminology
is from the latter).
13 Notice that vapid reduction is weaker than classical reduction not
only in that the “bridge laws” are loose and local, but also in that
there is no requirement that higher-level regularities be derivable
(even loosely and locally) from lower level laws.
14 This principle of interpretation is, of course, a variation on what
Quine 1960 (following Wilson) called the “principle of charity”
(see Quine’s sections 13 and 15). Quine used the principle as an
adequacy condition on translations of alien speech; but inasmuch
as interpretation is here a generalization of translation, the point
transfers.
15 I do not claim to have argued that semantic activity is only possi-
ble if thinking is a computational process conducted in a language
of thought—though that view is certainly widely held, and not
implausible.
16 See, for example, Quine 1960, Dennett 1971/78 and 1981/87, and
Stalnaker 1976 and 1984. Of course, there are also a number of
well-known philosophers whom I suspect of second-base lean-
ings—though, interestingly, more often from philosophy of lan-
guage than philosophy of psychology; J.L. Austin, Jonathan
Bennett, and Paul Grice come to mind. (I can’t decide whether
Gilbert Ryle plays second base way back or center ﬁeld close in.)
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

166
H av i n g Though t
17 For the notion of distributed representation, see Rumelhart,
McClelland, et al, 1986.
18 Davidson 1970/80 argues that standing in causal relations entails
token-identity with the strictly physical—at least for events. In
my 1983 (= chapter 5 in this volume), I challenge that argument,
and dispute its conclusion. 
19 Dretske 1981 appeals to a similar notion of diverse routes from a
common source in explaining his notion of “semantic content”
(see chapter 6, especially the remarks on pages 187–188).
20 For an explanation of the “language module” thesis and a survey
of linguistic and psychological evidence in its favor, see Fodor
1983.
21 See, for instance, Dennett 1978c, Stalnaker 1984, chapter 4, and
Dreyfus 1972/92, chapter 1, part 2.
22 See, for instance, Heidegger 1927/72 (especially Division One,
chapters 3–5), Sellars 1954/63 and 1969, and Brandom 1979 and
1983. As notable fellow travelers at third base, I hope to get away
with tagging at least John Dewey, Hubert Dreyfus, Michael
Dummett, and John McDowell. My own sympathies are also
mainly here. [But see the 1997 remark added to note 37 below.]
23 In “real life”, of course, it’s more complicated, because we have
various kinds and degrees of partial and parasitic membership.
Thus young children (and certain mental incompetents) are held
only to a subset of the norms, and participate in the censoring of
others only in a very limited way. Also, communities are seldom
sharply delineated, but overlap and merge into one another;
moreover, they often comprise numerous somewhat distinguish-
able subcommunities with variant “normative dialects”. Finally, I
think we can imagine “adjunct” members who don’t really parti-
cipate in a community’s norms—they neither censure nor are
censured—but nevertheless reliably behave “normally”, at least in
certain respects; I have in mind, for instance, robots programmed
to speak (a signiﬁcant fragment of) natural English, though they
can neither learn it nor teach it.
24 There is a natural extension of the notion of following an explicit
rule to that of a computer following an explicit program; and it
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
167
might be held that no material system could in fact exhibit the
required behavioral complexity and versatility unless it explicitly
followed a complex rule (program) “internally”. But this is a
strong and separate claim that calls for an independent argument.
The question is presumably in some sense empirical. Third base,
like second base, need not be concerned with how the disposi-
tions are “implemented”; hence, it is also entirely compatible with
“distributed representation” models of how it all works.
25 The last two paragraphs are meant to summarize and show com-
patibility with the ﬁrst seventeen paragraphs of Sellars 1954/63.
He does not develop an account like mine of how norms result
from conformism; but he very clearly delineates what he calls
“norm conforming behavior” (also “pattern governed behavior”) as
distinct both from “rule obeying behavior” (what I call “explicit
rule following”) and from behavior that “merely conforms to
rules” (what I call “regularities”). I take it as a condition of ade-
quacy on the conformist account of norms that it support both of
these distinctions.
26 As I read Being and Time, what Heidegger means by “the anyone”
(das Man) is roughly equivalent to what I am here calling a com-
mon (public) “way of life”. However, the notion of a way of life is
in principle more general than this, and encompasses, when fully
worked out, all of what Heidegger means by dasein. The parallel
with the Wittgensteinian phrase and idea of a “form of life” hardly
needs mention.
27 Note the parallels between the complexity described in this para-
graph and that called “semantic intrigue” at second base.
28 The instituted structure of sorted roles and relationships extends
not only to the tools and paraphernalia of a way of life, but to
those who live it as well—the members of the community whose
way of life it is. Thus, King of Belgium, postal clerk, committee
member, and so on, can be understood as social roles. The parallels
between equipmental and social roles—evidenced even in the
common term—are obvious. Roles of both kinds are induced by
conformism, and reﬂect proprieties regarding the behavior of, as
well as behavior towards, whatever plays the roles. Nevertheless,
the two kinds of role are fundamentally different, for social role
players, unlike their equipment, are themselves conformists.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

168
H av i n g Though t
Community members are positively inclined to be like their
peers, are subject to censure if they misbehave, and contribute to
the censure of others; but tools are oblivious to how they compare
with one another, are subject merely to redesign or repair if they
are defective, and are never censors. Since community members
are participants in the community, we do not say their roles deter-
mine what they are “for”, nor do we speak of “using” them. More
important, since the entire complexity of the way of life depends
on the normalized dispositions of its participants, these partici-
pants must be considerably more versatile and ﬂexible than ordi-
nary equipment need be. For instance, community members can
and do play many social roles at once, change their roles from
time to time, and even sometimes redeﬁne the roles they play.
29 The term ‘use’ here is not meant primarily in the deliberate or “on
purpose” sense in which one might, for instance, use a newspaper
to swat a bug, or use a cauldron as a planter. Rather, the primary
sense is the way in which we “automatically” use the equipment
that is most familiar to us, without paying attention or even
noticing—as when a skilled driver routinely uses the pedals, or
we thoughtlessly (but properly) use the knife and fork at dinner,
while concentrating on the conversation. 
30 Word tokens do occur (as word tokens) in, for instance, spelling
bees (oral), crossword puzzles (written), and such like. I take it
that these occurrences are not proper utterances, in that the
words are not being used to say anything, and that they are para-
sitic on the use of words in proper utterances.
31 These remarks about assertion have been especially inﬂuenced by
Brandom 1983.
32 In the case of speech, the normative circumstances resulting from
prior utterances will be entirely in the form of current (retained)
statuses—precisely because the tokens themselves do not last.
Written tokens, by contrast, usually remain on the page (or
chalkboard, or whatever) long enough to be part of the manifest
circumstances of subsequent linguistic actions.
33 At ﬁrst base, semantic articulation (in a language of thought with
a digital syntax) is introduced in order to explain how semantic
activity is possible; in other words, it is justiﬁed in terms of its
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

The intentionality all-stars
169
engineering payoff. There is an analogous payoff at third base, of
course (we need only master thousands of words to master tril-
lions of sentences, and so on); but there may be an independent
account of the “articulation” as well. For the very mechanism of
conformism induces a “clumping” effect in the normal sorts of
behavior and circumstances it institutes. Thus, just as herds are
widely scattered concentrations of animals, with at most the odd
stray between them, so normalized atomic speech dispositions
should naturally spread out into widely differentiated clumps in
the space of makable sounds—and that’s the essence of digital
articulation. In fact, a neo-pragmatist might argue that this natu-
ral tendency towards articulation in social practices explains why
sophisticated languages (which must be articulated, for the engi-
neering reasons) emerge in all and only conformist communities.
34 Brandom, from whom I have learned much, is working out a
detailed account of the semantics of explicit belief attributions (in-
cluding a novel account of the de re/de dicto distinction) along
roughly these lines.
35 It has sometimes been argued (for instance, Davidson 1974/84)
that we cannot make sense of ascribing intentional states that are
unintelligible to us, because (roughly) the only grounds we could
have for regarding them as intentional are fundamentally indis-
tinguishable from the grounds for understanding them in some
determinate way (namely, by mapping them onto our own states).
It seems to me that ﬁrst base and second base are committed to
this argument, but not third base. I see no reason in principle why
we could not recognize a group of creatures as a conforming
community, with highly developed norms and practices (includ-
ing rituals, equipment, games, and even language), quite apart
from whether or how far we could correlate those norms and
practices with any of our own.
36 This list of considerations is adapted directly from Dennett
(1984, 41), though I introduce it in a somewhat different (and
much briefer) way. It must be acknowledged, of course, that an
account along these lines is not restricted to neo-behaviorists
alone. A “modular” language faculty, for instance, may be inde-
pendently motivated, and could easily be accommodated at either
ﬁrst or third base; and that would generate the essential two-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 70
H av i n g Though t
tiered structure, on which the rest depends. Still, the approach is
less ad hoc at second base, since only there is the fundamental
understanding of cognition independent of anything language-
like (public or private); hence, only there are ordinary cognition
and talking different in kind on the face of it. Third base, how-
ever, does discriminate fundamentally between cognitive states
(which are linguistic) and the many (non-cognitive) capacities
and dispositions that are involved in routine skillful behavior; so
the underlying third-base distinctions are in fact more like those
at second base than those at ﬁrst—it’s just that neo-pragmatists
do not deem the pre-linguistic (animal-like) states cognitive.
37 Needless to say, these last few remarks derive much more from
Heidegger than from any of the other neo-pragmatists I’ve men-
tioned. My point in the paragraph, however, is that the seeds of
such doctrines lie in the grounds of neo-pragmatism itself, and
are not idiosyncratic to Heidegger (or “existentialism”).
Remark [added 1997]: While it is surely true that what I have
here called “neo-pragmatism” is not idiosyncratic to Heidegger, it is
questionable whether it is attributable to Heidegger at all. There
is a “pragmatist” strain at most in what he calls “The preparatory
fundamental analysis of dasein” (1927/62, Division One, espe-
cially chapters iii–v). Certainly the larger tendency of the work is
profoundly non-pragmatist. McDowell, likewise, is not really a
neo-pragmatist. (Compare chapter 13 below.)
38 For recent examples, see the entries listed under the two quoted
phrases in the index of Dennett 1987. Note, by the way, that even
if a neo-behaviorist were to allow internal computational tokens
at the implementation level, these needn’t be identical with either
the system’s “ordinary” cognitive states, intervening between per-
ceptions and actions, or its “verbal cognitions” (if any) formulated
explicitly in its linguistic module. The internal tokens might very
well have some sort of intentionality or representational content,
but it would be (on the present compromise, anyway) metaphysi-
cally derivative.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

chapter eight
Representational
Genera
A genus of representation is a general kind, within which there can be
more speciﬁc kinds, importantly different from one another, yet ge-
nerically alike. The level of generality intended can be indicated by
example. Natural languages, logical calculi, and computer program-
ming languages, as well as numerous more specialized notations, are
all interestingly different species; but they are generically alike in
being broadly language-like or logical in character. By contrast, pictures,
though equally representational, are not linguistic at all, even in this
broad sense; rather, they, along with maps, scale models, analog com-
puters, and at least some graphs, charts, and diagrams, are species in
another genus of broadly image-like or iconic representations. So the
level of generality intended for representational genera is that of logi-
cal versus iconic representations, thus broadly construed.
The motive for the notion lies in the possibility of raising two
kinds of question. First: on what basis are such genera gathered and
distinguished? That is, what sort of likeness or disparity between two
representational species determines whether they are in the same or
different genera? Given an account of this basis, it should be possible
to delineate the distinctive “essence” of each genus. Second: besides
the two familiar genera, are there any others? In particular, is so-called
distributed representation a separate genus, on a par with logical and
iconic representation, yet as different from each as they are from one
another? And, if so, what is its generic essence?
Inasmuch as distributed representations are still relatively strange
and (hence?) unintuitive, the latter questions can best be approached
by way of the former. Accordingly, even an investigation into the
essence of distributed representation must be guided in large part by
intuitions grounded in the better-known logical and iconic genera—
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 72
H av i n g Though t
in effect, bootstrapping these up to a common level, which can then
be extended and applied to less familiar cases. The considerations that
follow are even more than usually tentative and exploratory; the
results are at best preliminary and incomplete, perhaps much worse.
1 Representation: the “family” of the genera
An explicit account of representation as such will not be necessary;
that is, we can get along without a prior deﬁnition of the “family”
within which the genera are to be distinguished. A few sketchy and
dogmatic remarks, however, may provide some useful orientation, as
well as places to hang some terminological stipulations.
A sophisticated system (organism) designed (evolved) to maximize
some end (such as survival) must in general adjust its behavior to
speciﬁc features, structures, or conﬁgurations of its environment in
ways that could not have been fully prearranged in its design. If the
relevant features are reliably present and manifest to the system (via
some signal) whenever the adjustments must be made, then they need
not be represented. Thus, plants that track the sun with their leaves
needn’t represent it or its position, because the tracking can be guided
directly by the sun itself. But if the relevant features are not always
present (manifest), then they can, at least in some cases, be repre-
sented; that is, something else can stand in for them, with the power
to guide behavior in their stead. That which stands in for something
else in this way is a representation; that which it stands in for is its
content;1 and its standing in for that content is representing it.
As so far described, “standing in for” could be quite inﬂexible and
ad hoc; for instance, triggered gastric juices might keep a primitive
predator on the prowl, even when it momentarily loses a scent—thus
standing in for the scent. Here, however, we will reserve the term
‘representation’ for those stand-ins that function in virtue of a general
representational scheme such that: (i) a variety of possible contents can
be represented by a corresponding variety of possible representations;
(ii) what any given representation (item, pattern, state, event, …)
represents is determined in some consistent or systematic way by the
scheme;2 and (iii) there are proper (and improper) ways of producing,
maintaining, modifying, and/or using the various representations
under various environmental and other conditions. (This character-
ization is intended to be neutral not only among genera, but also
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
1 7 3
between internal and external representations, and between natural
and artiﬁcial schemes.)
Since the content of a given representation is determined by its
scheme (and since the point of the facility is to be able to represent
what isn’t present or currently accessible), it is possible for representa-
tions to misrepresent. What this amounts to will vary with the spe-
ciﬁc scheme, and even more with its genus; but it must hark back
eventually to the possibility of the system(s) using it being misguided in
their attempted adjustments to the features of the world. But misrep-
resentation should not be confused with improper deployment on the
part of the using system, nor bad luck in the results. These can diverge
in virtue of the fundamental holism underlying what can count as a
representation at all: the scheme must be such that, properly pro-
duced and used, its representations will, under normal conditions,
guide the system successfully, on the whole. In case conditions are, in
one way or another, not normal, however, then a representing system
can misrepresent without in any way malfunctioning.
2 Canonical accounts of the genera
Analyzing representation in terms of a relational structure—that
which represents–representing–that which is represented—suggests
looking for the distinctive essences of the genera in one or another of
those elements. But they clearly do not lie in the representative tokens
alone. One cannot simply say, for instance, that linguistic tokens are
essentially digital, whereas images are analog, since, in the ﬁrst place,
speech is to some extent analog, and in the second, images are often
handled digitally. More to the point, however, paradigm representa-
tions of any genus—logical, iconic, distributed, or whatever—can be
recorded without loss3 in strings of bits; and certainly no properties of
bit strings as such can differentiate in general between the sorts of
representation they record. And, on the face of it, there seems equally
little hope of differentiating the genera on the basis of their repre-
sented contents. Thus, a police ofﬁcer’s report might well include both
descriptions and photographs of one and the same crime scene; and,
prima facie, there could be distributed representations of it as well.
Apparently, then, the essential differentia must be sought in the
nature of the representing itself, the relation between representations
and their contents; and, indeed, standard characterizations of all three
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 74
H av i n g Though t
genera take this form. I, on the contrary, however, will argue that the
distinctions cannot be made out in terms of the representing relation
(but are to be found in what is represented—the contents—after all).
In order to appreciate what’s wrong with the standard approach, we
will need ﬁrst to outline how it is supposed to work for each genus.
These outlines can be called the canonical accounts, because they are
what almost everybody expects almost everybody else to believe. It
will not be necessary to formulate them precisely, since the underlying
problem is common and structural.
Logical representations are distinctive in that they have a (genera-
tive) compositional semantics. This means that complete logical tokens
(sentences, well-formed formulae, production rules, and so on) are
complex structures, each with a recursively speciﬁable syntax and de-
terminate atomic constituents, such that the semantic signiﬁcance of
the whole is determined by its syntax and the semantic signiﬁcances
of its constituents (perhaps with some situational parameters).
‘Semantic signiﬁcance’ is here used as an umbrella term, meant to
include, without being limited to, the represented contents (what the
tokens represent). The respective contributions of the possible struc-
tures and constituents are ﬁxed arbitrarily by the scheme (for in-
stance, a language); but, given these (and any relevant parameters),
the signiﬁcance of the compound is not at all arbitrary.
Iconic representations are distinctive in representing their contents
by virtue of being somehow isomorphic to them. In many familiar
cases, like pictures and scale models, the isomorphism is obvious
enough to strike the observer as resemblance. But that’s not required:
the isomorphisms that determine the representational contents of
graphs, wiring diagrams, and analog computers are often so abstract
or mathematical that we wouldn’t naturally call them resemblances
(though, of course, in a sense, they are). Note that there are many
different kinds of isomorphism, and the ones that are relevant to any
particular representation are all and only those determined by the
scheme to which it belongs. Thus a picture token that happens to be
entirely monochromatic may or may not represent its object as like-
wise monochromatic, depending on whether it belongs to a mono-
chromatic or full-color scheme. Which isomorphisms a given scheme
employs is initially arbitrary or conventional; but once they are ﬁxed,
the contents of particular tokens are not arbitrary.
Distributed representations are distinctive in that each portion of
the token participates (in some broadly egalitarian way) in the repre-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
1 75
senting of each portion of the represented contents. For this to make
sense, there must be antecedent notions of portions, both of the to-
kens and of the contents; and then the idea is that the representings of
the content portions are all spread out over the token portions and
superimposed on one another—whence the term “distributed”. What
these respective portions are, and how various possible content por-
tions can be (simultaneously) determined by various possible token
portions, is, of course, settled by the particular scheme (which is
arbitrary); but, given a scheme, it is not at all arbitrary what any
particular token represents.4
Each canonical account focuses on a distinctive sort of relation
between representing tokens and their represented contents—
namely, a relation that is systematically determined by complex struc-
tures and a primitive vocabulary, a relation that is based on having a
common abstract form, and a relation that somehow has its compo-
nents all mixed up (spread out and then superimposed). There is, of
course, no suggestion that these possibilities are exhaustive; it is an
interesting and important question whether there are or could be
other genera of representation, and if so what they are. As canonical
accounts of essences, however, they should at least be mutually exclu-
sive, so as to distinguish their respective genera. Unfortunately, they
are not.
3 Problems with the canonical accounts
This superﬁcial difﬁculty with the canonical accounts will be ex-
ploited, via a three-stage argument, as a symptom of an underlying
common failing. The ﬁrst stage is a group of three counter-example
sketches, designed to suggest that each account admits cases that
properly belong to another genus, and hence that none of them suc-
cessfully captures what is distinctive of its own genus. As with the
accounts themselves, the counter-examples will be presented infor-
mally, since the point is not really to get any of them right, but rather
to “see through” them, in preparation for a completely different tack.
The second stage will further that cause by advancing a trio of more
outlandish counter-theses, which are therefore also more transparent
in their operation. In particular, it should be obvious that they all
trade on failing to respect one and the same fundamental distinction.
The ﬁnal stage then re-examines the counter-examples from stage one
in the light of this distinction, and recruits them to show that the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 76
H av i n g Though t
failures at stage two lie not with the outlandish counter-theses, but
with the canonical accounts themselves.
So, stage one begins with three counter-examples. Consider ﬁrst a
designer’s ﬂoor plan, a kind of two-dimensional scale model of a
room, with movable cardboard cutouts for the various furnishings,
ﬁxtures, and pathways. There are explicit rules for composing these
primitives into well-formed rooms: the pieces must lie ﬂat, they
shouldn’t overlap, pathways have to be connected, and the like; and,
according to essentially the same rules, these room plans can then be
assembled into building plans, which in turn can make up city plans,
and so on (recursively), with no principled limit. For a digital variant,
arbitrarily deﬁne a grid (set of axes and unit pixels) on the Cartesian
plane, and assign distinct colors to a ﬁnite set of landscape features
(blue to water, green to forest, and so on); then maps can be recur-
sively deﬁned as follows: (1) a grid with a single colored pixel is a map;
and (2) a consolidation of two maps (coincident axes, no pixel con-
ﬂicts, all colored pixels contiguous) is a map. In each example, the
represented content of the resulting plan or map is manifestly a deter-
minate function of its compositional structure and the signiﬁcances of
its primitive components—just the token/content relation that was
supposed to be characteristic of logical representations. Yet ﬂoor plans
and maps are paradigmatically iconic.
Consider next how abstract and general the notions of form and
isomorphism are, and must be, if the canonical account of the iconic
genus is to accommodate such abstract representations as graphs,
analog computers, and wiring diagrams. Yet, in a sufﬁciently abstract
sense of form, it is arguable that many other (perhaps all) tokens
represent their particular contents by exhibiting the same form. Wit-
tgenstein (1921/74), for instance, once presented a theory of meaning
according to which sentences represent worldly facts by “picturing”
their logical structure; and, more recently, Sellars (1963/67, 1985) has
proposed an account of predication based on the idea that juxtaposi-
tion of predicate symbols is essentially a ﬂexible way of giving differ-
ent properties to terms—in a manner that “maps” the properties of
the referents of those terms. Regardless of whether any such approach
is viable in general, if it can be made to work for even one scheme of
logical representation, then the canonical account of iconic represen-
tation fails to exclude it.
Consider ﬁnally ordinary holograms: they seem to be paradigmatic
examples of the spread-out-ness and superposition that are ofﬁcially
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epresentational genera
1 77
characteristic of distributed representation. Thus, in the original and
most familiar sort of hologram, representing a scene in 3-d, each point
on the holographic plate represents (in some measure) each part of
the scene and each part of the scene is represented (in some measure)
by each point on the plate. Yet, in a perfectly straightforward sense,
such holographic representations of scenes are patently images—just
as every popular article and exhibition unabashedly calls them.
What’s more, as is well known, holographic techniques can also be
used in error-resistant encodings of logical representations.
These counter-examples are alike in suggesting that the canonical
accounts are insufﬁciently restrictive (each admits cases that don’t
belong) and hence are incapable of supporting principled distinctions
among the genera. One possible philosophical response would be to
try ruling out the examples by somehow sharpening the accounts;
another would be to give up, and concede that the alleged genera are
not, after all, essentially distinct. I am arguing instead that all three
canonical accounts misﬁre for a single underlying reason—namely,
they all mislocate the generic essences in the representing relation—
and, hence, the appropriate response is neither repair nor despair but
fundamental reconception.
4 The representing/recording distinction
The second stage in this argument now proceeds indirectly, through a
matched set of outlandish theses whose transparently spurious justiﬁ-
cations are designed to bring out the need for a basic distinction.
Outlandish thesis #1. It is easy to “translate” any iconic or
distributed representation into an equivalent logical representation—
that is, a set of sentences representing the same contents. Before
considering the “argument” for this thesis, we should perhaps remind
ourselves why it is outlandish. Explaining perceptual recognition—
how, for instance, a system can look at a scene (or picture) and pro-
duce an articulate verbal description of what it sees—is a profound
outstanding problem in psychology and artiﬁcial intelligence. It has
proven exceptionally difﬁcult, and remains substantially unsolved. Yet
thesis #1 implies that it should be easy. Here’s how: use a simple
computer-driven scanner to divide the scene (or picture) into a large
number of cells, and generate on a printer, for each cell, a sentence
token of the form: “The light reﬂected from direction (or pixel) x, y is
of intensity, hue, and saturation i, h, and s.” The supposed translations
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 78
H av i n g Though t
of distributed representations would be equally fatuous—for in-
stance, a list of sentences of the form: “The weight on the connection
between nodes j and k is w.”
Outlandish thesis #2. It is easy to “translate” any logical or
distributed representation into a representationally equivalent image.
Like perceptual recognition, this ought to be hard—harder, for in-
stance, than the job of a police artist, for the translator would have to
draw an accurate picture of the suspect, or the scene of the crime,
from the description alone, without any corrective feedback from the
witness. Yet thesis #2 implies it should be easy. Here’s how: Obtain a
clear, written copy of the relevant description, focus a camera on it,
and take a picture.5 The comparable iconic translation of a distributed
representation is only marginally less contrived: choose some sensible
one-to-one correlation between the connections in a given network
and the cells in a graphical array, and shade or ﬁll each cell in propor-
tion to the weight on the corresponding connection.6
Outlandish thesis #3. It is easy to “translate” any logical or
iconic representation into an equivalent distributed representation.
To establish thesis #3, we invoke a recent invention called Turing’s
piano. This versatile instrument has arbitrarily many notes, each a
pure unmodulated sine wave, ascending in a standard chromatic scale
from one hertz. Remembering, then, that any text or icon can be
encoded without loss in a ﬁnite string of bits, and noting that each
ﬁnite string of bits corresponds to a unique chord played on Turing’s
piano, we conclude that any text or icon can be encoded in such a
chord. The waveform produced, however, is a perfect distributed rep-
resentation, according to the canonical account: each point on the
waveform (instantaneous amplitude) participates in recording all of
the bits, and the recording of each bit is spread over all of the wave-
form. Since whatever it is that is representational in the original text
or icon is somehow captured in patterns of these bits, that represent-
ing too is spread out and superimposed in the waveform.
What these irritating examples have in common is most evident in
the case of a photographed inscription. While the result is, in one
sense, clearly an image, it is equally clearly not an image of whatever
the inscribed text was about; rather, it is an image of the inscription
itself, but in such a way that (assuming the text is still legible in the
image) the ability of the original to represent whatever it represented
is preserved in the image. Obviously, however, that representing
remains essentially logical in character. In other words, the logical
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
1 7 9
representation has in no sense been “translated” or transformed into
an iconic one; instead, it has merely been “recorded” in an iconic
medium. Signiﬁcantly, the recording process, unlike genuine transla-
tion, would proceed just as smoothly even if the given inscription
were complete gibberish. Evidently then, we must distinguish in this
case between the logical representation and its iconic recording.
The scanner-generated printout of sentences describing individual
pixels is basically symmetrical, but with an important added twist. In
case what is scanned is an image, then that image is clearly what the
sentences describe, pixel by pixel; and, as before, assuming the de-
scriptions are ﬁne enough, the ability of the image to represent what-
ever it does is preserved, but only as iconic. Thus, the image is not
translated or transformed into a logical representation, but only re-
corded in a logical medium.7 (And, again, the recording itself would
be equally successful even if the “image” were a contentless blob.)
The new twist emerges when we consider the companion case in
which what is scanned is not an image of a scene, but the scene itself.
Then, it seems, we must say that the resulting sentences describe the
scene, since there is no image in play for them to describe, or to record
logically. Yet, they don’t describe the scene in anything like the way an
articulate observer would describe it; rather, the “description” is essen-
tially the same as what the scanner would have delivered in recording
a photo of the scene. Hence, even when the sentences are generated
directly from the scene, what they are doing is logically recording an
image-like representation—a virtual image, we could call it—from the
perspective of the scanner; and it is this which the sentences describe,
pixel by pixel. This characterization is already intimated, I suspect, in
calling what is represented a “scene”, rather than, for instance, the
facts or a state of affairs.
Turing’s piano, of course, can be understood in the same way. It
generates distributed recordings of arbitrary bit strings; indeed, multi-
ple independent strings can be simultaneously recorded in the same
chord, either interspersed or concatenated. Whether, as representations,
these recorded strings are logical, iconic, or, perhaps, even distributed,
depends on something else—it is not settled by the fact that the
actual waveform records the bits and the contents (if any) in a spread
out and superposed manner. What else it depends on, that is, how the
representational genus is determined, remains an open question.
The common moral of the examples is now clear: we must distin-
guish between recording and representing, and that on two levels.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 80
H av i n g Though t
Consider once more a photo of an inscription: in favorable cases, it
both represents and records that text; and, meanwhile, the text itself is
a (different) representation of something else. What is the difference
between recording and representing, and how is it that they are so
readily confused? Fundamentally, I think, recording is a process of a
certain sort; and to be a record is to be the result of such a process. By
contrast, representing is a functional status or role of a certain sort, and
to be a representation is to have that status or role. These are not the
same because, in general, being the result of a recording process is
neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for having a representational status or
role. On the other hand, the recording process does produce an out-
put which is a record of its input; and representational status does
involve one entity standing in for another. This formal relational paral-
lel, plus the fact that, in certain cases (such as photography), the
product of the recording process can also have the status of represent-
ing the input, therefore being simultaneously a record and a represen-
tation of it, is the basis of the confusion.
Recording is a generalization of copying. To count as recording, a
process must be reversible in the sense that there is a complimentary
process—“playing it back”—which reproduces from the record a du-
plicate or copy of the original. Since a copy of a copy is a copy, copying
is a special case of recording (in which the record and play-back
processes are the same). Recording, like copying, is only partial; only
certain prespeciﬁed aspects of the original are recorded. In case what
is being recorded is a representation (as a representation), then the
relevant aspect, what must be reproduced on play-back, is its sche-
matic type; the criterion for successful recording of representations is
preservation of type-identity.
Recording is also essentially trivial or mechanical. Describing a
scene from a picture, or drawing a picture from a description, takes
experience and skill, whereas the camera or scanner “merely” records
the original. This notion of triviality, however, must be delineated
carefully; after all, any fool can tell a story, whereas cameras and
scanners require sophisticated technology. The crucial point is that
recording and playing-back are completely witless—the processes
themselves are oblivious to content (if any) and ignorant of the world.
By contrast, articulate description and artistic rendition depend cru-
cially and thoroughly on general background familiarity with the repre-
sented contents—that is, on worldly experience and skill. The claim,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
1 8 1
of course, is not that representations are never produced witlessly
(remember photography), but only that records always are.
An apparent exception (but one that proves the rule) is a court
recorder, whose task is to produce a verbatim transcript of the oral
proceedings. This task is anything but witless (so far, it can’t be done
by machine at all, despite substantial investment). The reason is that
the phonic realization of phonemic units is highly variable, and non-
disjoint; that is, the same word “sounds” quite different on different
occasions, to the point of overlapping with the sounds of other words.
A skilled recorder, like any speaker of the language, can identify the
words correctly on the basis of knowing what “makes sense” in con-
text—the exact opposite of witlessness. But this way of putting it
shows the way to the answer. A court recorder’s job is actually two-
fold: identifying the spoken words (non-trivial) and then recording
them (trivial). The case is essentially similar to producing a typescript
from someone’s handwritten scrawl, or even restoring the missing
characters in a spotty photocopy: identifying the words takes wits;
recording them, once identiﬁed, does not.
These considerations further suggest, though by no means estab-
lish, a sufﬁcient condition for sameness of representational genus: if
the representations of one scheme can be witlessly transformed into
equivalent representations from another scheme by a general pro-
cedure, then those schemes are species of the same genus.8 Thus,
Morse and ascii coded texts are equally logical, whereas pictorial and
verbal representations differ in genus. Of course, this is not a neces-
sary condition, since distinct natural languages cannot be witlessly
intertranslated, yet they are of the same genus. Even as a sufﬁcient
condition, the proposed test is so far only hypothetically acceptable,
since it depends on the plausible but unsupported assumption that
cross-generic “translation” always requires wits.9 Only later will we be
able to explain and support the plausibility of this assumption, and
thereby defend the suggested condition.
5 The initial problems rediagnosed
The third and ﬁnal stage of the argument against the canonical
accounts of the generic essences returns to the counter-examples in-
troduced at stage one. The aim is to rediagnose these examples as
showing not merely that the canonical accounts are insufﬁciently
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 82
H av i n g Though t
exclusive, but more importantly (and damningly) that they themselves
confuse the representing/recording distinction.
Ordinary holographic images of scenes are the easiest case. In prin-
ciple, they are no different from a Turing’s piano chord produced from
the output of a digitizing scanner. That is, if the hologram is prepared
from an ordinary image (say, a photograph), then it is a distributed
recording of that image, which, qua representation of the original
scene, remains iconic—even in its recorded form. If, on the other
hand, the hologram is prepared directly from the scene itself (as it
must be to achieve the famous 3-d effects), then, as in the earlier
treatment of the scanner, it is effectively recording a “virtual image”—
which is again still an iconic representation of the scene. In other
words, the distributedness in the example derives from and character-
izes not the genus of the representation but rather the technology
with which it is recorded.
The second counter-example, the picture theory of meaning, has
the same basic structure, though in a less obvious way. Suppose we
have a logical scheme of representation for which some sort of picture
theory provides a plausible semantics. Then a slavish parallel to the
above treatment of holographic images would go like this: the repre-
sentations in the specimen scheme are indeed logical, but they are
recorded in an iconic form. What’s more, since there have been no
actual prior sentences to record iconically, we must say that the re-
cordings are of “virtual sentences”—something like the facts pictured.
Now, surprisingly perhaps, I think this account is basically correct.
But it does call for some explanation.
Recall the strategy of the original example: ﬁrst it is pointed out
that isomorphism is a very general notion, and indeed must be so if
the account is to capture all kinds of icons; and then it is observed that
such a general notion might apply equally well to the relation between
sentences and facts. But this latter is just the tip of the iceberg. Iso-
morphisms are everywhere: a gunslinger’s notches and his trail of
victims, magnetic bit patterns and character strings, cash register
tapes and the day’s transactions, chess transcripts and the game’s
moves, and so on. All of these are familiar forms of record keeping,
and none of them is plausibly an image. Thus, isomorphism is a
common basis for making records, and not a distinctive mark of
iconic representation. (A reversible witless process is a likely candi-
date for a function deﬁning an isomorphism.) Hence, a general iso-
morphism between the tokens of some scheme and their contents
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
1 83
would not alone make that scheme iconic; for it might instead just be
the way the contents, understood as “virtual tokens”, are recorded.
But surely this is strained: we have actual logical representations
(sentences) allegedly both representing and isomorphically picturing
“virtual logical representations” (the “facts”); yet, the isomorphism is
not supposed to have anything to do with the representing. Rather,
the sentences are said also to record those same facts; and the isomor-
phism is supposed to be relevant only to this recording. But what then
is the sense of calling the facts “virtual logical representations”? And
what witless process could produce such a recording; indeed, isn’t
describing a situation a paradigm of a process that is not witless?
The appearance of paradox can be alleviated by reexamining two
earlier examples. Remember ﬁrst the task of the court recorder, which
is far from witless as a whole, but which can be resolved into two
subtasks: identifying the oral tokens, and then recording them. Once
it is appreciated that only the former requires background familiarity
with the contents and the world, then the recording itself can be seen
as witless after all. Then return to the case of the scanner producing
pixel-by-pixel descriptions, either from a photo of a scene or directly
from the scene itself. It was comparison of these that suggested the
notion of recording a virtual token in the ﬁrst place; and, conveniently,
a scanner working directly from a scene was still a thoroughly witless
process. But that process too can be conceived as a composite of two
others, though in this case both witless: producing a photo-like image
of a scene, and recording that image pixel by pixel.
Consolidating the two examples allows us to regard describing a
situation (in a language for which a picture theory is workable) as also
a composite process: identifying the pictured facts, and then verbally
recording them. As with the scanner, the ﬁrst step yields a virtual
token, but, as with the court recorder, that step is not witless—hence
neither is the composite. But the second step, the recording itself,
remains witless in every case. Needless to say, this story makes only as
much sense as the notion of facts as virtual sentences; but that much
is a burden of the picture theory already.
Finally, the example of recursively generated ﬂoor plans and maps
is at least as complicated and interesting as the preceding. Note ﬁrst
that the generative composition is, in each case, a process, starting from
given primitives, proceeding by formally speciﬁable, rule-governed
steps, and yielding the representation as a product. It is precisely this
process, moreover, that is cited when confronting these icons with the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 84
H av i n g Though t
canonical account of logical representations. To be sure, the construc-
tive process is not at all like that of recording a representation,
whether actual or virtual; it is, however, quite like the reverse process
of recovering a representation from a record of it.
To see this, consider the intermediate case of an architectural draw-
ing created by a computer-aided design system: it is stored within the
system as a set of line speciﬁcations, or, equivalently, line-drawing
commands, which can be sent to a pen-plotter or display driver to
execute. Now, those internal speciﬁcations are just as much a logical
record of an iconic representation as are our earlier printed sentences
describing individual pixels; and commanding the plotter to draw the
lines is just the (witless) process of “recovering” that image. The fact
that the image may never have existed in visible form before does not
mean that the process of drawing it is not the inverse of recording.
The commands to the plotter, however, are exactly analogous to the
formal speciﬁcations of the steps by which the ﬂoor plan or map may
be constructed—except that the step speciﬁcations need not actually
be written down, let alone all together in advance.
That suggests the following diagnosis: recursively generated maps
or ﬂoor plans are not therefore logical representations, but rather are
icons witlessly recovered from (possibly “virtual”) logical recordings of
them. To be sure, the idea of playing back virtual recordings has a
certain air of hocus pocus; but that doesn’t affect the point. We want
to know what it is about recursively speciﬁed maps that gives them a
semblance of being logical or language-like, even though they’re not;
and the answer is that the recursive speciﬁcation itself functions in the
account just as if it were a logical recording from which the image is
being restored.
Each canonical account characterizes its genus in terms of a dis-
tinctive sort of representing relation between the representations and
what they represent—roughly compositional semantics, structural
isomorphism, and spread-out superposition. Our diagnoses of the
three counter-examples, however, have revealed these distinctive rela-
tions to be indicative more of certain recording devices or processes
than of the respective representational genera. Of course, one might
still undertake to revise the deﬁnitions and/or rebut the diagnoses;
but the consistent pattern of results invites a more radical response—
namely, to abandon the canonical accounts completely, and seek the
distinctive marks of the genera elsewhere than in the representing
relation. Since the argument that a bit string can be a (recorded)
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
1 85
representation in any genus decisively rules out ﬁnding the marks in
the representations themselves, I now want to explore further the
prospects of ﬁnding them in what is represented—the contents of the
representations.
6 Skeletal versus ﬂeshed-out content
The ﬁrst question to ask is: What, strictly speaking, are the contents
of various representations? Exactly what objects, features, or conﬁgu-
rations in the world are represented? Often, in real-life communica-
tion, only a little need be indicated, in order to apprise the recipient of
much about the world. In practice, a little representation goes a long
way. But that’s because the recipient is already in a position to learn
much from just a little new information—perhaps by already “know-
ing” a lot about the current situation and/or about the world in gen-
eral. How much of what derives from this “background familiarity”
belongs in the represented contents as such?
In one sense, all or most of what a recipient could be expected to
learn from a communicated representation could be deemed “con-
tained” therein—that is, as part of the message. Unfortunately, such a
liberal attitude is problematic in the context of qualitatively differenti-
ating the contents characteristic of the respective genera. For, if the
recipient’s broader understanding is mediated by other (presumably
internal10) representations, themselves belonging to a genus different
from that of the representation being examined, then the contents
broadly construed would confusedly exhibit characteristics of both
genera. Since it is not possible in general to know about or control for
the effects of all such mediating representations, there is no hope of
ﬁnding the essences of the genera in the character of their contents,
unless these contents can be delimited more narrowly.
By way of anticipation, then, let’s call the strict content of a repre-
sentation, that not augmented or mediated by any other, its skeletal or
bare-bones content. The metaphor is intended to suggest that the full-
blooded contents of everyday representations are shaped and sup-
ported by their skeletal contents, but that they are (or can be) ﬂeshed
out and enlivened through other inﬂuences. How can this distinction
be made out?
Consider again the police ofﬁcer’s report from the scene of a
crime—including both descriptions and photographs. Clearly, the
room was searched; clearly, there was a violent struggle, resulting in
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 86
H av i n g Though t
the death of the victim; clearly, the victim was robbed; and much else
besides, as anyone can tell. But, reading more closely, the descriptive
report does not actually say that the room was searched; it says only
that all the drawers were opened, with the clothing removed and
strewn about. It says there were signs of a struggle, including spilled
drinks, broken furniture, and of course, a dead body; but it nowhere
characterizes that struggle as violent. Finally, though it does point out
that the decedent’s wallet was found on the ﬂoor, with all the cash and
credit cards missing, the report omits any mention of robbery.
Of course, the ofﬁcer has made numerous assumptions in describ-
ing the scattered clothing as the “removed from the drawers”, in saying
the cash and cards are “missing”, and so on; but that’s irrelevant here.
What matters, in delimiting the skeletal contents of the descriptions,
are rather the natural “assumptions” of the reader. Thus, however nat-
ural it is, perhaps even part of what the speaker intended, and prereq-
uisite to understanding the text, for the reader to appreciate that the
drawers were searched, the struggle violent, and the missing money
stolen, the fact remains that none of these is strictly contained in the
report itself—any more than the lurid and sensational surmises that
will make of it a journalistic bonanza. The content of what is strictly
said—said “in so many words”—is intuitively what we mean by skele-
tal content.
There are many difﬁculties with this distinction; of these, I will
discuss three brieﬂy (none adequately). First, the skeletal/ﬂeshed-out
distinction should be located relative to other and better-known dis-
tinctions, such as literal versus ﬁgurative, and explicit versus implicit.
Clearly it does not coincide with the former (even adjusting for the
fact that ﬁgurative excludes literal, whereas ﬂeshed-out includes skele-
tal). Thus, none of the reader’s natural assumptions (that the missing
money was stolen, and so on) are in any sense ﬁgurative; yet they are
not part of the bare-bones content. It might be, however, that (for
logical representations) a ﬁgure must always be shaped and supported
by a skeleton, hence that the skeletal is somehow a subset of the
literal.
The explicit/implicit distinction is closer, in that (again, for logical
representations) the skeletal may roughly coincide with the explicit;
but whether the rest of the full-blooded content can be regarded as
implicit depends on how carefully that word is used. It is not irrele-
vant that the connotations of ‘implicit’ (“folded within”) run exactly
counter to those of ‘ﬂeshed out’: the one suggests “already there but
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
1 8 7
hidden”, the other “added on”. More speciﬁcally, the implicit is what is
implied, in the sense that it can be got or brought out by inference.
But, even if this is taken broadly to include material implication (such
that, from a formal point of view, common knowledge would be func-
tioning as a suppressed premise), the merely implicit falls far short of
full-blooded content. Only if “implication” is stretched to the full
gamut of what can be expected from conversational skills, topical
associations, critical judgements, affective responses, and so on, can it
hope to encompass the sort of content routinely conveyed in the
newspaper, in the board room, and over the back fence. But, quite
apart from whether (as I think) that’s an overstretching of the word, it
remains the case that implication, like trope, is proper to logical repre-
sentation, whereas the bare-bones/ﬂeshed-out distinction is intended
to apply in any genus.
Yet another potentially confusing distinction in the vicinity might
be likened to that between a pig and its rider: some representations
incorporate or “carry on their shoulders” others that work according to
different schemes, maybe even in different genera. Here I do not have
in mind cases where, within one representation, another is repre-
sented (the protesters’ banners visible in the photos of the rally), or
encoded (the secret formula hidden in an innocent love letter), but
rather “piggyback” devices that systematically belong and contribute
to the representations that carry them. Perhaps the clearest examples
are the legends and descriptive tokens that often appear on maps; but
the standardized symbols in medieval paintings, and the labels in
political cartoons, are essentially comparable. Onomatopoeia and
“graphic” textual effects (advertising copy that not only touts speed,
but itself “looks” fast) are presumably analogous, in the other direc-
tion. It seems to me that the additional content in piggyback devices
might in principle itself sustain a skeletal/ﬂeshed-out distinction, and
that none of it should be counted in the content (even the full-
blooded content) of the underlying representation. What we have
instead is a sort of hybrid, with separate but related content on two
distinct levels.
Second, the idea of “ﬂeshing out” skeletal content suggests interloc-
utors who, over and above grasping the content of a representation as
dictated by its scheme, also bring into play general background
knowledge and familiar at-home-ness in the world at large. Put this
way, however, the notion seems to presuppose a scheme/background
distinction, which may in turn seem tantamount to the sort of
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

1 88
H av i n g  Though t
language/theory distinction that Quine warned us not to draw. But
the worry is misguided. What Quine argued against is the possibility
of a systematic distinction, in the grounds for what we say, between
arbitrary choice or convention and empirical evidence or theory; in
particular, the language in which a theory is expressed cannot be
separated from that theory in such a way that some theses are defensi-
ble on linguistic grounds alone, with no admixture of theory. But that
is not at all incompatible with distinguishing between what a particu-
lar thesis says “in so many words” (according to the language-cum-
theory of which it is a part), and what its concrete “implications” are
in the current circumstances (according to that same language-cum-
theory). Still less, therefore is it incompatible with the distinction
between skeletal and full-blooded content, inasmuch as the latter
extends even beyond implications.
Third, and most serious: artiﬁcial intelligence research has estab-
lished that natural language competence is impossible without a com-
mon-sense grasp of real-live ﬂesh-and-blood content; that is, systems
that lack such a grasp fail to understand natural discourse at all. But if
language with skeletal content alone is unintelligible, then perhaps
skeletal content, as a kind of abstraction from “living language”, makes
no sense. This argument effectively assumes, however, that each rep-
resentational scheme must make sense on its own, apart from all
others; but, once exposed, that assumption seems to have little
ground to stand on. Why, for instance, couldn’t one “living” scheme be
parasitic on another, or two schemes be symbiotic? Thus, it might be
granted that natural language is viable (as a means of communication,
or whatever) only with its full-blooded everyday content, but this be
attributed to its dependence on (or interdependence with) some other
scheme of representation—presumably internal to the language users.
In other words, the full content of a discourse, in terms of which it is
workable at all, is simultaneously a function of two determining fac-
tors: the skeletal content of those linguistic tokens themselves, plus
whatever else the relevant sensible speakers of that language can count
on one another to grasp in that context. That the latter is essential in
practice does not show that the former is impossible in theory, or
indeed inessential.
The suggestion that language depends on inner representations
has, of course, a long history. But traditionally, the idea has been that
thought is the original locus of all contentfulness, and that linguistic
tokens acquire contents only by having thought contents somehow
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
1 8 9
conferred on them. The present notion of “symbiosis”, however, is
much less deﬁnite. In the ﬁrst place, skeletal linguistic contentfulness
need not be dependent on internal representations at all; and even
ﬂeshed-out content is dependent only in the sense that it arises in the
linguistic practices of interlocutors whose usage relies also on other
representations. These do not so much as imply that linguistic con-
tents are of the same sort as those of internal representations, let alone
that the former are merely conferred duplicates of the latter.
Before attempting to characterize the skeletal contents of logical
representations more speciﬁcally, let’s ask in a general way whether a
comparable distinction can be made out for iconic representations.
What, for instance, would be the bare-bones contents of the police
ofﬁcer’s photos? On the one hand, the pictures reveal much that is
omitted from the descriptions, like the shape of the bloodstain on the
carpet, the color of the victim’s shirt, and the cockroach in the corner.
On the other hand, much that the ofﬁcer explicitly said is not repre-
sented in the photographs. For example, not only do they not show
the money and credit cards as stolen, they don’t even show them as
missing. More interestingly, the pictures don’t actually represent the
victim as dead, or, for that matter, as a victim—though, of course, we
would be likely to appreciate these facts, if we saw the pictures.
How far does this go? The same reasoning, pressed to its limit,
implies that, bare bones, the photographs don’t even represent a
human body lying on the ﬂoor in a pool of blood, surrounded by
scattered clothing and broken furniture. These are features that an
ordinary person, relying on common background familiarity with the
world, could easily “tell” about the situation depicted. But, as the
perceptual recognition research cited earlier has demonstrated, no
system innocent of the world, lacking common sense, is capable of
such telling. The ultimate conclusion would then be that all the pho-
tos “strictly” represent is certain variations of incident light with re-
spect to direction—taking seriously, in effect, the pun in photograph.
Of course, the pictures surely do represent the scene of a violent
robbery, just as much as the verbal reports describe one. The point is
not to deny the obvious, but rather to distinguish, within the undeni-
able contents of everyday representations, a substructure that is skele-
tal—in the special sense that it does not draw upon the user’s
antecedent familiarity with the situation and the world, and hence
cannot exhibit any admixture of characteristics from other (possibly
symbiotic) representational schemes.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

19 0
H av i n g  Though t
7 Distinguishing genera by contents
The motive for distinguishing skeletal from full-blooded content is to
clear the way for characterizing the essences of the genera in terms of
the natures of their respective contents. Fleshed-out content is not a
candidate for this role, inasmuch as it may confound the traits of
more than one scheme. Hence, it could at best be the general charac-
ters of the respective skeletal contents that are distinctive of the repre-
sentational genera.
What is the distinctive structure of the skeletal contents of logical
representations? The mainstream tradition in logic has always taken
atomic sentences to be about the properties of (or relations among)
things. Modern formal semantics generally remains within this tradi-
tion by explicating property instantiation in terms of set membership
and/or function application, and therewith mathematically extending
the approach not only to quantiﬁcation and sentential composition,
but also (so it is hoped) to tense, aspect, modality, adverbial modiﬁca-
tion, propositional attitude ascription, and what have you. Somewhat
further aﬁeld, but still logical, are calculi of parts and wholes, systems
representing condition/action pairs, notations for allocations of re-
sources to tasks, and so on. Of course, these are not incompatible:
conditions can be objects having properties, tasks can have others as
parts—indeed, in its way, natural language can handle them all.
It is awfully tempting to say that these contents of atomic sentences
are (possible11) atomic facts, somehow composed of, for instance, ob-
jects and properties; and that the contents of molecular sentences are
molecular facts, composed of, or in some other way determined by,
atomic facts. The difﬁculties in spelling out what sort of structures or
features of the world such facts might be, however, are well-known
and formidable. Thus, even if it is intelligible to say that a certain
object’s having a certain property is a structure or feature of the world,
it remains unclear what kind of structure or feature it would be for an
object not to have a property, or for it to have either one property or
another, or for it to be the case that at least one object has some
property. To be sure, each such “complex fact” is settled in any given
instance by some or all of the atomic facts: since the paint is red, it
isn’t yellow, it’s either red or green, and at least something is red. But
the paint’s being red isn’t equivalent to any of these other facts, be-
cause any or all of them might have obtained even had the paint not
been red.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
19 1
Evidently, non-atomic contents cannot in general amount to par-
ticular combinations of atomic contents: since different incompatible
combinations can equally well satisfy a given representation, the
structure represented must be conceived more abstractly. One attrac-
tive suggestion is that the represented content is a structure or feature
of the whole world that it shares with various alternative possible
worlds—for instance, its belonging to a certain set of such worlds. For
our purposes, however, it’s irrelevant how exactly this might go; and
the real lesson lies in why it’s irrelevant. Insofar as any representation
represents something about the world, and can misrepresent it, the
content of that representation can be conceived in terms of a partition
of possible worlds. Thus, the content of a certain map might be asso-
ciated with the set of worlds of which that map is accurate. But this
shows that whatever distinguishes some representations as logical
gets lost if content is reduced simply to a partition of possible worlds.
Or, to put it the other way around and more broadly, whatever in the
content distinguishes the genera must lie in distinct general sorts of
“possible” world. Sets of compossible atomic facts, for example, might
plausibly be the worlds needed for logical content, whereas totalities
of compossible shapes of terrain or compossible scenes might amount
to possible “iconic worlds”. But what underlies these differences?
The following, I believe, is the heart of the matter: the primitive
elements of logical contents—whether objects and properties, com-
ponents and complexes, conditions and actions, or what have you—
are always identiﬁable separately and individually. That is, they can
enter into atomic contents one by one, without depending on their
concrete relations to one another, if any. It can be a fact, for instance,
that the glass is broken, quite apart from whether it is larger than the
cockroach, contains traces of whisky, or used to belong to the de-
ceased. The point is not that all combinations are possible—obvi-
ously the glass can’t be both broken and intact—but rather that it is
not a precondition on its being broken (or representable as such) that
it or its brokenness occupy any determinate position in any structured
ensemble of other objects or properties; they stand in their together-
ness on their own. Seen from the side of language, this self-standing-
ness of fact elements shows up in the mutual independence of proper
names and the (in this regard) namelikeness of primitive predicates.
For reasons that will emerge shortly, I call these self-standing logical
content elements (such as individual objects and properties) absolute
elements.12
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

19 2
H av i n g Though t
The contents of iconic representations are in general quite differ-
ent. Taking a cue from graphs, and remembering the quip about
photographs, iconic contents might be conceived as variations of val-
ues along certain dimensions with respect to locations in certain other
dimensions. Thus, variations of temperature with respect to time, or
altitude with respect to latitude and longitude, would be the contents
of familiar icons. The former dimensions are called dependent, the
latter independent, because, for each point in the relevant indepen-
dent region, a point is determined in the dependent space, but not
necessarily vice versa. The (skeletal) contents of a color photograph
have two independent and three dependent dimensions; mono-
chrome photos reduce the latter to a single dimension, and line draw-
ings and silhouettes further restrict that dimension to two (or a few)
points. Representational sculptures can be thought of as silhouettes
with three independent dimensions; and scale models are much the
same, but with more internal detail. Analog computers typically rep-
resent the variations of quite a few dynamic variables, all with respect
to time, or time and space.
This account, however, is insufﬁciently speciﬁc, until the notion of
dimension is further delimited. Consider, for a moment, some un-
structured sequence of distinct objects as a “dimension”; and imagine
a space with n such independent dimensions, and one two-valued
dependent dimension. Then, for any n-adic property, a “graph” in that
“space” could show exactly which n-tuples of those objects have that
property. Pressing the idea to its limit: if all the primitive objects in
some universe of discourse were in such a sequence, and there were as
many independent dimensions as the highest “adicity” of any primi-
tive property, plus a separate dependent dimension for each primitive
property, then the entire object/property state of that universe could
be represented in a single multi-dimensional silhouette. What’s
wrong with this “picture”? The problem lies in regarding an arbitrary
sequence as a dimension.
On a genuine dimension (in the deﬁnition of iconic representation)
the relative positions of the content elements are not at all arbitrary.
Quite the contrary, those elements are always organized relative to
one another in some regular structure that every representational
token of the pertinent scheme essentially presupposes (and which,
therefore, cannot itself be represented by any such token). For in-
stance, both dimensions corresponding to a graph of temperature
versus time are uniform measurable magnitudes that admit of simple
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
193
metrics; and the very possibility of the graphing scheme depends on
this. Why? Because what is graphed is the shape of the variation;
hence, no particular temperature or instant is relevant except as
placed, along their respective dimensions, relative to all the others.
The point is even more conspicuous for maps and pictures: the shapes
of the variations are the represented (skeletal) contents—and “shape”
makes no sense except in terms of relative locations in structured
spaces. With obvious and I hope illuminating contrast to the above
use of ‘absolute’, I call the dimensionally placed elements of iconic
contents relative elements.
The point is not that the dimensions are continuous. Thus, for a
biological species that reproduces synchronously, it makes perfect
sense to graph population against generation, even though both vari-
ables are discrete. The graph makes sense because generations and
population sizes are themselves both intrinsically ordered. This does
not mean merely that they can be assigned numbers; rather, what
matters is the order in the dimensions themselves—an order that can
be captured in an assignment of numbers, if desired. By contrast, a
“graph” of telephone numbers versus social security numbers would be
nonsense, precisely because those assignments do not reﬂect any un-
derlying order. (They are, in effect, just absolute names, formed from
digits instead of letters.13) It is also not necessary that the dimensions
(or spaces), either dependent or independent, be Euclidean; they
might be, for instance, curved or ramiﬁed, so long as their intrinsic
structures enable relative locations and hence representable shapes.
The contents of logical representations are not, in any analogous
sense, “shapes” in “conceptual space”; and the reasons show up the
limitations of the spatial metaphor for factual possibilities. Only
spaces in which locations are identiﬁable with respect to intrinsically
ordered dimensions—such that relative position makes non-arbitrary
sense—support a notion of shape at all. Objects and properties (or
kinds) do not as a rule constitute such dimensions: one cannot place
Mugsy “between” Toto and Lassie on the dog scale, or spaniel “above
and to the left” of collie in breed space. Therefore, even if for every dog
there were a breed, it would make no more sense to graph breed
against dog than phone number against social security number: there’s
no space for such a graph to take shape in. Objects have their proper-
ties one by one, absolutely, and not as part of some shape, relatively.
Insofar, however, as contents are worldly, it may seem that logical
and iconic contents can overlap or coincide. We can, for instance,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

19 4
H av i n g Though t
say—it is a fact—that the Earth is round. Is this not the very same
“structure or feature of the world” that would be represented also by a
silhouette of the Earth against a bright background? I don’t think so.
In the ﬁrst place, the sentence identiﬁes (the fact comprises) a particu-
lar object and a speciﬁc property of that object, whereas the silhouette
identiﬁes no object or property: its skeletal content is just the overall
pattern of light and dark from some perspective. But further, though
the sentence is entirely compatible with the Earth being transparent
or just as bright as the background, the silhouette is not; and so on.
The thesis that representational genera are distinguished according
to the structure of their contents yields an unexpected dividend: it
explains and therefore supports the observation made earlier that
“translating” from one genus to another requires wits. If the skeletal
contents of two generically different representations—say, a picture
and a description of the scene of the crime—differ qualitatively, even
in their basic structure, then, in particular, neither includes the other.
That is, much (or all) of what the one representation represents is
simply not represented at all by the other. Thus, a description of a
situation does not “say” how the light values vary with angle of view,
any more than a photo of those values “graphs” what objects are
present with what properties. Hence, a witless conversion is not pos-
sible, simply because the content is not there to convert. On the other
hand, a system with wits of its own—background familiarity with the
world and the circumstances—might be able to “tell” or to “see” what
that missing content would have to be, and ﬁll it in. Often, for in-
stance, a person, relying on knowledge and experience, could tell that
a certain light pattern would normally issue only from an object with
a certain property, and could thereby supply the logical content
needed to “translate” an image into words.
8 Connectionist networks
Is it possible to give a comparable generic account of the contents of
distributed representations? In contrast to the familiar logical and
iconic genera, distributed representation is a relatively new idea, and
remains largely terra incognita outside the circle of scientiﬁc special-
ists. So far, acknowledged examples tend to be arcane, and disputes
continue as to which of their features are most signiﬁcant. What’s
more, the distinctions between recording and representing and be-
tween skeletal and ﬂeshed-out content, no matter how clarifying in
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
19 5
the long run, can only add perplexity at the outset. Accordingly, it will
not be possible in this case, as before, to draw out a broad character-
ization from a few intuitively paradigmatic examples, relying on the
reader to appreciate how the generalizations work. Instead, therefore,
I will attempt a concise overview of a central class of cases, and then
propose a generic account that seems both parallel to and interest-
ingly different from the logical and iconic genera considered above.
The most widely investigated examples, and those with regard to
which the term distributed representation was ﬁrst introduced, are con-
nectionist networks. Though there are many species, the following
characterization applies to a representative variety, and gives some
indication of how they can differ.
A network consists of a large number of independent elementary
units, each of which has a variable state, called its activation level.14
Each unit also has a number of inputs and/or outputs (via connec-
tions—see below), and corresponding transfer functions relating these
to its activation level. Often, the activation is determined as a function
(possibly stochastic) of its previous value and the sum of all the in-
puts; and the output is a function of the current activation. Both
functions tend to be simple, though they are seldom both linear.
Usually, the transfer functions of all units are the same (or of just a
few distinct types). More complicated arrangements, functions, and
states are, of course, possible; but they have the effect of locating more
of the system’s “power” in the individual units, and less in the net-
work—contrary to the spirit of connectionism.
The units of a network have a great many connections among them,
each of which has a determinate strength, called its weight. As a rule,
each connection connects one “source” to one “target” unit, with no
two having the same source and target. In the most general such case,
each pair of units is connected in each direction, and each unit is
connected to itself (so the number of connections is the square of the
number of units). Many networks, however, implement only a subset
of these connections; and they can be classiﬁed according to which
connections are included. The most signiﬁcant distinction is between
cyclic and acyclic nets: in the former, but not the latter, sets of connec-
tions can form closed paths (feedback loops). The general case is
cyclic. By contrast, feed-forward networks, in which the units are effec-
tively subdivided into two or more “layers” by implementing only
connections from one layer to the next, are acyclic. (Perceptrons are
two-layer acyclic nets.)
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

19 6
H av i n g Though t
The input to a network as a whole consists of a pattern of initial
activations assigned to some (perhaps all) of its units. The output
consists of the ﬁnal activation levels of some (perhaps the same, per-
haps different) units. These ﬁnal values are reached during a “run” in
which the units individually adjust their activations in response to
incoming values, and then broadcast outgoing values, according to the
respective transfer functions. The incoming value from a connection
to its target generally equals the product of that connection’s weight
and the value that was broadcast by its source. Thus, the output of a
network is a joint function of its input and the weights on all its
connections (plus, perhaps, some random factors). In the case of a
feed-forward network, the input is entered on the ﬁrst layer, and then
each successive layer is activated, until the output appears on the last.
Cyclic networks are more difﬁcult because the feedback can generate
instabilities (loops that feed on themselves chaotically); hence, they
must be carefully constrained to ensure that they will settle down and
yield an output.
Corresponding to this broad characterization of the networks
themselves, we need a comparably broad characterization of their
performance. In general, a network’s inputs and outputs are both
patterns of unit-activations: given a certain input pattern, the net will
produce some associated output pattern. What makes this different
in principle from a traditional look-up function (besides efﬁciency) is
the network’s fundamental tendency to group input and output pat-
terns according to similarities: that is, similar inputs tend to yield simi-
lar outputs. One can get a rough grip on why this should be so from
information theoretic considerations. Loosely speaking, the number
of possible input and output patterns is exponential in the number of
nodes, whereas the number of connections is only polynomial; so
there aren’t enough “bits” in the connection strengths to encode an
arbitrary distinct output pattern for each possible input pattern.15
Rather, arbitrary output patterns can be encoded for a number of
relatively scattered input patterns, leaving the rest to fall where they
may. Of course, the network will produce some output or other for
any given input; but these associations must be more or less deter-
mined by those already encoded—speciﬁcally by “clustering” around
them in some way.
Importantly, there can be multiple independent respects of similar-
ity in play at once. Thus, a given input might be classiﬁed as belonging
to (similar to) one group of possible inputs in one respect, and, at the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
197
same time, as belonging to an entirely different group in some other
respect. Operationally, of course, the groupings themselves deﬁne the
“respects”: for two patterns to be “similar” is nothing other than for
them to belong to the same cluster. The reason that the groups can be
thought of as kinds (similarity groups) is that a network can “learn”
them from examples, and then generalize to new cases. Depending on
the training set and other details, the generalizations can be both
surprising and strikingly apt. (The teachability of networks has also
been important to connectionist research for a more workaday reason:
trivial cases aside, there is no known practical way to determine suit-
able connection weights for given problem domains other than via
automated training regimes.)
Different networks induce different groupings, hence different re-
spects of similarity. How does a network induce a similarity grouping?
For the simplest classiﬁer, a domain is partitioned as follows: two
inputs belong to the same group just in case they produce (exactly)
the same output. But this is doubly restrictive: ﬁrst, it does not allow
for multiple respects; and second, it does not take account of outputs
being “almost” the same—that is, similar. Both restrictions are lifted
in principle by letting the outputs of one network be the inputs of one
or more others. If the latter are simple classiﬁers, each can deﬁne an
independent respect of similarity in the outputs of the ﬁrst network,
which can in turn induce subtler simultaneous respects of similarity
in its inputs. Indeed, still another network, connected to the outputs
of all the networks connected to the ﬁrst, can pick up patterns in the
co-occurrence of simultaneous groupings, thereby inducing still more
sophisticated (“meta”) groupings in the original input patterns. But all
of this is just to indicate indirectly the potential power of multi-layer
(or cyclic) networks.
Yet even this fails to capture the possible richness in the input/
output behavior of a sophisticated network, for it ignores the poten-
tial for relevant similarity relations among the output patterns. The
point is not simply that outputs can signiﬁcantly cluster—though
that’s important—but that relative positions of output patterns
within their similarity groups can systematically reﬂect the positions
of the input patterns within their similarity groups. Thus, to take a
contrived but suggestive example, imagine the input and output pat-
terns respectively coming from and going to a ping-pong player’s eyes
and muscles. Major similarity clusters in the input will effectively
“recognize” slams, slices, and lobs in the opponent’s stroke, as well as
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

19 8
H av i n g Though t
(simultaneously) topspin, bottomspin, and lateral English, not to
mention speed, direction, and the like, in the oncoming ball. Output
patterns must effect major partitions among forehand, backhand, and
scoop shots, and upward versus downward wrist motion, plus, of
course, locating and aiming the racket. Not only must the output
“choices” be coordinated in subtle ways with the input recognitions,
but also—and this is the point—everything depends on ﬁnely tuned
gradations within those major similarity groupings: variations and
nuances in the arriving shot call for corresponding variations and adjust-
ments in the return.
9 Are there “distributed” representations?
As examples like these illustrate, connectionist networks contain two
quite different candidates for status as representations. On the one
hand, there are patterns of activation across various sets of network
units—the input and output sets, obviously, but also perhaps others,
such as intervening layers. So, in the ping-pong example, patterns
might represent any number of concrete and abstract aspects of ball
and racket motions, gathered and/or projected. On the other hand,
there are patterns of connection weight among the units of the net. It is
usually much more difﬁcult to say what these might represent; but it
is somehow they that encode the distinctive capabilities of each indi-
vidual network. Thus, continuing the example, it would be the con-
nection strengths (collectively) that “contain” the system’s know-how
or ability to play ping-pong. In contrast to patterns of activation,
which are ephemeral (changing with the play in real time, say), con-
nection weights tend to remain constant, or to change only slowly
(with experience and practice, say).
Both sorts of pattern are commonly cited as instances of distrib-
uted representation. But in most actual research systems, input and
output patterns tend to be, at best, distributed recordings of various
determinate domain features, structures, or categories—in effect, lists
or descriptions. Thus, either individual activations indicate particular
features separately (not distributed at all, but “localist”), or else the
representations of a number of features are spread out and superim-
posed on a multi-unit pattern of activation—distributed in the re-
cording, but still, so to speak, localist in content. There is a perfectly
sensible reason for this: investigators must be able to interpret inputs
and outputs if they are to argue that their systems are representational
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
19 9
at all, and to evaluate their performance. Inasmuch as descriptive
(logical) representations are the most familiar, it is natural to want to
interpret others as equivalent or comparable to these—especially
when it is taken for granted that the generic differences lie not in the
represented contents but in the representing relation. Activation pat-
terns of hidden (non-input/output) units are often less fathomable;
but even here the temptation is to look for “micro-features” or “coarse-
coded” partitions.
Patterns of connection weight, on the other hand, are almost in-
variably quite undecipherable. These constitute not occurrent or epi-
sodic states that arise and pass away in the course of the net’s
operations (“thoughts”), but rather its long-term functionality or
competence (“know-how”)—which it is essentially impossible to ex-
press in words, except as generalities. But the fact that the best verbal
characterization of a skill is an imprecise hand-wave does not mean
that the skill itself lacks delicacy and detail; on the contrary, it has a
“complexity” and “precision” of its own. To the extent, therefore, that
connection patterns are regarded as representational at all, they are
the most compelling candidates in contemporary networks for illus-
trating a distinctive representational genus—to wit, distributed represen-
tations (as opposed to mere distributed recordings).
Does it even make sense to regard the embodiments of a system’s
abilities or know-how as representations? Why not take them rather as
just complex dispositional properties—acquired and subtle, per-
haps—but, for all that, no more representational than a reﬂex or an
allergy? Recall the characterization of representations as such adum-
brated at the outset: they serve as a kind of “stand-in” for speciﬁc
features or aspects of the environment to which the system must
adjust its behavior, even on occasions when those features or aspects
are not currently present or detectable. And consider, in those terms,
a very special but important case of ability or know-how: the ability
reliably to recognize the individual faces (or voices, or smells, …) of
one’s regular companions. It seems to me to be unquestionably some
sort of structure or feature of the environment that this face can look all
these different ways (different angles, expressions, surroundings, and
the like), another face can look all those other ways, and so on, with
hardly ever any overlap. Clearly, such a “feature” could never be de-
tected on a given occasion; yet “adjusting” to it in absentia, as a means
to correct reidentiﬁcations, would be of great value. Accordingly,
whatever incorporated the ability to recognize those faces could, by
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

200
H av i n g Though t
our account, be deemed a representation of that feature. To be sure, that
initial account was formulated only casually and without argument,
so nothing is proved by it; still, the consilience is not unsuggestive.
In particular, it suggests a natural generalization to other abilities
and know-how. Thus, it is likewise a structure or feature of the
world—quite determinate and intricate, albeit in some sense also
highly “abstract”—that just these patterns of movement will sufﬁce to
get those ping-pong balls back over the net, a car through this trafﬁc,
or, indeed, that fresh antelope home to the cubs. Again, such struc-
tures are never presently detectable, yet adjusting to (taking account
of) them in real time would be just as valuable. Surely, in fact, this
separation of recognitive and performative abilities is altogether artiﬁ-
cial: special cases aside, skillful performance is essentially adaptive to
current circumstances, which is to say responsive to recognized rele-
vant developments; and recognition in general can be nothing other
than production of responses relevant to what is recognized.
Representations as such, however, must be party to a general
scheme. How do patterns of connection weights, understood as rep-
resentations of the subtle worldly structures accommodated by abili-
ties and know-how, belong to a scheme? There is certainly little, if any,
prospect of ﬁnding explicit interpretation or projection rules that
would specify, for each “well-formed” weight pattern in some net,
what all it would represent. But this is at most to acknowledge that
schemes of distributed representation may not be articulately deﬁn-
able. It remains the case that a network, incorporated in a real-world
system (an organism, for instance), and typically encoding a consider-
able variety of complicated responsive dispositions, could have encoded
any of an enormous range of others, if only its connection weights had
been different. Moreover, for that system, the actual weights consis-
tently determine (ﬁx) which abilities are actually encoded; whereas for
a (qualitatively) different net or system, those weights might deter-
mine quite different dispositions, or none at all. Finally, there are clear
possibilities of malfunction or malperformance in the reliance upon
and/or management of actual weight patterns: for any of many rea-
sons, a system can misrecognize or misbehave, even within the range
of its normal abilities; and weight modiﬁcations in the light of experi-
ence (learning) can be carried out improperly, or result in degraded
performance. Thus, whether an explicit “semantics” is possible or not,
it does seem that weight patterns can be regarded as belonging to
representational schemes.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
2 01
The “elements” of the contents of distributed representations, at
least as we have considered them so far, would be the various aspects
or looks of recognizable individuals or kinds and the various behav-
iors or movements of skillful responses—that is, the elements of com-
petent situated action. What distinguishes these essentially from the
absolute and relative elements of logical and iconic contents? The
answer must lie in how they belong together, in two interdependent
ways. First, such elements can belong together in that they fall in the
same similarity cluster—for instance, by being aspects of the same
individual or executions of the same move. Second, they can belong
together in that one calls for the other, or determines it as relevant or
apt—for instance, when a recognized eventuality calls for a certain
response. These are interdependent because: (i) it is by virtue of call-
ing for similar responses that elements belong to the same recognition
clusters, and vice versa; and (ii) it is by virtue of belonging to a certain
recognition cluster that an element can call for a certain response, and
vice versa. With due, and I trust understandable, trepidation about
the history of the term, I call elements that belong together in this
twofold interdependent way associative elements.
It is perhaps worth mentioning explicitly three respects in which
this account of distributed representation differs essentially from clas-
sical associationism, such as Hume’s. First, and most conspicuously,
what are here deemed associative are elements not of representations
(ideas, for instance) but of represented contents (structures or features
of the represented world). Second, by traditional lights, the mind
associates ideas because they are antecedently (“objectively”) similar or
otherwise related; whereas here the similarity of elements is conse-
quent on (“induced by”) a system’s know-how or ability effectively
casting them into the same clusters. (Note carefully: this is not in-
compatible with it being a structure or feature of the environment that
such and such intricate responsive dispositions constitute competence
in it, relative to given ends.) Third, and hand-in-glove with the pre-
ceding, traditional theories did not understand the different associa-
tive relations, especially resemblance and constant conjunction, as
interdependent; but we have seen that clustering together and calling
for a certain response make sense only in terms of one another.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

202
H av i n g  Though t
10 Conclusions and morals
The upshot of these considerations—tentative and exploratory, I reit-
erate—is, ﬁrst, that representational genera are distinguished essen-
tially by the characteristic structures of their represented contents;
and, second, that the represented contents of logical, iconic, and dis-
tributed representations are structurally characterized respectively by
absolute, relative and associative elements.
In conclusion it may be observed that such an account of the
genera, to the extent that it is tenable, yields another unanticipated
dividend: by, in effect, dividing the spoils, it may mitigate the pdp/
gofai standoff in contemporary cognitive science. Thus, consider the
following putative dilemma: either pdp networks “implement” fam-
iliar symbolic ai architectures (in which case they are irrelevant to
cognitive theory), or else they are incapable of representing contents
which we know to be cognitively representable (in which case they are
inadequate to cognitive theory). But if it is acknowledged at the outset
that logical and distributed contents differ fundamentally in kind,
then proponents of network models can cheerfully embrace both
horns of the alleged dilemma, without conceding any damaging con-
sequences. For, on the one hand, people obviously speak, and can
think what they can say. (And no doubt that facility is implemented
in some sort of network: what else, if the brain is a “neural net”?) But
that doesn’t show the cognitive irrelevance of network models, unless
it is further assumed that logical contents are the only contents impor-
tant to cognition; and there’s no reason to assume that. On the other
hand, acknowledging the qualitative difference in kinds of content is
already to acknowledge that not all contents can be contents of dis-
tributed representations. But this implies no inadequacy of network
models unless it is further assumed that distributed contents are the
only contents they can allow as important to cognition; and there is no
reason to assume that. Therefore, the camps are not really at odds,
unless one (or each) purports to account for everything cognitive—
but there’s no reason to put up with that.
Indeed, the relationship may be considerably more intimate. Logi-
cal contents require absolute elements, such as determinate, reidentiﬁ-
able particulars and properties. But among the most frustrating
unresolved problems of “good old fashioned” ai and philosophy of
mind is how these contents are recognized in realistic situations.
(Constructing explicit tests in terms of neutral sense data, for in-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
2 03
stance, has proved quite unrewarding.) Recognition, however, is a spe-
cialty of systems employing distributed representations—suggesting
the possibility of a deep cooperation, based on an ability to apply
names. But any partnership would be unlikely to stop there, especially
insofar as language is an evolutionarily late capacity, implemented in
organs originally adapted for another sort of representation. Thus,
everyday speech is extraordinarily sensitive to relevance and topical
surprise, yet remarkably unfazed by ambiguity, ungrammaticality, and
catachresis; it is thoroughly suffused with allusion, trope, posture, and
drama; it is biassed, fanciful, opportunistic, emotion charged, and
generally fast and loose; and much the same could be said of thought.
Yet these qualities are notoriously resistant to capture in explicit sym-
bolic models. Perhaps, that is because they involve adjustment to
contents that cannot be represented logically: sophisticated and intri-
cate abilities that, in symbol processing terms, could only be classiﬁed
as transductions or basic operations—but are hardly peripheral or
primitive. Perhaps natural language is possible only as symbiotic with
the distributed representations of the system it is implemented in.
Notes:
1 This use of the term ‘content’ is not altogether standard. Most
contemporary authors (and I, in the other essays in this volume)
mean by the “content” of a representation something distinct
from the object it represents, and which determines that object
(as sense determines referent, for instance). Here, however, I
mean by ‘content’ that which the representation represents—the
“object” itself—but as it is represented to be (whether it is that way
or not). Thus, it is a possible object—which may in fact be actual,
or similar to something actual, or neither. [Note added 1997.]
2 For instance, if (or to the extent that) particular representations
are tokens of well-deﬁned types, the scheme will determine the
content of any given token as a function of its type—or, at least,
these will determine how that content is determined. Thus, if any
extra-schematic factors (such as situation or context) co-deter-
mine contents, then which factors these are and how they work
are themselves determined by the scheme and type.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

204
H av i n g Though t
3 “Without loss” here means without loss of representational con-
tent; it goes without saying that there could be other sorts of loss,
such as market value (think of a digitized Rembrandt) or conve-
nience (a digital recording often cannot be read, heard, or viewed
without special equipment).
4 The above deﬁnition is essentially that offered by Hinton, Mc-
Clelland, and Rumelhart 1986, 77; and by McClelland and
Rumelhart 1986, 176, but in a less binding terminology. The two-
volume set—the “pdp volumes”—in which both of these essays
appear has become something of a locus classicus for research on
parallel distributed processing. The most extended and penetrat-
ing treatment I have seen of distributed representation as such is
by van Gelder (1989), who argues persuasively that superposition
is more fundamental than spread-out-ness. (I have retained the
more usual account merely for expository convenience.) Philo-
sophical implications of connectionism are also discussed in Hor-
gan and Tienson 1987; Pinker and Mehler 1988; and Churchland
1989. Note, incidentally, that the notion of separate tokens for
distinct contents is undermined by distributed representations, to
the extent that there is just one “big” token representing many
different contents at once.
5 This procedure would be anything but ridiculous if the inscrip-
tion happened to be in an unknown script, such as on the wall of
an ancient tomb. Because the photograph will preserve all visible
features of the inscription, it will a fortiori preserve all representa-
tionally relevant visible features, even if no one yet knows what
they are.
6 Such graphical displays of points in weight-space (sometimes
called “Hinton diagrams”) are common in the connectionist liter-
ature; see, for example, Hinton, McClelland, and Rumelhart
1986, 103.
7 Fourier transforms of spatial intensity functions, expressed alge-
braically as sufﬁciently long sums of terms, would be comparable
logical recordings of distributed representations.
8 A general procedure here means an effective procedure that does
not depend on there being an upper bound on the number of
distinct representational types in either scheme. If there are such
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

R epr es entational  g e n e ra
2 05
witless transforms in both directions, the relation between the
schemes may have to be even closer—perhaps as close as being
“notational variants” of one another.
9 Note that witlessness is not a function of level of description.
Thus, it is sometimes said that whether certain processes in the
brain (or a computer) count as intelligent or sensible depends on
the level at which they are described; the very same processes can
be intelligent at the cognitive level, but simultaneously unintelli-
gent and mechanical at a lower formal or physical level. Be that as
it may, witlessness here means thoroughly witless—there is no level
at which the process can be redescribed as other than oblivious to
content and ignorant of the world
10 “Internal” here (and hereafter) means functionally internal, not
“immanent to the sphere of consciousness”, or any such epistemo-
logical/metaphysical status.
11 In general only possible because the sentences might be false;
“actual” facts would be the contents of true sentences.
12 Two qualiﬁcations. First, to call objects and properties (or what-
ever) “absolute” is not to imply that they are what they are inde-
pendent of the scheme in terms of which they are represented;
that is, the account of logical content in not meant to bear on
questions of realism. Second, the self-standingness at stake is
what might be called “occasion”, as opposed to “constitutive” self-
standingness. Thus, it may be constitutive of the kind ‘spaniel’ (as
identiﬁable in terms of some scheme) that it be a breed of ‘dog’
distinct from ‘collie’ and subsuming ‘cocker’. But, on any particu-
lar occasion, whether some object is of some kind is a function
just of that object and kind, and not of any determinate relation-
ships in which either may stand (except, of course, to the extent
that the kind is itself relational).
13 The point is not simply that there is no interesting correlation
between phone number and social security number, as there
might be no interesting correlation between blood pressure and
rate of hair growth, but rather that there is nothing there to
correlate. Of course, the numbers do identify particular tele-
phones and people, respectively; but they do not locate them
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

206
H av i n g  Though t
along any intelligible dimensions in ways that might or might not
be correlated.
14 Activations can be discrete, real, or (presumably) even complex
valued, bounded or unbounded. Units can also have additional
state variables, such as latency or fatigue conditions, or a kind of
momentum in the activation itself.
15 The argument is “hand-wavy” in various respects, most notably in
effectively assuming that the activation values and connection
strengths are both only ﬁnitely precise (and to approximately the
same degree).
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

ch a pt e r  n i n e
Mind Embodied
and Embedded
1 Intimacy
Among Descartes’s most lasting and consequential achievements has
been his constitution of the mental as an independent ontological
domain. By taking the mind as a substance, with cognitions as its
modes, he accorded them a status as self-standing and determinate on
their own, without essential regard to other entities. Only with this
metaphysical conception in place, could the idea of solipsism—the
idea of an intact ego existing with nothing else in the universe—so
much as make sense. And behind that engine have trailed the sorry
boxcars of hyperbolic doubt, the mind-body problem, the problem of
the external world, the problem of other minds, and so on. 
Although the underlying assumptions have been under ﬁre, off and
on, at least since Hegel—including with renewed intensity in recent
years—most of the challenges have been of a general sort that I will
call “interrelationist”. Characteristically, they accept as a premise that
the mental, or at any rate the cognitive, has some essential feature,
such as intentionality or normativity, and then argue that this feature
is impossible except through participation in some supra-individual
network of relations. For instance, accounts based on interpretation
and the “principle of charity”, such as those of Donald Davidson and
Daniel Dennett (with roots in Quine), ascribe contentful states only
as components of an overall pattern that is rational in context—that is,
in relation to the system’s situation or environment. Similarly, social
practice accounts, such as those of Richard Rorty and Robert Bran-
dom (with roots in Sellars and Wittgenstein), understand the norms
that enable reasoning and content to be instituted communally—that
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

208
H av i n g  Though t
is, in relation to the practices and responses of others. On neither
approach is solipsism even a coherent possibility.
Interrelationist arguments are holistic in the speciﬁc sense that they
take cognitive phenomena to be members of some class of phenom-
ena, each of which has its relevant character only by virtue of its
determinate relations to the others—that relevant character being, in
effect, nothing other than its “place” in the larger pattern or whole.
The obvious example is a move or play in a game: pushing around a
little piece of plastic shaped like a turret could only amount to a rook
move in an appropriate spatial and temporal context of other chess
pieces and moves. To call it a rook move apart from any such context
is simply nonsense. Likewise, so the reasoning goes, to regard any
phenomenon as intentional or normative in isolation from the rele-
vant whole, is also nonsense. And since, in the case of mental attribu-
tions, the relevant whole must include the individual’s environment
and/or community, the Cartesian independence of the mental realm
is impossible.
While undeniably important and compelling, considerations like
these seem to me seriously incomplete and potentially distorting.
They remain theoretical or intellectual in a way that not only does not
undermine but actually reinforces an aspect of the Cartesian separa-
tion that is still so pervasive as to be almost invisible. In particular,
interrelationist accounts retain a principled distinction between the
mental and the corporeal—a distinction that is reﬂected in contrasts
like semantics versus syntax, the space of reasons versus the space of
causes, or the intentional versus the physical vocabulary. (Notice that
each of these contrasts can be heard either as higher versus lower
“level” or as inner versus outer “sphere”.) The contrary of this separa-
tion—or battery of separations—is not interrelationist holism, but
something that I would like to call the intimacy of the mind’s embodi-
ment and embeddedness in the world. The term ‘intimacy’ is meant to
suggest more than just necessary interrelation or interdependence but
a kind of commingling or integralness of mind, body, and world—that is,
to undermine their very distinctness. The challenge is as much to
spell out what this could mean as to make a case for it. Indeed, no
sooner does such a possibility seem intelligible at all, than ways to
bring out its plausibility and signiﬁcance turn up everywhere.
There is little original in what follows. The strategy will be to bring
some well-known principles of systems analysis to bear on the mind-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
209
body-world “system” in a way that refocuses questions of division and
unity, and then to canvass a selection of investigations and propos-
als—some fairly recent, others not—in the light of this new focus.
The hope is that these superﬁcially disparate ideas, none of them new,
will seem to converge around the theme of intimacy in a way that
illuminates and supports them all. Sorting and aligning issues in this
manner has sometimes been discussed under titles like ‘embedded
computation’ and ‘situated cognition’.
2 Simon’s ant
The simplest introduction to the range of phenomena I want to ex-
plore is the beautiful parable with which Herbert Simon opens chap-
ter three of The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial, a chapter to which he gives the
subtitle “Embedding Artiﬁce in Nature”.
We watch an ant make his [sic] laborious way across a wind-
and wave-molded beach. He moves ahead, angles to the right to
ease his climb up a steep dunelet, detours around a pebble, stops
for a moment to exchange information with a compatriot. Thus
he makes his weaving, halting way back to his home. … Viewed
as a geometric ﬁgure, the ant’s path is irregular, complex, hard to
describe. But its complexity is really a complexity in the surface
of the beach, not a complexity in the ant.
(1969/81, 63–64)
Simon summarizes the lesson of his parable twice, word-for-word the
same, except for those indicating the subject of the behavior.
An ant [A man] viewed as a behaving system, is quite simple. The
apparent complexity of its [his] behavior over time is largely a reﬂection
of the complexity of the environment in which it [he] ﬁnds itself
[himself].
(64–65; italics in originals.)
This lesson can be taken in two rather different ways. On the one
hand, one might heave a sigh of scientiﬁc relief: understanding people
as behaving systems is going to be easier than we thought, because so
much of the apparent complexity in their behavior is due to factors
external to them, and hence external to our problem. On the other
hand, one might see the problem itself as transformed: since the rele-
vant complexity in the observed behavior depends on so much more
than the behaving system itself, the investigation cannot be restricted
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 1 0
H av i n g Though t
to that system alone, but must extend to some larger structure of
which it is only a fraction.
That Simon himself took the lesson in the ﬁrst way is evident from
the two “hedges” that he immediately offers—both of which strike me
as quite remarkable (and ultimately untenable).
Now I should like to hedge my bets a little. Instead of trying to
consider the “whole man,” fully equipped with glands and vis-
cera, I should like to limit the discussion to Homo sapiens,
“thinking man.” … I should also like to hedge my bets in a
second way, for a human being can store away in memory a great
furniture of information that can be evoked by appropriate
stimuli. Hence I would like to view this information-packed
memory less as part of the organism than as part of the environ-
ment to which it adapts.
(65; second hedge only in the second edition)
With these qualiﬁcations in place, Simon can safely turn his attention
away not only from sand dunes and pebbles, but also from human
knowledge, culture, the body, and the world, so as to concentrate on
cryptarithmetic and nonsense syllables—all in support of his view
that the human “information processing system” (essentially a glori-
ﬁed cpu) must be serial and rather simple. In effect, he wants to pare
away enough of the real human being that what’s left is strikingly like
an ant.
The alternative reading of the parable, however, is already sug-
gested by the history of artiﬁcial intelligence research itself. Perhaps
the largest-scale trend in this history has been precisely counter to the
suggestion of relegating knowledge (“information-packed memory”)
to the “environment”—that is, regarding it as external to the problem
of understanding intelligence. The essential point of systems based on
semantic nets, frames, internal models, prototypes, and “common
sense” is that, except in very special circumstances, the intelligent
performance of a system depends more directly on the particular inter-
connectedness and organization of its knowledge, than on any reason-
ing or processing power. Note that the issue is not the quantity of
information, but its speciﬁc quality—its concrete structure. Everything
is in the details—that these items are grouped together, that there is a
cross-reference from here to there, that this topic appears in that index
with those keys—in such a way that abstracting the form of the knowl-
edge from its content would make no sense. In other words, according
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
2 11
to this trend in ai, to study (or build) intelligent systems is, above all, to
study (or build) large, concrete knowledge structures—not simple
processors.
Until recently, however, nearly all of this research has retained the
assumption that the relevant “furniture of information” is imple-
mented as complex symbol structures that are, in many respects, just
like the contents of the traditional Cartesian mind. In particular, they
are internal to the individual agent, and different in kind from any
physiology or hardware. The explorations that follow can be seen as
trying out the second reading of Simon’s parable in a more radical way.
If the signiﬁcant complexity of intelligent behavior depends intimately
on the concrete details of the agent’s embodiment and worldly situa-
tion, then perhaps intelligence as such should be understood as char-
acteristic, in the ﬁrst instance, of some more comprehensive structure
than an internal, disembodied “mind”, whether artiﬁcial or natural.
3 Components, systems, and interfaces
Of course, human intelligence is embodied and embedded; nobody
denies that. The question is how important this fact is to the nature
of intelligence. One way to put the question is to ask whether we can
in principle partition off the intellect (or mind) from the body and/or
the world. “Partition off” does not this time mean isolation or re-
moval. That is, we can grant the holist thesis that mind would be
impossible in the absence of body and/or world, and still ask whether
it can be understood as a distinct and well-deﬁned subsystem within
the necessary larger whole. But this requires a brief discussion of the
principles for dividing systems into distinct subsystems along nonar-
bitrary lines.
It is a ﬁne testimony to the depth and breadth of Simon’s slender
volume that, in a later chapter, entitled “The Architecture of Com-
plexity”, he addresses this very issue: On what principled basis are
large systems decomposable into subsystems? And, to answer it, he
invites us to
distinguish between the interactions among subsystems, on the
one hand, and the interactions within subsystems—that is,
among the parts of those subsystems—on the other. The inter-
actions at the different levels may be, and often will be, of differ-
ent orders of magnitude.
(209)
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 1 2
H av i n g Though t
What is he getting at? Consider a television set in comparison to a
block of marble. The former, we are inclined to say, is highly system-
atic, composed of many nested interacting subsystems, whereas the
latter is hardly systematic at all. Why? One suggestion might be that
the tv is composed of many different kinds of material, arranged in
complicated shapes and patterns, whereas the marble contains rela-
tively few materials and is nearly (though not quite) homogeneous.
This cannot be the right answer, however, because a computer micro-
chip (an integrated circuit) is surely more systematic than a compost
of rotting table scraps, even though the former contains relatively few
materials and is nearly homogeneous, whereas the latter is diverse and
messy.
Rather, the difference must lie in the nature of the discontinuities
within the whole, and the character of the interactions across them.
To see this, think of how the tv is organized. If we suppose that, at
some level of analysis, it consists of a thousand components, then we
can ask how these components are distinguished. One possible de-
composition would be neatly geometrical: assuming the set is roughly
cubical, divide it into ten equal slices along each axis, to yield a thou-
sand smaller cubes, of which the entire set exactly consists. What’s
wrong with this “decomposition”? Well, consider one of the “compo-
nent” cubes—say, one near the center. It contains half of a transistor,
two thirds of a capacitor, several fragments of wire, a small triangle of
glass from the picture tube, and a lot of hot air. Obviously, this is an
incoherent jumble that makes no sense—even though a thousand
equally crazy “pieces”, put together exactly right, would make up a tv
set. Our task is to say why.
A resistor is a quintessential electronic component. It has two
wires coming out of it, and its only “job”, as the name suggests, is to
resist (to some speciﬁed degree) the ﬂow of electricity between them. It
doesn’t matter how it does that job—nor, within limits, does anything
else about it matter—just so long as it does that job properly and
reliably, and doesn’t interfere with any other components. An elec-
tronic component, like a resistor, is a relatively independent and self-
contained portion of a larger electronic circuit. This means several
things. In the ﬁrst place, it means that the resistor does not interact
with the rest of the system except through its circuit connections—
namely, those two wires. That is, nothing that happens outside of it
affects anything that happens inside, or vice versa, except by affecting
the currents in those connections. (To be more precise, all effects
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
2 13
other than these are negligible, either because they are so slight or
because they are irrelevant.) Second, it means that the relevant inter-
actions through those connections are themselves well-deﬁned, reli-
able, and relatively simple. For instance, it’s only a ﬂow of electrons, not
of chemicals, contagion, or contraband. Finally, it means that it is not
itself a composite of components at a comparable level of indepen-
dence and self-containedness: a resistor plus a capacitor do not add up
to a distinct component. (However, a suitable larger arrangement of
resistors, capacitors, and transistors might add up to a pre-amp—
which could in turn be a component in a higher-level system.)
An electronic component’s connecting wires constitute its “inter-
face” to the rest of the system. In careful usage, the notions of compo-
nent, system, and interface should all be understood together and in
terms of one another. A component is a relatively independent and self-
contained portion of a system in the sense that it relevantly interacts
with other components only through interfaces between them (and
contains no internal interfaces at the same level). An interface is a point
of interactive “contact” between components such that the relevant
interactions are well-deﬁned, reliable, and relatively simple. A system is
a relatively independent and self-contained composite of components
interacting at interfaces. So the pre-amp mentioned above would be
both a component and a system; such a component system is often
called a subsystem. Though these concepts are all deﬁned in terms of
one another, they are not therefore circular or empty, because they
collectively involve the further notions of relative independence, sim-
plicity, relevance, and interaction.
An important consequence is that genuine components are in prin-
ciple replaceable by functional equivalents. For instance, a resistor in
an electronic circuit can be replaced by any other that has the same
resistance value (and perhaps meets a few other speciﬁcations). The
circuit as a whole will continue to function as before, because all that
mattered about that resistor in the ﬁrst place was its resistance via a
simple interface—and, by stipulation, the replacement matches that.
(Of course, riﬂes had components before Eli Whitney invented inter-
changeable parts. But that was basically a difference of degree—
speciﬁcally, of how well-deﬁned the interfaces were and how readily
interchangeable the parts were.)
Return now to the thousand little cubes making up a tv set. Are
they components, in the strict sense? Obviously not, because they are
not even “relatively” independent and self-contained. Or, what comes
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 14
H av i n g Though t
to the same thing, the surfaces separating them are not proper inter-
faces. That is, the interactions required across those surfaces, for the
set to work, are absurdly complex and irregular, with no hope of clear
deﬁnition or reliable implementation. Just imagine trying to assemble
a new set from a thousand such cubes taken one each from a thou-
sand other sets! Yet a tv can easily be made out of parts taken from
others, if only the divisions are made at genuine interfaces.
The point is even more vivid if we consider instead a system that
moves, such as an engine or an animal: then the cubes wouldn’t so
much as contain the same physical hunks through time, and a consis-
tent “interface” wouldn’t even be conceivable. Yet decomposition of
such systems into simpler components is perfectly standard and
straightforward, if their boundaries are allowed to move with them.
For instance, a connecting rod between a piston and crankshaft is
relatively self-contained, and has very well-deﬁned interfaces in its
two bearing surfaces; and all that matters about them is that their axes
be kept reliably parallel and a certain distance apart. Again, the com-
ponent as such is delimited by its simple, reliable interfaces.
4 Incorporeal interfaces
Examples like electronic circuits, mechanisms, and even organisms
can leave the impression that the boundaries of components and sub-
systems are set by corporeal discontinuities—virtually complete, ex-
cept at the interfaces, where narrowly deﬁned contacts are permitted.
It is particularly important for our purposes to counter this impres-
sion, since the corporeal discontinuity between our bodies and the
world—the very discontinuity that determines these bodies as bod-
ies—misleadingly enhances the apparent signiﬁcance of bodily sur-
faces as relevant interfaces for the understanding of other phenomena,
such as intelligence.
That systematic interfaces need not coincide with corporeal sur-
faces can be shown by example. Large organizations, like govern-
ments, corporations, and universities, are almost always subdivided
into various divisions, departments, and units. But the correspon-
dence between these demarcations and corporeal boundaries is at best
haphazard, and never essential. Indeed, as more and more business is
conducted via worldwide communication networks, the physical loca-
tions of personnel and data become practically irrelevant. What mat-
ter instead are the access codes, permission levels, distribution lists,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
2 15
private addresses, priority orderings, and so on, that determine where
information ﬂows and what gets attended to. It is the structure of
these, ultimately, that determines departmentalization and hierarchy.
Members of a single department or unit tend to work more closely
together, sharing resources and concerns, than do members of differ-
ent departments. Likewise, units of the same division interact more
often and more intimately than do units of different divisions; and so
on. Nothing depends, ultimately, on who is in what building, or on
what continent—as Simon himself clearly appreciated.
Most physical and biological hierarchies are described in spatial
terms. We detect the organelles in a cell in the way we detect the
raisins in a cake—they are “visibly” differentiated substructures
localized spatially in the larger structure. On the other hand, we
propose to identify social hierarchies not by observing who lives
close to whom but by observing who interacts with whom.
These two points of view can be reconciled by deﬁning hierar-
chy in terms of intensity of interaction, but observing that in
most biological and physical systems relatively intense interac-
tion implies relative spatial propinquity.
(199)
“Intensity” of interaction here means something like how “tightly”
things are coupled, or even how “close-knit” they are—that is, the
degree to which the behavior of each affects or constrains the other.
Heard in this way, it can serve as a generic notion encompassing the
mechanical integrity of a connecting rod and the electrical unity of a
resistor, as well as the social or institutional cohesiveness of a group.
The different parts of a connecting rod interact so intensely, for exam-
ple, that they always move rigidly together; by comparison, its interac-
tions with the piston and the crankshaft are “looser”, allowing
independent rotation about a common axis. Further, comparing these
intensities can be the ﬁrst step in accounts, respectively, of relative
independence and interface simplicity; for each can be seen as a mat-
ter of less intense interaction—looser coupling—externally, as com-
pared to internally.
5 Intelligibility as the principle of decomposition
What Simon mentions only in passing, however, without the empha-
sis it will need for our purposes, is the motivation for treating systems
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 16
H av i n g Though t
in this way. In a brief subsection entitled “Near Decomposability and
Comprehensibility”, he writes:
The fact that many complex systems have a nearly decompos-
able, hierarchic structure is a major facilitating factor enabling
us to understand, describe, and even ‘see’ such systems and their
parts.
(218–219)
‘Nearly decomposable systems’ is his term for systems of relatively
independent interacting components with simple interfaces between
them. So the point about comprehensibility can be paraphrased as
follows: ﬁnding, in something complicated and hard to understand, a
set of simple reliable interfaces, dividing it into relatively independent
components, is a way of rendering it intelligible.
The signiﬁcance of this can be brought out by approaching it from
another side. Biological and electronic systems are also in some sense
physical—as, indeed, are social and (other) information systems. But
in that case, more than one kind of interaction, and accordingly more
than one kind of decomposition, would seem to be possible in what is
somehow the same “stuff”. How, then, are we to decide which interac-
tions and decompositions are the important ones? Once this question
is asked, however, the answer is obvious: it depends on what we’re
interested in—which is to say, it depends on what phenomena we are
trying to understand. Thus, when we turn to the mind-body-world
“system”, and wonder how, perhaps, to decompose it, our consider-
ations will perforce be relative to some prior identiﬁcation of what is
to be understood.
Part of the reason, for instance, that the structure of the beach is as
important as the structure of the ant in Simon’s parable is that the
ant’s actual path is determined in real time by close interaction between
the ant and the concrete details of the beach’s surface. If, by contrast,
the ant were responding to an internal model or representation of the
beach, instead of responding the beach itself, or if it just contained a
list of steps and turns which it followed slavishly, then the importance
of the beach would be reduced or eliminated. The other part of the
reason, however, and in some sense the prior part, is that what we
want to understand in the ﬁrst place is the ant’s path. If we were
interested instead in it’s respiration or its immune system, then the
beach would be largely irrelevant, regardless of how tightly the ant is
coupled to it when walking. In other words, which close interactions
matter, when considering the scope and structure of systems, depends
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
2 17
fundamentally on what we’re interested in—that is, what we’re trying
to understand.
Here, then, is where the account of decomposition takes hold. If
what we’re interested in is the path, and if the ant relies mostly on its
own internal structure to guide its steps, counting on the ground just
for friction and support, then the ant and beach are two relatively
independent components or systems, with a well-deﬁned simple in-
terface at the soles of its feet. If, on the other hand, there is constant
close coupling between the ant and the details of the beach surface,
and if this coupling is crucial in determining the actual path, then, for
purposes of understanding that path, the ant and beach must be
regarded more as an integrated unit than as a pair of distinct compo-
nents. This is the simplest archetype of what I mean by intimacy.
6 Brooks’s subsumption architecture
Insect examples have all the advantages and disadvantages of simple
archetypes. They are, of course, wonderfully clear, as far as they go;
but they don’t go very far. We will try to work our way up toward
more interesting cases via a series of intermediaries. Simon muses at
one point (64) that if someone were to build insect-like robots, their
behavior on a beach would be much like that of his ant. Little did he
know that, two decades later, such a project would be in full swing in
the laboratory of Rod Brooks at MIT. It is perhaps slightly ironic that
part of what drives Brooks’s efforts is a dissatisfaction with the sym-
bol-manipulation approach to artiﬁcial intelligence pioneered by
Simon and Allen Newell in the 1950’s. As we shall see, however, this is
no accident.
Brooks’s best known “creature”, named Herbert (after Simon), is a
self-powered, wheeled contraption, about the size of a small trash can,
with various sensors, one moveable arm on top, and surprisingly little
compute power. It’s lot in life is to buzz around the MIT AI Lab
looking for empty soda pop cans, pick them up, and return them to a
central bin. Herbert was built (around 1990) and actually worked
(albeit clumsily). What makes this noteworthy, compared, say, to
robots of the 1970’s, is that the labs and ofﬁces in which Herbert
worked were in no way specially prepared: there were no guidelines
painted on the ﬂoors or walls, the typical mess and clutter of real work
space were not cleaned up, people carried on with their own business
as usual, and so on. So Herbert managed to negotiate a relatively
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 1 8
H av i n g  Though t
inhospitable, changing environment, do its job, and stay mostly out of
trouble—with roughly the proﬁciency of a crustacean.
What matters for us is not this modest success but the design
principles on which Herbert is based. Two points deserve emphasis.
First, Brooks uses what he calls the “subsumption architecture”, ac-
cording to which systems are decomposed not in the familiar way by
local functions or faculties, but rather by global activities or tasks.
[This] alternative decomposition makes no distinction between
peripheral systems, such as vision, and central systems. Rather
the fundamental slicing up of an intelligent system is in the
orthogonal direction dividing it into activity producing sub-
systems. Each activity or behavior producing system individu-
ally connects sensing to action. We refer to an activity producing
system as a layer. An activity is a pattern of interactions with the
world. Another name for our activities might well be skill …
(1991, 146)
Thus, Herbert has one subsystem for detecting and avoiding obstacles
in its path, another for wandering around, a third for ﬁnding distant
soda cans and homing in on them, a fourth for noticing nearby soda
cans and putting its hand around them, a ﬁfth for detecting some-
thing between its ﬁngers and closing them, and so on … fourteen in
all. What’s striking is that these are all complete input/output sys-
tems, more or less independent of each other. They can’t be entirely
independent, of course, because, for instance, Herbert has only one
set of wheels; so if two different subsystems undertake to move the
robot at the same moment, one must dominate—through some inter-
face. But the bulk of the interactions, the tightest couplings, are within
the respective activity layers—including, as Brooks explicitly points
out, interactions with the world.
In other words, each of the various activities of this system is like
the walking of Simon’s ant. Each involves constant close interaction
with certain speciﬁc aspects of the environment, and can only be
understood in terms thereof. So the structures of the respective as-
pects of the environment are at least as important as the structures of
the internal portions of the corresponding layers in rendering the
different activities intelligible. Herbert has fourteen relatively inde-
pendent, closely knit subsystems, each encompassing both structures
within the robot and structures outside of it. To put it one last way,
one that foreshadows where we’re going, each of Herbert’s highest-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
2 19
level subsystems is somewhat mental, somewhat bodily, and some-
what worldly. That is, according to Simon’s principles of intensity of
interaction, the primary division is not into mind, body, and world,
but rather into “layers” that cut across these in various ways. And, in
particular, the outer surface of the robot is not a primary interface. (Of
course, there may be further subdivisions within the respective layers,
which may or may not take portions of this surface as subsidiary
interfaces.)
7 Perceiving instead of representing
The second point that deserves emphasis, closely related to the ﬁrst, is
captured in a slogan that Brooks proposes: The world is its own best
model. (1990, 5) This is precisely to repudiate designs like the alterna-
tives I mentioned earlier for Simon’s ant: that is, the ant should not
contain any inner model or representation of the beach, nor an inner
list of step and turn instructions. These alternatives would substitute
complexity within the organism for intensity of interaction between the
organism and its environment. But Brooks, as his slogan indicates, is
very much against that. Why? 
We can put the answer in another slogan that Brooks would prob-
ably like: Perception is cheap, representation expensive. Such a slogan
might surprise many AI workers, who are acutely aware of how difﬁ-
cult pattern recognition can be. But the point is that good enough
perception is cheaper than good enough representation—where that
means “good enough” to avoid serious errors. The trouble with repre-
sentation is that, to be good enough, it must be relatively complete
and relatively up to date, both of which are costly in a dynamic envi-
ronment. Perception, by contrast, can remain happily ad hoc, dealing
with concrete questions only as they arise. To take a homely example,
it would be silly, for most purposes, to try to keep track of what shelf
everything in the refrigerator is currently on; if and when you want
something, just look.
Why would anyone have supposed otherwise? The answer lies in
two deep assumptions that have informed symbolic ai from the be-
ginning—including the work of Newell and Simon. The ﬁrst is that
intelligence is best manifested in solving problems, especially hard prob-
lems. The second is that problems are best solved by a process of
reasoning: working from a statement of the problem and such ancillary
knowledge as is available to a statement of the solution. The greatest
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

220
H av i n g Though t
triumphs in the history of the ﬁeld are its demonstrations that these
ideals can be realized mechanically—principally via formal inference,
heuristically guided search, and structured knowledge representation.
But notice how they bias the orientation toward representation and
away from perception. Not only must the problem and the relevant
knowledge be represented, generally in some symbolic formalism, but
so also all the intermediate states that are explored on the way to the
solution. The generation, use, and management of all these represen-
tations then becomes the paramount concern.
Perception, under such a regime, is reduced to a peripheral channel
through which the problem is initially posed, and incidental facts are
supplied; it might as well be a teletype. In most of AI, in fact, the
process of perception has been conceived as transduction: some special
preprocessor takes optical or auditory input, “recognizes” it, and then
produces a symbolic output for the main system—not unlike what
the system could have gotten from a teletype. What’s pertinent about
a teletype here is that it’s a narrow-bandwidth device—the very
antithesis of tight coupling.
For instance, the number of “bits” of information in the input to a
perceptual system is enormous compared to the number in a typical
symbolic description. So a “visual transducer” that responds to a
sleeping brown dog with some expression like “Lo, a sleeping brown
dog” has effected a huge data reduction. And this is usually regarded
as a beneﬁt, because, without such a reduction, a symbolic system
would be overwhelmed. But it is also a serious bottleneck in the
system’s ability to be in close touch with its environment. Organisms
with perceptual systems not encumbered by such bottlenecks could
have signiﬁcant advantages in sensitivity and responsiveness. The al-
ternative “wide bandwidth” coupling, however, is precisely what, by
Simon’s systems-analytic criterion, would undermine or downgrade
the organism/environment boundary as an important decomposi-
tional interface—just as Brooks proposes.
Models that emphasize internal symbolic representations insinuate
bottlenecks into the understanding of action, just as they do for per-
ception, and for much the same reason. The product of a rational
problem-solving process is a low-bandwidth sequence of symbol
structures, which can either report the results (say, on a teletype) or
send instructions to an “output transducer”. But skillful or adept
engagement with a situation is as likely to proﬁt from a wide-band-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
2 2 1
width coupling as is responsiveness to it. (We will return to this
following the next section.)
In the meantime, notice that the very distinction between percep-
tion and action is itself artiﬁcially emphasized and sharpened by the
image of a central processor or mind working between them, receiving
“input” from the one and then (later) sending “output” to the other.
The primary instance is rather interaction, which is simultaneously
perceptive and active, richly integrated in real time. Thus, what’s note-
worthy about our refrigerator aptitudes is not just, or even mainly,
that we can visually identify what’s there, but rather the fact that we
can, easily and reliably, reach around the milk and over the baked
beans to lift out the orange juice—without spilling any of them. This
high-bandwidth hand-eye coordination—or, better, hand-eye-refrig-
erator coordination—is what Brooks calls an “activity” or “skill”
(though much more advanced than his robots). There is little reason
to believe that symbol processing has much to do with it—unless one
is already committed to the view that reasoning must underlie all ﬂexi-
ble competence.
8 Affordance and ecological optics
The psychologist James J. Gibson makes several related points at a
level somewhat higher than insects. Early in The Ecological Approach to
Visual Perception, he begins a section entitled “The Mutuality of Ani-
mal and Environment” by explaining that
the words animal and environment make an inseparable pair. Each
term implies the other. No animal could exist without an envi-
ronment surrounding it. Equally, although not so obvious, an
environment implies an animal (or at least an organism) to be
surrounded. This means that the surface of the earth, millions
of years before life developed on it, was not an environment,
properly speaking.
(1979, 8)
This is not a fussy semantic quibble, but a subtle observation about
levels and units of intelligibility. We can only understand animals as
perceivers if we consider them as inseparably related to an environ-
ment, which is itself understood in terms appropriate to that animal.
Central to Gibson’s “ecological approach” is his account of what it is
that an animal perceives and how. Visual perception cannot be under-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

222
H av i n g Though t
stood, he maintains, if one starts from the perspective of physical op-
tics. A system that sees—a sighted animal—is not responsive, in the
ﬁrst instance, to physically simple properties of light, like color and
brightness, but rather to visible features of the environment that mat-
ter to it. Gibson calls such features “affordances”.
The affordances of the environment are what it offers the animal,
what it provides or furnishes, for good or ill. The verb to afford is
found in the dictionary, but the noun affordance is not. I have
made it up. I mean by it something that refers to both the
environment and the animal in a way that no existing term does.
It implies the complementarity of the animal and the environ-
ment.
(127)
So for example, a suitably sturdy and ﬂat surface could afford a place to
stand or walk to an animal of a certain sort—not to a ﬁsh, of course,
and what affords standing room to a sparrow might not to a cat (a
matter of some importance to both). Nooks can afford shelter and
seclusion, green leaves or smaller neighbors can afford lunch, larger
neighbors can afford attack, and so on—all depending on who’s look-
ing and with what interests.
What’s important (and controversial) here is not the idea of affor-
dances as such, but the claim that they can be perceived—as opposed
to inferred. “The central question for the theory of affordances is not
whether they exist and are real but whether information is available in
ambient light for perceiving them.” (140) Intuitively, the startling the-
sis is this: it can be a feature of the ambient light itself that, for instance,
something over there “looks edible” or “looks dangerous” (from here,
to a creature like me). This would have to be a very complicated
feature indeed, practically impossible to specify (in physical terms).
Gibson calls such features “high-order invariants”, and makes essen-
tially two points about them. First:
The trouble with the assumption that high-order optical invari-
ants specify high-order affordances is that experimenters, accus-
tomed to working in the laboratory with low-order stimulus
variables, cannot think of a way to measure them.
(141)
In other words, if perceptual systems “pick up” high-order invariants,
then the surfaces of the eyes and other sense organs cannot be inter-
faces—because the relevant interactions are not well-deﬁned and rela-
tively simple.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
223
The second is a point that we have seen Gibson emphasize several
times already, and moreover just what we would expect to follow from
the lack of a well-deﬁned interface.
The hypothesis of information in ambient light to specify affor-
dances is the culmination of ecological optics. The notion of
invariants that are related at one extreme to the motives and
needs of an observer and at the other extreme to the substances
and surfaces of a world provides a new approach to psychology.
(143)
This is not merely to reiterate the complementarity of the animal and
its environment, but also to associate that integration with the “high-
order” affordances and invariants that constitute their interaction.
Speciﬁc complexity in the perceptual capacities of the organism itself
is what sustains the corresponding complexity in what it perceives, via
tightly coupled, high-bandwidth interaction—at the level of descrip-
tion appropriate to understanding perception. Thus, the culmination
of ecological optics is, in our terms, the intimacy of perceiver and
perceived.
9 Transduction versus skillful interaction
So far, with the exception of the refrigerator example, all our discus-
sions have involved relatively primitive creatures or systems. This
might give the impression that intimate intermingling of mind, body,
and world—in particular, lack of mental distinctness—is characteris-
tic mainly of lower life forms, as opposed to people. Descartes, after
all, held that animals have no minds at all, and are merely physical. The
space of reasons, by contrast, is often seen as pre-eminently or even
exclusively human; and it is chieﬂy ratiocination that seems to require
input/output interfaces and transducers to enable perception and
action. (Transduction, remember, is the function that Descartes as-
signed to the pineal gland.) So maybe the lesson is not to undermine
the mind/body separation across the board, but rather to restrict it to
ourselves—the rational animals.
On the contrary, however, I want to suggest that the human mind
may be more intimately intermingled with its body and its world than
is any other, and that this is one of its distinctive advantages. More-
over, I think that Simon’s criterion of intensity of interaction, at the
relevant level of intelligibility, will be just the right tool for making
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

22 4
H av i n g Though t
this visible. Let us return to the phenomenon of skillful behavior and
perception, and consider its structure in more detail. In Part III of
What Computers Can’t Do, in a chapter entitled “The Role of the Body
in Intelligent Behavior”, Hubert L. Dreyfus writes:
Generally, in acquiring a skill—in learning to drive, dance, or
pronounce a foreign language, for example—at ﬁrst we must
slowly, awkwardly, and consciously follow the rules. But then
there comes a moment when we ﬁnally can perform automati-
cally. At this point we do not seem to be simply dropping these
same rigid rules into unconsciousness; rather we seem to have
picked up the muscular gestalt which gives our behavior a new
ﬂexibility and smoothness. The same holds for acquiring the
skill of perception. (1972/79, 248–249; second edition wording)
A “muscular gestalt”? What have the muscles got to do with it? We react
with questions like these, perhaps even with a trace of exasperation,
because of a very seductive traditional story. When we are acting
intelligently, our rational intellect is (consciously and/or unconsciously)
taking account of various facts at its disposal, ﬁguring out what to do,
and then issuing appropriate output instructions. These instructions
are converted by output transducers into physical conﬁgurations (me-
chanical forces, electric currents, chemical concentrations, …) that
result in the requisite bodily behavior. The transducers, therefore,
function as (or deﬁne) interfaces between the rational and the physical.
As such, they also provide a natural point of subdivision—in the
sense that any alternative output subsystem that responded to the
same instructions with the same behavior could be substituted with-
out making any signiﬁcant difference to the intellectual part. On that
picture, then, the muscles would fall entirely on the physical side, and
not be relevant to the intelligent (sub)system at all—even as “gestalts”.
Well, are there transducers between our minds and our bodies? From
a certain all-too-easy perspective, the question can seem obtuse: of
course there are. Almost by deﬁnition, it seems, there has to be a conver-
sion between the symbolic or conceptual contents of our minds and
the physical processes in our bodies; and that conversion just is trans-
duction. But Dreyfus is, in effect, denying this—not by denying that
there are minds or that there are bodies, but by denying that there
needs to be any interface or conversion between them.
The fateful die is already cast in the image of the intellect ﬁguring
things out and then issuing instructions. An instruction (according to
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
2 25
conventional wisdom) is a syntactic expression which, by virtue of
belonging to a suitably interpretable formal system, carries a certain
sort of semantic content. Speciﬁcally, its content does not depend on
how or whether it might be acted upon by any particular physical
output system. For instance, if I decide to type the letter ‘A’, the
content of the forthcoming instruction wouldn’t depend on it being
an instruction to my ﬁngers, as opposed to any others, or even some
robotic prosthesis. Any output system that could take that instruc-
tion and type an ‘A’—and, mutatis mutandis, other instructions and
behaviors—would do as well. The idea that there are such instruc-
tions is morally equivalent to the idea that there are transducers.
10 Output patterns that aren’t instructions
A different—and incompatible—story might go like this. There are
tens of millions (or whatever) of neural pathways leading out of my
brain (or neocortex, or whatever) into various muscle ﬁbers in my
ﬁngers, hands, wrists, arms, shoulders, and so on, and also from vari-
ous tactile and proprioceptive cells back again. Each time I type a
letter, a substantial fraction of these ﬁre at various frequencies, and in
various temporal relations to one another. But that some particular
pulse pattern, on some occasion, should result in my typing an ‘A’
depends on many contingencies, over and above just which pattern of
pulses it happens to be.
In the ﬁrst place, it depends on the lengths of my ﬁngers, the
strengths and quicknesses of my muscles, the shapes of my joints, and
the like. Of course, whatever else I might do with my hands, from
typing the rest of the alphabet to tying my shoes, would likewise
depend simultaneously on particular pulse patterns and these other
concrete contingencies. But there need be no way to “factor out” the
respective contributions of these different dependencies, such that
contents could consistently be assigned to pulse patterns independent
of which ﬁngers they’re destined for. That is to say, there need be no
way—even in principle, and with God’s own microsurgery—to re-
connect my neurons to anyone else’s ﬁngers, such that I could reliably
type or tie my shoes with them. It would be like trying to assemble the
cubes from a thousand tv sets into a single new one. But, in that case,
what any given pattern “means” depends on it being a pattern speciﬁ-
cally for my particular ﬁngers—or, to use Dreyfus’s phrase, for ﬁngers
with my “muscular gestalts”.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

226
H av i n g Though t
Perhaps an analogy would help—even if it’s fairly far fetched.
Imagine an encryption algorithm with the following three features: it
uses very large encryption keys (tens of millions of bits, just for in-
stance); cryptograms, even for quite brief messages, are comparable in
size to the keys themselves; and it is tremendously redundant, in the
sense that (for each key) countless distinct cryptograms would decode
to the same message. Now, consider, for a given key and message, all
the cryptograms that would decode to that message; and ask whether
it could make any sense to speak of what these cryptograms have in
common apart from that particular key. It’s hard to see how it could.
Yet, if individual cryptograms have any meaning at all, then these
must all have the same meaning; so either cryptograms are meaning-
less, or they mean something only in conjunction with a particular key.
Then the analogy works like this: each individual’s particular body—his
or her own muscular gestalts—functions like a large encryption key;
and the pulse patterns coming down from the brain are the crypto-
grams, which are either meaningless, or they mean something only in
conjunction with that particular body. Either way, they aren’t instruc-
tions. This is only an analogy, however, because the activity of the
ﬁngers should not be regarded as “decoding neural messages”, but
rather as an integral part of the “processing” that the brain and other
neurons also contribute to.
But even that may be overly sanguine. Whether a given efferent
neural pattern will result in a typed ‘A’ depends also on how my ﬁngers
happen already to be deployed and moving, the angle of the keyboard,
how tired I am, and so on—factors that aren’t constant, even for the
short run. On different occasions, the same pattern will give different
letters, and different patterns the same letter. The reason that I can
type, despite all this, is that there are comparably rich afferent patterns
forming a kind of feedback loop that constantly “recalibrates” the
system. (In terms of the above analogy, it’s as if the encryption keys
were not only large, but ever changing—the new ones being sent
upstream all the time.) But that would mean that the “content” of any
given neural output pattern would depend not only on the particular
body that it’s connected to, but also on the concrete details of its current
worldly situation.
If there were simple instructions—well-deﬁned, repeatable mes-
sages—coming down the nerves from my brain to my ﬁngers, then
that narrow-bandwidth channel could be an interface to my ﬁngers as
physical transducers. Accordingly, it would be possible to divide the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
227
system there, and substitute “equivalent” ﬁngers, in place of mine.
Such an architecture is implicitly assumed by much of philosophy and
most of ai. By contrast, the alternative that I have been sketching sees
these nerves as carrying high-bandwidth interactions (high-intensity,
in Simon’s terms), without any simple, well-deﬁned structure. Thus,
by the same criterion, we would not get two relatively independent
separable components—a rational mind and a physical body, meeting
at an interface—but rather a single closely-knit unity.
11 Speciﬁc complexity
Nerve ﬁbers, of course, aren’t the only high-bandwidth channel be-
tween my ﬁngers and other parts of my body. The immune system, for
instance, is extraordinarily complex and responsive. And even the
circulatory transportation of metabolites and by-products carries, in
the technical sense, a lot of “information”. Why focus on the nerves?
Once the question is asked, the answer is easy to see. When we are
trying to understand intelligence—as manifested, say, in intelligent
behavior—we look to the complexity that is speciﬁc to that behavior.
The distribution of antibodies and proteins to my hands, while no
doubt essential to my typing ability, doesn’t differ very much depend-
ing which letter I type; indeed, it doesn’t depend much on whether I’m
typing, writing longhand, or tying bows.
But the complexity of the nervous system is task speciﬁc, and in
two different ways. In the ﬁrst place, at any moment, the pulse pat-
terns needed for typing an ‘A’ differ from those needed for typing a ‘B’,
not to mention from those needed for writing a ‘B’. The skills in
question just are the abilities to get these things done right. And
getting them right—this letter as opposed to that one—depends in
speciﬁc detail on the actual pulse patterns, in a way that it does not
depend on any details of my immune defenses. Second, as I acquired
these skills, various more or less permanent changes were made in my
neural pathways, in implementing all the relevant habits and reﬂexes.
(Dreyfus, remember, was discussing learning.) And these changes,
likewise, were speciﬁc to the skills learned—in a way that, for exam-
ple, increases in circulatory capacity wouldn’t have been.
The point, however, is not to focus exclusively on the nervous
system. Far from it. As emphasized above, actual performance
depends on a number of other speciﬁc contingencies besides nerve
impulses. Similarly, a range of other speciﬁcally relevant permanent
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 2 8
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
changes are involved in the acquisition of skills. Thus, muscles of the
requisite strengths, shapes, and limberness must be developed and
maintained—differently for different skills. This is most conspicuous
for very demanding manual abilities, like musicianship, surgery, and
stage magic. Indeed, a professional violinist must acquire speciﬁc cal-
louses, perhaps subtle grooves in the tips of her phalanges, even a
certain set of the jaw. 
The unity of mind and body can be promoted wholesale, perhaps,
on the basis of general principles of monism or the unity of science.
Such arguments are indifferent to variety and substructure within
either the mental or the physical: everything is unceremoniously
lumped together at one swoop. Here, by contrast, integration is of-
fered at retail. In attempting to undermine the idea of an interface
between the mind and the ﬁngers, I am staking no claim to the liver or
intestines. (Simon may be right about glands and viscera.) The idea is
not to wipe out all distinctions and homogenize everything on general
principles, but rather to call certain very familiar divisions into ques-
tion, on the basis of considerations highly peculiar to them.
12 Getting the whole rug smooth
If a rug doesn’t ﬁt, then ﬂattening it out in one place will just move the
hump to another. If there’s no interface between the brain and the
ﬁngers, then maybe it just is (has to be?) somewhere else. One might
imagine, for instance, that the efferent nerves are high bandwidth
because they (along with much of the spinal cord and some of the
brain) are all part of a very sophisticated physical output system—the
psycho-physical interface itself being further “in”. It could be that
ratiocination (or representation more generally) occurs only in the
cortex, or only the neocortex, or whatever. Then the relevant transduc-
tions would have to take place within the brain, between one part of it
and another—not so far from the pineal gland, as luck might have it.
Now, my question is: Why would anyone ever be tempted by such
a supposition? And the answer, surely, is the same presupposition that
the mental must be different in kind—categorically different—from
anything bodily or worldly; so, there must be some interface some-
where. For, without that a priori conviction, the obvious evidence of
neuroanatomy would be decisive: the neural pathways from percep-
tion to action are high-bandwidth all the way through. If anything, the
bandwidth increases toward the center, rather than narrowing down.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
2 29
There’s just no plausible constriction where well-deﬁned instructions
might be getting converted; that is, there’s no place where a counter-
part of the above argument against efferent transduction wouldn’t
apply.
Well then, might the hump slip out in the other direction, out past
the ﬁngers? It cannot be denied that the keyboard itself is a well-
deﬁned interface. No matter how complicated and various are the
ways of striking the keys, the result is always limited to character
codes from a set of a few hundred, in a slow, unambiguous, serial
order. (It’s not for nothing that a teletype was earlier our paradigm of
a low-bandwidth device.) By these lights, then, the meaningful (men-
tal) extends all the way to the ﬁngertips—maybe a touch beyond—
and then interfaces to the physical world. This is, to be sure, a surpris-
ing fall-back position for defenders of mental/physical transduc-
tion—certainly not Cartesian in spirit. But could it work?
The ﬁrst clue that it cannot is the artiﬁciality of the example.
Typing at a keyboard, though genuinely skillful activity, is quite atypi-
cal in the digital character of its success conditions. Dreyfus speaks
instead of driving, dancing, or pronouncing a foreign language. These,
too, are hard to learn; but there is no simple, well-deﬁned test for
whether the learner has got it right or wrong. The point is not merely
that, like cutting wood or matching colors, you can be more or less
right, that errors come in degrees. Rather, for driving, dancing, and
even pronunciation, there is no well-deﬁned standard specifying the
difference between correct and incorrect. This is not to deny that
there is a difference between doing well and doing badly, or that
experts can tell. Quite the contrary: the claim is that “telling the
difference” is itself a skill—one that is likewise hard to learn, and for
which there can be no exact speciﬁcation of what is done, or how.
Even driving, dancing, and pronunciation, however, are more so-
cially circumscribed and narrowly delimited than most of what we do.
From cooking to love making, from playing with the kids to shopping
in the mall, our lives are ﬁlled with activities that exhibit human
learning and human intelligence, that some of us are better at than
others (as the good ones can tell), but for which none of us could
articulate a deﬁnitive standard. This is the character of skillful being
in the world in general. The simple, interface-like deﬁniteness of what
counts as accuracy in typing or color matching is, by contrast, the
special case. So the hump in the rug can’t slide outward either. We
have to make it all lie ﬂat.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

230
H av i n g  Though t
13 Vicarious coping
If there is no determinate interface between the mind and the body, or
between the mind and the world, does this mean that the body and
the world are somehow mental, or that the mind is corporeal and
mundane? Yes, in a way, both. But not in a way that washes out all
distinctions, rendering the three terms synonymous, and therefore
redundant. As always, it is a matter of what we are trying to under-
stand. When we are studying anatomy and physiology, the brain is
relatively separable from the rest of the organism; the organism itself
is even more separable from its environment; and the mind isn’t in the
picture at all. When, on the other hand, our topic is intelligence, then
the mind is very much to the point, and its scope and limits are part of
the issue.
Intelligence abides in the meaningful. This is not to say that it is
surrounded by or directed toward the meaningful, as if they were two
separate phenomena, somehow related to one another. Rather, intelli-
gence has its very existence in the meaningful as such—in something
like the way a nation’s wealth lies in its productive capacity, or a
corporation’s strength may consist in its market position. Of course,
the meaningful, here, cannot be wholly passive and inert, but must
include also activity and process. Intelligence, then, is nothing other
than the overall interactive structure of meaningful behavior and ob-
jects. This is a view shared by scientists and philosophers, all the way
from the most classical ai to its most radical critics—including,
among others, Simon and Dreyfus. Why?
Perhaps the basic idea can be brought out this way. Intelligence is
the ability to deal reliably with more than the present and the mani-
fest. That’s surely not an adequate deﬁnition of intelligence, but it
does get at something essential, and, in particular, something that has
to do with meaning. For instance, representations—especially mental
representations—are often taken as the archetype of the meaningful,
and that wherein intelligence abides. The connection is straightfor-
ward. Representations are clearly an asset in coping with the absent
and covert, insofar as they themselves are present, and “stand in for”
something else—something absent—which they “represent”. This
“standing in for” is their meaningfulness; and it is what makes intelli-
gence possible.
 How does it work? A typical sort of story goes like this. Individual
representations can function as such only by participating, in concert
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
231
with many others, in a larger and norm-governed scheme of represen-
tation. Then, assuming the scheme itself is in good shape, and is used
correctly, a system can vicariously keep track of and explore absent
and covert represented phenomena by keeping track of and exploring
their present and manifest representational stand-ins. (Really, what it
means for a scheme to be “in good shape” is for this coping at one
remove to be generally feasible.) In effect, the structure of the extant
representations, in conjunction with that of the scheme itself, “en-
code” something of the structure of what is represented, in such a way
that the latter can be accommodated or taken account of, even when
out of view.
An alternative understanding of intelligence might keep the basic
framework of this account, while modifying certain speciﬁcs. Our
discussion of transduction, for instance, may have cast some suspicion
on the idea of mental representation, or even of mind/world separa-
tion. But it need not undermine the broader view that intelligence
abides in the meaningful, or that it consists in an ability to deal with
the unobvious. Could there be a way to retain these latter, but with-
out the former? That is, could there be a way to understand the
effectiveness of intelligence in terms of meaningfulness, but without
representations or a separated inner realm?
14 The world itself as meaningful
Not long after the passage about skills and muscular gestalts, Dreyfus
addresses exactly this question. 
When we are at home in the world, the meaningful objects
embedded in their context of references among which we live are
not a model of the world stored in our mind or brain: they are the
world itself.
(265–266)
There are really several (closely related) points being made in this
dense and powerful sentence. First, there is, so to speak, the locus of
the meaningful; second its character; and third, our situation with
regard to it. The meaningful is not in our mind or brain, but is instead
essentially worldly. The meaningful is not a model—that is, it’s not
representational—but is instead objects embedded in their context of
references. And we do not store the meaningful inside of ourselves,
but rather live and are at home in it. These are all summed up in the
slogan that the meaningful is the world itself. (This may be reminiscent,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

232
H aving Thought
anachronistically, of Brooks’s later but less radical dictum that the
world is its own best model.)
The ﬁrst thesis, in its negative aspect, is simply a repudiation of the
view, almost ubiquitous in cognitive science and traditional philoso-
phy, that the meaningful objects amidst which intelligence abides are
primarily inner. “Classical” cognitive scientists restrict these inner ob-
jects to symbolic expressions and models, whereas others are more
liberal about mental images, cognitive maps, and maybe even “distrib-
uted representations”. But Dreyfus wants to extend the meaningful
well beyond the inner, in any traditional sense: meaningful objects are
“the world itself”.
It is important to guard against a possible misunderstanding. Ev-
eryone would allow that worldly objects can be meaningful in a deriva-
tive way, as when we assign to them meanings that we somehow
already have. You and I, for instance, could agree to use a certain
signal to mean, say, that the British are coming; and then it would
indeed mean that—but only derivatively from our decision. (Many
philosophers and scientists would hold further that this is the only
way that external objects can come to be meaningful.) By contrast,
when Dreyfus says that meaningful objects are the world itself, he
means original meaning, not just derivative. That is, intelligence itself
abides “out” in the world, not just “inside”—contra cognitive science,
classical or otherwise.
The second thesis, in its negative aspect, is again a repudiation of
an almost universal assumption: that the meaningful is primarily rep-
resentational. As before, the target is not only the classical symbolic
approach, but most of its more liberal successors. These two negative
points combined constitute a rejection of what is sometimes called
“the representational theory of the mind”. In its positive aspect, that
the meaningful is “objects embedded in their context of references”,
the thesis may call for some explanation. Clearly what Dreyfus has in
mind are tools and other paraphernalia. What is the sense in which
these are meaningful?
We might begin by saying, very roughly, that the meaningful in
general is that which is signiﬁcant in terms of something beyond
itself, and subject to normative evaluation according to that signiﬁ-
cance. Then we could see representations as familiar paradigms of the
meaningful in this sense. That in terms of which a representation is
signiﬁcant is that which it purports to represent—its object—and it
is evaluated according to whether it represents that object correctly or
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
233
accurately. When cognitive scientists and philosophers speak of
meaningful inner entities, they always mean representations (nothing
other than representations has ever been proposed as inner and mean-
ingful). Descartes, in effect, invented the “inner realm” as a repository
for cognitive representations—above all, representations of what’s
outside of it—and cognitive science hasn’t really changed that at all.
But when Dreyfus holds that meaningful objects are the world
itself, he doesn’t just (or even mostly) mean representations. The
world can’t be representation “all the way down”. But that’s not to say
that it can’t all be meaningful, because there are more kinds of signiﬁ-
cance than representational content. A number of philosophers ear-
lier in the twentieth century—Dewey, Heidegger, Wittgenstein, and
Merleau-Ponty, to name a few of the most prominent—have made
much of the signiﬁcance of equipment, public places, community
practices, and the like. A hammer, for instance, is signiﬁcant beyond
itself in terms of what it’s for: driving nails into wood, by being wielded
in a certain way, in order to build something, and so on. The nails, the
wood, the project, and the carpenter him or herself, are likewise
caught up in this “web of signiﬁcance”, in their respective ways. These
are the meaningful objects that are the world itself; and none of them
is a representation.
There’s an obvious worry here that the whole point depends on a
pun. Of course, hammers and the like are “signiﬁcant” (and even “mean-
ingful”) in the sense that they’re important to us, and interdependent
with other things in their proper use. But that’s not the same as
meaning in the sense of bearing content or having a semantics. Cer-
tainly! That’s why they’re not representations. So it’s agreed: they are
meaningful in a broader sense, though not in a narrower one. The real
question is: Which sense matters in the context of understanding
human intelligence?
15 Knowing the way
The third thesis is that we live in the meaningful—that is, in the
world—and are at home there. Part of the point, to be sure, is that we
reside in the midst of our paraphernalia, and are accustomed to it. But
the more fundamental insight must connect the meaningful as such
with the nature of intelligence. It is clear enough how tools can extend
our capacity to cope with the present and manifest; that is more or
less the deﬁnition of a tool. But how do they help us deal with the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 3 4
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
absent and covert? Or, rather: aren’t those tools that do help us with
the absent and covert precisely, and for that very reason, representa-
tions? Not at all.
Consider the ability to get to San Jose. That’s a capacity to deal
with something out of view—a distant city—and so just what is
characteristic of intelligence. Moreover, a cognitive scientist will in-
stinctively attribute it to some sort of representation, either an inter-
nal or external map or set of instructions, which an intelligent system
either consists in or can consult and follow. But that’s not the only
way to achieve the effect. A quite different approach would be to keep
a stable of horses, one pre-trained for each likely destination. Then all
that the capable person would need to do is pick the right horse, stay
on it, and get off at the end. Here we’re inclined to say that it’s the
horse that knows the way, not the rider—or maybe that the full ability
is really collaborative, say like Gilbert and Sullivan’s. At any rate, the
horse’s contribution is not to be ignored.
Now let me tell you how I get to San Jose: I pick the right road
(Interstate 880 south), stay on it, and get off at the end.1 Can we say
that the road knows the way to San Jose, or perhaps that the road and
I collaborate? I don’t think this is as crazy as it may ﬁrst sound. The
complexity of the road (its shape) is comparable to that of the task
and highly speciﬁc thereto; moreover, staying on the road requires
constant high-bandwidth interaction with this very complexity. In
other words, the internal guidance systems and the road itself must be
closely coupled, in part because much of the “information” upon
which the ability depends is “encoded” in the road. Thus, much as an
internal map or program, learned and stored in memory, would (pace
Simon) have to be deemed part of an intelligent system that used it to
get to San Jose, so I suggest the road should be considered integral to
my ability.
Don’t be distracted by the fact that the road was designed and built
by intelligent engineers who, no doubt, knew the route. Even if we
might want to extend the collaboration in this case, the engineers are
not essential in the way that road itself is; for some “roads”—forest
trails, for instance—need not be intelligently designed, yet the argu-
ment works the same for them. A more serious worry is how narrow
the example is: intelligent navigation ought to be more ﬂexible, allow-
ing, say, for alternative destinations and starting points. And then it
might seem that the intelligence lies in this adaptability—knowing how
to get there from the east as well as from the north, or where to turn
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
2 35
off to get to Palo Alto or Modesto instead—which is internal after all.
But, in the ﬁrst place, even that ﬂexibility is mostly encoded in the
world, in the road signs that enable one to choose and stay on the
“right” road. And, in the meantime, the road itself still holds the
information for getting from one junction to the next. Most impor-
tant, however, is to remember the point: it’s not that all of the struc-
ture of intelligence is “external”, but only that some of it is, in a way
that is integral to the rest.
16 Abiding in the meaningful
Still, the road example is quite limited. How much of what a culture
has learned about life and its environment is “encoded” in its para-
phernalia and practices? Consider, for example, agriculture—without
question, a basic manifestation of human intelligence, and dependant
on a vast wealth of information accumulated through the centuries.
Well, where has this information accumulated? Crucial elements of
that heritage, I want to claim, are embodied in the shapes and
strengths of the plow, the yoke, and the harness, as well as the prac-
tices for building and using them. The farmer’s learned skills are
essential too; but these are nonsense apart from the speciﬁc tools they
involve, and vice versa. Their interaction must be high-bandwidth, in
real time. Hence, they constitute an essential unity—a unity that
incorporates overall a considerable expertise about the workability of
the earth, the needs of young plants, water retention, weed control,
root development, and so on.
The structure of an intricate and established institution can like-
wise be an integral contribution to an understanding of how, say, to
build cars or manage a city. That the departments are related this way,
that the facilities for that are over there, that these requests must be
submitted to those ofﬁces on such and such forms—all of this consti-
tutes, if not a theory, at least an essential part of the architecture of a
very considerable overall competence. Such competence is as distinc-
tively human as is any other sophisticated art or technology. Yet, not
only is it not the competence of any single individual, it is also not the
sum of the competencies of all the individuals—for that sum would
not include the structure of established interrelationships and institu-
tional procedures, not to mention the physical plant, which are pre-
requisite to the whole. The point is not merely that organizations
evolve in functionally effective ways, as do insects and trees, but rather
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

236
H av i n g Though t
that the structure of an institution is implemented in the high-band-
width intelligent interactions among individuals, as well as between
individuals and their paraphernalia. Furthermore, the expertise of
those individuals could not be what it is apart from their participation
in that structure. Consequently, the intelligence of each is itself intelli-
gible only in terms of their higher unity.
Even in so self-conscious a domain as a scientiﬁc laboratory,
whether research or development oriented, much of the intelligent
ability to investigate, distinguish, and manipulate natural phenomena
is embodied in the specialized instrumentation, the manual and per-
ceptual skills required to use and maintain it, and the general labora-
tory ethos of cleanliness, deliberation, and record keeping. Without
these, science would be impossible; they are integral to it. The point is
not that theory is baseless without evidence, or useless without appli-
cations. Rather, apart from its intimate involvement in highly speciﬁc
complex activities in highly speciﬁc complex circumstances, there’s no
such thing as scientiﬁc intelligence—it doesn’t make any sense. For all
its explicitness and abstraction, science is as worldly as agriculture,
manufacturing, and government. 
I have postponed till last the most obvious externalization of
human intelligence—texts, images, maps, diagrams, programs, and
the like—not because I underestimate their importance, but because
they are so similar to what is traditionally supposed to be in the mind.
That poses two dangers. First, it distracts attention from the radical-
ness of the claim that intelligence abides in the meaningful world: not
just books and records, but roads and plows, ofﬁces, laboratories, and
communities. Second, it makes it too easy for a traditionalist to think:
“External representations are not really integral to intelligence, but are
merely devices for conveying or restoring to intelligence proper—the
inner mind—contents which it might otherwise lack.” By now, how-
ever, these dangers will (I hope) have abated. So it can safely be
acknowledged that (to borrow Simon’s phrase) the “great furniture of
information” that civilization has accumulated belongs with the rest
of its furniture in the abode of its understanding.
17 Conclusion
If we are to understand mind as the locus of intelligence, we cannot
follow Descartes in regarding it as separable in principle from the
body and the world. I have argued that such separability would have
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Mind embodied and embedde d
237
to coincide with narrow-bandwidth interfaces, among the interactions
that are relevant to intelligence. In recent decades, a commitment to
understanding intelligence as rational problem solving—sometimes
assumed a priori—has supported the existence of these interfaces by
identifying them with transducers. Broader approaches, freed of that
prejudicial commitment, can look again at perception and action, at
skillful involvement with public equipment and social organization,
and see not principled separation but all sorts of close coupling and
functional unity. As our ability to cope with the absent and covert,
human intelligence abides in the meaningful—which, far from being
restricted to representations, extends to the entire human world.
Mind, therefore, is not incidentally but intimately embodied and inti-
mately embedded in its world.
Note:
1 The “road to San Jose” example is inspired by a discussion in
Batali (unpublished).
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Truth
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

ch a pt e r  t e n
Objective
Perception
1 Perceiving objects as such
I want to distinguish and characterize what I take to be a special case
among broadly sensory or perceptual phenomena. Some might main-
tain that this case is the only genuine case of perception properly so
called; but I will sidestep that largely terminological issue, and simply
specify the kind of case I mean as objective perception—not worrying
about what to call other kinds of case. It is part of my view, though
not part of what I will argue for, that objective perception, in this
sense, is exclusive to people. This is not to deny that, in some other or
wider sense or senses, animals perceive too; nor is it to deny that
people also perceive in some or all of these other senses; nor, ﬁnally, is
it to deny that some other senses of perception may also be distinctive
of people (such as aesthetic perception). It is only to claim that at least
some human perception is “objective” in a special sense, and no animal
perception is.1 Though I will not be defending this claim, I will have it
always in mind, and will occasionally take it for granted in choosing
illustrations.
The qualiﬁer ‘objective’ is intended to suggest perception of objects as
objects. Thus, it is very much part of the undertaking to spell out what
is meant by the object of a perceiving. It should be clear at the outset,
therefore, that ‘object’ is used in a formal sense, to identify a role or
position vis-à-vis (for instance) perception; in particular, it does not
carry any implications about the nature of the objects perceived—
such as that they be substantial, corporeal, or otherwise thing-like.
Objectivity in perception is a kind of structure that involves the per-
ceiving, that which is perceived, and the relation between them. The
aim is to delineate this distinctive structure and its presuppositions.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 42
H av i n g Though t
Several familiar problem areas in the philosophy of perception will
be seen to converge in this topic, among them: (i) picking out what is
perceived from among the various causal antecedents of the perceiv-
ing; (ii) the normativity of objective perception (that is, the possibil-
ity of misperception); (iii) the respect in which objective perception
depends on an understanding of what is perceived; (iv) the relevance
of language to the possibility of objective perception; and (v) the
prerequisite character of the perceiving self or subject. On the other
hand, a number of other important issues connected with perception
will not enter directly into the present discussion, including in partic-
ular: (i) the peculiar “of-this-ness” or indexicality of perceptual con-
tent; (ii) the richness of (apparently) ineffable yet determinate detail
in perceptual content; and (iii) the special connection (if any) be-
tween perception and imagery or imagination.
2 Dretske on the object perceived
It is convenient to begin with the identiﬁcation of what is perceived—
the “object” in a broad sense—from among the many causal anteced-
ents of the perceiver’s perceiving. We can take for granted that, at least
in ordinary sensory perception, the perceived object is one (or some)
of those antecedents. The question is: Which one? Or, rather, the
question is: On what principled basis can we identify one among
them as “the” object? For instance, if I look at and see a bicycle, part of
the cause of that perceiving in me is the presence and properties of the
bike—particularly those properties that determine in detail how it
reﬂects light. But other important causal factors include the ambient
light around me (as reﬂected in part by the bike), the source of the
illumination of the bike in the ﬁrst place, the source of the bike itself,
the functioning of my visual system, and so on. We want to say that
what I perceive, the object of my perception, is the bicycle, and none
of these other factors. The question is: Why?
Dretske (1981, chapter 6, especially pages 155–168) suggests that the
object of a perceptual state is whatever that state carries information
about in a primary way. “Carrying information” is the operative no-
tion. Roughly: given conditions of kind K, a’s being F carries the
information that b is G just in case a could not have been F in such
conditions had b not been G. To put it anthropomorphically, a’s being
F carries the information that b is G if you can “tell” from a’s being F
(and the conditions being K) that b is G. It carries this information in
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
2 43
a primary way if it does not carry it “via” any other fact, such as c’s
being H. Intuitively, to say that a’s being F carries the information that
b is G via c’s being H means that it carries that information only because
it carries the information that c is H, and c’s being H carries in turn the
information that b is G.2
Dretske illustrates the point by explaining why, when someone
rings the doorbell, we hear the bell ringing but we don’t hear the
button being pushed. Under normal conditions, our perceptual re-
sponse—what Dretske calls the “perceptual experience”—carries
both the information that the button is pushed and the information
that the bell is ringing. This is because we wouldn’t have that experi-
ence if the button weren’t pushed, nor would we have it if the bell
weren’t ringing. But the only reason we wouldn’t have it if the button
weren’t pushed is that we wouldn’t have it if the bell weren’t ringing,
and (under normal conditions) the bell wouldn’t ring if the button
weren’t pushed. Hence, the information about the button is carried
via the information about the bell.
To see how this works, consider the (abnormal) conditions in
which the bell wires occasionally short, thereby ringing the bell with-
out the button being pushed. Under those conditions, the same expe-
rience would still carry the information that the bell was ringing, but
it would no longer carry the information that the button was
pushed—precisely because the bell’s ringing would itself no longer
carry that information. So, even in normal conditions, when the per-
ceptual experience does carry the information that the button is
pushed, it does so only via the bell’s ringing. Hence, the experience
does not carry the information about the button in a primary, but
only a secondary way. And this is why, according to Dretske, the
button is not the object of the perception. Even though we can tell that
the button is pushed, we do not perceive that it is (unless we happen
also to be outside watching). What we hear is not the button but the
bell.
The more interesting and difﬁcult question is why the experience
carries even the information about the bell in a primary way. It might
be argued, for instance, that the experience also carries the informa-
tion that the air or our eardrum is vibrating in a certain manner, and
that, moreover, it carries the information that the bell is ringing only
via this information about the air or eardrum.3 In that case, only the
latter information would be carried in a primary way; and then, by the
above logic, it would have to be conceded that what we really hear,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 44
H av i n g Though t
even under normal conditions, is the air or our eardrum, rather than
the bell.
Dretske’s reply to this challenge is ingenious, but ultimately, I
think, unsuccessful. It has two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, he points out
that one thing’s being the case can carry the information that another
is, without carrying any information about the intervening causal pro-
cesses, if (in the relevant conditions) any of several different causal
processes might have occurred, and each would have had the same
result. Thus, suppose that the mantle bowl only has lemon drops in it
when one of the children buys some, and that the children only buy
lemon drops when Grampa provides the funds. Then, if there are
lemon drops in the bowl today, that fact carries the information that
Grampa recently paid, but it carries no information as to which grand-
child fetched—because they’re all equally eager and able. A fortiori, it
can’t carry the former information via carrying the latter.
The second stage, then, is to argue that the different ways the air or
eardrum might vibrate when we hear the bell ring are like the differ-
ent grandchildren that might fetch the candy for Grampa. That is, the
perceptual experience must have been caused by some vibration or
other that could only have been caused (in the relevant conditions) by
the bell ringing; but there are any number of such vibrations that
would have sufﬁced with no difference in effect. Under those condi-
tions, the experience would carry the information that the bell is
ringing without carrying any information as to which of the sufﬁcient
vibrations mediated causally. Thus, the distal information (about the
bell) is not carried via any more proximal information (about how the
air or eardrum is vibrating), for the simple reason that the proximal
information is not carried (by that experience) at all. And this is why
it is the bell which we hear after all.
How is this argument made out? Dretske appeals to perceptual
constancy effects, which, as he rightly points out, are ubiquitous. We
do not perceive the table as changing shape when we walk around it,
changing size when we approach, or changing color as daylight gives
way to dusk and then to candles, even though the proximal stimuli—
the patterns of light entering our eyes or the patterns of neuron ﬁrings
in our retinas—vary dramatically. Thus, we see the table as equally
square, whether our vantage is such that its retinal projection is itself
square, rhomboid, or trapezoid. So, (under normal conditions) the
perception carries the information that the table is square, without
carrying any information as to which retinal projection happened, on
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
2 45
this occasion, to mediate the perceiving causally. Accordingly, it car-
ries the information about the table in a primary way—not via carry-
ing information about any proximal stimulus—and hence it is the
table which we see.
The essential difﬁculty here lies in the characterization of the prox-
imal stimulus. Note that the argument depends on the claim that the
same perceptual experience of the same object can be mediated by
different stimuli; for, if only one stimulus could mediate, then the
experience would carry information about it, and hence the informa-
tion about the object would not be carried in a primary way. For
purposes of discussion, we can accept the suggestion, based on per-
ceptual constancy, that in some sense the experience and the object
remain the same; the question concerns the sense in which the respec-
tive proximal stimuli are different. Of course, it’s qualitative differ-
ence—difference in kind—that’s at issue; and whether two instances
differ in kind depends on which kinds are being considered.
Which kinds need Dretske consider? Since the argument depends
on a nonexistence claim, it must, in effect, consider all kinds. For if
there were any single kind of stimulus that mediated all and only the
constant perceivings (same kind of perception of the same kind of
object), then the perception would carry the information that the
stimulus was of that kind, and hence would carry the information
about the distal object only via the information about the stimulus.
Dretske points out that there are respects in which the stimuli differ:
some are rhomboid projections, some trapezoid, and so on. But that
isn’t enough; he must argue that there is no respect in which these
stimuli (and only these) are all alike.
Of course, such a kind would not be as simple as the shape of an
instantaneous optical projection on the retina. And Dretske even
mentions (1981, 164), as plausible explanations of constancy phenom-
ena, the existence of “‘higher order’ variables in the stimulus array”
and “global characteristics of the entire stimulus pattern” to which our
sensory systems are sensitive.4 Unaccountably, however, he never con-
siders the possibility that such “higher order” and more “global” stim-
ulus kinds might undermine his account of why the stimulus itself is
not perceived. That is, he never considers the possibility that the
perceptual response carries the information that the (proximal) stim-
ulus is of such a (higher order, global) kind, and thus carries informa-
tion about the (distal) object only via that information about the
stimulus.5
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 4 6
H av i n g  Though t
What’s worse, it seems that there must be such kinds, if sensory
perception is to be possible at all. For if one can reliably recognize the
squareness of the table from varying perspectives, then there must be
something—something higher order, global, relative to context, or
whatever—normally common to all and only the stimuli from such
objects, on pain of rendering perception magical. To be sure, percep-
tion is not 100% reliable, in part because stimuli of the relevant kinds
can be produced artiﬁcially (or accidentally) even when the corre-
sponding objects are not present. But this is no help to Dretske. Quite
the contrary: it not only suggests that there are the stimulus kinds that
his account can’t allow, but also that perceptual responses track these
kinds primarily, and the object kinds only via them.
3 The objects of chess perception
So far, the question has been: Why, despite being via (proximal)
stimuli, is perception of (distal) objects. The answer, as we have seen,
cannot depend on the absence of suitable kinds for the stimuli to
instantiate. Thus, presumably it must depend instead on something
positive about the objects themselves, and about perceiving them. It is
crucial, however, not to suppose at the outset that objects are an un-
problematic ﬁxed point, and the only issue is how perception gets to
be of them. In particular, we must not tacitly presuppose that being an
object is tantamount to being a temporally and spatially cohesive
corporeal lump. Rather, the “objecthood” of perceptual objects and
the “of-ness” of perception go hand in hand, and are intelligible only in
terms of one another, something like the interdependence of target
and aim, or puzzle and solution. So, the deeper question is: How and
why is such a structure—what we might call the structure of objectivity—
imposed on the physics and physiology of sensation?
In order to avoid the prejudicial presupposition that we know in
advance what “objects” are, I shall turn temporarily to a different sort
of example, one in which the temptation to equate ‘object’ with ‘body’
is perhaps less compelling. In this context, it will be possible to ask
what it is about the objects that lets them be objective, without the
distraction of supposed “obviousness”. That is, the question can really
be confronted and maybe even answered. On that basis, then, we will
be able to return to the case of ordinary corporeal “things” with clearer
horizons.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
2 47
The special case I want to consider is chess, when the game is
played in a visible medium—that is, such that one can see positions,
threats, moves, and the like. I can, for instance, see you castling, early
in the midgame; a little later, I can see your knight simultaneously
threatening my queen and rook, in a so-called knight fork; and, before
long, I can even see the untenability of my entire king-side defense,
and conclude that I might as well resign. We should not try to imag-
ine that these perceptual abilities are all built up out of a handful of
“primitive” or “atomic” abilities, such as identifying the individual
pieces and squares. I can recognize a knight fork just as “immediately”
as I can recognize a knight or a square; and it may not even be
possible to deﬁne ‘untenable king side’ in terms of pieces and loca-
tions—suggesting that they can only be perceived as gestalts.
What’s involved in seeing these objects? An instructive ﬁrst indica-
tion is the fact that dogs and cats can’t see them at all. Without
broaching, for the moment, the question of what exactly they do see,
we can be quite sure that no dog or cat could see even a rook as such
on the k2 square, never mind the power, daring, or foolishness of that
position. And the reason is not far to ﬁnd: dogs and cats don’t have a
clue about chess. The very possibility of such a game, and all that it
entails, is utterly alien to them. We might gather, then, that some
grasp or understanding of the game of chess, and maybe also of games
more generally, is prerequisite to any ability to perceive the phenom-
ena manifested in chess play. But it will be worth the trouble to
proceed more slowly, and explore what such a grasp amounts to, and
why it is required.
Surely no creature or system can see a given conﬁguration as a
knight fork without having some sense of what a knight fork is. To
put it in a familiar but perhaps misleading terminology, nothing can
apply a concept unless it has that concept.6 Of course, having a sense
(or “concept”) of what something is cannot be merely an ability to
detect it reliably, or discriminate it from other things; locks, for in-
stance, reliably detect the keys that ﬁt them, and it’s not out of the
question that pigeons could be trained to discriminate (for a given
chess set) positions containing knight forks.
In the case of chess, however, even the discrimination problem is
harder than that; for chess sets can be implemented in all sorts of
styles and media, from labeled slips of paper or computer-screen icons
to costumed palace servants or elaborately painted helicopters. Knight
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 4 8
H av i n g Though t
forks are equally knight forks in any of these sets; but, to see them, a
perceiver would have to “abstract from” the gross and conspicuous
differences of implementation, and attend only to the chess-relevant
features of the conﬁgurations.
Indeed, the matter is still more complicated, because other games,
quite different from chess, can be played with the board and tokens
that we ordinarily call chess sets. And it could well happen that, in the
course of such a game, an arrangement occurs that would be a knight
fork were chess being played. But, in fact, it’s nothing like a knight
fork, because, in this game, the pieces move (or are used) completely
differently—the token that would typically implement a knight in
chess doesn’t implement a knight in this domain at all. So, in order to
see that a certain conﬁguration is a knight fork, a perceiver must ﬁrst
be able to see, or otherwise appreciate, that it has occurred in the
midst of a chess game.
These complementary considerations, that chess can be played in
widely different media, and that widely different games can be played
in the same media, together with the fact that knight forks can occur
(and be perceived) in all of the former but none of the latter, show
that the ability to perceive knight forks presupposes some grasp or
understanding of the game of chess—at least enough to tell when it’s
being played, regardless of medium. The same point is even more
obvious for seeing that a king-side defense is untenable; and a little
reﬂection shows that it is equally true for seeing that some piece is a
knight (a chess knight), or anything else that occurs only in chess
games. Chess games are a kind of pattern, and chess phenomena can
only occur within this pattern, as subpatterns of it. The point about
different media and different games is that these subpatterns would
not be what they are, and hence could not be recognized, except as
subpatterns of a superordinate pattern with the speciﬁc structure of
chess—not a pattern of shape or color, therefore, but a pattern at
what we might call “the chess level”. To put it more metaphysically, the
game of chess is constitutive for chess phenomena, and therefore some
grasp of it is prerequisite to their perceivability as such.
The pivotal phrase, “some grasp or understanding”, has so far been
left dangerously vague. It is all too easy to gloss this grasp as: knowing
the rules (including the starting and goal conﬁgurations) that deﬁne
the game—what one might get by reading Hoyle or the instructions
on the box. But there are several reasons to resist this temptation. In
the ﬁrst place, it’s not obvious that reading (and understanding) the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
2 49
rules is the same as, or even sufﬁcient for, understanding the game.
Second, and more to the point, it’s not obvious that knowing the rules
is required for understanding the game, at least not if knowing is
taken in a sense that implies discursive cognizance of the rules in
some explicit formulation (such as one gets by reading). But third,
and most important, chess is serving here just as an example; the
hope, without which the example would not repay the effort, is to
generalize its lessons to less specialized cases—in particular, to cases
for which, though there are constitutive prerequisites, these prerequi-
sites have never been (and perhaps cannot ever be) articulated in any
“rules according to Hoyle”.
4 Chess objects without language
Too often, I believe, philosophers take it on faith that what essentially
distinguishes people is language—“essentially” in the sense that all
our other interesting differentia (society, morality, objectivity, self-
understanding, history, science, normativity, sense of humor, …) ﬂow
from, or at least necessarily involve, this one. It seems to me, on the
contrary, that some of these—objectivity, in particular—are funda-
mentally independent of language, and that we misunderstand them if
we overlook this independence. Accordingly, I want now to indulge in
a brief thought experiment, by imagining some creatures that are, in
certain respects, intermediate between known animals and people.
These creatures—“super-monkeys”, we could call them—are sub-
human in that they have no linguistic facility whatever: they neither
produce nor understand speech (nor any other articulate gestures or
signs to the same effect). This is not to say they never cry out in pain,
make warning signals, or give mating displays; but they never, for
instance, tell stories, describe things, or formulate rules. On the other
hand, they stand out from all other animals in that they learn and play
games, including sophisticated games like chess. 
 Since super-monkeys are animals, and in fact a lot like us, there is
no problem in ascribing to them, not only various beliefs and desires
(at least in the minimal sense of Dennett’s “intentional systems
theory”—1981/87), but also a considerable range of affects and moods,
emotions and motives. It’s perfectly obvious, for instance, that they
like strawberries (as well as the janitor who brings them), that they
enjoy frolicking in the pool (but would sometimes rather sleep), that
they get angry when picked on, because it hurts, and that’s why they
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

250
H av i n g  Though t
strike back. These qualities sharply differentiate super-monkeys from
any current or imminent generation of “game-playing” computer.
What should we look for in super-monkeys, if we are to under-
stand them as playing games, even though they don’t talk about it?
Well, of course, they must at least reliably go through the motions;
that is, they must actually move the pieces, not merely in accord with
the rules, but in a manner more or less suited to winning. And, in the
spirit of the above remarks about emotions and motives, we can ex-
pect them to be pleased and self-satisﬁed when they do win (or gain
ground), and dejected or frustrated at the opposite. This shows that,
in one sense, they are not just going through the motions, for the
outcomes evidently matter to them. But it does not yet show that the
motions are speciﬁcally chess moves, for it has not been shown that
they are made as and only as subpatterns of a superordinate pattern at
the chess level. Such further speciﬁcity is not hard to add, however:
we merely require that our super-monkeys also be able to play chess in
various media, and other games in the same media. This is not at all a
trivial or inconsequential requirement; but it does not seem to pre-
suppose linguistic facility, so it remains within the parameters of the
thought experiment.
Super-monkeys, as described so far, are clearly guided in their
moves by sensory input from the chess board; and so, in at least that
limited sense, they are certainly perceiving. When we ask, however,
with Dretske, what the perception is of, the situation is more compli-
cated. On the one hand, since the responses involved are not limited to
(and may not even include) inner experiences, but are rather them-
selves also movings of the chess pieces, we have, so to speak, a new
“angle” on the objects: they are both perceived and acted on. Of course,
just as we can ask about perception, why it is of a distal rather than a
proximal cause, we can ask about action why it is of a distal rather
than a proximal effect—why it is an action of moving a knight, for
instance, rather than of moving an arm and some ﬁngers. But the fact
that the piece on the chess board is the one place where these two
causal trajectories intersect, and especially if there is continuous feed-
back, as in visually guided movement, strongly suggests that it is the
proper object of both the perception and the action. It is this feedback
linkage, I believe, that inclines us to identify, to the extent that we do,
the “objects” of ordinary animal perception and action.
On the other hand, we should notice the restricted scope of this
feedback argument. It applies to a chess piece only insofar as it is a
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
251
sensible, manipulable token, and has nothing whatever to do with its
role or character in chess. In other words, the question of whether
chess phenomena can be the objects of perception (or action), even for
super-monkeys, has not yet been touched. And, in fact, the earlier
argument brought against Dretske’s information-based proposal, ap-
plies here as well. For, if chess phenomena are the phenomena they
are by virtue of the way they are subpatterns within a superordinate
pattern at the chess level, then, inevitably (under normal conditions),
the proximal stimulus patterns are instances of corresponding kinds,
according as they are subpatterns of higher order and more global
patterns in the proximal stimuli overall. These latter patterns will
have to be comparable in “level” to the chess level, in that they abstract
from features that are characteristic of the various different media,
and depend instead on the global relationships that deﬁne chess
games as chess. But there is no reason to deny the existence of such
patterns, and hence of such stimulus kinds.
5 Letting the standards govern
There is, however, one more requirement that super-monkeys will
have to meet if they are to be recognized as genuine chess-players; and
this last requirement will prove crucial also for objectivity. It can be
introduced by asking what happens in the face of an illegal move. We
have already required, of course, that, as candidate chess players at all,
super-monkeys must reliably make legal moves; and in undertaking to
play they must, in effect, be counting on this reliability in one another.
This cannot mean, however, that they have to be perfect, or that they
can take perfection for granted, in the sense of being unprepared to
deal with illegality.7 No system that would blithely ignore the illegal-
ity of an opponent’s move could properly be deemed a chess player.
Hence, any genuine chess player—in fact, any game player—must,
as such, occupy a peculiar position. A player must, on the one hand,
be ever vigilant against illegal moves, yet, on the other hand, always
count on consistent legality.8 These two are more intimately related
than they might seem. Let’s examine them in turn.
As vigilant, a player needs two quite distinct abilities: (i) to tell in
general what move is made (including any relevant context),9 when-
ever a player makes a move; and (ii) to tell, for any identiﬁable move,
whether that move would be legal.10 These abilities together (but
neither of them alone) enable players reliably to detect illegal
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

252
H av i n g Though t
moves—an obvious prerequisite to vigilance. The ﬁrst ability, in ef-
fect, induces a ﬁeld of recognizable moves (that is, identiﬁable phe-
nomena that are either legal or illegal); and the second induces a
partition on that ﬁeld (into the legal and the illegal). Clearly, the ﬁeld
of identiﬁable moves had better include candidates on both sides of
that partition, lest the vigilance be vacuous. That is: it must be possi-
ble to identify moves that would be illegal—moves, in other words,
that are ruled out by those very rules that are constitutive for chess
phenomena and their identiﬁcation at all. To say that these abilities
are distinct is to say that they have within them this essential possibil-
ity of discord.
Counting on consistent legality means more than just expecting it,
but something like insisting on it—on pain of giving up the game. This
insistence is a kind of commitment or resolve not to tolerate illegality: in
case an illegal move is detected, ordinary play is breached, extraordi-
nary measures are called for—and the game itself (that is, continued
play) is at stake in the outcome. The vigilant player’s insistence, there-
fore, is a commitment not to stand for the kind of discord (between
the above two abilities), the possibility of which is prerequisite to
vigilance in the ﬁrst place. So the extraordinary measures, when called
for, will be an attempt to eliminate this discord, by rectifying either
the identiﬁcation of the move or the determination of its legality. As
we shall see, it is this commitment to the deﬁnitive standards consti-
tutive for the domain as such (for instance, to the rules of chess) that
transmits normative force (including the potential for correction) to
the move identiﬁcation ability, and hence underlies the possibility of
its objectivity. Hence, the capacity for such commitment is a prerequi-
site character of any self or subject that is to be capable also of objec-
tive perception (or thought or action).
Suppose, for example, that Bobby Baboon is in the midst of a chess
game when his “illegal-move alarm” goes off. As a genuine chess
player, Bobby is antecedently disposed to take extraordinary measures
in the face of such an event, and to adjust accordingly. And among
those measures will be to “double check” his identiﬁcation of what
move was actually made. The details of this double checking are not
important. But we can imagine Bobby looking over the board again,
perhaps from different angles, checking for overhanging branches or
bad lighting obscuring part of the board, making sure that what he
took for a bishop isn’t really a knight seen from the back, and so on.
We can even imagine that Bobby is still getting used to an unfamiliar
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
25 3
chess set, and sometimes has to remind himself (or be reminded)
which pieces are which. (Basically similar things could be said about
Bobby “double checking” or “reconsidering” his assessment that the
move was illegal—perhaps he forgot about capturing en passant, for
example.)
It is crucial that this double checking be an effort, and that “suc-
cess” not be automatic. If Bobby turned up a “misperception” every
time he looked for one, then the checking would be a sham. Rather, we
must suppose that the double-checking is an extension, elaboration,
or more careful mode of the primary recognition ability, together with
an ability to tell whether the result is coming up different, and to
adjust if so. (Still more impressive would be a capacity to diagnose
what went wrong in cases where a misperception is uncovered; but I
don’t see that this is required.) The enabling assumption is that,
almost always, this more careful mode is unnecessary, because it
wouldn’t make any difference. But, occasionally, it would make a dif-
ference; and, in those cases (often ﬂagged by the alarm), the result of
the more careful mode is almost always better.
What does “better” mean? It means: more conducive to continued
chess play, in the long run. Playing a game governed by constitutive
standards is a nontrivial achievement; dogs and ordinary monkeys, for
instance, are utterly incapable of it.11 The mark of such an achieve-
ment is not an ability to articulate those standards as explicit rules,
nor is it a disposition to go through any particular motions of play.
Rather, it is the ability to play in fact, while at the same time putting
the game itself at stake in insisting on the standards; that is, it is the
ability to let the standards govern the play. Thus, the aforementioned
possibility of discord—a possibility which, on the one hand, is reli-
ably avoided, but, on the other hand, is resolutely not tolerated—is
fundamental. Realizing a set of dispositions that works with this
structure is the achievement; and the ﬁne tuning effected in the dou-
ble checking is best to the extent that it fosters this achievement.
6 Objects determine perceptual correctness
Notice that, almost incidentally, we have now assembled the resources
needed to answer Dretske’s question. What the perception is of is that
which the constitutive standards govern: the moves, pieces, positions,
and so on, in the chess game. Why? Because, when the possibility of a
misperception arises, what the issue turns on is telling how things
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

254
H av i n g  Though t
stand with regard to those standards. That’s what accurate perception
is counted on to tell; it’s what is checked for in the double checking; it’s
the way in which perceptual ability contributes to the game-playing
achievement. In other words, the norms governing the perceptions as
such, and in virtue of which they can be objective, are inseparable
from the standards governing, and indeed constituting, the chess phe-
nomena as such; or, to make the Kantian paraphrase even more obvi-
ous: the conditions of the possibility of objective perception as such are
likewise the conditions of the possibility of the objects of that perception.12
To be concrete, suppose that, on a certain occasion, the actual chess
position is of one kind, but (due to some quirk in the circumstances)
the ambient optic array around Bobby, and hence also his perceptual
response, is of the sort usually caused by chess positions of some other
kind. Is his response a misperception of the chess position, or an
accurate perception of the ambient array? Clearly the former—because
what’s at issue in the perceiving at all, the whole point of looking in the
ﬁrst place, is telling what the position is. And this is manifest in the
fact that, if Bobby’s alarm goes off and he discovers the discrepancy,
he will change his response; that is, to the best of his ability, he will
bring his response into line with the actual position, rather than the
optic array (the entire aim and purpose of double checking). There-
fore, even when there is no discrepancy, it is the position and not the
array that is perceived.
This shows, I believe, that our imaginary super-monkeys are capa-
ble of objective perception—like people, and unlike any (actual) ani-
mals. The fact that these super-monkeys are completely nonlinguistic
shows further that language is not prerequisite to objective percep-
tion, and hence that it is not language that fundamentally separates us
from the animals with regard to the possibility of objectivity. On the
other hand, the fact that putative perceptions are normatively be-
holden to their objects, subject to correction in light of double-check-
ing those objects, is integral to the account. What’s more, these norms
are completely dependent in force and content on the constitutive
standards to which the perceived objects are held, and which must
therefore be counted primary. And it is, ﬁnally, the super-monkeys
themselves that “hold” those objects to those standards. Such holding
to standards, by simultaneously counting on it and insisting on it, is,
when it succeeds, understanding. Thus, the objects of objective per-
ception are ipso facto understood. Understanding, not language, is what
separates super-monkeys (and us) from “thoughtless brutes”.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
25 5
7 Chess without language (revisited)
That there might actually be “super-monkeys” that learn and play
games like chess without beneﬁt of language is, to be sure, practically
incredible. Hence, the intended point and force of the example calls
for explanation. It will help ﬁrst to rehearse a few notable objections.
Thus, it is extremely unlikely that the cognitive and social capacities
prerequisite for chess would evolve prior to and independently of
those required for language. For, clearly, there is a great deal of overlap
in these capacities; and they would have far more survival value if used
for language than if used only for formal games. It could even be that
our own ability to play chess relies essentially on species-speciﬁc
“modules” that are integral to our linguistic faculty—such as our
ability to parse complex structures, or to see individual tokens as
tokens of digital types, or to remember a large “vocabulary” of possible
constituents.
Likewise, it is almost impossible to imagine teaching chess, even to a
creature with all the native capacities of homo sapiens, without verbal
instruction and admonition. How could one hope to convey the rele-
vant alternatives and restrictions in various situations without explicit
conditionals and modal adverbs? Indeed, if genuine chess presupposes
not just that the moves in fact be legal, but that the players insist on
this, then they had better have a way of expressing their insistence.
Expressions of insistence, moreover, cannot be the same as mere ex-
pressions of displeasure, dismay, or disapproval; for those could have
any number of possible grounds, whereas insistence (as used here) can
be grounded only in issues of constitutive legality. But that means that
expressions of insistence must be somehow marked as such, marked
as concerned with issues of legality, so as to communicate speciﬁcally
that concern. And wouldn’t such speciﬁcally marked, communicative
expression be tantamount to language?13
Objections based on actual or plausible evolutionary history, how-
ever, are beside the point. Thus, it might also be that chess-like games
could not have emerged until after prehensile hands; but, even if so,
that wouldn’t say much of interest about the games as such. The
arguments that matter, therefore, are those to the effect that chess
itself presupposes language, either for learning it or for playing it. But
to those, I think, a simple reply is decisive. It is certainly no harder to
learn and play chess than it is to learn and speak a natural language.
Quite the contrary: games are clearly much less demanding than
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

256
H av i n g Though t
languages on all counts. In particular, languages are just as constituted
by standards, hence just as dependent on speakers’ insistence, as any
game. Yet, it must be possible to learn and speak a language without
beneﬁt of (any other or prior) language, on pain of regress. So, in
principle, it’s possible for games as well.14
There remains the idea that chess itself might be a language. It goes
without saying that languages and games are similar in many ways—
to the extent that it has become a philosophical cliché to refer to
languages as “games”. Nevertheless, there are also many differences,
including the following, which is both easy to see and crucial. Chess,
like all formal games, is self-contained in the sense that what moves
would be proper (legal) on any given occasion depends only on factors
that are internal to the game—previous moves, the locations of other
pieces, and the like. By contrast, for any genuine language, what it is
proper to say on a given occasion—what is true, authorized, materi-
ally valid, and so on—depends in general on more than the speciﬁ-
cally linguistic context. Therefore, no formal game is (in and of itself) a
language.
Why belabor the point? I certainly do not deny that language is
characteristic of people, and centrally important to what we are. But I
want to resist what strikes me as an all too prevalent tendency to
make of language a magic fulcrum on which every human quality
turns—as if language were the whole essence of what distinguishes us
from machines on the one hand, and beasts on the other. That, I
believe, is a grave distortion, for many reasons, most of which go
beyond the present discussion. Even in the context of a theory of
perception, however, it is important not to overestimate the role of
language (if only because correct perception is prerequisite to dialog
itself).
Playing chess, like speaking, involves interacting with items and
structures in ways that depend—not just causally but normatively—
on their types (roles), their reidentiﬁcation as individuals (histories),
and their relations to other items and structures (“contexts”). The
ability to engage in such interaction is at least the greater part of what
is meant by a conceptual grasp. Granted, a person who can talk and
theorize might have more and richer concepts of chess phenomena
than could a nonlinguistic super-monkey. Yet the basic concept of,
say, a rook is determined by its role in the game; and any creature that
can play must have mastered that. Concepts are in general articulated
by their relations to one another, as expressed in the detailed contin-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
257
gencies of acceptable practice. Often these contingencies are primarily
linguistic, and, in particular, inferential. But, as the chess example
shows, they need not be: proper chess play itself, without verbal ac-
companiment, is sufﬁciently structured to institute a conceptual artic-
ulation of the corresponding phenomena.
8 Scientiﬁc commitments and objectivity
It must be acknowledged that chess is not a typical example of a
perceptual domain. The question therefore arises whether the ac-
count of objectivity, in terms of constitutive standards, insistence, and
achievement, might be limited to games and their ilk. We ask, that is,
whether the account depends essentially on any features peculiar to
such domains, or whether it depends only on features characteristic of
objective perception more generally. The following stand out as dis-
tinctive of chess and the like—in contrast, for instance, to scientiﬁc
observation and everyday perception of sticks and stones.
1 Chess is deﬁned by constitutive standards (rules) that are
arbitrary human inventions; they do not have the character of
empirical discoveries, liable to refutation. (Even so, the rules
of a playable game must be consistent, complete, and follow-
able—an achievement that is not at all automatic.)
2 When chess players insist upon legal moves, this is under-
stood primarily in terms of rule-compliance by other play-
ers—agents who can be held to account for their behavior.
(Less often an issue, though just as important, is insistence
that the board and pieces function properly—by not melting,
wandering around, or such like.)
3 It is almost always easy to tell what move has been made in a
chess game, and whether that move is legal—because the
game is digital, explicitly deﬁned, and relatively simple. (On
the other hand, further perceptual skills, such as recognizing
strategic weaknesses and opportunities, are not easy and may
well not be reducible to these basic discriminations.)
Science, by contrast, seems anything but arbitrary an invention: its
discoveries are a paragon of the empirical and refutable. Moreover,
scientists never hold observable phenomena to account for their be-
havior: if some observed phenomenon fails to accord with scientiﬁc
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

258
H av i n g Though t
expectations, it is the observation or expectations that are at fault, not
the phenomenon itself. Finally, scientiﬁc investigation is difﬁcult: it
takes years of training plus painstaking effort, both to perform reliable
experiments and to tell with conﬁdence what results are acceptable.
This, however, is not to deny that the objects of scientiﬁc study are
held to standards. Donald Davidson (1970/80, 211 and 219–222), for
instance, more or less deﬁnes the physical as that which can be picked
out in terms drawn exclusively from a closed, comprehensive theory
with strong constitutive elements and precise, explicit, exception-free
laws.15 This is as much as to say that being subsumable under such a
theory—strict subsumability, we might call it—is a constitutive stan-
dard for the physical: to be physical is to be strictly subsumable.
 Speaking in a similar vein, but of the history of chemistry, Thomas
Kuhn writes:
Changes in the standards governing permissible problems, con-
cepts, and explanations can transform a science. In the next
section I shall even suggest a sense in which they transform the
world. 
(1962/70, 106)
And, in the next section, he continues:
For Dalton, any reaction in which the ingredients did not enter
in ﬁxed proportion was ipso facto not a purely chemical process.
A law that experiment could not have established before Dal-
ton’s work, became, once that work was accepted, a constitutive
principle that no single set of chemical measurements could
have upset. … As a result, chemists came to live in a world
where reactions behaved quite differently from the way they had
before.
(133–134)
In other words, the principle of ﬁxed proportions became a constitu-
tive standard for what it is to be a chemical reaction—and thereby also
for being an element or a compound. Kuhn, however, unlike David-
son, is concerned not merely with the notion of standards for entities,
but with the implications of this view for the conduct of science.
Finally, at a still higher level, there is another set of commit-
ments without which no man is a scientist. The scientist must,
for example, be concerned to understand the world and to ex-
tend the precision and scope with which it has been ordered.
That commitment must, in turn, lead him to scrutinize, either
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
25 9
for himself or through colleagues, some aspect of nature in great
empirical detail. And if that scrutiny displays pockets of appar-
ent disorder, then these must challenge him to a new reﬁnement
of his observational techniques or to a further articulation of his
theories.
(42)
Scientists, that is to say, are scientists by virtue of their commit-
ments—in particular, commitments that require what we have earlier
called vigilance. “Pockets of apparent disorder” are nothing other than
apparent breaches of the relevant constitutive standards, the exact
analog of apparent illegal moves; and scientists must simultaneously
be on the lookout for them, and resolved not to tolerate them. Scien-
tists insist that the scientiﬁcally observed world be orderly (strictly
subsumable, for instance). Moreover, their alternatives in the face of
an apparent breach are essentially the same as those available to a
chess player: reﬁnement of observational technique, further articula-
tion of the theory,16 or giving up the game (scientiﬁc breakdown and/
or revolution).
The constitutive standards for the objects of scientiﬁc research—
whether local to particular disciplines, like combining in ﬁxed propor-
tions, or global throughout science as such, like displaying an order
with precision and scope—are not arbitrary inventions. On the other
hand, they are not exactly empirical discoveries either; for, as Kuhn is
at pains to show, accurate observations and discoveries presuppose
them, and they are not readily dislodged. They are somehow both
empirical and invented—“synthetic a priori”, Davidson says (1970/80,
221). Standards for the constitution of objects are worked out by ﬁts
and starts over many years, such that, in accord with them, ever more
objects can be scrutinized in great empirical detail and ordered with
precision and scope. “It is hard”, Kuhn notes (135), “to make nature ﬁt
a paradigm”; and a fundamental component in that difﬁculty is com-
ing up with paradigms that nature can be made to ﬁt. Scientists may
invent the recipe; but experiment is the proof of the pudding. Like
chess—only far more so—science is an achievement.
It is an old problem in the philosophy of science to say just what is
measured by a scientiﬁc instrument. In particular, in what sense can it
be said that so-called “theoretical” entities and properties are mea-
sured, as opposed to “phenomenal” or “observational” properties or
states of the instrument itself? Notice that this question has essen-
tially the same structure as Dretske’s question about how we can say
that we hear the bell, and not the vibrations in the air or our
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

260
H av i n g  Though t
eardrums. And the solution, it seems to me, is essentially the same
too. What the measurement is of is that which the constitutive stan-
dards govern: the entities, properties, and relations in terms of which
the theory is expressed. Why? Because, when the possibility of a
mismeasurement or experimental error arises, what the issue turns on
is telling how things stand with regard to those standards. That’s what
accurate instrumentation is counted on to measure; it’s what is checked
for in double checking; it’s the way in which experimental ability
contributes to the scientiﬁc achievement. Successfully holding those
entities to those standards, in the face of ever more precise and de-
tailed experimental testing, is scientiﬁc understanding—understanding
what the entities are.
Philosophers of science speak more often of explanation than of
understanding, but these come to the same: to explain is to render
intelligible—to show that and how something can be understood.
Thus it is that explanations are of two sorts. An entire domain of
phenomena can be constituted and explained when standards to
which they can be held are grasped and successfully insisted upon.
(Such a success is a paradigm.) And, within a domain, particular
phenomena, or particular classes of phenomena, are explained by
showing how they in particular can be held to the constitutive stan-
dards. In case the pertinent standards include strict subsumability,
those internal explanations will be, in part, deductive nomological. In
case the domain-constituting standards are otherwise—for instance:
the Davidson/Dennett notion of rationality, the integrated operation
of functional systems and organisms, or the historical/institutional
dynamics of cultures and subcultures—then the explanations and
intelligibility will be of different sorts. What they have in common is
the structure of insistence: practitioners have the ability to recognize
phenomena that are ruled out by the standards that are constitutive of
that recognizability, and will refuse to accept them.
9 Everyday objectivity
Can the same account be extended also to the objectivity of everyday
perception, say of sticks and stones? It would be here, presumably, if
anywhere, that dogs and cats would have perceptual abilities compa-
rable to our own. No doubt, we share with higher animals various
innate “object-constancy” and “object-tracking” mechanisms that au-
tomatically “lock onto” medium sized lumps—especially ones that are
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
2 61
moving and/or staring at us. The question is whether, for us in con-
trast to animals, there is any more to the objectivity of perceivable
“things” than that they trigger such mechanisms—in particular,
whether there are constitutive standards to which we, as perceivers,
hold them.17 It seems to me that there are, though they are somewhat
vague and difﬁcult to formulate. The essential tenet is something like:
things are integral bearers of multiple properties. Integrity is the way
the properties belong together in space and time, in (at least) two
respects: cohesively and compatibly.
A thing is a cohesive spatio-temporal unit. At a time, a thing
occupies—that is, its properties are instantiated at—exactly one
place, a place which has a deﬁnite size and shape, and which is occu-
pied by no other thing. Through time, the place of a thing can vary, as
can the properties collected in it there. But mostly these variations can
be only gradual—that is, relatively slow and continuous. For other-
wise, it would cease to be well-deﬁned which properties belong
together as properties of which things; their staying identiﬁably to-
gether in one continuing thing is what ﬁxes their belonging together
at all.
The properties of a single thing must always be mutually compati-
ble, and they can be interdependent; that is, some combinations of
properties and/or lacks are not permissible in one thing. But no prop-
erties or lacks in distinct things are incompatible; that is, any individ-
ually possible things are compossible with any others, or none at all
(Leibniz not withstanding). This is to say that things are what they
are independently of one another, that their properties are intrinsic to
them. Properties as such are “proper to” the things that have them.18
Can we make sense of the suggestion that human perceivers (but
not animals) hold things to some such standard—insist upon it? Con-
sider ﬁrst (before turning to things) how the members of a family are
perceivable (on a corporeal level): each has his or her own characteris-
tic visual appearance, sound of voice, odor, way of moving, and so on;
and, of course, their various parts stay attached in the same way. But
suppose, one day, all these aspects started permuting: what looks like
Sister sounds like Father, moves like Grandma, and smells like Kid
Brother. Even the parts could mix up: Mother’s head (but Father’s
hair) on Uncle’s torso with Baby’s limbs—or just two heads with no
limbs or torso at all (sounding like a truck and smelling like a water-
melon). And moments later, they switch again, with new divisions
and new participants. What would you say?
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

262
H av i n g Though t
Surely something like: “Egad! Am I going crazy? Am I being
tricked or drugged? I can’t really be seeing this—it’s impossible”. That is,
you would reject what you seemed to perceive, you would not accept
them as objects. Now suppose that, instead of you, it were the family
dog who came home to this. We can’t ask what it would say, because
dogs can’t talk; and, of course, any estimate of its reaction at all is
bound to be largely conjecture and prejudice. But, by way of counter-
point to sharpen the main point, I’ll express my own prejudice: I
think the dog would bark. I expect it would be disoriented and dis-
tressed, maybe even frightened. But I can’t imagine any part of a dog’s
reaction amounting to a rejection of the scene, a discounting of its
reality, on the grounds that it’s impossible. Though Fido can tell Sister
from Brother, and humans from cats, I don’t think he can distinguish
in any sense between possible and impossible. And this, I believe, is
the same as to say that he holds no objects to constitutive standards,
and therefore understands nothing.
The integrity of family members—people—is certainly a different
matter from that of things. Yet analogous permutations of the sensi-
ble properties of rocks and blossoms, comets and waterfalls would be
equally fantastic. We might occasionally accept, even relish, such dis-
integrated phantasmagoria in dreams or hallucinations; but no one
who understood what it meant could accept them as objective things.
That is, the experiences, whatever else they might be, could not be
objective perception. To perceive things as objects is to insist upon
their coherent integrity—the constitutive standard for thinghood—
just like insisting upon legality in chess, rationality in interpretation,
and ordering with precision and scope in empirical science.
Notes:
1 This is not intended as a conceptual or deﬁnitional point, but as a
factual claim. It could turn out, I suppose, that dolphins or extra-
terrestrials are capable of objective perception; but (at least in the
case of the former) I’m highly dubious.
2 Abbreviate “a’s being F carries the information that b is G” with
“Fa⇒Gb”. Clearly, for a ﬁxed speciﬁcation of the conditions, this
relation is transitive: If Fa⇒Hc and Hc⇒Gb in the same condi-
tions, then (in those conditions) Fa⇒Gb. More, however, is re-
quired for Fa⇒Gb to be via Hc than that Fa⇒Hc and Hc⇒Gb in
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bj ecti ve percept io n
2 63
the same conditions—because, intuitively, it might be that
Fa⇒Gb independently of Hc. Suppose, however, that there are
some conditions in which Fa⇒Hc but not Hc⇒Gb, and some in
which Hc⇒Gb but not Fa⇒Hc, but the only conditions in which
Fa⇒Gb are those in which both Fa⇒Hc and Hc⇒Gb. Then,
plausibly (and according to Dretske), it is only via Hc that
Fa⇒Gb.
3 It would not be difﬁcult to contrive “abnormal” conditions in
which the air or eardrum were vibrated in such a manner as to
cause the perceptual experience, even without the bell ringing—
for example, using an audio recorder.
4 The terminology is reminiscent of Gibson, whom Dretske in fact
cites, in a slightly different context, on the following page.
5 In terms of the earlier illustration, this amounts to suggesting
that, although the presence of the lemon drops does not carry any
information about which child fetched, it does carry the informa-
tion that some child fetched (so, ‘child’ = the higher-order kind);
and, moreover, it carries the information that Grampa paid only
via the information that some child fetched. (Note, by the way,
that ‘some child’ is not in general equivalent to any disjunction:
‘child a, or child b, or …’.)
6 This way of putting it may be misleading because, as I will argue
in sections 4 and 5, it is possible in principle for nonlinguistic
creatures to play chess; the reader, therefore, should not suppose
that I intend this mention of conceptual ability to entail linguistic
ability. (I will suggest in section 7 that conceptual understanding
is possible without language.)
7 An existence proof for illegal moves is not required: Murphy’s
Law is the best conﬁrmed generalization in all of empirical meta-
physics.
8 This counting-on and vigilance are to be understood as implicit
in persistent behavioral dispositions, and not (at least, not neces-
sarily) as conscious conviction, or deliberate being on the lookout
for.
9 For nonlinguistic players (like our super-monkeys), telling what
moves are made will be exhibited, in the ﬁrst instance, in their
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

264
H av i n g  Though t
own legal move making (in the light of that move, so to speak).
But it could also take the form of producing the equivalent moves
(and positions) in various alternative media—in effect, “translit-
erating” them.
10 In chess, of course, both these abilities are already required in
normal play, and are exhibited in a player’s ability to make legal
moves of its own. Note that these two abilities “to tell” amount to
abilities to recognize, respectively, the subordinate and superordi-
nate patterns mentioned in section 3.
11 If I’m wrong about ordinary monkeys (or even dogs), then so
much the better for them; what’s important is that there’s a line to
be drawn, not where.
12 “…the conditions of the possibility of experience in general are like-
wise conditions of the possibility of the objects of experience…” (1781/
1929, a 158/b 197).
13 This paragraph is based closely on a conversation with Jim
Conant. 
14 It could be argued that a ﬁrst language is learnable only by boot-
strapping. That is, only a minimal initial “core” is learnable with-
out beneﬁt of language; the remainder of the language is not so
learnable, because learning (and/or speaking) it relies on the core.
Then, if it were further maintained that chess is essentially more
difﬁcult that this core, the argument in the text would fail. What
I ﬁnd highly dubious in this line of thought, however, is the
suggestion that anything essentially less sophisticated than chess
(and similar formal games) could be in any proper sense a lan-
guage. Yet, without that, the challenge collapses.
15 I say “more or less” because Davidson, in fact, nowhere offers an
explicit deﬁnition of the physical, nor do the various remarks on
which my attribution is based quite add up to one.
16 For a scientist, of course, “further articulation” can include more
than just a better ability to tell what is and isn’t permissible; it can
include modest modiﬁcations (“friendly amendments”) to the
theory itself. (There is no analog to this for chess players.)
17 By ‘things’ here I mean mere things, realia—like sticks and stones.
“Things” in the sense of paraphernalia or equipment, things
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

O bjective pe rception
265
constituted by their roles and appropriate uses, are also held to
constitutive standards, but different ones. Accordingly, the most
proper perception of them as objects, and what is insisted upon in
such perception, is also different
18 A fuller discussion would: disengage locatedness at a particular
place from the togetherness (collocation) of cohesion; add a re-
quirement for concreteness (complete determinacy) to that for
compatibility; connect locatedness and concreteness with actual-
ity (as opposed to mere possibility), and therefore with each other
(and with particularity); and so on. But exactly how is another
question.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

ch a pt e r  e lev e n
Pattern and 
Being
Daniel Dennett’s landmark “Real Patterns” (1991) is an essay in ontol-
ogy: its topic is the being of entities. Ostensibly, it is prompted by
questions about the reality of intentional states, and about the impli-
cations of Dennett’s own seminal account in “Intentional Systems”
(1971/78). But these are pretexts: the issue is not intentionality at all,
except in passing, but rather being. Intentional states—beliefs, desires,
and the like—frame the discussion, motivating it in the introduction,
and secured by it in the conclusion. But all the main points are made
in a more general way, in terms of patterns. Intentional states are just a
special case, and there can be other special cases as well, the status of
all of which we will be able to understand once we understand the
ontology of patterns more generally. In the same spirit, I too will
mention the intentional only incidentally, and will focus instead on
the general case. (Also, I will take it for granted that the reader is
familiar with Dennett’s work, especially the two articles just cited.)
1 Patterns and their elements
From the beginning, Dennett’s ontological investigation of patterns
exhibits a perplexing vacillation between two levels. It can be brought
to the fore with the following question: What are the entities the status
of which is to be illuminated? Are they the patterns themselves, or are
they rather the elements (components) of the patterns? This distinc-
tion should not be confused with another: namely, that between pat-
terns considered abstractly or concretely. For instance, a melody is a
pattern of notes, varying relative to one another in pitch and timing.
Abstractly, the melody need be in no particular key, register, or tempo,
not to mention at any date or location. But in any concrete instance
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

268
H av i n g  Though t
(of which there can be arbitrarily many), these and all other character-
istics must be determinate. The vacillation is between the pattern and
its elements, the melody and the notes, not between the abstract form
and its concrete instances.
On the one hand, the title “Real Patterns” suggests that it is the
patterns themselves, rather than their component elements, whose
ontological status (“reality”) is to be explained and defended. This
interpretation is reinforced by the initial example of a visible pattern
of dots within a frame: the status of the dots is never questioned, but
only that of the pattern of black and white stripes that they make up.
Dennett says: “I take it that this pattern, which I shall dub bar code, is
a real pattern if anything is” (31) and then asks the essential question:
“what does it mean to say that a pattern in one of these frames is real,
or that it is really there?” (32) Again, the invocation of mathematical
randomness, or the incompressibility of a bit map (32–33), presup-
poses the bits or the “data”. Only the status of the pattern itself is in
doubt: “A pattern exists in some data—is real—if there is a descrip-
tion of the data that is more efﬁcient than the bit map, whether or not
anyone can concoct it.” (34)
On the other hand, Dennett introduces his catalog of “different
grades or kinds of realism” about beliefs by asking: “When are the
elements of a pattern real and not merely apparent?” (30) Indeed, in
assimilating the intentional stance to radical interpretation and radical
translation (30 and 46), Dennett is inevitably (and willingly) commit-
ted to the brand of holism that understands intentional items in terms
of the ordered wholes they participate in (not any wholes they might
individually comprise). That is, the intentional items, such as beliefs
and desires, are not themselves the relevant patterns, but are rather
the elements of the relevant patterns. Hence, to inquire after the
ontological status of intentional states is to inquire after the status of
pattern elements, not patterns. These are the two levels between
which Dennett vacillates.
It is tempting to suppose that the opposition must somehow be
false, that the ontological status of the pattern and its elements must
go hand in hand—because (as one wants to say) “each is deﬁned in
terms of the other”. Insofar as this is right, however, it is a posing of
the problem rather than a solution. The problem is: How can such a
“going hand in hand” make nontrivial (non-question-begging) sense?
In resolving this problem, it should become clear for the ﬁrst time
what patterns have to do with ontology.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat tern and being
269
2 To be is not just to “count as”
It is important to avoid at the outset an attractively easy false start.
What, after all, are the bits in a bit map, or the pixels in a picture? As
was pointed out above, these elements are taken for granted—their
“reality” is not in question—when we ask about the status of mathe-
matical or visual patterns of them. But, of course, their status as bits or
pixels is not at all independent of those patterns. A particular ﬂipped
ﬂip-ﬂop or black dot on white paper would not count as a bit or pixel
except insofar as it is a component in some relevant mathematical or
visual pattern. Likewise, nothing could count as this sort of mathemat-
ical or visual pattern except insofar as it is a pattern of such bits or
pixels. Accordingly, it seems, the patterns and their elements are
deﬁned in terms of one another, and their respective statuses go hand
in hand.
But this misses the point: the being of the bits or pixels is not at
issue at all, but only whether the terms ‘bit’ or ‘pixel’ apply to them—
that’s what “counting as” a bit or pixel means. Thus, whether it’s a
pixel or not, the dot is still there; its status as an entity (namely, a dot)
is quite independent of whether it counts as a pixel in some visual
pattern. The corresponding approach to intentional states would be
to say that they are (for instance) structures in the brain, identiﬁable
neurophysiologically or syntactically, but so related to one another in
an overall pattern that they also count as beliefs and desires. The being,
the “reality”, of such states would be nothing other than that of those
brain structures—for they would be identical. Such an account (a
version of token identity theory) would be ontologically straightfor-
ward and familiar. It might well be Fodor’s view, or even Davidson’s;
but it surely isn’t Dennett’s.
It bears mentioning, therefore, that the analogy that Dennett still
proposes between beliefs and centers of gravity (27–29) is completely
misleading, and should be discarded. A center of gravity is nothing
other than a spatial point at a time, or a point trajectory through time.
Hence, its ontological status is exactly on a par with that of any other
spatial point or trajectory—including the center of the smallest
sphere containing all the socks Dennett has ever lost. Whether a
given point or trajectory counts as a center of gravity, or a lost-sock
center, depends on its position relative to certain masses or socks; but
its being is spatial, and independent of what else it counts as.1 Accord-
ingly, the greater usefulness, in scientiﬁc calculation, of centers of
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

270
H av i n g Though t
gravity does not confer on them any further ontological status; they are
no more “real” than lost-sock centers—just more worth keeping track
of. This is not at all analogous to the claim about beliefs: as just noted,
Dennett never suggests that beliefs are simply a subset of the set of all
brain structures (or computational states, or anything else indepen-
dently speciﬁable) which, by virtue of participating in some pattern,
also count as intentional.
3 Patterns in the Life world
Centers of gravity and bit patterns, however, are merely preparatory
for Dennett’s richest and most developed example: patterns in the Life
world.2 Although the lessons will ultimately be quite different, Life
looks at ﬁrst to be little more than a kinetic variant of a pattern of
pixels. Thus, much as a black dot is a black dot, whether or not it
counts as a pixel in some image, so also a Life cell is a Life cell,
whether or not it counts as a component in a glider, eater, or other
pattern in the Life plane.3 Moreover, the same point can be made at
successive higher “levels.” For instance, if a Turing machine is imple-
mented (as can be done) as a higher-order pattern of gliders, eaters,
and so on, then each glider is the glider it is, whether or not it also
counts as (say) a token on the tape of that Turing machine. Though
its status as a tape token depends on its participating in the higher-
order pattern, its own status as an entity—a glider, as it happens—
does not.
A glider, as its name suggests, moves across the plane from mo-
ment to moment; so it cannot be identiﬁed with any ﬁxed set of cells
or cell states; but, somewhat like a trajectory, it might plausibly be
identiﬁed with a temporal sequence of sets of cell states. The trouble
with such an identiﬁcation is that it ignores the motivation for picking
out this particular kind of sequence. Thus, there are any number of
deﬁnable sequences of sets of cell states—which, when they occur, are
all equally “actual” or “real”.4 But some few of these kinds of sequence,
including gliders, are very special. Roughly, they persist as reidentiﬁ-
able nonempty conﬁgurations against an empty background.
One way to think about this special persistence is from below, as a
consequence of the kinetic law governing cell state changes in the Life
world. This law entails that if, at a given time, all the cells in the Life
world are off except those that would be on for a single glider at that
time, then the sequence of sets of cell states for that glider will occur
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat ter n and  bei n g
2 7 1
in the future of that world—that is, the glider will persist. Further:
the effect of the kinetic law is entirely local, which means that the
glider will persist for as long as those cells sufﬁciently nearby are all off
(what’s happening far away doesn’t matter at the moment). To put it
another way, the law guarantees that once a glider sequence is started,
and so long as it is not interfered with, it will continue. Very few of
the deﬁnable sequences of sets of cell states have this feature of guar-
anteed persistence; hence those that do are special.5
A different way to think about persistence is to consider, not what
makes it possible (and rare), but what makes it noteworthy or impor-
tant—to ask, in effect, what’s so special about persisting conﬁgura-
tions. Dennett speaks of their “salience as real things”, and says this
means that one can “proceed to predict—sketchily and riskily—the
behavior of larger conﬁgurations or systems of conﬁgurations”. (40)
In other words, persistent patterns and structures are special because
they can be relied upon as components of higher-order patterns or
structures—such as tokens on Turing machine tapes. This is to think
about the persistence, or, more broadly, the specialness of certain pat-
terns from above, in terms of what they participate in or contribute to.
In a Life-world implementation of a Turing machine tape, the
gliders are, at the same time, patterns and components of patterns.
They fall, therefore, on both sides of Dennett’s initial vacillation. As
we shall see, it is precisely in this double or bivalent position, includ-
ing “specialness from above”, that patterning can have ontological
import—that is, confer status as an entity. But this will require more
careful attention to the notion of ‘pattern’.
4 Patterns and pattern recognition
Relatively early in his article, Dennett inserts a remarkable passage,
one with little evident connection to the remainder of the text.
… I propose that the self-contradictory air of “indiscernible pat-
tern” should be taken seriously. We may be able to make some
extended, or metaphorical, sense of the idea of indiscernible
patterns (or invisible pictures or silent symphonies), but in the
root case a pattern is “by deﬁnition” a candidate for pattern
recognition.
(32)
Nowhere in the ensuing discussion, however, does he tell us anything
about what pattern recognition is, or why it should have this deﬁnitive
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

272
H av i n g Though t
signiﬁcance. On the contrary, no sooner has he acknowledged the
implication of an “unbreakable link to observers or perspectives” than
he turns instead to “discernibility-in-principle” and the mathematical
deﬁnition of randomness—two ideas that seem as observer indepen-
dent and nonperspectival as one could hope to ﬁnd. Tracing this
ambivalence will show, by steps, that Dennett understands ‘pattern’ in
two different ways, that he needs both of them to make his ontological
point, and that this is what “stances” are all about. But, to get there
from here, we ﬁrst have to ask what it means to recognize something.
Recognizing, as the quoted passage indicates, is at least discerning
or discriminating. To recognize something is to respond to it in a way
that distinguishes it from other things; to recognize is to tell apart.
But differential response cannot be the whole story, for two deeply
related reasons. First, what is recognized is always some determinate
item, feature, or characteristic of the confronted situation, whereas a
given response can equally well be taken as a response to any of several
distinct things. Second, recognition, unlike response, is a normative
notion: it is possible to misrecognize something, to get it wrong,
whereas a response is just whatever response it is to whatever is there.
These are related because: only insofar as something determinate is
supposed to be recognized, can there be an issue of recognizing it
rightly or wrongly; and it is only as that which determines rightness
or wrongness that the object of recognition is determinate.
Thus, in order to understand recognition, as distinct from mere
differential response, we must understand these interrelated phenom-
ena of object determinacy and normativity. Consider an automatic
door: it responds to an approaching pedestrian by opening, and to the
pedestrian’s passing through by closing again. Of course, it might
respond identically to a wayward shopping cart, or a large enough
piece of plaster falling from the ceiling; and we can even imagine it
being triggered by the magnetic ﬁelds of a ﬂoor polisher passing near
its control box, across the hall. Are such incidents misrecognitions? Has
the door mistaken plaster or a ﬂoor polisher for a pedestrian, say?
Obviously not, for pedestrians, plaster, and polishers are nothing to a
door. Therefore, even in the usual case, we cannot say that it has
recognized a pedestrian.
Should we conclude instead that it recognizes pressure on its ﬂoor
pad, the current in some wire, or—in the limit—a force adequate to
open it? Again, no; for if the possibility of error is systematically
eliminated, then it’s vacuous to speak of correctness or recognition at
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat ter n and  bei n g
2 7 3
all. Rather, whenever the door opens, there is an extended set of
relevant causal factors (some proximal, some distal) any of several of
which might equally well be identiﬁed as “the” factor to which it
responded—depending on what we’re interested in at the time. But
since the door doesn’t get any of them right or wrong—it just re-
sponds as it does—none of the responses amounts to recognition.
The same can be said about a trout striking at a ﬂy (whether natural
or hand-tied), and, in my view, about a hound chasing a rabbit
(whether across a ﬁeld or around a racetrack). 
If, on the other hand, opening for anything other than a pedestrian
would amount to an error (regardless of what pressures or currents
did or didn’t intervene), then, in the ordinary case, the pedestrian
(and not any pressure or current) would be the object of the response;
that is, the system would recognize pedestrians. (This is just what the
situation would be if the “system” were a human employee.) To put it
more generally, if some speciﬁc causal factor can be singled out as
making the difference, from case to case, between correct response
and error, then, in any given nonerroneous case, this same factor also
can be singled out as the object recognized. And likewise vice versa: if a
response has a determinate proper object—if it is a recognitive re-
sponse—then, absent that object, the response is an error. In sum,
recognition, object determinacy, and the possibility of mistake belong
together.
Thus, to comprehend the full content of the suggestion that pat-
terns be regarded as candidates for recognition, we will need to under-
stand the normative standards according to which they can stand
individually as criteria for correct recognitions.
5 Recognizabilia or orderly arrangements?
There are really two notions of ‘pattern’ at work in Dennett’s article.
On the one hand, there is the idea that patterns are “by deﬁnition”
candidates for discernment or recognition; on the other, there is the
idea that a pattern is some sort of orderly or nonrandom arrange-
ment—the opposite of chaos. The ﬁrst idea invites an operational or
practical deﬁnition, via an account of recognizing and correctness; the
second invites an explicit or theoretical deﬁnition, in terms of what’s
arranged, what arrangements are possible, and which of those ar-
rangements are orderly. The mathematical deﬁnition, as well as all the
pixel examples, are of this latter sort. The obvious question is: Why
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

274
H av i n g Though t
have both? In particular, why bother with the looser operational deﬁ-
nition when the explicit theoretical deﬁnition is available?
One advantage of the “operational deﬁnition” in terms of recogni-
tion is that it does not presuppose or depend on any determination of
what the pattern is a pattern of. The mathematical deﬁnition, by
contrast, only makes sense if the “bits”—or, more generally, the possi-
ble types and relations of its elements—are speciﬁed in advance. But
recognition needs no such prespeciﬁcation: you just have to “know
one when you see one”. For instance, when I recognize the faces of my
friends, or the expressions on their faces, or the genre of a book, there
are no particular bits or other elements that these are patterns of. A
delighted smile is not a pattern of epidermal cells, still less of pixels or
light waves; if anything, it’s a concurrence of cheek lift and brow
movement, of lip shape and eye sparkle. But these are no more ante-
cedently determinate than smiles themselves, perhaps less so. Smiles,
as the deﬁnition suggests, are what they are because we recognize
them to be, and not the other way around. Likewise, the recognizable
mystery or romance in a novel is not a pattern of words, still less of
letters, but of something more like characters, situations, and
mood—again, because readers reliably take them so.
The recognition-based deﬁnition is liberating in a second respect
as well: it is not oriented exclusively to the “internals” of the recog-
nized pattern. Thus, when I recognize something as a reassuring or a
cautionary gesture, my response is inﬂuenced not only by the speciﬁc
character of the gestural motions, but also, and perhaps largely, by the
circumstances in which they are made. “Context dependence” of inter-
pretations is, of course, familiar; but it is frequently understood on a
broadly inferential model:
1 Any instance of I, in context C, would be (or count as) an R.
2 Here is an instance of I; and it is in context C.
3 So, here is an R.
This presumes, however, that C and I are identiﬁable as such indepen-
dently, and that the recognition of R is then just drawing a conclu-
sion—not really a recognition at all. But very often, I think, context-
informed phenomena (gestures are but one example) are recognized
for what they are, quite apart from any independent recognition of the
context or of anything which is “in” the context. Indeed, if there are to
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat ter n and  bei n g
2 75
be any inferences, they, can just as easily go in the other direction.
Joint recognizability of instance-cum-context yields a notion of pat-
tern notably divergent from that of an orderly arrangement of parts.
In the meantime, requiring determinate prespeciﬁcation of the bits
or elements, as the mathematical deﬁnition does, can be a philosophi-
cal embarrassment, in more than one way. First, many relevant pat-
terns—conspicuously including the behavioral patterns that support
intentional interpretation—do not seem to be made up of well-
deﬁned bits or elements. Just which causal commerce with the envi-
ronment amounts to perception and action is by no means speciﬁable
in advance, nor can it be precisely delineated in any case. Second, the
account of patterns as orderly arrangements of predetermined ele-
ments is an invitation to metaphysical reductionism: the thesis that
these patterns are “nothing but” their elements as arranged. Clearly,
however, (whatever else one thinks about it) this runs counter to
Dennett’s motivating insight that “real patterns” might be of distinc-
tive ontological status and interest. Third, if (in spite of all the forego-
ing) an attempt were made to merge the two notions of pattern, such
that recognizable patterns must at the same time be arrangements of
prior elements, then, arguably, their recognizability would have to be
via prior recognition of those elements; and that would be a version of
epistemological foundationalism.
No sooner are these observations made, however, than the outline
of a rapprochement becomes roughly visible. For if the independent
identiﬁability of the elements of an orderly-arrangement pattern is
problematic, and if, at the same time, the identity of a recognition
pattern can be context dependent, then the one hand may wash the
other. Rather than merging (so as to coincide), the two notions of
pattern join forces, to mutual advantage. In this larger conception, the
“elements” of an orderly arrangement need no longer be thought of as
simple (“elementary”), like bits or pixels, or even as independently
identiﬁable. On the contrary, they might be quite elaborate, elusive,
and/or subtle—so long as some relevant creatures are (or can learn to
be) able to recognize them. This recognizability, in turn, can perfectly
well depend, in part, on their participation in the arrangement (= the
context) of which they are the elements.
In effect, we have “patterns” at two different levels, one level for
each of Dennett’s two deﬁnitions—but in such a way that (artiﬁcially
simpliﬁed cases aside) each requires the other. That is, both of the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

276
H av i n g Though t
deﬁnitions are integral to a single uniﬁed account. What’s more, this
one integral account reveals how Dennett’s ambivalence between the
two notions of ‘pattern’ is deeply connected with his initial vacillation
between considering patterns and considering their elements; for both
involve the same distinction of “level.” But we still must see how their
integration enables his ontological insight.
6 The normativity of recognition
Recognition, we noted, is subject to normative appraisal, and has a
determinate (purported) object. These related characteristics are
what distinguish it from mere differential response. But what they are
and how they are possible has yet to be explained. If, however, recog-
nizable patterns are understood as elements of orderly-arrangement
patterns, then the resources may be available to supply that explana-
tion. For the elements of an orderly arrangement are by no means
arbitrary: the order itself, in conjunction with the other elements,
imposes strict constraints on what any given element can be. In par-
ticular, it sharply—as a rule, uniquely—limits which among the
causal antecedents of a response could possibly be such an element.
This limitation, in other words, picks out a single factor in the causal
background of the response as having a special status and importance,
vis-à-vis the larger orderly arrangement; and then, if that single factor
could be identiﬁed as its object, the response would amount to a recog-
nition.
To pick out which factor, if any, would have the status of object,
however, is not yet to show that any factor does have that status. For
that, something else about the larger, two-level picture must be
brought out, something in terms of which responses can be deemed
right or wrong according as they track that object. Or, to put it
differently, it is yet to be shown how this singled-out factor, the candi-
date object, can serve as a criterion for the correctness of the response.
Return to the Life world. Since a universal Turing machine can be
implemented in it, so can any other computer architecture, and any
program on any such computer—indeed, in many different ways.
Dennett imagines a chess playing system implemented (several levels
up) in a vast “galaxy” of gliders, eaters, and so on; and then imagines
setting it up to play against itself. (41) The point of the exercise is that
an outsider might adopt any of a variety of perspectives on this assem-
blage, including, at the highest level, the intentional stance.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat tern and being
277
… one can shift to an ontology of chess-board positions, possi-
ble chess moves, and the grounds for evaluating them; then,
adopting the intentional stance toward the conﬁguration, one
can predict its future as a chess player performing intentional
actions—making chess moves and trying to achieve checkmate.
Once one has ﬁxed on an interpretation scheme, permitting one
to say which conﬁgurations of pixels count as which symbols …,
one can use the interpretation scheme to predict, for instance,
that the next conﬁguration to emerge from the galaxy will be
such-and-such a glider stream (the symbols for ‘r ×q’, say). (41)
There are in fact three distinct perspectives or levels mingled in this
dense passage: (i) the chess ontology (board positions, possible moves,
and so on); (ii) the ontology of symbols for chess moves (‘r ×q’); and
(iii) the intentional ontology (actions, tryings, and the like).
Focus, for the moment, on the chess ontology: certain subpatterns
in this galaxy are chess pieces and positions, and appropriate changes
in them are chess moves. What makes them so? Clearly the basic
requirement is that, understood as chess phenomena, they be found
reliably to accord with the rules of chess—the pieces must be those
deﬁned for chess, they must start in the standard starting position, the
moves must be legal (and not too bad), and so forth. Implicit in these
are also certain “enabling” prerequisites, such as that the pieces and
positions be reidentiﬁable, that they be changeable in the ways per-
mitted by the rules, that they be otherwise reliably stable, and so on.
Consistent with those, anything whatever can serve as a chess set—
including, but by no means limited to, subpatterns in a galaxy of
ﬂashing cells in the Life plane.
Chess phenomena, constituted as they are in accord with these
preconditions, are a perfect example of what was earlier described as
specialness from above—something’s being noteworthy as a pattern not
by virtue of how it’s built out of elements, but by virtue of how it
participates in or contributes to something else. Hence, in our larger
uniﬁed account, chess pieces, locations, and moves, would ﬁll the bill
as recognition patterns, functioning as elements in the orderly-arrange-
ment pattern deﬁned by the rules of the game.6 The rules of chess,
moreover, are paradigmatically normative.7 Consequently, at least for
domains with this particular structure, a credible source is at hand for
the corresponding derivative norms of recognition. Two main things,
therefore, remain to be shown. First, how this derivation works; that
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

278
H av i n g Though t
is, how the standards that govern chess phenomena as such induce
norms for the recognition of those phenomena. And, second, how the
account, introduced in terms of rule-governed games, can be seen to
generalize to other domains as well.
7 Chess players and their commitments
A fundamental limitation of Life-world chess is that one can at best
observe it as an outsider; there is no provision for interactive input to
the system, hence no way to play against it. So consider instead a
more congenial system, such as a computer that accepts opponents’
moves via keyboard input, and continuously displays the current posi-
tion on a screen. Again, what makes these display patterns chess pieces
is not that they look like old-fashioned chess pieces to us (indeed,
they may not), but that they are positioned and moved according to
the rules. Only this time we’re not just observing, we’re playing—so
some of those moves are our own. What difference does that make?
If you want to play chess, you have to play by the rules, and insist
that your opponent also play by the rules—you have to commit yourself
to the game proceeding in accord with the rules. In any given instance,
that means you have to be able to tell what the current position is,
what move is being made (considered), and whether that move is
(would be) legal in that position. And you must be resolved to resist if
it isn’t. In other words, in taking on a commitment to the legality of
the game, you inevitably also take on a commitment to recognize the
pieces, positions, and moves—and recognize them correctly—for only
in that way can legality be judged and maintained. This is how the
norms that govern chess phenomena as such can induce norms for the
recognition of those phenomena.
More speciﬁcally, a concord of two potentially discordant factors is
required. If we ask which recognitions are correct, and why, we might
answer that those recognitions are correct that ﬁnd the positions to be
stable and the moves legal—because these are the conditions on there
being chess phenomena to recognize at all. But this risks vacuity; for if
there were no other constraint on correct recognition, then arbitrary
patterns could be gratuitously “recognized” as the moves of any legal
game you like. The ﬁrst leaf falling today could be white’s opening,
p–k4; the second leaf could be black’s reply, also p–k4; and so on, at
tournament level. Obviously, what keeps recognition from being thus
vacuous is its being beholden somehow to what is ostensibly being
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat ter n and  bei n g
2 7 9
recognized, yet in such a way that the criteria of correctness are in-
duced from above.
Here lies the true import of the phrase “you know one when you
see one”: recognition is essentially a skill. It can be easy or arduous to
acquire; but once mastered, it can be performed reliably and consis-
tently. What’s more, competent practitioners can almost always tell
when they’re having difﬁculty; and, in such cases, they can much
improve their performance by taking extra care, making multiple at-
tempts, asking for help, and so on. This conscientious, sometimes
painstaking, practical exercise is the concrete way in which recogni-
tion holds itself to its object. The constitutive standards for a given
domain—the rules of chess, for instance—set conditions jointly on a
range of responsive dispositions and a range of phenomena: if they are
both such that the former consistently ﬁnd the latter to accord with
the standards, then the former are recognition skills and the latter are
objects in the domain. But such eventual concord is anything but
vacuous: it is rare and, in general, a considerable achievement.
It amounts to an achievement precisely because skillful practitio-
ners—observers are a special case—can tell if it isn’t working, and
sometimes rectify it. Thus, whatever form the chess pieces, positions,
and moves take, players who play with them would have to be able to
tell if pieces were disappearing, positions randomly changing, or the
moves illegal. And not only could they tell, but they wouldn’t stand
for it. At ﬁrst, an apparent breach would elicit a more thorough
examination, double checking, perhaps excuses or explanations—all
geared to correcting the recognitions, in case there were some mistake.
But these attempted corrections are themselves just further exercises
of the same recognitive skills constituted along with the recognizable
phenomena according to the standards for the domain. This means
that the efforts may well not succeed: it may turn out that the alleged
chess phenomena are not reliably stable or legal after all—which is to
say, they may not be chess. Thus, insistence on the constitutive stan-
dards is on pain of giving up the game. The fact that this could
happen is what makes it an achievement when it doesn’t.
More generally, if a larger arrangement pattern is constitutive for
the domain of its elements, and is as such insisted upon by skillful
practitioners, it can induce the norms by which those elements can
themselves be recognition patterns. That is, the elements can be crite-
rial for the correctness of their own recognition, and in that sense
objects.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 8 0
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
8 Ontology without equivocation
The term ‘object’ brings connotations of “objectivity” and “autonomy”:
an object is an entity “in its own right”, quite apart from us—which is
why it can stand over against us as a criterion, hence why we can be
wrong about it. Though Dennett does not use the word ‘object’ in this
privileged way, he unmistakably endorses these connotations in his
pervasive talk of ontology, realism, and “salience as real things”. His
purpose, of course, is to explicate and defend his own long-standing
position on the ontological status of intentional entities, a position he
now wants to call mild, intermediate, or semi realism. I am not happy
with any of these expressions. I do agree with Dennett’s ﬁnal assess-
ment that the view itself is clearer than the labels (51); but that, it
seems to me, is not merely a credit to the view, but also a discredit to
the labels.
Let us begin by considering the reality of chess pieces. The ﬁrst
temptation, always, is to think of chess pieces as the familiar manipu-
lable ﬁgurines—conventionally shaped lumps of wood, plastic, or
whatever—and these, of course, are paradigmatically real. Being real,
after all, is being thingly, being in the manner of the res; and the
cohesive, enduring corporeal lump is the paradigm thing. We should,
however, be very hesitant to identify chess pieces with things.
Traditional metaphysics interprets the thing as substance: the indi-
vidual perduring bearer of multiple variable properties.8 The substan-
tial thing is independent in a strong sense, as that which needs nothing
else in order to be.9 This gives the metaphysical meaning of ‘property’:
that which is “proper to” or “owned by” a substance all by itself, that
which a substance “has” regardless of anything else.10 In the case of
corporeal substances, their spatio-temporal continuity and integrity is
the basis of their identity and individuality; and their properties
include mass, shape, hardness, temperature, and the like. By contrast,
market price, functional role, ecological niche, and so on, are not prop-
erties of things: they can never “belong to” an individual indepen-
dently and all by itself.11 The fact that this ontological understanding
remains vague in important respects, and has evolved in a variety of
distinct traditional directions, should not blind us to its very consid-
erable speciﬁcity and deﬁniteness. It is anything but tautologically
empty and noncommittal.
What then about chess pieces—rooks, pawns, knights—are they
substantial things? Manifestly not. A chess piece is “deﬁned”, what it is
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat t e r n  a n d  be i n g
2 8 1
is determined, by how it moves around the chess board in relation to
other pieces, how it threatens, protects, captures, and is captured by
them. Apart from its participation in chess, a rook makes no sense,
and could not be: to be a rook is to play the part of a rook in a chess
game. That is why patterns in the Life plane or on a computer display
can be rooks. The point is not that such patterns are “insubstantial”,
so at least some rooks are. Rather: no rook is a substance. No matter
how the metaphysical notions of independence and property are
worked out, they will not apply to rooks. Nothing about a rook is
determinate, not even its “rookness”, apart from its participation in a
chess game.
It is equally important to resist the thought that rooks, in contrast
to corporeal things, are “abstract”. Insofar as abstraction concerns the
consideration of properties apart from any particular instantiations in
things, then it has nothing to do with chess pieces. But if we broaden
the abstract/concrete distinction to mark the difference between gen-
eral characteristics or possibilities and their determinacy in particular
individuals, then rooks can be considered either way. Considered in
the abstract, rooks—any rook, “the” rook, rooks as a type—always
start in a corner of the board, move only along ranks and ﬁles, tend to
be more valuable than knights, and so on. But at a particular point in
a particular game, this particular rook is a fully concrete individual:
everything that can be determinate for a rook is determinate for this
one—the particular square that it’s on, the particular other pieces that
are threatening or blocking it, its particular history of prior moves, its
particular strategic value in the current position, and whatever else.12
Must we not acknowledge, however, still speaking of this particular
rook, that it is identical to—the very same entity as—this particular
lump of black plastic? Further, having granted that the lump of plastic
is a thing, must we not concede after all that the rook, this particular
rook token, is a thing too—the very same thing? Whatever the fate of
token identity theory in other domains, I believe it is demonstrably
false for chess pieces. Chess imposes quite deﬁnite identity conditions
on its pieces, and they simply do not coincide with those for lumps of
plastic. For instance, a game begun with the plastic set in the garden,
can, after lunch, be carried on with the ivory set in the library. Now,
the rule for castling stipulates that one cannot castle with a rook that
has previously moved, even if it has since returned to its original
square. And, clearly, for one continuing game, black’s queen-rook
would be the same piece in the garden and in the library; that is, black
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 82
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
couldn’t move it in the garden, and then castle with it later in the
library, claiming that it was a different rook. But the plastic and ivory
lumps are quite distinct (all day long); hence neither can be identical
with that (or any) rook.13
Dennett’s double notion of pattern gives us also another way to see
past the token identity theory. As the account has been emerging,
individual chess pieces are recognition patterns serving as the ele-
ments of rule-constituted games, themselves understood as orderly
arrangements. But recognition patterns need have no separate identi-
ﬁability at all (as patterns of anything else, for example), apart from
their recognizability in context. There must, of course, be ways of
double-checking these recognitions, perhaps from multiple angles or
by multiple observers (with insistence on the rules inducing the nor-
mative force). Even so, ultimately, it is (or can be) just a matter of
recognition—knowing one when you see one. If, with all due care and
attention, that can’t be made to work, then the game breaks down,
and objectivity vanishes. But until then, everything’s ﬁne. In other
words, there need in principle be no determinate candidate in any
other domain (such as corporeal substances or arrangements of pixels)
for token identiﬁcation.
So, are chess pieces real? It depends on how the term is meant. If it’s
used in its strict (metaphysical) sense, then, no, chess pieces are not at
all real, not even a little bit. But if it’s used in one of its more colloquial
senses, to pick out all and only what there is—what there “really” is, as
opposed to the posits of hallucinations, superstitions, and false pre-
tenses—then, of course, there really are chess pieces, lots of them, all
over the world. On neither reading, however, is the reality of chess
pieces “intermediate” or “halfway”: they are not substances at all, but
they are genuine, full-ﬂedged entities, one hundred percent. As far as I
can see, the idea of “mild realism” depends on running together these
two distinct senses of ‘real’—and, consequently, is much more likely
to confuse than to illuminate.14
9 Stance and being
It would be a misunderstanding, therefore, to take the analogy be-
tween intentional states, on the one hand, and patterns and game
phenomena, on the other, as a way of mitigating or watering down the
ontology of the mental—as if to say they’re “no more real” than these.
The distinctions among the ways of being, and, in particular, between
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat t e r n  a n d  be i n g
2 83
the being of the intentional and the being of the physical, are, of
course, central to the account; and it is to illuminate these that pat-
terns and games are discussed. But the inner coherence and genius of
Dennett’s position lies not in the analogies among these distinctions,
but the underlying unity that binds them all together, that makes
them all distinctions among ways of being.
Famously, Dennett introduces and explicates intentionality in
terms of what he calls “the intentional stance”. A stance, on the face of
it, is a kind of posture or attitude that somebody can take toward
something, a speciﬁc way of regarding and dealing with it. That inten-
tional systems should be deﬁned in terms of a possible attitude to-
ward them has misled many into thinking the point is to downgrade
their status, to imply that the intentional is somehow secondary, ob-
server relative, or artiﬁcial—in contrast, say, to the physical. But, in
this respect, Dennett puts the intentional and the physical exactly on
a par: each is understood in terms of a possible stance. To be sure, the
physical stance is importantly different from the intentional; but it is a
stance, nonetheless. And there are others: Dennett discusses also the
design stance, and later considers the possibility of a moral or per-
sonal stance.15 Presumably, he would be equally receptive to stances
for evolutionary biology, cultural anthropology, macro economics, and
so on.
Ofﬁcially, a stance is a strategy that one might adopt in order to
predict and explain the behavior of something. Which stance one
adopts in a given case is, of course, constrained by which strategies
can be expected to work; but it is otherwise optional—a pragmatic
decision, based on interests and purposes. Thus, a person might be
treated as a physical object when calculating elevator loads, as a
designed system when performing surgery, as an intentional system
when offering coffee, and so on. The phenomena predicted and ex-
plained from the respective stances are not the same. Purposive ac-
tion, for instance, is not the same as physiological movement; and
both are distinct from physical motion. Indeed, each stance has its
own peculiar vocabulary, and, in general, even its own observational
and explanatory methodology. So, from the design stance, one speaks
of what the various structures and processes are for, and explains how
their organized complexes work; and, in this context, one can say also
that something is malfunctioning, the wrong size, out of kilter, or
broken—terms that make no sense from either the intentional or the
physical stance.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 84
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
But a stance is more than just an attitude toward or a perspective
on things, more even than a method and terminology for dealing with
them. Adopting a stance is taking a stand. Why? Because it is this
alone—commitment to constitutive standards—that allows that to-
ward which the stand is taken to stand out as phenomena, to stand
over against us as objects. Such standards determine the being of the
objects: what it is for them to be, and what is possible and impossible
for them. Practitioners’ insistence that the objects accord with the
standards presupposes an ability to tell whether they do, and a resolve
not to stand for it if they don’t—either by ﬁnding out what went
wrong and ﬁxing it, or (failing that) by “giving up the game”. Only in
the light of this commitment can it be said nonvacuously, when things
go right, that phenomena have been discovered, that objects have been
constituted.16 Only against a genuine and determinate possibility of
failure can there be any meaningful success.
Dennett discusses only the intentional stance in any detail. For the
intentional domain, rationality is the constitutive standard—“rational-
ity is the mother of intention” (1971/78, 19). Although Dennett speaks
of a presumption of rationality, rather than a commitment to it, the
force is the same.
The presumption of rationality is so strongly entrenched in our
inference habits [about people] that when our predictions prove
false, we at ﬁrst cast about for adjustments in the information-
possession conditions (he must not have heard, he must not
know English, he must not have seen x, been aware that y, etc.)
or goal weightings, before questioning the rationality of the
system as a whole. In extreme cases personalities may prove to
be so unpredictable from the intentional stance that we abandon
it …
(1971/78, 32)
In other words, for intentional attribution, we insist upon rationality:
in confronting apparent breaches of the standard, we ﬁrst attempt to
rectify them (that is, to explain them away in terms sanctioned by the
standard itself); and, failing that, we give it up. This, I claim—and I
intend it fully in the spirit of Dennett’s stances—is the essence of all
science, and, indeed, of all objective knowledge.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat t e r n  a n d  be i n g
2 85
10 Outer and inner recognition
To bring out the essential shape of “Real Patterns”, I have so far
suppressed the noise in it. Yet noise is an integral component of
Dennett’s insight. Intentional systems, as he is constantly reminding
us, do not have to be perfectly rational—just mostly (a lot better than
chance). Ultimately, in fact, the notion of “perfect rationality” (or, for
that matter, perfect accord with constitutive standards more gener-
ally) need not be well deﬁned. This is one of several respects in which
the “chess stance” can be misleading, if taken as more than an intro-
ductory example; for digital games are quite exceptional in the explicit
precision with which their constitutive standards can be articulated,
and the corresponding absoluteness of the demand for compliance.
Even physics, notable as it is for ontical precision, is less well spelled
out in its ontological foundations than is chess, and more tolerant of
anomalies in its concrete practice.
To see the possibility of unarticulated (perhaps inarticulable) con-
stitutive standards, we turn again to Dennett’s deﬁnition of ‘pattern’ in
terms of recognition, only this time from the inside out. What we
have hitherto called “recognition patterns” are patterns that can be
recognized, so to speak, from the outside, when the pattern as a whole
is present. These have served, in the two-level account, as the ele-
ments of a larger “arrangement pattern”, which is the global structure
of the domain as prescribed by its constitutive standards. In principle,
however, there need be no articulate speciﬁcation of these standards:
all that is really essential is an ability to tell, in any given case, whether
the standards are being met. Thus, for chess, it would sufﬁce in prin-
ciple if the players could tell which moves were legal, regardless of
whether they could spell out the rules that deﬁne legality—or, indeed,
whether there were any such rules.
So we can distinguish two fundamentally different sorts of pattern
recognition. On the one hand, there is recognizing an integral,
present pattern from the outside—outer recognition we could call it. On
the other hand, there is recognizing a global pattern from the inside,
by recognizing whether what is present, the current element, ﬁts the
pattern—which would, by contrast, be inner recognition. The ﬁrst is
telling whether something (a pattern) is there; the second is telling
whether what’s there belongs (to a pattern). When chess players recog-
nize pieces, positions, and moves, it is outer recognition of the consti-
tuted phenomena; when they recognize these phenomena as legal or
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 8 6
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
illegal, it is inner recognition of the constitutive standards. What
these have in common, as species of recognition, is that “you can tell by
looking”—that is, in both cases, it’s the exercise of a practical, learn-
able skill (not an inference or a rule-application).
What is crucial for objectivity is that the two recognitive skills be
distinct. (They cannot, of course, be independent, inasmuch as what
is recognized in the one way is constitutive for what is recognized in
the other.) In particular, skillful practitioners must be able to ﬁnd
them in conﬂict—that is, simultaneously to outer-recognize some
phenomenon as present (actual) and inner-recognize it as not allowed
(impossible). For only in the face of such potential discord does it
make sense to insist that the patterns accessible to outer recognition
accord with the pattern accessible to inner recognition; and only on
the strength of such insistence can the latter pattern be a standard
according to which the former are constituted as objects.
The essential but perhaps elusive distinction between these two
recognitive skills is reﬂected in the equally essential but sometimes
elusive distinction between knowledge and understanding. Roughly,
knowledge is outer recognition, understanding inner. That is, phe-
nomena are known insofar as they are recognized as present with their
respective characteristics and relations; they are understood insofar as
they are recognized as being in accord with the standards constitutive
for their domain. If understanding is lord of the domain, explanation
is concierge: to explain a phenomenon is to “show it in”, to exhibit its
allowability according to the standards, to let it be. This is what lies
behind Dennett’s saying that a stance is a strategy for explanation. A
stance, as a commitment to the relevant standards, as made concrete
in the respective recognitive skills and insistence on their concord, is
nothing other than a strategy for showing that the observable phe-
nomena ﬁt the overall constitutive pattern. The centrality of explana-
tion in the philosophy of science has exactly the same provenance.
Herein lies also, I think, the ultimate limitation of the intentional
stance. For, if the foregoing is correct, then neither knowledge nor
understanding is possible for a system that is itself incapable of adopt-
ing a stance—that is, insisting that objects accord with constitutive
standards. By this test, neither extant animals nor current computers
can know or understand anything. This jibes with—I suspect, ac-
counts for—widespread intuitions to the effect that “genuine” or “full-
ﬂedged” intentional states cannot properly be ascribed to animals
and/or computers. They may exhibit, one wants to say, behavioral
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat t e r n  a n d  be i n g
2 8 7
regularities that are best characterized as informed goal directedness;
but they don’t understand what they’re doing at all. Dennett has hoped
to demystify such notions as belief and desire by assimilating them to
the posits of the intentional stance—being careful all the while to
acknowledge the differences of degree between more and less sophisti-
cated intentional systems. But “beliefs” and “desires”, in the complete
absence of any understanding, indeed the absence of any possibility of
understanding, what they are about, could hardly be of the same
order as what we ordinarily understand by these words. So the differ-
ences are not of degree; and the demystiﬁcation fails.
Yet, in a larger sense, it succeeds. For the true achievement lies not
in the account of the intentional stance in particular, but in the ac-
count of stances and objectivity in general. If the so-called “intentional
states” ascribed in the so-called “intentional stance” are not genuinely
intentional, that indicates no worse than a misnomer—and certainly
not a misidentiﬁcation or mischaracterization of an important do-
main of objective inquiry. But further, if intentionality proper is ever
to be understood as an objective phenomenon, then it too must be
constituted in accord with a standard-setting stance. Whether this
stance, as itself a stance toward standard-setting as such, must be in
some unique way a stance toward itself and its own ﬁnitude, can here
be left open. In that direction lies the existential analytic of dasein, an
undertaking which Dennett has only just begun.
Notes:
1 This is not, of course, to pretend that spatial being is unproblem-
atic, nor that it is unconnected with physics and/or everyday life.
The point is merely that counting as a center of gravity or a lost
sock center is not, on the face of it, an ontological determination.
2 Note: “the Life world” here refers to the realm of possible struc-
tures and processes in the two dimensional formal system called
“The Game of Life”; it has nothing to do, not even as a pun, with
Husserl’s Lebenswelt.
3 Though Dennett makes nothing of it (nor will I), it is interest-
ingly difﬁcult to say just which cells (at a time) are components of
a pattern such as a glider or an eater. Clearly, they must include
not just the cells that are “on” there and then, but also at least
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

2 8 8
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
some of the adjacent “off” cells; for were those not off, it would be
a different pattern. But exactly which cells need to be in which
states is not always clear, and may even depend on spatial and
temporal context—as when an eater is in the process of consum-
ing something else.
4 The phrase “when they occur” is what differentiates this example
from trajectories. A given trajectory through space-time may or
may not be the center of gravity for some extended mass; but
there’s no sense in which the trajectory itself “occurs” or not,
depending on this—it’s just “there”, as a continuous, one-dimen-
sional manifold, either way. A sequence of sets of cell states, by
contrast, actually occurs only if the relevant cells are in fact in the
relevant states in the relevant temporal order; otherwise, it isn’t
“there”, it isn’t “realized” at all.
5 Actually, since Life is deterministic, every conﬁguration has a
guaranteed future, as long as it’s not interfered with; and one
might say that this total future amounts to one “pattern” which
persists. But gliders and a few other patterns persist in the much
stronger sense that they are periodic: that is, the same momentary
conﬁgurations (perhaps translated) recur in the same order indef-
initely.
6 Whether anyone could, in fact, recognize them as implemented
in the Life plane is a separate question; but the essential point
could be made as well with a less formidable implementation.
7 But see the distinction between regulations and standards in
chapter 13; the former are clearly normative, the latter not. [Note
added 1997.]
8 Compare this with Quine’s deﬁnition: “To be is to be the value of
a bound variable”—meaning that identiﬁable unity of which an
arbitrarily complex open sentence is true.
9 In part one, paragraph 51, of his Principles of Philosophy, Descartes
writes: “By substance we can understand nothing other than a
thing which exists in such a way as to depend on no other thing
for its existence.” (1644/1985, 210)
10 Relational properties, if not rejected as incoherent, can be con-
ceived as proper to a plurality of substances—but, again, proper to
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Pat t e r n  a n d  be i n g
2 8 9
them, regardless of anything else. Extrinsic properties, properties
that individuals have by virtue of their relations to others, are
then not, strictly speaking, properties at all, but rather abbreviated
ways of speaking about pluralities.
11 This, no doubt, is why philosophers from time to time try to
explain them away—they’re not “really real”.
12 In just this spirit, I believe also that Dennett should avoid speak-
ing (as he does, for instance, on page 29) of beliefs as abstract
objects. Beliefs, of course do not belong to the thing category any
more than chess pieces do; but, in the broadened sense of the
abstract/concrete distinction, surely beliefs can be discussed ei-
ther in abstraction or in the concrete. Thus, one might (as in
logic) consider beliefs only with regard to their content, “abstract-
ing away” from the degree of conviction with which they are held,
the source of the evidence on which they are based, their recep-
tion as good news or bad news, and so on. Concretion for beliefs,
by contrast, is to be fully determinate in all such possible regards.
13 The rules for en passant and stalemate also depend on the identity
of pieces from move to move. I think the same argument implies
that there is no piece identity from one game to another, and
hence that there are no chess pieces at all except in the midst of
games—in the box, there’s just plastic. This is to say, in another
terminology, that the that-it-is of a chess piece (its being “in play”)
is just as dependent on chess as is its what-it-is (its “chess role”).
Note that token identity theory for chess pieces breaks down just
as thoroughly when the pieces “are” Life-plane or screen-pixel
patterns as when they “are” lumps of plastic; in other words, this
‘are’ cannot be the ‘is’ of identity, but must be something else.
Perhaps we should say that the pixels or plastic “serve as” or
“implement” the pieces, or some such.
14 A further confusion possibly lurking in the progression from
“milder than mild” to “industrial strength” realism is the sugges-
tion that ontologies come in “degrees”, arrayed along a single di-
mension. But I see no reason whatever to suppose that the
respective ways of being (“reality”) of intentional states, functional
components, physical particles, chess pieces, everyday parapher-
nalia, works of art, institutions, people, and whatever else there is,
form a one-dimensional series in any interesting sense.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

29 0
H av i n g Though t
15 See Dennett 1973/78, 240–243.
16 This suggestion that objectivity is contingent on a commitment
(eventually) to “give up the game”, if it cannot be made to work in
practice, is similar in structure and intent to Popper’s proposal of
falsiﬁability as the mark of the scientiﬁc; but it is, so to speak, a
level up (ontological rather than ontical). Thus, Popper addressed
his criterion to hypotheses (particular candidate bits of doctrine),
thereby presupposing an already constituted vocabulary for ex-
pressing the hypotheses, and an already constituted methodology
for testing them. A stance, by contrast, effectively is a vocabulary
and a methodology, coupled with a demand for what will in fact
be found—or, more to the point, what will not be found. Hence,
what is up for rejection in case of failure is not any particular
hypothesis but rather the entire constituted domain (at least in
the current situation).
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

c h a pt e r  t w e lv e
Understanding:
Dennett and Searle
1 Reconciliation
I want to attempt here what may seem the impossible: to agree with
both Dan Dennett and John Searle about the mind—or, at any rate,
about intentionality. I don’t mean agreement on every detail, of course;
that would be too much to hope. Rather, the idea is to outline a view
that accommodates (what seem to me) the most central and the most
important of their respective insights and intuitions, at the expense of
a few others. As it happens, the effort to achieve unity will entail the
occasional point of disagreement with both of them, as well as the
introduction of some exogenous material which I can only hope is
compatible with what’s already there.
We can begin with some obvious and acknowledged common
ground. Dennett and Searle agree in regarding intentionality as an
entirely natural phenomenon, and in their commitment to a scientiﬁc
understanding of nature. Moreover, they are each materialists, at least
to the extent of holding that (as a matter of fact, so far as we know)
matter, suitably arranged and interacting, is necessary and sufﬁcient
for intentionality. In other words, two worlds that were materially
identical would be mentally identical as well; but if you took away the
matter, or sufﬁciently rearranged it, you would destroy all intentional-
ity too. On the other hand, neither Dennett nor Searle is sympathetic
to traditional physicalist reductionism. That is, neither holds out any
prospect for strict deﬁnitions of mental or intentional concepts in
physical terms.
Where they diverge, then, is in the way they characterize that
“suitable arrangement and interaction” of matter, and hence in their
accounts of which systems might have it, and how we can tell. The
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

29 2
H av i n g  Though t
appearance of conﬂict, however, is artiﬁcially heightened by overem-
phasis on a few strategic examples—particularly computers and ai.
Better, I think, to concentrate on basic principles as much as possible,
with the hope that controversial cases will not simply be “decided” but
illuminated. The ideal outcome would be not an adjudication but an
explanation of why those cases are controversial in the ﬁrst place—
that is, why they pull in both ways. But, before we can make any
headway with that, we will need a brief overview of the two ap-
proaches under consideration.
2 Dennett on intentionality
Dennett introduced his notion of the intentional stance to articulate his
view that intentionality is, in a certain sense, in the eye of the be-
holder. The sense is this: a system has intentional states—paradig-
matically, beliefs and desires—just in case its behavior exhibits a
speciﬁc sort of observable pattern. (1981/87, 25–29) The intentional
states aren’t the same as that observable pattern, or, at least, not the
observable part of it; rather, they are a kind of completion of the
pattern that is more or less necessary for it to stand out clearly in the
ﬁrst place. So it’s roughly as if you were given every other letter of a
text, or a scattered fraction of an image, and you “ﬁll in” the “missing”
pieces. Without that ﬁlling in, the visible part seems irregular and
disjointed; yet its structure becomes conspicuous and compelling,
once the remainder is interpolated. Furthermore, in terms of the new
whole, the original part can itself be redescribed (namely, in inten-
tional terms).
It is important to understand, however, that this is not “inference
to the best explanation”. Dennett is not saying that the rest of the
pattern is “really there” though, for some reason, invisible—so we
must infer it from the part we can see. In particular, he’s not saying
that beliefs and desires are determinate brain conﬁgurations or pro-
cesses, which, as it happens, we are (so far) unable to observe. Rather,
intentional states and processes are, in principle, nothing but our pro-
jected ﬁlling in of the pattern, in such a way that it makes sense
overall. This is the way in which they are “in the eye of the be-
holder”—or perhaps it would be better to say, in the sense of the
understander. But note well: this by no means renders them ﬁctional,
gratuitous, or arbitrary. In any given case, the attribution of inten-
tional states is strongly constrained, both by principles and by facts—
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Un derstanding: Dennet t and Searle
293
so strongly, indeed, that it is a nontrivial achievement to succeed at it at
all. (24–25)
The essential principle of the intentional stance is a constitutive
standard of rationality. This, in effect, deﬁnes the kind of sense that can
be made of a behavior pattern by interpolating intentional states and
processes into it, and simultaneously redescribing the behavior itself
in intentional terms—for instance, as perceptions and actions. Ratio-
nality is a global property of a system’s behavior in context, including
actual truth and success. (17–21) Moreover, it must be understood as
projectable (in Nelson Goodman’s sense—that is, it supports coun-
terfactuals). That is why it is a constraint on a pattern, and a strong
enough one to support interpolation and a new descriptive vocabu-
lary. Perception and action make sense as such as, and only as, rational.
The intentional stance is the descriptive and projective stance adopted
by someone—the “observer”—who, by counting on this pattern and
using its vocabulary, understands the system as intentional (rational).
3 Searle on intentionality
Searle will have next to none of this. Above all, he rejects the idea that
intentionality is in any sense in the eye of the beholder. (1992, 7 and 78)
It’s just as real—right there in the brain—as any other higher-order
property of complex systems, such as liquidity, digestion, photosyn-
thesis, or life itself. (14 and 28–29) The microstructure of the brain is
causally responsible for its mental (and any other emergent) proper-
ties, in just the sense that the microstructure of water is causally
responsible for its liquidity—though, of course, in a much more com-
plicated way. This offers a perfectly straightforward solution to the
traditional problem of mind-body interaction, while preserving cer-
tain other attractive features of that tradition. Thus, since mental
states and events just are physical states and events, only described at
a higher level, there is no mystery about how they can interact causally
with other physical states and events. At the same time, however,
these interactions are entirely contingent, and are in no way constitu-
tive of the mental as such.
So, for instance, it would be metaphysically possible—though ap-
palling—to have mental states and events without any actual connec-
tion to perception or behavior. By the same token, it makes perfect
sense—though it strains credulity—to imagine a system that behaved
exactly as if it had mental states, but in fact had none. (65–71) This is
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

29 4
H av i n g  Though t
the basis of Searle’s rejection of the Turing test. It’s not that he be-
lieves that ai is on the verge of producing systems that act just like
people, even though they’re zombies “inside”. There are plenty of
reasons to be sceptical of that. The point is rather that the Turing
test—and by implication, the intentional stance—is incompetent to
decide what, if anything, is inside. Intentionality is, in Searle’s terms,
intrinsic to the systems that have it. No amount or kind of behavior is
either necessary or sufﬁcient.
Finally, Searle emphasizes, in a way that Dennett does not (and
cannot), that intrinsic intentionality is essentially subjective. (93–100)
Obviously, “subjective” doesn’t here mean observer-relative or in the
eye of the beholder—as when we say that aesthetic tastes are “subjec-
tive”. Rather, it means that intentional states—again, paradigmati-
cally beliefs and desires—always belong to somebody, a subject who has
them. Subjectivity, according to Searle, is entails consciousness in the
following way: any genuine subject, at least sometimes, has some of its
intentional states consciously (and could, in principal, have any of
them consciously). That is, no system incapable of consciousness is a
subject or has any intentional states (except derivatively).
Thus, in Searle’s terminology, the difference between him and
Dennett is that he regards intentionality as intrinsic and subjective,
whereas Dennett regards it as observer-relative and objective. Subject
to some qualiﬁcations about how these terms are to be understood, I
think this characterization is fair enough; and, moreover, put this way,
I think Searle is closer to the truth. Predictably, however, the qualiﬁ-
cations I have in mind are not altogether trivial, nor necessarily ac-
ceptable to Searle. Indeed, as my introductory remarks hinted, the net
effect will be to make Searle’s position rather closer to Dennett’s than
either of them might expect (or, perhaps, appreciate).
4 Normativity and aspect
Everyone agrees that intentionality is somehow normative. For Den-
nett, this comes out in the appeal to rationality as the criterion for
adequate interpretation. (1981/87b, 51–54) The point, of course, is not
that the interpreter must be rational, but rather that the system being
interpreted must, as interpreted, be rational. That is, the normative
standard is imposed on the intentional system as such. Still, it’s being
imposed—that is, it’s observer-relative. For Searle, the normative ele-
ment shows up in what he calls the satisfaction conditions for intentional
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Un derstanding: Dennet t and Searle
295
states; and, needless to say, he maintains that the having of satisfac-
tion conditions is itself also intrinsic to intentional mental states.
(1992, 51 and 238) But, for both authors, the mental just is—or, at any
rate, supervenes on—the physical; and Searle has no more to say than
Dennett about how a physical system might have normative properties
intrinsically. In fact, Dennett might well claim it as an advantage of his
“eye-of-the-beholder” approach that it needn’t address this question
(or, anyway, so it seems). Searle, on the other hand, can’t get off so
easily.
To say that intentional states are normative—are subject to
norms—is to say that there is a way that they’re supposed to be, which
may or may not be the way they are. Moreover, it is characteristic of
the speciﬁc normativity of the intentional that whether any given state
is as it is “supposed to be” depends on some determinate condition or
state of affairs outside of it—namely, its satisfaction condition (some-
times also called its “intentional object”). Finally, however, all inten-
tional states (that we know of) are ﬁnite; that is to say, they do not and
cannot depend on everything about any concrete particular, but can
only depend on speciﬁc aspects of it. Searle calls this the aspectual shape
of intentional states.
For example, I believe that Mugsy is a brown dog. As an inten-
tional state, my belief is subject to norms; more speciﬁcally, as a belief,
it is supposed to be true. Whether it is in fact true, however, depends
on something outside of it—namely, Mugsy. But it does not and
cannot depend on everything about Mugsy, because Mugsy has inﬁ-
nitely (or, at least, indeﬁnitely) many concrete determinations, and I
am incapable of beliefs with inﬁnite determinate content. Instead, my
belief depends on only two of Mugsy’s determinations: her color and
her biological species. That is, it depends only on whether she is
brown and a dog; this is its aspectual shape. (The term ‘aspectual
shape’ suggests a visible “look”; and Searle does associate it with “see-
ing as”, “perspective”, and “point of view”. But I think the argument
from ﬁnitude, which Searle does not give, is both more general and
more fundamental.)
5 A special case: chess perception
So the question is: How can naturally evolved physical brain conﬁgu-
rations be normative in this way intrinsically? This is the question that
I want to sketch an answer to—an answer that superﬁcially sides with
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

29 6
H av i n g  Though t
Searle against Dennett, but more deeply brings the two of them to-
gether. I will begin by considering a special case and a special problem
concerning it—a problem which I will try to solve in the special case.
Then I will suggest that the case, the problem, and the solution all
generalize. The special case is visible chess phenomena: pieces, positions,
moves, and the like. The special problem is how these phenomena can
be the satisfaction conditions of perceptual states.
Why is that a problem? Well, suppose that I am looking at the
current position, and I see that your knight is threatening my rook. In
virtue of what is it the case that my perception is of that—in other
words, has those satisfaction conditions? Science, of course, has
learned a lot about vision. We know, for example, that ambient pho-
tons bounce off the surfaces of the knight and rook, enter my eyeball,
and stimulate a complex pattern of pulses in my optic nerve, which
ultimately causes my perceptual state. Moreover, had my bishop been
where my rook is, then the photon and pulse patterns would have
been different, and (most likely) I would have seen your knight as
threatening my bishop instead.
So causal histories are highly relevant to what we perceive. Never-
theless, they cannot be what determine the content of our perceptual
states, for two closely related reasons. In the ﬁrst place, the pieces on
the board are only one stage in those causal histories, and nothing in
the histories themselves picks out that particular stage as more impor-
tant than the others, even counterfactually. That is, the causal histo-
ries as such give no reason to say that I perceive the chess pieces, as
opposed to the photons or even the pulses in my optic nerve. Second,
and more to the heart of the matter, causal histories are not norma-
tive. The content of my perception, its satisfaction condition, is what
is supposed to have caused it, regardless of what actually caused it.
Misperceptions and illusions, after all, are caused too—just not by
what they purport to be of. (Deviant causal chains complicate things
even more; but they can be set aside in the present context.)
What we need, then, is an account of why my perception is supposed
to have been caused by your knight threatening my rook, and why that
normative condition is intrinsic—that is, not observer-relative. (Such
an account would also explain why that stage in the causal history is
the relevant one.) To understand the normativity of perception, we
must understand what perception is, and what is required of it. This
is where the artiﬁciality of the chess example helpfully clariﬁes and
simpliﬁes matters. Perceiving chess phenomena is clearly an integral
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Un derstanding: Dennet t and Searle
297
part of playing chess—along with making moves, weighing options,
developing strategies, and so on. (Of course, one can also be a specta-
tor at a chess match; but that capacity, surely, is parasitic on the ability
to play.)
6 Constitutive commitment
Consequently, we must make a brief digression about what it is to
play chess. Two points will be important for what follows. First, chess
phenomena cannot be identiﬁed with any particular shapes, colors,
materials, or other low-level properties; rather, they are ontologically
constituted by higher-order standards that are spelled out in the rules
of the game. So, on the one hand, chess pieces do not have to be the
familiar wooden or plastic ﬁgurines: they can be marks on a piece of
paper, costumed servants, patterns of light on a computer screen, or
what have you—just so long as they are moved consistently according
to the rules of chess. And, on the other hand, the pieces of an ordi-
nary chess set could easily be used to play some quite different
game—in which case they wouldn’t be chess pieces or phenomena.
Hence, whether there are chess phenomena there to be perceived at all
depends on whether the standards constitutive for chess are in fact
being met.
Second, the chess player/perceiver cannot be indifferent as to
whether these standards are being met. If I am to see something as,
say, a knight threatening a rook, I must be committed to it being part of
a larger pattern of other things I can or could see—other pieces,
moves, positions, and so on—that consistently accord with the rules.
This commitment, I believe, is precisely what Dennett calls a stance—
not an intentional stance, of course, but rather a chess stance. The
constitutive role of the rules of the game exactly parallels the constitu-
tive role he assigns to rationality-in-context for the intentional stance.
Without adopting such a stance (that is, committing to it) it would be
impossible to see anything as a chess phenomenon at all.
Commitment to constitutive standards means at least three things.
First it means that if something does not seem to accord with them,
then one had better double check to make sure there’s no mistake.
Second, if the anomaly persists, and no mistake can be found, then
one must either modify the standards, or give up on them (and the
corresponding perceptions) altogether. But, third, modifying or giving
up on established constitutive standards is not a matter to be taken
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

29 8
H av i n g  Though t
lightly. For instance, I might believe that you had made an illegal move
if, say, I mistook your bishop for a pawn, or got confused about the
icons on our new computer. But if something does seem illegal to me,
I can’t just ignore it. I need to ﬁnd (and correct) my mistake (if any),
because if there’s no mistake—if you are in fact making (what would
be) illegal chess moves—then this isn’t chess. Either you’re playing a
different game, or none at all. Finally, however, I shouldn’t give up too
easily, because constituting a domain of phenomena according to
standards is a nontrivial and valuable achievement—and, in the case of
established standards, one with a history of reliability.
7 Objectivity (transcendental philosophy)
The stakes, however, are higher than just rule-governed games. The
idea of constituted phenomena goes back to Kant; and the idea that
there can be multiple phenomenal domains constituted according to
different and perhaps contingent standards is a staple of twentieth-
century philosophy—as the litany of terms like ‘regional ontology’,
‘framework of entities’, ‘conceptual scheme’, ‘scientiﬁc paradigm’, and
now ‘stance’ should make obvious. While these are not all equivalent,
what they have in common is a conviction that the objects of percep-
tion, thought, and action are intelligible as the objects they are only in
terms of some prior commitment on our part to the limits of what
they can be. And the terms provided (constituted) by that commit-
ment are precisely the aspects under which those objects can be the
objects of intentional states.
And that brings us back to Searle and the normativity of percep-
tion. Suppose there is something odd about the pattern of photons
bouncing off your knight into my eye. For some reason, from my
current angle of view, that pattern is much more like what would
usually come from a bishop than what would usually come from a
knight. So I have the response that I would usually have if there were
a bishop there. Is that a mistake? The question can be put more
sharply. Have I misperceived your knight, or have I correctly perceived
the photons? The account of constitutive standards provides the an-
swer. What I am committed to is playing chess. Chess standards con-
strain pieces, positions, and moves on the chessboard—not photons.
Accordingly, the questions of misperception and correctness that can
arise (and must be resolved) in the context of chess concern only those
pieces, positions, and moves—not the photons. This is why my
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Un derstanding: Dennet t and Searle
299
perceptions are supposed to be of the pieces, positions, and moves—not
the photons. In other words: objectivity as such is constituted.
8 Subjectivity (transcendental philosophy)
But is it intrinsic? Yes! Commitment to standards is the very founda-
tion and essence of intrinsic intentionality. To see this, we must exam-
ine what is meant by ‘intrinsic’. Obviously, the intentionality of some
particular belief or desire cannot be intrinsic to that individual state
all by itself. That would be incompatible with the holism of intention-
ality and its essential dependence on the background—two theses
which Searle (among others) has espoused for years. (1992, 175–178)
Rather, the intrinsicness must pertain at once to all the intentional
states of a single system; and it means that the intentionality of those
states is independent of any other intentionality—that is, the inten-
tionality of any other system. For instance, printed marks on a page,
or the states of an adding machine, may have various meanings—but
only because we assign those meanings to them. Their intentionality
is derivative from ours, and in that sense observer (or user) relative.
Intrinsic intentionality is not thus derivative. (78–82 and 211–212)
That, however, is merely a negative characterization: it says what
intrinsic intentionality is not. A genuine positive characterization
would have to show how intentionality that is not derivative is even
possible—that is, how it is possible for any system to have intentional
states on its own. (This amounts to showing how intentionality is
possible at all, since derivative intentionality only makes sense if there
is some nonderivative intentionality for it to be derivative from.) It’s
worth remarking in passing that what counts as a single “system” is so
far a free parameter in the account; Searle often speaks as if the
relevant systems are individual brains, but that’s not built into the
theory. What matters is that the unity of the system follow from the
same positive account of how such a system could have intentional
states on its own—that is, intrinsically.
But that’s precisely what commitment to constitutive standards
provides. The unity of the system is the unity of a single consistent
commitment in terms of which a plurality of intentional states can be
normatively beholden to their constituted satisfaction conditions.
Moreover, it is the basis of the necessary subjectivity of intentional
states. ‘Subject’ here cannot just mean grammatical subject: even an
adding machine is the “subject” if its states in that sense. Rather,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

300
H av i n g Though t
‘subject’ means something like “author and owner”—someone who is
responsible for the states in question, and to whom they matter.
Surely that subject is none other than the one who is committed to
the very standards that render these states intentionally normative in
the ﬁrst place. My commitment to getting my intentional states
“right” is what makes their intentionality my own—that is, intrinsic to
me.1 In other words: subjectivity as such is constituted.
It might even be that commitment throws some light on the rele-
vance of consciousness; for one of the characteristic features of con-
sciousness is that, though it’s not always reﬂective, it’s always potentially
reﬂective. The self is, so to speak, always there in the background. But
commitment to constitutive standards likewise lurks always in the
background. When I am playing chess, I am not constantly double-
checking my perceptions to ensure their accuracy; but I am always
quietly at the ready. I am always, so to speak, “on guard”, so that
whenever there’s an anomaly, then the issue can come to the fore.
9 Understanding
I have, in effect, been urging Dennett’s hallmark notion of a stance
onto Searle, as the foundation of his own account of intentionality.
But I have not actually been urging Dennett’s own position. For Den-
nett understands intentionality in terms of a particular stance—the
intentional stance—adopted toward a system; whereas I am suggesting
that we understand intentionality in terms of a stance—any stance—
adopted by a system. Dennett himself discusses what he calls “higher-
order” intentionality, which would have to involve a system adopting
the intentional stance, adopting the stance that something else is
adopting the intentional stance, and so on. (1983/87, 243–250) But
this is not quite the same as what I’m talking about, nor does Dennett
make anything like the use I’m trying to make of it.
Here is why I think adopting a stance is prerequisite to intentional-
ity. Any number of different states and arrangements of matter can be
regarded as carrying information about things other than themselves.
This can be a consequence of natural causal dependencies, as when
clouds inform us of imminent rain; or it can be a matter of tacit or
explicit convention, as when a badge informs me that someone is a
police ofﬁcer. More interestingly, complex systems can be built that
record, transmit, combine, and otherwise usefully manipulate such
information bearing states in ways that systematically preserve their
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Un derstanding: Dennet t and Searle
301
status as reliable bearers of information. For instance, an automated
business accounting system can be built such that its manipulations
preserve correct arithmetic relationships (according to the relevant
interpretations of its states), thereby extracting many useful results.
This is what we now call computation.
What is conspicuous about all such systems, whether automated
or not, is that they themselves do not have a clue about the informa-
tion that (from our point of view) they carry. Clouds do not under-
stand anything about rain, nor do badges about police. Likewise, a
computer has no understanding whatever about business, accounting,
or even arithmetic. Understanding a domain and its entities is under-
standing the principles according to which that domain and those
entities are constituted; and such understanding can be nothing other
than a commitment to those principles. Intentionality presupposes a
committed stance because intentionality—meaning—presupposes
understanding.
Searle once said of computers, including ai—what I call good old
fashioned ai, or gofai—systems, that they understand exactly noth-
ing; they are not in that line of business. (1980, 288) I like the straight-
forwardness of this claim; and, what’s more, I agree with it completely.
Gofai systems (including, of course, computer “chess-playing” sys-
tems) are utterly incapable of any sort of commitment: nothing is at
stake for them. They are never in a position of having to ﬁgure what
their own “mistake” could have been, on pain of having to modify the
standards, or “give up the game”. Therefore, they understand nothing. 
For what it’s worth, I have no reason to believe that connectionist
or any other approaches to ai are any better off than gofai in this
regard. But I make no principled claim as to whether artiﬁcial systems
of any sort will ever understand. Who knows?
10 Ersatz intentionality
Nevertheless, I do not agree with Searle about computers and other
systems entirely. It seems to me that he makes too few distinctions, in
a way that results in some misclassiﬁcations. He describes three dif-
ferent ways in which we talk about intentionality: (i) intrinsic inten-
tionality; (ii) derived intentionality; and (iii) as-if intentionality. The
ﬁrst is the real thing; it is what we and the higher (that is, conscious)
animals share. The second is intentionality, but only, so to speak,
delegated or borrowed from some prior intrinsic intentionality; it is
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

302
H av i n g  Though t
what computers and public inscriptions share. For instance, a printed
sign that says “No smoking” really does mean “No smoking”, but only
because we give it that meaning; it can mean nothing all by itself. The
third category is not really intentional at all, but only a sort of meta-
phor, as when we say that water “seeks” its own level, or the saplings
are “trying” to grow up to the sunlight.
Now I have no problem (for the moment) with the classiﬁcations
of people, signs, and water. But animals and computers, it seems to
me are more difﬁcult, and might better be handled by an intermediate
classiﬁcation, which I propose to call “ersatz intentionality”. Consider
a gofai robot of a sort not too far from current technology. It wan-
ders around campus avoiding obstacles, keeping track of which paths
are blocked (so as to stay up to date on the quickest routes), recharg-
ing its batteries periodically, and perhaps delivering packages or re-
cording how long each parked car has been where it is. This system
not only contains a large number of representations, but it modiﬁes
them in direct response to its environment, relies on them to help it
reach various goals, manipulates them internally in various combina-
tions to “ﬁgure out” what to do and how to do it—all without human
intervention.
It seems to me that the relation of this robot to its representations
is importantly different from the relation that a piece of paper bears to
a message written on it. There is a clear (even if limited) sense in
which the robot is actually making and using those representations as
representations—that is, as aids to dealing vicariously with other things
that are not themselves present. If the representations were different,
the robot would behave differently; if they were false, it would per-
form more poorly (or, perhaps, correct them). None of this, or any-
thing like it, is true of the piece of paper. So it does not seem to me
that the robot and the paper should be classiﬁed together. (Here I am
agreeing with Dennett, while disagreeing with Searle.)
On the other hand, not only are all of the robot’s resources and
goals preprogrammed by its designers, but also, and more important,
all of the standards for what are treated as objects, adequate represen-
tations, goals, success, and so on, are tacitly presupposed and “hard-
wired” in that design. The point is not that the standards are given to
the robot; rather, the robot doesn’t “have” them at all—they remain
entirely external to it. So, even though it’s actual intentionality is not
merely delegated (like that of the words on a page), nevertheless the
standards in virtue of which those states can be understood as inten-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Un derstanding: Dennet t and Searle
303
tional and normative are conferred from the outside. Hence, its states
do not belong to it (as a subject) in the way that ours belong to us.
This is why I want an intermediate classiﬁcation between genuine and
merely derived intentionality—namely, ersatz intentionality. (Neither
Dennett nor Searle acknowledges such an intermediate status.)
11 Animals
Once ersatz intentionality is distinguished and characterized, how-
ever, it becomes apparent that there are candidates for it besides
gofai robots. In particular, I want to suggest that (as far as we know)
the intentionality of animals is entirely ersatz (except for purely tro-
pistic creatures, whose intentionality is at best “as-if”). That is, we can
understand animals as having intentional states, but only relative to
standards that we establish for them. This makes animal intentional-
ity exactly analogous to biological teleology. We say that the “purpose”
of the heart is to pump blood, that it’s “supposed to” work in a certain
way, that functional descriptions are “normative”, and so on. This is
not mere as-if teleology (mere metaphor or façon de parler); nor is it
any delegation of our own purposes and norms—like those for tools
(by many accounts). But ﬁnally, of course, the heart does not have any
purposes in the way that a person does, nor does it accede to any norms
on its own responsibility. Extending my new terminology, I could say
that biological systems have only ersatz teleology and normativity.
Searle might agree with this characterization of biological teleol-
ogy. (Compare pages 237–239.) Dennett will not only agree (it’s the
design stance, after all), but accept the proposed afﬁnity with animal
intentionality. But there the congeniality ends. For Searle maintains
that animal intentionality is intrinsic, just like our own (and unlike
robots), whereas Dennett wants the intentional stance to apply to us,
animals, and robots all in the same way—leaving no distinction for
‘ersatz’ to mark. By splitting the difference between them, I abandon
both.
By my lights, animal intentionality is ersatz because (or to the
extent that) animals do not commit to constitutive standards, hence
do not submit themselves to norms, and do not understand anything.
This is not to say that they do not perceive, remember, desire, learn,
strive, and so on, but only to say that it’s all ersatz—just as it would be
for (advanced) robots. The fact that higher animals are much more
similar to us than are robots physiologically, ethologically, and even
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

304
H av i n g Though t
phylogenetically, is not necessarily signiﬁcant when considering inten-
tionality. After all, animals are also very different from us in many
other ways, such as morality, tradition, art appreciation, commerce,
technology, and so on. Indeed, in a few respects, like the employment
of structured representations and certain kinds of problem solving,
machines are, on the face of it, more our kin than are monkeys.
The point is that none of these observations carries any probative
weight unless and until there is some prior account of which kinds of
considerations are relevant. And that prior account could itself only
be based in a philosophical explication of what intentionality is and
how it works. I have sketched one possible explication in terms of
commitment to constitutive standards. According to this approach,
however, all of the above comparisons are equally irrelevant. With
regard to what matters for intentionality, robots and animals are more
similar to each other than either is to us. Only people have intrinsic
intentionality.
12 Conclusion
I have suggested that there is more in common to Dennett and Searle
on intentionality than meets the eye—including, I think, their eyes.
Pivotal to the envisioned rapprochement is Dennett’s basic notion of a
stance, but used in a way that neither he nor Searle anticipates. If a
stance is conceived as a constitutive commitment, then it can be seen
as a transcendental ground of objectivity, subjectivity, and normativ-
ity—all of which are prerequisite to intentionality. A committed
stance is the essence of understanding—hence (the colon in) my title.
Note:
1 Compare this discussion of Searle and intrinsic intentionality to
chapter 7, note 9, above. I am in effect suggesting here that the
term ‘intrinsic’ should be reserved for that special case of original
intentionality (in my old sense) in which the intentional system is
committed to a constituted domain—otherwise I call it ‘ersatz’ (see
sections 10 and 11 of the present essay). I have, however, no reason
to believe that Searle (or Dennett) would accept this suggestion.
[Note added 1997.]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

ch a pt er t h i rt e e n
Truth and
Rule-Following
1 Exhibited and governing rules
What we understand by ‘rule’ and by ‘rule-following’ go hand in hand.
Different sorts or conceptions of rules go with different sorts or con-
ceptions of following. I want to consider the sorts of rule and rule-
following that are most fundamental to our telling what’s what—
telling the truth—about worldly entities (objects). As will emerge,
this cannot mean simply identifying one special sort of rule-following
that is more basic than any others. Rather, even the most rudimentary
(perhaps prelinguistic) objective truth-telling presupposes an inte-
grated structure of rules of several different and interdependent sorts.
The aim is to begin to spell this out.
Toward that end, it is helpful ﬁrst to rehearse some preliminary
classiﬁcations. Perhaps the broadest distinction among rules is be-
tween those that we understand as merely exhibited in what happens,
and those that we understand as, in some way, governing or determining
what happens. For those rules that are expressed verbally (or in some
similar notation), this exhibited/governing distinction corresponds
roughly to that between descriptive and prescriptive rules; but there is
no need to build verbal expression, or even expressibility, into the
conception of rules and rule-following. Various physical patterns,
rhythms, regularities, and propensities would be paradigmatic rules
in the exhibited or descriptive sense, whereas social mores, ofﬁcial
regulations, design speciﬁcations, and recipes would be paradigmatic
governing rules.
The distinction can be seen as kin to one that G.E.M. Anscombe
(1957, section 32) draws, and John Searle (1979) elaborates and names,
between world-to-word and word-to-world “directions of ﬁt”. Exhib-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

306
H av i n g  Though t
ited rules are understood as having a world-to-rule direction of ﬁt, in
the sense that, if there is a discrepancy between a supposed rule and
what actually happens, then that reﬂects only on the rule—either it
isn’t really a rule after all, or it must somehow be limited in accuracy,
scope, or probability. Governing rules, by contrast, are understood as
having a rule-to-world direction of ﬁt, because discrepancies can reﬂect
instead on the discrepant phenomena—as somehow out of order,
unruly, or faulty. In other words, there is only one intelligible sort of
nonfollowing for an exhibited rule: the rule itself is limited or inappli-
cable. But there are two intelligible sorts of nonfollowing for a govern-
ing rule: besides limitation or inapplicability of the rule,1 there can
also be failure or breach in the phenomena—that is, a default rather
than an exception.
This suggests a third way to frame the basic distinction. Exhibited
rules are understood as factual: they are just how things turn out or
are likely to be. Governing rules, on the other hand, are understood as
normative: they are how things ought to be, in some relevant sense of
‘ought’. Putting the point in this third way makes it easy to ask two
related questions about governing rules. First, where does the “norma-
tive force” of governing rules come from? What is their “authority” or
their claim on compliance? And second, how does it come about that
the phenomena do in fact accord with governing rules (to the extent
that they do)? How is the “force” brought to bear or made effective?
Differing answers to these questions yield different understandings of
what it is to follow various governing rules, hence also a basis for
sorting the rules themselves further into species and subspecies.
For instance, ofﬁcial regulations carry legal or institutional author-
ity, enforced, perhaps, by sanctions. The authority of a recipe, on the
other hand, is grounded in its author’s experience and expertise, en-
forced, presumably, by threat of failure. This difference marks regula-
tions and recipes out as quite different sorts of governing rule. They
are importantly alike, however, in another respect: namely, in the
manner in which compliance comes about. This similarity has two
related components. First, regulations and recipes govern the behavior
of determinate agents: reidentiﬁable rule-followers to which or to
whom the phenomena governed somehow belong (as “their” activities
or actions). Second, they are explicit rules: they are expressed in some
general scheme or notation—such as natural-language sentences—
and the rule-follower complies with them by complying with tokens
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 07
of these expressions.2 Following rules by following explicit expres-
sions of them raises a familiar explanatory issue.
2 Expressions and basic governing rules
Let’s ﬁrst acknowledge a distinction between those explicit rules that
are just expressed and those that are articulated. A rule is articulated, in
this sense, if it is one whose expression speciﬁes multiple steps that
are to be carried out in some orderly way. Thus, articulated rules
(recipes are a prime example) are not only explicit but explicitly com-
plex. To follow such a rule, a rule-follower must both perform the
right steps and perform them in the right order. By contrast, the
instruction “Pencils down!” (given at the conclusion of an exam) is not
explicitly complex. Examinees do not comply by performing several
steps in an order speciﬁed by the rule; they simply put their pencils
down. One might say that the instruction tells them what to do, but
not how to do it.3
Now, complying with a rule by way of responding to an expression
of it (whether articulated or not) is itself a matter of following rules—
rules that are in general distinct from the one expressed. They are the
rules that determine the scheme or notation in which that expression
is couched. These rules are also governing rules. That is, they are
normative in at least the sense that they concern what is supposed to
happen in response to a token of an expression, rather than what is
likely to happen. If there is a discrepancy between the rule and what
actually happens, that reﬂects not on the rule but on what happens,
the rule-following—and hence (in these cases) on the rule-follower.
The idea of complying with a rule by complying with an expression
of it—following a rule by following other rules—raises an obvious
question: How is the latter compliance to be understood? On pain of
vicious regress, compliance with an expression of a rule cannot itself
always require yet further expressions to be complied with. More
generally, for each sort of governing rule, it cannot be the case that, in
order to comply with any rule of that sort, it is always necessary ﬁrst
to comply with some other rule of that sort. Hence, for each sort of
governing rule, at least some rule compliance must be intelligible as
basic, in the sense that the rule is not complied with by (that is, by
means of) complying with some other rule(s) of that sort.4 This
regress in itself will not be of particular concern here. Rather, what is
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

308
H av i n g Though t
important is to discover and show which sorts of basic governing rule
(or basic compliance with governing rules) ground the possibility of
truth-telling.
There is no intrinsic difﬁculty with the notion of basic governing
rules as such. Indeed, there is more than one kind of basic governing
rule, and at least several of these are fairly well understood. The
question is rather whether those basic governing rules that are essen-
tial to truth-telling can be understood in any of these familiar ways. In
order to suggest a negative answer to this question, I want to summa-
rize two different accounts of basic governing rules, each of which is
plausibly adequate in its proper domain, and either of which might
seem initially promising as a route to understanding the foundations
of truth-telling. Showing how they nevertheless fall short can then be
a guide to what is required instead.
3 Biologically evolved normativity
Consider ﬁrst the normal operations of functional structures and
organs in natural organisms. We understand these operations as fol-
lowing or according with governing rules. The very fact that they are
called normal operations, in a sense that clearly contrasts with poten-
tial abnormalities, is a signal that they are understood in normative
terms. Thus, it is not merely an exhibited regularity or propensity
that hearts pump blood. Rather, they’re supposed to pump blood; and
when they don’t, there’s something wrong with them (or with some-
thing else that they depend on).
When we understand the rules of biological functioning as norma-
tive, where do we understand their normative force as coming from,
and how do we understand that force as taking effect? Roughly, our
understanding of the normative force is part of and integral to a larger
account of how individual organisms of that kind work as a whole on
the whole; that is, we understand it as deriving from the systematic
contribution made by that proper functioning to that overall working
in general. In other words, the understanding is holistic and statisti-
cal: the norms governing the component functions are intelligible
together in terms of their interdependent roles in enabling the whole
system to succeed—that system-level success being understood in
turn in reproductive or evolutionary terms.5 Thus, the mechanism of
natural selection is how, in the fullness of time, the normative force is
effectively brought to bear. Of course, natural selection does not oper-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 0 9
ate on individuals, or in a single generation. But, retrospectively, we
understand it as the mechanism by which proper functioning has
been rendered typical in the current population.
I do not know how common it is in biological systems for an organ
or subsystem to follow a rule by complying with an expression, or
even an articulation, of that rule. I suppose that protein synthesis
under the direction of genetic codes is a plausible candidate; control of
growth, metabolism, and behavior by hormones and other messenger
chemicals may be another; and response to signals in a nervous system
is yet a third. There may even be structures within biological systems
that are initially plastic, and come, in some rule-governed way, to
express or articulate further rules in response to speciﬁc contingencies
in the organism’s life experience. This could be a kind of learning or
behavioral “programming” that enhances ﬁtness by ﬁne-tuning each
individual to its concrete circumstances.
Note merely that, in each of these cases, and in any others like
them, the basic rule-following—the (equally normative) rule-follow-
ing that is complying with the expressions as such—is itself also
perfectly intelligible in biological terms. There is nothing problematic
about it. Whether that basic rule-following is reductively explainable,
or even just redescribable, in other (nonbiological) terms is not at
issue here. Either way, its normative character, which derives from its
functional role in the (not atypical) organic whole, makes sense bio-
logically.
Not only can biological systems or states carry instructions (ex-
press rules) that other systems are supposed to follow; they can also
carry information, about the state of something else, for the beneﬁt of
other systems (or the organism as a whole); and it can be their proper
function to do so. To say that it is the function of a system to carry
information about something allows an important distinction to be
drawn. In the so-called information-theoretic sense, a signal either
carries information about something or it doesn’t; there’s no such
thing as misinformation. But if it is the function of a certain signal to
carry certain information, then, if it malfunctions, or if something else
goes wrong, it can misinform. In other words, biological functional
norms make misinformation intelligible.
But there is another important distinction that biological norms do
not enable. That is the distinction between functioning properly
(under the proper conditions) as an information carrier and getting
things right (objective correctness or truth), or, equivalently, between
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

31 0
H av i n g  Though t
malfunctioning and getting things wrong (mistaking them). Since
there is no other determinant or constraint on the information carried
than whatever properly functioning carriers carry, when there is no
malfunction, it’s as “right” as it can be. In other words, there can be no
biological basis for understanding a system as functioning properly,
but nevertheless misinforming—functionally right but factually
wrong, so to speak.
Imagine an insectivorous species of bird that evolved in an environ-
ment where most of the yellow butterﬂies are poisonous, and most
others not; and suppose it has developed a mechanism for detecting
and avoiding yellow butterﬂies. Then the point can be put this way: if
a bird in good working order (with plenty of light, and so on) detects
and rejects a (rare) nonpoisonous yellow butterﬂy, there can be no
grounds for suggesting that it mistook that butterﬂy for a poisonous
one; and similarly, if it detects and accepts a (rare) poisonous orange
butterﬂy. Suppose further that (due to the way it is implemented) this
“yellow-detecting” mechanism, even when working properly, happens
also to give positive responses to a certain unusual pattern of red and
green stripes, and indeed does not respond to yellow when it has a
certain unusual mottling. Then, in such cases, we could not say that
the birds mistook the stripes for yellow, or the mottled yellow for
another color. For there is nothing that the response can “mean” other
than whatever actually elicits it in normal birds in normal conditions.
Here is another way see the same point. Natural selection and the
evolution of species can give sense to a kind of norm for individuals: a
given specimen, or its particular circumstances, can be abnormal or
out of order if it is contrary to what is normal for the relevant species.
But no comparable sense extends to any idea of the species itself or
the whole habitat (generation after generation) being out of order or
“wrong”. Thus, we cannot say of the above bird species that it is biolog-
ically abnormal in that its members cannot discriminate certain stripe
patterns from yellow. The most we could ever do would be to suggest
that its discrimination capabilities reﬂect a general design limitation
(or compromise).
4 Socially instituted normativity
Consider, now, a second example: social norms or mores, understood
as instilled in succeeding generations through a process of training by
their predecessors. This training and the response to it, the “learning”,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 1 1
both follow rules, possibly of various sorts, even including social
norms. But an analog of the foregoing regress argument shows that
the learning itself cannot all be governed by social norms (unless
children are born socialized, which would undermine the point of the
account). Likewise, the learning cannot all be understood as following
explicit rules (unless children are born able to use a language or simi-
lar notation).6 So, at least some of the learning rules must be nonso-
cial, and at least some not explicit. An obvious candidate, since they
are known to be operative in animals and humans anyway, are the
rules of conditioning, habit formation, and the like—presumably
themselves understood as biologically normative (functional).7
In my preferred variation on this theme, the emergence and main-
tenance of basic social norms is to be understood in terms of a
package of (in the ﬁrst place, biological) dispositions—or, rather,
meta-dispositions—that I call conformism. The central idea is that
community members effectively promote similarities in how they and
their fellows are disposed to behave relative to circumstances. This
presupposes that they can tell who behaved how in what circum-
stances, and how that compares with what others would have done; it
also presupposes that they can modify their own and each other’s
dispositions in the direction of conformity. (Conditioning enters as a
plausible component in the latter ability.) Assuming the dynamic pa-
rameters are compatible with stability, this institutes a community with
a common set of social customs and mores.
We understand these customs as governing rules, as normative
mores, because of the manner in which they are instituted and sus-
tained. When an individual is deemed out of step, other community
members intervene so as to restore compliance (in a way that, by
assumption, is likely to be effective). Thus, in very concrete terms,
there is a rule-to-world direction of ﬁt: the discrepancy reﬂects on the
individual, not the rule. The “normative force” of these mores is essen-
tially majority rule: deviant behavior is what one is not supposed to
do (abnormal, out of bounds) in the speciﬁc sense that it’s what the
community members on the whole will not allow. It is brought to
bear—made effective—via peer pressure actuating the mechanisms of
behavior modiﬁcation (conditioning or whatever).
It isn’t only the norms as such that are socially instituted, but also
the respective behaviors and circumstances that those norms “con-
nect”. Thus, what it is to greet someone, and what it is to be a
circumstance in which a greeting is appropriate, are nothing other
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

31 2
H av i n g Though t
than what the community members accept and deem as such—which
is to say, they are themselves instituted along with the normative
practices in which they occur, and by the same socializing process.
This allows for considerable intricacy and interdependence—espe-
cially if community members can keep track of particulars and what
has happened to them. For such tracking makes it possible for current
behavior and circumstances to incorporate not just “manifest” recog-
nizabilia, but instituted statuses and roles, accrued over time. Social
rank and ofﬁce can be instituted in this way, as well as ﬁner-grained
actions, rights, and responsibilities, such as those contingent on
whose turn it is, who owns what, which water is holy, or how the
teams stand in the league.8
Presumably, social customs and mores are in some sense grounded
in biological functions such as sensory discrimination and behavioral
conditioning. But they differ essentially from biological norms in the
mechanism by which compliance is brought about, and therefore in
the character of that to which they apply. One way or another, compli-
ance with social norms is induced in individual community members
via the monitoring and interference of others—at the outset, elders.
And what the others (elders) press for is primarily a function of how
they themselves were socialized.9 In other words, each individual
starts out as largely plastic, except for its susceptibility to socializa-
tion, and some tendency to pass it on. Therefore, whatever determi-
nate institutional structure results is not constrained in detail by any
biological raw materials, but rather emerges historically, in the form of
a tradition.10 (The passing on of customs to succeeding generations
amounts to a new mechanism of reproduction, hence a possible new
medium of selective evolution, analogous to but fundamentally dis-
tinct from that of genetic transmission.)
This same difference in mechanism is also the basis of a further
and more striking difference in structure. Since the foundation of
socialization is community members taking an interest in each others’
behavior, including keeping it in line, it is of the essence that particu-
lar behaviors be assigned to particular perpetrators—namely, those
very perpetrators who will have to be induced to change their ways, in
case the behavior is inappropriate. In other words, socialized commu-
nity members (unlike biological organs) must be understood as agents,
to whom their behavior belongs, in the sense that they are accountable
and can be taken to task for it.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 13
As with some biological norms, it can be that some conformist
social norms are followed by complying with expressions or articula-
tions of them. Further, the prerequisite basic norms governing the
scheme(s) of expression can themselves also perfectly well be social.
(As before, it is not at issue here, and beside the point, whether the
following of social norms is explainable, or even redescribable, in any
other terms.) Finally, and again analogous to their biological counter-
parts, social norms can institute behaviors the proper social role of
which is to carry information; and this underlying social normativity
can likewise fund a distinction between information and misinforma-
tion. A light that is green when it should be red does not merely fail to
carry information; it misinforms.
Here, then, is the pivotal question: can social norms as such—
whether understood in conformist terms or in some others—enable,
unlike biological norms, a distinction between proper performance
and getting things right? I will argue that they cannot, as a last pre-
lude to an exploration of what is required instead. 
5 Telling yellow
‘To tell’ can mean many things: to convey information, to instruct, to
recount, to reveal. I want to pick up on (what I take to be) the core
senses around identifying and discriminating: telling what (who,
when, where, whether, …) something is, telling things apart, telling
the differences between them, and so on. Telling in these senses can
often be expressed or reported in words, but is not in itself essentially
verbal. People can tell things, and act accordingly, without ever verbal-
izing them; this, indeed, is the bulk of cases. People can tell things for
which they have no words, including things that are hard to tell,
things that are culturally determined, things the telling of which takes
years to master.
More speciﬁcally: telling is a responsive rule-following (perhaps
called for in the course of following some other governing rule) in
which the propriety of the response (or what is done in following the
other rule) depends on something external to the performance itself.11
The telling is the responding to that something in the required way.
Thus, telling is itself a following of a governing rule, and, as such, has
a rule-to-world direction of ﬁt, in the sense that performances can be
faulty—performed improperly. But insofar as there is also a kind of
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

314
H av i n g Though t
propriety or correctness of a telling that is a function of that worldly
something to which it is supposed to respond, there would seem, in
addition, to be a world-to-telling direction of ﬁt: in case of a discrep-
ancy, it is the telling that is at fault, not whatever it is supposed to
respond to. The essential question is whether—or rather how—these
two governing norms, proper performance and getting things right,
with their respective directions of ﬁt, can ever be genuinely distinct.
Can it ever be—and, if so, how—that a telling is performed properly
(in proper conditions) and yet its response is wrong about the world?
Let’s put words to what we want, and then see what we can get.
The trouble with the insectivorous birds is that there is no deﬁnition
of that to which they are supposed to respond except as that to which
they do respond when everything is functionally in order. There is
really only one type of norm at work, the biological norms governing
that responsive function. The colors of the butterﬂies have no norma-
tive status at all apart from their involvement in that normal function-
ing. What objectivity demands, by contrast, is that the “objects” of
objective tellings should have a determinacy and normative standing
independent of the performance norms for those tellings, such that the
tellings could be performed properly, and still get their objects wrong.
In other words, there must be two distinct types of norm for objective
tellings: propriety of the performances as such, and correctness of the
results vis-à-vis their objects. And the objects themselves must stand
as independent criteria for that correctness.
As noted in the previous section, social conformism institutes not
only performance norms, but also the performances themselves and
the conditions in which they would and would not be proper. Thus,
hand in hand with a greeting norm, go not only the normal behaviors
that amount to greetings, but also the normal conditions that call for
them. And learning to greet properly involves learning to tell when
these conditions obtain. But, as with the yellow butterﬂies for the
birds, the normative status of those conditions is nothing other than
their involvement in the social norm for proper greeting. So there is
no room for a greeting—including telling when the appropriate con-
ditions obtain—to have been performed correctly, according to the
instituted norms for greetings, and yet to have got those conditions
wrong. There is really only one type of norm at work: the instituted
conditions themselves have no independent criterial status at all.
Here’s another way to look at it. While instituted conditions are
indeed independent of any individual’s tellings, and even, on isolated
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 1 5
occasions, of everyone’s tellings, they are not, and cannot be, indepen-
dent of the “general telling” of the community at large. Thus, there are
two relevant generalities: the usual responses of any given individual,
and the common responses of most individuals. It can happen that
isolated individuals are consistently out of step with their peers; and it
can also happen that, on isolated occasions, all or most members of
the community (by an amazing coincidence) happen to misperform
in the same way at the same time. What cannot happen is that all or
most of the community members systematically respond wrongly to a
certain class of instituted conditions—for their common systematic
responses deﬁne the very conditions in question. Thus, the “indepen-
dence” of instituted conditions can extend no farther than usual
consensus. Since this consensus is nothing other than what deter-
mines propriety of performance, there is no room for distinct norms of
propriety and correctness. Accordingly, there is a fatal ﬂaw in any
proposed account of objectivity that cannot give sense to the possibil-
ity of everyone being consistently wrong about something.12
A pair of contrasting examples will illustrate this point and bring
out its urgency. They have the following common outline. In a certain
community, everyone learns to grock13 when it is proper—that is, in
grock-worthy circumstances—and not otherwise. In so learning, they
learn how to tell which circumstances are grock-worthy, how to tell
when someone is grocking, and how to grock by themselves. And
through the mechanisms of conformist normalizing, or something
like them, they all acquire the normal dispositions of proper grocking.
In this way, grocking, grock-worthiness, and the norms connecting
them are all socially instituted together. In terms of these institutions,
we can understand what it would be for a member of this community
to tell grock-worthy circumstances wrongly (or even for everyone to be
wrong once in a while).
But could they ever all be wrong in some systematic way? Or, more
poignantly, could they all be wrong but one? Until a few weeks ago,
say, everyone concurred in telling grock-worthy circumstances. But
then poor Pat began to diverge: sometimes everyone grocked but Pat;
sometimes Pat grocked and no one else did. Pat protested and perse-
vered against the tide for a while; but, conformism being what it is,
everyone agreed again soon enough. Now, is there any chance that,
during the disturbance, Pat was right and the others wrong? Would it
so much as make sense to imagine that initially they had it right, but
then, somehow, Pat led them all astray? Or, could it be that, initially,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

316
H av i n g Though t
everyone had it wrong, until Pat ﬁnally got it right, and then brought
the others around? On what basis could these alternatives even be
differentiated, let alone be decided among? It depends.
Suppose, for the ﬁrst case, that grocking is a special maneuver that
is called for, according to the villagers, in a certain circumstance that
occasionally arises in a rather free-form folk dance. Outsiders have a
hard time telling when these circumstances arise, not to mention
whether the relevant dancer grocks; and the villagers are not very good
at explaining either one. But—until the incident with Pat, anyway—
they never had any trouble telling what was going on, and agreeing
among themselves. In this case, it seems to me that mere conformist
norms are the only norms intelligibly in play. If all the other villagers
consistently disagree with Pat, then they are right and Pat is wrong, in
the only sense of right and wrong that I can understand as pertinent.
This remains so regardless of whether there is any independent way
for us to determine which dancing is the “same” as which, or who
changed when. That is, it doesn’t matter whether Pat changed, the
(other) villagers changed, neither, or both, or even whether this makes
sense to ask; at all events, the villagers are authoritative about their
dance.
Suppose, for the second case, that grocking is pronouncing the
word ‘yellow’, and that grock-worthy circumstances are those which,
in the face of something yellow, call for a color-identifying response. If
there is anything to objective truth-telling, a case like this had better
be different from the folk dance. On the one hand, of course, which
sign is to be used for yellow—‘jaune’, ‘gelb’, a certain handwave—is
entirely a matter of public consensus, just like the dance step. There is
no way everyone could be wrong about that, or Pat right and everyone
else wrong. On the other hand, however, that some particular object is
in fact yellow is not a matter of consensus: it’s an objective state of
affairs, quite apart from any and every response to it. Accordingly,
once the customs have established that ‘yellow’ (or whatever) is the
proper way to identify the color of yellow things, Pat’s systematic
responses to that object could perfectly well be right, and everyone
else’s wrong; or they could all be wrong.
The trouble is, instituted norms alone cannot sustain this distinc-
tion. If what it is to be yellow were itself instituted along with the
norm for responding properly to it, then the consensus could no more
be wrong about what is yellow than about the proper (customary)
response thereto. Imagine a charismatic ﬂorist who, without affecting
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 1 7
any other color responses, convinced everyone that a certain jonquil is
sacred, and that the proper color response to it is not ‘yellow’ but
‘scarlet’. In thus determining the general disposition, the charismatic
ﬂorist would ipso facto just (further) determine what it is to be “yellow”
(and “scarlet”), for purposes of proper color response in this commu-
nity—and, if the norms are merely instituted, what other purposes
could be relevant? By the same token, however, such responses would
not be objective color reports (that is, not really color reports at all).
Approaches to normativity that take its bases to lie in social insti-
tution may be termed pragmatist. My aim here is not so much to argue
the inadequacy of pragmatism as to sketch an alternative. But the
motivation for this aim might be illuminated by what I take to be an
historical parallel with psychologism.
All sides agree that thought processes are not and cannot be ran-
dom or gratuitous. Impressed by the achievements of natural science
(and abjuring divine guidance), naturalistic psychologists (such as
Hume and Mill) argue that the necessary order could only be a matter
of natural law, on a par with physical regularity. Impressed more by
the possibility of doing science than its results, antipsychologists
(such as Kant and Frege) retort that there must be two fundamentally
distinct sorts of necessary order: the laws of nature and the laws or
norms of reason. To collapse the rational normative into the natural
nomological is to obliterate the essential character of thought.
Sensitive to both of these pulls, contemporary pragmatists (such as
Rorty and Brandom) agree that thought is essentially norm-governed,
but hold that normativity too can be understood in a way that is not
incompatible with an appropriate naturalism—namely, in terms of
socially instituted proprieties.14 Likewise sensitive to both pulls, but
convinced that genuine science is more than a social institution, anti-
pragmatists (such as Heidegger and I) retort that there must be two
fundamentally distinct sorts of normative constraint: social propriety
and objective correctness (truth). To collapse correctness into propri-
ety is to obliterate the essential character of thought. Indeed, the two
retorts are equivalent if one supposes—as I do, and as I believe Kant
and Frege did—that the norms of reason and of objective truth are
ultimately the same.
How, then, can norms of objective correctness be understood (in a
spirit of naturalism, appropriately construed15)?
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

31 8
H av i n g Though t
6 Constitutive rules and regulations
Some years ago, John Rawls and John Searle each introduced a dis-
tinction between two senses of ‘rule’ (and hence also of ‘following’).
Although the purposes and speciﬁcs are different, both distinctions
are drawn within the general class of governing rules, and they more
or less coincide on one side. Broadly speaking, the distinction in each
case is between, on the one hand, rules that govern phenomena that
already make sense as what they are, independently of those rules,
and, on the other hand, rules that deﬁne or constitute the phenomena
that they govern—phenomena which, therefore, could not make
sense independently of those rules. It is these latter, constitutive rules,
that Rawls and Searle concur on, and that matter here. Though is no
part of what they intended, it will be my purpose to show that consti-
tution can be essentially more than mere institution.
Rawls (1955, section 3) distinguishes rules in the sense of ‘maxims’
or ‘rules of thumb’ from what he calls ‘the practice conception of
rules’. Maxims are guides to action that summarize the results of
earlier analyses and/or the wisdom of experience. Their point is efﬁ-
ciency and convenience, particularly in situations where it isn’t feasible
(or worth the trouble) to ﬁgure out exactly what is optimal; hence,
they carry the force of advice or prudence. So, for instance, “Have a
physical exam annually” and “Don’t take candy from strangers” are
maxims. Notice that the phenomena of having exams, taking candy,
and so on, are perfectly intelligible apart from these and other such
rules.
By contrast, rules in the practice sense are deﬁnitive or constitutive of
the very phenomena that they govern. Rawls invokes games, especially
baseball, to illustrate the difference. Here’s an example: in American
baseball, there’s a rule according to which, when a batter gets three
strikes, he or she is out. This rule is not a guideline based on previous
analysis or experience, and it is in no sense advice. Rather, this rule,
along with others, deﬁnes the very notions of batter, strike, out, and so
on. It’s not just the words or concepts that are “deﬁned”, but the
phenomena themselves: they only make sense as being what they are in
terms of their according with these rules. This is what is meant by
saying that the rules are constitutive. Apart from these rules that consti-
tute the game of baseball, there could be no such thing as a batter, a
strike, or an out.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 19
Of course, there could be—indeed, are—games more or less simi-
lar to American baseball (“hardball”), with roles and phenomena anal-
ogous to these, and even called by the same names. But nothing
important hinges on when or how we decide whether to construe
such phenomena as the same or different. Is a “strike” in Finnish
baseball, or sandlot softball the same thing as a strike in American
hardball? Well, roughly, but not exactly, depending on the aim of the
question. To say that games are constituted by rules, and that these
rules therefore deﬁne the phenomena of the game, is not to be com-
mitted to any tendentious sort of essentialism. Strikes in all of the
above forms are constituted phenomena, whether precisely or loosely
deﬁned, whether deemed the same or different.
Searle (1969, section 2.5) distinguishes between what he calls “regu-
lative” and “constitutive” rules. Regulative rules are regulations: they
stipulate how, in relevant circumstances, some agent or agents may or
must act. Unlike maxims, regulative rules are genuine imperatives and
permissives: they carry the force of some antecedently legitimate au-
thority. So “You must be in bed by 10 o’clock” and “Thou shalt not
bear false witness” are regulative rules. But again, the phenomena of
being in bed and bearing false witness, like those of having an exam
and taking candy, are perfectly intelligible apart from such rules.
Like Rawls, Searle uses games—especially chess and football—to
illustrate the notion of constitutive rule. And he makes many of the
same points, including that constitutive rules deﬁne and make possi-
ble the very phenomena that they govern. But there is one important
difference in Searle’s account that is a symptom, I think, of an under-
lying problem in both. According to Searle, constitutive rules are a
special case of regulative rules: every constitutive rule is also regulative
(but not vice versa). For instance, the rules of chess or football stipu-
late how the game is to be played: they specify what the players qua
players are required and/or permitted to do.
Rawls could not (and does not) make a parallel claim, because
constitutive rules are obviously not maxims. (There are, to be sure,
plenty of prudential maxims in constituted games—when to bunt, or
when to develop one’s queen, say—but these are not the rules consti-
tutive of the game.) This difference between Rawls and Searle, how-
ever, reﬂects only the fact that maxims are not regulative; it does not
show that rules in Rawls’s practice sense are not a special sort of
regulation. Indeed, reliance on game examples tends to focus atten-
tion on the rules governing the players, and hence positively invites the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

320
H aving Thought
subsumption of constitutive rules under regulations—as much for
Rawls as for Searle.
This is but one instance of how the use of games as examples is
fraught with philosophical peril. In order, therefore, that the advan-
tages of such examples—especially their structure and (relative)
transparency—not be distorted or destroyed, it will be necessary to
spell out several distinctions and qualiﬁcations.
7 Constitutive standards
There are, I believe, at least four distinct sorts of rule and rule-follow-
ing telescoped into what Rawls and Searle, relying on game examples,
have called “constitutive” rules. First, of course, there are the “rules of
the game”, which regulate the actions of the players within the game,
stipulating what they may or may not, must or must not do. These
are the rules that one has in view when one thinks of “playing by the
rules”; and they are clearly what is foremost in the minds of Rawls and
Searle. To avoid confusion, I will call constitutive rules in this sense
constitutive regulations—just as Searle’s terminology suggests. The nor-
mative authority of such regulations derives from an (often tacit)
agreement or convention (mutual deontic commitment) among the
players, and is enforced by threat of ejection from the game.
Constitutive regulations, however, governing only the actions of
the players, are not the same as what I will call constitutive standards,
which govern all the phenomena that occur within the game, and
determine what they are. This distinction can be hard to see. For
instance, a baseball player can become a base-runner by ﬁrst being a
batter and then hitting a pitch into fair territory, being hit by a pitch,
or receiving a base on balls (a walk). A base-runner (who has not been
tagged, forced, or caught out, and whose side has not been retired)
may advance from base to base, but only in order, and only when the
ball is in play or the pitcher has begun to pitch. These rules, qua
regulations, govern the actions of the players. But, at the same time,
qua speciﬁcations of what can and cannot happen in the game, they
effectively determine what it is to be a base-runner. It is only in this
latter capacity that I call them constitutive standards. The reason that
the same rules—or, at any rate, what seem like the same rules—can
wear both hats (thereby making the hats hard to distinguish) is that
the players’ actions are among the phenomena that can occur within
the game.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru th and  ru le- f ol lowi n g
32 1
But not all the phenomena that can or must occur within a game,
and are constituted as such, are actions of the players. For instance, a
baseball game needs bases and a ball. The bases must lie on the
ground (in a diamond, 90 feet apart), remain visible, and not move.
The ball, when pitched, must sail through the air toward the strike
zone, deviating at most slightly from a ballistic trajectory; when hit by
the bat, it must rebound (not stick to the bat or explode) and sail off
in another direction; and so on. These requirements are not regula-
tions governing the actions of any players; yet they are constitutive of
what it is to be bases and balls, hence, indirectly, also of other baseball
phenomena. Similarly, chess pieces must be amenable to the players’
moves, and must remain where and what they are when not being
moved. Here we have constitutive standards that are clearly not con-
stitutive regulations.
It is easy to underestimate constitutive standards. In games like
chess and baseball, all the “action” is initiated and largely controlled by
the players; the constituted paraphernalia, by contrast, are required
merely to remain suitably at their disposal—a kind of compliance and
inertness clause. Thus, the standards governing how rooks may move,
thereby constituting what it is to be a rook, are (apart from that
inertness clause) little more than an isomorph of the regulations gov-
erning how players may move their rooks. And since, if there were no
players playing by the rules, there would surely be no games, moves,
or pieces at all, it looks as if the regulations are primary, the standards
being just a shadow they cast in a certain analytic light.
As a step toward working free of this impression, consider semi-
automatic chess, which is just like chess except that random legal
moves are automatically inserted between the moves made by the
players (a random white move before white plays, and a random black
move before black plays). In effect, half of the moves are made by the
pieces themselves. Given the needed equipment, this is a perfectly
playable game, maybe even interesting. But precisely because auto-
matic pieces must sometimes move themselves—and then only le-
gally—much more is required of them than mere compliance and
inertness. Thus, the constitutive standards deﬁning them are far from
mere shadows of regulations governing what the players may do. 
The point can be made all the more vivid by imagining more
elaborate variations—call them automatic chess—such as games in
which the moves that the pieces can make on their own are qualita-
tively different from those that the players may make with them, or
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

322
H aving Thought
games in which many or even most of the pieces move exclusively by
themselves, only a few being movable by the players. There need not
even be a requirement of taking turns; and some or all of the players
may be cooperating instead of competing. But none of these variations
would undermine the idea that what the pieces are is constituted by the
standards governing how they can move in the game. The difference is
that those standards are so conspicuously distinct from, and poten-
tially more important than, the regulations governing how the players
may play, that the tables are perhaps turned. So far from the stan-
dards being mere shadows of the regulations, it may rather be that the
regulations themselves are constitutive only because they enjoin the
players to move the pieces in accord with the pertinent extant stan-
dards—which would be to say, they are simply constitutive of the
players as players.
8 Constitutive and mundane skills
By know-how or skill I mean a reliable, resilient ability to abide by a
governing rule correctly and reliably. Resilience, as here intended, is
related to reliability, but is not the same, and maybe a little harder to
explain. It’s a kind of perseverance born simultaneously of adaptability
and self-assurance. I have in mind, as a paradigm of resilience, an
expert who “knows full well” that he or she can do something—and so
is not turned aside or discouraged at the ﬁrst, or even the second, sign
of recalcitrance. Adjust a bit here, try that a little longer, don’t fall for
every semblance of trouble: these are the stuff of resilience as we
admire it in physicians and mechanics, scientists and school teachers.
But everyone is a skillful expert at lots of things. Nearly all of us can
tie our shoes in the cold, describe one friend to another, tell whether
the roast is done—and because we know we can, we stick to it in the
face of initial difﬁculty.
Needless to say, people have skills of many different sorts. I want to
distinguish two general sorts of skill—constitutive and mundane—that
are (as I shall argue) quite different from one another, and yet essen-
tially interdependent. The classiﬁcation is meant to be exclusive; but it
is far from exhaustive. I will introduce them ﬁrst in connection with
understanding games; indeed, the whole point of talking about games
has been to set up an account of this distinction and the relational
structure that supports it. But the eventual goal is to reinforce and
elaborate that structure, while leaving games behind.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 2 3
Constitutive skills are the third of the four sorts of rule and rule-
following that (along with constitutive regulations and constitutive
standards) Rawls and Searle had telescoped together in their accounts
of constitutive rules. A constitutive skill is a resilient ability to tell
whether the phenomena governed by some constitutive standard are,
in fact, in accord with that standard. So, for chess, the constitutive
skills are those skills that each player has, and must have, to tell
whether any speciﬁed move is or would be legal. Clearly, no one who
lacked these skills could play chess: to be a chess player, one must be
able to tell not only whether the candidate moves that one is consider-
ing would be legal, but also whether the moves that one’s opponent
actually makes (or attempts) are in fact legal.
To exercise a constitutive skill is itself to follow a rule—indeed, a
governing rule. But the rules that are being followed in exercising
these skills are not at all the same as the rules—namely, the constitu-
tive standards—compliance with which is being monitored in those
exercises. Telling whether a chess move is legal is quite different even
from making a legal move, never mind being one. Accordingly, the
normative authority of these rules, and the way it is brought to bear,
must also be distinct from the standards. (We will return to this topic
in section 16.)
Note that a player need have no further knowledge of the constitu-
tive standards beyond this ability to tell whether they are being fol-
lowed in practice. A chess-player need not be able to recite the rules of
chess, to assent when somebody else recites them, to refer or defer to
somebody who can recite them, or anything else apart from being able
to apply them in practice, in exercises of constitutive skills. On the
other hand, ability to recite the rules in their fullest precision and
glory would be for nought in actual play without the ability to apply
them. This suggests that, with regard to the standard-governedness of
constituted phenomena, constitutive skills have a kind of practical
priority over any articulate expression, or even expressibility, of the
standards.
Mundane skills, by contrast, are the resilient abilities to recognize,
manipulate, and otherwise cope with phenomena within the game,
including other players, as required and permitted by the rules—in
effect, the ability to engage in play. Thus, in order to play chess at all, a
player must be able to tell, for each piece, what kind of piece it is, what
square it occupies, what squares it threatens, and so on, as well as to
move and capture pieces on the board, keep track of whose move it is,
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

32 4
H aving Thought
and a few other things. (A better player needs to be able to tell and do
much more than that.) The mundane skills required for baseball are
rather more challenging: not only to run, hit, throw, and catch, but
also to tell whether a pitch will be (or was) a strike, whether a base-
runner will (or did) beat a throw, whether a ﬁelder will (or did) make
a catch, and so on. Baseball also requires the ability to keep track of
several on-going statuses that are not present and manifest, such as
the batting order, the score, the inning, the number of outs, and the
count on the current batter.
Constitutive skills depend in an obvious way on mundane skills: in
order to tell whether constituted phenomena are in accord with the
constitutive standards, it is necessary to be able to tell what those
phenomena are. A chess player could hardly tell whether a given move
is legal without telling which piece is moving and how, not to mention
what other pieces are where on the board. The three-strikes-and-
you’re-out rule could hardly be applied if no one could tell a strike
from a ball, or keep track of the count.
Mundane skills depend, in a different but equally obvious way, on
constitutive skills. There could be no telling which pieces are where
on the board if there were no such things as chess pieces—which is to
say, if there were no constitutive standards applicable in practice via
constitutive skills. To put it another way, if nobody could tell a legal
from an illegal chess move, then nobody could tell a chess rook from a
chess knight, because there would be no chess games, hence no such
pieces. Likewise, there would be no baseball strikes and outs to tell if
nobody could tell what is and isn’t required and allowed in baseball.
There is another aspect of the relation between mundane and con-
stitutive skills, implicit in the foregoing, but important enough to
spell out. Mundane skills are, in an oblique or extended sense, game
phenomena themselves. The sense is this: they are what they are only
in connection with the game and with its phenomena in the strict
sense. The abilities to recognize or move a rook, to call or throw a
strike, make no more sense apart from chess or baseball than do rooks
or strikes themselves. The reason the sense is oblique or extended is
that the skills as such are not governed by the constitutive standards
(at least not directly); so they are not constituted in the same sense as
the phenomena in the strict sense are. We might instead think of
mundane skills as “co-constituted” along with the phenomena that
their exercises respond to, manipulate, and cope with.16
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru th and  ru le- f ol lowi n g
325
The strategy from now on will be to show how some mundane
skills, understood in this sense as interdependent with constitutive
skills, can therefore also be understood as objective—that is, as having
independent objects that are criterial for their correct exercise. By
‘object’ I mean in general that which occupies a certain position vis-à-
vis such skills, and not any speciﬁc character. Thus, objects need not
be corporeal, substantial, or particularly thing-like. Rather, they are
“objective phenomena” in the following three-fold sense: (i) mundane
skills are responsive to and/or can affect them (they are accessible);
(ii) they have normative status as criterial for the correct exercise of
objective skills (they are authoritative); and (iii) they are independent
not only of particular exercises but also of any mere consensus (they
are autonomous17). The idea then is: constituted phenomena, and only
constituted phenomena, can thus stand as accessible independent cri-
teria, hence be objects—and therefore also that this is what we ordi-
narily and scientiﬁcally understand by ‘object’.
What, then, is constitution?
9 Letting be
To constitute is to bring into being. This formulation, while strictly
defensible, is deliberately provocative. For it seems to force a choice
between two hopeless ways of understanding the idea that ordinary
objective phenomena are constituted, one incredible, the other self-
defeating. That provocation sets a stage on which the merits of a more
careful formulation—constituting is letting be—can come into view.
According to the incredible reading, bringing into being means
creating—that is, causing to be. Causal creation might be ex nihilo:
“And God said, ‘Let there be light’; and there was light.” Or it might
be fashioning or generating out of some available materials, by giving
them some different or additional form. A poet creates a poem by
arranging extant words in a new order; a builder makes a house out of
provided lumber by cutting and reassembling. Likewise, it might be
suggested, ordinary phenomena (objects of experience, for instance)
are constituted by us as follows: we have or are given some raw materi-
als (raw sensory data, perhaps), and we make objects out of them by
imposing on them some suitable objective form.18
Constitutive standards, on this approach, would amount to success
conditions. In the most straightforward case, they would just be the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

326
H aving Thought
imposed forms construed as antecedent speciﬁcations on the objects
to be created. And those objects would be nothing other than the
given materials, as shaped or formed by us—hence literally our cre-
ations. Never mind whether or how creation could account for the
objectivity of objects—that is, for their standing as accessible autono-
mous authorities. For, to take the suggestion seriously at all would be
to maintain that constituted objects simply do not exist until the
moment of their constitution. While such a consequence might be
plausible for some constituted objects (chess pieces, for instance), it
would be utterly incredible in any account of the constitution of many
ordinary things (not to mention the objects investigated by most
sciences).
The apparent alternative is to suppose that the objects as such are
already there, and that constitution just means taking them to be—
“counting them as”—something else, over and above what they already
were. Thus, they aren’t brought into being altogether, but only as what
they newly become. Unlike creation out of available materials, bring-
ing into being by counting-as doesn’t rearrange or give new form to
what’s already there, but only accords it some new status, qualiﬁca-
tion, or role. So constitutive standards would be, in effect, the deﬁni-
tions of these new statuses, construed as preconditions on counting as
having them. For instance, letting little ﬁgurines ﬁgure as pieces in a
chess game doesn’t form them in any way or rearrange what they’re
made of, but rather—so it is tempting to say—simply allows them to
ﬁll speciﬁed roles for the duration of a game. (Both Rawls and Searle
explicitly connect constitution with counting-as.)
This second alternative, however, is philosophically self-defeating.
Never mind how it could account for the constitution of sticks and
stones, protons and quasars. (What already accessible entities could
be “counted as” such things?) The approach is broken-backed for a
more basic reason. The project is to understand the objecthood of
objects—their standing as criteria for objective skills—in terms of
their constitutedness. But counting-as presupposes the objecthood of
the objects that are counted as something else, and merely adds onto
those objects some new relative features (relative to whatever they are
counted as). On this line, for example, a rook would just be a certain
ﬁgurine (or whatever) for as long as the latter is so counted—with all
its chess features relative to that counting. But it would really be the
ﬁgurine itself that stood as the independent criterion for the players’
perceptions or actions: they would have to locate and identify the
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 2 7
ﬁgurine correctly, in order to tell where the rook is, or to move it. In
other words, if all constitution were mere counting-as, it would always
presuppose, hence could never contribute to, an account of objectiv-
ity—which would forfeit the point.
Letting there be light, or letting ﬁgurines be pieces, are at best special
cases of the constitution of objects as objects. How can we understand
constitution—letting be—more generally, such that it is neither in-
credible nor self-defeating as the basis of an account of objectivity as
such?
10 Esoteric chess
The temptation to understand constitution as creating or counting-as
(making or taking) is another of the perils of starting with games. As
before, the ﬁrst step on the road to recovery is to tinker with the
examples in such a way as to make unnoticed but important charac-
teristics conspicuous. Consider, for this purpose, esoteric chess, which
differs from ordinary chess only in the “medium” in which it is played.
Like all chess players, players of esoteric chess must learn to recognize
and move the pieces, in the course of playing the game; only, for them,
it’s much harder than for ordinary chess players. It is this peculiar
difﬁculty that makes the game esoteric.
The relevant point can be brought out through a pair of comple-
mentary analogies. On the one hand, there are the “chicken-sexers” of
epistemological lore: semi-skilled laborers who, through long training,
can learn to tell the sex of a newly hatched chick. But they don’t know
how they can tell; it’s as if they acquire a new perceptual primitive. On
the other hand, there are various “hidden picture” puzzles and novel-
ties: arrangements of line and color that seem, at ﬁrst, to be mere
random jumbles or scatters, but in which, though diligence and prac-
tice, one can come to be able to see, often with startling clarity, an
image that was previously quite imperceptible. In both cases, the
resulting ability is a resilient and reliable responsive skill.
The analogies are alike in that the ability to perceive something
comes only slowly and with difﬁculty, but then becomes easy. They
differ in what makes them compelling. The chicken-sexers have no
idea why some chicks strike them as male and others female; but there
is an independent and conclusive test for whether they’re getting it
right: letting the chicks grow up. By contrast, when one “gets” a hid-
den image, there is no doubt about why one takes it to be an image: it
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

3 2 8
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
looks remarkably like other images with which one is already familiar.
But there is no comparable independent test for getting it right—just
the concurrence of other viewers (and perhaps the puzzle’s designer).
Esoteric chess players, after enough training, can also “just tell” the
positions, moves, and pieces when they see them—even though
untrained eyes can’t discern anything (a cloud, a jumble, a mass of
digits, …). The ability to make moves calls, of course, for comparable
training—the uninitiated can’t get the hang of it at all for a while, but
once mastered it’s practically effortless.19 What would make these
abilities similarly compelling? Unlike chicks, esoteric pieces never
“grow up”. Nor can it be that, once seen, they look remarkably like
chess pieces; for there’s nothing that chess pieces as such look like.
What makes chess pieces the chess pieces they are is not how they’ll
grow up, nor what they look like, but rather how they can move in a
chess game—that is, the constitutive standards by which they abide,
and in terms of which they are thus intelligible.
Therefore, esoteric chess skills will be “compelling” just in case, via
them, the players can and do actually play chess with one another. If
the players can play chess, then not only must they be able to tell and
make moves, but also the pieces themselves must be abiding by the
standards. The players will be playing via their esoteric skills—that is,
using the esoteric pieces—if they are relying on them to produce and
keep track of the positions (instead of, for instance, playing by mem-
ory, as in blindfold chess). Some regime like the following might help
to show that they are really doing that: player-one makes a move in
the absence of player-two, and then exits; player-two enters and does
the same; and so on. Under these conditions, a legal game could ensue
only if each player could actually make moves (changes in the posi-
tion) that the other could then perceive. And even outsiders could
conﬁrm that the game was legal if the players were also discreetly
recording or conﬁding their moves as they made them.
In an earlier example, we saw that communal agreement is neces-
sary and sufﬁcient for determining proper dance performances and
recognitions. Esoteric chess is similar in that the moves are what the
initiates make and accept from one another as such. But, unlike
grock’n roll, esoteric chess depends also on the behavior of the pieces
themselves. If the pieces were not in fact movable by the players, and if
they did not in fact sit still and stay the same between moves, the
game could not be played. Hence, consensus regarding the identity of
moves and pieces also depends on this behavior, and cannot be sufﬁ-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru th and  ru le- f ol lowi n g
329
cient to establish it or make it the case. Because the constitutive stan-
dards for the game are more than mere shadows of regulations
governing what the players do, correctness regarding game phenom-
ena is more than mere consensus. In effect, the compliance and inert-
ness clause is the “empirical content” of esoteric (and ordinary) chess.
Letting esoteric chess pieces be is neither creating them nor count-
ing other items (already objectively intelligible) as them. In particular,
esoteric chess players do not ﬁrst see jumbles or masses of digits (as
others might) and then “count them as” chess pieces, any more than
you or I ﬁrst see sense data or colored surfaces and then “count them
as” a tomato. They don’t see jumbles or digits at all (and, indeed, they
may never have), but only chess pieces. Letting esoteric chess pieces
be is ﬁnding them—learning to ﬁnd them—by ﬁnding that chess can
be played with them. In playing chess with them, one ﬁnds (and
shows) that they are intelligible and usable chess pieces, in accord
with the constitutive standards of chess. Constituting objects is let-
ting them be by ﬁnding and showing that they make sense in some
determinate way, and can consistently be told and otherwise coped
with as such.
This is just as true for ordinary as for esoteric chess pieces. Letting
them be the objects that they are, namely chess pieces, is nothing
other than making sense of them as chess pieces by playing chess with
them. The fact that they coincide for a while with—are “implemented
in” or “carried by”—plastic ﬁgurines (or whatever) is a practical conve-
nience and an ontological distraction. Chess pieces are no more ﬁgu-
rines than words are sounds, or thoughts are brain states. Esoteric
chess makes vivid, what can remain concealed in ordinary chess, that
what chess players perceive and move, the objects that stand as criteria
for the correct exercise of their mundane skills, are chess pieces, not
ﬁgurines.
11 Empirical chess
To pick out and specify the objects of chess skills is not yet to explain
how they can stand as such objects. In other words, the philosophical
work of understanding objectivity has not been accomplished but
only, so to speak, located. Perhaps the most stubborn obstacle stand-
ing in the way of games as a model for objectivity is the fact that they
are made up—they are our own inventions, tailored to our own tastes
and purposes. Surely this is, on the face of it, the antithesis of genuine
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

330
H av i n g  Though t
independence and objectivity. What’s worse, constitutedness itself
seems deeply connected with this very made-up-ness that jeopardizes
independence (autonomy). How, then, can constitution, as extracted
from and explicated via game examples, form the basis of an account
of objectivity?
This ﬁnal challenge will be met with the ultimate tinkered exam-
ple. Empirical chess is esoteric and automatic chess, only more so.
Automatic chess, remember, is a game (or class of games) in which
most of the moves are made by the pieces themselves, and most or all
of the rules—that is, standards—according to which their moves are
legal differ from those according to which the pieces moved by the
players may move. (Also, there need be no turn-taking, and the play-
ers may be cooperating instead of competing.) What has so far been
left unspeciﬁed, however, is where the rules come from, and why the
pieces abide by them.
Approaching the example as a game encourages one to suppose that
the rules are stipulated, or at least understood, in advance, and that
the pieces abide by those rules because they have been constructed, or
at least selected, in advance to behave that way. But these suppositions
are not necessary. Imagine that the interesting challenge is not so
much winning the game as ﬁguring out what it is—that is, how to
play it. Or—more to the point—it can be part of the challenge to
ascertain whether there’s a game at all or not, and, if so, what belongs
to it and what doesn’t. Such an exploratory pursuit would be, I think,
empirical in a full and proper sense; this is what I mean by “empirical
chess”. (By the same token, of course, it is “chess”, or even a game, in at
best a stretched or metaphorical sense.)
The conspicuous “self-action” exhibited by automatic chess pieces
is an extrapolation of the inconspicuous compliance and inertness
that is prerequisite in ordinary game paraphernalia—thus, of what
was earlier called the “empirical content” of such games. Empirical
chess is an extrapolation of another easily overlooked feature of ordi-
nary games as well: some imaginable games are (would be) playable,
and some not. For instance, there could not be a variant of baseball in
which the pitcher is required to make the ball “hang” for a second or
two in front of the batter, before hurtling on to the catcher. The
problem is not in getting the pitcher to comply, but in getting the ball
to comply. A game with such a rule could not in fact be played. What
that shows is that the rules of even so “made up” a game as baseball are
not entirely up to us—far from it, in fact.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 3 1
Finding that a game is playable—or, better, ﬁnding a game that is
playable—is therefore a kind of achievement, one that includes an ele-
ment of “discovery” about the world. This element of discovery is
quite different, of course, from the sort of discovery that is possible
within a game: that one’s rook is indefensible, or that the batter is
trying to bunt, for instance. Rather, it’s something like a prior or
“meta” discovery to the effect that indefensible rooks or attempted
bunts are intelligibly possible at all, and how they are possible. If we
call such “meta discovery” disclosure, we can reserve the word ‘discovery’
for ordinary or mundane ﬁndings within the game.20 What is dis-
closed, then, is the playable game as such, including the intelligible
domain within which its phenomena make the sense they make.
Manifestly, ﬁnding a version of empirical chess that is playable
would be much more of an achievement, much harder, than ﬁnding
that ordinary (or even esoteric) chess is playable. Accordingly, the
element of disclosure would be larger, more impressive—it would
seem much more like ﬁnding something. Yet empirical “chess” remains
a constituted domain that can only be entered into by those who have
mastered unobvious (“esoteric”) mundane skills—skills the proper
exercise of which can only be gauged by others who are already initi-
ated. Except, unlike the original esoteric chess example, now even the
rules and standards are problematic and at stake. So how, exactly, can
this alleged “achievement” be hard ? What keeps anybody honest?
12 The excluded zone
Return, for a moment, to ordinary (or merely esoteric) chess. Rooks
are pieces that move in a certain way, in the context of a game; bish-
ops, knights, and so on, are pieces that move in their respective differ-
ent ways. Just such pieces are what the players must, with their
mundane skills, be able to recognize as rooks, bishops, knights, and
the rest. Further, of course, the players must be able to recognize
various positions and moves on the board—not to mention, to “make”
some of them.
Now, recognizing that something is a rook cannot amount simply
to recognizing that it is presently moving along a rank or ﬁle. For one
thing, other pieces sometimes move along ranks or ﬁles; and, for
another, rooks need to be recognizable even when they’re not moving.
Likewise, and for similar reasons, recognizing that a piece is presently
moving along a rank or ﬁle cannot amount simply to recognizing that
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

332
H aving Thought
it is a rook. In other words, the skills for recognizing pieces and moves
must be separate and exercisable independently of one another. So, to
recognize a piece of a certain type moving in a certain way requires (at
least) three recognitive abilities: for the type of piece, for the way it is
moving, and for, so to speak, their combination (in the same piece).21
Not all recognizable combinations of recognizable pieces and
moves would be legal; in fact, most wouldn’t. For instance, were a rook
to move along a diagonal, or a bishop to move otherwise than along a
diagonal, the players would be able to recognize as much, even though
either would be completely illegal (that is, contrary to the constitutive
standards). Indeed, the recognizability in principle of illegal moves (or
purported moves) is prerequisite to constitutive standards and legality
as such. For if, in principle, nothing recognizable could ever be illegal,
then the “standards” would impose no difference, and legality itself
would be without content.
Yet the very idea of an illegal move ﬂirts with paradox. That there
should be chess phenomena at all presupposes that they accord with the
rules (standards) that constitute chess as such. Nothing is so much as
intelligible, let alone recognizable, as a chess phenomenon outside of
the domain constituted according to those standards. In a perfectly
straightforward sense, the rules delimit everything that is intelligibly
possible in a chess game; anything not within those limits is precisely
ruled out. Hence, strictly speaking, illegal moves are impossible. Yet
they must be recognizable—and hence (in at least that sense) some-
thing that conceivably “could ” occur—if the ruling-out is to be nonva-
cuous. That’s the paradox.
Evidently, there must be two distinct senses of ‘can’ or ‘possible’
associated with any constituted domain—one wider and one nar-
rower. The wider sense, which we might call the conceivable, comprises
everything that the players, qua players, would have the resources to
recognize or otherwise cope with, were it to occur. It is, in effect, the
scope or compass of all the mundane skills needed for and thus be-
longing to the domain.22 The narrower or stricter sense, for which we
can now reserve the term possible, includes only that which would
accord with the constitutive standards, were it to occur. Thus, in this
sharpened usage, illegal moves are conceivable but not possible. On
the other hand, whatever is possible in a domain is conceivable in it.
(Note that the conceivable, as here deﬁned, is always tied to the skills
belonging to—co-constituted with—a particular domain; it does not
mean the conceivable, let alone the imaginable, “at large”.)
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 3 3
Yet there remains a peculiarity, even after the distinction. For con-
sider that zone of the conceivable that lies “out of bounds” for some
domain—that which, though conceivable, is impossible in the strict
sense. Let’s call it the excluded zone. As we have noted, the extent of
this zone cannot be zero; on the contrary, the conceivable must extend
well beyond the possible, lest the constitutive standards be vacuous,
and the domain itself devoid of form. At the same time, however,
anything that is conceivable in a domain at all is so only in relation to
the mundane objective skills that belong to that domain. And these
skills, in turn, along with the constituted phenomena that are sup-
posed to stand as criteria for their correct or successful exercise, only
make sense insofar as those phenomena in fact abide by the constitu-
tive standards. In other words, the very intelligibility of the excluded
zone depends on its being actually empty (or virtually so).23
Every constituted domain requires an excluded zone—a non-zero
extension of the conceivable beyond the possible—that is in fact
empty. It is excluded in the sense that “phenomena” in it are not
possible; they are ruled out by the constitutive standards. But such
phenomena are nevertheless conceivable (hence, the extent of the
zone is non-zero) in that, were they to occur, they could be recog-
nized by exercises of the mundane skills that belong to the domain.
Therefore, the crucial requirement that they don’t in fact occur is sub-
ject to empirical test. The availability of such tests is what lets disclo-
sure be hard—lets it be an achievement—because it is vulnerable, liable
to fail.
So far, however, this notion of empirical testability is very general.
In order to elaborate it into an account of objective correctness
(truth), at least three issues remain to be addressed: (i) how, given
that general liability to failure, individual skills and results can be
tested; (ii) how such testability can vest normative authority in the
objects (objective phenomena) themselves—let them be criteria; and
(iii) how that objective authority (force) is in fact brought to bear and
made effective.
13 Precarious equilibrium
Prima facie, a test is a confrontation between exercises of two (or more)
mundane skills; a failure is an incompatibility between the ﬁndings
(or other results) of those exercises. Incompatibilities are excluded
combinations—a rook moving along a diagonal, for instance—where
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

3 3 4
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
excluded means ruled out by the constitutive standards. But constitu-
tive standards are brought to bear in practice via exercises of constitu-
tive skills. It is by exercise of constitutive skills that players can tell
when something has gone wrong. So, more deeply, a test is a confron-
tation among exercises of two or more mundane skills and at least one
constitutive skill.
In the face of a challenge, either a particular exercise of a skill, or
that skill itself, can come into question; that is, it could be either that
the performance was somehow erroneous (in a sense that is so far
neutral between impropriety of performance and incorrectness of re-
sult), and should be revised (rectiﬁed), or else that the skill itself is
somehow defective or inadequate, and should be repaired (modiﬁed
and improved). Accordingly, there are four basic responses to a failure:
mundane or constitutive revision or repair. As a matter of principle,
none of these can be taken lightly. If performances or skills are “re-
vised” or “repaired” casually, at the ﬁrst sign of trouble, then nothing is
seriously excluded, and all “testing” is a farce. This is why the skills
must be resilient: they must be able to stand up to one another, and
hold their ground, lest any contentions among them be hollow and
inconsequential.
On the other hand, resilience cannot mean complete obstinacy or
rigidity; for that too is incompatible with meaningful testing. Sup-
pose, for instance, that two observations or measurements are found
(by exercise of some constitutive skill) to be incompatible. Other
things equal, neither should yield to the other right away; they should
both be resilient. But suppose further that a third mundane result
turns out to be compatible with the second, but not the ﬁrst; and then
a fourth is compatible with both the second and third, but still not the
ﬁrst; and so on. It does not matter in principle whether these ﬁndings
are made all by one investigator, or by several. Before long, that ﬁrst
result begins to look pretty lonely, and as if it must have been a/the
error. (This example illustrates another important point as well: test
failures had better be relatively isolated; and that is why—and also
what it means that—objective skills have to be reliable.24)
The role of the constitutive skill(s) is distinctive and fundamental.
The account of errors depends essentially on incompatibilities among
mundane ﬁndings. But in and of themselves, no two (or more) actual
ﬁndings are incompatible. There is, for instance, no immediate in-
compatibility between recognizing a rook and seeing it to move along
a diagonal. Only given the standards of chess, which rule out such
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 35
moves, is there any incompatibility in that. Indeed, only given the
standards of chess, is there any incompatibility in recognizing a rook
and then seeing it to be not a rook—for, in some games (and, for
pawns, even in chess) pieces can sometimes legally change their types.
Therefore, constitutive skills are not, and cannot be, just further
mundane skills. They must be “meta” or “monitoring” skills vis-à-vis
the results of mundane performances; for their essential exercise is to
watch out for incompatibilities among those results—an exercise of
vigilance. So, though there can be a “confrontation” among several
mundane ﬁndings and a constitutive ﬁnding, there can be no incom-
patibility between the former and the latter. Rather, it is at most the
mundane results that are mutually incompatible, and the constitutive
ﬁnding “confronts” them by, so to speak, accusing them of that.
To point out that constitutive skills are essentially different from
mundane skills is not at all to suggest that their exercises are immune
to revision, or that they themselves are immune to repair. Players can
certainly misunderstand or inadvertently misapply constitutive stan-
dards; a chess player might forget, for instance, about capturing en
passant, or overlook that a castling rook is threatened. As with mun-
dane errors, constitutive errors are likely only to be noticed in the face
of something supposedly impossible; and the resolution, after further
testing and rechecking, is again accession to the preponderant.
In contrast to rectifying particular performances, repairing and im-
proving the skills themselves is a matter of changing how they are
performed in general, altering the relevant abilities and dispositions.
As resilient, objective skills must be resistant to repair, just as they are
to revision, and for the same reason. Repairs, unlike revisions, are
prompted not by isolated discrepancies, surrounded by results that
agree, but rather by persistent and recalcitrant patterns of discrep-
ancy. If things keep going wrong, maybe the problem is not individual
errors in performance, but deﬁciencies in the skills themselves. (If you
keep seeing rooks moving along diagonals, and bishops along ranks
and ﬁles, maybe the problem is that you can’t tell a rook from a
bishop, or have them mixed up; or maybe they aren’t rooks and bish-
ops at all.)
A repair makes a difference to which performances were and will
be proper or correct. That’s the point, after all: to root out a persistent
pattern of problems, past and prospective. But repairs also carry,
therefore, a distinctive risk and burden. In changing a skill itself, all its
performances are potentially affected, including those that were not
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

336
H av i n g Though t
previously problematic. But it’s of little use to eradicate one pattern of
difﬁculty at the expense of introducing another, as bad or worse.
What’s more, it can easily happen that the best (or only workable)
option is to modify several skills at once, so that what would have led
to additional problems in any one of them alone is offset by the
others, and problems are reduced overall. In effect, skill repair is just
the sort of multi-factor trading off or equilibrating that is familiar
from holist epistemology.
Constitutive skills are subject to repair too, and are, in their own
way, part of the same balancing act. Modifying constitutive skills and
modifying constitutive standards are not fundamentally separable: ul-
timately and concretely, the standards just are what the players recog-
nize in exercises of the skills. To modify or repair the constitutive
skills is to change the game itself—slightly or radically, as the case
may be. Such an option may not loom large for routine recreational
games; but it can become central when, as in empirical chess, the
primary challenge is to ﬁgure out whether there’s a “game” (intelligible
domain) at all, and, if so, what it is, what belongs to it, and how to
play it. If, in order to maintain or regain equilibrium, a number of
constitutive and/or mundane skills must be modiﬁed together, the
effect is apt to seem “revolutionary”.
In sum, then: against the background of an established and stable
equilibrium, individual mundane performances can be tested through
comparison with others, according to constraints set by constitutive
standards (as imposed by exercises of constitutive skills). This yields a
clear, new sense for the idea of isolated mundane errors (and, at a
higher level, of isolated constitutive errors), a sense that transcends
merely instituted consensus. What has not yet been shown, however,
is how mundane error in this new sense can be understood more
speciﬁcally as objective incorrectness.
As has often been noted in related contexts, individual errors are
intelligible as such only given a lack of error—or, as we should rather
say, a lack of incompatibility—on the whole. That such by-and-large
agreements, as here understood, are not merely coherent and consen-
sual is already anticipated in the fact that the background skillful
equilibrium upon which they all depend is itself vulnerable in the face
of patterns of errors—in the fact that any achieved equilibrium is
always empirically precarious.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 3 7
14 Power to the phenomena
The excluded zone is what makes the difference between constitution
and institution. Constitutive standards and the zone they exclude give
sense to a distinctive sort of potential incompatibility among particu-
lar mundane exercises. Constituted objective phenomena are the loci
of these potential incompatibilities. Such loci are what constitution
lets phenomena be—namely, as we shall see, empirical objects.
Here’s why. These same incompatibilities—excluded conceivable
combinations—also ground an equally distinctive sort of error. Mun-
dane exercises are, of course, skillful performances; and, as such, they
can be done properly or improperly. If, for instance, the skills are
handed down in a tradition, or disseminated within some community
by deliberate training, then the collective judgement of the relevant
experts (communal elders, perhaps) is authoritative about perfor-
mance propriety—essentially the structure of institution. But, as we
just saw, mundane performances in a constituted domain can also be
found erroneous in another and quite different way. If all but one in a
group of related mundane results turn out to be compatible with one
another, but incompatible with that one, then the outlier stands to be
rejected as erroneous. That such a result is an error is not simply a
matter of a consensus of experts; indeed, they might all agree that
each performance was properly executed. Rather, the error is a matter
of a structure of relations among a number of actual mundane ﬁnd-
ings—actual responses to the constituted phenomena. In other
words, the phenomena themselves might confound the experts (or
everybody).
What is authoritative for this new sort of error is not any consen-
sus or collective judgement but rather the locus of incompatibility
among those related exercises—which is to say, the constituted object.
It is that locus, that point of intersection, at which the many results
concur, and the one stands apart. But the kind of potential error for
which the object itself is authoritative—normatively criterial—is
nothing other than objective incorrectness. Therefore, the excluded zone
enables a normative distinction between objective correctness and
incorrectness that is quite different from that between propriety and
impropriety of performance.
To be sure, it is to be hoped and expected that most objective
mistakes will be traceable to failings in the skillful performances that
produced them. (If not, then perhaps some skills are in need of repair;
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

338
H av i n g  Though t
indeed, the whole point of improving observation and measurement
techniques is to bring performance propriety into line with objective
correctness of results.) But what is important ﬁrst is not that the two
kinds of error will tend to occur in tandem, but rather that there really
are two kinds, and either can occur without the other. In other words,
for mundane exercises in a constituted domain, there are two types of
norm in play, not just one.
The point can be seen also from the side of the phenomena. Merely
instituted phenomena, such as dance steps, greetings, and the appro-
priate occasions for them, are what they are only in relation to con-
sensual proprieties of performance. Thus, it can never be the case that
everyone is systematically wrong about them, takes them to be other
than they are; for, if everyone systematically took them some other
way, then that’s what they would be. Such phenomena have, therefore,
no independent normative standing over against the general skills and
customs for producing, recognizing and interacting with them. And,
consequently, they can never “resist” or “stand up to” those skills—
they can never show proper performances to be in error, or the skills
themselves to be in need of repair.
Constituted phenomena, by contrast, can stand up to mundane
skills. By virtue of the constitutive standards imposing constraints on
combinations of results, individual loci of incompatibility can resist and
refute particular proper (or improper) performances—show their
results to be incorrect. In effect, the standards, by ruling out the bulk
of conceivable combinations, bind the totality of actual results within
the narrow bounds of possibility. And this binding together allows
them, so to speak, to “gang up on” isolated performances whose results
are incompatible with—impossible in the light of—the overwhelm-
ing majority. Figuratively, we can think of the phenomena as gaining
the power to resist by “locking arms” against the skills, with the con-
stitutive standards providing their grip or their ability to lock to-
gether. Thus, in another image, an excluded zone is how a complex
practice can stick its neck out empirically, by giving constituted phe-
nomena this power to resist or refute it.
Objective correctness is a normative rule governing the results of
mundane skillful exercises, distinct from the norm of proper perfor-
mance. The constituted objects themselves are authoritative in regard
to—that is, they stand as normative criteria for—objective correct-
ness.25 But where does this authority, the normative force of the rule,
come from? And, how is it brought to bear? How does it take effect?
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 3 9
15 First-person involvement
To understand the normative authority of objects, its source and its
effectiveness, is to understand objectivity. In order to pursue this un-
derstanding, however, it will be necessary to make an apparent, and
perhaps surprising, digression into subjectivity.
Much of twentieth-century philosophy has been driven by a rejec-
tion of any special standing or epistemic authority for subjects or
other “insiders”—favoring instead evidence that is publicly available
from a third-person perspective. Accordingly, there is a tendency, al-
most a professional reﬂex, to consider a question about, for instance,
the objectivity of esoteric or empirical chess exclusively as outsiders—
to ask, that is, how “we” (noninitiates, detached spectators, scien-
tists, …) could reliably tell whether “they” (initiates, involved partici-
pants, natives, …) are really perceiving objects, or are merely being
agreeable and consistent. But such “radical” post-empiricism runs
together two quite different issues about subjectivity, and thereby
distorts both.
The move to the third person in epistemology and the philosophy
of mind is methodological, motivated by concerns about the character
of evidence—to avoid such shopworn “myths” as unmistakable data,
privileged access, the transparency of meaning, and so on. The trouble
is that the spectators’ and participants’ perspectives differ in other
ways than what is (allegedly) evident from them; and the distortions
lie in obscuring these other differences. Thus, to return attention to
the ﬁrst-person position need not be, and is not here, an attempt to
rehabilitate any supposed epistemic security or privilege. It is rather to
recover something else that gets lost when one restricts consideration
to what is outwardly observable—namely, the participants’ own in-
volvement in what is going on.
First-person involvement, I shall argue, is a crucial element in the
structure of objectivity. Therefore, objectivity must be considered in
its relation to subjectivity. This doesn’t mean reliance on introspection
or autobiography. It means rather that the topic is ﬁrst-person involve-
ment, as opposed to observable behavior, or what can be pieced to-
gether therefrom by radical interpretation. Note in this connection
that the ﬁrst person doesn’t mean particularly the ﬁrst-person singular.
The return in our considerations from the third to the ﬁrst person is
not a return from publicness to privacy, any more than from what
is overt to what is covert, but rather a return from detachment to
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

3 40
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
personal involvement, from the position of the spectator to that of the
participant(s).
Thus, reverting to game examples for a moment, the way to con-
sider esoteric chess is not to imagine that we are anthropologists
observing esoteric chess players engaged in a game, and then ask what
we could learn philosophically. Rather, we should imagine that we are
ourselves esoteric chess players engaged in a game, and then ask what
we can learn philosophically. From this latter perspective, unlike the
former, our (imagined) involvement in the game can come into view
as something that might be relevant.
Obviously, for instance, there is more to playing chess than just
moving ostensible pieces in accord with the rules (even if that accord
is counterfactually projectable). For one thing, the players should be
trying to win. Now I make no claim as to whether or how the pres-
ence and signiﬁcance of such a feature in some activity could be estab-
lished by radical interpretation. I claim rather that it is beside the
point. The aim is not to certify that anyone is playing a game, or even
to see how such certiﬁcation is possible, but instead to understand
what game-playing—and eventually science—amounts to, in its es-
sential aspects. Trying to win is one way that players are essentially
involved, in the ﬁrst person, in (some) games; but it is not the only
way, or even the most fundamental.
Any player of chess, esoteric or otherwise, has an investment in the
legality of all the moves in the game, regardless of whose moves they
are. If the “moves” made by your opponent, for example, are not all (or
virtually all) legal chess moves, then you cannot understand the pieces
being moved, or, by extension, any of the pieces, as chess pieces. The
very existence and continuation of the game depends on the legality of
the moves. In other words, if you are to keep playing—you who are
involved in this game as a player—then you must insist that both your
own and your opponent’s moves be legal. This insistence on legality is
a kind of ﬁrst-person involvement that is even more fundamental to
game playing than istrying to win.
16 Existential commitment
To undertake a game in earnest, to engage seriously in play, is to make
a commitment to the rules that deﬁne or constitute that game. Now
commitment can be understood in a deontic sense and in what, for
want of a better word, I shall call an “existential” sense. Both are
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 41
relevant in the case of games, but they are different, and the difference
matters.
A deontic commitment is a socially grounded obligation or duty:
something that is incumbent on one, a way one is supposed to behave,
in virtue of one’s relations to others. Making a commitment to the
rules of a game means, in this sense, undertaking an obligation to play
by the rules—say, by entering into (or implying) an agreement.
Someone who fails to abide by such a commitment is corrected, or, if
incorrigible, rejected as a player. (To engage in a folk dance is to
undertake a comparable, if less articulated, commitment—likewise
on pain of rejection.)
Existential commitment, by contrast, is no sort of obligation but
something more like a dedicated or even a devoted way of living: a
determination to maintain and carry on. It is not a communal status
at all but a resilient and resolute ﬁrst-personal stance. (Marriage and
monastic vows may be deontic commitments; love and faith are exis-
tential.) Such commitment is not “to” other players or people, or even
to oneself, but rather to an ongoing, concrete game, project, or life.
Thus, it is no more a psychological or an intentional state than it is a
communal status; rather it is a way, a style, a mode of playing, working,
or living—a way that relies and is prepared to insist on that which is
constitutive of its own possibility, the conditions of its intelligibility.
Insofar as existential commitment includes insistence on the stan-
dards constitutive of some domain, it can as well be called constitutive
commitment. This (at long last) is the fourth of the four sorts of rule
and rule-following that, along with constitutive regulations, constitu-
tive standards, and constitutive skills, was telescoped into the original
idea of constitutive rule. Constitutive regulations, so prominent at the
outset, have, by now, rather receded as a derivative and special case.
Existential constitutive commitment, on the other hand, will come to
the fore as fundamental. What kind of “rule-following” is this?
Clearly, existential commitment is a governing, and not just an
exhibited rule; for an individual can fall away from or fail to live up to
it. Equally clearly, however, its “governance” is peculiar and in a class
by itself—sui generis. The governing or normative “authority” of an
existential commitment comes from nowhere other than itself, and it
is brought to bear in no way other than by its own exercise—that is,
by self-discipline and resolute persistence. A committed individual
holds him or herself to the commitment by living in a resilient, deter-
mined way. Thus, its authority is sui generis in a stronger sense than
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

3 42
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
just “of its own genus”: it is of its own genesis, self-generated. (An-
other word for ‘sui generis’ in this stronger sense is authentic.)
Corresponding to the distinction between deontic and existential
commitment, we can draw another between deontic and existential
responsibility. Every commitment entails responsibilities. A promise to
look after a child, for instance, entails accepting responsibility for the
child’s whereabouts, safety, entertainment, and such like. Existential
responsibility, on the other hand, is responsibility for the conditions
on which the sustainability of the commitment itself depends. It en-
tails, therefore, insofar as that commitment is also constitutive, re-
sponsiveness to the constituted phenomena, in particular with regard
to their compliance with the standards in accord with which they are
constituted. It is the responsibility, in other words, to take seriously—
that means, neither to ignore nor easily to acquiesce in—apparent
breaches of those standards. 
Only in this existential-constitutive sense (as opposed to the deon-
tic sense) can the character and behavior of objective phenomena
belong to the “content” of anyone’s commitment—what he or she is
responsible for. One can be deontically responsible only for the char-
acter and consequences of one’s own behavior (and omissions). By
contrast, a chess player as such is committed not only to following the
rules of the game, but also to seeing that the rooks and bishops
themselves abide by the constitutive standards—for otherwise the
game cannot go on. (‘Seeing that’ is here neutral between ‘ﬁnding that’
and ‘seeing to it that’.) Constitutive commitment to chess is not an
agreement to play by the rules, on pain of being rejected, but rather an
involved insistent way of responding and playing, so of ﬁnding things
and dealing with them, on pain of “giving up the game”.
More precisely and more generally, the content of—the issue for—
any existential constitutive commitment is maintenance of the rele-
vant precarious equilibrium. It is this commitment that stands behind
the unacceptability of incompatible mundane results, as determined by
exercises of constitutive skills. (For instance, commitment to a chess
game is what stands behind the unacceptability of illegal moves.)
Accordingly, it also stands behind the ability of objects to resist mun-
dane ﬁndings, to show them up as incorrect. And therefore, ﬁnally, it
is the driving force behind all efforts to resolve apparent incompatibil-
ities, whether by exposing them as merely apparent (revising incorrect
results), or by repairing the system so as to avoid such results in
general (changing the mundane or constitutive skills themselves).
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 4 3
Here the artiﬁciality and ultimate inadequacy of chess and all game
analogies come most blatantly into the open. Playing legal chess is not
hard; nor is giving up on a game likely to be costly. Still less—and this
is the important point—is the playability of the game as such ever in
question. It’s just a game. Empirical science (for which empirical chess
has been my rhetorical stalking horse) is another matter entirely. Un-
like playing a game, even to carry out a research program properly and
to obtain correct results (never mind to succeed impressively or ﬁnd
anything interesting) is a difﬁcult endeavor, not to be taken for
granted either before or after the fact. And giving up on a science can
cost a career, perhaps many.
Yet what is most important, the essential difference between science
and games, is that the enterprise itself is always in question. In sci-
ence, unlike in any game, the repair and improvement not only of
mundane but also of constitutive skills is always potentially (and often
in fact) an issue. The responsibilities entailed by an empirical consti-
tutive commitment thus necessarily extend to the very skills and con-
cepts that are the form and substance of the domain itself. It is this
empirical responsibility for the terms in which the enterprise can so
much as be conducted, grounded in an existential constitutive com-
mitment, that most deeply distinguishes genuine empirical research
from all other human endeavors.26
The questions left at the end of section 14 are now easily answered.
The normative authority of objects, by virtue of which they can stand
as criteria for the correctness of mundane results—and thus as bind-
ing on judgements and assertions—devolves upon them from the
commitment to the standards in accord with which they are consti-
tuted. Note that this is not to suggest that the authority of objects is
somehow “delegated” or “ceded” to them by those committed to the
standards. That would be to suppose that the latter already had the
relevant authority and could then give it away, neither of which makes
clear sense. Rather it is to say that, in committing to a constituted
domain, and thereby ﬁnding objects, those who are thus committed
necessarily also ﬁnd the objects as authoritative, and acknowledge them
as such. The authority is implicit in the structure of the ﬁnding. That
normative authority of the discovered objects, derived from but not at
all the same as the sui generis normative authority of the constitutive
commitment, then takes its effect via the responsible responsiveness
of the mundane skills.
This completes the basic account of objectivity and truth.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

3 44
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
17 Mere coherence
It remains to show that this account of truth is not a coherence theory
in disguise. Initially, one might suppose that all incompatibility must
reduce to contradiction, and hence that all insistence on constitutive
standards reduces to insistence on logical consistency or coherence
among explicit propositions. For instance, the incompatibility be-
tween being a rook and moving along a diagonal might seem to reduce
to the contradiction between “Rooks never move along diagonals” and
“There’s a rook moving along a diagonal.” 
There are two things wrong with this idea. First, it gratuitously
presupposes, what is surely tendentious, that all the relevant skills (or
ﬁndings) can be expressed adequately in sentences. But second, and
more fundamental, if the thesis is understood as an account of how
incompatibilities can be recognized at all (rather than just a claim
about how they might be described by an articulate observer), then it
founders on a regress not unlike those mentioned in section 2 above.
For, if a contradiction is itself to be recognized, the respective proposi-
tional expressions and also their contradictoriness must be recog-
nized. But abilities to recognize those conditions amount to mundane
and constitutive skills for the domain in which assertions are possible.
Thus, recognizing a contradiction is a special case of recognizing an
excluded incompatibility in a constituted domain. If those recogni-
tions in turn require propositional expression and recognized contra-
diction, then the regress starts. But, if they don’t, then why suppose
that all other recognitions of incompatibility require expression and
recognized contradiction?
Still, it might seem that ‘precarious equilibrium’ is just another
name for coherence in a deeper sense. Here’s a way to bring the worry
into focus. If objects are supposed to stand as criteria for correctly
telling what they are, then they had better be independent of those
tellings (and related skills). Now, all chess phenomena—and, in this,
they are surely representative of constituted phenomena in general—
are constituted in terms of how they relate to one another, as required
and allowed by the constitutive standards. So any given chess object, a
certain rook for instance, is what it is in terms of how it ﬁts into a legal
chess game: how it relates to the board, the other pieces, and so on.
But these relationships and other pieces are themselves accessible only
via further exercises of the same body of mundane skills in terms of
which the rook itself is recognizable. Therefore, it seems, the identity
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 4 5
of the given rook is not independent of mundane skillful exercises
after all, even when the role of the standards is taken into account; the
dependence is just shared with that of other pieces, and spread out
over a lot of skills.
Spread-out dependence, however, is not independence. If that were
all precarious equilibrium could offer, it would indeed reduce to the
sort of holism that is merely internal coherence—not so much an
account of objectivity as a quitting of the ﬁeld. To be sure, there is no
way to check a skillful exercise except by other skillful exercises. This
is the truth behind Donald Davidson’s remark that “nothing can
count as a reason for holding a belief except another belief ”.27 And he
expressly intends this thesis to characterize the sort of coherence
theory that he endorses. But endorsing coherence as the only mark of
correctness is the problem, not the solution. For, in that case, inde-
pendent objects and objectivity would simply drop out. What we
want is a way to acknowledge that all objective checking (testing,
validation, conﬁrmation, and so on) is “internal” to its domain—at
least in the sense of not being alien to it—while maintaining that
objective correctness is importantly independent of the practices con-
stituting that domain.
The spectre raised by “mere” coherence is that, in a constituted
domain, all the mundane skillful exercises are internal to one and the
same well-oiled story—hence that all the passed “tests” are as mutu-
ally conﬁrming as the synchronized alibis of a gang of thieves. To put
it another way, if those skills themselves are subject to “revision and
improvement” in the course of maintaining the equilibrium, what’s to
keep them from becoming mere “yea-sayers” to whatever it is that the
standards demand, the despot’s trusted scouts who have been selected
over the years never to bring unwelcome news? Honest objectivity, by
contrast, would seem to require some external constraint, tying cor-
rectness to something other than coherent in-house self-congratula-
tion.
As Wilfrid Sellars (1956/63) showed, it is not sufﬁcient to under-
stand such constraint in terms of bare—that is, nonnormative—
causal responsiveness to things. For the issue is not how our responses
can be responses, but how, as responses, they can be right or wrong
about what they are responding to. It is correctness, not responsiveness,
that coherence seems to promise too cheaply. All the same, causality is
not simply to be set aside. Skills, including recognition as a responsive
skill, are essentially causal too. (Even inference is ineliminably causal:
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

3 4 6
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
unless a conclusion is accepted because the premises are, it isn’t inferred
from them.) Correct responses are still and necessarily responses.
All is therefore lost if, from the outset, object and response are
understood in terms of fundamentally disjoint conceptual frame-
works—the causal/law-governed and the normative/rational, say. For
then the relation between them could not intelligibly be either causal
or normative; whereas any external constraint that is to transcend
mere coherence must be both. (It is no solution to propose causal/
normative “dual citizenship” for object and response; for then, barring
reduction, it is at best a coincidence if what is caused is what is right. I
say at best a coincidence, since, at worst, such duality—“token iden-
tity”—makes no sense at all.)
In a constituted domain, however, skills and objects are made for
each other : the objective skills are co-constituted along with the objective
phenomena, and the latter are precisely what the former respond to
(and otherwise deal with). At the same time, as we saw in section 14,
those same objects stand as normative criteria for the objective cor-
rectness of the results of exercising those skills. Therefore, the spectre
of mere coherence will be exorcized if and only if it can be shown that
those objects, hence the constraints that they afford on correctness,
are external in the appropriate way.
18 Truth as beholdenness
Since the phenomena by which the performances are constrained are
themselves constituted, hence are, in at least that sense, internal to the
domain, it hardly seems that any constraint they might afford could
be appropriately external. In other words, that same character of these
phenomena—their constitutedness—that makes it intelligible how
(co-constituted) responses can be related to them both causally and
normatively, threatens also to drag them back within the orbit of the
very coherence that those relations were intended to transcend. In-
deed, one might suppose that, whatever the details, such a collapse is
inevitable. For either the desired constraint is really external or it isn’t.
If it is, then its putative role as a normative criterion is unintelligible;
if not, then everything relevant is internal, and mere coherence reigns
again unchecked.
But this, as we are now in a position to see, is a false predicament.
It trades on an equivocation in the word ‘external’. On the one hand,
an external constraint might be one that is alien—“utterly” or “concep-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 47
tually” alien—to a domain. For instance, a gravitational inﬂuence
would be altogether alien to a chess position, or a political inﬂuence
on the composition of the asteroids. A purely physical causal impact on
rational norm-governed phenomena would be alien in this sense also.
To whatever extent such inﬂuences can occur at all, it is only as surd
intrusions; in particular, they are not intelligible as the objective con-
straints that check coherence.
On the other hand, however, an external constraint might be one
that is independent, in the sense that the limits or demands it imposes
are not under the control of, or already prearranged by, that which is
supposedly constrained. An independent constraint precludes com-
placency and ﬁat: it will catch slips and failings, and might well im-
pose unwelcome or even disruptive changes. An external ﬁnancial
audit, for example, is not one conducted in the alien terms of, say,
physics or chess, but rather one that cannot be controlled or manipu-
lated by the organization being audited—in other words, one with
the independent capacity and authority to expose error, incompe-
tence, or rampant corruption. A genuine independent constraint is
one that could, in the end, bring the system down.
The false predicament, then, is the supposition that, even though
an alien intervention is unintelligible as a normative check, only such
an intervention could serve as an external constraint on coherence.
The resolution is to notice that a genuine external check need not be
alien at all, but instead independent, and that an independent norma-
tive check is perfectly intelligible. For precisely what the excluded
zone and constitutive commitment confer upon mundane tests is the
capacity and authority to expose failings, all the way from routine
mistakes up to and including systematic incompatibilities that under-
mine the whole. And that just is independence in the required sense:
the witness has not been bought off, the jury can indeed convict. To
put it another way, objective phenomena are both accessible as norma-
tive criteria and literally out of control. The constitution of the domain
determines what it comes to for them to be or to behave in this way or
that; but whether they then do or not is “up to them”—and skillful
practitioners can tell.
Ordinary or “mere” coherence, taken as a characteristic of a set of
propositional attitudes and/or speech acts, whether individual or
communal, lacks this element of independent constraint. It leaves no
intelligible space for the objects that the propositions are supposedly
about to resist those propositions, to show them up as false. If consti-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

3 4 8
H av i n g  Tho u g h t
tuted domains are regarded as a variant sort of coherent set, with
constituted phenomena and skillful responses in place of or added to
propositional contents, and constitutive exclusion replacing or aug-
menting noncontradiction, then it is crucial to see this difference:
constituted objects themselves, unlike any beliefs or statements alleg-
edly about them, can “talk back”. Since constituted criterial objects
can be independent in this way, skillful mundane performances can be
normatively beholden to them for the correctness of their results. We
might call this a beholdenness theory of truth.
19 Objective things
The bare notion of an object—a locus of potential incompatibility in a
constituted domain—is scrupulously formal, in the sense that it lacks
any speciﬁc or determinate content. That is because there are and can
be no antecedent restrictions on the character of constituted domains,
apart from those essential to the structure of constitution as such.
(There is, of course, much more to that structure than has been
indicated here.) Thus, whether the relevant loci have the ontological
character of ordinary things, or some other and quite different charac-
ter, is a function of the domain in question. I believe, for instance, that
the main lesson of Daniel Dennett’s (1991) “mild realism” about beliefs
and desires is that (according to his account of their constitution in
the intentional stance) they are simultaneously quite objective and not
at all thing-like. Nevertheless, things are an exemplary case.
The paradigm thing is an integral individual bearer of multiple
variable properties.
Integrity in a thing means that it “hangs together” in a determinate
and regular (nonarbitrary) way. It has two basic components. First, a
thing is spatio-temporally cohesive, occupying a well-deﬁned, con-
nected trajectory, no part of which overlaps that of any other thing.
Thus, at each moment during which it exists, it has a deﬁnite size,
shape, and location; and any variations in these are continuous and
regular (or nearly so) throughout its existence.
The second component of a thing’s integrity is full and regular
coherence among its properties. Each property of a thing must be com-
patible with each other property that it has, and with the absence of
each possible property that it lacks, at each moment of and through-
out its existence. Of course, some combinations of properties and/or
lacks that would be ruled out at the same time may be allowed at
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
3 49
distinct times, and vice versa. To say that the coherence among the
properties of a thing is full is to say that the presence or absence of
each possible property is determinate at each moment of its existence;
in other words, integral things are always concrete. The regularity of
cohesion and coherence shows up in practice as predictability.
To say that a thing is an individual is to say that, as long as it exists,
it is (in principle) identiﬁable at any moment as one thing—“this”
thing—in distinction from any other, and reidentiﬁable as the same
(numerically identical) thing at any other moment. The regularities
constitutive of a thing’s integrity—cohesiveness and coherence at and
across times—are the basis for its identiﬁability and reidentiﬁability.
The essential notion of a property combines at least three elements.
First and foremost, properties are proper to their bearers. (Particular
pluralities of things can jointly bear relational properties, such as
similarity, relative location, or interaction.) This means that whether a
thing (or plurality of things) has some property or not is a function
only of it (or them), and not of anything else. Properties are, in this
sense, “atomistic” or “intrinsic”. Thus, the mass of a thing, unlike its
weight, is proper to it—for the mass depends on the thing alone, and
on nothing else.28 The gravitational attraction between two things
depends only on them, and so is proper to the pair (that is, a rela-
tional property). Shape, chemical composition, temperature, color,
hardness, and so on, are other typical properties.29 By contrast, being
hidden, unusual, dangerous, defective, notorious, or expensive are not
properties of things, strictly speaking, because they depend on factors,
needs, or circumstances other than the thing in question.
Second, the properties of things are determinations of how they inter-
act with anything else—including, in particular, with observers. Prop-
erties are therefore accessible; the properties of a thing are what can be
told about it, either directly or via their effects on other things. It is
primarily as having its various properties that a thing can be known.
Though there may be practical impediments, and perhaps occasional
exceptions, it is essential that, as a rule, properties can be told in more
than one way, and that multiple properties can be told together (that
is, as coinstantiated in one and the same thing). Perceptible properties
can be told without (much) instrumentation or inference (though
perhaps only by trained observers); imperceptible or theoretical prop-
erties can be told only in less direct ways.
Third, properties are general. Generality can be characterized in
two ways. The usual way is to say that a general property can be had
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

350
H av i n g  Though t
(borne, instantiated) separately by any number of distinct things (in-
cluding, perhaps, none). Thus, being the highest mountain on Earth,
Edmund Hillary’s greatest triumph, or Mount Everest, cannot be
properties strictly so called, because at most one thing can be such.
The other way to characterize the generality of properties is to say
that whether a thing has a property never depends on which thing it
is—that is, on its identity as one particular individual, rather than
another.
The second characterization of generality is less restrictive, but
maybe more basic, than the ﬁrst. It precludes being Mount Everest as
a property; but it does not preclude being the Earth’s highest moun-
tain or Hillary’s greatest triumph. The latter two, on the other hand,
but not the former, are precluded as properties by the requirement
that properties be proper to their bearers: being the highest mountain
and Hillary’s greatest triumph are not proper to Everest, but being
Mount Everest (presumably) is. That a property must be such that
any number of distinct things can instantiate it follows from the
stipulations that properties are proper to their bearers, and never
depend for their instantiation on which particular individuals those
bearers are.
These last few paragraphs amount to a rough and ready sketch of
the constitutive standards for the domain of ordinary objective things
and properties. It seems to me that something like these standards is
built into (modern western) common sense—which is not to say that
ordinary people could articulate them, or would assent to them if
articulated. It is only to say that, to a ﬁrst approximation, they are
applied—that is, insisted upon—in everyday practice. So, for exam-
ple, “things” that seemed to pop into and out of existence, to change
their properties radically and capriciously, to differ in character de-
pending on who looked at them or how, or to be accessible only to
speciﬁc individuals or under peculiar circumstances—such “things”
would be, ceteris paribus, repudiated as unreal. This is exactly the
basis for the common-sense denial of reality to hallucinations,
dreams, delusions, occult phenomena, and the miracles of charlatans.
It does not affect this point that you can fool some of the people all
of the time, or even all of the people some of the time. What matters
is that the standards are in place—that is, that they are imposed in
practice mostly, and that mostly they work. In some sense, there
needn’t have been a world in which phenomena abide by the stan-
dards of enduring things and their variable properties; no logic or
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
351
metaphysics can prove its necessity. But, given that we have indeed
disclosed such a world, by successfully (if tacitly) insisting upon its
standards in how we live, then there are indeed things with objectively
accessible properties.
A charismatic ﬂorist, therefore, cannot make a yellow jonquil scarlet
by convincing everyone to call it that. For there are established stan-
dards governing the colors of things: colors don’t depend on what
anybody says (and especially not on cajoling); the color of something
doesn’t depend on which individual thing it is; there are multiple ways
to determine colors; there are known relations between color and light
frequencies, chemical composition, and visibility under various condi-
tions; colors seldom change unprompted, especially without passing
through intermediate hues; and so on. Thus, the color of the sacred
jonquil could be told by a colorimeter, by examining it under various
lamps, by comparing its composition and microstructure with those
of other jonquils, or by showing it to people who don’t realize which
jonquil it is. If these or similar tests are performed by those who call it
scarlet, incompatibilities will soon appear, and constitutive commit-
ment will insist on a resolution. Or, if no such tests are performed,
then what would have happened would have happened; and so much
the worse for the fools.
20 Playing chess with nature
Scientiﬁc standards may have their roots in the ontology of things;
but they tend to be more speciﬁc, more explicit, and, above all, stricter
(more exclusive). In The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery (1935/59), Karl
Popper proposed to demarcate science from other cognitive endeavors
by a criterion of falsiﬁability. A theory is falsiﬁable to the extent that it
rules out (by being logically incompatible with) basic or test state-
ments. Thus, falsiﬁability comes in degrees; and a theory is more
objective, says more about the world, the stricter or more falsiﬁable it
is—that is, the more it rules out. Theoretical science aims at obtain-
ing theories that, on the one hand, are highly falsiﬁable, in the sense
that they rule out almost all logically possible basic statements (that
is, they permit only a narrow range of possibilities), but, on the other
hand, have not in fact been falsiﬁed, despite assiduous efforts to refute
them with various tests.30 (See sections 6–8, 31, and 82.)
Basic statements, on this view, are singular positive existentials (to
the effect that an event of a certain type occurred at a certain place and
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

352
H av i n g  Though t
time) that trained observers are motivated to accept by experience.
Popper is quite clear that basic statements are never justiﬁed by experi-
ence; rather, their acceptance is (logically) a matter of free decision—
decisions which, however, may be (psychologically) well-adapted reac-
tions to events or experiences.31 This does not mean that basic state-
ments cannot be challenged or justiﬁed at all, but only that, when
they are justiﬁed, it is by appeal to other statements, basic and theo-
retical. Such justiﬁcation has no natural end; rather it is carried on to,
and only to, the point at which the relevant investigators agree. (See
sections 27–30.)
Obviously, the excludedness of what I have called “the excluded
zone” is a descendant of Popperian falsiﬁcation. Insistent vigilance
corresponds roughly to the requisite effort to refute; and the constitu-
tive/mundane divide among skills is clearly analogous to that between
theoretical and basic among statements. But the two positions are not
the same. Details aside, the principal difference lies in the notion of
constitution: Popper has no counterpart to the idea that the objects of
science are themselves constituted normative constraints, and therefore
also no counterpart to my account of objectivity and truth.
In differing from Popper in this way, I am expanding instead on a
difﬁcult and controversial theme in Thomas Kuhn’s The Structure of
Scientiﬁc Revolutions (1962/70). In a passage typical of several he writes:
In a sense that I am unable to explicate further, the proponents
of competing paradigms practice their trades in different worlds.
(150; compare 111, 121, and 129)
The “worlds” are different because the constituted objects are differ-
ent; that is, they belong to different domains. It seems to me that the
notion of distinct constituted domains encompasses everything that
was ever properly meant by distinct conceptual schemes and incom-
mensurability. Contra Davidson (1974/84), it does not presuppose
anything like what he calls a “dualism of scheme and content”.
Constituting is neither creating nor counting as, but rather letting
be. Disclosure of a domain is allowing a range of phenomena to make
sense—or, perhaps better, allowing the sense that the phenomena can
make—such that they can be noticed, recognized, or discovered as
what they are. Thus, it is ﬁnding them in their (perhaps newfound)
intelligibility. What does it mean for phenomena to “make sense”? It
means that they are accessible not just in their actuality but in their
possibility. For the possible, as a (severe) restriction of the actual, can
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
353
account for the fact that—show why—within the conceivable, the
actual has the determinate character it has, rather than various others
(namely, others that are conceivable but ruled out as impossible).
When actual phenomena are recognized as what they are, by the
correct exercise of mundane skills, they are known. When phenomena
are recognized as possible, by the correct exercise of constitutive skills,
they are understood.32 Such exercises, hence such intelligibility, can be
either with or without regard to a concrete situation. If some actual
phenomenon is recognized as “concretely” possible—that is, as possi-
ble given the details of its actual situation—then its actuality is (to that
extent) understood. If, on the other hand, some conceivable kind of
phenomenon is recognized as possible (either in general or with re-
gard to a kind of possible situation), then that kind of phenomenon is
understood. This is what it means for phenomena to make sense.
To say that the excluded zone is empty is precisely to say that
actuality implies possibility (not just conceivability)—and, in the
same breath, that knowability implies intelligibility (not just conceiv-
ability). Possibility and intelligibility (at the constitutive level), like
the world and its knowability (at the mundane), are two sides of one
coin.
This essential connection between (real) possibility and under-
standing grounds and illuminates the otherwise puzzling (though so
commonplace that the puzzle is seldom noticed) connection between
laws and explanation. For laws are nothing other than true empirical
universal claims with modal force: statements of what is and isn’t
possible among the phenomena. And, to explain is to make intelligi-
ble. Therefore, to show that, given the laws and the actual concrete
circumstances, some actual phenomenon had to occur—or, in some
cases, even just that it could occur—is to explain it.
Constitution, making sense of objects, is not free. It depends on an
equilibrium among a number of constitutive and mundane skills—an
equilibrium which, since it excludes the bulk of what it renders con-
ceivable (testable), is empirically precarious. But, for the same reason,
and for as long as it lasts, it is also an empirical achievement. The
constituted objects participate in that achievement, deriving determi-
nacy and normative status from it. But they also have an ability to
resist that transcends that participation, because it is they, and they
alone, upon which the equilibrium itself rests; by not cooperating,
they have the power to bring it down. Even though in so doing they
must annihilate themselves as what they are, nevertheless they can.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

354
H av i n g  Though t
It is this potentially resistant yet normatively signiﬁcant role for the
objects themselves that Popper cannot accommodate and Kuhn can-
not explain. Though it is more sophisticated than Davidson’s coher-
entism, Popper’s falsiﬁcationism fails ultimately for the same reason:
it allows nothing but statements in the normative space of justiﬁca-
tions. In particular, objects have no place at all. Yet scientiﬁc observa-
tions, theories, and explanations, like those in everyday life, are
objective precisely because and to the extent that objects (objective
phenomena) stand as accessible independent criteria for their correct-
ness—truth—as made possible by an interdependent structure of
constitutive and mundane rule-following.
Notes:
1 A governing rule can be limited or inapplicable, for instance, if
there is an excuse for not following it. Moreover, as Anscombe
points out, this can sometimes even be counted a defect in the
rule itself, such as when complying with the rule would be impos-
sible, or contrary to some overriding rule.
2 To say that a scheme is general is to say that it affords the re-
sources to express any number of different rules (by using tokens
of different types). To say that the follower complies with an
expression of a rule is to say not only that it responds to the token
by complying with that rule, but also that, if the token had been
different (expressing a different rule), then, ceteris paribus, the rule-
follower would have responded by complying with that different
rule instead.
3 The fact that the expression itself is complex—consisting of two
words—is a separate point, and inessential in this case; the in-
structor could just as well ring a bell.
4 A relative of this regress argument is articulated by Kant in the
Introduction to the Analytic of Principles (1781/1929, a132–133/
b172–173). Wittgenstein (1962)develops other relatives at Investiga-
tions, paragraphs 84–87 and 198–201. But the clearest antecedent
occurs on the ﬁrst page of Sellars (1954/63) “Some Reﬂections on
Language Games”.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
355
5 This binds biological normality to typicality, but it does not
equate the two, or even reduce the one to the other. What is
abnormal for a species cannot be typical in the long run, but what
is atypical can perfectly well be normal. Only some of what is
typical for a species is required by its norms of proper function-
ing—namely, that which is invoked in a holistic functional ac-
count of how typical individuals succeed reproductively. To be
atypical in ways irrelevant to that account is just to be odd, not
defective.
6 Astonishingly, Fodor (1975) turns this argument on its head: since
(he says) all learning must be understood as following explicit
rules, some language or other—the “language of thought” (what
Wittgenstein might scathe as the “last metalanguage”)—must be
innate.
7 Sellars (1954/63) introduces what he calls “pattern-governed”
behavior in much this way. His aim is expressly to account for the
possibility of learning a language—language understood as essen-
tially “norm-conforming” behavior—while avoiding both the
regress of explicit rules and a metaphysical appeal to meanings.
John McDowell’s (1984) exposition of Wittgenstein’s treatment of
rules has a similar structure. Wittgenstein is presented as steering
a course between Charybdis, the idea that the basic level is not
normative at all, and Scylla, a dilemma (rooted in the regress)
between the “paradoxical” idea that anything whatever could be
interpreted as according with a given norm, and a “mythological”
(roughly metaphysical) idea of meanings as somehow super-rigid
or unmistakable. In discussing how such a middle course is possi-
ble, McDowell talks about communal practices and initiation into
customs; but, unlike Sellars, he does not mention conditioning.
8 These remarks are an allusion to the notion of “scorekeeping”
(though not just for language games) as introduced by Lewis
(1979/83) and much elaborated by Brandom (1994, especially
chapter 3).
9 It goes without saying that the concrete training dispositions of
elders and peers are themselves also socially instilled and norm-
governed in essentially the same way as are ﬁrst-order socialized
dispositions. There is no reason to suppose that such normative
dispositions can be speciﬁed in (or reduced to) nonnormative
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

356
H av i n g  Though t
terms. The suggestion that the effectiveness of at least some train-
ing might be attributable to nonnormative mechanisms (such as
conditioning or behavioral reinforcement) has no bearing on the
speciﬁability of what is taught or learned. It seems to me that
Brandom’s discussion (1994, 34–46) of what he calls “social regu-
larity accounts” is confused on this point.
10 The terms ‘history’ and ‘tradition’ are used here in thin senses. In
a fuller and more proper sense, a people has a history and a
tradition only when it sustains and preserves what I will go on to
describe as constitutive commitment and objectivity (not unre-
lated to what Heidegger calls an understanding of being).
11 To say that telling is a responsive rule-following is to say that it is a
means by which something about the teller (perhaps an internal
state, or how the teller performs something else) can be passively
contingent on the conditions told. The challenge is to explain
how some telling can be objective, in a way that the responsive
capacities of compass needles and birds—what Brandom (1994,
especially chapter 4) calls “reliable differential responsive disposi-
tions”—are not. As will emerge, I maintain that telling can be
objective only insofar as it is not only responsive but also responsi-
ble—that is, as it essentially involves an active taking of responsi-
bility both for the correctness of individual responses and for the
responsive capacities themselves. Thus, to this extent at least, the
account of objective telling will parallel what Kant says about the
essential unity of receptivity and spontaneity (passivity and activ-
ity) in objective intuition. (See also section 16 and note 26 below.)
12 Though arrived at by a different route, this is essentially the
complaint lodged against Crispin Wright’s (1980) reading of
Wittgenstein by McDowell (1984). The example that follows in
the text distantly echoes one in McDowell’s paper; but the treat-
ment of the issue that I go on to offer has no counterpart there.
13 That’s ‘grock’, not ‘grok’. (Apologies nonetheless to Heinlein and
all strangers in strange lands.)
14 Rorty (1991, especially part i) bites the pragmatist (or “antirepre-
sentationalist”) bullet, declaring that a hankering after objective
truth—characteristic of a secularized culture in which the scien-
tist replaces the priest (35)—is not something we should try to
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
357
satisfy, but rather try to eradicate (37). He recommends instead
(13) a community that strives after intersubjective agreement and
novelty (what Heidegger calls Gerede and Neugier)—a community
in which, as it seems to me, the priest is replaced by the couturier.
Brandom says of his own account that it is built on the prag-
matist idea that “[b]eing true is … to be understood as being
properly taken-true (believed).” (1994, 291) But, more subtle and
more ambitious than Rorty, he wants also to reconstruct, within a
social pragmatist framework, both representation and objective
correctness; or, as he puts it, to show how we can in fact
anchor our thought and talk in particular objects that it is
about—the objects that must be consulted in order to as-
sess the truth of our claims and the beliefs they express. 
(582)
He has, however, and can have no account of what it is to “con-
sult” an object. Thus, in elaborating the idea later in the chapter,
he writes:
The social metaphysics of claim-making settles what it
means for a claim to be true by settling what one is doing in
taking it to be true. It does not settle which claims are true—
that is, are correctly taken to be true.
(601)
Brandom may have, in his earlier chapters, an account of making
something (in terms of what he calls “the game of giving and asking
for reasons”); but to call it an account of claim-making, prior to an
account of truth, would be (as Brandom well knows) to beg the
question. Claim-making, as the quoted passage implies, just is
taking something to be true; and that presupposes the notion of
truth. (This can be seen as a variant of the point that McDowell
makes against Davidson: “When Davidson argues that a body of
beliefs is sure to be mostly true, he helps himself to the idea of a
body of beliefs, a body of states that have content.” (1994, 68)
Brandom does show (603–604) that his ingenious version of
social pragmatism—what he calls an “I-thou” as opposed to an
“I-we” social account—does not entail the thesis that, if everybody
believes p, then p (helping himself to the term ‘belief’). Following
this proof (and three others closely related), he remarks:
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

358
H av i n g  Though t
The demonstrations just presented deﬁne a robust sense in
which the facts as construed in this work are independent of
what anyone or everyone is committed to. The claim-making
practices described here are accordingly properly under-
stood as making possible genuine fact-stating discourse, for
they incorporate practices of assessing claims and inferences
according to their objective correctness—a kind of correct-
ness that answers to how things actually are, rather than to
how they are taken to be, by anyone (including oneself) or
everyone. 
(606–607)
But the second sentence, at least, is a non sequitur. What the
proofs show is that there is no legal move, in Brandom’s system,
from ‘Everybody believes p’ (or: ‘I believe p’) to ‘p’. But they don’t
show anything at all about what could legitimate ‘p’ instead; in
particular, they don’t begin to show how ‘p’ could “answer to how
things actually are”—which is just to say that they don’t show
how any of the moves could be claim-makings or fact-statings.
15 By “naturalism appropriately construed” I mean the thesis that
people are, though distinctive, still naturally evolved creatures
(somehow implemented in whatever physics tells us about).
16 Thus, ‘co-constituted’ is roughly a successor notion to Hanson’s
‘theory-laden’.
17 Autonomy is the counter-concept to phenomenalism (empirical
idealism), whether individual or social.
18 A common misreading of Kant takes something like this to be
the basic idea of the transcendental deduction.
19 The ability to recognize and produce phonemes in a natural lan-
guage has something of this character; and I suspect the same is
true for many professional skills.
20 The repetition of Heidegger’s terminology, ‘discovery’ versus ‘dis-
closure’ (Entdeckung versus Erschließung) in this section, as well as
‘resolute’ and ‘authentic’ (entschlossen and eigentlich) later (in section
16) is deliberate.
21 It is conspicuous especially here that the present essay lacks any
explicit treatment of judgement (or assertion); for, as Kant em-
phasizes (especially in section 19 of the b deduction), the function
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
359
of judgement is precisely to represent combination in the object. I
have proceeded in the present uncommon manner in a double
hope: ﬁrst that the basic structure of objectivity might be deline-
able independently of any particular doctrine of judgement; and
second that, on that basis, a more originalary account of the forms
of judgement (categories) might eventually prove possible. (A
companion lack of, and need for, discussion of spatio-temporal
form will be notable in section 14, when I introduce the funda-
mental notion of a “locus of incompatibility”.)
22 Note that the resources to recognize or identify are by no means
limited to those of immediate perception. Depending on the do-
main, there can and in general will be mundane experimental,
inferential, and theoretical skills that extend the recognizable (or
observable or measurable) well beyond what is directly percepti-
ble. As with all mundane skills, these too are “co-constituted”
along with the phenomena they render accessible.
23 Much of the point of this section (and, indeed, much of the point
of the present essay) was anticipated half a century ago in Sellars’s
(1948/80) “Concepts as Involving Laws and Inconceivable with-
out Them”. A restriction tantamount to my excluded zone is
clearly described in the ﬁrst paragraph of his section 5. In that
same section, he also uses the term ‘domain’ more or less I do, and
introduces his term ‘material invariances’ (which he later equates
with laws of nature) to much the same effect as my constitutive
standards. Finally, he contrasts possibility and conceivability in
basically the same way as they are here, and for what is at least a
closely related reason.
24 Note that this deﬁnition gives a very different sense to the term
‘reliable’ than it typically has in “reliabilist” epistemology.
25 To import Sellars’s (1956/63) expression into somewhat different
context, this is as much as to say that constituted objects must
themselves have a place in “the space of reasons”. And compare
McDowell’s invocation of the same phrase.
The world itself must exert a rational constraint on our
thinking. If we suppose that rational answerability lapses at
some outermost point of the space of reasons, short of the
world itself, our picture ceases to depict anything recogniz-
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

360
H av i n g Though t
able as empirical judgement; we have obliterated empirical
content altogether.
(1994, 42–43)
26 In this and the preceding several paragraphs, I take myself to be
elaborating on a theme sounded (but not elaborated) in both
Kuhn and McDowell. Thus, Kuhn writes:
Finally, at a still higher level, there is another set of commit-
ments without which no man is a scientist. The scientist
must, for example, be concerned to understand the world
and to extend the precision and scope with which it has
been ordered. That commitment must, in turn, lead him to
scrutinize, either for himself or through colleagues, some
aspect of nature in great empirical detail. And, if that scru-
tiny displays pockets of apparent disorder, then these must
challenge him to a new reﬁnement of his observational tech-
niques or to a further articulation of his theories.
(1962/70, 42)
And McDowell:
… the faculty of spontaneity carries with it a standing obli-
gation to reﬂect on the credentials of the putatively rational
linkages that, at any time, one takes to govern the active
business of adjusting one’s world-view in response to experi-
ence. Ensuring that our empirical concepts and conceptions
pass muster is ongoing and arduous work for the under-
standing. It requires patience and something like humility.
(1994, 40; see also pages 12, 43, and 81)
27 Davidson (1986, 310); later in the same paragraph, he quotes
Rorty with approval:
… nothing counts as justiﬁcation except by reference to
what we already accept, and there is no way to get outside
our beliefs and our language so as to ﬁnd some test other
than coherence.
(Rorty 1979, 178.)
28 Weight can be considered a kind of pseudo-property in the fol-
lowing way: if the mass of the Earth is held constant, and the
thing is restricted to the region near the Earth’s surface, then the
weight is a function of nothing aside from these constraints and
the thing itself.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Tru t h  a n d  ru l e - f ol low i n g
361
29 This list includes several traditional “secondary” properties, at
least some of which might be thought to belong with weight in
the category of “pseudo-property” (see preceding note). Thus,
colors depend on certain accidents of human vision—for in-
stance, the fact that a mixture of blue and yellow light can be the
same color as green light. But that accident determines only what
the colors are, and does not in the slightest affect the colors of any
things, which are a function of them alone, hence proper to them.
30 It seems not to have occurred to Popper that the class of logically
possible basic statements not ruled out by any theory will always
be vast, simply because so many of them are irrelevant—framed,
for instance, in a vocabulary that makes no logical contact with
the theory at all. By contrast, as I deﬁne the “possible” (what, in
his terms, a theory “permits”), it is relativized to what is conceiv-
able (recognizable) with the resources of the domain in question,
and includes only what is not ruled out within that.
31 Popper is, in effect, anticipating Davidson here (and is thus sub-
ject to the same criticisms). He realizes that events as such, psy-
chological or otherwise, cannot justify any statements (because
they are not in the space of reasons); yet he wants them to bear
somehow on the empirical probity of certain statements by caus-
ing or motivating their acceptance.
32 Kant says that the understanding is the faculty of knowledge,
both transcendental and empirical. It would better ﬁt my uses of
the terms—including construing faculties as abilities or skills—
to distinguish a transcendental (that is, constitutive) faculty of
understanding from an empirical (that is, mundane) faculty of
knowledge. Of course, taking faculties to be interactive skills—
something like abilities to apply concepts in the world—makes
them overlap importantly with what Kant calls imagination, and
even sensibility, as well. Roughly, I’m putting constituted domains
and objects where Kant has sensibility, skillful exercises where he
has imagination, and the responsive/responsible skills themselves
where he has knowledge and understanding. (In other words, my
structure is a lot like Heidegger’s being-in-the-world.)
Note, by the way, that to associate my ‘constitutive’ with Kant’s
‘transcendental’ is not to suggest that constitutive standards take
the place of the categories.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

 
Acknowledgments
The eleven previously published essays are reprinted here substan-
tially unchanged. Formatting and citations have been rendered consis-
tent; and, occasionally, wording has been adjusted in the interest of
clarity. Section divisions and/or headings have be added to chapters 5,
6, 8, and 10. An explanatory note has been added to each of chapters
7, 8, 11, and 12, and a qualifying appendix to chapter 5, each clearly
marked as added in 1997.
Though he is acknowledged many times below, I would like above
all to thank Bert Dreyfus for ﬁrst teaching me what philosophy is and
much of what I will ever know about it.
The Nature and Plausibility of Cognitivism was ﬁrst pub-
lished (along with thirty-one comments and an author’s response) in
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1 (1981): 215–226; and reprinted that same
year in the ﬁrst edition of Mind Design (Haugeland 1981). Reprinted
with the permission of Cambridge University Press.
For inspiration and constant guiding criticism, I owe more than I
can properly express to Bert Dreyfus. I am also indebted to Bob
Brandom, Dan Dennett, Jay Garﬁeld, Allan Gibbard, Bill House, and
Zenon Pylyshyn for helpful comments and corrections.
Understanding Natural Language was presented at the APA
Eastern meetings in 1979 (where C. Wade Savage and James Moor
commented) and at a Berkeley Cognitive Science colloquium, before
appearing in The Journal of Philosophy 76 (1979): 619–632. It has been
reprinted in Foundations of Cognitive Science: The Essential Readings, Jay
Garﬁeld, ed. (New York: Paragon House, 1990), 398–410; and Mind
and Cognition, William Lycan, ed. (Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell,
1990), 660–670. Reprinted by permission of The Journal of Philosophy.
I am grateful for suggestions from Nuel Belnap, Bob Brandom,
Bert Dreyfus, Jay Garﬁeld, and Zenon Pylyshyn.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

364
Ac k n owled g men t s
Hume on Personal Identity grew out of a question I asked fol-
lowing a talk by David Pears to the Philosophy Department at Berke-
ley in the fall of 1973. Paul Grice reformulated the question and
subsequently suggested that we jointly write a brief article based on
the idea behind it. Later that fall, I wrote and presented a ﬁrst draft to
Barry Stroud’s Hume seminar; early in the spring, I wrote a second
draft and presented it to the Philosophy Department at the Univer-
sity of Pittsburgh; ﬁnally, sometime in 1977, I made a third revision,
responding to some suggestions by Annette Baier and remarks in
Stroud (1977). That draft is printed here essentially unchanged (only
an ill-considered ﬁnal sentence about Kant has been deleted); it has
not previously been published.
Although Grice never actually worked on any of the drafts, he and
I had several lengthy discussions about Hume, and about this idea in
particular, during the course of which what he taught me about
Hume and philosophy was limited only by my ability to learn.
Analog and Analog ﬁrst appeared in Philosophical Topics 12 (1981):
213–225. That volume of the journal was subsequently republished as
Mind, Brain, and Function, J.I. Biro and Robert W. Shahan, eds. (Nor-
man: University of Oklahoma Press, 1982). Reprinted by permission
of Philosophical Topics.
Weak Supervenience was presented in various drafts at Western
Ontario, Minnesota, Stanford, and Princeton from 1978 to 1980 be-
fore being published in The American Philosophical Quarterly 19 (1982):
93–103—by whose permission it is here reprinted.
Ontological Supervenience was delivered at a Spindel Confer-
ence on Supervenience at Memphis State in 1983, and published in a
special supplement to The Southern Journal of Philosophy 22 (1984): 1–12,
devoted to the proceedings of that conference. Reprinted by permis-
sion of The Southern Journal of Philosophy.
The Intentionality All-Stars was around for a long time before
assuming its present form and making it into print. The ﬁrst recog-
nizable draft was patched together in 1981, largely out of chunks “bor-
rowed” from other things I was working on at the time (1980, 1982,
1982a), and read at the University of British Columbia, Hampshire
College, SUNY Buffalo, Memphis State, and Chicago. I revised it in
1984, and read the revised version at the Chapel Hill Colloquium,
Tufts, Loyola (New Orleans), and Rochester. In 1988 I revised it yet
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Acknowled gment s
365
again, producing a version more than twice as long as the earlier ones.
That text was ﬁnally published in Philosophical Perspectives 4: Action
Theory and Philosophy of Mind, James E. Tomberlin, ed. (copyright by
Ridgeview Publishing Co., Atascadero, CA, 1990), 383–427, and then
reprinted in The Philosopher's Annual i989, Volume 12, Patrick Grim,
Gary Mar, and Peter Williams, eds. (Atascadero: Ridgeview, 1991),
87–131. Reprinted by permission of Ridgeview Publishing Company.
In the long history of this essay I have incurred too many debts to
recount (or even remember), but I am especially grateful for substan-
tial comments and criticisms from Johnathan Bennett, Bob Brandom,
Earl Conee, Dan Dennett, Bert Dreyfus, and Jerry Fodor.
Representational Genera grew out of a talk entitled “Is There
Distributed Representation?” given at the Cognitive Science Society
Meetings in Montreal and at the University of Missouri, Saint Louis
in academic year 1988/89; and the ﬁnal version was one of two keynote
addresses at the Fourth International Conference on Computers and
Philosophy (Carnegie Mellon University, 1989). However (as previ-
ously promised) it was ﬁrst published in Philosophy and Connectionist
Theory, William Ramsey, Stephen Stich, and David Rumelhart, eds.
(Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1991), 61–89; only later did it appear in
the CMU conference proceedings, Philosophy and the Computer, Leslie
Burkholder, ed. (Boulder: Westview Press, 1992), 105–134. Reprinted
by permission of Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
My consideration of the issues raised in this paper was inspired
especially by discussions with Tim van Gelder and Sonia Sedivy.
Mind Embodied and Embedded grew out of discussions with Bill
Clancey, Alison Gopnick, and especially Bert Dreyfus at a conference
in Santa Fe in June 1992, where a preliminary version was then hastily
composed and presented. Over the next two years, more developed
versions were presented at Helsinki, Taipei (Academia Sinica), Berke-
ley (Cognitive Sciences Group), Pittsburgh (Center for Philosophy of
Science), APA Paciﬁc meetings, Prague (Center for Theoretical
Studies), and at an NEH Summer Institute in Santa Cruz. It was
ﬁrst published in Mind and Cognition: Philosophical Prespectives on
Cognitive Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Leila Haaparanta and Sara
Heinämaa, eds., Acta Philosophica Fennica 58 (1995): 233–267; and re-
printed in Mind and Cognition, Yu-Houng Houng and Jih-Ching Ho,
eds. (Taipei: Institute of European and American Studies, Academia
Sinica, 1995), 3–37.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

366
Ac k n owled g men t s
I am grateful for comments on earlier drafts from Lilli Alanen, Jim
Conant, Fred Stoutland, Lisa Van Alstyne, Tim van Gelder, and
G.H. von Wright.
Objective Perception was presented, in academic year 1991/92, at
Indiana, Simon Frazer, Lund (Sweden), Göteborg (Sweden), and
Tampere (Finland). It was published in Perception: Vancouver Studies in
Cognitive Science, Volume V, Kathleen Akins, ed. (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1996), 268–289. Used by permission of Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Inc.
I am grateful for comments from Jim Conant, Dan Dennett, Fred
Dretske, Chris Peacocke, and Tim van Gelder.
Pattern and Being was written especially for the volume Dennett
and His Critics, Bo Dahlbom, ed. (Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell,
1993), 53–69. Reprinted by permission of Basil Blackwell.
Understanding: Dennett and Searle grew out of a talk entitled
“Intentionality and Stance”, given at an international symposium on
consciousness in Turku (Finland) in 1992, and was published by the
organizers of that symposium in Consciousness in Philosophy and Cogni-
tive Neuroscience, Antti Revonsuo and Matti Kamppinen, eds., (Hills-
dale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1994), 115–128. Reprinted by permission
of Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Truth and Rule-Following grew out of a short talk entitled “Can
a Machine Follow a Rule?” given at the 16th International Wittgen-
stein Symposium in Kirchberg am Wechsel, Austria, in 1993, which
was published as “Remarks on Machines and Rule-Following” in Phi-
losophy and The Cognitive Sciences: Proceedings of the 16th International
Wittgenstein Symposium, Roberto Casati, Barry Smith, and Graham
White, eds. (Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, 1994). Intermediate
versions were presented at an NEH Summer Institute in Santa Cruz
and Rice University in 1994 and 1995. The present essay, about four
times longer than its ancestor, is new in this volume.
For help along the way, I am grateful especially for advice from Bob
Brandom, Jim Conant, John McDowell, and Joan Wellman. I have
also proﬁtted from discussions with and/or comments from Aryeh
Frankfurter, Henry Jackman, Rebecca Kukla, Ken Manders, Ram
Neta, Doug Patterson, Anna Pilatova, David Stern, and Jennifer
Whiting.
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

 
Bibliography
Anderson, Alan Ross, ed. 1964. Minds and Machines. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall. [1]
Alt, Franz L., ed. 1964. Advances in Computers, volume 1. New York: 
Academic Press. [2]
Anscombe, G.E.M. 1957. Intention. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. [13]
Bar-Hillel, Yehoshua. 1964. “The Present Status of Automatic 
Translation of Languages”, in Alt 1964. [2]
Baron, Robert J. 1970. “A Model for Cortical Memory”, Journal of 
Mathematical Psychology, 7: 37–59. [1]
Batali, John. “Trails as Archetypes of Intentionality” (unpublished). [9]
Black, Max, ed. 1965. Philosophy in America. Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press. [1]
Block, Ned, ed. 1980. Readings in Philosophy of Psychology (two volumes), 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. [7]
  1986. “Advertisement for a Semantics for Psychology”, in French, 
Euhling, and Wettstein 1986. [7]
Block, Ned and Jerry Fodor. 1972. “What Psychological States Are Not”, 
Philosophical Review, 81: 159–181; reprinted in Block 1980, volume 1 
(with revisions), and in Fodor 1981. [7]
Bobrow, Daniel, and Allan Collins, eds. 1975. Representation and 
Understanding. New York: Academic Press. [2]
Bobrow, Daniel and Terry Winograd. 1977. “An Overview of KRL-0, a 
Knowledge Representation Language”, Cognitive Science, 1: 3–46. [2]
Bogen, James, and James E. McGuire, eds. 1985. How Things Are. 
Dordrecht: Reidel. [8]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

368
Biblio g ra ph y
Brandom, Robert. 1979. “Freedom and Constraint by Norms”, American 
Philosophical Quarterly, 16: 187–196. [7]
  1983. “Asserting”, Noûs, xvii: 637–650. [7]
  1994. Making it Explicit. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. [13]
Brentano, Franz. 1874/1973. Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunct. 
Leipzig: Duncker und Humblot. Translation, by Antos C. 
Rancurello, D.B. Terrell, and Linda L. McAlister): Psychology from an 
Empirical Standpoint. (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973.) (An 
earlier translation of a substantial exerpt is included in Chisholm 
1960.) [7]
Brooks, Rod. 1990. “Elephants Don’t Play Chess”, Robotics and 
Autonomous Systems 6: 3–15. [9]
  1991. “Intelligence without Representation”, Artiﬁcial Intelligence 47: 
139–159; reprinted (revised and enlarged) in Haugeland 1997. [9]
Campbell, Fergus W. 1974. “The Transmission of Spatial Information 
through the Visual System”, in Schmitt and Worden 1974. [1]
Castellan, John N., David B. Pisoni, and George R. Potts, eds. 1977. 
Cognitive Theory II. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. [1]
Cathey, W. Thomas. 1974. Optical Information Processing and Holography. 
New York: John Wiley and Sons. [1]
Cavanaugh, J.P. 1972. Holographic Processes Realizable in the Neural Realm. 
Unpublished PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University. [1]
Chisholm, Roderick. 1957. Perceiving: A Philosophical Study. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press. [7]
  1960. Realism and the Background of Phenomenology. New York: The 
Free Press; facismile edition available from Ridgeview Publishing 
Company, Atascadero, CA. [7]
Churchland, Paul M. 1989. A Neurocomputational Perspective: The Nature of 
Mind and the Structure of Science. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT 
Press. [8]
Cummins, Robert. 1975. “Functional Analysis”, Journal of Philosophy, 72: 
741–765; reprinted in Block 1980, volume 1. [1]
Davidson, Donald. 1963/80. “Actions, Reasons, and Causes”, Journal of 
Philosophy, 60: 685–700; reprinted in Davidson 1980. [7]
  1970/80. “Mental Events”, in Foster and Swanson 1970; reprinted 
in Davidson 1980 and Block 1980, volume 1. [1][5][7][10]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Biblio g raphy
369
  1973/80. “The Material Mind”, in Suppes, et al, 1973; reprinted in 
Davidson 1980 and Haugeland 1981. [1]
  1973/84. “Radical Interpretation”, Dialectica, 27: 313–328; reprinted 
in Davidson 1984. [1]
  1974/84. “On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme”, Proceedings 
and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association, 47: 5–20; 
reprinted in Davidson 1984. [7][13]
  1980. Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
[1][5][7][10]
  1984. Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. [1][13]
  1986. “A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge”, in LePore 
1986. [13]
de Beaugrande, Robert, and Benjamin Colby. 1979. “Narrative Models of 
Action and Interaction”, Cognitive Science, 3: 42–66. [2]
de Groot, Adriaan D. 1965. Thought and Choice in Chess. The Hague: 
Mouton. [1]
Dennett, Daniel. 1971/78. “Intentional Systems”, Journal of Philosophy, 68: 
87–106; reprinted in Dennett 1978 and Haugeland 1981. [1][7][11]
  1973/78. “Mechanism and Responsibility”, in Honderich 1973; 
reprinted in Dennett 1978. [11]
  1975/78. “Why the Law of Effect Will Not Go Away”, Journal for 
the Theory of Social Behavior, 5: 169–187; reprinted in Dennett 1978. [1]
  1977/78. “Critical Notice: The Language of Thought by Jerry Fodor”, 
Mind, 86: 265–280; reprinted, under the title “A Cure for the 
Common Code?”, in Dennett 1978 and Block 1980, volume 2. [7]
  1978. Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology. 
Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press. [1][5][7][11]
  1978a/78. “Why You Can’t Make a Computer that Feels Pain”, 
Synthese, 38: 415–456; reprinted in Dennett, 1978. [1]
  1978b. “Two Approaches to Mental Images”, in Dennett 1978. [1]
  1978c. “How to Change Your Mind”, in Dennett 1978. [7]
  1981/87. “True Believers: The Intentional Strategy and Why It 
Works”, in Heath 1981; reprinted in Dennett 1987 and Haugeland 
1997. [7]
  1981/87b. Three Kinds of Intentional Psychology”, in Healey 1981; 
reprinted in Dennett 1987. [12]
  1982/87. “Beyond Belief”, in Woodﬁeld 1982; reprinted in Dennett 
1987. [7]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

370
Biblio g ra ph y
  1983/87. “Intentional Systems in Cognitive Ethology: The ‘Pan-
glossian Paradigm’ Defended”, The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
6: 343–90; reprinted in Dennett 1987. [12]
  1984. Elbow Room. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press. [7]
  1987. The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT 
Press. [7][10][12]
  1987a/87. “Evolution, Error, and Intentionality”, in Wilks and Par-
tridge 1987; reprinted in Dennett 1987. [7]
  1991. “Real Patterns”, Journal of Philosophy, 89: 27–51. [11][13]
Descartes, René. 1641/1984. Meditationes de Prima Philosophiae. Paris: 
Michel Soly. Translation (including the objections and replies) by 
John Cottingham, Robert Soothoff, and Dugald Murdoch: The 
Philosophical Writings of Descartes, Volume 2. (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1984). [7]
  1644/1985. Principia of Philosophiae,. Amsterdam: Elzevir. 
Translation, by John Cottingham, Robert Soothoff, and Dugald 
Murdoch: The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, Volume 1. (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1985). [11]
Dewey, John. 1925; second edition, 1929. Experience and Nature. La Salle, 
IL: Open Court. [7]
Dretske, Fred. 1981. Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, 
MA: Bradford/MIT Press. [7][10]
Dreyfus, Hubert L. 1972/92. What Computers Can’t Do. New York: 
Harper & Row; second edition, slightly revised and with a new 
introduction, 1979. Third edition, under the title What Computers Still 
Can’t Do, and with yet a third introduction, Bradford/MIT Press, 
1992. (Pagination in the second and third editions is the same, but 
differs from the ﬁrst.) [1][5][7][9]
Erickson Robert P. 1974. “Parallel ‘Population’ Neural Coding in Feature 
Extraction”, in Schmitt and Worden 1974. [1]
Feigl, Herbert, and Michael Scriven, eds. 1956. Minnesota Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, Volume I: The Foundations of Science and the Concepts 
of Psychology and Psychoanalysis. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press. [13]
Field, Hartry. 1978. “Mental Representation”, Erkenntnis, 13: 9–61; 
reprinted with an added postscript in Block 1980, volume 2. [7]
Firth, Ian Mason. 1972. Holography and Computer Generated Holograms. 
London: Mills and Boon. [1]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Biblio g raphy
3 7 1
Fodor, Jerry A. 1965. “Explanation in Psychology”, in Black 1965. [1]
  1974/81. “Special Sciences (or: The Disunity of Science as a Work-
ing Hypothesis)”, Synthese, 28: 97–115; reprinted in Fodor 1981 and 
Block 1980, volume 1. [1][5]
  1975. The Language of Thought. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell. 
[7][13]
  1980/81. “Methodological Solipsism Considered as a Research 
Strategy in Cognitive Psychology” (including 25 commentaries and 
the author's responses), Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3: 63–109; 
reprinted (without commentaries or responses) in Fodor 1981 and 
Haugeland 1981. [7]
  1981. Representations. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press. [7]
  1983. The Modularity of Mind. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT 
Press. [7]
Fodor, Jerry A., and Zenon W. Pylyshyn. 1988. “Connectionism and 
Cognitive Architecture: A Critical Analysis”, Cognition: International 
Journal of Cognitive Science, 28: 3–71; reprinted in Pinker and Mehler 
1988 and (abridged) in Haugeland 1997. [8]
Foster, Lawrence, and J.W. Swanson, eds. 1970. Experience and Theory. 
Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press. [1][5][7][10]
French, P., T. Euhling, and H. Wettstein, eds. 1986. Studies in the 
Philosophy of Mind: Midwest Studies in Philosophy, X. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. [7]
Gabor, D. 1969. “Associative Holographic Memories”, IBM Journal of 
Research and Development, 13: 156–159. [1]
Gardner, Martin. 1979. “Mathematical Games”, Scientiﬁc American, 240 
( June 1979): 20–34. [2]
Gibson, James J. 1979. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston: 
Houghton Mifﬂin. [9]
Goodman, Nelson. 1968. Languages of Art. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. 
[4]
Grandy, Richard. 1973. “Reference through Meaning and Belief”, Journal 
of Philosophy, 70: 439–452. [1]
Greeno, James. 1977. “Process of Understanding in Problem Solving”, in 
Castellan, Pisoni, and Potts 1977. [1]
Grice, H. Paul. 1957. “Meaning”, Philosophical Review, 66: 377–88. [7]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

372
Biblio g ra ph y
Gunderson, Keith, ed. 1975. Language, Mind and Knowledge: Minnesota 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, volume 7. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press. [7]
Hare, Richard M. 1952. The Language of Morals. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
[5]
Harman, Gilbert. 1973. Thought. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
[1]
Haugeland, John. 1980. “Programs, Causal Powers, and Intentionality”, 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3: 432–433. [7]
  ed. 1981. Mind Design. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press. 
[1][2][7][12]
  1982. “Heidegger on Being a Person”, Noûs, 16: 15–26. [7]
  1982a. “The Mother of Intention”, Noûs, 16: 613–19. [7]
  1983. “Weak Supervenience”, American Philosophical Quarterly, 19: 
93–103; included in this volume as chapter 6. [6][7]
  1985. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: The Very Idea. Cambridge, MA: 
Bradford/MIT Press. [7]
  ed. 1997. Mind Design II. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press. 
[2][7][8][12]
Healey, Richard. 1981. Reduction, Time, and Reality: Studies in the Philosophy 
of the Natural Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [12]
Hearst, Eliot. 1967. “Psychology across the Chessboard”, Psychology Today, 
June 1967: 28–37. [1]
Heath, Anthony F., ed. 1981. Scientiﬁc Explanation. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. [7]
Heidegger, Martin. 1927/62. Sein und Zeit. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer 
Verlag. Translation, by John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson: 
Being and Time. (New York: Harper & Row, 1962.) [7][13]
Hellman, Geoffrey, and Frank Thompson. 1975. “Physicalism: Ontology, 
Determinism, and Reduction”, Journal of Philosophy, 72: 551–564. [6]
  1977. “Physicalist Materialism”, Noûs, 11: 309–345. [6]
Hemple, Carl G. 1965. Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation. New York: Free 
Press. [1]
Hempel, Carl G., and Paul Oppenheim. 1948. “Studies in the Logic of 
Explanation”, Philosophy of Science, 15: 135–175; reprinted, with a new 
postscript, in Hemple 1965. [1]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Biblio g raphy
3 7 3
Herriot, D. R. 1968. “Applications of Laser Light”, Scientiﬁc American, 218 
(September 1968): 140–156. [1]
Hinton, Geoffrey E., Jay L. McClelland, and David E. Rumelhart. 1986. 
“Distributed Representations”, in Rumelhart, et al, 1986. [8]
Honderich, Ted , ed. 1973. Essays on Freedon and Action. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. [11]
Hook, Sydney, ed. 1960. Dimensions of Mind: A Symposium. New York: 
New York University Press. [1]
Horgan, Terrance, and John Tienson, eds. 1987. Connectionism and the 
Philosophy of Mind. Published as a special supplement to volume 26 of 
The Southern Journal of Philosophy. [8]
Hudson, Liam. 1972. The Cult of the Fact. London: Cape. [1]
Hume, David. 1739/1888. A Treatise of Human Nature. L.A. Selby-Bigge, 
ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press. [3]
Kabrisky, M. 1966. A Proposed Model for Visual Information Processing in the 
Human Brain. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. [1]
Kant, Immanuel. 1781/1929. Critik der reinen Vernunft. Riga: Harrknoch. 
Translation, by Norman Kemp Smith: Critique of Pure Reason. (New 
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1929.) [10][13]
Kemp Smith, Norman. 1941. The Philosophy of David Hume. London: 
MacMillan. [3]
Kim, Jaegwon. 1978. “Supervenience and Nomological Incommensura-
bles”, American Philosophical Quarterly, 15: 149–56. [5]
  1979. “Causality, Identity, and Supervenience in the Mind-Body 
Problem”, Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 4: 31–49. [5]
Kosslyn, Steven, and J. R. Pomerantz. 1977. “Imagery, Propositions and 
the Form of Internal Representations”, Cognitive Psychology, 9: 52–76. 
[1]
Krantz, David H., Richard C. Atkinson, R. Duncan Luce, and Ptrick 
Suppes, eds. 1974. Contemporary Developments in Mathematical 
Psychology, volume 2: Measurement, Psychophysics, and Neural Information 
Processing. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman. [1]
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1962/70; second edition, with a new postscript, 1970. 
The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. [1][10][13]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

374
Biblio g ra ph y
Leith, Emmett N., and Juris Upatnieks. 1965. “Photography by Laser”, 
Scientiﬁc American, 212 ( June 1965): 24–35. [1]
LePore, Ernest, ed. 1986. Truth and Interpretation: Perspectives on the 
Philosophy of Donald Davidson. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. [13]
Lewis, David K. 1969. Convention: A Philosophical Study. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. [7]
  1971. “Analog and Digital”,  Nous, 5: 321–27. [4]
  1974/83. “Radical Interpretation”, Synthese, 27: 331–344; reprinted 
in Lewis 1983, volume 1. [1]
  1979/83. “Scorekeeping in a Language Game”, Journal of Philosophi-
cal Logic, 8: 339–359; reprinted in Lewis 1983, volume 1. [2][13]
  1983. Philosophical Papers, volume 1. New York: Oxford University 
Press. [2][13]
MacKay, Alfred, and Daniel Merrill, eds. 1976. Issues in the Philosophy of 
Language. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Marr, David. 1977. “Artiﬁcial Intelligence—A Personal View”, Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence, 9: 37–48; reprinted in Haugeland 1981. [1]
McCarthy, John. 1979. “Ascribing Mental Qualities to Machines”, in 
Ringle 1979. [1]
McClelland, Jay L., and David E. Rumelhart. 1986. “A Distributed 
Model of Human Learning and Memory”, in McClelland, et al, 1986. 
[8]
McClelland, Jay L., David E. Rumelhart, and the PDP Research Group. 
1986. Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of 
Cognition. Volume 2: Psychological and Biological Models. Cambridge, 
MA: Bradford/MIT Press. [8]
McDowell, John. 1984. “Wittgenstein on Following a Rule”, Synthese, 58: 
325–363. [13]
  1994. Mind and World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
[13]
McNabb, D.G.C. 1966. David Hume: His Theory of Knowledge and Morality 
(second edition). Oxford: Basil Blackwell[3]
Minsky, Marvin. 1974. “A Framework for Representing Knowledge”, 
MIT AI Lab Memo #306; exerpts reprinted in Winston 1975; other 
exerpts reprinted in Haugeland 1981 and 1997. [2]
Minsky, Marvin, and Seymour Papert. 1972. “Progress Report on 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence”, MIT AI Lab Memo #252. [1]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Biblio g raphy
3 75
Nagel, Thomas. 1974. “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review, 
83: 435–451; reprinted in Block 1980, volume 1. [7]
Pavio, Allen. 1975. “Imagery and Synchronic Thinking”, Canadian 
Psychological Review, 16: 147–163. [1]
Penelhum, Terrence. 1955/65. “Hume on Personal Identity”, Philosophical 
Review, 64: 571–589; reprinted in Sesonske and Fleming 1965. [3]
Pinker, Steven, and Jacques Mehler, eds. 1988. Connections and Symbols. 
Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press. Reprint of a special issue of 
Cognition: International Journal of Cognitive Science, volume 28. [8]
Pollen, Daniel A., and Joseph H. Taylor. 1974. “The Striate Cortex and 
the Spatial Analysis of Visual Space”, in Schmitt and Worden 1974. 
[1]
Popper, Karl R. 1935/68. Logik der Forschung. Vienna: Julius Springer 
Verlag. Translation, by the author (with new appendices and 
footnotes): The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. (New York: Harper & Row, 
1959, slightly revised 1968.) [13]
Pribram, Karl H. 1971. Languages of the Brain. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. [1]
  1974. “How is it that Sensing so Much we can do so Little?” in 
Schmitt and Worden 1974. [1]
Pribram, Karl H., Marc Nuwer, and Robert J. Baron. 1974. “The 
Holographic Hypothesis of Memory Structure in Brain Function 
and Perception”, in Krantz, et al, 1974. [1]
Price, H.H. 1940/65. “The Permanent Signiﬁcance of Hume’s 
Philosophy”, Philosophy, 15: 10–36; reprinted in Sesonske and Fleming 
1965. [3]
Putnam, Hilary. 1960/75. “Minds and Machines”, in Hook 1960; 
reprinted in Anderson 1964 and Putnam 1975a. [1]
  1973. “Reductionism and the Nature of Psychology”, Cognition, 2: 
131–146; reprinted in Haugeland 1981. [1]
  1975. “The Meaning of ‘Meaning’”, in Gunderson 1975; reprinted 
in Putnam 1975a. [2][7]
  1975a. Mind, Language, and Reality: Philosophical Papers, volume 2. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [1][2][7]
Pylyshyn, Zenon W. 1973. “What the Mind’s Eye Tells the Mind’s Brain: 
A Critique of Mental Imagery”, Psychological Bulletin, 80: 1–24. [1]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

376
Biblio g ra ph y
  1978. “Imagery and Artiﬁcial Intelligence”, in Savage 1978; 
reprinted in Block 1980, volume 2. [1]
  1984. Computation and Cognition: Toward a Foundation for Cognitive 
Science. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press. [7]
Quine, Willard Van Orman. 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. [1][7]
  1978. “Facts of the Matter”, Southwestern Journal of Philosophy, 9 
(number 2): 155–169. [6]
Rawls, John. 1955. “Two Concepts of Rules”, Philosophical Review, 64: 3–32. 
[13]
Ringle, Martin. ed. 1979. Philosophical Perspectives in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. 
Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press. [1]
Rorty, Richard. 1979. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. [13]
  1991. Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. [13]
Rumelhart, David E. 1975. “Notes on a Schema for Stories”, in Bobrow 
and Collins 1975. [2]
Rumelhart, David E., Jay L. McClelland, and the PDP Research Group. 
1986. Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of 
Cognition. Volume 1: Foundations. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT 
Press. [7][8]
Savage, Wade C., ed. 1978. Perception and Cognition: Issues in the Foundations 
of Psychology. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, volume 9. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. [1]
Schank, Roger and Robert Abelson. 1975. “Scripts, Plans, and Knowl-
edge”, International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, iv. Cam-
bridge, MA: The MIT AI Lab. [2]
Schmitt, Francis O., and Frederick G. Worden, eds. 1974. The 
Neurosciences: Third Study Program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. [1]
Searle, John R. 1969. Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [13]
  1979. “A Taxonomy of Illocutionary Acts”, in Searle 1979a. [13]
  1979a. Expression and Meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. [13]
  1980. “Minds, Brains, and Programs” (including 27 commentaries 
and the author's responses), Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3: 417–457; 
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Biblio g ra ph y
377
reprinted (without commentaries or responses) in Haugeland 1981 
and 1997. [7][12]
  1983. Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [7]
  1992. The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press. [12]
Sellars, Wilfrid. 1948/80. “Concepts as Involving Laws and Inconceivable 
without Them.” Philosophy of Science, 15: 287–315; reprinted in Sellars 
1980. [13]
  1954/63. “Some Reﬂections on Language Games”, Philosophy of 
Science, 21: 204–228; reprinted with revisions in Sellars 1963. [7][13]
  1956/63. “Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind”, in Feigl and 
Scriven 1956; reprinted in Sellars 1963. [13]
  1963. Science, Perception and Reality. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul. [1][7][13]
  1963/67. “Abstract Entities”, Review of Metaphysics, 16: 627–671; 
reprinted in Sellars 1967. [8]
  1967. Philosophical Perspectives, Volume II: Metaphysics and 
Epistemology. Reseda, CA: Ridgeview.  [8]
  1969. “Language as Thought and as Communication”, Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research, 29: 506–527. [7]
  1980. Pure Pragmatics and Possible Worlds: The Early Essays of Wilfrid 
Sellars, edited by Jeffrey F. Sicha. Reseda, CA: Ridgeview Publishing. 
[13]
  1985. “Toward a Theory of Predication”, in Bogen and McGuire 
1985. [8]
Sesonske, Alexander, and Noel Fleming, eds. 1965. Human Understanding: 
Studies in the Philosophy of David Hume. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. [3]
Shepard, Roger, and J. Metzler. 1971. “Mental Rotation of Three-Dimen-
sional Objects”, Science, 171: 701–703. [1]
Shoemaker, Sydney. 1975. “Functionalism and Qualia”, Philosophical 
Studies, 27: 291–315. [1]
Simon, Herbert A. 1969/81 (second edition revised and enlarged). The 
Sciences of the Artiﬁcial. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. [1][9]. 
Stalnaker, Robert. 1976. “Propositions”, in MacKay and Merrill 1976. [7]
  1984. Inquiry, Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press. [7]
Stroud, Barry. 1977. Hume. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. [3]
Suppes, Patrick, et al., eds. 1973. Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of 
Science (proceedings of the fourth International Congress for Logic, 
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

378
Biblio g ra ph y
Methodology, and Philosophy of Science, 1971). Amsterdam: North-
Holland. [1]
Taylor, Charles. 1971. “Interpretation and the Sciences of Man”, Review of 
Metaphysics, 15: 3–51. [2]
van Gelder, Timothy. 1989. Distributed Representation. Unpublished PhD 
dissertation, Department of Philosophy, University of Pittsburgh. 
[8]
van Heerden, Pieter J. 1963. “A New Method of Storing and Retrieving 
Information”, Applied Optics, 2: 387–392. [1]
Waltz, David. 1972. Generating Semantic Descriptions from Drawings of Scenes 
with Shadows. MIT Ph.D. thesis; published in Winston 1975. [1]
Wilensky, Robert. 1978. “Why John Married Mary: Understanding 
Stories Involving Recurring Goals”, Cognitive Science, 2: 235–266. [2]
Wilks, Yorick. 1974. “Natural Language Understanding Systems within 
the AI Paradigm”, Stanford AI Memo #237. [2]
Wilks, Yorick, and D. Partridge, eds. 1987. Sourcebook on the Foundations of 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [7]
Wilson, Neil L. 1959. “Substances without Substrata”, Review of 
Metaphysics, 12: 521–539. [1]
Winograd, Terry. 1971. “Understanding Natural Language”, Cognitive 
Psychology, 1: 1–191; reprinted by Academic Press, New York, 1972. [1]
Winston, Patrick H., ed. 1975. The Psychology of Computer Vision. New 
York: McGraw Hill. [1]
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1921/74. “Logisch-philosophische Abhandlung”, 
Annalen der Naturphilosophie, 14: 185–262. Translation, by David F. 
Pears and Brian F. McGuinness (German and English on facing 
pages, with Bertrand Russell’s introduction): Tractatus Logico-Philo-
sophicus. (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961, revised 1974.) [8]
  1962. Philosophical Investigations. (German and English on facing 
pages; translation by G.E.M. Anscombe.) New York: Macmillan. [13]
Woodﬁeld, Andrew, ed. 1982. Thought and Object. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. [7]
Wright, Crispin. 1980. Wittgenstein on the Foundations of Mathematics. 
London: Duckworth. [13]
Yevick, Meriam L. 1975. “Holographic or Fourier Logic”, Pattern 
Recognition, 7: 197–213. [1]
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

 
Index
accountability, unit of  160
achievement
constitution as  253, 279, 293, 298, 
353
disclosure as  331, 333
science as  259
Aesop  57
affordance  221–223
agents
community members  312
competent  142
rational  159
rule-followers  306
analog
definition of  84
devices  82–87
images as ?  173
not second-order digital  86–87
second-order digital  84–86
animals
as perceivers  241, 247
don’t understand  2, 254, 286, 
301–304
have ersatz intentionality  
303–304
supermonkeys  249–253, 255
anomalous monism  89–91
anomaly  135, 297
Anscombe, G.E.M.  305
ant, Simon’s  209–211, 216, 218
approximation  83, 85–86
artificial intelligence  40, 47, 49–50, 
59–60, 138, 140, 157, 219
See also gofai
ascription
constraints on  139, 144, 146
intentional  138–145
principle of  142, 158
aspects (aspectual shape)  295, 298
Austin, J.L.  146
authenticity  342
autonomy (of objects)  280, 325, 330
background, the  61, 164, 180, 185, 
187, 194
Bailey’s razor  113, 116, 119, 123
bandwidth (of coupling)  220–229, 
234–237
Bar-Hillel, Yehoshua  48, 51
baseball
as constituted  320–321
intentionality metaphor  127–162
behaviorism  42
neo- versus paleo-  138
beholdenness
theory of truth  346–348
to objects  254, 278, 348
to satisfaction conditions  299
being  269, 282–284, 318, 356
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

380
I n dex
being-in-the-world  361
biography  58, 141
black box  18
intentional (ibb)  21–28, 138, 142
Block, Ned  88, 163
Brandom, Robert  4, 147, 169, 317, 
355, 356, 357–358
Brooks, Rodney  217–221, 232
calculus of individuals  110
care/caring  2, 55
See also commitment and involve-
ment
causality
and Humean identity  67–70
and normativity  128, 136, 141, 151, 
152, 158, 345–346
and strict laws  90–92
robust versus mathematical  93, 
106
censoriousness  147–149
charismatic florist  316–317, 351
chess
as constituted  277–279, 321–324, 
327–329, 331–332
as instituted  151
automatic  321–322
compared to science  257–258
empirical  329–331
esoteric  327–329
illegal moves paradoxical  332
illegal moves unacceptable  251, 
278, 342
in the Life world  276
perception  247–251, 295–297
pieces aren’t things  247–248, 
280–282, 329
players of  18–19, 22, 32, 36, 47–48, 
55–56, 139, 278–279
stance  297
supervenience example  104
trying to win  55–56, 139, 250, 340
without language  249–250, 
254–257
chicken-sexers  327
cogency conditions  22–23, 25, 
37–40
cognition, verbal  146–147
cognitive processes  26
cognitivism  9–43
coherence
and interpretation  133
internal versus external  133, 
345–346
situational  54
theory of truth  344–348
coin, two sides of  6, 353
commitment
as transcendental ground  304
constitutive  252, 257–259, 
340–343
deontic  320, 341–342
existential  2, 340–343
scientific  257–259, 343, 360
to rules or standards  252, 278, 
284, 297–301, 340
common sense, holism of  48–52
competence  142
complexity  76
compliance and inertness clause  321, 
329, 330
components
of a pattern  207, 267–268, 271
of a system  13, 29–30, 212–214
computers
definition of  137
don’t give a damn  47, 60
don’t understand  286, 301–304
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Index
38 1
conceivable (versus possible)  
332–333
concepts
having/applying  247, 256, 361
structured  50
concreteness  121, 349
conditioning  147, 311
conditions of possibility  254, 341
conformism  147–151, 311–313
connectionism  195–199, 301
See also distributed representation
consciousness  159, 294, 300
constitution
definition of (letting be)  325
versus institution  318, 337–338
constitutive
commitment  252, 257–259, 
340–343
regulations  320
rules  318–320
skills  323–325, 334–336
standards  252, 257–262, 279, 286, 
293, 320–326, 332–333
definition of  320
content
elements of
absolute  191
associative  201
relative  193
non-standard usage  203
piggyback  187
skeletal versus fleshed-out  
185–189
contingent, the  112, 114, 121–122, 128
convention  150, 320
copyability, perfect  75–76, 78
correctness
and objectivity  338
objects as criteria for  276, 279, 
314, 337–338, 343
of perception  253–254
of recognitions  273
versus propriety  309–310, 
313–317, 337–338
counting as  269, 326
coupling
with the world  220, 223–228, 234
within/among components  159, 
215, 218
criteria, objects as  276, 279, 314, 
337–338, 343
Cummins, Robert  12
custom/practice, social  4, 147–152, 
207, 235, 311–313
dasein  167, 170, 287
Davidson, Donald  17, 23, 48, 89–96, 
105, 106, 161, 258–260, 269, 
345, 352, 357, 360
de Groot, Adriaan D.  36
default assignments  50
definition  50, 75
Dennett, Daniel C.  59, 104, 138, 147, 
161, 249, 260, 267–287, 
291–304, 348
Derrida, Jacques  131
Descartes, René  112, 127, 131, 207, 
223, 233, 288
describability  89–91
design stance  283, 303
See also “how it works”
determination (by physics)  109–111, 
114–120
determinism (lack of)  99
Dewey, John  153, 233
digital
definition of  78
devices  75–82
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

382
I n dex
language as ?  173
second-order  84–86
simulation  85–87
why language is  168–169
dimensions
of analog devices  83–86
of iconic contents  192–193
of instantiation  28
direction of fit  305–306, 311, 313
disclosure  331, 333, 351–352
dispositions  12, 140, 147–151, 356
second-order or meta  147, 311
distributed representation  140, 157, 
174, 195, 198–203, 232
dog (would bark)  262
domain  96–98, 101
constituted  260, 298, 352
double checking  252, 279
Dretske, Fred  242–246, 253
Dreyfus, Hubert L.  36, 52, 105, 147, 
224–225, 229–233
eliminative materialism  107
embodiment  223–228
emergence  151
empirical testability  333–336
engineering  80, 169
environment. See world
equilibrium, precarious  333–336, 
344–345
equipment/tools  152–154, 232–237
error  145, 260, 273, 334–336
eternal, the  112, 120–121
events
mental versus physical  89–91
robust versus mathematical  
91–94, 101, 106
evolution
biological  151, 308
cultural/social  151, 312
excluded zone  331–333, 337, 347, 353
exhaustion (by physics)  109–111, 
114–123
existential
commitment  2, 340–343
holism  55–60
explanation
and encapsulation  29–30
and understanding  10, 113, 260, 
286, 353
deductive-nomological  10, 260
derivational-nomological  11, 38
morphological  12
multiple  117
systematic  13–14, 24, 26, 41, 308
explicit
rules  39, 149, 248, 306–307, 311
versus implicit  186
falsifiability  290, 351
feedback  226, 250
fiber-optics bundle  11–12
Field, Hartry  132
finitude  295
Fodor, Jerry A.  17, 88, 91, 132, 161, 
269, 355
Frege, Gottlob  317
functional components  13, 29–30, 
212–214
games
as self-contained  256
formal  82
perils of, as examples  320, 327, 
329–330, 343
versus language  155, 256
versus science  257–258, 343
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Index
383
Gibson, James J.  221–223
giving up the game  252, 259, 279, 
284, 297, 301, 342
gofai  202, 301–304
See also artificial intelligence
Goodman, Nelson  78–81, 84, 293
Grice, H. Paul  63, 145–146
grocking  315–316
Hare, Richard  107
Heidegger, Martin  2, 4, 147, 167, 
170, 233, 317, 356, 357, 358, 361
Hellman, Geoffrey  109–111, 118, 
120–121
Hempel, Carl G.  10
hermeneutics  54–55
Hobbes, Thomas  127
holism
and patterns  130–132, 135, 208
and systematicity  134–136, 139
common-sense  48–52
existential  55–60
not in Hume  69
of biological function  308
of interpretation  47–48, 134–135, 
268
of representation  173
prior versus real-time  49–50
situation  52–54
vapid  130–132, 138, 147
holograms  31–33, 36, 176, 182
“how it works”  13, 38, 283
Hume, David  63–71, 317
Husserl, Edmund  71
hylomorphism  120–121
identity theory
token  91, 96–100, 109–111, 
114–123, 132, 140, 346
counterexample to (chess)  
281–282
versus implementation  
247–248, 289, 329
type  91, 109, 132
identity, personal (Hume)  63–71
implicit
versus explicit  186
versus tacit  142
incommensurability  352
incompatibility
among mundane results  333–335
objects as loci of  337, 348
independent
objects as  314, 330, 344–345
versus alien (constraint)  345–348
individuals, calculus of  110
information
carrying  242–245, 309, 313
processing system (ips)  24–28, 
210
insight  37–40
insistence  252, 254, 256, 259–261, 
286, 341
instantiation (physical and inten-
tional)  26–28
institution
(process)  151, 157–158, 207, 
310–311
(product)  112, 147, 151, 235, 
311–313, 314–317
versus constitution  318, 337–338
integrity (of things)  261–262, 
348–349
intelligence and meaning  18, 
230–237
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

384
I n dex
intelligibility  37–40, 113, 116, 
215–217, 298, 353
intentional
ascription  138–145
black box (ibb)  21–28, 138, 142
instantiation  27
interpretation  17–28, 47–48, 
133–138, 207, 275
stance  268, 283, 286–287, 292–293
states  21, 267
systems theory  249
intentionality  127–162
as normative  128, 157–158, 
294–295
as-if  301–302
ersatz  301–304
intrinsic versus observer-relative  
163, 164, 294, 299
mental  129
original versus derivative  129, 
136–137, 145, 156, 163, 232
interaction
among tokens  136–138
intrasystematic  13, 24, 30, 211–215
with environment  138–145, 
218–219
interfaces  30, 213–215
interpretation
and making sense  19–23, 48, 55, 
133–135
constraints on  27, 37, 134–135
de-/re-interpretation  24, 26–28
holism of  47–48, 134, 135, 268
intentional  17–28, 47–48, 
133–138, 207, 275
principle of  134, 158
radical  268, 339
scheme of  18, 49, 277
textual  54
interrelationism  207–208
intimacy  207–209, 217, 223, 237
involvement, subjective/personal  
56–60, 339–340
See also commitment
isomorphism  174
Kant, Immanuel  112, 254, 298, 317, 
354, 356, 358, 361
Kemp Smith, Norman  65
Kim, Jaegwon  95–96
know-how. See skills/know-how
knowledge (versus understanding)  
286, 353
Kuhn, Thomas S.  2, 42, 258–259, 
352, 360
language
and ascription  145–147
as constituted  256, 344
as social practice  153–156
natural  47–60
objectivity without  249–250, 
254–257
of thought  138, 140, 163, 355
versus games  155, 256
laws
and explanation  10–11, 353
physical  90, 99
psycho-physical  17, 95
strict  90–91, 114
versus norms  317
learning  35, 37, 147, 197, 255–256, 
309–311
letting be  286, 325–327, 329, 337, 352
Lettvin, Jerrold  104
levels (within systems)  16, 212
Lewis, David  80–81, 84, 150, 161, 355
Life world (game of Life)  270–271
chess in  276
love and faith  2, 341
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Index
385
MacNabb, D.G.C.  66
making sense
and intentionality  292
and interpretation  19–23, 48, 55, 
133, 135
as mark of the mental  1
behavior as  139
definition of  353
disclosure as  331, 352
of chess pieces  329
of the world  37–40
phenomena as  318
understanding speech  181
Marr, David  30
materialism  3–4, 15, 291
eliminative  107, 115
physicalist  109–123
vapid  128–131, 151
mattering (to someone)  55–56, 250
See also commitment and involve-
ment
McDowell, John  355, 357, 360
meaning  17–26, 59
See also intentionality and repre-
sentation
meaningful, intelligence abides in 
the world as  230–237
measurement. See observation
medium independence  76, 82
mental
events  89–91
intentionality  129
the mark of  1
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice  233
Mill, John Stuart  317
monism, anomalous  89–91
moods  33–35
moral (of a story)  58
mousetrap psychology  143–145
mundane skills  323–325, 334–336
muscular gestalts  224–226
Nagel, Thomas  162
naturalism  317
network, connectionist  195–199
neurons  29–30, 202
Newell, Allen  217
normative
and causal both  345–346
biological functions as  158, 303, 
308–310
constraints on interpretation  
134–135
effect (versus force)  306
ersatz  303
force/authority  149, 252, 306, 
308, 311, 320, 333, 341, 343
institutions as  148–150, 311–313
intentionality as  128, 157–158, 
294–295
perception as  253–254, 296
recognition as  272, 276–278
representation as  172
status  154–156, 314, 325, 353
the meaningful as  232
versus causal/regular  150, 317
versus factual (rules)  306
objectivity
and correctness  314, 317, 338
and truth  316, 317, 343
everyday  260–262
of perception  253–254
scientific  257–259, 351–354
without language  249–250, 
254–257, 359
objects
as accessible/resistant  325, 338, 
342, 347, 353
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

386
I n dex
as authoritative/criterial  276, 279, 
325, 343
as autonomous/independent  314, 
325, 330, 344–345
as constituted  284, 286, 325, 329, 
337
as loci of incompatibility  337, 348
combination in  261, 332, 333, 359
definition of  325
in a formal sense  241, 325, 348
of perception  242, 246, 250–251, 
253–254, 262, 298
recognized  272–273
See also thing
observation  48, 257–259, 334, 338, 
359, 360
Ockham’s razor  113
See also Bailey’s razor
ontology  113, 267, 280, 297
regional  298
Oppenheim, Paul  10
Papert, Seymour  59
paradigm  42, 259–260, 298
imposter  42
patterns
among Humean ideas  68–70
and holism  130–132, 135, 208
and subpatterns  68, 248, 271, 
276–277
and their elements  267–268
association of  32, 196
gestalts  247
in pdp networks  196–200
of behavior  275, 292–293
of interaction with environment  
4, 138–145, 218
of interpretable tokens  19–23, 31, 
37, 132–138
of intrasystematic interaction  
13–14
orderly arrangements  273–278
recognition of  32, 36, 197–201, 
271–278
versus randomness  272–273
ways of life as  147, 151
perception  22, 138, 219–223, 295–297
and understanding  242, 247
animal  241, 247
objective correctness of  253–254
perfection  77–78, 83
person: first/third  162, 339
personal identity (Hume)  63–71
phenomena
and interpretation  21
constituted as objective  284, 325
recognition of  252
physical
definition of  258
determination  109–111, 114–120
events  89–91
exhaustion  109–111, 114–123
instantiation  27
primacy of  94, 99
two senses of  93
physicalism  94, 103, 109–123
physics
and digital simulation  87
and ordinary events  92
reduction to  17
pineal gland  223, 228
Popper, Karl R.  290, 351–352, 361
positive procedure  77–82, 85
possibility
actuality implies  353
and possible worlds  100, 191
and reality  262
and understanding  286, 353
conditions of  254, 341
versus conceivability  332–333
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Index
38 7
practice/custom, social  4, 147–152, 
207, 235, 311–313
pragmatics  60
pragmatism  170, 317, 356–358, 358
neo  147–156
precarious equilibrium  333–336, 
344–345
present and manifest, not  172, 
230–231, 324
primitive magnitudes  84
principle of charity  48, 165, 207
problem solving  25–26, 219
procedure
approximation  83, 86
positive  77–82, 85
reliable  77
progress, scientific  42, 112
property
definition of  261, 349–350
intrinsic  23, 129, 261, 280, 349
propriety (versus correctness)  
309–310, 313–317, 337–338
psychologism  317
psychology
cognitive  9–43, 132
mousetrap  143–145
scientific  26, 40–43
Putnam, Hilary  12, 17
Pylyshyn, Zenon W.  132
Quine, W.V.O.  18, 44, 48, 123, 138, 
288
randomness (versus pattern)  
272–273
rationality  18, 133–134, 141, 156, 260, 
284, 293
Rawls, John  318–320
realism  280
reasoning  25, 33, 219
recognition
and distributed representation  
197–203
as a mundane skill  331–333
normativity of  272, 276–278
of objects  272–273
of patterns  32, 36, 197–201, 
271–278
of phenomena  252
outer versus inner  285–286
versus differential response  272, 
276
reduction
and type identity  109, 116, 132
intentional  26–28
nomological  16, 94
systematic  16–17
vapid  132, 134
regularity (versus norm)  150, 317
reliability
of chess as achievement  298
of digital procedures  77
of skills  322, 334
definition of  334
representation  171–203
as normative  172
as standing in for  172, 230
distributed  140, 157, 174, 195, 
198–203, 232
iconic or image-like  174, 192–194
internal or mental  188, 230
logical or language-like  4, 174, 
190–191, 193
quasilinguistic  18–21, 35
scheme of  172–173, 188, 200, 231
symbolic  219–221
versus recording  177–185
resemblance
and Humean identity  67
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

388
I n dex
and representation  133, 174
See also similarity
resilience
of commitment  341
of digital devices  86
of skills or abilities  322, 334
definition of  322
resistance (of objects)  338, 342, 347, 
353
resoluteness  252, 341
responsibility
deontic versus existential  342
for one’s skills and concepts  343, 
356
revolution
conceptual  336
scientific  259
roles (instituted)  147, 152–153, 160, 
312–313
Rorty, Richard  131, 317, 356, 360
rule-following  149, 305–308, 313, 
341, 354
rules
basic (governing)  307, 309, 311, 313
constitutive  318–320
exhibited versus governing  
305–307, 341
explicit  39, 149, 248, 306–307, 311
expressed versus articulated  307
made to be broken  135
normative versus factual  306
of thumb  90, 318
regress of  307, 344
regulative  319
Rumelhart, David  61
San Jose, the way to  234
satisfaction conditions  156, 
294–296, 299
scheme
conceptual  298, 352
for expressing rules  149, 306–307
of interpretation  18, 49, 277
representational  172–173, 188, 
200, 231
science
and constitutive standards  
258–260, 343
as achievement  259
as worldly  236
cognitive psychology as  40–43
not a game  257–258, 343
unexplained explainers  15, 17, 70
unity of  15, 17, 111, 228
scientist (being one)  259, 360
Searle, John R.  131, 146, 163, 164, 
291–304, 305, 318–320
segregation strategy  34–36
self. See subject/self
Sellars, Wilfrid  147, 167, 176, 345, 
354, 355, 359
semantic
activity versus inertness  137
articulation  137, 146
compositionality  20, 137, 174
intrigue  144–146
similarity  32, 196–198, 201
Simon, Herbert A.  16, 30, 209–211, 
215–220
ant example  209–211, 216, 218
simulation (digital)  85–87
situated
action  201
cognition  209
tokens  134
situation, holism of  52–54
skills/know-how
and distributed representation  
198–201
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

Index
38 9
as co-constituted  279, 324, 346
as reliable and resilient  322, 334
Brooks’s robots  218
chess  36, 257, 323, 328
constitutive  323–325, 334–336
coupling with world  220, 
223–228, 234
definition of  322
different from thought  35–36, 159
mundane  323–325, 334–336
not witless  180
recognition as  279, 286, 331–333
revision or repair of  334–336, 342
Skinner, B.F.  131
social practices  4, 147–152, 207, 235, 
311–313
solipsism  207
Stalnaker, Robert  138, 147
stance (à la Dennett)  282–284, 287, 
297, 300, 341
See also intentional: stance
standards
constitutive  252, 257–262, 279, 
286, 293, 320–326, 332–333
holding things to  254, 261
status, normative  154–156, 314, 325, 
353
Stroud, Barry  70
subject/self
and beliefs/desires  294
as constituted  299–300
identity of (Hume)  63–71
involvement of  56–60, 339–340
rational agent  159
thinking thing  159
unit of social accountability  160
substance. See thing
subsumption (and the physical)  90, 
258
success (and ascription)  142
super-monkeys  249–253, 255
Supertrap  144
supervenience
and token identities  94–98
nomological  99
ontological  109–120
weak  96–105, 109–120
syntax  81, 137, 168–169
synthetic a priori  259
system  299
and subsystems  211–214
definition of  13–14, 213
information processing (ips)  
24–28, 210
intentional (unity of)  299
levels within  16, 212
mind-body-world  209
nervous  29–30
systematicity (lest holism be trivial)  
134–136, 139
tacit (versus implicit)  142
teleology, ersatz  303
tell, ability to
and conformism  151
and constitutive standards  285
and information  242
as a skill  229
definition of  313
in chess play  251, 278–279, 323, 
328
properly versus correctly  313–317
properties (of things)  349
recognition as  272
what makes sense  37
what’s in a scene  189, 194
whether objects comply  347
temporal, the  112, 114, 121–122
theory-laden-ness  358
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

39 0
I n dex
thing (res)
chess pieces are not  247–248, 
280–282, 329
definition of  261, 348–350
sense of ‘physical’  93
standards for  261, 264, 350
Thompson, Frank  109–111, 118, 
120–121
tokens and types  20–21, 76–79, 91, 
132–137
See also identity theory
type identity of tokens  78–79
tools/equipment  152–154, 232–237
transduction  146, 203, 220, 223–225
translation
and understanding  49, 56
indeterminacy of  44
mechanical  41
radical  18, 48, 133, 268
transubstantiation  82, 131
truth  142, 156
and objectivity  316, 317, 317, 343
as normative constraint  134
beholdenness theory  346–348
coherence theory  344–348
not just consensus  316
See also correctness
Turing machine  270
Turing test  294
Turing’s piano  178–179
understanding
and cognitivism  36–40
and constitution  254, 353
and explanation/laws/science  10, 
113, 260, 286, 353
and perception  242, 247
and possibility  286, 353
animals and computers lack  254, 
286, 301–304
as mark of the mental  1
of natural language  41, 47–60
versus knowledge  286, 353, 361
vapid
holism  130–132, 138, 147
materialism  128–131, 151
reduction  132, 134
vicarious coping  230–231, 302
vigilance  251–252, 259, 335
wave hits (on corks)  101–103
way of life  147, 151, 341
What else could it be?  31–33
Wilks, Yorick  51
witless (recording)  180
Wittgenstein, Ludwig  147, 176, 233, 
354
world/environment, the
as meaningful  231–237
coupling with  220, 223–228, 234
interaction with  138–145, 218–219
interpretation and  133
its own best model  219, 232
making sense of  37–40
Copyright © 1998 The President and Fellows of Harvard College

