HCISPP Study Guide
Timothy Virtue
Justin Rainey
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON 
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO 
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Syngress Publishers is an imprint of Elsevier

Acquiring Editor: Chris Katsaropoulos
Editorial Project Manager: Benjamin Rearick
Project Manager: Surya Narayanan Jayachandran
Designer: Maria Ines Cruz
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek 
permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements 
with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the 
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical 
treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in 
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein.  
In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety 
of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, 
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products 
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, 
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN: 978-0-12-802043-2
For information on all Syngress publications  
visit our website at http://store.elsevier.com/

v
Dedication
To my wife Jill – Your unconditional support and love make 
me the luckiest man alive. Thanks for sharing your life 
with me.
To my late grandpa Justin O’Connell whose 45 years of 
dedication teaching English at the University of Minnesota 
served as my inspiration to write this book.
Justin
To my late grandmothers Claire and Stella who showed 
me the importance of living life to the fullest, and that 
with passion and true grit, anything is possible.
Tim

xi
Author Bio
Justin C. Rainey (CISSP, CIPP/US) is a global information security, privacy 
and technology risk management leader whose entire professional career has 
focused on the protection of nonpublic information. Justin began his career 
in 1998 providing security and technical support for an independent school 
district, and over the past 16 years, gained security and privacy experience in 
various areas including healthcare, research, education, telecommunications, 
retail, banking, insurance, and investment management. He currently serves as 
information security manager for a global investment management firm and is 
pursuing a bachelor of science degree in Political Science at the University of 
Houston. Justin resides in Houston, Texas with his wife Jill and their two dogs 
Austin and Mariette.
Tim Virtue (HCISPP, CISSP, CIPP/G, CISA, CCSK, CFE, CSM) is a global in-
formation security, privacy and risk management executive. Tim has extensive 
experience with publicly traded global corporations, privately held businesses, 
government agencies, and nonprofit organizations of all types and sizes. Tim 
holds an executive master of science in information systems technology degree 
from George Washington University and a bachelors of science in Criminal 
Justice degree with a concentration in security management from Northeastern 
University. He currently serves as the chief information security officer (CISO) 
for Texas.gov.

xiii
Technical Editor Bio
Jason Adamson (CEH, CISSP) is information security director for Voya 
Financial Services focusing on penetration testing, application code review, 
and other kinds of security testing. He has been working to protect PII and 
company sensitive data for 15 years and has worked for companies in finan-
cial, manufacturing, retail, and telecommunications sectors. Jason holds a  
degree in computer engineering technologies from Southern Polytechnic State 
University.

xv
Preface
We are living in unprecedented times. This environment of constant change 
and transformation offers both opportunities and challenges. The opportu-
nities and societal advances offered by healthcare technology are abundant. 
However, these advancements come with privacy and security concerns. We 
do not advocate fearing such change simply because of the privacy and secu-
rity concerns. In fact, we look forward to all of the benefits and embrace the 
change, as long as society can find a way to balance the risks against the re-
wards. As we transition some of our most valued personal health information 
to various healthcare technology systems, there is and always will be a critical 
need for Information Security and Privacy professionals in the healthcare field.
There is a significant shortage of qualified professionals who truly understand 
all the aspects of Information Security and Privacy, including what it takes to de-
velop, implement, and maintain an effective program while supporting the busi-
ness needs of the organization and delivering leading-edge healthcare. We have 
seen a plethora of new threat actors enter the arena in an attempt to exploit vul-
nerable systems with various motives. These actors include foreign governments, 
“hacktivists,” organized crime, cyber criminals, and even competitors in an at-
tempt to gain a strategic advantage. The sophistication and scale of attacks surpass 
anything we’ve seen over the past decade and protecting healthcare organizations 
becomes more difficult as new technologies are adopted. This contributes to an 
insatiable demand for qualified Information Security and Privacy professionals.
Why focus on the Healthcare industry? Healthcare is growing at an unprec-
edented pace and is increasingly vulnerable as the industry shifts to electronic 
healthcare records.
The following is a list of key issues we believe will drive information security 
and privacy activities within the Healthcare industry and contribute to the de-
mand for qualified professionals.
1.	 The Healthcare industry is extremely fragmented with minimal 
standards for interoperability and data sharing between hospitals, 
pharmacy benefit management companies, insurance companies, and 

Preface
xvi
pharmacies. These issues are actively being addressed, but require a 
significant investment in technology. With increasing connectivity and 
access to systems and data, risks will also increase. Connectivity in the 
form of health information exchanges (HITS) and accountable care 
organizations also drives demand for qualified professionals.
2.	 There has been huge underinvestment in technology and especially for 
providers with most investments focused on providing or improving 
patient care. Old (legacy) systems remain a major security concern 
as many contain ePHI and need to be secured as they are updated or 
replaced.
3.	 There are enormous amounts of healthcare fraud and abuse within 
the industry, causing costs to spiral out of control. Technology in 
conjunction with security and privacy controls can provide solutions to 
increase business visibility and assist with managing these risks.
4.	 Demand for healthcare is exploding commensurate with the rapidly 
aging baby boomer population. This will require expansion of 
existing systems and implementation of new technologies to improve 
productivity and outcomes.
5.	 It is projected that the United States will experience a shortage of 
160,000 doctors over the next 20 years and the industry will have 
to find new ways of improving doctor productivity. This will require 
implementation of new and innovative technologies that need to 
be secured.
6.	 Regulators have been aggressive in regulating the security and privacy of 
Healthcare IT systems and issuing fines for noncompliance.
7.	 Despite having vast amounts of sensitive data, healthcare Information 
Security programs are far behind that of Financial Services and other 
similarly situated industries. The FBI has also issued warnings to the 
Healthcare industry to urgently improve their programs and controls.
8.	 The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) projects the job market for 
Information Security professionals to expand by 37% between 2012 
and 2022. Information Security is one of the fastest-growing professions 
in the job market.
There are a vast number of opportunities for qualified healthcare Informa-
tion Security and Privacy professionals. The HealthCare Certified Information 
Security and Privacy Practitioner (HCISPP) credential will certify your knowl-
edge and stature as a qualified professional. There will be vast opportunities 
for those who prepare for the future, and this book is your first step toward a 
rewarding healthcare information security and privacy professional.

xvii
Acknowledgments
Justin would like to thank his wife, Jill, for her patience and support through-
out the writing of this book. Thanks to co-author Tim Virtue and technical 
editor Jason Adamson for their contributions and collaboration on this work. 
And finally thanks to his family for their support: Kathleen Rainey, Edward 
Rainey, Scott Britain, and Dan and Allison Connally.
I would like to thank my family, friends, educators, and industry colleagues. 
Without your support, guidance, and mentorship over the years, I would not 
have the inspiration, expertise, or ability to write this book. I would also like 
to give a special thanks to co-author Justin Rainey, technical editor Jason Ad-
amson, and the team at Elsevier. If not for their hard work, dedication, and 
support, we would not have had this book today.

1
HCISPP Study Guide
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Introduction
CHAPTER 1
THIS CHAPTER WILL HELP READERS UNDERSTAND
j	 Importance of information security and privacy
j	 Target audience
j	 HealthCare Information Security and Privacy Practitioner (HCISPP) 
certification requirements
j	 Learning objectives
BACKGROUND
The importance of security and privacy is rapidly increasing across all indus-
tries, especially given a recent acceleration in public data breach and record dis-
closures. As this book was composed the public has witnessed large breaches 
within the retail industry involving stolen credit card and personal informa-
tion. At first glance one might discard this type of threat as not applicable 
to healthcare organizations given their core business involves the delivery of 
patient care. In many cases they might be wrong given patients regularly pay 
for healthcare services using a credit or debit card, the massive amount of per-
sonal health information (PHI) within the organization, a significant increase 
in the use of health information technology (which creates additional privacy 
and security risk), and PHI being shared outside organizational boundaries 
with third parties to support the delivery of healthcare services. Healthcare 
organizations will need qualified risk management professionals to assist with 
managing the broad array of risks faced within the industry. The HCISPP certi-
fication is for individuals who want to understand how to assess risk and im-
plement and maintain security and privacy controls specific to the healthcare 
industry while being compliant with the many laws and regulations that gov-
ern the healthcare industry. Individuals with certifications such as the HCISPP 
are more likely to be selected for job interviews based on the immediate recog-
nition of an industry certification and the qualifications it conveys. Since the 

CHAPTER 1: 
Introduction
2
exam details are subject to change, per (ISC)2, we encourage candidates to ob-
tain the most current HCISPP Candidate Information Bulletin available from 
(ISC)2 prior to beginning their exam preparation. Candidates may require a 
deeper understanding of some concepts discussed throughout this book de-
pending on the nature of their current or future roles, educational background, 
and work experience in each of the specific HCISPP exam domains. However, 
this book was written to provide a foundational level of knowledge and teach 
candidates only what is necessary to pass the HCISPP examination – nothing 
more, nothing less. Consider this the first step in a journey, as a security and 
privacy practitioner in the healthcare industry. Since the healthcare industry, 
the technology that supports it, and the laws and regulations that govern it 
continuously change we encourage HCISPP candidates and certificate holders 
to actively participate in the industry, stay abreast of changes, and commit to 
continuing education and gaining new experiences. The examination and this 
book focus on six key domains of knowledge:
j	 Healthcare industry
j	 Regulatory environment
j	 Privacy and security in healthcare
j	 Information governance and risk management
j	 Information risk assessment
j	 Third-party risk management
Individuals who may want to consider obtaining a HCISPP certification in-
clude, but are not limited to:
j	 Information security analysts
j	 Information security officers (CSO, CISO, ISO)
j	 Privacy officers (CPO)
j	 Compliance officers (CCO)
j	 Records management personnel
j	 Information technology managers
j	 Security and privacy consultants
j	 Risk management personnel
j	 Internal and external auditors
j	 Data protection officers
j	 Health information managers
HCISPP Certification Requirements
Prior to taking the HCISPP examination, candidates must meet the following 
requirements:
j	 Register for the exam and pay the examination fee. The most current 
fees are available at https://www.isc2.org/certification-register-now.aspx.

Background
3
j	 Have a minimum of 2 years’ security, privacy, and compliance 
experience in one of the six knowledge domains. At least 1 year of 
experience is required in one of the following three domains:
j	 Healthcare industry
j	 Regulatory environment in healthcare
j	 Privacy and security in healthcare
The second year of experience can be in the domains mentioned earlier or in 
one of the following three domains:
j	 Information governance and risk management
j	 Information risk assessment
j	 Third-party risk management
Legal and information management experience may also be substituted for 
compliance and privacy experience, respectively.
j	 Provide a truthful attestation of professional experience and legally 
agree to abide by the Code of Ethics; and
j	 Provide yes or no responses to four questions pertaining to criminal 
history and background.
Exam Registration
The exam is computer-based (CBT) and proctored at an authorized location, 
while paper-based exams are available on a case-by-case basis. The exam will 
consist of 125 multiple choice questions with 4 potential choices and must be 
completed in 3 h. Candidates should ensure sufficient rest prior to the exami-
nation, and if traveling from outside the area, consider staying at a hotel close 
to the testing facility the night beforehand. Registration for the exam can be 
completed online through the (ISC)2 website or over the phone and requires 
payment of the exam fee, agreement to the Code of Ethics, and responses to 
criminal history and background questions.
Code of Ethics
The Code of Ethics includes a preamble and four cannons focused on ethics. 
All professionals who receive an HCISPP certification must abide by the Code, 
recognize their certification is a privilege (not a right), and understand the cer-
tification is subject to revocation for members who intentionally or knowingly 
violate the Code.
Preamble
The safety and welfare of society and the common good, duty to our princi-
pals, and to each other, requires that we adhere, and be seen to adhere, to the 

CHAPTER 1: 
Introduction
4
highest ethical standards of behavior. Therefore, strict adherence to this Code 
is a condition of certification.
Code of Ethics Cannons
j	 Protect society, the common good, necessary public trust and 
confidence, and the infrastructure.
j	 Act honorably, honestly, justly, responsibly, and legally.
j	 Provide diligent and competent service to principals.
j	 Advance and protect the profession.

5
HCISPP Study Guide
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Healthcare Industry
CHAPTER 2
THIS CHAPTER WILL HELP CANDIDATES:
j	 Understand fundamental components of the healthcare industry
j	 Understand healthcare delivery models
j	 Understand healthcare technology
j	 Understand healthcare exchanges and healthcare information flows
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS
Healthcare is delivered in a number and variety of ways in today’s modern 
healthcare system. Healthcare services range from being delivered by an indi-
vidual physician to a global pharmaceutical company. In addition to a wide 
range and structure of healthcare providers, there are also a large number of 
third parties (vendors, business partners, etc.) that provide a range of support 
services (e.g., medical equipment suppliers, billing, technology). Another criti-
cal component of the healthcare system is the various government agencies 
and regulators.
HEALTHCARE ORGANIZATIONS
Organizations providing healthcare can be structured in a variety of ways, but 
are commonly classified into either for-profit or not-for-profit organizations. 
Each type of entity has its own objectives and challenges, but the underlying 
commonality is the delivery of high-quality healthcare services at a low cost. 
Healthcare costs have significantly increased in recent years and the costs are 
anticipated to continuously rise over the next several years. Healthcare organi-
zations may also be impacted by their physical and jurisdictional locations, the 
specific types of healthcare services they deliver, and country-specific legal and 
regulatory requirements.

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
6
HEALTHCARE PROVIDER
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) recognizes defini-
tions for both healthcare providers and covered entities:
j	 Healthcare provider – A provider of medical or health services and 
any other person or organization who furnishes, bills, or is paid for 
healthcare in the normal course of business.
j	 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)–
covered entity – Any organization or corporation that directly handles 
personal health information (PHI) or personal health records (PHRs).
ORGANIZED PHYSICIAN SERVICES
Organized physician services evolved from single practitioner service model to 
provide more comprehensive care by an organization. This model enables an 
independent organization to deliver scalable patient care services that are not 
possible by a single physician.
THE NATIONAL PROVIDER IDENTIFIER (NPI)
The NPI is a unique 10-character identification number for covered health-
care providers. Its purpose is to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the 
electronic transmission of health information and is mandated as part of 
the ­Administrative Simplification provisions of the HIPAA. The Centers for 
­Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) has developed the National Plan and 
Provider Enumeration System (NPPES), which is responsible for the assign-
ment and administration of these unique identifiers.
PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY
The pharmaceutical industry is composed of various types of enterprises that 
produce medicine and drugs used in the delivery of healthcare. It is important 
to note that in most cases, pharmaceutical companies do not deliver medicine 
and drugs directly to patients. Furthermore, pharmaceutical companies are 
heavily regulated and must adhere to a variety of laws and regulations regarding 
the research, testing, marketing, and production of drugs to ensure proper use 
and patient safety. Closely related are the organizations (commonly referred 
to as pharmacies) responsible for the direct medicine and drug ­distribution.
PAYERS
A payer in healthcare generally refers to entities other than the patient that 
finance or reimburse the cost of healthcare services. There are a number and 
variety of types of organizations that meet these criteria, but some of the more 

Value-added networks (VANs)
7
common types of entities include insurance companies, healthcare service 
contractors, self-insured organizations providing healthcare, and governments 
making payments for healthcare services.
A healthcare provider sends claims to a health plan to request payment for 
medical services.
ELECTRONIC DATA INTERCHANGE (EDI)
According to the HHS, EDI “Is the electronic transfer of information, such as elec-
tronic media health claims, in a standard format between trading partners. EDI 
allows entities within the health care system to exchange medical, billing, and 
other information and to process transactions in a manner, which is fast and cost 
effective. With EDI there is a substantial reduction in handling and processing 
time compared to paper, and the risk of lost paper documents is eliminated. EDI 
can eliminate the inefficiencies of handling paper documents, which will signifi-
cantly reduce administrative burden; lower operating costs, and improves overall 
data quality.” Under HIPAA, the following standard transactions must use EDI:
j	 Claims and encounter information
j	 Payment and remittance advice
j	 Claims status
j	 Eligibility
j	 Enrollment and disenrollment
j	 Referrals and authorizations
j	 Coordination of benefits
j	 Premium payment
Additionally, under HIPAA, the following specific code sets for diagnoses and 
procedures must also be used:
j	 Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) (Ancillary 
Services/Procedures)
j	 CPT-4 (Physicians’ Procedures)
j	 CDT (Dental Terminology)
j	 ICD-9 (Diagnosis and Hospital Inpatient Procedures)
j	 ICD-10 (As of October 1, 2014)
j	 National Drug Codes (NDC)
VALUE-ADDED NETWORKS (VANs)
Many healthcare organizations choose to work with VANs to aid in EDI. A 
VAN is a hosted service offering that acts as an intermediary between ­business 
partners such as hospitals and insurance payers. It simplifies the communica-
tions process by reducing the number of parties with which a company needs 

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
8
to facilitate EDI. VANs can offer a variety of support services for EDI and related 
activities and healthcare organizations should select the services most appro-
priate to their specific operating and regulatory models.
HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGES
Health insurance exchanges are centralized health insurance offerings available 
to individuals who do not currently have healthcare insurance. The exchanges 
are typically subsidized and/or managed by government program, the larg-
est example being HealthCare.gov. These exchanges typically offer competitive 
rates since insurers are spreading risk among a larger population and can offer 
“group” discounts and rates. Health insurance exchanges are supported by the 
U.S. government, and are the foundation of the Affordable Care Act.
BUSINESS ASSOCIATES
Since most healthcare service providers focus on delivering patient care, they 
look to other organizations to provide the necessary business support activi-
ties associated with modern healthcare delivery. Some common examples of 
business associates include accounting and financial services, claims proces-
sors, transcription services, consultants, etc. Under the HIPAA Privacy Rule, 
covered providers and health plans are allowed to disclose protected health 
information to business associates if the providers or plans obtain satisfactory 
assurances that the business associate will comply with the following practices 
to ensure patient information is properly safeguarded:
j	 Use the information only for the purposes for which it was engaged by 
the covered entity.
j	 Safeguard the information from misuse.
j	 Help the covered entity comply with some of the covered entity’s duties 
under the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (HIT)
According to the HHS, HIT “Involves the exchange of health information in 
an electronic environment. Widespread use of health IT within the health care 
industry will improve the quality of health care, prevent medical errors, reduce 
health care costs, increase administrative efficiencies, decrease paperwork, and 
expand access to affordable health care.” Some of the more common com-
ponents include electronic medical records (EMRs), clinical decision support 
systems (CDSS), and computerized physician order entry (CPOE). In addition 
to HIT being used directly for the delivery of patient care services, healthcare 
organizations also use HIT for management and business support functions.

Meaningful use regulations
9
MEDICAL DEVICES
Medical devices are an integral part for many organizations’ delivery of today’s 
modern healthcare treatments and services. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) defines a medical device as “An article, instrument, apparatus or ma-
chine that is used in the prevention, diagnosis or treatment of illness or disease, 
or for detecting, measuring, restoring, correcting or modifying the structure or 
function of the body for some health purpose.” Types of medical devices often 
include self-care, electronic, diagnostic, surgical, durable medical equipment, 
acute care, emergency and trauma, long-term care, storage, and transport. Due 
to the varied types and widespread use of medical devices, healthcare organi-
zations have a responsibility to properly protect patients and their associated 
health data when using medical devices for patient care. The U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration formally acknowledges and classifies medical devices. Ac-
cording to the FDA website, “The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has es-
tablished classifications for approximately 1,700 different generic types of de-
vices and grouped them into 16 medical specialties referred to as panels. Each 
of these generic types of devices is assigned to one of three regulatory classes 
based on the level of control necessary to assure the safety and effectiveness of 
the device. The three classes and the requirements, which apply, to them are:
Device Class and Regulatory Controls
1.	 Class I General Controls
a.	 With Exemptions
b.	 Without Exemptions
2.	 Class II General Controls and Special Controls
a.	 With Exemptions
b.	 Without Exemptions
3.	 Class III General Controls and Premarket Approval.”
MEANINGFUL USE REGULATIONS
One of the most important changes to the U.S. healthcare system, and a signifi-
cant driver of HIT, is meaningful use (MU). According to HealthIT.gov, “The 
Medicare and Medicaid Electronic Health Record (EHR) Incentive Programs 
provide financial incentives for the ‘meaningful use’ of certified EHR technol-
ogy. To receive an EHR incentive payment, providers have to show that they are 
‘meaningfully using’ their certified EHR technology by meeting certain mea-
surement thresholds that range from recording patient information as struc-
tured data to exchanging summary care records.”
There are a variety of organizational benefits to the adoption of electronic 
health record (EHR) technology and MU. Some of the more common benefits 

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
10
include accurate and updated information, and increased accessibility to both 
patients and healthcare providers.
ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD
EHRs are the new cornerstone of today’s modern healthcare delivery and man-
agement. According to the Healthcare Information and Management Systems 
Society (HIMSS), “The Electronic Health Record (EHR) is a longitudinal elec-
tronic record of patient health information generated by one or more encoun-
ters in any care delivery setting. Included in this information are patient de-
mographics, progress notes, problems, medications, vital signs, past medical 
history, immunizations, laboratory data and radiology reports. The EHR au-
tomates and streamlines the clinician’s workflow. The EHR has the ability to 
generate a complete record of a clinical patient encounter – as well as support-
ing other care-related activities directly or indirectly via interface – including 
­evidence-based decision support, quality management, and outcomes report-
ing.” As you can see from this very comprehensive definition, the EHR plays a 
critical role in the overall operations of a healthcare organization and touches 
upon and often includes a tremendous amount of sensitive information. There-
fore, healthcare organizations must understand the elements and information 
flows of EHRs and implement the appropriate privacy and security safeguards.
PERSONAL HEALTH RECORD
A PHR is very similar to an EHR. The primary difference is that the informa-
tion and management of the record is managed at the individual patient level. 
HealthIT.gov states, “A personal health record (PHR) is an electronic applica-
tion used by patients to maintain and manage their health information in a 
private, secure, and confidential environment.” PHRs:
j	 Are managed by patients
j	 Can include information from a variety of sources, including healthcare 
providers and patients themselves
j	 Can help patients securely and confidentially store and monitor health 
information, such as diet plans or data from home monitoring systems, 
as well as patient contact information, diagnosis lists, medication lists, 
allergy lists, immunization histories, and much more
j	 Are separate from, and do not replace, the legal record of any healthcare 
provider
j	 Are distinct from portals that simply allow patients to view provider 
information or communicate with providers
Often times PHRs are associated with EHRs and the information from each 
type of record can be exchanged across the two record types. For this reason, it 

Health insurance
11
is important that the information contained within and the PHRs themselves 
be properly safeguarded. Healthcare organizations managing the technology 
supporting PHRs also have the responsibility to protect patient information. 
Additionally healthcare organizations need to partner with patients to ensure 
the patient understands their individual roles and responsibilities in managing 
their healthcare information and a PHR.
HEALTH INSURANCE
In order to comprehensively understand modern healthcare delivery, it is im-
portant to discuss the subject of health insurance. There are numerous types of 
health insurance and patients often have a variety of arrangements they can se-
lect from to assist in the payment or reimbursement for healthcare. However, a 
common theme among most health insurance plans is that an insurer will pay 
for some or all of the healthcare costs for a patient in exchange for a premium. 
In fact, HealthCare.gov defines health insurance as “A contract that requires 
your health insurer to pay some or all of your healthcare costs in exchange for 
a premium.” As indicated earlier, the number of types and specific details of 
health insurance can vary greatly from organization to organization. The fol-
lowing discussions will highlight some of the more common health insurance 
programs. However, it is important to note that the details of plans change fre-
quently and organizations outside of the United States often have additional 
variances in their programs that are specific to the healthcare delivery customs 
for that country.
Private Health Insurance
Private health insurance is a type of insurance coverage where individuals are 
responsible for providing their own health insurance coverage. However, in 
most cases the patient’s employer provides all or some of the funding as an 
employee benefit. Private health insurance is currently the most prevalent form 
of health insurance in the United States. However, it is important to note that 
Medicare and Medicaid (two types of public health coverage) are also common 
in the United States.
Although private health insurance often has a wider network of healthcare pro-
viders and services, it often costs considerably more than public health insur-
ance.
Public Health Insurance
The other major type of health insurance is public health insurance. This is 
an insurance program provided by the government. The primary benefit of 
a public health insurance program is that it can provide health insurance 
access and affordability to patients who could not obtain private health 

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
12
­insurance. A major disadvantage of public health insurance is the eligibility 
requirements often associated with a government-managed health insurance 
program.
Health Insurance Programs
As discussed earlier, there are a variety of health insurance programs. The spe-
cifics arrangements of each program are left to the discretion of the insurer 
and the patient. A list and high-level description of common health insurance 
programs in the United States is shown as follows:
Name of Health Insurance Program
Description of Health Insurance 
­Program
Indemnity plan
Patient selects healthcare provider of their 
choice. The service provider submits a 
claim to the patient’s insurance for services 
rendered
Health Maintenance Organization (HMOs)
Patient pays a set premium and is entitled 
services included in the benefit offering. 
Patients must see a primary care physician 
within the HMO, and are required to obtain 
a referral for specialists and additional 
healthcare services not included in the 
HMO’s primary offering
Preferred provider organizations (PPOs)
A PPO can be considered a hybrid of an 
indemnity plan and an HMO. Patients can 
select a healthcare provider of their choice, 
as long as it is within PPO network. Some 
PPOs will allow patients to select service 
outside of the network, but will usually only 
reimburse patients for a smaller percent-
age than if they had stayed within the 
network
Exclusive provider organizations (EPOs)
EPOs are similar to PPOs except that pa-
tients will only be reimbursed for healthcare 
services provided within the network
Point-of-service plans (POS)
A POS is a hybrid between an HMO and a 
PPO
High-deductible health plan (HDHP)
HDHPs are plans with high deductibles, 
but these are balanced with very low 
premiums
Catastrophic health insurance plan
These plans also have high deductibles, 
but only provide coverage for serious injury 
or illness
Medicare and Medicaid
U.S. government insurance programs. 
Medicare provides insurance for the elderly 
and Medicaid provides insurance for the 
poor

Healthcare coding
13
PAYMENT MODELS
There are a variety of payment models currently available in the healthcare in-
dustry. We will provide a high-level perspective as payment for healthcare ser-
vices is an important component of the overall healthcare system. However, 
specific program details and operating models vary among organizations and 
we will focus on some of the more common payment models, which are listed 
as follows:
j	 Fee for service – Reimbursement for specific, individual services 
provided to a patient.
j	 Pay for coordination – Payment for specified care coordination 
services, usually to certain types of providers (e.g., nursing home).
j	 Pay for performance – Defined as a payment or financial incentive 
(e.g., a bonus) associated with achieving defined and measurable goals 
related to care processes and outcomes, patient experience, resource use, 
and other factors.
j	 Episode or bundled payments – Single payments for a group of 
services related to a treatment or condition that may involve multiple 
providers in multiple settings.
j	 Comprehensive care/total cost of care payment – A single risk-
adjusted payment for the full range of healthcare services needed by a 
specified group of people for a fixed period of time.
HEALTHCARE CODING
Healthcare coding is essential to the transactional aspect of healthcare 
­delivery. According to the CMS, “Under HIPAA, the Secretary of Health and 
­Human Services (HHS) adopted certain standard transactions for Electronic 
Data Interchange (EDI) of health care data. These transactions are: claims 
and encounter information, payment and remittance advice, claims status, 
eligibility, enrollment and disenrollment, referrals and authorizations, coor-
dination of benefits and premium payment. If a covered entity conducts one 
of the adopted transactions electronically, they must use the adopted stan-
dard – either from ASC X12N or NCPDP (for certain pharmacy transactions). 
Covered entities must adhere to the content and format requirements of each 
transaction. Also, under HIPAA, HHS has adopted specific code sets for diag-
noses and procedures to be used in all transactions. The HCPCS (Ancillary 
­Services/Procedures), CPT-4 (Physicians Procedures), CDT (Dental Terminol-
ogy), ICD-9 (Diagnosis and hospital inpatient Procedures), ICD-10 (As of 
October 1, 2014) and NDC (National Drug Codes) codes with which provid-
ers and health plan are familiar, are the adopted code sets for procedures, 
diagnoses, and drugs.”

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
14
Medical Coding Systems
Currently there are two medical coding systems used in the United States and 
include:
j	 HCPCS:
j	 Level I Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes and Level II 
National Codes
j	 International Classification of Disease (ICD)
The HCPCS is used to report hospital outpatient procedures and physician 
services.
These coding systems support the healthcare system by providing functions for 
physician reimbursement, hospital payments, quality review, and the collec-
tion of statistical data.
The American Medical Association (AMA) publishes CPT codes. CPT codes are 
used to report medical procedures and services under public and private health 
insurance programs. The WHO maintains the ICD classification. Its primary 
purpose is to categorize diseases for morbidity and mortality reporting. As of 
this writing the WHO states, “ICD-10 was endorsed by the Forty-third World 
Health Assembly in May 1990 and came into use in WHO Member States as 
from 1994. The 11th revision of the classification has already started and will 
continue until 2017.” U.S.-based healthcare organizations should note that 
the United States has used a clinical modification of ICD (ICD-10-CM) for the 
additional purposes of reimbursement.
SYSTEMATIZED NOMENCLATURE OF MEDICINE 
(SNOMED) – CLINICAL TERMS (CT)
According to the International Health Terminology Standards Development 
Organization (IHTSDO) (the not-for-profit organization that owns, maintains, 
and distributes SNOMED CT), “SNOMED CT provides the core general termi-
nology for the electronic health record (EHR) and contains more than 311,000 
active concepts with unique meanings and formal logic-based definitions orga-
nized into hierarchies. When implemented in software applications, SNOMED 
CT can be used to represent clinically relevant information consistently, reliably 
and comprehensively as an integral part of producing electronic health records.” 
Healthcare organizations use coding systems to enable aggregation of accounting 
and medical record data by disease, patient characteristics, or site of care. These 
systems often include the various patient classification systems such as Diagnosis-
Related Groups (DRGs), Ambulatory Patient Groups (APGs), and Resource Utili-
zation Groups (RUGs). The common classification systems are defined as follows:

HIPAA transaction and code sets
15
j	 DRG – Payment approach that focuses on inpatient hospitalizations, 
setting a price based on categories of illness.
j	 APGs – Encompass a full range of ambulatory settings and designed to 
explain the amount and type of resources used in an ambulatory visit.
j	 Ambulatory Payment Classifications (APCs) – Used by the U.S. 
government for hospital services provided to Medicare and Medicaid 
patients.
j	 RUGs – Relies on specific documentation of patient care delivered, 
meaning patient resources used.
MEDICAL BILLING
Medical billing is the part of the healthcare process where claims and payment 
information is managed and communicated with health insurance companies 
in order for the healthcare provider to receive payment (reimbursement) for 
services delivered to a patient. After a healthcare provider sees a patient, the 
diagnosis and procedure codes are assigned accordingly. These codes assist 
the insurance company in determining coverage and reimbursement for the 
­rendered services.
HIPAA TRANSACTION AND CODE SETS
Under HIPAA, the TCS Standard/Rule mandates uniform electronic ­interchange 
formats for all covered entities. The TCS Rule only covers PHI in electronic form 
and is used with EDI standards and requires their use by all covered entities. 
It has selected its EDI standards from among the preexisting transaction and 
code set specifications of a variety of nongovernmental Designated ­Standards 
Maintenance Organizations (DSMOs).
The TCS Rule uses the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Accred-
ited Standards Committee (ASC) X12 transactions (ANSI X12N) standards as 
follows:
j	 Health Care Claims or Equivalent Encounter Information (X12N 837)
j	 Eligibility for a Health Plan (X12N 270/271)
j	 Referral Certification and Authorization (X12N 278 or NCPDP for retail 
pharmacy)
j	 Health Care Claim Status (X12N 276/277)
j	 Enrollment and Disenrollment in a Health Plan (X12N 834)
j	 Health Care Payment and Remittance Advice (X12N 835)
j	 Health Plan Premium Payments (X12N 820)
j	 Coordination of Benefits (X12N 837 or NCPDP for retail pharmacy)

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
16
NATIONAL UNIFORM BILLING COMMITTEE (NUBC)
The NUBC is a voluntary committee whose work is coordinated through the 
offices of the American Hospital Association (AHA) and includes participation 
of all the major national provider and payer organizations. The Committee 
monitors and manages the utilization of this standard uniform (UB) billing 
form and data set used throughout the industry for billing transactions.
HEALTHCARE CLEARINGHOUSE
Healthcare clearinghouses are organizations that process nonstandard data el-
ements of health information into standard data elements. The clearinghouse 
receives unstructured healthcare transactions from a healthcare organization 
and translates the data into the format required and forwards the processed 
information to the appropriate partner organization (commonly a payer).
WORKFLOW MANAGEMENT
Due to the significant emphasis on healthcare reform and in order to comply 
with various legal, regulatory, and industry best practices, healthcare organiza-
tions work on ways to improve their processes, deliver high-quality care more 
efficiently, and simultaneously reduce costs. Since many healthcare processes 
are complex and data intensive, and include both clinical and administrative 
activities, healthcare organizations are turning to various kinds of workflow 
management systems to manage healthcare activities. Healthcare organiza-
tions are seeking automated solutions and applications that simplify the rou-
tine delivery of patient healthcare. Although workflow management systems 
can vary in type, size, and function from organization to organization, there 
are several common applications within the healthcare industry. The workflow 
management applications common to the healthcare industry address routine 
administrative (billing, claims, etc.) and clinical (patient management, chart-
ing, etc.) activities.
REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT
Although Chapter 3 will go into great detail about the specific security, pri-
vacy, and oversight issues impacting the healthcare industry, it is important to 
recognize the overall and significant impact the regulatory environment has 
on the healthcare industry. Since the healthcare industry is heavily regulated, 
laws and regulations drive many of an organization’s daily operations, in or-
der to safeguard patient health information. Understanding the complexity of 
the regulatory environment is fundamental to understanding how the health-
care industry is required to deliver services. Additionally, understanding of the 

Authorization and informed consent
17
­regulatory environment allows organizations to develop policies and proce-
dures that simultaneously deliver effective patient care, meet business objec-
tives, and comply with legal and regulatory requirements.
PUBLIC HEALTH REPORTING
According to the HHS, “The HIPAA Privacy Rule recognizes the legitimate need 
for public health authorities and others responsible for ensuring public health 
and safety to have access to protected health information to carry out their 
public health mission. Accordingly, the rule permits covered entities to disclose 
protected health information without authorization for specified public health 
purposes.”
CLINICAL RESEARCH
Clinical research is an integral part of the healthcare industry. It allows for 
advances in healthcare and improved patient care. However, such advances are 
dependent on excellent research and proper research methodologies such as 
Good Clinical Research Practice (GCP). According to the WHO, GCP is a pro-
cess that incorporates established ethical and scientific quality standards for 
the design, conduct, recording, and reporting of clinical research involving the 
participation of human subjects and provides public assurance that the rights, 
safety, and well-being of research subjects are protected.
AUTHORIZATION AND INFORMED CONSENT
In regards to clinical research an authorization is different than informed con-
sent. An authorization is an individual’s permission for a covered entity to 
use or disclose PHI for a specific purpose (e.g., a research study). Informed 
consent, on the other hand, is the individual’s permission to participate in the 
research study. An authorization is required to contain specific elements and 
required statements in accordance with the Privacy Rule.
These elements and statements include:
j	 A description of the PHI to be used or disclosed, identifying the 
information in a specific and meaningful manner.
j	 The names or other specific identification of the person or persons (or 
class of persons) authorized to make the requested use or disclosure.
j	 The names or other specific identification of the person or persons (or 
class of persons) to whom the covered entity may make the requested 
use or disclosure.
j	 A description of each purpose of the requested use or disclosure.

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
18
j	 Authorization expiration date or expiration event that relates to 
the individual or to the purpose of the use or disclosure (“end of the 
research study” or “none” is permissible for research, including for 
the creation and maintenance of a research database or repository).
j	 Signature of the individual and date – If the individual’s legally 
authorized representative signs the authorization, a description of the 
representative’s authority to act for the individual must also be provided.
INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARDS
All clinical research studies in the United States are reviewed by the FDA and 
governing bodies called institutional review boards (IRBs), whose job is to 
make sure participants’ rights are fully protected and that participants are not 
exposed to any unnecessary risks. An IRB is charged with protecting the rights 
and welfare of people involved in research. This is accomplished by making 
sure critical activities and industry best practices are being followed. Although 
a comprehensive discussion on clinical trial best practices is outside the scope 
of this discussion, healthcare organizations participating in this sector must 
recognize that a comprehensive program that is compliant with all applicable 
laws and regulations must be in place when performing clinical trials.
HEALTHCARE RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Proper healthcare records management is a critical part of today’s healthcare 
systems. As the healthcare industry strives for efficiency and automation, prop-
er management of healthcare records becomes increasingly important. Further-
more, effective healthcare records management programs support compliance 
with various legal and regulatory requirements. Although each ­organization 
will need to develop a program that meets its specific needs, two essential 
elements are generation and maintenance of records (including quality and 
access control, and management and distribution) and proper destruction of 
healthcare records. Healthcare record information must be properly managed 
and safeguarded from start (record generation) to finish (record destruction) and 
the entire time in between. Although each organization will need to comply 
with specific organizational, jurisdictional, and legal/regulatory data retention 
requirements, there are some industry best practices that should be followed 
around proper data destruction. According to the HHS, the HIPAA Privacy and 
Security Rules offer the following guidance on proper data destruction:
“Depending on the circumstances, proper disposal methods may include (but 
are not limited to):
j	 Shredding or otherwise destroying PHI in paper records so that the 
PHI is rendered essentially unreadable, indecipherable, and otherwise 

Understanding external third-party relationships
19
cannot be reconstructed prior to it being placed in a dumpster or other 
trash receptacle.
j	 Maintaining PHI for disposal in a secure area and using a disposal 
vendor as a business associate to pick up and shred or otherwise destroy 
the PHI.
j	 In justifiable cases, based on the size and the type of the covered entity, 
and the nature of the PHI, depositing PHI in locked dumpsters that are 
accessible only by authorized persons, such as appropriate refuse workers.
j	 For PHI on electronic media, clearing (using software or hardware 
products to overwrite media with non-sensitive data), purging 
(degaussing or exposing the media to a strong magnetic field in order 
to disrupt the recorded magnetic domains), or destroying the media 
(disintegration, pulverization, melting, incinerating, or shredding).”
DATA SHARING
Healthcare organizations must note that under HIPAA’s transaction, privacy, 
and security rules, when sharing protected health information, it should be 
properly safeguarded. Each of the HIPAA transactions, privacy, and security 
rules also references agreements or contracts among organizational entities. 
According to the American Health Information Management Association 
(AHIMA), “The HIPAA transactions, security, and privacy regulations identify 
five agreements and relationships that can be established between healthcare 
entities to achieve economies of scale and lessen HIPAA’s administrative bur-
den. They are:
j	 Affiliated covered entity (ACE)
j	 Business associate contract
j	 Chain of trust agreement
j	 Data use agreement
j	 Organized healthcare arrangement (OHCA)
j	 Trading partner agreement”
UNDERSTANDING EXTERNAL THIRD-PARTY 
RELATIONSHIPS
In order for healthcare organizations to deliver quality care, at a low cost, and 
efficiently, they must often work with external organizations to achieve their 
healthcare delivery goals. The specifics of each relationship vary among individ-
ual healthcare organizations and their selected third-party partners. If a vendor 
receives PHI from a healthcare organization, the vendor is considered a ­business 
partner. The term business partner is formally defined under HIPAA, and all 
business partners of a healthcare organization must agree in writing to certain 

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
20
mandatory provisions regarding the proper safeguarding, use, and disclosure of 
protected health information. Healthcare organizations must take note that the 
HIPAA Transaction Rule describes the use of a Trading Partner Agreement.
The Trading Partner Agreement specifies various technical requirements for 
communications protocols, such as:
j	 How the transactions are to be addressed
j	 What character set must be used
j	 Whether receipt will be acknowledged
Although the Transaction Rule does not require a Trading Partner Agreement, 
if one is used, the rule specifies what may not be included in the agreement. 
The Trading Partner Agreement cannot:
j	 Change any definition, data condition, or use of a data element
j	 Add any data elements or segments to the maximum defined data set
j	 Require use of any codes or data elements that are marked “not used” 
or are not present in the implementation guide
j	 Change the meaning or intent of the standard’s implementation 
specification
INFORMATION FLOW AND LIFE CYCLE IN THE 
HEALTHCARE ENVIRONMENTS
Healthcare organizations create, receive, and distribute massive amounts of 
sensitive data that flow internally (e.g., within organizational boundaries and 
among its employees) and externally (e.g., with third-party relationships) in the 
delivery and management of modern healthcare services. This information flow 
will vary among healthcare organizations based on the type, size, and healthcare 
services that are delivered. There are a number of technologies and strategies that 
organizations can deploy to address their specific operating, ­business, and regu-
latory requirements. Although a detailed discussion is outside the scope of this 
book, and it is the responsibility of each individual organization to select tech-
nology solutions that meet their needs, there are some common considerations 
that all organizations need to consider when addressing information flow and 
life cycle within their specific operating environment. The common consider-
ations often include information flow and data mapping, security and privacy 
issues, data quality, data management and retention, and data destruction.
HEALTH DATA CHARACTERIZATION
Since most healthcare organizations have a tremendous amount of data, much 
of which is PHI, they face many data management challenges on the daily ba-
sis. In order to properly protect and manage data, they should be characterized 

Data analytics
21
by the organization. Data characterization is best considered an umbrella term 
that encompasses the following:
j	 Classification – Labels similar data types into groups based on 
sensitivity level (e.g., confidential, public use) allowing for consistency 
and proper data handling across the organization.
j	 Taxonomy – Is a hierarchical organizational system that structures data 
into categories and subcategories. It is used to simplify vocabulary and 
avoid confusion since it becomes a commonly understood and agreed-
upon classification.
j	 Analytics – Various scientific and mathematically based processes that 
can support data management in a healthcare organization.
HEALTHCARE PROVIDER TAXONOMY CODES
The National Uniform Claim Committee (NUCC) for standardized classifi-
cation of healthcare providers maintains the Healthcare Provider Taxonomy 
Codes (HPTCs).
The NUCC updates the code set twice a year with changes effective April 1 and 
October 1. The CMS in partnership with the NUCC maintains the following 
code lists:
j	 Health Care Code Lists:
j	 Claim Adjustment Reason Codes (CARC)
j	 Remittance Advice Remark Codes (RARC)
j	 Claim Status Category Codes
j	 Claim Status Codes
j	 Health Care Service Type Codes
j	 Health Care Services Decision Reason Codes
j	 HPTCs
j	 Provider Characteristics Codes
j	 Insurance Business Process Application Error Codes
j	 Health Insurance Exchange Code Lists:
j	 Payment-type codes
j	 Report-type codes
DATA ANALYTICS
Industry experts have not agreed upon the exact definition of data analyt-
ics. The ever-changing technology, industry-specific uses, and organizational 
­nuances add to the challenge of a universal definition. However, most orga-
nizations agree that data analytics involves the collection, processing, and 
scientific or mathematical analysis of the organization’s business intelligence 

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
22
(information generated from its systems and applications). The output of this 
information can be used by organizations in a variety of ways. Additionally, 
there are several common types of analytics and methodologies (e.g., statisti-
cal, contextual, quantitative, predictive) and a detailed review is outside the 
scope of this discussion. However, regardless of the definition or methodology 
selected, organizations find tremendous value in adopting data analytics. The 
adoption of such programs leads to greater efficiency, improved organizational 
knowledge, and increased business value. For healthcare organizations this can 
mean anything from the analysis of business services (e.g., how many new 
patients joined our service through social media recommendations) to clini-
cal research (e.g., which medicines were most effective for treating a particular 
disease). It is important to note that healthcare organizations must properly 
safeguard any patient health information used or generated in analytics.
DATA INTEROPERABILITY AND EXCHANGE
According to the HIMSS, “Interoperability is the ability of different informa-
tion technology systems and software applications to communicate, exchange 
data, and use the information that has been exchanged. Data exchange schema 
and standards should permit data to be shared across clinicians, lab, hospital, 
pharmacy, and patient regardless of the application or application vendor.” 
HIMSS continues to explain that there are three levels of HIT interoperability. 
It defines the levels as:
j	 Foundational – Interoperability allows data exchange from one 
information technology system to be received by another and does not 
require the ability for the receiving information technology system to 
interpret the data.
j	 Structural – Interoperability is an intermediate level that defines 
the structure or format of data exchange (i.e., the message format 
standards) where there is uniform movement of healthcare data from 
one system to another such that the clinical or operational purpose 
and meaning of the data is preserved and unaltered. Structural 
interoperability defines the syntax of the data exchange. It ensures 
that data exchanges between information technology systems can be 
interpreted at the data field level.
j	 Semantic – Interoperability provides interoperability at the highest 
level, which is the ability of two or more systems or elements to 
exchange information and to use the information that has been 
exchanged. Semantic interoperability takes advantage of both the 
structuring of the data exchange and the codification of the data 
including vocabulary so that the receiving information technology 
systems can interpret the data. This level of interoperability supports the 

Legal medical records
23
electronic exchange of patient summary information among caregivers 
and other authorized parties via potentially disparate EHR systems and 
other systems to improve quality, safety, efficiency, and efficacy of 
healthcare delivery.
INTEGRATING THE HEALTHCARE ENTERPRISE
According to the Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) website, IHE “Is 
an initiative by health care professionals and industry to improve the way com-
puter systems in health care share information. IHE promotes the coordinated 
use of established standards such as DICOM and HL7 to address specific clini-
cal needs in support of optimal patient care. Systems developed in accordance 
with IHE communicate with one another better, are easier to implement, and 
enable care providers to use information more effectively.”
HEALTH LEVEL SEVEN INTERNATIONAL
According to the Health Level Seven International (HL7) website, “Health Lev-
el Seven International (HL7) is a not-for-profit, ANSI-accredited standards de-
veloping organization dedicated to providing a comprehensive framework and 
related standards for the exchange, integration, sharing, and retrieval of elec-
tronic health information that supports clinical practice and the management, 
delivery, and evaluation of health services.” Since HL7 utilizes open system 
architecture, any healthcare organization adopting HL7 standards can interface 
with any other organization, system, or application also using HL7.
DIGITAL IMAGING AND COMMUNICATIONS  
IN MEDICINE (DICOM)
According to the Association of Electrical Equipment and Medical Imaging 
Manufacturers, DICOM is “The international standard for medical images and 
related information (ISO 12052). It defines the formats for medical images 
that can be exchanged with the data and quality necessary for clinical use. 
DICOM is implemented in almost every radiology, cardiology imaging, and 
radiotherapy device (X-ray, CT, MRI, ultrasound, etc.), and increasingly in de-
vices in other medical domains such as ophthalmology and dentistry.”
LEGAL MEDICAL RECORDS
According to the HIMSS, “Healthcare organizations across the country recog-
nize the benefits of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) to improve care, reduce 
costs, and improve efficiency.” However, organizations must also recognize the 

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
24
legal implications of the EHR. An organization’s healthcare records must meet 
all statutory, regulatory, and professional requirements for both clinical and 
business purposes. HIMSS recommends, “EHR selection criteria must include 
ensuring that a given EHR is appropriately designed and can be appropriately 
used to ensure adherence to federal and state rules, as well as institutional 
requirements and additional certification standards that may apply to their or-
ganization.” Although the specifics will vary among individual organizations, 
HIMSS suggests the following policy elements be included by healthcare orga-
nizations when addressing the legal elements of EHRs:
j	 Unique health record created and maintained for each patient
j	 Content requirements including author, date, time, and authentication
j	 Access, privacy, confidentiality, and security policies
j	 Policies and procedures for amendments, corrections, timeliness, 
completeness, and late entries
j	 Policies and procedures for forms, templates, and voice recognition and 
dictation
j	 Policies and procedures for records retention, records archiving 
and destruction, coding and abstracting, data quality management, and 
reporting
DEFINITIONS
Term
Definition
Affiliated Covered Entity (ACE)
Legally separate covered entities that are affiliated 
may designate themselves as a single covered 
entity for purposes of the HIPAA Privacy Rule
Ambulatory Patient Groups (APG)
Encompass a full range of ambulatory settings 
and designed to explain the amount and type of 
resources used in an ambulatory visit
Authorization
Authorization is an individual’s permission for a 
covered entity to use or disclose PHI for a certain 
purpose, such as a research study
Catastrophic health insurance plan
A catastrophic health insurance plan covers 
­essential health benefits but has a very high 
­deductible. This means it provides a kind of 
“safety net” coverage in case the patient has an 
accident or serious illness
Chain of Trust Agreement
The Chain of Trust Agreement is described 
as a contract in which the parties agree to 
­electronically exchange data and to protect the 
transmitted data
Covered entity
A HIPAA covered entity is any organization or 
corporation that directly handles personal health 
information (PHI) or personal health records 
(PHRs)

Definitions
25
Term
Definition
Diagnosis-Related Groups (DRG)
Payment approach that focuses on inpatient 
­hospitalizations, setting a price based on 
­categories of illness
Digital Imaging and Communications 
in Medicine (DICOM)
DICOM is the international standard for ­medical 
images and related information (ISO 12052). 
It defines the formats for medical images that 
can be exchanged with the data and quality 
­necessary for clinical use
Electronic data interchange (EDI)
Electronic data interchange
Electronic Health Records (EHR)
EHRs are electronic systems that store a patient’s 
health information, such as the patient’s history 
of diseases and which medications the patient 
is taking. They allow doctors to easily keep track 
of patients’ health information and may enable 
them to access patients’ information when a 
patient has a problem even if their doctor’s office 
is closed
Exclusive provider organizations 
(EPOs)
EPOs are similar to PPOs except that patients 
will only be reimbursed for healthcare services 
provided within the network
Good Clinical Research Practice 
(GCP)
GCP is a process that incorporates established 
ethical and scientific quality standards for the 
­design, conduct, recording, and reporting of 
clinical research involving the participation of 
human subjects. Compliance with GCP provides 
public assurance that the rights, safety, and 
­well-being of research subjects are protected 
and respected and ensures the integrity of 
­clinical research data
Healthcare clearinghouse
Organizations that process nonstandard data 
elements of health information into standard data 
elements
Health Information Technology (HIT)
The exchange of health information in an 
­electronic environment
Health Level Seven International 
(HL7)
HL7 is a not-for-profit, ANSI-accredited ­standards 
developing organization dedicated to ­providing a 
comprehensive framework and related ­standards 
for the exchange, integration, sharing, and 
­retrieval of electronic health information that 
supports clinical practice and the management, 
delivery, and evaluation of health services
Health Maintenance Organization 
(HMO)
Patient pays a set premium and is entitled 
­services included in the benefit offering. Patients 
must see a primary care physician within the 
HMO, and are required to obtain a referral for 
specialists and additional healthcare services not 
included in the HMO’s primary offering
High-deductible health plans 
(HDHPs)
HDHPs are plans with high deductibles, but these 
are balanced with very low premiums

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
26
Term
Definition
Indemnity plan
Patient selects healthcare provider of their choice. 
The service provider submits a claim to the 
­patient’s insurance for services rendered
Legal medical record
An organization’s healthcare records must meet 
all statutory, regulatory, and professional require-
ments for both clinical and business purposes
Medicaid
U.S. government insurance program that 
­provides insurance for the poor
Medical device
An article, instrument, apparatus, or machine 
that is used in the prevention, diagnosis, or 
treatment of illness or disease, or for detecting, 
measuring, restoring, correcting, or modifying the 
structure or function of the body for some health 
purpose
Medicare
U.S. government insurance program that 
­provides insurance for the elderly
National Uniform Billing Committee 
(NUBC)
A voluntary committee whose work is 
­coordinated through the offices of the ­American 
Hospital ­Association (AHA) and includes 
­participation of all the major national provider and 
payer ­organizations
Payer
Refers to entities other than the patient that 
finance or reimburse the cost of healthcare 
services
Personal health records
An electronic application used by patients to 
maintain and manage their health information in a 
private, secure, and confidential environment
Point-of-service plan
A POS is a hybrid between an HMO and a PPO
Preferred provider organization (PPO)
A PPO can be considered a hybrid of an 
­indemnity plan and an HMO. Patients can select 
a healthcare provider of their choice, as long as 
it is within PPO network. Some PPOs will allow 
patients to select service outside of the network, 
but will usually only reimburse patients for a 
smaller percentage than if they had stayed within 
the network
Reimbursement
Reimbursement is being repaid or compensated 
for expenses already incurred or, as in the case 
of healthcare, for services that have already been 
provided
Resource Utilization Groups (RUGs)
Each facility is paid a daily rate based on the 
needs of individual Medicare patients, with an 
adjustment for local labor cost
Taxonomy
A hierarchical organizational system that struc-
tures data into categories and subcategories. It is 
used to simplify vocabulary and avoid confusion 
since it becomes a commonly understood and 
agreed-upon classification

Definitions
27
Practice Exam
1.	 A healthcare provider is:
a.	 A provider of medical or health services in the normal course of 
business
b.	 Synonymous with a covered entity under HIPAA
c.	 Any organization or corporation that directly handles PHI
d.	 None of the above
2.	 A covered entity is:
a.	 A provider of medical or health services in the normal course of business
b.	 Synonymous with a healthcare provider under HIPAA
c.	 Any organization or corporation that directly handles PHI
d.	 None of the above
3.	 EDI is:
a.	 Electric data interchange
b.	 Electronic dental interchange
c.	 Electronic data interchange
d.	 Electronic data import
4.	 Business associates:
a.	 Provide medical services
b.	 Provide support services to medical providers
c.	 Are not required to comply with HIPAA
d.	 Both b and c
5.	 HIT is an acronym for:
a.	 Healthcare information technician
b.	 Health information technology
c.	 Healthcare information technology
d.	 Health information technician
6.	 Medical devices are classified into:
a.	 Three regulatory categories
b.	 Six regulatory categories
c.	 One regulatory category
d.	 None of the above
7.	 An EHR is:
a.	 An electronic health record
b.	 Different from a personal health record
c.	 Synonymous with a personal health record
d.	 Both a and b
8.	 Meaningful use is:
a.	 A major driver of health information technology
b.	 Optional for smaller organizations
c.	 Only beneficial for healthcare organizations
d.	 None of the above

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
28
9.	The two basic types of health insurance are:
a.	 PPO and POS
b.	 Medicare and Medicaid
c.	 Public and private
d.	 HMO and PPO
10.	Healthcare coding is:
a.	 Essential to the transactional aspect of healthcare delivery
b.	 Required under HIPAA
c.	 Only important to large healthcare organizations who use third-party billing 
services
d.	 Both a and b
11.	HCPCS is an acronym for:
a.	 Healthcare Communication Procedure Coding System
b.	 Healthcare Common Procedure Communication System
c.	 Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System
d.	 None of the above
12.	SNOMED CT is an acronym for:
a.	 Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms
b.	 Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clerical Terms
c.	 Systematized Naming of Medical Clinical Terms
d.	 None of the above
13.	TCS is an acronym for:
a.	 Transactions and Code Sets
b.	 Technology and Code Sets
c.	 Transfer and Code Sets
d.	 None of the above
14.	SNOWMED CT often includes:
a.	 Diagnosis-Related Groups (DRGs)
b.	 Ambulatory Patient Groups (APGs)
c.	 Resource Utilization Groups (RUGs)
d.	 All of the above
15.	The National Uniform Billing Committee:
a.	 Is a voluntary committee
b.	 Is coordinated through the American Hospital Association
c.	 Manages standards for uniform billing
d.	 All of the above
16.	A healthcare clearinghouse:
a.	 Provides patient care
b.	 Only processes Medicare and Medicaid claims
c.	 Only processes private insurance claims
d.	 None of the above

Definitions
29
17.	Public Health Reporting Regulations:
a.	 Are addressed under HIPAA
b.	 Require patient authorization
c.	 Only apply to public health insurance programs
d.	 None of the above
18.	Health records management:
a.	 Is important from beginning to end of the health record
b.	 Addresses data and quality management
c.	 Addresses record destruction
d.	 All of the above
19.	Data characterization includes:
a.	 Classification
b.	 Taxonomy
c.	 Analytics
d.	 All of the above
20.	DICOM is an acronym for:
a.	 Digital Imaging and Compliance in Medicine
b.	 Digital Integrity and Communications in Medicine
c.	 Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine
d.	 Direct Imaging and Communications in Medicine
Practice Exam Answers
  1.	 a
  2.	 c
  3.	 c
  4.	 d
  5.	 b
  6.	 a
  7.	 d
  8.	 a
  9.	 c
10.	 d
11.	 c
12.	 a
13.	 a
14.	 d
15.	 d
16.	 d
17.	 a
18.	 d
19.	 a
20.	 a

CHAPTER 2: 
Healthcare Industry
30
References
http://www.hhs.gov/.
http://www.minnesotamedicine.com/Past-Issues/Past-Issues-2011/February-2011/Five-Payment-
Models-The-Pros-the-Cons.
http://www.himss.org/library/ehr/.
http://www.healthit.gov/providers-professionals/faqs/what-personal-health-record.
https://nppes.cms.hhs.gov/NPPES/NPIRegistryHome.do.
https://www.healthcare.gov/glossary/health-insurance/.
http://www.who.int/medical_devices/definitions/en/.
http://www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/overview/classifyyourdevice/
default.htm.
http://www.healthit.gov/policy-researchers-implementers/meaningful-use-regulations.
http://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/payer.
http://aspe.hhs.gov/admnsimp/final/txfin00.htm.
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/HIPAA-Administrative-Simplification/­
TransactionCodeSetsStands/index.html?redirect=/transactioncodesetsstands/02_transaction-
sandcodesetsregulations.asp.
https://www.healthcare.gov/get-covered-a-1-page-guide-to-the-health-insurance-marketplace/.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/special/healthit/.
https://www.healthcare.gov/what-are-the-different-types-of-health-insurance/.
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/MedHCPCSGenInfo/index.html?redirect=/medhcpcsgeninfo/.
http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/.
http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/physician-resources/solutions-managing-your-practice/­
coding-billing-insurance/cpt/about-cpt.page?
http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/.
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/HIPAA-Administrative-Simplification/­
TransactionCodeSetsStands/index.html?redirect=/transactioncodesetsstands/02_transaction-
sandcodesetsregulations.asp.
http://www.x12.org/.
http://www.nubc.org/aboutus/index.dhtml.
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/HIPAA-Administrative-Simplification/­
HIPAAGenInfo/Downloads/CoveredEntitycharts.pdf.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/special/publichealth/.
http://apps.who.int/prequal/info_general/documents/GCP/GCP_handbook.pdf.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/special/research/research.pdf.
http://www.phrma.org/sites/default/files/pdf/042009_clinical_trial_principles_final.pdf.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/enforcement/examples/disposalfaqs.pdf.
http://library.ahima.org/xpedio/groups/public/documents/ahima/bok1_014066.
hcsp?dDocName=bok1_014066.
http://www.wpc-edi.com/reference/.
http://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/analytics/.
http://www.hl7.org/.

Definitions
31
http://medical.nema.org/Dicom/about-DICOM.html.
http://www.himss.org/library/interoperability-standards/what-is.
http://www.ihe.net/.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/securityrulepdf.pdf.
http://www.himss.org/files/HIMSSorg/content/files/LegalEMR_Flyer3.pdf.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/consumers/medicalrecords.html.

33
HCISPP Study Guide
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Regulatory Environment
CHAPTER 3
  
THIS CHAPTER WILL HELP CANDIDATES:
j	 Understand the legal and regulatory environment for health information
j	 Understand healthcare-related security and privacy frameworks
j	 Understand regulatory requirements and controls
j	 Understand code of conduct and ethics in a healthcare information 
environment
LEGAL ISSUES THAT PERTAIN TO INFORMATION 
SECURITY AND PRIVACY FOR HEALTHCARE 
ORGANIZATIONS
Under the wide array of legal issues, healthcare organizations face several chal-
lenges around information security and privacy. In addition to there being 
high-level governance frameworks, many of the specific security and privacy 
requirements impact the operations of healthcare organizations. Although all 
healthcare organization employees have the responsibility for properly safe-
guarding healthcare information, security, and privacy, professionals are at 
the forefront of compliance with legal and regulatory requirements associated 
with healthcare delivery.
HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND 
ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 1996 (HIPAA)
In the United States, one of the most important healthcare laws is HIPAA. 
According to the Office for Civil Rights, “The Office for Civil Rights enforces 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule, which protects the privacy of individually identifiable 
health information; the HIPAA Security Rule, which sets national standards 
for the security of electronic protected health information; the HIPAA Breach 
Notification Rule, which requires covered entities and business associates to 

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
34
provide notification following a breach of unsecured protected health infor-
mation; and the confidentiality provisions of the Patient Safety Rule, which 
protect identifiable information being used to analyze patient safety events 
and improve patient safety.” Although HIPAA contains several legislative man-
dates, the most relevant section to information security is the Administrative 
Simplification section. This section includes the standards for privacy, security, 
and enforcement. Figure 3.1 shows the relationship between the various ele-
ments of HIPAA.
SELECT ELEMENTS AND DEFINITIONS
As stated earlier, HIPAA has several elements and covers a number of issues 
that healthcare organizations must comply with. However, for exam prepara-
tion purposes we would like to highlight some select elements and definitions 
from HIPAA. According to the HIPAA, Public Law 104-191 (August 21, 1996), 
Subtitle F Administrative Simplification, Part C, Section 1171, the term “health 
information” means any information, whether oral or recorded in any form or 
medium, that:
1.	 Is created or received by a health care provider, health plan, public 
health authority, employer, life insurer, school or university, or health 
care clearinghouse; and
2.	 Relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental health 
or condition of an individual; the provision of health care to an 
individual; or the past, present, or future payment for the provision of 
health care to an individual.
FIGURE 3.1 Elements of HIPAA.

The american recovery and reinvestment act (ARRA) of 2009
35
Individually identifiable health information is information that is a subset of 
health information, including demographic information collected from an in-
dividual, and:
1.	 Is created or received by a health care provider, health plan, employer, 
or health care clearinghouse; and
2.	 Relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental health 
or condition of an individual; the provision of health care to an 
individual; or the past, present, or future payment for the provision of 
health care to an individual; and:
a.	 That identifies the individual; or
b.	 With respect to which there is a reasonable basis to believe the 
information can be used to identify the individual.
Additionally, protected health information is defined by 45 CFR 160.103, and, 
as defined, is referenced in Section 13400 of Subtitle D (“Privacy”) of the Health 
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act).
“Protected health information means individually identifiable health informa-
tion [defined above]:
(1)	 Except as provided in paragraph
(2)	 of this definition, that is:
(i)	 Transmitted by electronic media;
(ii)	 Maintained in electronic media; or
(iii)	 Transmitted or maintained in any other form or medium.
(2)	 Protected health information excludes individually identifiable health 
information in:
(i)	 Education records covered by the Family Educational Rights and 
Privacy Act, as amended, 20 U.S.C. 1232g;
(ii)	 Records described at 20 U.S.C. 1232g(a)(4)(B)(iv); and
(iii)	 Employment records held by a covered entity in its role as 
employer.”
THE AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT 
(ARRA) OF 2009
The ARRA of 2009 was enacted to provide stimulus and recovery mechanisms in 
response to the great recession. Although there are many elements to ARRA, most 
of which are outside the scope of this book, we focus our discussions on select 
healthcare domains, specifically the HITECH Act and amendments to HIPAA.
The most significant changes to HIPAA now include:
j	 The final Breach Notification Rule
j	 Updates to business associate responsibilities

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
36
j	 Expansion of the penalty consequences
j	 Investigative authority for potential violations to the Attorney General 
of each state
With these changes to HIPAA, healthcare organizations were required to ex-
pand and enforce their own privacy and security structures as well as expand 
the controls to their business relationships and partners with whom they share 
healthcare information.
According to the Office for Civil Rights, “The Health Information Technology for 
Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, enacted as part of the ­American 
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, was signed into law on ­February 17, 
2009, to promote the adoption and meaningful use of health information tech-
nology. Subtitle D of the HITECH Act addresses the privacy and security con-
cerns associated with the electronic transmission of health information, in part, 
through several provisions that strengthen the civil and criminal enforcement of 
the HIPAA rules.” Figure 3.2 demonstrates the relationship between HITECH Act 
and HIPAA privacy and security rules. Specifically, they work together to ensure 
privacy and security concerns are properly addressed as healthcare organizations 
adopt and extend the meaningful use of health information technology (IT).
INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS
When looking outside of U.S. boundaries, many international healthcare or-
ganizations face similar legal and regulatory challenges. Several countries are 
developing or adhering to regulations that require the protection of personally 
identifiable information used by healthcare organizations. Some of the more 
common laws and regulations include:
j	 Canada’s Personal Information Protection and Electronic 
Documents Act (PIPEDA) – Sets out ground rules for how private 
sector organizations may collect, use, or disclose personal information 
in the course of commercial activities.
FIGURE 3.2 Relationship between HITECH and HIPAA.

Organizational-level privacy and security requirements
37
j	 European Commission Data Protection Legislation – Various 
legislation, documents, and guidance on the protection of personal 
data within the European Union.
j	 UK Data Protection Act 1998 – Controls how organizations, 
businesses, or the government uses your personal information.
A CULTURE OF PRIVACY AND SECURITY
It is important to remember that employees take their cues from the organiza-
tion’s senior leadership. When senior leaders place importance on proactive se-
curity and privacy programs, healthcare organizations can properly safeguard 
the personal health information (PHI) entrusted to them by the patients they 
serve. This “tone at the top” not only enables the right attitude when deliver-
ing patient care services but also ensures that privacy and security profession-
als have the resources they need. Although it is important to remember that 
every employee at a healthcare organization is responsible for safeguarding 
PHI, privacy and security professionals are charged with the protection of PHI 
on a daily basis. Although there can be subtle differences between the spe-
cific roles of privacy and security professionals, we think it is best to focus on 
the intent and key principles needed to support effective privacy and security 
programs and leave organizational structure and job roles to be managed by 
individual healthcare organizations. Both privacy and security efforts should 
be thoroughly documented in policies, procedures, and standards within the 
organization. Additionally, those efforts need to be supported by the organiza-
tion’s senior leadership.
ORGANIZATIONAL-LEVEL PRIVACY AND SECURITY 
REQUIREMENTS
Many organizations find it is best to focus on the successful implementation 
and management of comprehensive privacy and security programs based on 
industry best practices. A majority of the time, doing so complies with most 
specific regulatory or legal requirements and provides greater program effi-
ciency as opposed to chasing various fragmented regulatory requirements as 
disparate compliance activities. Some of the key privacy and security principles 
organizations should focus on include the following:
j	 The PHI must be collected by an organization for a specific purpose and 
used only for that purpose.
j	 PHI must be kept isolated from any persons who are not authorized by 
the organization or the original data owner.
j	 The information must be deleted at an appropriate time (i.e., when no 
longer needed for its intended purpose).

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
38
DATA BREACH REGULATIONS
Unfortunately, even with all of a healthcare organization’s privacy and security 
controls in place, there is a good chance a data breach will occur. Organizations 
are obligated to take certain steps when a data breach has been ­believed to oc-
cur. Understanding the definition of a data breach and the required steps after a 
breach is critical for healthcare organizations. This knowledge and understand-
ing enables compliance with various regulatory and legal requirements. Accord-
ing to the U.S. Health and Human Services Office for Civil Rights, “A breach is, 
generally, an impermissible use or disclosure under the Privacy Rule that com-
promises the security or privacy of the protected health information. An imper-
missible use or disclosure of protected health information is presumed to be a 
breach unless the covered entity or business associate, as applicable, demon-
strates that there is a low probability that the protected health information has 
been compromised based on a risk assessment of at least the following factors:
1.	 The nature and extent of the protected health information involved, 
including the types of identifiers and the likelihood of re-identification;
2.	 The unauthorized person who used the protected health information or 
to whom the disclosure was made;
3.	 Whether the protected health information was actually acquired or 
viewed; and
4.	 The extent to which the risk to the protected health information has 
been mitigated.”
In addition to understanding how data breaches are defined, healthcare orga-
nizations must also understand their reporting responsibilities. Specifically, the 
Office for Civil Rights declares that “The HIPAA Breach Notification Rule, 45 
CFR §§ 164.400-414, requires HIPAA covered entities and their business associ-
ates to provide notification following a breach of unsecured protected health 
information. Similar breach notification provisions implemented and enforced 
by the Federal Trade Commission apply to vendors of personal health records 
and their third party service providers, pursuant to section 13407 of the HITECH 
Act.” From an operational perspective, this means that organizations must have 
policies and procedures in place to detect and respond to data breaches and 
have the capabilities for proper notification in accordance with industry best 
practices and in adherence with legal and regulatory requirements.
PENALTIES AND FEES
Healthcare organizations should not only focus on proactive measures to 
avoid privacy and security problems but also need to understand the conse-
quences of not having effective privacy and security programs and noncompli-
ance with regulatory requirements. Many legal and regulatory requirements 
have specific penalties and fines for noncompliance. One stringent example 

Information flow mapping
39
is ARRA of 2009, which included updates to HIPAA and increased the penalties 
for unauthorized disclosure of PHI. Fines can be levied up to $1.5 million per 
annum. ­Figure 3.3 from the Federal Register (Vol. 74, No. 209, Friday, October 
30, 2009) depicts the specific penalties.
45 CFR 164.514: HIPAA PRIVACY RULE (THE 
DE-IDENTIFICATION STANDARD AND ITS TWO 
IMPLEMENTATION SPECIFICATIONS)
As part of understanding and complying with the HIPAA Privacy Rule, care-
ful consideration must be given to data de-identification and the associated 
implementation specifications. The focus of this chapter is on the healthcare 
regulatory environment and at this point in the exam preparation process, 
it is only important to note that there are 18 personal data identifiers and 
the standard requires that data be de-identified following the 2-implementa-
tion specifications. Additional, specific information on the 18 personal data 
identifiers and the implementation standards are discussed in Chapter 4.
In common practice, the list of the 18 personal data identifiers helps orga-
nizations understand that if a document or set of information contains any 
of these characteristics or combinations of personal data identifiers, about an 
individual or a number of individuals, then that set of information should be 
considered PHI and protected accordingly.
INFORMATION FLOW MAPPING
Given the inordinate and ever-growing amount of data most healthcare orga-
nizations have in their possession, managing data and information flows is of 
the utmost importance. This often proves to be challenging for many healthcare 
organizations given the volume and types of data within their environment. 
Specifically, organizations need to determine what data are considered PHI 
and where they are located on their infrastructure, which commonly includes 
servers, storage, and endpoint devices. Unfortunately, many data breaches oc-
cur when organizations do not properly identify the entire range of PHI that 
flows through their environment and therefore cannot implement the appro-
priate safeguards. Ignorance of where PHI is located within an organization’s 
FIGURE 3.3 HIPAA violation and corresponding penalties.

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
40
boundaries does not exonerate the organization from legal and regulatory 
compliance. This is why information flow mapping is critical to healthcare 
organizations protecting PHI in their possession.
MONITORING PHI INFORMATION FLOWS
After a healthcare organization identifies PHI and implements appropriate 
safeguards, they must also continuously monitor the information flow and 
access to the information, and report any breaches if the information is inap-
propriately accessed or otherwise compromised. For many organizations this 
means the need to institute information security practices and associated tech-
nology that can identify and protect the stored PHI, control access to the PHI, 
and manage the information flow inside and outside the organization’s physi-
cal, logical, and legal boundaries.
JURISDICTIONAL IMPLICATIONS
In addition to organizations needing to understand the relationship that PHI 
has within their physical, logical, and legal boundaries, they must also be 
aware of any jurisdictional issues. Healthcare organizations in today’s digital-
ly connected world have many external, but interconnected business relation-
ships associated with their healthcare delivery services. This requires health-
care organizations to be aware of any data sharing issues, particularly when 
transacting with other organizations across local, state, national, or interna-
tional boundaries. Understanding the jurisdictional implications of sharing 
data from one organization to another ahead of time is essential so that each 
organization can understand any liabilities and responsibilities involved in 
the exchange of healthcare information. However, understanding is just the 
first step, and healthcare entities must implement the appropriate privacy and 
safeguards.
DATA USE AND RECIPROCAL SUPPORT  
AGREEMENT (DURSA)
The DURSA is a common data sharing agreement that enables healthcare or-
ganizations to share information. Prior to the development of DURSA, many 
organizations struggled with sharing information due to the lack of uniform 
standards across various state and local healthcare privacy and security laws. 
The Office of the National Coordinator for Health IT developed the DURSA 
for organizations participating in electronic health information exchanges 
(HIEs). It was built upon the legal requirements of the participants and seeks 
to provide a framework that insures protection for health information during 

Legislative and regulatory updates
41
exchanges. The Agreement reflects consensus among the state-level, federal-
level, and private entities regarding the following issues:
j	 Multiparty agreement
j	 Participants actively engaged in HIE
j	 Privacy and security obligations
j	 Requests for information based on a permitted purpose
j	 Duty to respond
j	 Future use of data received from another participant
j	 Respective duties of submitting and receiving participants
j	 Autonomy principle for access
j	 Use of authorizations to support requests for data
j	 Participant breach notification
j	 Mandatory nonbinding dispute resolution
j	 Allocation of liability risk
DATA SUBJECTS
The specific data elements of human subjects commonly contained in PHI 
entrusted to healthcare organizations are extremely valuable. These data have 
tremendous value on the black market and are therefore highly valued and 
targeted by cybercriminals. With the ubiquitous nature of today’s PHI being 
made available electronically, organizations find themselves as primary targets 
and face an ever-increasing amount of cyber attacks.
DATA OWNERSHIP
Although a patient is the ultimate owner of their personal healthcare informa-
tion, there are many individuals (e.g., controllers, custodians, processors) within 
a healthcare organization who collectively have responsibilities for protecting PHI 
and act on the owner’s behalf. Any sharing of PHI that is in possession of a health-
care organization must be done with appropriate consent. Additionally, even if the 
patient is not currently receiving treatment or is otherwise a current patient of the 
provider, the healthcare organization is still responsible for safeguarding the PHI.
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY UPDATES
Since the legal and regulatory environments are constantly changing with vari-
ous updates to address constant changes in society, technology, and healthcare, 
organizations must stay abreast of changes and revise their policies, procedures, 
and operations to remain compliant and in good standing. It is important to 
know that organizations are also responsible for providing training and aware-
ness on said changes to ensure that all of the employees are compliant with the 
most up-to-date legal and regulatory requirements when delivering healthcare.

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
42
TREATIES
With an increase in globalization, countries are often compelled by businesses 
and healthcare organizations to find ways to conduct business despite country-
specific legal and regulatory requirements. To accomplish such undertakings, 
countries collaborate on international agreements to address any of the differ-
ences in how PHI is used and protected. Additionally, there are many country-
specific requirements, and sometimes organizations will create legal agree-
ments that exclusively govern the partnerships and exchanges between two 
specific organizations. Therefore, it is best for each organization to be aware of 
their specific requirements and create agreements accordingly. However, there 
are other instances where healthcare organizations need to be aware of broader 
privacy and security agreements, such as Safe Harbor.
International Safe Harbor Principles
The U.S.–EU Safe Harbor is an agreed-upon process that enables U.S. com-
panies to comply with the EU Directive 95/46/EC (the protection of personal 
data). Organizations operating in the European Union cannot send personal 
data outside of the European Economic Area (EEA) unless the organizations 
outside of the EEA are compliant with the Safe Harbor Privacy Principles. The 
seven privacy principles include:
j	 Notice – Organizations must notify individuals about the purposes for 
the data collection.
j	 Choice – Organizations must give individuals the opportunity to 
choose (i.e., opt out and opt in – an affirmative choice is required when 
dealing with sensitive data) if their information is to be shared with a 
third party or used for purposes other than it was originally collected 
for.
j	 Onward transfer (transfers to third parties) – Prior to transfer 
organizations must follow the principles of notice and choice.
j	 Access – Individuals must have access to personal information about 
them that an organization holds and be able to correct, amend, or 
delete that information where it is inaccurate.
j	 Security – Organizations must take reasonable precautions to protect 
personal information from loss, misuse, and unauthorized access, 
disclosure, alteration, and destruction.
j	 Data integrity – An organization should take reasonable steps to ensure 
that data are reliable for their intended use, accurate, complete, and 
current.
j	 Enforcement – There must be (a) readily available and affordable 
independent recourse mechanisms so that each individual’s complaints 
and disputes can be investigated and resolved and damages awarded 

Policies, procedures, standards, and guidelines
43
where the applicable law or private sector initiatives so provide; (b) 
procedures for verifying that the commitments companies make to 
adhere to the Safe Harbor principles have been implemented; and (c) 
obligations to remedy problems arising out of a failure to comply with 
the principles.
INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC LAWS
There are several industry-specific laws and regulations that may also be ap-
plicable to a healthcare organization; many are out of scope for this discus-
sion and preparation for the HCISPP preparation. However, the following sec-
tion will review some of the more common compliance requirements facing 
today’s organizations. Having a basic familiarity of similar legal and privacy 
requirements facing most organizations is beneficial to healthcare organiza-
tions, particularly when considering their scope of compliance and ensuring 
safeguards can be applied to other compliance requirements. However, we rec-
ommend that each organization take the time to consider any additional laws 
at the local, state, or federal level that may be relevant to an organization’s spe-
cific business and operations models. Although not exhaustive, the following 
list highlights some of the more common legal and regulatory requirements 
facing today’s healthcare organizations beyond healthcare-specific regulatory 
requirements:
j	 Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSH Act) – Under the 
OSH Act, employers are responsible for providing a safe and healthful 
workplace.
j	 Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards (PCI DSS) – Provides 
an actionable framework for developing a robust payment card data 
security process, including prevention, detection, and appropriate 
reaction to security incidents.
j	 Sarbanes–Oxley Act (SOX) – The Act mandated a number of reforms 
to enhance corporate responsibility, enhance financial disclosures, 
and combat corporate and accounting fraud, and created the Public 
Company Accounting Oversight Board.
POLICIES, PROCEDURES, STANDARDS, AND GUIDELINES
At the surface, policies, procedures, standards, and guidelines sound syn-
onymous. However, there are distinct differences and organizations must 
understand these subtleties as well as manage the relationship among these 
governance tools in order to ensure a successful privacy and security program 
within a healthcare organization. In Figure 3.4 is given the relationship between 
each distinct governance document (e.g., policy, procedure).

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
44
Now that we understand the relationship between policies, standards, and 
guidelines and how they support an organization’s privacy and security pro-
gram, we can examine the specifics of each.
Policies
Policies are high-level formal documents that briefly state the organization’s 
perspective on a particular topic. Typically these are approved by senior man-
agement and help enforce the “tone at the top” for the organization. Since they 
are written at a high level, they focus on organizational objectives, rather than 
specific guidance on how to achieve said objectives.
Procedures
Procedures are the detailed sequential steps that are documented and inform 
the healthcare organization’s employees on how to perform specific actions. 
Since policies are written at a high level and only state what the organization is 
trying to accomplish, procedures are needed to tell employees how to specifi-
cally accomplish the organizational objectives.
Standards
A standard is a set of specifications that must be followed by the healthcare or-
ganization’s employees and typically addresses a system or technical configu-
ration. For example, the organization might have a standard for all employee 
laptops using the Microsoft Windows operating system. This would specify 
how the operating system and laptop are configured throughout the entire or-
ganization. Standards enable organizations to have consistency. Having orga-
nizational consistency supports policies and ensures that privacy and security 
objectives are achieved uniformly within the organization. Standards are not 
optional and are required throughout the organization.
Guidelines
Guidelines are documented recommendations or suggestions that offer topic-
specific guidance based on industry best practices. Most healthcare organizations 
FIGURE 3.4 Relationship between policies, procedures, standards, and guidelines.

Common security and privacy compliance frameworks
45
provide guidelines to employees to help them make reasonable choices and 
guide them toward decisions and producing outcomes that align with industry 
best practices.
A Practical Example
The following scenario can be used to exemplify the relationship between a 
policy, procedure, standard, and guideline. The senior leadership team at a 
healthcare organization is concerned about restricting access to PHI and pre-
venting unauthorized users from accessing PHI from the organization’s lap-
tops. The senior leadership team recognizes that they need to provide infor-
mation on ensuring this objective is met and know that many end users will 
require specific information on how to comply with the objective. Also, they 
recognize the controls will be more successful and easier to manage when de-
ployed consistently across the organization. Figure 3.5 demonstrates how the 
earlier scenario flows across an organization’s policies, procedures, standards, 
and guidelines.
COMMON SECURITY AND PRIVACY COMPLIANCE 
FRAMEWORKS
There are a number of security and privacy compliance frameworks available 
to healthcare organizations that can be used to ensure PHI is properly safe-
guarded and organizations are compliant with privacy and security, legal, and 
regulatory requirements. Each organization must decide which framework best 
suits their specific business and regulatory requirements, but the following is a 
list and brief description of the most common security and privacy compliance 
FIGURE 3.5 A practical example of a policy, procedure, standard, and guideline.

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
46
frameworks available to healthcare organizations. Since there are advantages 
and disadvantages between the various frameworks, we recommend taking a 
“best-breed” or hybrid approach and selecting the combination of frameworks 
that best suits your healthcare organization’s specific needs.
ISO
The International Standards Organization (ISO) is recognized across the world 
and has over 30 standards related to information security best practices and 
audit. In addition to being a comprehensive privacy and security framework, 
healthcare organizations conducting business internationally often select this 
framework. Healthcare organizations either are required or find it to be a well-
respected common ground by their international partners.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND 
TECHNOLOGY (NIST)
Similar to the ISO, the NIST provides a comprehensive list of standards. The 
most significant difference between ISO and NIST is that ISO targets the inter-
national community, while NIST is U.S. centric. The NIST Special Publication 
(SP) 800 series are most relevant to privacy and security. While focused on 
the federal government, they are free to use and can be applied to the private 
sector. One of the most useful SPs for healthcare organizations is SP 800-66. 
SP 800-66, An Introductory Resource Guide for Implementing the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Security Rule, is an invaluable resource 
for healthcare organizations concerned with the HIPAA Security Rule.
The remainder of the SPs offer suite of comprehensive privacy and security-
related guidance. The NIST SPs can be used individually to address specific tech-
nology and security issues, but are also designed to work in conjunction (many 
of the documents reference other documents) so that an organization can ac-
complish all of its privacy and security goals within a single framework. Al-
though the range of coverage is broad reaching, many healthcare organizations 
will benefit from the more commonly used documents that address areas such 
as encryption, security controls, risk management, and awareness and training.
NIST INTERAGENCY REPORTS (IRS)
Another important resource for healthcare organizations that is provided by 
NIST is the NIST IRs. The NIST IRs are research reports that provide detailed 
technical information on a specific topic. Healthcare organizations involved in 
HIEs should review the IR on the secure exchange of health information:
• NISTIR 7497 – Security Architecture Design Process for Health Information 
Exchanges (HIEs)

Common criteria–certified product categories
47
COMMON CRITERIA
Another widely accepted framework is the Common Criteria. According to the 
official Common Criteria Arrangement, “The purpose of this Arrangement is 
to advance those objectives by bringing about a situation in which IT products 
and protection profiles which earn a Common Criteria certificate can be pro-
cured or used without the need for further evaluation.” They also state that the 
participants in the arrangement share the following objectives:
1.	 To ensure that evaluations of IT products and protection profiles are 
performed to high and consistent standards and are seen to contribute 
significantly to confidence in the security of those products and profiles;
2.	 To improve the availability of evaluated, security-enhanced IT products 
and protection profiles;
3.	 To eliminate the burden of duplicating evaluations of IT products and 
protection profiles;
4.	 To continuously improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the 
evaluation and certification/validation process for IT products and 
protection profiles.
It is important to note that the Common Criteria is formally known as Com-
mon Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation (CC). It works 
with the Common Methodology for Information Technology Security Evalu-
ation (CEM). When organizations adhere to the CC and CEM, they are well 
positioned to work with another organization under an internationally recog-
nized framework. Specifically, the Common Criteria Recognition Arrangement 
(CCRA) manages this partnership and framework. The CCRA provides the 
technical basis for an international agreement among member countries. The 
standards and the operating methodology are based on the agreement among 
participating members. It is also important to note that the Common Crite-
ria includes three distinct sets of documentation including the general model, 
the security functional requirements, and the security assurance requirements. 
This is further supported by the CEM, which describes the activities performed 
by an evaluator assessing the implementation of the functional and assurance 
requirements.
COMMON CRITERIA–CERTIFIED PRODUCT CATEGORIES
The Common Criteria certifies products under the following categories, to 
assist participating organizations in their selection process:
j	 Access control devices and systems
j	 Biometric systems and devices
j	 Boundary protection devices and systems
j	 Data protection

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
48
j	 Databases
j	 Detection devices and systems
j	 ID cards, smart cards, and smart card–related devices and systems
j	 Key management systems
j	 Multifunction devices
j	 Network and network-related devices and systems
j	 Operating systems
j	 Products for digital signatures
j	 Trusted computing
THE INFORMATION GOVERNANCE (IG) TOOLKIT
The IG Toolkit is an online self-assessment tool that enables the National 
Health Service (NHS) organizations and partners in the United Kingdom to 
comply with the Department of Health Information Governance policies and 
standards.
Although there are different standards for different types of organizations, the 
IG Toolkit assesses all organizations against the following governance require-
ments:
j	 Management structures and responsibilities (e.g., assigning 
responsibility for carrying out the IG assessment, providing staff 
training)
j	 Confidentiality and data protection
j	 Information security
GENERALLY ACCEPTED PRIVACY PRINCIPLES (GAPP)
The GAPP is a set of privacy principles that are jointly defined by the American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) and the Canadian Institute 
of Chartered Accountants (CICA). The principles are based on commonly ac-
cepted privacy standards for protecting personal information. Further discus-
sion and additional details of GAPP are in Chapter 4.
HEALTH INFORMATION TRUST ALLIANCE (HITRUST)
According to HITRUST, “The Health Information Trust Alliance (HITRUST) 
was born out of the belief that information security should be a core pillar of, 
rather than an obstacle to, the broad adoption of health information systems 
and exchanges.”
HITRUST bases its program on the Common Security Framework (CSF). 
The CSF can be used by any and all organizations that create, access, store, 

SANS critical security controls
49
or exchange personal health and financial information. One of the benefits 
of the CSF is that it was designed to align with many existing requirements. 
HITRUST states, “The CSF is an information security framework that har-
monizes the requirements of existing standards and regulations, including 
federal (HIPAA, HITECH), third party (PCI, COBIT) and government (NIST, 
FTC).”
SANS CRITICAL SECURITY CONTROLS
The SANS 20 Critical Security Controls are essentially a subset of the NIST 
SP 800-53 Controls. They are a selection of the 20 most critical controls that 
organizations “must have in place.” They are viewed as “must haves” because 
they are the most critical and broad-reaching controls that, when implemented 
correctly, provide the most value for organizations with the fewest number 
of control implementations. We do not advocate limiting your organization’s 
security control framework to only 20 controls, but agree this is a great starting 
point, with fundamental security controls, covering a broad area of security 
risk. Organizations may use the SANS 20 Critical Security Controls under the 
Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. In accordance 
with the license (http://www.sans.org/critical-security-controls/) Figure  3.6 
displays the latest version of the SANS 20 Critical Security Controls.
FIGURE 3.6 SANS Critical Security Controls – Version 5.

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
50
RISK-BASED DECISION MAKING
Although Chapter 5 will detail specific risk management methodologies and 
life cycles for healthcare organizations, a brief discussion on risk-based deci-
sion making is warranted in our discussion of the regulatory environment. At 
a high level, the outcome of risk management activities for organizations is 
identifying a risk, implementing appropriate controls to reduce the identified 
risk, and managing any residual risk so that the organizations can achieve their 
business and organizational-level goals and objectives. Since there is no such 
thing as zero risk, healthcare organizations must take a risk-based approach 
and balance the identified risks against the rewards of business and financial 
objectives when delivering healthcare services. Figure  3.7 demonstrates the 
cost–benefit perspective organizations must consider when delivering today’s 
information-based healthcare services.
We are not advocating that healthcare organizations are reckless with PHI 
when achieving financial and business goals. In fact, we are taking the opposite 
perspective. The following discussions on compensating controls and manag-
ing residual risk will allow organizations to properly safeguard PHI while bal-
ancing the business benefits with identified risks when delivering technology-
based healthcare services.
COMPENSATING CONTROLS
In Chapter 4, we will detail specific types of controls that organizations can use 
to safeguard PHI. From a high-level perspective a control is implemented by an 
organization to address an identified vulnerability or risk that could be exploit-
ed by a threat. Healthcare organizations should implement a comprehensive 
set of primary controls to address any risks identified in their governance and 
risk management process. Fundamentally, there are three categories of controls 
(administrative, technical, and physical) with three possible implementation 
types (preventive, detective, and corrective) that can be applied to each catego-
ry. For example, a healthcare organization can have a series of technical con-
trols that are implemented with an end result of a preventive technical control, 
a detective technical control, and a corrective technical control. There is no 
FIGURE 3.7 Balance of risk versus reward when delivering information-based healthcare.

Compensating controls
51
limit on the combination of categories or implementation types a healthcare 
organization can have, but the organization must have a comprehensive and 
layered set of controls that addresses any identified risks. To better understand 
the possible range of combinations, types, and implementations available to 
healthcare organizations, each control category and implementation type is 
defined as follows:
j	 Administrative – A senior management–driven control, such as policy.
j	 Logical – System software–level control that limits access, such as role-
based access controls.
j	 Physical – Provides access control at a physical layer, such as door locks.
j	 Preventative – Prevents a threat from exploiting vulnerabilities, such as 
a firewall.
j	 Detective – Alerts the organization that an unauthorized activity has 
occurred, such as an intrusion detection system.
j	 Corrective – Corrects or reduces the harmful activity from further 
exploiting the vulnerability, such as a patch management tool that fixes 
identified system issues.
Figure 3.8 displays the relationship between the three control categories (ad-
ministrative, technical, and physical) and the implementation types (preven-
tive, detective, and corrective) typically included in a set of comprehensive pri-
mary controls.
According to SANS, “Compensating controls are alternate controls designed to 
accomplish the intent of the original controls as closely as possible, when the 
originally designed controls can not be used due to limitations of the environ-
ment. These are generally required when our activity phase controls are not 
available or when they fail.” After an organization implements their primary 
comprehensive control framework, other controls may be needed to address 
any residual risk, control failures, and gaps. Compensating controls should 
be implemented by healthcare organizations to address any primary control 
failures or shortcomings. They should be used to address any residual risk after 
primary controls have been implemented. Compensating controls can also al-
low a healthcare organization an additional layer of protection and support a 
defense-in-depth approach to privacy and security.
FIGURE 3.8 Relationship between control categories and implementation types.

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
52
CONTROL VARIANCE DOCUMENTATION
In a majority of circumstances healthcare organizations should be adhering to 
the security and privacy controls outlined in their selected framework. How-
ever, there are times where it makes sense to deviate from program specifics. 
Organizations must do so by leveraging a risk-based approach. These types  
of operational deviations should not be considered lightly or approached 
­haphazardly. Prior to being in an actual situation that requires an operational 
variance to the privacy and security program, organizations must have a spe-
cific process in place that allows them to deviate from the standard program. 
This must occur in a controlled manner, but still accomplish the overall privacy 
and security goals. Most organizations will find this is best achieved by hav-
ing a formal risk management and documentation process. This should be in 
place and designed to address operational variances, emergencies, and other 
unplanned events. When organizations properly document action plans and 
strategies ahead of an actual event, they are better prepared to deal with the 
situation at hand. Even with a proactive process and documentation, there still 
may be operational challenges, unintended consequences, and residual risk. 
However, if the process is comprehensive in nature and deviations are prop-
erly documented, organizations will be positioned to successfully deviate from 
their primary security and privacy programs, while addressing special circum-
stances or unplanned events. Another benefit of the documentation is that it 
can be used for a retrospective and organizational lessons learned. Often, dur-
ing an unplanned event, organizations are consumed by managing the event 
at a tactical level. After the event, healthcare organizations can take a strategic 
perspective, and implement any required program changes identified during 
the retrospective. These changes can be used to enhance the existing privacy 
and security program.
RESIDUAL RISK TOLERANCE
As we have already stated there is no such thing as zero risk. Organizations 
must accept a certain level of residual risk (after implementing a comprehen-
sive set of security controls to address the initial risk that has been identified) 
when delivering information-driven healthcare services. Since each healthcare 
organization’s senior leadership team has a different level of risk acceptance, 
residual risk tolerance will vary greatly among organizations. Therefore, each 
organization must carefully consider their culture, business model, and the 
types of healthcare services they deliver. Although the specific business and 
operating requirements vary significantly among healthcare organizations, 
there are some common elements that impact the acceptance of residual risk. 
These typically include cost considerations, the regulatory environment, and 
technology and resource limitations. Since healthcare organizations constantly 

53
(ISC)2 code of ethics
face an ever-changing threat landscape, they must continuously review their 
risk management programs. When doing so, they must also ensure the residual 
risk they accept is appropriate for the healthcare services they deliver. Finally, it 
is important that the senior leadership team fully understands and is account-
able for the residual risk they have accepted on behalf of the organization and 
healthcare recipients.
ORGANIZATIONAL CODE OF ETHICS
A healthcare organization that is in possession of PHI has an ethical duty to 
properly safeguard PHI and associated sensitive data. Healthcare organiza-
tions are in a position of trust and the recipients of their services demand 
the highest ethical standards when entrusting their most personal informa-
tion to a healthcare organization. Since organizations have access to the vast 
amounts of PHI, it is important that all employees embrace ethical behav-
ior. Additionally senior managers must lead by example and with an ethical 
“tone at the top.” An import step toward creating an ethical culture is for 
healthcare organizations to have policies, procedures, standards, training, 
and awareness that document and communicate the organization’s Code of 
Ethics.
(ISC)2 CODE OF ETHICS
Since the HCISPP is sponsored by the (ISC)2, there is expectation that all 
members and certificate holders adhere to the highest level of professional 
standards and ethics. Specifically, the (ISC)2 has a Code of Ethics that must 
be followed.
Code
The (ISC)2 Code states the following:
“All information systems security professionals who are certified by 
(ISC)2 recognize that such certification is a privilege that must be 
both earned and maintained. In support of this principle, all (ISC)2 
members are required to commit to fully support this Code of Ethics 
(the “Code”). (ISC)2 members who intentionally or knowingly violate 
any provision of the Code will be subject to action by a peer review 
panel, which may result in the revocation of certification. (ISC)2 
members are obligated to follow the ethics complaint procedure upon 
observing any action by an (ISC)2 member that breaches the Code. 
Failure to do so may be considered a breach of the Code pursuant to 
Canon IV.

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
54
There are only four mandatory canons in the Code. By necessity, such 
high-level guidance is not intended to be a substitute for the ethical 
judgment of the professional.”
Code of Ethics Preamble
(ISC)2 states the following for their Code of Ethics Preamble:
j	 “The safety and welfare of society and the common good, duty to our 
principals and to each other, requires that we adhere, and be seen to 
adhere, to the highest ethical standards of behavior.
j	 Therefore, strict adherence to this Code is a condition of certification.”
Code of Ethics cannons
The (ISC)2 contains the following mandatory canons in the Code:
j	 “Protect society, the common good, necessary public trust and 
confidence, and the infrastructure.
j	 Act honorably, honestly, justly, responsibly, and legally.
j	 Provide diligent and competent service to principals.
j	 Advance and protect the profession.”
SANCTIONS
(ISC)2 has a formal set of complaint procedures for members to address con-
cerns of potentially unethical behavior of any member or certification holder. 
The procedures enable a process for reporting observations, while assuring ap-
propriate levels of confidentiality. This includes the protection of identity from 
the general public of the reporting individual and the individual involved in 
the questionable behavior or practices. Additionally, the (ISC)2 Board of Direc-
tors has appointed an Ethics Committee to hear all ethics complaints and make 
recommendations to the board. The board has final decision-making authority 
and the ability to provide disciplinary actions for confirmed ethical violations.
DEFINITIONS
Term
Definition
Breach
An impermissible use or disclosure under the Privacy Rule 
that compromises the security or privacy of the protected 
health information
Common Criteria
An internationally recognized technical evaluation and 
standards program. It is governed by agreement among 
member countries, using the Common Criteria Recognition 
Arrangement (CCRA)

Definitions
55
Term
Definition
Compensating controls
The additional controls that can be implemented to 
address any primary control failures, shortcomings, or 
residual risk
Data controller
The senior person in charge of managing the data  
systems used in capturing, storing, or analyzing the PHI 
of patients under care of the organization. They have the 
responsibility for authorizing access of internal and external 
workforce members to the data system and its included 
PHI
Data custodian
The staff responsible for the maintenance and integrity of 
the data system – software and hardware – that houses 
and processes data containing PHI. This will include keep-
ing the systems updated, backing up stored data, and 
maintaining and monitoring network activity for potential 
vulnerabilities
Data owner(s)
Two types:
1.	The person to whom the actual data pertain, i.e., the 
patient receiving treatment for which the record is being 
created. This is the individual who has the final determi-
nation for how the data are used and by whom the data 
can be used or disclosed
2.	The healthcare organization that provides the treatment 
services for the patient and captures information dur-
ing treatment services has an ownership of the health 
record for the legally specified time period after the treat-
ment has ended
Data processors
Staff who are involved in implementing the software sys-
tems that support health information processing on behalf 
of the data controller
Guidelines
Provide suggestions for organizational desired outcomes 
that align with industry best practices
Health information
The data collected about a specific person potentially 
across a number of treatment services from a number of 
healthcare organizations
Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA)
HIPAA is the federal Health Insurance Portability and Ac-
countability Act of 1996. The primary goal of the law is to 
make it easier for people to keep health insurance, protect 
the confidentiality and security of healthcare information, 
and help the healthcare industry control administrative 
costs
Health record
The collection of health information based on treatment 
services provided by a healthcare organization on behalf of 
a patient receiving the services at that organization
IG Toolkit
A set of self-assessment steps to enable UK healthcare 
organizations to comply with the Department of Health 
Information Governance policies and standards
ISO
The International Standards Organization (ISO) is recog-
nized across the world and has over 30 standards related 
to information security best practices and audit

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
56
Term
Definition
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)  
addresses the measurement infrastructure within  
science and technology efforts for the U.S. federal  
government
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration 
(OSHA)
A unit of the U.S. Department of Labor and addresses 
safety and protection of workers in organizations that in-
volve hazards and hazardous wastes as potential sources 
of injuries and health-related problems
Personally identifiable  
information (PII)
Any information that allows positive identification of an  
individual, usually as a combination of several  
characteristics
Personal health  
information (PHI)
The PII involved with the healthcare and treatment of an 
individual
Policies
The high-level formal documents that briefly state the  
organization’s perspective and are driven by senior  
management to set a “tone at the top” for the  
organization
Primary control
The initial set of controls implemented by an organiza-
tion to protect organizational vulnerabilities from being 
exploited by threats
Procedures
The detailed sequential steps that are documented and 
inform the healthcare organization’s employees on how to 
perform specific actions
Standards
Are consistent sets of detailed specifications followed 
throughout the entire healthcare organization and typically 
address a system or technical configuration
Practice Exam
1.	 ARRA is an acronym for:
a.	 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
b.	 Availability, Resilience, and Readiness Act
c.	 Applicable Regulations and Requirements Act
d.	 American Accessibility and Readiness Act
2.	 HITECH Act is an acronym for:
a.	 Health Information Technology for Equality and Child Health Act
b.	 Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act
c.	 Health Information Transfer for Emergency and Clinical Health Act
d.	 Health Information Technology for Education and Clinical Health Act
3.	 When U.S. healthcare organizations conduct business internationally, they do 
not need to be concerned with:
a.	 HITECH Act
b.	 UK Data Protection Act
c.	 PIPEDA
d.	 Safe Harbor

Definitions
57
4.	 Safe Harbor is based on:
a.	 HITECH Act and HIPAA
b.	 Seven privacy principles
c.	 EU Directive 95/46/EC
d.	 Both b and c
5.	 DURSA is an acronym for:
a.	 Data Use and Reciprocal Support Agreement
b.	 Data Use and Regulatory Systems Act
c.	 Data Use and Reciprocal Support Act
d.	 Data Use and Regulatory Systems Agreement
6.	 Which of the following is not a principle of Safe Harbor?
a.	 Access
b.	 Enforcement
c.	 Encryption
d.	 Onward transfer
7.	 Additional regulatory requirements healthcare organizations are likely to face 
include:
a.	 OSH Act
b.	 PCI–DSS
c.	 GLBA
d.	 Both a and b
8.	 A policy:
a.	 Does not apply to covered entities
b.	 Details the sequential steps for healthcare employees to follow
c.	 Is synonymous with a procedure
d.	 Is a high-level formal document approved by senior management
9.	 A procedure:
a.	 Is a suggestion intended to streamline a healthcare process
b.	 Details the sequential steps for healthcare employees to follow
c.	 Is synonymous with a guideline
d.	 Is a high-level formal document approved by senior management
10.	 ISO:
a.	 Is the International Standards Organization
b.	 Offers over 30 standards related to information security best practices
c.	 Provides U.S.-approved healthcare security best practices
d.	 Both a and b
11.	 NIST:
a.	 Can only be used by the U.S. government
b.	 Does not apply to covered entities
c.	 Can only be used for Safe Harbor compliance
d.	 None of the above
12.	 NISTIR 7497:
a.	 Must be followed according to DURSA
b.	 Provides required HIPAA security controls for covered entities

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
58
c.	 Is the guide for implementing the HIPAA Security Rule
d.	 Is Security Architecture Design Process for Health Information Exchanges
13.	 Common Criteria:
a.	 Certifies IT products
b.	 Is a widely accepted framework
c.	 Is managed under the CCRA
d.	 All of the above
14.	 The IG Toolkit:
a.	 Is an online self-assessment tool
b.	 Allows organizations in the United Kingdom to comply with DHIG policies 
and standards
c.	 Can be used by all types and sizes of organizations
d.	 All of the above
15.	 The IG Toolkit assesses organizations against the following governance 
requirements:
a.	 Management structures and responsibilities
b.	 Confidentiality and data protection
c.	 Information security
d.	 All of the above
16.	 GAAP is the acronym for:
a.	 Globally Accepted Privacy Principles
b.	 Generally Accepted Privacy Principles
c.	 Globally Accepted Privacy Practices
d.	 Generally Accepted Privacy Practices
17.	 HITRUST:
a.	 Is only recognized in the United Kingdom
b.	 Cannot be used with other security frameworks
c.	 Is required under HITECH Act
d.	 None of the above
18.	 SANS 20 Critical Security Controls:
a.	 Can be used by any organization
b.	 Supersede NIST SP 800-53 Controls when complying with the HITECH Act
c.	 Provide the most value with the fewest number of control implementations
d.	 Both a and b
e.	 Both a and c
19.	 Compensating controls:
a.	 Should not be used by covered entities
b.	 Should be implemented as part of a comprehensive control framework
c.	 Are required under HIPAA but not the HITECH Act
d.	 None of the above
20.	 The (ISC)2 Code of Ethics:
a.	 Applies to all members and certificate holders
b.	 Holds individuals to the highest level of professional standards

Definitions
59
c.	 Has a preamble and four canons
d.	 All of the above
Practice Exam Answers
1.	 a
2.	 b
3.	 a
4.	 d
5.	 a
6.	 c
7.	 d
8.	 d
9.	 b
10.	 d
11.	 d
12.	 d
13.	 d
14.	 d
15.	 d
16.	 b
17.	 d
18.	 e
19.	 b
20.	 d
References
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/enforcementrule/hitechenforcementifr.html.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/breachnotificationrule/.
http://ico.org.uk/for_organisations/guidance_index/∼/media/documents/library/Data_­
Protection/Detailed_specialist_guides/data-controllers-and-data-processors-dp-guidance.pdf.
https://www.priv.gc.ca/leg_c/leg_c_p_e.asp.
http://health.state.tn.us/hipaa/.
http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:337:0011:0036:en:PDF.
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/index_en.htm.
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/29/contents.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/breachnotificationrule/.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/enforcementrule/enfifr.pdf.
http://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/dursa-2009-version-for-production-pilots-20091118-1.pdf.
http://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/privacy/privacy-and-security-guide.pdf.
http://www.export.gov/safeharbor/eu/eg_main_018365.asp.

CHAPTER 3: 
Regulatory Environment
60
https://www.osha.gov/.
https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org.
http://www.sec.gov/about/laws.shtml#sox2002.
http://www.sec.gov/about/laws/soa2002.pdf.
http://www.sans.org/security-resources/policies/Policy_Primer.pdf.
http://www.iso.org/iso/home.htm.
http://nist.gov/.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-66-Rev1/SP-800-66-Revision1.pdf.
http://www.hpa.org.uk/web/HPAweb&HPAwebStandard/HPAweb_C/1195733746440.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7497/nistir-7497.pdf.
https://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/.
https://www.igt.hscic.gov.uk/.
http://hitrustalliance.net/.
http://www.sans.edu/research/security-laboratory/article/security-controls.
https://www.isc2.org/ethics/default.aspx.

61
HCISPP Study Guide
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
CHAPTER 4
THIS CHAPTER WILL HELP CANDIDATES:
j	 Understand security and privacy concepts
j	 Understand the relationship between security and privacy
j	 Understand general privacy principles and standards
j	 Understand sensitive data and handling implications
INTRODUCTION
Security Fundamentals
Confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) are the foundational elements 
required to ensure privacy and security that users of the healthcare system 
deserve and expect. It is best to think of CIA as interrelated pillars that sup-
port privacy and security initiatives in healthcare. If any of the foundational 
elements are missing or vulnerable, privacy and security objectives within the 
healthcare system cannot be achieved. Confidentiality, integrity, and availabil-
ity are often referred to as the CIA triad and usually represented in the model 
shown in Figure 4.1.
Confidentiality
Under HIPAA, “Confidentiality means the property that data or information 
is not made available or disclosed to unauthorized persons or processes.” 
Simply put, confidentiality is about preventing unauthorized disclosure of 
healthcare information. Anytime sensitive healthcare information is accessed, 
viewed, or transmitted in an unauthorized manner, patient confidentiality is 
at risk.
Integrity
Integrity is formally defined by HIPAA as “Means the property that data or 
information have not been altered or destroyed in an unauthorized manner.” 
It is best to think of integrity as the reliability of information. Imagine the 

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
62
­consequences to patient healthcare delivery if medical professionals make 
­patient care choices based on inaccurate or unreliable data.
Availability
Availability is the third essential element to the CIA triad. Healthcare profes-
sionals require patient information systems to be there when needed. When 
critical healthcare systems are unavailable, quality healthcare services cannot 
be delivered in an efficient manner. Beyond efficiency, patient care decisions 
are significantly impacted when system or the information contained in those 
systems is unavailable. In many healthcare settings the system being down can 
be life-threatening rather than an inconvenience. Although HIPAA formally 
defines availability as “The property that data or information is accessible and 
useable upon demand by an authorized person,” one can see the importance 
of healthcare technology availability through the perspective of having the 
right tools to do the job. Modern healthcare has become reliant on technology 
as a tool for quality service delivery. Resilient healthcare systems are required 
to provide healthcare practitioners with the tools they need to perform their 
jobs on a daily basis. Just as in the past it would be unacceptable for a physi-
cian to visit a patient without his black bag and stethoscope, we cannot expect 
practitioners to provide services without high availability health information 
systems.
SECURITY PRINCIPLES
One of the most effective ways to ensure CIA is to take a defense-in-depth 
or layered approach when addressing privacy and security issues. A tiered 
­approach avoids a single point of failure and supports layered controls in case 
one of the controls is compromised or does not operate as intended.
Access Control
Access control is often the first and possibly most robust controls that can be 
implemented to ensure privacy and security in the healthcare environment. 
FIGURE 4.1 CIA triad.

Security principles
63
When you think about a typical healthcare environment and all the sensi-
tive information present, you quickly understand the importance of limiting 
the access to that information to only authorized individuals who need to 
have ­access to the information in order to perform their job responsibilities 
and deliver healthcare services. Although similar in nature, it is important 
to distinguish between physical and logical access control. Since physical se-
curity is often the first line of defense we will start there. Since systems that 
store sensitive healthcare information are located within the physical walls 
of healthcare service providers, we can focus on the outside and work our 
way in. Considering the defense-in-depth security methodology, we are able 
to achieve our first layer of access control just by limiting physical access to 
information systems. This does not mean we do not need logical security, but 
rather we can gain some comfort in knowing that well-designed and properly 
maintained physical security access controls can deter or prevent unauthor-
ized individuals from being able to physically access sensitive information 
or healthcare systems. Since we must avoid creating single points of failure 
and there are some threats that exist regardless of physical security controls, 
logical access controls are the next layer in effective security and required to 
support the CIA triad. Logical access controls should be developed to support 
the system architecture and be implemented at as many layers as possible. 
This typically means ensuring proper access control at both the network and 
system level. For example, a healthcare practitioner’s access should be con-
trolled when he or she logs into the network and again when he or she wants 
to access a particular system hosted on the network. From a more practical 
and healthcare-focused view, organizations do not want just anyone to be 
able to view or access patient information. So do organizations just need to 
implement controls preventing only outsiders from accessing patient records? 
The answer is no. Just because a person is employed by a healthcare orga-
nization does not mean they should be allowed to access sensitive patient 
information. In fact, effective access control is based on the concept of least 
privilege (individuals should only be able to access the information required 
to perform their job – no more, no less) and we will discuss in greater detail a 
little later. Once a healthcare organization ultimately determines who should 
be able to access information, the next challenge becomes the “how.” Think-
ing back to our discussion on defense-in-depth, it makes sense that there is 
no single approach or access control to accomplish the task. In fact, the more 
layered the controls, the better. In order to understand how to best implement 
access controls, let us take a look at the three types of controls: administrative, 
physical, and technical.
It is best to think of these as independent but interconnected elements that 
work together to ensure appropriate levels of access control for healthcare 
­organizations. Figure 4.2 shows the relationship among the control types.

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
64
Although the three categories work together and can be implemented indepen-
dently, we recommend the sequence of administrative, physical, and technical 
and that is the order they will be discussed in this book. Administrative con-
trols, when supported by senior leadership, set the foundation (aka “tone at 
the top”) for the organization’s access control objectives. These are often “soft” 
controls based on policies and organizational culture and regulatory require-
ments. Physical controls are usually the first layer of defense and often provide 
perimeter support for technical controls. These can range from door locks and 
ID badge systems to physical partitions separating employee work and patient 
care areas. Technical controls usually reside at the system level and are the 
mechanisms in place to support the organization’s privacy and security poli-
cies. A common example would be requiring a valid username and password 
before accessing the system.
Now that we have drawn the distinction between physical and logical access 
controls, we will review three common logical access control models. The three 
models commonly used in logical access control include discretionary access 
control (DAC), mandatory access control (MAC), and role-based access con-
trol (RBAC).
j	 DAC – Is a control mechanism where the user explicitly allows access to 
other users or programs that the user has ownership or control over.
j	 MAC – Is a control mechanism where the user permissions are explicitly 
controlled by the information system. The permissions are enforced 
by a collection of prebuilt access rules within the system. When the user 
is assigned permissions to a system object, the system restricts the 
activity of the user in accordance with the object’s permission level. For 
example, a user cannot share information with unauthorized users or 
system objects.
FIGURE 4.2 Relationship of control types.

Security principles
65
j	 RBAC – Is a control mechanism based on business-specific functions 
within an organization. For example, the role of “Accountant” can view 
accounts payable information, but the role of “Accounting Manager” 
can perform accounts payable transactions.
Data Encryption
Encryption is a foundational component of healthcare security and pri-
vacy. It enables organization to achieve privacy and security objectives. 
Per the HIPAA Security Rule, protected health information (PHI) must be 
­encrypted and encryption is defined as “the use of an algorithmic process 
to transform data into a form in which there is a low probability of assign-
ing meaning without use of a confidential process or key.” It is important 
to note that not all encryption algorithms function in the same manner and 
that some ­models and algorithms are suitable to meet specific healthcare 
­requirements.
Although predominantly used for the protection of data, cryptography can 
be used for authentication. The three types of encryption algorithms include 
­secret key (symmetric), public key (asymmetric), and hash functions.
j	 Secret or symmetric key cryptography – Utilizes one key for both 
encryption and decryption
j	 Public or asymmetric key cryptography – Utilizes one key for 
encryption and a different key for decryption
j	 Hash functions – Are used to support integrity by converting a message 
into a one-way irreversible hash function
Before detailing cryptography types mentioned earlier, one must understand 
some foundational definitions to truly appreciate how each cryptography mod-
el functions. Ciphertext is the encrypted output from an encryption ­algorithm. 
The original unencrypted data is called plaintext. Any number of encryption 
algorithms can be selected by the organization to convert the plaintext into 
ciphertext. When the ciphertext is decrypted, the data is transformed into its 
original readable state, the plaintext.
Secret Key Encryption
In secret key encryption, since the same key is used to encrypt and decrypt, prop-
er safeguarding and distribution of that key is of paramount importance. If the 
key is shared with unauthorized or unintended recipients at any time during 
the ­information’s life cycle, the protection of the information must be consid-
ered compromised. A compromised data protection, or encryption process that 
is considered to be compromised, cannot be relied on to support the confiden-
tiality and integrity (the C and I elements of the CIA triangle) of the data being 
encrypted.

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
66
Public Key Encryption
Public key encryption uses two different keys. One key is used to encrypt the 
information and the other is used to decrypt the information. Sometimes this 
is referred to as asymmetric encryption because two keys are required to make 
the system and/or process work securely. One key is known as the public key 
and should be shared by the owner with anyone who will be securely com-
municating with the key owner. However, the owner’s secret key is not to be 
shared and considered a private key. If the private key is shared with unauthor-
ized recipients, the encryption mechanisms protecting the information must 
be considered compromised.
Hash Functions
It is important to know that the slight technical differences that support hash-
ing are significant enough to draw a distinction between symmetric or asym-
metric cryptography and hash functions. Hashing only supports integrity and 
not confidentiality services. A hash function is a one-way cryptographic algo-
rithm. The use of a one-way cryptographic algorithm means that the ciphertext 
cannot be decrypted to reveal the original plaintext. The algorithm is made of 
two parts. The first element is the original content and is called the message. 
After encryption, the output, or second element, is called the message digest. 
The message digest is a unique identifier and based on the message. It is often 
viewed as a digital fingerprint. If the original message were altered in anyway, 
then it would not match the original message digest. Table 4.1 compares the 
types of encryption algorithms as well as provides a common example.
Table 4.1  Common Encryption Algorithms
Encryption Type
Strengths
Weakness
Example
Symmetric
• Faster than asym-
metric systems
• Difficult to break 
when large key size is 
used
• Requires secure 
mechanism to deliver 
keys
• Key management is 
difficult due to high 
volume of keys
• Cannot perform non-
repudiation
• AES
• 3DES
Asymmetric
• Stronger key distribu-
tion
• Improved scalability
• Provides integrity, 
authenticity, and non-
repudiation functions
• Slower than symmet-
ric systems
• Mathematically 
intense work factor
• RSA
• DSA
Hash function
• One-way ­efficiency
• Provides file/­message 
integrity
• Does not support 
confidentiality
• SHA 1
• MD5

Security principles
67
Training and Awareness
Although training and awareness should be a cornerstone of an organization’s 
healthcare security program, they are often an underutilized security strategy. 
When managed properly, it can be a powerful tool for educating and remind-
ing the organization’s workforce on security, privacy, and regulatory require-
ments. Training is a specific curriculum intended to teach individuals the spe-
cific skills needed to perform their job responsibilities.
Awareness is a more general program with a broader audience (i.e., the entire 
organization) intended to educate and remind employees about adhering to 
security and privacy initiatives to support the organization’s healthcare secu-
rity, privacy, and regulatory requirements. Training and awareness are people-
focused activities and therefore need to be managed differently than a specific 
security or privacy technology. Unlike an automated system process or configu-
ration setting, people have (and often do have) the ability to stray from orga-
nization best practices. One of the most effective ways to overcome this chal-
lenge is to design, implement, and manage effective training and awareness 
programs. Our emphasis will be on security awareness and privacy programs 
(as these are more universal in nature and applicable to all healthcare organi-
zations) but assume that organizations will deploy specific training programs 
(suited to their specific technologies and processes) under the following best 
practices:
j	 Training tailored to organizational-specific technologies (e.g., CCNA® 
certified engineers if your organization uses Cisco networking and 
firewall equipment)
j	 Regulatory specific training for compliance personnel (e.g., HIPAA, 
Records Management, Safe Harbor)
NIST Special Publication 800-16 details specific recommendations for success-
ful training and awareness programs but the following elements should be 
included:
j	 Clearly defined learning objectives
j	 Relevant and “user-friendly” content and delivery
j	 Metrics and measurements (for program delivery and continuous 
improvement)
j	 Student evaluation and performance tracking
j	 Implementation and tracking evidence (for regulatory compliance and 
audit purposes)
When healthcare organizations design, build, deploy, and manage robust 
training and awareness programs, they are receiving several benefits. Figure 4.3 
depicts the cultural benefits of organizations adopting a strong training and 
awareness program. Not only are they adhering to best practices and ­complying 

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
68
with specific healthcare security and privacy requirements, but also additional-
ly they are creating a security-aware and proactive security- and privacy-focused 
culture for their organization.
Logging and Monitoring
Once an organization implements controls to safeguard healthcare informa-
tion, it is essential they log and monitor the activities associated with said 
controls. An audit log is a system-generated chronology of events and activity 
associated with that system. Audit logs are typically highly configurable but 
most organizations focus on logging access and operational activity associ-
ated with the system. Monitoring works in conjunction with logging and is the 
systematic process of reviewing activity based on specific thresholds defined 
in the audit log configuration. HIPAA requires the following three activities 
­associated with logging and monitoring:
Term
Description
HIPAA Reference
Log-in monitoring
Monitoring system log-in 
and access for discrep-
ancies. The requirement 
applies to “log-in attempts” 
including both failed and 
successful log-ins
164.308(a)(5)(ii)(C)
Audit controls
Cover audit logging and 
other audit trails on systems 
that deal with sensitive 
health information
164.312(b)
Information system activity 
review
Regularly reviews records of 
information system activity 
such as audit logs, access 
reports, and security inci-
dent tracking
164.308(a)(1)(ii)(D)
Vulnerability Management
NIST Special Publication 800-53 Rev. 4 defines vulnerability management as 
“The systematic examination of an information system or product to determine 
the adequacy of security measures, identify security deficiencies, provide data 
FIGURE 4.3 Training and awareness relationship.

Security principles
69
from which to predict the effectiveness of proposed security measures, and con-
firm the adequacy of such measures after implementation.” As demonstrated in 
Figure 4.4, when performed correctly, vulnerability management is a continu-
ous process that includes the identification and remediation of vulnerabilities.
As part of a more comprehensive security management process HIPAA requires 
a systematic vulnerability management program that includes the following 
elements: program evaluation, security management process, risk analysis, risk 
management, information system activity review, incident procedures, and 
awareness and training.
Requirement
Description
HIPAA Reference
Program evaluation
“Perform a periodic ­technical 
and nontechnical ­evaluation 
based initially upon the 
­standards implemented under 
this rule and subsequently, in 
response to environmental or 
operational changes affecting 
the security of electronic pro-
tected health information, that 
establishes the extent to which 
an entity’s security policies and 
procedures meet the require-
ments of this subpart.”
(a)(8)
Risk analysis and manage-
ment
• “Conduct an accurate and 
thorough assessment of the 
potential risks and vulner-
abilities to the confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability of 
electronic protected health 
­information held by the 
­covered entity.”
And
• “Implement security measures 
sufficient to reduce risks and 
vulnerabilities to a reasonable 
and appropriate level …”
(a)(1)(ii)(A) and (a)(1)(ii)(B)
FIGURE 4.4 Vulnerability management cycle.

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
70
System activity review
“Implement procedures to 
regularly review records of 
information system activity, such 
as audit logs, access reports, 
and security incident tracking 
reports.”
(a)(1)(ii)(D)
Incident procedures
“Implement policies and pro-
cedures to address security 
incidents.”
(a)(6)(i) and (a)(6)(ii)
Awareness and training
“Implement a security aware-
ness and training program for 
all members of its workforce 
(including management).”
(a)(5)(i)
Figure  4.5 shows how the five specific elements support a comprehensive 
­vulnerability program required by HIPAA.
Systems Recovery
Systems recovery and contingency planning is the series of processes and 
­procedures that healthcare organizations implement to ensure availability 
(remember the availability leg of the CIA triangle) of electronic protected 
health information (EPHI). All healthcare organizations should develop 
a comprehensive business resiliency program to ensure the availability of 
healthcare information against natural or man-made disruptions. In addi-
tion to contingency planning being a security best practice, the HIPAA Con-
tingency Plan Standard also addresses the importance of contingency plan-
ning through five implementation specifications. Per the HIPAA Standard 
[§164.308(a)(7)(ii)(A)–(E)] the five contingency plan implementation stan-
dards are a data backup plan (required), disaster recovery plan (required), 
emergency mode operation plan (required), testing and revision procedures 
FIGURE 4.5 HIPAA vulnerability program elements.

Security principles
71
(addressable), and application and data criticality analysis (addressable) and 
are defined as follows:
j	 Data backup plan: “Establish and implement procedures to create 
and maintain retrievable exact copies of electronic protected health 
information.”
j	 Disaster recovery plan: “Establish (and implement as needed) 
procedures to restore any loss of data.”
j	 Emergency mode operation plan: “Establish (and implement as 
needed) procedures to enable continuation of critical business 
processes for protection of the security of electronic protected health 
information while operating in emergency mode.”
j	 Testing and revision procedures: “Implement procedures for periodic 
testing and revision of contingency plans.”
j	 Application and data criticality analysis: “Assess the relative criticality 
of specific applications and data in support of other contingency plan 
components.”
Segregation of Duties
Segregation of duties mandates that sensitive job functions that, when com-
bined, have a high potential for abuse should be performed by separate people 
in order to reduce that risk of abuse. This is often accomplished by having at 
least two individuals (one to perform and one to approve) involved to ensure 
a system of checks and balances. For example, if a server configuration change 
needs to be made to support a software installation for a developer, the devel-
oper cannot directly make that change. He or she would request the change 
be made, and after approval from management, a system administrator would 
make the changes for the developer.
Least Privilege
According to NIST Special Publication 800-12 least privilege is defined as “the 
security objective of granting users only those accesses they need to perform 
their official duties.” From a HIPAA perspective, the Privacy Rule typically re-
quires covered entities to take reasonable actions to limit the disclosure of PHI 
to the least amount required to accomplish the intended task. In addition to 
providing users the least amount of access needed to perform their jobs, health-
care organizations also need to routinely review that privileges are still needed 
and appropriate for the user’s current role. In a busy healthcare organization, it 
is common for an employee’s job function to change and they may no longer 
need the same level of permissions for their new role within the organization.
Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery
Business continuity is a relatively broad concept and often means different 
things to different organizations. However, in its simplest form, business 

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
72
­continuity is about ensuring an organization’s critical business functions are 
available and continue to operate during an incident or emergency. Each orga-
nization will need to define what critical operations are, as well as what an in-
cident or emergency is, and business continuity and disaster recovery planning 
accomplish this. Business continuity planning is the process that organizations 
follow so they can implement policies, procedures, processes, and technology 
used to ensure how an organization’s business objectives will be performed 
after a significant disruption. It is important to note that a variety (both natural 
and man-made) of events (e.g., flood, terrorism) can define a significant dis-
ruption and organizations must plan accordingly. Additionally, patients have 
high expectations that healthcare organizations have the ability to provide 
critical services and patient care regardless of a significant disruption. In fact, if 
the event is regional or national in nature (e.g., an entire state is impacted by 
a pandemic), there may be an even greater expectation or need that healthcare 
organizations can deliver patient care services. Disaster recovery planning is 
similar in nature to business continuity planning and they often work in con-
junction to support the healthcare organization’s short- and long-term needs 
when recovering from a significant and disruptive unplanned event. A useful 
perspective on the relationship is that business continuity is about building 
systems and processes that are resilient to disruptions and disaster recovery is 
about systems and processes that enable the organization to quickly recover 
from a disruption. Disaster recovery tends to focus on the short-term response 
after a disaster occurs. Typically it focuses on the organization’s critical systems 
(essential to providing healthcare services) in a timely manner (e.g., the phar-
macy system needs to be available within 2 h of a disaster). Although each 
healthcare organization will determine its specific needs, and several factors 
should go into a disaster recovery planning, the following elements are essen-
tial to a comprehensive disaster recovery plan:
j	 Critical application assessment – Determining which systems are 
essential to the healthcare organization delivering critical services.
j	 Backup procedures – Determining the details (e.g., who, what, when) 
and steps for backing up systems and data.
j	 Recovery procedures – Determining the details (e.g., who, what, when) 
and steps for recovering data and systems from backup after a disaster.
j	 Implementation procedures – Determining how to best implement the 
selected procedures.
j	 Test procedures – Developing test procedures so that testing can be 
performed on a regular basis to ensure the organization is capable of 
recovering after a disaster.
Before an appropriate backup strategy can be selected, it is important to un-
derstand the fundamentals of backups. Essentially, backups can be managed as 
onsite or remote. However, most healthcare organizations will determine that 

Security principles
73
a hybrid approach offers the best solution since there are both advantages and 
disadvantages to each strategy.
j	 Onsite backups – Allow organizations to store the data onsite, the 
advantage being they are readily available if needed. One disadvantage 
is that if the onsite location is unavailable or destroyed, so are the 
backup data. Another disadvantage is that the physical backup media 
(and information it contains) must be properly safeguarded.
j	 Remote backups – Allow organizations to store the data offsite, the 
advantage being that if the location is unavailable or destroyed, 
the backup data still exist. The disadvantage is that it can be time 
consuming or difficult to obtain backup data in a timely manner when 
they are not located onsite.
Another important factor when discussing backups is the frequency and spe-
cific methodology. Each method has advantages and disadvantages and most 
healthcare organizations select a hybrid approach to best meet their specific 
needs. The most common types include the following:
j	 Full backup – Includes all data and is slower to backup but faster to 
restore and requires the most storage space.
j	 Incremental backup – Only includes new or modified data, is fast to 
backup, has a moderate restore time, and requires lower storage space.
j	 Differential backup – Includes all changed data since the last full 
backup, has a moderate time frame to backup, and requires moderate 
storage space.
j	 Mirrored backup – Only includes new or modified data and has the 
fastest backup and restore times, but requires the most storage space.
Healthcare organizations should develop a compressive program and support-
ing documentation to support their backup strategy. This is used to clarify ex-
pectations and execution details. It is best to answer the “five W’s plus one” 
(who, what, when, where, why, and how) questions when documenting the 
backup strategy. Since both improvements to backup technology and the sub-
stantial reduction in cost for backup technology have occurred in recent years, 
healthcare organizations have additional alternatives (rather than traditional 
tape or other storage media) to consider when developing their backup strat-
egies. This includes alternative sites, high availability architectures and tech-
nologies, and real-time journaling. Additionally, the capabilities associated 
with alternate sites need to also be considered by the healthcare organization’s 
strategy. The three most common considerations include a hot site, cold site, 
and warm site.
j	 Hot sites – Duplicate the primary production site in terms of both 
infrastructure and data. The main advantage is that there is little to 
no time required to shift operations from the original production 

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
74
site to the alternative site. The primary disadvantage is the costs 
and maintenance associated with fully duplicating a production 
environment.
j	 Cold sites – Have the primary advantage of being low cost, since 
the information system hardware and backup data are not present 
at the cold site. The disadvantage is the time and effort required to 
establish a production-level environment.
j	 Warm sites – Are a hybrid alternative to hot and cold sites. The 
advantage is that they cost less than a hot site, but have more robust 
capabilities than a cold site.
Data Retention and Destruction
Data retention and destruction policies and procedures involve the healthcare 
organization’s specifications for retaining and destroying data in accordance 
with legal, regulatory, and business requirements. The HIPAA Privacy Rule re-
quires that covered entities apply appropriate administrative, technical, and 
physical safeguards to protect the privacy of PHI, in any form. This applies 
to the disposal of such information when the data are no longer required or 
a specific data retention period has expired. Additionally, the HIPAA Security 
Rule requires that covered entities implement policies and procedures to ad-
dress the final disposition of EPHI and/or the hardware or electronic media 
on which it is stored, as well as to implement procedures for removal of EPHI 
from electronic media before the media are made available for reuse.
Since both the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules address data retention and 
destruction, healthcare organizations must implement the appropriate safe-
guards to protect PHI and comply with HIPAA requirements.
GENERAL PRIVACY PRINCIPLES
There are 12 general privacy principles we will be discussing that are applicable 
to the 4 commonly recognized healthcare privacy standards. The four health-
care privacy standards are:
j	 Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
Privacy Principles
j	 Generally Accepted Privacy Principles (GAPP)
j	 Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act 
(PIPEDA)
j	 UK Data Protection Act 1998 (DPA)
We will be detailing the 4 healthcare privacy standards later in the chapter, but 
understanding the 12 general privacy principles provides a solid foundation 
and the 4 healthcare privacy standards are based on the privacy principles. 

General privacy principles
75
­Although there are slight differences between how each standard utilizes the  
12 principles, the intent and overall commonality of each principle is applicable.
12 Privacy Principles
The 12 principles and their descriptions are listed as follows:
j	 Consent/Choice – Permission granted from the patient or their legal 
guardian to an organization to use protected health information  
(PHI) for lawful healthcare purposes (treatment, research,  
operations, etc.).
j	 Limited Collection/Legitimate Purpose/Purpose Specification – 
The principle that states that the purposes for which personal data 
are collected should be specified not later than at the time of data 
collection and the subsequent use limited to the fulfillment of those 
purposes or such others as are not incompatible with those purposes 
and as are specified on each occasion of change of purpose.
j	 Disclosure Limitation/Transfer to Third Parties/Trans-Border 
Concerns – Specifies that personal information can only be disclosed 
for the purposes identified under notice and consent. It may also mean 
that personal data be disclosed outside of jurisdictional boundaries.
j	 Access Limitation – This usually ensures that access to information is 
limited only to individuals who specifically require access. Under the 
DPA, it means appropriate safeguards to prevent unauthorized access to 
personal data.
j	 Security – Organizations must have safeguards to protect personal 
information.
j	 Accuracy, Completeness, Quality – This principle specifies that 
organizations in possession of personal information are responsible for 
ensuring its accuracy, completeness, and quality.
j	 Management, Designation of Privacy Officer, Supervisor ­Re-
Authority, Processing Authorization, Accountability – These principles 
ensure that the organization has formally assigned accountability to 
safeguarding personal information under its control.
j	 Transparency, Openness – Organizations must make their policies 
readily available to individuals and be clear on the intended use of an 
individual’s personal information.
j	 Proportionality, Use and Retention, Use Limitation – This principle 
protects an individual’s healthcare information by restricting the use of 
data and ensuring that organizations destroy information when it is no 
longer in use.
j	 Access, Individual Participation –This principle states that individuals 
have the right to request from organizations a verification of whether or 
not the organization has information about them.

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
76
j	 Notice, Purpose Specification – Is a principle that ensures that 
organizations provide notice to individuals about the organizations’ 
policies and procedures regarding the collection, retention, and 
disclosure of data.
j	 Additional Measures for Breach Notification – Is a principle to ensure 
that organizations have specific policies and procedures for notifying 
individuals in the event of a data breach.
Now that we have a detailed understanding of the 12 general privacy prin-
ciples we can see how they relate to the 4 specific healthcare standards listed 
in the following. It is important to note that since 4 different authorities is-
sued the standards, there may be some slight differences, and in some cases 
not all of the 12 general privacy principles may directly apply. However, since 
the principles are rooted in the fundamentals of privacy, it is best to focus on 
the spirit or intent of the standard or law rather than the letter of the standard  
or law.
Data Privacy Standards
Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development Privacy 
Principles
According to the OECD, their mission is to “promote policies that will im-
prove the economic and social well-being of the world.” Although the OECD 
achieves their mission in many ways and provides invaluable guidance in a 
number of areas, our focus will be on the privacy principles. In terms of exam 
preparation, focusing on the 12 general privacy principles, and applying foun-
dational privacy knowledge to the mission and organizational aspects of the 
OECD will suffice for exam preparation. Since OECD has an international 
presence, and works with organizations across the world, they can leverage 
the 12 privacy principles to address healthcare privacy from an international 
perspective.
Generally Accepted Privacy Principles
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the Canadian In-
stitute of Chartered Accountants sponsor the GAPP. Their guidance is intended 
to provide a framework for organizations looking to implement a privacy pro-
gram. In comparison to the OECD, the GAPP has a business perspective and 
less of an international focus and may not address all specific local, national, 
or international privacy laws. However, it is still grounded in the 12 general 
privacy principles and enables organizations insight on how to properly safe-
guard healthcare information and manage effective privacy programs.
Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act
The PIPEDA is the framework set forth by Canada’s Office of the Privacy 
­Commissioner. It applies to both federal and private sector organizations and 

General privacy principles
77
governs the collection, use, and disclosure of personal information. One of the 
most significant aspects of PIPEDA is that it enables individuals the right to ac-
cess (and correct if necessary) their personal information if it was collected by 
federal and private entities. PIPEDA, as with GAPP and OECD, is based on the 
12 general privacy principles discussed earlier.
UK Data Protection Act 1998
The UK Data Protection Act of 1998, commonly referred to as DPA, is an in-
dependent authority in the United Kingdom, responsible for allowing access 
to official information and protecting personal information. One of the ways 
this is accomplished is through the United Kingdom’s Information Commis-
sioner’s Office (ICO). All organizations, unless specifically exempt, that pos-
sess and/or use personal information must register with the Commissioner’s 
Office. The UK DPA also uses eight data protection principles to ensure per-
sonal information is properly safeguarded. The ICO specifically states the 
­following:
1.	 Personal data shall be processed fairly and lawfully and, in particular, 
shall not be processed unless:
a.	 At least one of the conditions in Schedule 2 is met, and
b.	 In the case of sensitive personal data, at least one of the conditions 
in Schedule 3 is also met.
2.	 Personal data shall be obtained only for one or more specified and 
lawful purposes, and shall not be further processed in any manner 
incompatible with that purpose or those purposes.
3.	 Personal data shall be adequate, relevant, and not excessive in relation 
to the purpose or purposes for which they are processed.
4.	 Personal data shall be accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date.
5.	 Personal data processed for any purpose or purposes shall not be kept 
for longer than is necessary for that purpose or those purposes.
6.	 Personal data shall be processed in accordance with the rights of data 
subjects under this Act.
7.	 Appropriate technical and organizational measures shall be taken 
against unauthorized or unlawful processing of personal data and against 
accidental loss or destruction of, or damage to, personal data.
8.	 Personal data shall not be transferred to a country or territory outside 
the European Economic Area unless that country or territory ensures an 
adequate level of protection for the rights and freedoms of data subjects 
in relation to the processing of personal data.
Another important element of the DPA to take notice of is the restrictions it 
holds for data transfer and use outside of the European Economic Area. Oth-
erwise, like the other 3 privacy standards, the DPA is based on the 12 privacy 
principles.

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
78
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PRIVACY AND SECURITY
Although there can be some inherent conflicts between privacy and security, 
security is required to support privacy objectives. Therefore, there is a very close 
relationship and it is understood that some privacy issues (e.g., monitoring 
and data collection) are caused when implementing sound security practices. 
Most organizations will find they need to balance elements of the privacy and 
security relationship to properly safeguard PHI. Figure 4.6 depicts the privacy 
and security relationship.
Some of the more common privacy issues impacting security include network 
and system monitoring, background investigations, supplier and partner rela-
tionships, and information sharing programs. Organizational privacy objec-
tives and requirements are accomplished by the implementation of security 
controls. Looking back the CIA triangle, privacy is supported by the confiden-
tiality and integrity legs of the triangle.
THE DISPARATE NATURE OF SENSITIVE DATA AND 
HANDLING IMPLICATIONS
Healthcare organizations are responsible for the implementation of safeguards 
in order to protect sensitive patient data. Healthcare organizations and the infor-
mation systems they rely on have massive amounts of data. Before the organiza-
tion can select the appropriate controls and safeguards they must understand 
what they are trying to protect and why. Although more detailed strategies are 
discussed in the risk management sections of this text, data classification is one 
of the first steps. If you do not structure and organize the data, how can you 
prioritize and protect it? Furthermore, not all data and information are equal 
in value, so all data sets do not need to be managed, protected, and handled 
the same way.
Data classification schemas allow healthcare organizations to classify and 
label their data. These organizational-based standards and definitions al-
low for effective communication and understanding and enable employees 
FIGURE 4.6 Privacy and security relationship.

The disparate nature of sensitive data and handling implications
79
to have a uniform understanding of the data and associated precautions 
within their ­organization. Although there may be slight variances and spe-
cific organizational differences in data classification models, they are based 
on the common principles. These typically include a hierarchical structure 
and clearly defined labels and definitions to ensure information is handled 
consistently.
Once the data are properly classified, organizations need to create detailed 
handling procedures that address the following data handling elements:
j	 Access – Who can access the data?
j	 Use – Why is it needed? Principle of least privilege.
j	 Destruction – How is the information destroyed after acceptable use?
Disparate data are commonly defined as data that are dissimilar in ­nature. This 
usually means differences in type, quality, format, and source. ­Considering the 
overall complexity (large number of separate and distinct organizations and 
systems with extensive data sharing and interdependencies) of the healthcare 
delivery system disparate data can be a complex ­challenge.
Specifically, this operating model causes the following data problems:
j	 Continuation and formation of data silos – e.g., each healthcare 
organization (or distinct unit within an organization) will create a 
separate patient record
j	 Data duplication and regeneration – e.g., separate systems (billing 
and pharmacy systems) containing duplicate information for the same 
patient
j	 Lack of standardized data formats – e.g., variance in patient record 
formats
In addition to making intersystem and organizational data sharing difficult, 
disparate data create an increased security risk. The more instances of confi-
dential patient information, the greater the risk exposure becomes. Electronic 
medical records (EMRs) are intended to consolidate disparate data from all of 
the ­independent systems (e.g., pharmacy, billing, insurance) within a health-
care organization. Although this reduces many of the security concerns with 
disparate data referenced earlier, additional privacy and security challenges still 
remain. Specifically, a majority of the data types within an EMR need to be 
safeguarded and comply with the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
Protected Health Information
PHI is defined as any information in the medical record or designated 
­record set that can be used to identify an individual and that was ­created, 
used, or disclosed in the course of providing a healthcare service such as 

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
80
­diagnosis or ­treatment under HIPAA. The HIPAA Privacy Rule protects 
the 18 common identifiers listed as follows that are often associated with 
­medical records:
1.	 Names
2.	 All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including street address, 
city, county, precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geocodes, except for 
the initial three digits of a zip code, if according to the current publicly 
available data from the Bureau of the Census: (a) the geographic unit 
formed by combining all zip codes with the same three initial digits 
contains more than 20,000 people; and (b) the initial three digits of 
a zip code for all such geographic units containing 20,000 or fewer 
people is changed to 000
3.	 All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an 
individual, including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date 
of death; and all ages over 89 and all elements of dates (including 
year) indicative of such age, except that such ages and elements may be 
aggregated into a single category of age 90 or older
4.	 Phone numbers
5.	 Fax numbers
6.	 Electronic mail addresses
7.	 Social Security numbers
8.	 Medical record numbers
9.	 Health plan beneficiary numbers
10.	 Account numbers
11.	 Certificate/license numbers
12.	 Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers
13.	 Device identifiers and serial numbers
14.	 Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)
15.	 Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers
16.	 Biometric identifiers, including fingerprints and voiceprints
17.	 Full face photographic images and any comparable images
18.	 Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code (note this 
does not mean the unique code assigned by the investigator to code the 
data)
The HIPAA Privacy Rule prescribes 18 identifiers that usually need to be prop-
erly safeguarded under HIPAA requirements. However, when separated (as 
opposed to multiple single patient identifiers in aggregate), data identifiers 
may not necessarily be designated as PHI. For example, a patient’s name in 
isolation would not be considered PHI since the name alone is not directly 
connected with that individual’s other PHI and the name would be consid-
ered publicly available information. Healthcare organizations need to be very 
­cautious since data sets and the 18 protected identifiers can quickly change 

The disparate nature of sensitive data and handling implications
81
context, thus ­requiring organizations to comply with HIPAA Privacy and 
­Security ­Safeguards. In the previous example, a name (not associated with any 
other identifiers) was considered public information and not considered to 
be PHI. However, that same name associated with additional healthcare data 
(e.g., patient treatment and billing information) would be considered PHI 
and would be required to be protected in accordance with the HIPAA Privacy and 
Security Rules. Now that we understand the relationship between data sets, PHI, 
and the 18 protected identifiers, we need to discuss some specific mitigation 
strategies to ensure HIPAA compliance. These fall under the category of data 
de-identification.
Data De-Identification
The HIPAA Privacy Rule contains a de-identification standard. The standard 
prescribes that health information is not individually identifiable if (1) it does 
not identify an individual and (2) the covered entity has no reasonable basis 
to believe it can be used to identify an individual. The HIPAA Privacy Rule 
continues to support this standard in sections 164.514(b) and (c) by speci-
fying two acceptable methods for de-identification of data. These methods 
include Expert Determination and Safe Harbor. Expert Determination states 
that an organization may only determine information is not individually 
identifiable if:
1.	 A person with appropriate knowledge of and experience with generally 
accepted statistical and scientific principles and methods for rendering 
information is not individually identifiable;
2.	 Applying such principles and methods, it is determined that the 
risk is very small that the information could be used, alone or in 
combination with other reasonably available information, by an 
anticipated recipient to identify an individual who is a subject of the 
information; and
3.	 The methods and results of the analysis are documented in a way that 
justifies such determination.
The Safe Harbor method is the removal of certain identifiers (from the list of 
the 18 identifiers listed earlier) of the individual or of relatives, employers, or 
household members of the individual, where the covered entity does not have 
actual knowledge that the information could be used alone or in combination 
with other information to identify the individual who is the subject of the 
information.
Data Anonymization
Data anonymization can also be considered by covered entities that are 
­leveraging data-driven research analysis projects (e.g., data mining, ­predictive 

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
82
analytics). However, it is important to point out the risks associated with these 
types of efforts. There are many tools, technologies, and methodologies that 
can be used to reverse engineer or de-anonymize data sets. Additionally, the 
manipulation and generation of new data from existing data (i.e., ­metadata) 
may require patient consent. When complying with the HIPAA Privacy Rule, it 
is important to note that sensitive health information falls under the Privacy 
Rule requirements regardless of delivery or recording formats. This means that 
both oral and recorded patient health information must be properly safe-
guarded. It is also important to note that HIPAA includes the protection of 
mental health data in its scope of coverage. In addition to mental health speci-
fications, the following healthcare areas are also protected by HIPAA:
j	 Substance abuse – Substance abuse programs may not share patient 
information outside of the program.
j	 Pregnancy – Is not considered a preexisting condition, but all other 
health insurance requirements still exist.
j	 HIV research data – Originally not included under HIPAA.
j	 DNA – Not specifically protected, but considered to be PHI.
Many of the healthcare-specific services under HIPAA’s coverage are quite intui-
tive. However, we must not forget the services that support healthcare delivery 
must also be compliant with HIPAA requirements. Figure 4.7 depicts the rela-
tionship that business support functions have with HIPAA compliance. At the 
highest level, any business data, system, or service used to support or deliver 
healthcare falls under HIPAA’s regulatory authority.
The following is a list of the more common business elements associated with 
the support or delivery of healthcare:
j	 General administrative data
j	 Financial/accounting data
j	 Actuarial data
FIGURE 4.7 Business support functions’ relationship with HIPAA compliance.

Key terms
83
KEY TERMS
Access control
Is a mechanism used to restrict access to a place or resource. 
It can apply to both physical and logical resources and is 
typically composed of administrative, technical, or physical 
controls
Authorization
The explicit permission from the object owner that allows a 
subject to access a resource
Business associate
A person who on behalf of a covered entity (or of an organized 
healthcare arrangement in which the covered entity partici-
pates) performs or assists in the performance of:
• A function or activity involving the use or disclosure of 
individually identifiable health information, including claims 
processing or administration, data analysis, processing  
or administration, utilization review, quality assurance,  
billing, benefit management, practice management, and 
repricing; 
• Any other function or activity regulated by this subchapter; 
or
• A person who provides legal, actuarial, accounting, consult-
ing, data aggregation, management, administrative, accredi-
tation, or financial services to or for such covered entity (or 
to or for an organized healthcare arrangement in which the 
covered entity participates) where the provision of the ser-
vice involves the disclosure of individually identifiable health 
information from such covered entity (or arrangement), or 
from another business associate of such covered entity (or 
arrangement), to the person
Consent
Permission granted by the patient or the patient’s guardian to 
use or disclose protected health information for purposes of 
treatment, payment, or healthcare operations
Covered entities
Under HIPAA means:
• A health plan
• A healthcare clearinghouse
• A healthcare provider who transmits any health information 
in electronic form in connection with a transaction covered 
under HIPAA requirements
De-identified information
Health information that does not identify an individual and 
with respect to which there is no reasonable basis to believe 
that the information can be used to identify an individual is not 
individually identifiable health information
Disclosure
Disclosure means the release, transfer, provision of, access 
to, or divulging in any other manner of information outside the 
entity holding the information
Group Health Plan
An employee welfare benefit plan, including insured and self-
insured plans, to the extent that the plan provides medical 
care, including items and services paid for as medical care, to 
employees or their dependents directly or through insurance, 
reimbursement, or otherwise

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
84
Healthcare operations
Any of the following activities of the covered entity to the 
­extent that the activities are related to covered functions:
• Conducting quality assessment and improvement 
­activities
• Reviewing the competence or qualifications of healthcare 
professionals
• Underwriting, premium rating, and other activities relating to 
the creation, renewal, or replacement of a contract of health 
insurance or health benefits
• Conducting or arranging for medical review, legal services, 
and auditing functions
• Business planning and development
• Business management and general administrative activities 
of the entity
Health information
Any information, oral or recorded in any medium, that is 
­created or received by a healthcare provider, health plan, public 
health authority, employer, life insurer, school or university, or 
healthcare clearinghouse; and relates to the past, present, or 
future physical or mental health or condition of an individual; 
the provision of healthcare to an individual; or the past, pres-
ent, or future payment for the provision of healthcare to an 
individual
Individual
The person who is the subject of protected health 
­information
Individually identifiable 
health information
Information that is a subset of health information, including 
demographic information collected from an individual, and:
• Is created or received by a healthcare provider, health plan, 
employer, or healthcare clearinghouse; and
• Relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental 
health or condition of an individual; the provision of health-
care to an individual; or the past, present, or future payment 
for the provision of healthcare to an individual; and
• That identifies the individual; or
• With respect to which there is a reasonable basis to believe 
the information can be used to identify the individual
Institutional review 
board (IRB)
An IRB is a board, committee, or other group formally 
designated by an institution to review research, involv-
ing humans as subjects. IRBs have authority to approve, 
require modification to, or disapprove all research activities 
covered by the HHS and FDA protection of human subjects 
­regulations
Limited data set
A limited data set excludes specified direct identifiers of the 
individual or of relatives, employers, or household members of 
the individual
Need-to-know
A security principle that states a user should only be able to 
access the data they need to perform their job
Plan administration 
functions
An administration function performed by the Plan Sponsor 
of a Group Health Plan on behalf of the Group Health Plan 
and excludes functions performed by the Plan Sponsor in 
connection with any other benefit or benefit plan of the Plan 
Sponsor

Key terms
85
Protected health  
information
Individually identifiable health information that is or has been 
electronically maintained or electronically transmitted by a 
covered entity, as well as such information when it takes 
any other form that (1) is created or received by a healthcare 
provider, health plan, employer, or healthcare clearinghouse; 
and (2) relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental 
health or condition of an individual, the provision of healthcare 
to an individual, or the past, present, or future payment for the 
provision of healthcare to an individual
Treatment
The provision, coordination, or management of healthcare and 
related services among healthcare providers or by a healthcare 
provider with a third party, consultation between healthcare 
providers regarding a patient, or the referral of a patient from 
one healthcare provider to another
Unique user identifier
A combination name/number assigned and maintained in 
security procedures for identifying and tracking individual user 
identity
Use
With respect to individually identifiable health information, the 
sharing, employment, application, utilization, examination, or 
analysis of such information with an entity that maintains such 
information
Practice Exam
1.	 Which element of CIA security model is least important?
a.	 Availability – Data security is the primary concern; as long as the data are 
secure, availability does not matter.
b.	 Confidentiality – HIPAA already ensures patient healthcare information, so 
we do not have to worry about confidentiality in the CIA security model.
c.	 Availability – Strong access controls already ensure information is only 
available to authorized healthcare employees.
d.	 None – All elements of the CIA security model are equally important.
2.	 Confidentiality is best accomplished by which of the following?
a.	 Encryption
b.	 Data backup systems
c.	 Logical system controls that enforce data validation
d.	 Vulnerability management
3.	 The three broad types of access control are:
a.	 Confidentiality, integrity, availability
b.	 Confidential, sensitive, public
c.	 Administrative, physical, technical
d.	 Discretionary, mandatory, role-based
4.	 Sensitive data should be encrypted:
a.	 At rest
b.	 In transit

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
86
c.	 Only when leaving the organization’s network
d.	 Both a and b
5.	 Security awareness training:
a.	 Only needs to be given to new employees
b.	 Does not need to be given since healthcare employees receive this training 
when they receive their healthcare training and certification
c.	 Should be given to all employees on an annual basis
d.	 Only needs to be given to employees who handle PHI
6.	 Audit logging:
a.	 Only needs to be performed 1 month prior to an audit
b.	 Should be performed in conjunction with monitoring
c.	 Does not need to be performed by covered entities (only healthcare 
organizations)
d.	 Does not need to be performed by healthcare organizations (only covered 
entities)
7.	 Vulnerability management includes:
a.	 Identification and remediation
b.	 A continuous process
c.	 Remediation only
d.	 Both a and b
8.	 Segregation of duties:
a.	 Does not apply to covered entities
b.	 Is not required when encryption is being used
c.	 Is designed to reduce the risk of system abuse
d.	 Only applies to larger organizations since having more employees increases 
the risk for system abuse
9.	 Business continuity:
a.	 Only applies to covered entities since they are businesses that support 
healthcare organizations rather than deliver patient healthcare services
b.	 Is composed of many technologies and processes that support the 
availability leg of the CIA triangle
c.	 Is optional for covered entities since they do not provide direct patient care
d.	 None of the above
10.	Data destruction includes:
a.	 Shredding
b.	 Degaussing
c.	 None of the above
d.	 Both a and b
11.	OECD focuses their mission on serving:
a.	 The United States
b.	 People around the world
c.	 The United Kingdom
d.	 North America

Key terms
87
12.	GAPP applies to:
a.	 Federal organizations in the United States and Canada
b.	 The United States and Canada
c.	 The United States only
d.	 Canada only
13.	PIPEDA stands for:
a.	 Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act
b.	 Privacy Information Protection and Electronic Document Act
c.	 Personal Information Protection and Electronic Data Act
d.	 Privacy Information Protection and Electronic Data Act
14.	The UK DPA:
a.	 Involves the Information Commissioner’s Office
b.	 Has restrictions on data transfer outside of the European Economic Area
c.	 Contains eight specific data protection principles
d.	 All of the above
15.	Consent/Choice is:
a.	 Not important in healthcare setting since healthcare organizations need to 
have PHI to perform service requested by the patient
b.	 Should be discussed with the patient prior to delivering any services
c.	 Is only relevant for healthcare-related research, not traditional patient care 
services
d.	 Only applies to US entities following GAAP
16.	The accuracy privacy principle:
a.	 Requires organizations to maintain complete and reliable PHI
b.	 Is applicable to GAAP
c.	 Is applicable to PIPEDA
d.	 All of the above
17.	Breach notification requirements:
a.	 Are only important for transborder data flows
b.	 Do not apply if the PHI was for testing and research purposes
c.	 Both a and b
d.	 None of the above
18.	The relationship between privacy and security:
a.	 Is symbiotic and both are relevant to safeguarding PHI
b.	 Is not relevant since privacy and security are two separate and distinct 
disciplines
c.	 Is not relevant since privacy is more important than security
d.	 Is not relevant since security is more important than privacy
19.	Under the HIPAA Privacy Rule, there are:
a.	 18 possible identifiers of PHI
b.	 81 possible identifiers of PHI
c.	 8 possible identifies of PHI
d.	 No specific number as it depends on the organization’s use of PHI

CHAPTER 4: 
Privacy and Security in Healthcare
88
20.	De-identification and anonymization are:
a.	 Synonymous
b.	 Two methods for preventing disclosure of PHI
c.	 Both a and b
d.	 None of the above
Practice Exam Answers
1.	 d
2.	 a
3.	 c
4.	 d
5.	 c
6.	 b
7.	 d
8.	 c
9.	 b
10.	 d
11.	 b
12.	 b
13.	 a
14.	 d
15.	 b
16.	 d
17.	 d
18.	 a
19.	 a
20.	 b
References
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/index.html.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/securityrulepdf.pdf.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/privacyrule/index.html.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/privacyrule/privruletxt.txt.
http://www.oecd.org/internet/ieconomy/oecdguidelinesontheprotectionofprivacyandtransbor-
derflowsofpersonaldata.htm.
http://www.aicpa.org/INTERESTAREAS/INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY/RESOURCES/PRIVACY/
GENERALLYACCEPTEDPRIVACYPRINCIPLES/Pages/default.aspx.
http://www.priv.gc.ca/leg_c/leg_c_p_e.asp.
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/29/contents.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips140-2/fips1402.pdf.

Key terms
89
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-122/sp800-122.pdf.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-66-Rev1/SP-800-66-Revision1.pdf.
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-53r4.pdf.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-50/NIST-SP800-50.pdf.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-40-Ver2/SP800-40v2.pdf.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-34-rev1/sp800-34-rev1_errata-Nov11-2010.pdf.

91
HCISPP Study Guide
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Information Governance 
and Risk Management
CHAPTER 5
THIS CHAPTER WILL HELP CANDIDATES UNDERSTAND:
j	 Information governance
j	 Risk management methodology
j	 Key concepts associated with risk assessment
j	 Information risk management life cycle
j	 Risk management activities
INTRODUCTION
Few will disagree regarding the importance of information to healthcare or-
ganizations in their mission to provide quality patient care, conduct clinical 
research, and achieve business objectives. As the healthcare industry evolves to 
increasingly rely on digital information and technologies, so too do the nature, 
complexity, and volume of threats they face. Whether a global healthcare con-
glomerate or a small medical office, a comprehensive information governance 
and risk management program is a necessity whether driven by duty of care, 
regulatory, or legal and compliance requirements. In response to changing 
threat and regulatory landscapes, the healthcare industry must implement and 
maintain an effective information governance and risk management program. 
The program must be supported by knowledgeable staff and consist of rea-
sonable administrative, physical, and technical safeguards designed to protect 
the confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of their information. While 
legal protections are mandated for certain classes of information such as per-
sonally identifiable information (PII) and personal health information (PHI) 
depending on where organizations conduct business, a risk-based approach 
for protecting all classes of information should be implemented as part of a 
comprehensive program.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
92
Knowledge Areas
After reviewing this chapter and supporting reference materials, HCISPP candi-
dates should comprehend the foundational principles required to implement 
and maintain an effective information governance and risk management pro-
gram. This includes understanding how healthcare organizations manage risk 
through adoption of security and privacy programs, risk management method-
ologies, information risk management life cycle frameworks, and common risk 
management activities.
Industry Resources
The foundation of many information governance and risk management pro-
grams is based on common industry frameworks and standards such as those 
published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and the United 
Kingdom’s National Health Service (NHS) just to name a few. Before getting 
started, it is important to understand their background and some of the re-
sources that will be referenced throughout this chapter.
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Founded in 1901, the NIST is one of the largest developers of standards and 
guidance within the information security field. As an agency of the US Depart-
ment of Commerce, its Computer Security Division provides a broad range of 
information security tools, standards, and guidelines to assist with the devel-
opment of risk management programs. Security resources published by NIST 
are generally grouped into four areas:
Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS): Security standards 
surrounding compliance with the Federal Information Security 
Management Act (FISMA) of 2002.
NIST Special Publications (SPs): Publications from the SP 800 series 
(computer security) and SP 500 series (information technology) relating 
to computer security.
NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIRs): Background 
information relating to FIPS and SP publications.
Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) Bulletins: Monthly digests of 
NIST security publications, programs, and projects.
NIST’s SPs in the 800 series are particularly useful in supporting the develop-
ment of an information risk management program. Figure 5.1 provides just a 
few examples of the resources referenced in this chapter and the more than 150 
currently published and available for free through NIST’s Computer Security 
Resource Center (csrc.nist.gov).

Introduction
93
International Organization for Standardization
A major developer of international standards with over 19,500 published 
since its founding in 1947, the International Organization of Standardization 
(ISO) is based in Geneva, Switzerland, and its information technology stan-
dards have helped organizations build the foundation of information security 
programs around the world. ISO currently has members from 162 countries, 
thousands of technical bodies, and over 150 full-time employees supporting 
its development efforts. Of particular importance to security professionals and 
the exam are the following.
ISO/IEC 27002:2005
This information security standard was published by ISO and the International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) under the name of Information technology – 
Security techniques – Code of practice for information security management. In lay-
man’s terms, just remember this standard is generally referred to within the in-
dustry as ISO 27002. It provides basic principles and guidance to plan, design, 
implement, maintain, and improve information security programs covering 
the following 11 knowledge areas:
j	 Security policy
j	 Organization of information security
j	 Asset management
j	 Human resources security
j	 Physical and environmental security
j	 Communications and operations management
j	 Access control
j	 Information systems acquisition, development, and maintenance
j	 Information security incident management
j	 Business continuity management
j	 Compliance
ISO 27799:2008
Serving as a companion to ISO/IEC 27002, this standard focuses on assisting 
healthcare and other organizations handling PHI implement ISO/IEC 27002 
to protect the CIA of their information.
FIGURE 5.1 NIST SP 800 series examples.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
94
These standards are available for purchase on the ISO website: www.iso.org.
National Health Service
The United Kingdom’s NHS has published an Information Governance Toolkit 
as a means of guiding organizations and providing a framework for imple-
menting an information governance program. While focused on information 
governance, it is inclusive of information security principles and guidelines to 
ensure compliance with various laws including:
j	 The Data Protection Act 1998;
j	 The common law duty of confidentiality;
j	 The Confidentiality NHS Code of Practice;
j	 The NHS Care Record Guarantee for England;
j	 The Social Care Record Guarantee for England;
j	 The international information security standard: ISO/IEC 27002:2005;
j	 The Information Security NHS Code of Practice;
j	 The Records Management NHS Code of Practice;
j	 The Freedom of Information Act 2000;
j	 The Human Rights Act article 8; and
j	 The Code of Practice for the Management of Confidential Information.
The governance toolkit is available for free on the NHS website: www.igt.hscic.
gov.uk.
UNDERSTANDING SECURITY AND PRIVACY 
GOVERNANCE
A strong information governance program is essential to the successful imple-
mentation of any security and privacy governance program. In the following 
sections, we will review the purpose of information governance and structures 
(frameworks) available to assist with the development of an information 
governance program.
Information Governance
Information governance can be defined as a structure (or framework) consisting 
of policies, processes, procedures, behaviors, and technologies designed to as-
sist with managing information throughout its life cycle in a manner consistent 
with stakeholder expectations. The information life cycle begins when informa-
tion is first created and continues until such time as the information is disposed, 
destroyed, or no longer requires protection. A governance structure provides 
an organization with the ability to manage information in a manner to help 
meet its business objectives while minimizing risk and maintaining compli-
ance with the various laws where it conducts business. While information gov-
ernance may have been historically viewed as a records management activity, it 

Understanding security and privacy governance
95
now requires additional stakeholder participation from areas such as human 
resources, finance, legal, compliance, information security, and information 
technology to sufficiently address a vast array of evolving cybersecurity, privacy, 
electronic discovery, operational, and regulatory requirements. Additionally, a 
key component to any information governance program includes the develop-
ment and implementation of a comprehensive security and privacy program. 
A qualified individual must be appointed as accountable for the effective de-
sign, implementation, and continuous management of a program consisting 
of reasonably designed administrative, physical, and technical safeguards (also 
referred to as controls) to protect the CIA of its information. Administrative 
safeguards are defined as actions, policies, and procedures involved in the se-
lection, development, implementation, and maintenance of security measures. 
These measures support the protection of information and give management 
guidance on the proper conduct of the workforce in relation to the protection of 
information. Physical safeguards are defined as physical measures to protect the 
organization’s electronic information systems, data in physical form, buildings, 
and equipment from natural and environmental hazards and unauthorized in-
trusion. Technical safeguards are defined as the technology and associated tech-
nical standards for its use to protect and control access to information. When 
administrative, physical, and technical safeguards are implemented together, 
they can provide a strong foundation for security and privacy programs includ-
ing layers of protection. While various models and resources are available to as-
sist with developing governance structures, they all share similar principles and 
objectives. Prior to selecting or developing an information governance struc-
ture, it is important to establish authority, define roles and responsibilities, and 
engage stakeholders to solicit input and management support. After authority 
to build a governance program has been established, the process of defining 
and assigning roles and responsibilities can begin with stakeholder assistance. 
While roles and responsibilities will differ between organizations and various 
industry models, NIST SP 800-37 recommends the assignment of the following 
roles and responsibilities at a minimum.
Head of Agency (CEO)
The head of agency (or chief executive officer) is the highest-level official with-
in an organization with overall responsibility for providing information secu-
rity protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm (i.e., im-
pact) to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, 
and the Nation resulting from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, 
modification, or destruction of:
j	 Information collected or maintained by or on behalf of the agency; and
j	 Information systems used or operated by an agency or by a contractor 
of an agency or other organization on behalf of an agency.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
96
Risk Executive (Function)
The risk executive (function) is an individual or group within an organization 
that helps to ensure that:
j	 Risk-related considerations for individual information systems, to 
include authorization decisions, are viewed from an organization-wide 
perspective with regard to the overall strategic goals and objectives 
of the organization in carrying out its core missions and business 
functions; and
j	 Managing information system–related security risks is consistent 
across the organization, reflects organizational risk tolerance, and is 
considered along with other types of risks in order to ensure mission/
business success.
Chief Information Officer (CIO)
The CIO is an organizational official responsible for:
j	 Designating a senior information security officer;
j	 Developing and maintaining information security policies, procedures, 
and control techniques to address all applicable requirements;
j	 Overseeing personnel with significant responsibilities for information 
security and ensuring that the personnel are adequately trained;
j	 Assisting senior organizational officials concerning their security 
responsibilities; and
j	 In coordination with other senior officials, reporting annually to 
the head of the federal agency on the overall effectiveness of the 
organization’s information security program, including progress of 
remedial actions.
Information Owner/Steward
The information owner/steward is an organizational official with statutory, 
management, or operational authority for specified information and the re-
sponsibility for establishing the policies and procedures governing its gen-
eration, collection, processing, dissemination, and disposal. In information-
sharing environments, the information owner/steward is responsible for 
establishing the rules for appropriate use and protection of the subject infor-
mation (e.g., rules of behavior) and retains that responsibility even when the 
information is shared with or provided to other organizations. The owner/
steward of the information processed, stored, or transmitted by an information 
system may or may not be the same as the system owner. A single information 
system may contain information from multiple information owners/stewards. 
Information owners/stewards provide input to information system owners re-
garding the security requirements and security controls for the systems where 
the information is processed, stored, or transmitted.

Understanding security and privacy governance
97
Senior Information Security Officer
The senior information security officer, also known as Chief Information 
Security Officer (CISO) or Chief Security Officer (CSO), is an organizational 
official responsible for:
j	 Carrying out the CIO security responsibilities under FISMA; and
j	 Serving as the primary liaison for the CIO to the organization’s 
authorizing officials, information system owners, common control 
providers, and information system security officers.
The senior information security officer:
j	 Possesses professional qualifications, including training and 
experience, required to administer the information security program 
functions;
j	 Maintains information security duties as a primary responsibility; and
j	 Heads an office with the mission and resources to assist the 
organization in achieving more secure information and information 
systems in accordance with the requirements in FISMA.
Authorizing Official
The authorizing official is a senior official or executive with the authority to for-
mally assume responsibility for operating an information system at an acceptable 
level of risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organiza-
tions, and the Nation. Authorizing officials typically have budgetary oversight 
for an information system or are responsible for the mission and/or business 
operations supported by the system. Through the security authorization pro-
cess, authorizing officials are accountable for the security risks associated with 
information system operations. Accordingly, authorizing officials are in manage-
ment positions with a level of authority commensurate with understanding and 
accepting such information system–related security risks. Authorizing officials:
j	 Approve security plans, memorandums of agreement or understanding, 
and plans of action and milestones and determine whether significant 
changes in the information systems or environments of operation 
require reauthorization;
j	 Deny authorization to operate an information system or if the system is 
operational, halt operations, if unacceptable risks exist;
j	 Coordinate their activities with the risk executive (function), CIO, senior 
information security officer, common control providers, information system 
owners, information system security officers, security control assessors, and 
other interested parties during the security authorization process; and
j	 Are responsible for ensuring that all activities and functions associated 
with security authorization that are delegated to authorizing official 
designated representatives are carried out.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
98
Authorizing Official Designated Representative
The authorizing official designated representative is an organizational official 
who acts on behalf of an authorizing official to coordinate and conduct the re-
quired day-to-day activities associated with the security authorization process. 
Authorizing official designated representatives can be:
j	 Empowered by authorizing officials to make certain decisions with 
regard to the planning and resourcing of the security authorization 
process, approval of the security plan, approval and monitoring of the 
implementation of plans of action and milestones, and the assessment 
and/or determination of risk; and
j	 Called upon to prepare the final authorization package, obtain the 
authorizing official’s signature on the authorization decision document, 
and transmit the authorization package to appropriate organizational 
officials.
Common Control Provider
The common control provider is an individual, group, or organization respon-
sible for the development, implementation, assessment, and monitoring of 
common controls (i.e., security controls inherited by information systems). 
Common control providers are responsible for:
j	 Documenting the organization-identified common controls in a 
security plan (or equivalent document prescribed by the organization);
j	 Ensuring that required assessments of common controls are carried 
out by qualified assessors with an appropriate level of independence 
defined by the organization;
j	 Documenting assessment findings in a security assessment report; and
j	 Producing a plan of action and milestones for all controls having 
weaknesses or deficiencies.
Information System Owner
The information system owner is an organizational official responsible for 
the procurement, development, integration, modification, operation, mainte-
nance, and disposal of an information system. The information system owner 
is responsible for:
j	 Addressing the operational interests of the user community (i.e., 
users who require access to the information system to satisfy mission, 
business, or operational requirements);
j	 Ensuring compliance with information security requirements;
j	 In coordination with the information system security officer, 
development and maintenance of the security plan and ensuring that 
the system is deployed and operated in accordance with the agreed-
upon security controls; and

Understanding security and privacy governance
99
j	 In coordination with the information owner/steward, deciding who has 
access to the system (and with what types of privileges or access rights) 
and ensuring that system users and support personnel receive the 
requisite security training (e.g., instruction in rules of behavior).
Information System Security Officer
The information system security officer is an individual responsible for ensuring 
that the appropriate operational security posture is maintained for an informa-
tion system and, as such, works in close collaboration with the information sys-
tem owner. The information system security officer:
j	 Serves as a principal advisor on all matters, technical and otherwise, 
involving the security of an information system;
j	 Has detailed knowledge and expertise required to manage the security 
aspects of an information system and, in many organizations, is 
assigned responsibility for the day-to-day security operations of a 
system;
j	 May be called upon to assist in the development of the security policies 
and procedures and to ensure compliance with those policies and 
procedures; and
j	 In close coordination with the information system owner, often plays 
an active role in the monitoring of a system and its environment 
of operation to include developing and updating the security plan, 
managing and controlling changes to the system, and assessing the 
security impact of those changes.
Information Security Architect
The information security architect is an individual, group, or organization re-
sponsible for ensuring that the information security requirements necessary to 
protect the organization’s core missions and business processes are adequately 
addressed in all aspects of enterprise architecture including reference models, 
segment and solution architectures, and the resulting information systems 
supporting those missions and business processes. The information security 
architect:
j	 Serves as the liaison between the enterprise architect and the 
information system security engineer;
j	 Coordinates with information system owners, common control 
providers, and information system security officers on the allocation of 
security controls as system-specific, hybrid, or common controls; and
j	 In close coordination with information system security officers, advises 
authorizing officials, CIOs, senior information security officers, and the 
risk executive (function), on a range of security-related issues including, 
for example, establishing information system boundaries, assessing the 

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
100
severity of weaknesses and deficiencies in the information system, plans 
of action and milestones, risk mitigation approaches, security alerts, 
and potential adverse effects of identified vulnerabilities.
Information System Security Engineer
The information system security engineer is an individual, group, or organiza-
tion responsible for conducting information system security engineering ac-
tivities. Information system security engineering is a process that captures and 
refines information security requirements and ensures that the requirements 
are effectively integrated into information technology component products 
and information systems through purposeful security architecting, design, de-
velopment, and configuration. Information system security engineers:
j	 Serve as an integral part of the development team (e.g., integrated 
project team) designing and developing organizational information 
systems or upgrading legacy systems;
j	 Employ best practices when implementing security controls within an 
information system including software engineering methodologies, 
system/security engineering principles, secure design, secure 
architecture, and secure coding techniques; and
j	 Coordinate their security-related activities with information security 
architects, senior information security officers, information system owners, 
common control providers, and information system security officers.
Security Control Assessor
The security control assessor is an individual, group, or organization respon-
sible for conducting a comprehensive assessment of the management, opera-
tional, and technical security controls employed within or inherited by an in-
formation system to determine the overall effectiveness of the controls (i.e., the 
extent to which the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, 
and producing the desired outcome with respect to meeting the security re-
quirements for the system). Security control assessors:
j	 Provide an assessment of the severity of weaknesses or deficiencies 
discovered in the information system and its environment of operation 
and recommend corrective actions to address identified vulnerabilities; 
and
j	 Prepare the final security assessment report containing the results and 
findings from the assessment.
Governance Structures
For purposes of the exam and understanding the basic principles and objec-
tives involved, next we will review the governance structures published by the 
NIST and the United Kingdom’s NHS.

Understanding security and privacy governance
101
NIST Structure
The NIST SP 800-39 outlines three approaches (centralized, decentralized, and 
hybrid) to information security governance. The approaches differ in authority, 
responsibility, and decision-making power and selecting an appropriate struc-
ture will vary based on a number of factors (e.g., business requirements, organi-
zation culture and size, risk tolerance). However, the information security gover-
nance structures are aligned with other governance structures (e.g., information 
technology governance) to maximize compatibility and overall effectiveness.
Centralized Governance
In centralized governance structures, the authority, responsibility, and decision-
making power are vested solely within central bodies. These centralized bod-
ies establish the appropriate policies, procedures, and processes for ensuring 
organization-wide involvement in the development and implementation of risk 
management and information security strategies, risk, and information security 
decisions, and the creation of interorganizational and intraorganizational com-
munication mechanisms. A centralized approach to governance requires strong, 
well-informed central leadership and provides consistency throughout the or-
ganization. Centralized governance structures also provide less autonomy for 
subordinate organizations that are part of the parent organization.
Decentralized Governance
In decentralized information security governance structures, the authority, re-
sponsibility, and decision-making power are vested in and delegated to indi-
vidual subordinate organizations within the parent organization (e.g., bureaus/
components within an executive department of the federal government or busi-
ness units within a corporation). Subordinate organizations establish their own 
policies, procedures, and processes for ensuring (sub) organization-wide involve-
ment in the development and implementation of risk management and informa-
tion security strategies, risk and information security decisions, and the creation 
of mechanisms to communicate within the organization. A decentralized ap-
proach to information security governance accommodates subordinate organi-
zations with divergent mission/business needs and operating environments at 
the cost of consistency throughout the organization as a whole. The effectiveness 
of this approach is greatly increased by the sharing of risk-related information 
among subordinate organizations so that no subordinate organization is able to 
transfer risk to another without the latter’s informed consent. It is also important 
to share risk-related information with parent organizations as the risk decisions 
by subordinate organizations may have an effect on the organization as a whole.
Hybrid Governance
In hybrid information security governance structures, the authority, responsi-
bility, and decision-making power are distributed between a central body and 

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
102
individual subordinate organizations. The central body establishes the poli-
cies, procedures, and processes for ensuring organization-wide involvement 
in the portion of the risk management and information security strategies and 
decisions affecting the entire organization (e.g., decisions related to shared 
infrastructure or common security services). Subordinate organizations, in a 
similar manner, establish appropriate policies, procedures, and processes for 
ensuring their involvement in the portion of the risk management and in-
formation security strategies and decisions that are specific to their mission/
business needs and environments of operation. A hybrid approach to gov-
ernance requires strong, well-informed leadership for the organization as a 
whole and for subordinate organizations, and provides consistency through-
out the organization for those aspects of risk and information security that 
affect the entire organization.
National Health Service Structure
As an alternate framework, the United Kingdom’s NHS has published an in-
formation governance toolkit (the “NHS Toolkit”) designed to enable orga-
nizations and partners to assess compliance with the various laws, policies, 
and standards associated with information governance. While this particular 
toolkit incorporates legal requirements for healthcare organizations operating 
in the United Kingdom, it provides foundational principles that should be part 
of any information governance program and can be adapted to incorporate 
requirements for healthcare organizations operating in any jurisdiction. The 
NHS Toolkit provides a framework of information governance requirements 
inclusive of security and privacy objectives that vary by the type of healthcare 
organization. As an example, the minimum requirements for General Practice 
organizations cover the three control areas shown in Figure 5.2: information 
governance management, confidentiality and data protection assurance, and 
information security assurance.
FIGURE 5.2 NHS General Practice information governance life cycle.

Understanding risk management methodology
103
While Figure 5.2 provides a high-level overview of the requirements for Gen-
eral Practice organizations, requirements for alternate types of healthcare or-
ganizations are available on the NHS Toolkit website (www.igt.hscic.gov.uk). 
The NHS Toolkit also provides the minimum requirements for each control 
area as shown in Figure 5.3 based on the various laws and policies govern-
ing a General Practice organization. Additional supplemental assessment and 
implementation guidance for each individual control is available on the NHS 
Toolkit website.
UNDERSTANDING RISK MANAGEMENT METHODOLOGY
A comprehensive risk management methodology is a foundational compo-
nent to any successful security and privacy program, and is driven by regu-
latory requirements in many jurisdictions. For example, the HIPAA Security 
Rule requires organizations to implement policies and procedures to prevent, 
detect, contain, and correct security violations with risk analysis as one of the 
four required implementation specifications. It also requires organizations to 
conduct accurate and thorough assessments of the potential risks and vulnera-
bilities to the CIA of electronic protected health information. Risk assessments 
FIGURE 5.3 Minimum requirements for General Practice organizations.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
104
should be conducted on a periodic basis and designed to identify, assess, pri-
oritize, respond to, and monitor risk to the organization for the purpose of 
informing and enabling stakeholders to make risk-based decisions. The meth-
ods for risk analysis will vary based on the size, complexity, and capabilities of 
an organization, but for purposes of the exam we will focus on the important 
concepts and steps involved in a risk management methodology including 
preparation, execution, communication, and maintenance as recommended 
by NIST (Figure 5.4).
Framing
The first component of the risk management methodology involves under-
standing the environment in which the organization operates and its risk toler-
ance (or appetite) to ensure risk is appropriately framed. The purpose of fram-
ing is to enable implementation of a risk management strategy that aligns with 
how an organization plans to assess, respond to, and monitor risk based on 
their established risk tolerance and decision-making processes. This provides 
the framework for managing risk and enabling risk-based decisions.
Assessment
The second component of the methodology involves assessing risk to identify 
threats, vulnerabilities, potential impact (harm) and likelihood harm will oc-
cur for the purpose of determining risk.
Response
The third component of the methodology addresses how an organization should 
respond to risk once identified. It also ensures alignment with the organization’s 
risk management strategy, evaluation of options for risk acceptance, avoidance, 
FIGURE 5.4 NIST risk assessment within the risk management process.

Understanding risk management methodology
105
remediation and transfer, determination of appropriate courses of action, and 
successful implementation of actions in accordance with risk decision.
Monitoring
The final component of the risk methodology involves the monitoring of risk 
over time for the purpose of evaluating control effectiveness, identifying sys-
tem and environment changes that create risk, and ensuring risk responses are 
implemented in alignment with business objectives, regulatory requirements, 
and security and privacy policies, standards, and guidelines. Risk management 
methodologies can be incorporated into a number of risk processes and activi-
ties to assist with development of an information security architecture, defin-
ing requirements for the interconnection of information systems, designing 
security controls and supporting implementation of information systems and 
various technologies, access management processes and authorization con-
trols, and valuation of changes to information systems.
Risk Assessment Approach
The high-level steps involved in a risk assessment as outlined by the NIST SP 
800-30 are (Figure 5.5):
Assessment preparation: Establish a context for the assessment informed 
by risk framing as discussed earlier.
FIGURE 5.5 NIST risk assessment process.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
106
Conduct assessment: Produce a list of risks that can be prioritized and 
used to make risk-based decisions.
Communicate results: Ensure decision makers are appropriately 
informed to enable risk-based decisions.
Assessment maintenance: Monitor changes and ensure risk assessment 
results are kept up to date.
Before discussing the information risk assessment process in Chapter 6, it is 
first important to understand key concepts associated with risk management 
methodologies.
Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis
The first concept is quantitative and qualitative analysis. An approach for as-
sessing risk can be qualitative, quantitative, or a combination of both with 
approach selection based on the organization’s existing risk methodology or 
culture. Quantitative assessments involve numbers (e.g., $10,000, $50,000, 
$100,000) and typically involve a set of methods, principles, or rules for 
assessing risk using these numbers. These assessments tend to be less subjec-
tive than other methods and are quite effective when evaluating the costs 
and benefits of various risk responses to assist decision makers in selecting 
an appropriate course of action. However, the results are not always straight-
forward after taking into consideration potential assumptions and con-
straints associated with the results, so interpretation and further explanation 
may be required. The quality of a quantitative assessment can be measured 
by the rigor, repeatability, and reproducibility of the results, but sometimes 
outweighed by the cost associated with obtaining the results due to the time 
and expertise required. Quantitative assessments can also be measured in 
terms of:
Single loss expectancy (SLE): Loss in monetary (e.g., dollars) terms 
associated with occurrence of a single event. Expressed as an equation: 
SLE = asset value × exposure (% of loss of total asset value).
Annual rate of occurrence (ARO): The anticipated frequency that a SLE 
event is projected to occur in a 12-month period.
Annual loss expectancy (ALE): The expected loss over a 12-month period 
based on the SLE of an event and the ARO. Expressed as an equation: 
ALE = SLE × ARO.
For example, let us say an organization has 10,000 records of electronic PHI 
including names and Social Security numbers stored within an application. 
If we can tie the total potential loss of each health record to a specific dollar 
figure such as $200, the maximum potential impact in a situation where all 
records are lost would not exceed $2,000,000. If a particular event occurs twice 

Understanding risk management methodology
107
every 12 months and results in a 5% loss of records per event, we can calculate 
the following:
Maximum impact ($2,000,000) = records (10,000) × impact ($200 per 
record)
SLE ($100,000) = asset value ($2,000,000) × exposure (5%)
ALE ($200,000) = SLE ($100,000) × ARO (2 per year)
Alternatively, qualitative assessments involve non-numerical categories or lev-
els (e.g., low, moderate, high) and can be more effective when communicat-
ing with stakeholders. However, this type of analysis is subjective and each 
category or level must be clearly defined to produce results that are repeatable 
and reproducible. Similar to quantitative, further explanation may be required 
including the summarization of reasons supporting the result. For example, let 
us say we want to measure an organization’s risk associated with losing 10,000 
records of electronic PHI in terms of how much media coverage it receives. 
While we may be unable to quantify the loss in dollars, it can be expressed in 
categorical terms if associated with each type of media coverage (Figure 5.6).
If the organization received regional media coverage associated with the loss 
of these 10,000 records (moderate impact) and we estimate this loss would 
occur every 5 years (likelihood), a qualitative approach using Figure 5.7 would 
conclude this presents an overall medium risk to the organization.
FIGURE 5.6 Qualitative analysis based on media coverage.
FIGURE 5.7 Qualitative analysis leveraging likelihood and impact.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
108
Asset Identification and Valuation
The second concept to understand involves asset identification and valuation. 
An important component to a risk management methodology is the identifica-
tion and inventory of information assets. Without an accurate asset inventory, 
it will be difficult to assess risk and ensure appropriate administrative, physical, 
and technical safeguards are implemented to protect the organization’s assets. 
For example, as the HIPAA Security Rule mandates protection for electronic 
protected health information, the organization must understand where this 
type of information is stored, received, maintained, or transmitted to ensure 
it receives appropriate protections and the organization maintains compliance 
with the law. Asset valuation is another important factor in identifying the 
importance of assets to an organization. Value can be derived in both tan-
gible and intangible forms and associated with risk (e.g., low, medium, high). 
Tangible forms involve direct (real) value of physical assets including revenue 
and server or facility costs. Intangible forms involve indirect value such as 
brand, reputation, and loss of prospective customers and intellectual property. 
For example, let us say a healthcare organization has an online prescription fill-
ing system that generates $5000 per hour in revenue. If the system goes offline  
unexpectedly for 3 hours and leaves the organization unable to take new orders 
or fill prescriptions, the organization would have $15,000 in tangible (direct) 
revenue losses. The organization might also incur intangible losses associated 
with media coverage of the outage impacting brand and reputation or custom-
ers filling prescriptions with a competitor. An inventory of information assets 
and their associated value will enable organizations to leverage a risk-based 
approach to protecting only those assets with the greatest need of protection. 
Otherwise organizations will be left wasting resources and likely failing to pro-
tect all information assets equally based on the highest set of requirements.
Threats
The next concept to understand is a threat, which is any event with the poten-
tial to adversely impact the CIA of information systems through unauthorized 
access, destruction, disclosure, or modification of information, or denial of 
service. Healthcare organizations will need to identify threats that are unique 
and reasonably applicable to their operating environment. Threat sources can 
be internal or external and involve:
j	 Hostile cyber or physical attacks
j	 Structure failures of organization-controlled resources (e.g., hardware, 
software)
j	 Natural or man-made disasters and accidents (even intentional)
Internal threats involve resources (e.g., employees, contractors, vendors) with 
access to the organization’s assets and threats can even come from the assets 
themselves. These can include:

Understanding risk management methodology
109
j	 An internal contractor attempting unauthorized access to an 
information system, posing a threat to data confidentiality
j	 An employee accidently entering the wrong Social Security number for 
a patient, posing a threat to data integrity
j	 A backup generator for the organization’s data center failing to start 
during a power outage, posing a threat to availability
External threats are those from sources outside the organization’s control such 
as weather (e.g., hurricanes, tornados, floods) resulting in a natural disaster or 
cyber attacks conducted by organized crime rings.
Vulnerability
The next concept to understand is vulnerability (sometimes referred to as ex-
posure), which can be characterized as any weakness in an information sys-
tem such as servers, networks, and infrastructure that could be intentionally 
or unintentionally exploited by a threat. While many can be attributed to the 
absence or ineffectiveness of security controls, some arise naturally due to 
changes in people, process, and technology over time. Healthcare organiza-
tions must identify vulnerabilities, which, if exploited by a threat, reasonably 
present a risk of inappropriate access to or disclosure of PHI. Examples of vul-
nerabilities may include:
System patching: As server, network, and infrastructure vulnerabilities 
are identified, manufacturers typically release software patches to fix or 
mitigate the vulnerability. If organizations have not implemented effective 
patching processes, they will remain exposed to these vulnerabilities and 
provide threats an opportunity to exploit them.
System hardening: Systems should be sufficiently hardened to provide 
additional security beyond base or default configurations. This includes 
disabling or removing unnecessary services and software, changing 
default passwords and administrator accounts, and ensuring appropriate 
patches are applied. Without effective hardening practices, systems will be 
exposed to a greater number of vulnerabilities over time and will increase 
the opportunity for threats to exploit them.
Mobile media: Organizations should control the use of mobile media 
devices such as USB storage devices. These devices can introduce 
malicious software directly onto an information system or provide a 
means for information to be copied off of the organization’s systems.
Backup: Information and systems should be regularly backed up to 
enable the organization to recover from an adverse event. If a system 
vulnerability were exploited by a threat or encountered due to a natural 
disaster and resulted in the corruption or loss of data, an organization 
will need to be able to sufficiently recover using backup processes and 
procedures.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
110
Change management: Vulnerabilities can be introduced by changes in 
people, process, and technology. An effective change management process 
can include the evaluation of potential impacts resulting from a change 
and ensure vulnerabilities are sufficiently mitigated prior to change 
implementation.
Access management: Inappropriate access to systems, networks, and 
infrastructure introduces vulnerabilities for threat exploitation. If the user 
account of a terminated contractor is not removed or disabled in a timely 
manner, the account could facilitate unauthorized access.
Controls
The next concept to understand is controls, which are techniques, methods, 
policies, standards, processes, procedures, guidelines, and physical devices de-
signed to mitigate the vulnerability of an information asset or probability of 
successful vulnerability exploitation by a threat. Controls are also referred to 
as safeguards and can be administrative, physical, or technical in nature to re-
duce an organization’s exposure to both threats and vulnerabilities. Figure 5.8 
provides examples of various administrative, physical, and technical controls.
Likelihood
The next concept to understand is likelihood, which is an estimate of the likeli-
hood (also referred to as probability) a threat will be motivated and capable 
of exploiting a vulnerability. It addresses the probability or possibility that an 
event will occur and result in an adverse impact, regardless of the magnitude 
of harm that is expected. The estimation should be determined based on cur-
rent state of the target system, an analysis of existing control effectiveness, and 
the expected likelihood after new controls are applied. Likelihood should also 
be associated with a specific time frame (e.g., next month, 6 months, 1 year, 
5 years) and take into consideration the estimated frequency of an event. 
Figure 5.9 provides an example of likelihood associated with frequency.
FIGURE 5.8 Control examples.
FIGURE 5.9 Association between likelihood and frequency.

Understanding risk management methodology
111
As part of the estimation process, organizations should assess the likelihood a 
threat will attempt to exploit one or more vulnerabilities and the likelihood it 
will result in an adverse impact or harm the organization.
Impact
The next concept to understand is impact, which is the expected harm or dam-
age to an organization resulting from the successful exploitation of a vulner-
ability. The harm or damage can result from unauthorized information disclo-
sure, modification, destruction, or loss of availability and be realized by both 
organizational and nonorganizational stakeholders such as clients, sharehold-
ers, business heads, or information system owners. Some organizations may 
define how established values and priorities guide the identification of im-
portant assets and the potential adverse impact to organizational stakeholders 
using a process generally referred to as asset classification. This process enables 
an organization to clearly indicate the organizational impact associated with 
different types of information. Figure 5.10 provides an example of asset clas-
sification where impacts are associated with specific data types.
Risk
The next concept to understand is risk, which is a measure of the extent to which 
an organization is threatened by a particular event. It is also a function of the like-
lihood the adverse event occurs and the resulting impact to the organization. One 
of the more common ways to express risk is using a formula as follows:
Risk
threat
vulnerability
=
×
Several lower-level risks can also be aggregated (combined) into one general 
or higher-level risk. For example, if an assessment produces four low and two 
medium risks, they could be reflected as one high (medium + medium) and 
one medium (low + low + low + low) when aggregated together depending on 
the nature of the risks involved.
There are three main types of risk: inherent, managed, and residual. Inherent 
risk is the maximum potential loss and likelihood associated with a particular 
event given the absence of controls or safeguards. Managed (also referred to as 
FIGURE 5.10 Example of asset classification.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
112
mitigated) risk is the potential loss and likelihood associated with a particular 
event with existing controls and safeguards in place. Residual risk is the poten-
tial loss and likelihood remaining after existing and newly proposed controls, 
safeguards, and actions have been implemented. Figure 5.11 provides an over-
view of how these three risk types interrelate.
Risk Treatment
Organizations generally have four possible options for responding to different 
types of risks that include:
j	 Acceptance: Decision to accept a particular risk and its associated losses 
assuming it falls within an organization’s risk tolerance. Acceptance usually 
occurs for lower risks or when the cost associated with selecting one of the 
other three options exceeds the maximum potential loss of the asset.
j	 Transfer: Decision to fully or partially transfer a particular risk and its 
associated losses to a third party such as vendor or insurance company. 
For example, if the maximum potential loss associated with an asset is 
$100,000, an organization might purchase a $75,000 insurance policy 
from a third party to reduce its direct risk exposure to $25,000 (after 
insurance coverage).
j	 Mitigate: Decision to reduce vulnerabilities through implementation 
of additional administrative, physical, and/or technical safeguards. For 
example, to reduce the risk of data loss associated with a lost or stolen 
laptop, an organization might implement encryption as an additional 
technical control.
j	 Avoid: Decision to avoid taking actions or activities that would create 
new risk for the organization. For example, if implementation of a new 
website would provide $100,000 in revenue but result in $500,000 in risk 
exposure on an annual basis, an organization may choose to avoid the 
risk altogether by not implementing the new website in the first place.
INFORMATION RISK MANAGEMENT LIFE CYCLE 
AND ACTIVITIES
Information risk management is a continuous life cycle beginning from the 
point information is created and ending when information is disposed, de-
stroyed, or no longer requires protection. While various frameworks have been 
FIGURE 5.11 Risk types and relationships.

Information risk management life cycle and activities
113
published by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), ISO, and 
NIST, all share similar principles and objectives. For purposes of the exam and 
understanding the basic principles and objectives of information risk manage-
ment life cycles and associated activities, we will focus on the NIST SP 800-37 
framework as shown in Figure 5.12.
A system development life cycle typically involves five phases including initia-
tion (concept/requirements definition), development/acquisition, implementa-
tion, operation/maintenance, and disposal. Each risk management life cycle step 
shown in Figure 5.12 is integrated into each system development life cycle phase.
Step 1: Categorize Information Systems
The categorization of information systems involves three distinct tasks that 
occur during the initiation stage of the system development life cycle. This 
step also assists with the identification of assets and information systems that 
create, receive, transmit, or maintain electronic PHI as required by the HIPAA 
Security Rule.
Categorize
Arguably the most important item is the implementation of a security catego-
rization process that ensures information systems are categorized based on the 
FIGURE 5.12 Information risk management life cycle.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
114
mission and business objectives of an organization. The categorization process 
also takes into consideration an organization’s risk management strategy and 
the potential impact associated with the loss of CIA of the information system. 
The results of categorization assist with the selection of appropriate admin-
istrative, physical, and technical security controls to ensure the information 
system is appropriately protected.
Describe
Document the description of the information system in a manner commen-
surate with its categorization. Information system descriptions may include 
information such as:
j	 Name and/or unique identifier of the information system;
j	 Information system owner, relevant contacts, and location;
j	 Purpose, function, and capabilities of the information system;
j	 Results from security categorization process;
j	 Types of information processed, stored, and transmitted; and/or
j	 Hardware, operating systems, databases, and applications involved.
Register
Include the information system within the organization’s system inventory 
and define who will own, manage, and/or control the system. When all tasks 
are completed, the system owner should be able to answer in the affirmative to 
the checkpoint questions in Figure 5.13.
Step 2: Select Security Controls
The selection of security controls step involves four distinct tasks that occur 
during the initiation or development/acquisition stages of the system develop-
ment life cycle.
Identify
Identify common security controls that are provided by the organization and 
inherited by information systems during the initiation stage of the development 
FIGURE 5.13 NIST step 1 checkpoint.

Information risk management life cycle and activities
115
life cycle. If common controls will not be sufficient to adequately protect an 
information system, the system owner will need to evaluate system-specific 
controls or risk acceptance as possible options.
Select
Select, tailor, and document the required security controls based on the in-
formation system’s categorization during the initiation phase of the system 
development life cycle. Risk assessment results can also be leveraged to provide 
guidance during the security control selection process. After selection is com-
pleted, security controls may need to be tailored so they more closely align 
with the needs of the organization or information system. The tailoring pro-
cess generally involves establishing baseline security controls, adjusting base-
line controls and selecting additional compensating controls where necessary, 
and providing guidance for control implementation.
Monitor
Develop a strategy to continuously monitor security control effectiveness dur-
ing the initiation phase of the system development life cycle. After controls are 
implemented, an important component of any risk management program is 
monitoring effectiveness of the control to understand the state of the informa-
tion system over time as a result of evolving threats, vulnerabilities, technolo-
gies, and business objectives. Criteria are also defined and agreed to by the 
system owner to determine the frequency with which security controls are as-
sessed and monitored postdeployment.
Plan
Develop, review, and approve an overall information system security plan dur-
ing the development/acquisition phase of the system development life cycle. 
The system owner and other appropriate stakeholders review the security plan 
to ensure it is complete and consistent, and satisfies the security requirements 
for the information system. If no changes are required, the plan is accepted and 
the system owner should be able to answer in the affirmative to the checkpoint 
questions in Figure 5.14.
Acceptance of the security plan represents an important milestone in both the 
risk management process and the system development life cycle. The stake-
holder, by approving the security plan, agrees to the set of security controls 
proposed to meet the security requirements for the information system. This 
approval allows the risk management process to advance to the next step in 
the RMF (i.e., the implementation of the security controls). The approval of 
the security plan also establishes the level of effort required to successfully 
complete the remainder of the steps in the RMF and provides the basis of the 
security specification for the acquisition of the information system, subsys-
tems, or components.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
116
Step 3: Implement Security Controls
The implementation of security controls step involves two distinct tasks that 
occur during both the development/acquisition and implementation stages of 
the system development life cycle.
Implement
Implement the security controls defined by the security plan in a manner con-
sistent with the organization’s enterprise and information security architecture 
and industry best practice. A security engineering process should be invoked to 
evaluate the control requirements and assist with their design and integration 
into information systems.
Document
Document how the security controls were implemented as part of the security 
plan. Documentation should include expectations regarding overall informa-
tion system performance, details surrounding the implementation of common 
and system-specific administrative, physical, and technical security controls, 
and any system or platform dependencies. When all tasks are completed, the 
system owner should be able to answer in the affirmative to the checkpoint 
questions in Figure 5.15.
Step 4: Assess Security Controls
The assessment of security controls step involves four distinct tasks that occur 
during both the development/acquisition and implementation stages of the 
system development life cycle.
FIGURE 5.14 NIST step 2 checkpoint.

Information risk management life cycle and activities
117
Prepare
Develop, review, and approve a security assessment plan that defines objectives, 
road map for a security controls assessment, and assessment procedures. The 
plan should also ensure the individual performing the assessment (assessor) 
has sufficient technical expertise and independence (no conflicts of interest) to 
successfully carry out the assessment.
Assess
Execute the security assessment plan to determine if controls are implemented 
correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome to meet 
the information systems security requirements. The assessment should be per-
formed early in the system development life cycle to enable identified security 
weaknesses and deficiencies to be resolved in a more cost-effective and timely 
manner. The assessor will be responsible for evaluating the security controls in 
accordance with the assessment procedure and providing the information sys-
tem owner with specific recommendations on how to correct security control 
weaknesses or deficiencies and reduce or eliminate vulnerabilities.
Report
Prepare the security assessment report that includes details with regard to is-
sues, findings, recommendations, and information pertaining to overall secu-
rity control effectiveness.
Remediate
Begin initial remediation (or treatment) of issues and findings and reassess-
ment of remediated controls. If information system owners and management 
decide that certain findings warrant immediate action, they may direct that 
initial remediation begin immediately. After initial remediation has complet-
ed, the assessor will need to reevaluate the remediated controls and update 
the assessment report where appropriate. Once the assessment has been com-
pleted, the security plan should also be updated to ensure it includes a list 
FIGURE 5.15 NIST step 3 checkpoint.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
118
and description of implemented security controls and residual vulnerabilities. 
When all tasks are completed, the system owner should be able to answer in 
the affirmative to the checkpoint questions in Figure 5.16.
Step 5: Authorize Information System
The authorization of information systems step involves four distinct tasks that 
occur during the implementation stage of the system development life cycle.
Plan
Prepare a plan of action and associated milestones based on the findings and 
recommendations from the security assessment report.
Package
Prepare and submit the security plan, security assessment report, and plan of 
action as a package to management for review.
Risk
Determine the overall risk to the organization’s operations based on its risk 
management methodology and evaluate potential courses of action including 
risk acceptance, avoidance, mitigation, or transfer.
Accept
Determine if the risk is acceptable and provide authorization to the system 
owner including terms, conditions, and end date where appropriate. When all 
FIGURE 5.16 NIST step 4 checkpoint.

Information risk management life cycle and activities
119
tasks are completed, the system owner should be able to answer in the affirma-
tive to the checkpoint questions in Figure 5.17.
Step 6: Monitoring Security Controls
The monitoring of security controls step involves seven distinct tasks that occur 
during the operation/maintenance or disposal stages of the system develop-
ment life cycle.
System Change
Assess the security impact associated with proposed or actual changes to the in-
formation system and its operating environment during the operation/main-
tenance stage of the development life cycle. As information systems are in a 
constant state of change, a formal process to assess, manage, control, and docu-
ment information system changes is required to monitor and ensure security 
controls remain effective.
Monitor
Implement continuous monitoring of information system operational and 
technical security controls based on the approved security plan during the op-
eration/maintenance stage of the development life cycle.
Remediate
Remediate issues and deficiencies identified from continuous monitoring, risk 
assessments, and any remaining action plans during the operation/mainte-
nance stage of the development life cycle.
Update
Regularly update the security plan, assessment report, and plan of action dur-
ing the operation/maintenance stage of the development life cycle based on 
results of continuous monitoring and progress toward issue and deficiency 
remediation.
FIGURE 5.17 NIST step 5 checkpoint.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
120
Status
Periodically report the security status of the information system and control 
effectiveness to management during the operation/maintenance stage of the 
development life cycle.
Risk and Accept
Review the security status of the information system with management and 
determine if risk remains within acceptable tolerances or further plans of ac-
tion are required during the operation/maintenance stage of the development 
life cycle.
Disposal
Implement a disposal strategy for when information systems are removed from 
service during the disposal stage of the development life cycle. The strategy 
should be designed to ensure appropriate sanitization of media and updating 
of asset inventories to support system decommission and/or disposal. When 
all tasks are completed, the system owner should be able to answer in the af-
firmative to the checkpoint questions in Figure 5.18.
Exception Handling
As part of any program, a process is required for handling exceptions to ad-
ministrative, physical, and technical safeguards as a means of providing tem-
porary relief. Exceptions should be formally documented, risk rated, tracked, 
and periodically reviewed. For example, in a situation where an administrative 
policy has been implemented requiring a password at least 10 characters in 
length, but an older system can only enforce 8 characters, a temporary excep-
tion might be warranted until an action plan can be completed to remediate 
the deficiency.
FIGURE 5.18 NIST step 6 checkpoint.

Information risk management life cycle and activities
121
Reporting and Metrics
Measurement and reporting of key risk indicators (KRIs) and key perfor-
mance indicators (KPIs) is an important component to measuring program 
effectiveness.
As provided by NIST SP 800-55, an information security measurement program 
should include the four interdependent components shown in Figure 5.19.
The foundation is strong upper-level management support, for not only the 
success of the information security program but also the program’s implemen-
tation. This support establishes a focus on information security within the 
highest levels of the organization. The second component is the existence of 
information security policies and procedures backed by the authority necessary 
to enforce compliance. Information security policies delineate the information 
security management structure, clearly assign information security responsi-
bilities, and lay the foundation needed to reliably measure progress and com-
pliance. Procedures document management’s position on the implementation 
of an information security control and the rigor with which it is applied. Mea-
sures are not easily obtainable if no procedures are in place to supply data for 
measurement. The third component is developing and establishing quantifi-
able performance measures (e.g., KPIs, KRIs) that are designed to capture and 
provide meaningful performance data. To provide meaningful data, quantifi-
able information security measures must be based on information security per-
formance goals and objectives, and be easily obtainable and feasible to mea-
sure. They must also be repeatable, provide relevant performance trends over 
time, and be useful for tracking performance and directing resources.
Finally, the information security measurement program itself must empha-
size consistent periodic analysis of the measures data. Results of this analysis 
are used to apply lessons learned, improve effectiveness of existing security 
FIGURE 5.19 Measurement program structure.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
122
controls, and plan for the implementation of future security controls to meet 
new information security requirements as they occur. The success of an infor-
mation security program implementation should be judged by the degree to 
which meaningful results are produced. A comprehensive information security 
measurement program should provide substantive justification for decisions 
that directly affect the information security posture of an organization.
KEY TERMS
Term
Definition
CIA
Confidentiality, integrity, and availability
PII
Personally identifiable information
PHI
Personal health information
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
FIPS
Federal Information Processing Standards
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
Information governance
Structure (or framework) consisting of policies, processes, 
procedures, behaviors, and technologies designed to assist 
with managing information throughout its life cycle in a man-
ner consistent with stakeholder expectations
Administrative safeguards
Actions, policies, and procedures involved in the selection, 
development, implementation, and maintenance of security 
measures
Physical safeguards
Physical measures to protect the organization’s electronic 
information systems, data in physical form, buildings, and 
equipment from natural and environmental hazards and 
unauthorized intrusion
Technical safeguards
Technology and associated technical standards for its use to 
protect and control access to information
Head of agency
Highest-level official within an organization with overall re-
sponsibility for providing information security protections
Risk executive
Individual or group who ensures risk is viewed from an orga-
nization-wide perspective and risk is managed consistently
Chief Information Officer
Organizational official responsible for designating senior infor-
mation security officer, maintaining policies and procedures, 
overseeing security personnel, and assisting and coordinat-
ing with senior officials regarding security matters
Information owner/stew-
ard
Organizational official with statutory, management, or opera-
tional authority for specified information and the responsibil-
ity for establishing the policies and procedures governing 
its generation, collection, processing, dissemination, and 
disposal
Senior information secu-
rity officer
Also known as Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) or 
Chief Security Officer (CSO), is an organizational official re-
sponsible for carrying out security responsibilities and serving 
as primary liaison for Chief Information Officer

Key terms
123
Term
Definition
Authorizing official
Senior official or executive with the authority to formally as-
sume responsibility for operating an information system at 
an acceptable level of risk to organizational operations and 
assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation
Authorizing official desig-
nated representative
Organizational official who acts on behalf of an authorizing 
official to coordinate and conduct the required day-to-day 
activities associated with the security authorization process
Common control provider
Individual, group, or organization responsible for the develop-
ment, implementation, assessment, and monitoring of com-
mon controls (i.e., security controls inherited by information 
systems)
Information system owner
Organizational official responsible for the procurement, devel-
opment, integration, modification, operation, maintenance, 
and disposal of an information system
Information system secu-
rity officer
Also known as information security officer (ISO), is an individ-
ual responsible for ensuring that the appropriate operational 
security posture is maintained for an information system and, 
as such, works in close collaboration with the information 
system owner
Information security 
architect
Individual, group, or organization responsible for ensur-
ing that the information security requirements necessary 
to protect the organization’s core missions and business 
processes are adequately addressed in all aspects of enter-
prise architecture including reference models, segment and 
solution architectures, and the resulting information systems 
supporting those missions and business processes
Information system secu-
rity engineer
Individual, group, or organization responsible for conducting 
information system security engineering activities
Security control assessor
Individual, group, or organization responsible for conducting 
a comprehensive assessment of the management, opera-
tional, and technical security controls employed within or 
inherited by an information system to determine the overall 
effectiveness of the controls
Centralized governance
Authority, responsibility, and decision-making power are 
vested solely within central bodies
Decentralized governance
Authority, responsibility, and decision-making power are 
vested in and delegated to individual subordinate organiza-
tions within the parent organization
Hybrid governance
Authority, responsibility, and decision-making power are dis-
tributed between a central body and individual subordinate 
organizations
Framing
Understand the environment in which the organization 
operates and its risk tolerance (or appetite) to ensure risk is 
appropriately framed
Assessment
Identify threats, vulnerabilities, potential impact (harm) and 
likelihood harm will occur for the purpose of determining  
risk
Response
How an organization should respond to risk once identified

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
124
Term
Definition
Monitoring
Monitoring of risk over time for the purpose of evaluating 
control effectiveness, identifying system and environment 
changes that create risk, and ensuring risk responses are 
implemented in alignment with business objectives, regulato-
ry requirements, and security and privacy policies, standards, 
and guidelines
Quantitative analysis
Analysis largely involving numbers (e.g., $10,000, $50,000, 
$100,000), visible properties, and statistics and a set of 
methods, principles, or rules for assessing risk
Qualitative analysis
Involves non-numerical categories or levels (e.g., low, moder-
ate, high) and can be more effective when communicating 
with stakeholders. May also involve data such as themes, 
trends, or patterns of human behavior
Single loss expectancy 
(SLE)
Loss in monetary (e.g., dollars) terms associated with occur-
rence of a single event
Annual rate of occurrence 
(ARO)
Anticipated frequency that a single loss expectancy event is 
projected to occur in a 12-month period
Annual loss expectancy 
(ALE)
Expected loss over a 12-month period based on the single 
loss expectancy (SLE) of an event and the annual rate of 
occurrence (ARO)
Tangible loss
Involves direct (real) value of physical assets including rev-
enue and server or facility costs
Intangible loss
Involves indirect value such as brand, reputation, and loss of 
prospective customers and intellectual property
Threat
Any event with the potential to adversely impact the con-
fidentiality, integrity, or availability of information systems 
through unauthorized access, destruction, disclosure, or 
modification of information, or denial of service
Vulnerability
Sometimes referred to as exposure, any weakness in an in-
formation system such as servers, networks, and infrastruc-
ture that could be intentionally or unintentionally exploited by 
a threat
Controls
Sometimes referred to as safeguards, they are techniques, 
methods, policies, standards, processes, procedures, 
guidelines, and physical devices designed to reduce the 
vulnerability of an information asset or likelihood of success-
ful vulnerability exploitation by a threat
Likelihood
Estimate of the likelihood (or probability) a threat will be moti-
vated and capable of successfully exploiting a vulnerability
Impact
Expected harm or damage to an organization resulting from 
the successful exploitation of a vulnerability
Risk
Measure of the extent to which an organization is threatened 
by a particular event
Risk acceptance
Decision to accept a particular risk and its associated losses 
assuming it falls within an organization’s risk tolerance

Key terms
125
Term
Definition
Risk transfer
Decision to fully or partially transfer a particular risk and its 
associated losses to a third party such as vendor or insur-
ance company
Risk mitigation
Decision to reduce vulnerabilities through implementation of 
additional administrative, physical, and/or technical safe-
guards
Risk avoidance
Decision to avoid taking actions or activities that would cre-
ate new risk for the organization
Information risk manage-
ment
Continuous life cycle beginning from the point information is 
created and ending when information is disposed, de-
stroyed, or no longer requires protection
Information system devel-
opment life cycle (SDLC)
Involves five phases including initiation (concept/require-
ments definition), development/acquisition, implementation, 
operation/maintenance, and disposal
Practice Exam
1.	 A structure consisting of policies, processes, procedures, behaviors, and 
technologies designed to assist with managing information throughout its life 
cycle is defined as:
a.	 Administrative safeguards
b.	 Privacy and security governance
c.	 Physical safeguards
d.	 Information governance
2.	 Actions, policies, and procedures involved in the selection, development, 
implementation, and maintenance of security measures are defined as:
a.	 Administrative safeguards
b.	 Privacy and security governance
c.	 Physical safeguards
d.	 Information governance
3.	 The Chief Information Officer is:
a.	 The highest-level official within an organization with overall responsibility 
for providing information security protections
b.	 Responsible for designating a senior information security officer
c.	 Responsible for carrying out chief information security responsibilities
d.	 An organizational official with statutory, management, or operational 
authority for specified information and the responsibility for establishing the 
policies and procedures governing its generation, collection, processing, 
dissemination, and disposal
4.	 The organizational official responsible for the procurement, development, 
integration, modification, operation, maintenance, and disposal of an 
information system is:

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
126
a.	 Authorizing official
b.	 Information owner/steward
c.	 Information system owner
d.	 Chief Information Officer
5.	 NIST SP 800-39 outlines approaches to information security governance that 
include all of the following except:
a.	 Centralized
b.	 Hybrid
c.	 Decentralized
d.	 Uniform
6.	 The International Organization for Standardization:
a.	 Has published an information governance toolkit designed to enable 
organizations and partners to assess compliance with the various laws, 
policies, and standards associated with information governance
b.	 Is responsible for the SP 800 series (computer security) and SP 500 series 
(information technology) publications relating to computer security
c.	 Is responsible for publication of the 27002:2005 and 27799:2008 standards
d.	 a and c
7.	 Framing involves:
a.	 Understanding the environment in which the organization operates
b.	 Understanding risk tolerance to ensure risk is appropriately framed
c.	 Assessing risk to identify threats, vulnerabilities, potential impact, and 
likelihood of harm
d.	 Evaluating risk over time for the purpose of evaluating control effectiveness, 
identifying system and environment changes that create risk, and ensuring 
risk responses are implemented in alignment with business objectives, 
regulatory requirements, and security and privacy policies, standards, and 
guidelines
8.	 Qualitative assessments:
a.	 Involve non-numerical categories or levels (e.g., low, moderate, high) and 
can be more effective when communicating with stakeholders
b.	 Involve an analysis largely involving numbers (e.g., $10,000, $50,000, 
$100,000), visible properties, and statistics and a set of methods, principles, 
or rules for assessing risk
c.	 a and b
d.	 None of the above
9.	 Annual loss expectancy (ALE) is:
a.	 The anticipated frequency that a single loss expectancy (SLE) event is 
projected to occur in a 12-month period
b.	 The expected loss over a 12-month period based on the SLE of an event and 
the annual rate of occurrence (ARO)
c.	 ALE = SLE × ARO
d.	 b and c

Key terms
127
10.	 A vulnerability is:
a.	 Any event with the potential to adversely impact the confidentiality, integrity, 
or availability of information systems through unauthorized access, 
destruction, disclosure, or modification of information, or denial of service
b.	 Any weakness in an information system such as servers, networks, and 
infrastructure that could be intentionally or unintentionally exploited by a 
threat
c.	 A measure of the extent to which an organization is threatened by a 
particular event
d.	 a and c
11.	 A risk is:
a.	 Any event with the potential to adversely impact the confidentiality, integrity, 
or availability of information systems through unauthorized access, 
destruction, disclosure, or modification of information, or denial of service
b.	 Any weakness in an information system such as servers, networks, and 
infrastructure that could be intentionally or unintentionally exploited by a 
threat
c.	 A measure of the extent to which an organization is threatened by a 
particular event
d.	 a and c
12.	 Risk treatment generally involves the following options:
a.	 Transfer, acceptance, mitigate, eliminate
b.	 Acceptance, transmit, mitigate, deflect
c.	 Avoid, transfer, eliminate, manage
d.	 Mitigate, transfer, acceptance, avoid
13.	 Which one of the following formulas is incorrect?
a.	 Managed risk = residual risk − inherent risk
b.	 SLE = asset value × exposure
c.	 ALE = SLE − ARO
d.	 a and c
14.	 Controls are:
a.	 Any weakness in an information system such as servers, networks, and 
infrastructure that could be intentionally or unintentionally exploited by a 
threat
b.	 Techniques, methods, policies, standards, processes, procedures, 
guidelines, and physical devices designed to increase the vulnerability of an 
information asset
c.	 Techniques, methods, policies, standards, processes, procedures, 
guidelines, and physical devices designed to decrease the vulnerability of 
an information asset
d.	 Techniques, methods, policies, standards, processes, procedures, 
guidelines, and physical devices designed to maintain the vulnerability of an 
information asset

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
128
15.	 Likelihood is:
a.	 The expected harm or damage to an organization resulting from the 
successful exploitation of a vulnerability
b.	 The probability a vulnerability will be motivated and capable of exploiting a 
threat
c.	 A measure of the extent to which an organization is threatened by a 
particular event
d.	 None of the above
16.	 The categorization of information systems, selection, implementation, and 
assessment of security controls, authorization of information systems, and 
monitoring of security controls are steps included in the:
a.	 Information governance process
b.	 System development life cycle
c.	 IT governance process
d.	 Information risk management life cycle
17.	 Intangible loss involves:
a.	 Direct (real) value of physical assets including revenue and server or facility 
costs
b.	 Indirect value such as brand, reputation, and loss of prospective customers 
and intellectual property
c.	 Indirect value such as revenue and server or facility costs
d.	 None of the above
18.	 The information system development life cycle includes the following 
phases:
a.	 Initiation, development/acquisition, monitoring, disposal
b.	 Disposal, initiation, operational/maintenance, development/acquisition
c.	 Categorization, selection, implementation, authorization, monitoring
d.	 Selection, implementation, monitoring, disposal
19.	 Centralized governance is defined as:
a.	 Authority, responsibility, and decision-making powers that are distributed 
between a central body and individual subordinate organizations
b.	 Structure (or framework) consisting of policies, processes, procedures, 
behaviors, and technologies designed to assist with managing information 
throughout its life cycle in a manner consistent with stakeholder 
expectations
c.	 Authority, responsibility, and decision-making powers that are vested solely 
within central bodies
d.	 Authority, responsibility, and decision-making powers that are vested in 
and delegated to individual subordinate organizations within the parent 
organization
20.	 Risk transfer involves:
a.	 A decision to avoid taking actions or activities that would create new risk for 
the organization

Key terms
129
b.	 Decision to accept a particular risk and its associated losses assuming it 
falls within an organization’s risk tolerance
c.	 Decision to reduce vulnerabilities through implementation of additional 
administrative, physical, and/or technical safeguards
d.	 None of the above
Practice Exam Answers
1.	 d
2.	 a
3.	 b
4.	 c
5.	 d
6.	 c
7.	 a
8.	 a
9.	 d
10.	 b
11.	 c
12.	 d
13.	 d
14.	 c
15.	 d
16.	 d
17.	 b
18.	 b
19.	 c
20.	 d
References
National Health Service, n.d. Information Governance Toolkit. IG Toolkit Home. Web. June 29, 
2014. <https://www.igt.hscic.gov.uk/Home.aspx?tk(414078609082725&cb(3d2de24d-bef5-
4339-b5d2-f6cdb29e6a21&lnv(7&clnav(YES>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments. NIST 
Computer Security Publications – NIST Special Publications (SPs). Version SP 800-30 rev1. Web. 
June 29, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-30-rev1/sp800_30_r1.pdf>.
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, n.d. 45 CFR Parts 160, 162, and 164 Health Insur-
ance Reform: Security Standards; Final Rule. Health Information Privacy. Web. June 29, 2014. 
<http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/securityrulepdf.pdf>.
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, n.d. Guidance on Risk Analysis Requirements Un-
der the HIPAA Security Rule. Health Information Privacy. Web. June 29, 2014. <http://www.
hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/rafinalguidancepdf.pdf>.
International Organization for Standardization, n.d. Home. About ISO. Web. June 28, 2014. 
<http://www.iso.org/iso/home/about.htm>.

CHAPTER 5: 
Information Governance and Risk Management
130
International Organization for Standardization, n.d. Home. ISO/IEC 27002:2005. Web. June 29, 
2014. <http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber(50297>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Search. NIST Computer Security Publications. 
Web. June 27, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. About NIST. Web. June 29, 2014. <http://
www.nist.gov/public_affairs/nandyou.cfm>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Hot Topics. NIST Computer Security Divi-
sion. Web. June 29, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Guide for Applying the Risk Management 
Framework to Federal Information Systems. Computer Security Division, Computer Security 
Resource Center. Version SP 800-37 rev1. Web. June 29, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/publica-
tions/nistpubs/800-37-rev1/sp800-37-rev1-final.pdf>.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, n.d. CMS Information Security Risk Assessment (IS RA) 
Procedure. CMS Information Security Overview. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 
Version 1.0. Web. June 29, 2014. <https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Sys-
tems/CMS-Information-Technology/InformationSecurity/downloads/IS_RA_Procedure.pdf>.
International Organization for Standardization, n.d. Home. ISO 27799:2008. Web. June 29, 2014. 
<http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber(41298>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Managing Information Security Risk: Or-
ganization, Mission, and Information System View. Computer Security Division, Computer 
Security Resource Center. Version SP 800-39. Web. June 29, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/publi-
cations/nistpubs/800-39/SP800-39-final.pdf>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Performance Measurement Guide for Infor-
mation Security. Computer Security Division, Computer Security Resource Center. Version SP 
800-55 rev1. Web. June 29, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-55-Rev1/
SP800-55-rev1.pdf>.

131
HCISPP Study Guide
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Information Risk Assessment
CHAPTER 6
THIS CHAPTER WILL HELP CANDIDATES:
j	 Understand risk assessment
j	 Identify and use assessment control procedures
j	 Understand the risk assessment process
j	 Understand the risk response and remediation process
INTRODUCTION
Healthcare organizations have an increasing reliance on information technol-
ogy and information systems to carry out their mission. These technologies and 
systems are subject to serious threats that can have an adverse impact on the con-
fidentiality, integrity, and availability of organizational operations and assets. As 
a result, it is important that organizations implement risk assessment processes 
as part of an overall governance program to assist with continuously monitoring 
the effectiveness of administrative, physical, and technical safeguards.
Knowledge Areas
After reviewing this chapter and supporting reference materials, HCISPP 
candidates should comprehend the importance and purpose of conducting 
information risk assessments. This includes identifying assessment control 
procedures, the process for conducting a risk assessment, and the process to 
respond and remediate risk.
UNDERSTANDING RISK ASSESSMENT
Risk assessments are a core component of any information risk management 
program, can be qualitative and/or quantitative in nature, and are designed to 
identify, estimate, and prioritize risk associated with the operation and use of 
information systems.

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
132
Key Terms
Let us briefly review key terms associated with information risk assessment:
j	 Risk: Measure of the extent to which an organization is threatened by a 
particular event.
j	 Information life cycle: Continuous life cycle beginning from the point 
information is created and ending when information is disposed or destroyed.
j	 Threat: Any event with the potential to adversely impact the 
confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information systems through 
unauthorized access, destruction, disclosure, or modification of 
information, or denial of service.
j	 Vulnerability: Sometimes referred to as exposure, any weakness in an 
information system such as servers, networks, and infrastructure that 
could be intentionally or unintentionally exploited by a threat.
j	 Controls: Sometimes referred to as safeguards, they are techniques, 
methods, policies, standards, processes, procedures, guidelines, and 
physical devices designed to reduce the vulnerability of an information 
asset or likelihood of successful vulnerability exploitation by a threat.
j	 Likelihood: Estimate of the likelihood (or probability) a threat will be 
motivated and capable of exploiting a vulnerability.
j	 Impact: Expected harm or damage to an organization resulting from 
the successful exploitation of a vulnerability.
j	 Risk acceptance: Decision to accept a particular risk and its associated 
losses assuming it falls within an organization’s risk tolerance.
j	 Risk transfer: Decision to fully or partially transfer a particular risk and 
its associated losses to a third party such as vendor or insurance company.
j	 Risk mitigation: Decision to reduce vulnerabilities through 
implementation of additional administrative, physical, and/or technical 
safeguards.
j	 Risk avoidance: Decision to avoid taking actions or activities that 
would create new risk for the organization.
Life Cycle and Continuous Monitoring
As discussed in Chapter 5, the information life cycle begins when information 
is first created and continues until such time as the information is disposed of 
or destroyed. As a result, risk assessments cannot be simply one-time activities 
with the hope of providing long-term and definitive information, but must be 
performed periodically throughout the information life cycle to:
j	 Protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information; and
j	 Guide and inform decision makers in their response to risks.
In addition to periodic risk assessments, information and systems should be 
continuously monitored to ensure control effectiveness and identify potential 
threats, events, or changes warranting risk analysis.

Understanding risk assessment
133
Tools, Resources, and Techniques
While various tools, resources, and techniques exist to assist healthcare orga-
nizations with the performance and maintenance of information risk assess-
ments, all share similar principles and objectives. However, selection will vary 
based on a number of factors including, but not limited to, cost and an orga-
nization’s requirements, culture, and size.
NIST Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments
NIST’s Special Publication 800-30 provides guidance for conducting risk as-
sessments of federal information systems and organizations. It is intended to 
serve a diverse group of risk management professionals including:
j	 Individuals with oversight responsibilities for risk management 
(e.g., heads of agencies, chief executive officers, chief operating officers, 
risk executives);
j	 Individuals with responsibilities for conducting organizational 
missions/business functions (e.g., mission/business owners, 
information owners/stewards, authorizing officials);
j	 Individuals with responsibilities for acquiring information technology 
products, services, or information systems (e.g., acquisition officials, 
procurement officers, contracting officers);
j	 Individuals with information system/security design, development, and 
implementation responsibilities (e.g., program managers, enterprise 
architects, information security architects, information system/security 
engineers, information systems integrators);
j	 Individuals with information security oversight, management, 
and operational responsibilities (e.g., chief information officers, 
senior information security officers, information security managers, 
information system owners, common control providers); and
j	 Individuals with information security/risk assessment and monitoring 
responsibilities (e.g., system evaluators, penetration testers, security 
control assessors, risk assessors, independent verifiers/validators, 
inspectors general, auditors).
ISO/IEC 27005:2011
The ISO/IEC 27005:2011 standard provides guidance for information security 
risk management including the performance of risk assessments. As described 
by ISO, “it supports the general concepts specified in ISO/IEC 27001 and is 
designed to assist the satisfactory implementation of information security 
based on a risk management approach.”
Desired Outcomes
The purpose of a risk assessment in terms of the information it is intended to 
produce and the decisions it is intended to support must be defined to achieve 

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
134
a desired outcome. Their intent is to inform decision makers and support risk 
responses by identifying:
j	 Relevant threats to an organization;
j	 Internal and external vulnerabilities;
j	 Potential impact resulting from a threat exploiting a vulnerability; and
j	 Likelihood that impact will occur or be realized.
Role of Internal and External Audit
Internal and external audit provide organizations with an independent perspec-
tive regarding information security program and control effectiveness in protect-
ing the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information. While internal 
audit departments typically review various security controls on a periodic basis, 
organizations should understand the Health Information Technology for Eco-
nomic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH) also requires Health and Human Ser-
vices (HHS) to perform periodic external audits of covered entity and business 
associate compliance with HIPAA Privacy, Security, and Breach Notification Rules.
ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
As defined by NIST Special Publication 800-53A Revision 1, an assessment 
procedure consists of a set of assessment objectives, each with an associated set 
of potential assessment methods and assessment objects.
Assessment Objective
An assessment objective includes a set of determination statements related to the 
security control under assessment. The determination statements are linked to 
the content of the security control (i.e., the security control functionality) to en-
sure traceability of assessment results back to the fundamental control require-
ments. The application of an assessment procedure to a security control pro-
duces assessment findings. These assessment findings reflect, or are subsequently 
used, to help determine the overall effectiveness of the security control.
Assessment Object
Assessment objects identify the specific items being assessed and include speci-
fications, mechanisms, activities, and individuals:
j	 Specifications are the document-based artifacts (e.g., policies, procedures, 
plans, system security requirements, functional specifications, and 
architectural designs) associated with an information system.
j	 Mechanisms are the specific hardware, software, or firmware safeguards 
and countermeasures employed within an information system.
j	 Activities are the specific protection-related pursuits or actions supporting 
an information system that involve people (e.g., conducting system backup 
operations, monitoring network traffic, exercising a contingency plan).

Assessment procedures
135
j	 Individuals, or groups of individuals, are people applying the 
specifications, mechanisms, or activities described earlier.
Assessment Methods
Assessment methods define the nature of the assessor actions and include:
Examine method: The process of reviewing, inspecting, observing, 
studying, or analyzing one or more assessment objects (i.e., specifications, 
mechanisms, or activities). The purpose of the examine method is to 
facilitate assessor understanding, achieve clarification, or obtain evidence.
Interview method: The process of holding discussions with individuals 
or groups of individuals within an organization to, once again, facilitate 
assessor understanding, achieve clarification, or obtain evidence.
Test method: The process of exercising one or more assessment objects 
(i.e., activities or mechanisms) under specified conditions to compare 
actual with expected behavior.
In all three methods, the results are used in making specific determinations 
called for in the determination statements and thereby achieving the objectives 
for the assessment procedure.
NIST Example
The first assessment objective for CP-2 is derived from the basic control state-
ment (Figure 6.1). Potential assessment methods and objects are added to the 
assessment procedure (Figure 6.2).
FIGURE 6.1 NIST example contingency plan security control.

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
136
In a similar manner, the second assessment objective and potential assessment 
methods and objects for CP-2 are established (Figure 6.3).
FIGURE 6.2 NIST example assessment procedure.
FIGURE 6.3 NIST example assessment procedure (continued).

Risk assessment process
137
RISK ASSESSMENT PROCESS
In Chapter 5 we reviewed roles and responsibilities and four key components 
associated with a holistic risk management process that include risk framing, 
assessment, response, and monitoring as outlined by NIST SP 800-30. This 
section focuses on the assessment component and the four-step process of as-
sessing information security risk:
j	 Prepare for the assessment.
j	 Conduct the assessment.
j	 Communicate assessment results.
j	 Maintain the assessment.
Figure 6.4 illustrates the relationship between these steps and their supporting 
set of tasks discussed later in this chapter.
Risk Assessment Hierarchy
Risk assessments can be conducted at all three tiers in the risk management 
hierarchy:
j	 Tier 1 (organization level);
j	 Tier 2 (mission/business process level); and
j	 Tier 3 (information system level).
FIGURE 6.4 NIST risk assessment process.

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
138
At Tiers 1 and 2, organizations use risk assessments to evaluate areas such as 
systemic information security-related risks associated with organizational gov-
ernance and management activities, mission/business processes, enterprise 
architecture, or funding of information security programs. At Tier 3, organi-
zations use risk assessments to more effectively support implementation of 
the information risk management life cycle processes and activities described 
in Chapter 5. Figure 6.5 illustrates the risk management hierarchy defined in 
NIST SP 800-39, which provides multiple risk perspectives from a strategic to 
tactical level. Traditional risk assessments have generally focused on Tier 3, 
which can result in overlooking other significant risk factors more appropri-
ately assessed at Tiers 1 or 2. Risk assessments also support risk response deci-
sions at different tiers of the risk management hierarchy.
Tier 1: Organizational Level
At Tier 1, risk assessments support organizational strategies, policies, guidance, 
and processes for managing risk. Risk assessments conducted at Tier 1 focus on 
organizational operations, assets, and individuals – comprehensive assessments 
across mission/business lines. For example, Tier 1 risk assessments may address:
j	 The specific types of threats directed at an organization and how those 
threats affect policy decisions;
j	 Systemic weaknesses or deficiencies discovered in multiple organizational 
information systems capable of being exploited by threats;
j	 The potential adverse impact on organizations from the loss or 
compromise of organizational information (either intentionally or 
unintentionally); and
FIGURE 6.5 NIST risk management hierarchy.

Risk assessment process
139
j	 The use of new information and computing technologies such 
as mobile and cloud and the potential effect on the ability of 
organizations to successfully carry out their missions/business 
operations while using those technologies.
Tier 1 risk assessments can also affect:
j	 Organization-wide information security programs, policies, procedures, 
and guidance;
j	 Risk management organizational structure;
j	 The types of appropriate risk responses or treatments;
j	 Investment and procurement decisions for information technologies/
systems;
j	 Minimum organization-wide security controls;
j	 Conformance to enterprise/security architectures; and
j	 Monitoring strategies and ongoing authorizations of information 
systems and common controls.
Tier 2: Mission/Business Process
At Tier 2, risk assessments support the determination of mission/business pro-
cess protection and resiliency requirements. They also support the allocation of 
these requirements to enterprise architecture. This allocation is accomplished 
through an information security architecture embedded within the enterprise 
architecture. Tier 2 risk assessments also inform and guide decisions on wheth-
er, how, and when to use information systems for specific mission/business 
processes, in particular for alternative mission/business processing in the face 
of compromised information systems. Tier 2 risk assessments can also affect:
j	 Enterprise architecture/security architecture design decisions;
j	 The selection of common controls and suppliers, services, and 
contractors to support organizational missions/business functions;
j	 The development of risk-aware mission/business processes; and
j	 The interpretation of information security policies with respect to 
organizational information systems and environments in which those 
systems operate.
Tier 3: Information System
The Tier 2 context and the system development life cycle determine the pur-
pose and define the scope of risk assessment activities at Tier 3. While ini-
tial risk assessments (those performed for the first time vs. updating prior risk 
assessments) can be performed at any phase in the system development life 
cycle, they should be performed ideally during the initiation phase. In the 
initiation phase, risk assessments evaluate the anticipated vulnerabilities and 
presumed conditions affecting the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of 

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
140
information systems in the context of the planned operational environment. 
Such assessments inform risk response, enabling information system owners/
program managers and mission/business owners to make the final decisions 
about the necessary security controls based on the security categorization and 
environment of operation. Risk assessments are also conducted at later phases 
in the system development life cycle and update risk assessment results from 
earlier phases. These risk assessment results for as-built or as-deployed infor-
mation systems typically include descriptions of vulnerabilities in the systems, 
an assessment of the risks associated with each vulnerability (thereby updating 
the assessment of vulnerability severity), and corrective actions that can be 
taken to mitigate the risks. Tier 3 risk assessments can also affect:
j	 Design decisions (including the selection, tailoring, and 
supplementation of security controls and the selection of information 
technology products for organizational information systems);
j	 Implementation decisions (including whether specific information 
technology products or product configurations meet security control 
requirements); and
j	 Operational decisions (including the requisite level of monitoring 
activity, the frequency of ongoing information system authorizations, 
system maintenance decisions, and possibly addition of controls to 
address coverage gaps).
Step 1: Prepare
The first step in the process is assessment preparation and involves five sup-
porting tasks:
j	 Identify purpose.
j	 Identify scope.
j	 Identify assumptions and constraints.
j	 Identify information sources.
j	 Identify risk model and analytic approach.
Task 1-1: Identify Purpose
Identify the purpose of the risk assessment in terms of the information that 
the assessment is intended to produce and the decisions the assessment is in-
tended to support. The purpose should be explicitly stated in sufficient detail 
to ensure the assessment produces the appropriate information and supports 
the intended decisions. Each organization can determine how best to capture 
and present information produced during the risk assessment.
At Tier 1, risk assessments:
j	 Support the risk executive (function); and
j	 Serve as a key input to the risk management strategy.

Risk assessment process
141
At Tier 2, risk assessments enable organizations to:
j	 Understand dependencies and ways in which risks are treated among 
information systems that support organizational mission/business 
processes;
j	 Support architectural and operational decisions for organizational risk 
responses;
j	 Identify trends to enable proactive risk response strategies and courses 
of action for mission/business processes to be defined; and
j	 Support reciprocity, particularly to enable information sharing.
At Tier 3, risk assessments support:
j	 Authorization-related decisions throughout the system development life 
cycle;
j	 Reciprocity, particularly for reuse of assessment information;
j	 Risk management activities at Tier 2; and
j	 Programmatic risk management activities throughout the system 
development life cycle.
Risk assessments can also have a very specific purpose such as answering a ques-
tion (e.g., What are the risk implications of a newly discovered vulnerability or 
class of vulnerabilities, allowing new connectivity, outsourcing a specific function, 
or adopting a new technology?). The purpose of a risk assessment is influenced 
by whether it is an initial assessment (first time) or a subsequent assessment initi-
ated from the risk response or monitoring steps in the risk management process.
For initial assessments, the purpose can include:
j	 Establishing a baseline assessment of risk; or
j	 Identifying threats and vulnerabilities, impacts to organizational 
operations and assets, individuals, and other organizations, and other 
risk factors to be tracked over time as part of risk monitoring.
For reassessments, the purpose can include:
j	 Providing a comparative analysis of alternative risk responses or 
answering a specific question;
j	 Updating the risk assessment based on:
• Ongoing determinations of the effectiveness of security controls in 
organizational information systems or operational environments;
• Changes to information systems or operational environments (e.g., 
changes to hardware, firmware, software; changes to system-specific, 
hybrid, or common controls; changes to mission/business processes, 
common infrastructure and support services, threats, vulnerabilities, 
or facilities); and
• Results from compliance verification activities.

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
142
Reassessments may also be initiated by organizations due to incidents that 
have occurred (e.g., cyber attacks compromising organizational information 
or information systems).
Task 1-2: Identify Scope
Identify the scope of the risk assessment in terms of organizational applicabil-
ity, time frame supported, and architectural/technology considerations. The 
scope determines what will be considered in the assessment, affects the range 
of information available to make risk-based decisions, and is determined by 
the organizational official requesting the assessment and the risk management 
strategy. Establishing the scope of the risk assessment helps organizations to 
determine:
j	 What tiers are addressed in the assessment;
j	 What parts of organizations are affected by the assessment and how 
they are affected;
j	 What decisions the assessment results support;
j	 How long assessment results are relevant; and
j	 What influences the need to update the assessment.
Establishing the scope of the risk assessment also helps to determine the form 
and content of the risk assessment report, as well as the information to be shared 
as a result of conducting the assessment. At Tier 3, the scope of a risk assessment 
can depend on the authorization boundary for the information system.
Organizational Applicability
Organizational applicability describes which parts of the organization or sub-
organizations are affected by the risk assessment and resulting risk-based de-
cisions. For example, the risk assessment can inform decisions regarding in-
formation systems supporting a particular organizational mission/business 
function or process. This can include decisions regarding the selection, tailor-
ing, or supplementation of security controls for specific information systems 
or the selection of common controls. Alternatively, the risk assessment can 
inform decisions regarding a set of closely related missions/business functions 
or processes. The scope of the risk assessment may include not only the mis-
sions/business functions, mission/business processes, common infrastructure, 
or shared services on which the organization currently depends but also those 
which the organization might use under specific operational conditions.
Effectiveness Time Frame
Organizations determine how long the results of particular risk assessments 
can be used to legitimately inform risk-based decisions, which is usually re-
lated to assessment purpose. For example, a risk assessment to inform Tier 1 
policy-related decisions needs to be relevant for an extended period of time 

Risk assessment process
143
since the governance process for policy changes can be time-consuming in 
many organizations. On the other hand, a risk assessment conducted to in-
form a Tier 3 decision regarding the use of a compensating security control 
for an information system may be relevant only until the next release of the 
information technology product providing the required security capability. Or-
ganizations determine the useful life of risk assessment results and under what 
conditions the current assessment results become ineffective or irrelevant. 
Risk monitoring can also be used to help determine the effectiveness of time 
frames for risk assessments and the need to refresh existing controls to address 
a changing threat landscape.
Architectural/Technology Considerations
Organizations use architectural and technology considerations to clarify the 
scope of the risk assessment. At Tier 2, for example, the scope of the risk as-
sessment can be defined in terms of the mission/business segment architecture 
(e.g., including all systems, services, and infrastructures that support a specific 
mission/function). For a targeted risk assessment at any tier, the specific ques-
tion to be answered can restrict the scope to a specific technology. At Tier 3, for 
example, the scope of the risk assessment can be an organizational informa-
tion system in its operational environment. This entails placing the informa-
tion system in its architectural context, so that vulnerabilities within inherited 
controls can be taken into consideration. Alternately, the scope of the assess-
ment can be limited solely to the information system, without consideration 
of inherited vulnerabilities.
Task 1-3: Identify Assumptions and Constraints
Identify the specific assumptions and constraints under which the risk assessment 
is conducted. As part of the risk framing step in the risk management process, 
organizations make explicit the specific assumptions, constraints, risk tolerance, 
and priorities/trade-offs used within organizations to make investment and op-
erational decisions, which guides and informs organizational risk assessments. 
When an organizational risk management strategy cannot be cited, risk assess-
ments identify and document assumptions and constraints. Assumptions and 
constraints identified by organizations during the risk framing step and included 
as part of the organizational risk management strategy need not be repeated in 
each individual risk assessment. By making assumptions and constraints explicit, 
there is greater clarity in the risk model selected for the risk assessment, increased 
reproducibility/repeatability of assessment results, and an increased opportunity 
for reciprocity among organizations. Organizations identify assumptions in key 
areas relevant to the risk assessment including, for example:
j	 Threat sources and events;
j	 Vulnerabilities and predisposing conditions;

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
144
j	 Potential impacts;
j	 Assessment and analysis approaches; and
j	 Which missions/business functions are primary.
Organizations also identify constraints in key areas relevant to the risk assess-
ment including, for example:
j	 Resources available for the assessment;
j	 Skills and expertise required for the assessment; and
j	 Operational considerations related to mission/business activities.
Finally, organizations consider the uncertainty with regard to assumptions made 
or other information used in the risk assessment, as uncertainty can affect orga-
nizational risk tolerance. For example, assumptions based on a lack of specific or 
credible information may reduce an organization’s risk tolerance because of the 
uncertainty influencing the assumptions. The following are examples of areas 
where assumptions/constraints for risk assessments may be identified.
Threat Sources
Organizations need to determine which types of threat sources are to be con-
sidered during risk assessments. Organizations make explicit the process used 
to identify threats and any assumptions related to the threat identification pro-
cess. If such information is identified during the risk framing step and included 
as part of the organizational risk management strategy, the information need 
not be repeated in each individual risk assessment. Risk assessments can ad-
dress all types of threat sources, a single broad threat source (e.g., adversarial) 
or a specific threat source (e.g., trusted insider).
Threat Events
Organizations need to determine which type of threat events are to be consid-
ered during risk assessments and the level of detail needed to describe such 
events. Descriptions of threat events can be expressed in highly general terms 
(e.g., phishing, distributed denial-of-service), in more descriptive terms using 
tactics, techniques, and procedures, or in highly specific terms (e.g., the names 
of specific information systems, technologies, organizations, roles, or locations). 
In addition, organizations consider what representative set of threat events can 
serve as a starting point for the identification of the specific threat events in the 
risk assessment and what degree of confirmation is needed for threat events to be 
considered relevant for purposes of the risk assessment. For example, organiza-
tions may consider only those threat events that have been observed (either in-
ternally or by organizations that are peers/partners) or all probable threat events.
Vulnerabilities and Predisposing Conditions
Organizations need to determine the types of vulnerabilities that are to be 
considered during risk assessments and the level of detail provided in the 

Risk assessment process
145
vulnerability descriptions. Organizations make explicit the process used to 
identify vulnerabilities and any assumptions related to the vulnerability iden-
tification process. If such information is identified during the risk framing 
step and included as part of the organizational risk management strategy, the 
information need not be repeated in each individual risk assessment. Vul-
nerabilities can be associated with organizational information systems (e.g., 
hardware, software, firmware, internal controls, and security procedures) or the 
environments in which those systems operate (e.g., organizational governance, 
external relationships, mission/business processes, enterprise architectures, in-
formation security architectures). Organizations also determine the types of 
conditions that are to be considered during risk assessments including, for 
example, architectures and technologies employed, operational environments, 
and personnel.
Likelihood
Organizations need to make explicit the process used to conduct likelihood 
determinations and any assumptions related to the likelihood determination 
process. If such information is identified during the risk framing step and in-
cluded as part of the organizational risk management strategy, the information 
need not be repeated in each individual risk assessment.
Impacts
Organizations need to determine potential adverse impacts in terms of orga-
nizational operations (i.e., missions, functions, image, and reputation), orga-
nizational assets, individuals, and other organizations. Organizations make 
explicit the process used to conduct impact determinations and any assump-
tions related to the impact determination process. If such information is iden-
tified during the risk framing step and included as part of the organizational 
risk management strategy, the information need not be repeated in each in-
dividual risk assessment. Organizations address impacts at a level of detail 
that includes, for example, specific mission/business processes or information 
resources (e.g., information, personnel, equipment, funds, and information 
technology). Organizations may include information from an impact analysis 
with regard to providing impact information for risk assessments.
Risk Tolerance and Uncertainty
Organizations need to determine the levels and types of risk that are accept-
able. Risk tolerance is determined as part of the organizational risk manage-
ment strategy to ensure consistency across the organization. Organizations also 
provide guidance on how to identify reasons for uncertainty when risk factors 
are assessed, since uncertainty in one or more factors will propagate to the re-
sulting evaluation of level of risk, and how to compensate for incomplete, im-
perfect, or assumption-dependent estimates. Consideration of uncertainty is 

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
146
especially important when organizations consider advanced persistent threats 
(APTs) since assessments of the likelihood of threat event occurrence can have 
a great degree of uncertainty. To compensate, organizations can take a variety 
of approaches to determine likelihood, ranging from assuming the worst-case 
likelihood (certain to happen sometime in the foreseeable future) to assuming 
that if an event has not been observed, it is unlikely to happen. In determin-
ing likelihood, they should also consider the probability of an attack being 
attempted and its probability of success. Organizations also determine what 
levels of risk (combination of likelihood and impact) indicate that no further 
analysis of any risk factors is needed.
Analytic Approach
Risk assessments include both assessment approaches (i.e., quantitative, quali-
tative) and analysis approaches (i.e., threat-oriented, asset/impact-oriented, 
vulnerability-oriented). Together, the assessment and analysis approaches 
form the analytic approach for the risk assessment. Organizations determine 
the level of detail and the form in which threats are analyzed including the lev-
el of granularity to describe threat events or threat scenarios. Different analysis 
approaches can lead to different levels of detail in characterizing adverse events 
for which likelihoods are determined. For example, an adverse event could be 
characterized in several ways (with increasing levels of detail):
j	 A threat event (for which the likelihood is determined by taking the 
maximum overall threat sources);
j	 A pairing of a threat event and a threat source; or
j	 A detailed threat scenario/attack tree.
In general, organizations can be expected to require more detail for highly 
critical missions/business functions, common infrastructures, or shared ser-
vices on which multiple missions or business functions depend (as common 
points of failure), and information systems with high criticality or sensitivity. 
Mission/business owners may also amplify this guidance for risk hot spots 
(e.g., information systems, services, or critical infrastructure components of 
particular concern) in mission/business segments.
Task 1-4: Identify Information Sources
Identify the sources of descriptive, threat, vulnerability, and impact informa-
tion to be used in the risk assessment. Descriptive information enables or-
ganizations to be able to determine the relevance of threat and vulnerability 
information.
At Tier 1, descriptive information can include:
j	 The type of risk management and information security governance 
structures in place within organizations; and

Risk assessment process
147
j	 How the organization identifies and prioritizes critical missions/
business functions.
At Tier 2, descriptive information can include information about:
j	 Organizational mission/business processes, functional management 
processes, and information flows;
j	 Enterprise architecture, information security architecture, and 
the technical/process flow architectures of the systems, common 
infrastructures, and shared services that fall within the scope of the risk 
assessment; and
j	 The external environments in which organizations operate including 
the relationships and dependencies with external providers.
Such information is typically found in architectural documentation (par-
ticularly documentation of high-level operational views), business continu-
ity plans, and risk assessment reports for organizational information systems, 
common infrastructures, and shared services that fall within the scope of the 
risk assessment.
At Tier 3, descriptive information can include information about:
j	 The design of and technologies used in organizational information 
systems;
j	 The environment in which the systems operate;
j	 Connectivity to and dependency on other information systems; and
j	 Dependencies on common infrastructures or shared services.
Such information is found in system documentation, contingency plans, and 
risk assessment reports for other information systems, infrastructures, and ser-
vices. Sources of information can be either internal or external to organizations. 
Internal sources of information that can provide insights into both threats and 
vulnerabilities can include risk assessment reports, incident reports, security logs, 
trouble tickets, and monitoring results. Note that internally, information from 
risk assessment reports at one tier can serve as input to risk assessments at other 
tiers. Mission/business owners are encouraged to identify not only common in-
frastructure and/or support services they depend on but also those they might use 
under specific operational circumstances. External sources of threat information 
can include cross-community organizations [e.g., US Computer Emergency Read-
iness Team (US-CERT), Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) for 
critical infrastructure sectors], research and nongovernmental organizations (e.g., 
Carnegie Mellon University, Software Engineering Institute – CERT), and security 
service providers. Organizations using external sources should consider the time-
liness, specificity, and relevance of threat information. Similar to sources of threat 
information, sources of vulnerability information can also be either internal or 
external to organizations. Information about predisposing conditions can be 

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
148
found in a variety of sources including descriptions of information systems, op-
erational environments, shared services, common infrastructures, and enterprise 
architecture. Sources of impact information can include mission/business impact 
analyses, information system component inventories, and security categoriza-
tions. Security categorization constitutes a determination of the potential impacts 
should certain events occur that jeopardize the information and information 
systems needed by the organization to accomplish its assigned missions, protect 
its assets, fulfill its legal responsibilities, maintain its day-to-day functions, and 
protect individuals. Security categories are to be used in conjunction with vulner-
ability and threat information in assessing the risk to organizational operations 
and assets, individuals, and other organizations. Security categories constitute an 
initial summary of impact in terms of failures to meet the security objectives of 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability, and are informed by types of harm.
Task 1-5: Identify Risk Model and Analytic Approach
Identify the risk model and analytic approach to be used in the risk assess-
ment. Organizations need to define one or more risk models for use in con-
ducting risk assessments and identify which model is to be used for the risk 
assessment. To facilitate reciprocity of assessment results, organization-specific 
risk models include, or can be translated into, the risk factors (i.e., threat, vul-
nerability, impact, likelihood, and predisposing condition). Organizations 
also identify the specific analytic approach to be used for the risk assessment 
including the assessment approach (i.e., quantitative, qualitative) and the 
analysis approach (i.e., threat-oriented, asset/impact-oriented, vulnerability-
oriented). Organizations typically define the assessment scales to be used in 
their risk assessments and can identify different assessment scales to be used in 
different circumstances. For example, for low-impact information systems, or-
ganizations could use qualitative values, while for moderate- and high-impact 
systems, the most granular semiquantitative values (0–100) could be used. As 
discussed in NIST Special Publication 800-39, Task 1-1, Risk Assumptions, or-
ganizations vary in the relative weights applied to risk factors. Therefore, this 
guideline does not specify algorithms for combining semiquantitative values. 
Organization-specific risk models include algorithms (e.g., formulas, tables, 
rules) for combining risk factors. If an organization-specific risk model is not 
provided in the risk management strategy as part of the risk framing step, then 
part of this task is to specify the algorithms for combining values. Algorithms 
for combining risk factors reflect organizational risk tolerance. Organization-
specific risk models are refined as part of preparation for a risk assessment by:
j	 Identifying the risk model and the rationale for using it (when multiple 
organization-specific risk models are provided);
j	 Providing additional examples for values of risk factors; and
j	 Identifying any assessment-specific algorithms.

Risk assessment process
149
In the absence of preexisting organization-specific risk models or analytic 
approaches defined in the organizational risk management strategy, the risk 
model and analytic approaches to be used in the risk assessment are defined 
and documented as part of this task (Figure 6.6).
Step 2: Conduct the Assessment
The second step in the risk assessment process is to conduct the assessment with 
the objective of producing a list of information security risks that can be priori-
tized by risk level and used to inform risk response decisions. To accomplish this 
objective, organizations analyze threats and vulnerabilities, impacts and likeli-
hood, and the uncertainty associated with the risk assessment process. This step 
also involves the gathering of essential information as a part of each task and is 
conducted in accordance with the assessment context established in the Prepare 
step of the risk assessment process. The expectation for risk assessments is to 
adequately cover the entire threat space in accordance with the specific defini-
tions, guidance, and direction established during the Prepare step. However, in 
practice, adequate coverage within available resources may dictate generalizing 
threat sources, threat events, and vulnerabilities to ensure full coverage and as-
sessing specific, detailed sources, events, and vulnerabilities only as necessary to 
accomplish risk assessment objectives. Conducting a risk assessment includes:
j	 Identifying threat sources relevant to the organization;
j	 Identifying threat events that could be produced by threat sources;
j	 Identifying vulnerabilities that could be exploited by threat sources 
through specific threat events;
j	 Determining likelihood that threat sources would initiate specific threat 
events and the likelihood that the threat events would be successful;
j	 Determining adverse impacts resulting from vulnerability exploitation; 
and
j	 Determining information security risks as a combination of likelihood 
of threat exploitation of vulnerabilities and its associated impact.
FIGURE 6.6 NIST key activities – assessment preparation.

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
150
Task 2-1: Identify Threat Sources
Identify and characterize threat sources of concern, including capability, in-
tent, and targeting characteristics for adversarial and nonadversarial threats 
and the range of effects for nonadversarial threats. Organizations need to iden-
tify threat sources of concern and determine the characteristics associated with 
those threat sources. For adversarial threat sources, assess the capabilities, in-
tentions, and targeting associated with the threat sources. For nonadversarial 
threat sources, assess the potential range of effects from the threat sources. The 
risk management strategy and the results of the Prepare step provide organiza-
tional direction and guidance for conducting threat source identification and 
characterization including:
j	 Sources for obtaining threat information;
j	 Threat sources to consider (by type/name);
j	 Threat taxonomy to be used; and
j	 The process for identifying threat sources of concern for the risk 
assessment.
As identified in Task 1-3, organizations make explicit any assumptions con-
cerning threat sources including decisions regarding the identification of threat 
sources when specific and credible threat information is unavailable. Organi-
zations can also view adversarial threat sources from a broad-based perspec-
tive, considering the time such threat sources may have to exploit identified 
organizational vulnerabilities, the scale of the attack, and the potential use of 
multiple attack vectors. The identification and characterization of APTs can 
involve considerable uncertainty, so organizations should annotate such threat 
sources with appropriate rationale and references.
Task 2-2: Identify Threat Events
Identify potential threat events, relevance of the events, and the threat sources 
that could initiate the events. Threat events are characterized by the threat 
sources that could initiate the events, and, for adversarial events, the proce-
dures used to carry out attacks. Organizations define these threat events with 
sufficient detail to accomplish the purpose of the risk assessment. At Tier 1, 
threat events that could affect the organizational level are of particular inter-
est. At Tier 2, threat events that cross or span information system boundaries, 
exploit functional dependencies or connectivity among systems, or affect mis-
sion/business owners are of particular interest. At Tier 3, threat events that 
can be described in terms of specific information systems, technologies, or 
operational environments are of particular interest. While multiple threat 
sources can initiate a single threat event, conversely a single threat source can 
potentially initiate any of multiple threat events. As a result, there can be a 
many-to-many relationship among threat events and threat sources that can 
potentially increase the complexity of the risk assessment. To enable effective 

Risk assessment process
151
use and communication of risk assessment results, organizations tailor the 
general descriptions of threat events to identify how each event could poten-
tially harm organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, 
or reputation) and assets, individuals, or other organizations. For each threat 
event identified, organizations determine the relevance of the event using a 
range of values. These values have a direct linkage to organizational risk toler-
ance. The more risk averse, the greater the range of values considered. Organi-
zations accepting greater risk or having a greater risk tolerance are more likely 
to require substantive evidence before giving serious consideration to threat 
events. If a threat event is deemed to be irrelevant, no further consideration 
is given. For relevant threat events, organizations identify all potential threat 
sources that could initiate the events. For use in Task 2-4, organizations can 
identify each pairing of threat source and threat event separately since the 
likelihood of threat initiation and success could be different for each pairing. 
Alternatively, organizations can identify the set of all possible threat sources 
that could potentially initiate a threat event.
Task 2-3: Identify Vulnerabilities and Conditions
Identify vulnerabilities and conditions that affect the likelihood that threat 
events of concern result in adverse impacts. The primary purpose of vulner-
ability assessments is to understand the nature and degree to which organiza-
tions, mission/business processes, and information systems are vulnerable to 
threat sources identified in Task 2-1 and the threat events identified in Task 
2-2 that can be initiated by those threat sources. Vulnerabilities at Tier 1 can 
be pervasive across organizations and can have wide-ranging adverse impacts 
if exploited by threat events. For example, organizational failure to consider 
supply chain activities can result in organizations acquiring subverted com-
ponents that adversaries could exploit to disrupt organizational missions/
business functions or to obtain sensitive organizational information. Vulnera-
bilities at Tier 2 can be described in terms of organizational mission/business 
processes, enterprise architecture, the use of multiple information systems, 
or common infrastructures/shared services. At Tier 2, vulnerabilities typically 
cross or span information system boundaries. Vulnerabilities at Tier 3 can 
be described in terms of the information technologies employed within or-
ganizational information systems, the environments in which those systems 
operate, and/or the lack of or weaknesses in system-specific security controls. 
There is potentially a many-to-many relationship between threat events and 
vulnerabilities. While multiple threat events can exploit a single vulnerability, 
conversely multiple vulnerabilities can be exploited by a single threat event. 
The severity of a vulnerability is based on an assessment of the relative im-
portance of mitigating such a vulnerability. Initially, the extent to which miti-
gation is unplanned can serve as a surrogate for vulnerability severity. Once 
the risks associated with a particular vulnerability have been assessed, a gap 

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
152
assessment can be performed to understand the impact severity and exposure 
of the vulnerability given the security controls implemented and other vul-
nerabilities can be taken into consideration in assessing vulnerability sever-
ity. Assessments of vulnerability severity support risk response. Vulnerabilities 
can be identified at varying degrees of granularity and specificity. The level of 
detail provided in any particular vulnerability assessment is consistent with 
the purpose of the risk assessment and the type of inputs needed to support 
follow-on likelihood and impact determinations. Due to the ever-increasing 
size and complexity of organizations, mission/business processes, and the in-
formation systems supporting those processes, the number of vulnerabilities 
tends to be large and can increase the overall complexity of the analysis. There-
fore, organizations have the option of using the vulnerability identification 
task to understand the general nature of the vulnerabilities (including scope, 
number, and type) relevant to the assessment (see Task 1-3) and performing 
a cataloging of specific vulnerabilities as necessary to do so. Organizations 
determine which vulnerabilities are relevant to which threat events in order 
to reduce the space of potential risks to be assessed. In addition to identify-
ing vulnerabilities, organizations also identify any predisposing conditions 
that may affect susceptibility to certain vulnerabilities. Predisposing condi-
tions that exist within organizations (including mission/business processes, 
information systems, and environments of operation) can contribute to (i.e., 
increase or decrease) the likelihood that one or more threat events, once initi-
ated by threat sources, result in adverse impacts to organizational operations, 
organizational assets, individuals, or other organizations. Organizations de-
termine which predisposing conditions are relevant to which threat events in 
order to reduce the space of potential risks to be assessed. Organizations also 
assess the pervasiveness of predisposing conditions to support determination 
of the tier(s) at which risk response could be most effective.
Task 2-4: Determine Likelihood
Determine the likelihood that threat events of concern result in adverse im-
pacts, considering:
j	 The characteristics of the threat sources that could initiate the events;
j	 The vulnerabilities/predisposing conditions identified; and
j	 The organizational susceptibility reflecting the safeguards/
countermeasures planned or implemented to impede such events.
Organizations employ a three-step process to determine the overall likelihood 
of threat events. First, organizations assess the likelihood that threat events 
will be initiated (for adversarial threat events) or will occur (for nonadversarial 
threat events). Second, organizations assess the likelihood that threat events 
once initiated or occurring will result in adverse impacts to organizational op-
erations and assets, individuals, or other organizations. Finally, organizations 

Risk assessment process
153
assess the overall likelihood as a combination of likelihood of initiation/oc-
currence and likelihood of resulting in adverse impact. Organizations assess 
the likelihood of threat event initiation by taking into consideration the char-
acteristics of the threat sources of concern including capability, intent, and tar-
geting. If threat events require more capability than adversaries possess (and 
adversaries are cognizant of this fact), then the adversaries are not expected to 
initiate the events. If adversaries do not expect to achieve intended objectives 
by executing threat events, then the adversaries are not expected to initiate 
the events. And finally, if adversaries are not actively targeting specific organi-
zations or their missions/business functions, adversaries are not expected to 
initiate threat events. Organizations can use the assessment scale in Figure 6.7 
and provide a rationale for the assessment allowing explicit consideration of 
deterrence and threat shifting.
Organizations can also assess the likelihood of threat event occurrence 
(nonadversarial) using Figure  6.8 and provide a similar rationale for the 
assessment.
Organizations assess the likelihood that threat events result in adverse impacts 
by taking into consideration the set of identified vulnerabilities and predispos-
ing conditions (see Task 2-3). For threat events initiated by adversaries, organi-
zations consider characteristics of associated threat sources. For nonadversarial 
threat events, organizations take into account the anticipated severity and du-
ration of the event. Organizations can use the assessment scale in Figure 6.9 
and provide a rationale for the assessment allowing explicit consideration as 
stated previously.
Threat events for which no vulnerabilities or predisposing conditions are iden-
tified have a very low likelihood of resulting in adverse impacts. The overall 
likelihood of a threat event is a combination of:
j	 The likelihood that the event will occur (e.g., due to human error or 
natural disaster) or be initiated by an adversary; and
j	 The likelihood that the initiation/occurrence will result in adverse 
impacts.
FIGURE 6.7 NIST assessment scale – likelihood of threat event initiation (adversarial).

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
154
Task 2-5: Determine Impact
Determine the adverse impacts from threat events of concern considering:
j	 The characteristics of the threat sources that could initiate the events;
j	 The vulnerabilities/predisposing conditions identified; and
j	 The susceptibility reflecting the safeguards/countermeasures planned or 
implemented to impede such events.
Organizations describe adverse impacts in terms of the potential harm caused 
to organizational operations and assets, individuals, or other organizations. 
Where the threat event occurs and whether the effects of the event are con-
tained or spread influence the severity of the impact. Assessing impact can 
involve identifying assets or potential targets of threat sources, including in-
formation resources (e.g., information, data repositories, information systems, 
applications, information technologies, communications links), people, and 
physical resources (e.g., buildings, power supplies), which could be affected by 
threat events. Organizational impacts are defined and prioritized at Tiers 1 and 
2, and communicated to Tier 3 as part of risk framing. At Tier 3, impacts are 
associated with information system capabilities (e.g., processing, display, com-
munications, storage, and retrieval) and resources (e.g., databases, services, 
components) that could be compromised.
FIGURE 6.8 NIST assessment scale – likelihood of threat event occurrence (nonadversarial).
FIGURE 6.9 NIST assessment scale – likelihood of threat event resulting in adverse impacts.

Risk assessment process
155
Task 2-6: Determine Risk
Determine the risk to the organization from threat events of concern 
considering:
j	 The impact that would result from the events; and
j	 The likelihood of the events occurring.
Organizations assess the risks from threat events as a combination of likeli-
hood and impact. Figure 6.10 illustrates this relationship.
The level of risk associated with identified threat events represents a determi-
nation of the degree to which organizations are threatened by such events. 
Organizations make explicit the uncertainty in the risk determinations, in-
cluding, for example, organizational assumptions and subjective judgments/
decisions. Organizations can order the list of threat events of concern by the 
level of risk determined during the risk assessment – with the greatest atten-
tion going to high-risk events. Organizations can further prioritize risks at the 
same level or with similar scores. Each risk corresponds to a specific threat 
event with a level of impact if that event occurs. In general, the risk level is 
typically not higher than the impact level, and likelihood can serve to reduce 
FIGURE 6.10 Likelihood and impact relationship.

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
156
risk below that impact level. However, when addressing organization-wide 
risk management issues with a large number of missions/business functions, 
mission/business processes, and supporting information systems, impact as 
an upper bound on risk may not hold. For example, when multiple risks 
materialize, even if each risk is at the moderate (or medium) level, the set 
of those moderate-level risks could aggregate to a higher level of risk for 
organizations. To address situations where harm occurs multiple times, or-
ganizations can define a threat event as multiple occurrences of harm and an 
impact level associated with the cumulative degree of harm. During the ex-
ecution of Tasks 2-1 to 2-5, organizations capture key information related to 
uncertainties in risk assessments. These uncertainties arise from sources such 
as missing information, subjective determinations, and assumptions made. 
The effectiveness of risk assessment results is in part determined by the abil-
ity of decision makers to be able to determine the continued applicability of 
assumptions made as part of the assessment. Information related to uncer-
tainty is compiled and presented in a manner that readily supports informed 
risk management decisions. Additionally, guidance should be provided to 
decision makers for each risk level regarding the estimated time frame (e.g., 
immediate; 30, 60, 90 days) to select a treatment option (e.g., acceptance, 
transfer, mitigate, avoid) and implement an appropriate corrective action (or 
remediation) plan (Figure 6.11).
Step 3: Communicating Risk Assessment Information
The third step in the risk assessment process is to communicate the assessment 
results and share risk-related information. The objective of this step is to ensure 
that decision makers across the organization have the appropriate risk-related 
information needed to inform and guide risk decisions. Communicate risk 
assessment results to organizational decision makers (e.g., Board, CEO, CIO, 
CISO/CSO, ISO) to support risk responses. Organizations can communicate 
risk assessment results in a variety of ways (e.g., executive briefings, risk assess-
ment reports, dashboards, heat maps). Such communications can be formal or 
informal with the content and format aligning with the organizations’ existing 
risk management reporting process or examples provided within NIST Special 
Publication 800-30 (Figure 6.12).
Step 4: Maintaining the Assessment
The fourth and final step in the risk assessment process is to maintain the as-
sessment. The objective of this step is to keep current the specific knowledge of 
the risk organizations incur. The results of risk assessments inform risk man-
agement decisions and guide risk responses. To support the ongoing review 
of risk management decisions (e.g., acquisition decisions, authorization deci-
sions for information systems and common controls, connection decisions), 
organizations maintain risk assessments to incorporate any changes detected 

Risk assessment process
157
through risk monitoring. Risk monitoring provides organizations with the 
means to, on an ongoing basis:
j	 Determine the effectiveness of risk responses;
j	 Identify risk-impacting changes to organizational information systems 
and the environments in which those systems operate; and
j	 Verify compliance.
FIGURE 6.11 NIST key activities – conducting the assessment.
FIGURE 6.12 NIST key activities – communicating risk assessment information.

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
158
Maintaining risk assessments includes the following specific tasks:
j	 Monitor risk factors identified in risk assessments on an ongoing basis 
and understand subsequent changes to those factors;
j	 Update the components of risk assessments reflecting the monitoring 
activities carried out by organizations.
Task 4-1: Monitor Risk Factors
Conduct ongoing monitoring of the risk factors that contribute to changes in risk 
to organizational operations and assets, individuals, or other organizations. Or-
ganizations monitor risk factors of importance on an ongoing basis to ensure that 
the information needed to make credible, risk-based decisions continues to be 
available over time. Monitoring risk factors (e.g., threat sources and threat events, 
vulnerabilities and predisposing conditions, capabilities and intent of adversar-
ies, targeting of organizational operations, assets, or individuals) can provide crit-
ical information on changing conditions that could potentially affect the ability 
of organizations to conduct core missions and business functions. Information 
derived from the ongoing monitoring of risk factors can be used to refresh risk 
assessments at whatever frequency deemed appropriate. Organizations can also 
attempt to capture changes in the effectiveness of risk response measures in or-
der to maintain the currency of risk assessments. The objective is to maintain an 
ongoing situational awareness of the organizational governance structures and 
activities, mission/business processes, information systems, and environments of 
operation, and thereby all of the risk factors that may affect the risk being in-
curred by organizations. Therefore, in applying the risk assessment context or risk 
frame (i.e., scope, purpose, assumptions, constraints, risk tolerances, priorities, 
and trade-offs), organizations consider the part risk factors play in the risk re-
sponse plan executed. For example, it is expected to be quite common for the se-
curity posture of information systems (i.e., the risk factors measured within those 
systems) to reflect only a part of the organizational risk response, with response 
actions at the organization level or mission/business process level providing a sig-
nificant portion of that response. In such situations, monitoring only the security 
posture of information systems would likely not provide sufficient information 
to determine the overall risk being incurred by organizations. Highly capable, 
well-resourced, and purpose-driven threat sources can be expected to defeat com-
monly available protection mechanisms (e.g., by bypassing or tampering with 
such mechanisms). Thus, process-level risk response measures such as reengineer-
ing mission/business processes, wise use of information technology, or the use of 
alternate execution processes, in the event of compromised information systems, 
can be major elements of organizational risk response plans.
Task 4-2: Update Risk Assessment
Update existing risk assessment using the results from ongoing monitoring 
of risk factors. Organizations determine the frequency and the circumstances 

Risk response and remediation
159
under which risk assessments are updated. Such determinations can include, 
for example, the current level of risk to, and/or the importance of, core orga-
nizational missions/business functions. If significant changes (as defined by 
organizational policies, direction, or guidance) have occurred since the risk as-
sessment was conducted, organizations can revisit the purpose, scope, assump-
tions, and constraints of the assessment to determine whether all tasks in the 
risk assessment process need to be repeated. Otherwise, the updates constitute 
subsequent risk assessments, identifying and assessing only how selected risk 
factors have changed, for example:
j	 The identification of new threat events, vulnerabilities, predisposing 
conditions, undesirable consequences and/or affected assets; and
j	 The assessments of threat source characteristics (e.g., capability, intent, 
targeting, range of effects), likelihoods, and impacts.
Organizations communicate the results of subsequent risk assessments to enti-
ties across all risk management tiers to ensure that responsible organizational 
officials have access to critical information needed to make ongoing risk-based 
decisions (Figure 6.13).
RISK RESPONSE AND REMEDIATION
Risk response identifies, evaluates, decides on, and implements appropri-
ate courses of corrective action to accept, avoid, mitigate, or transfer risk to 
organizational operations and assets, individuals, and other organizations, 
resulting from the operation and use of information systems. Identifying and 
analyzing alternative courses of action typically occurs at Tier 1 or 2. This is 
due to the fact that alternative courses of action (i.e., potential risk respons-
es) are evaluated in terms of anticipated organization-wide impacts and the 
ability of organizations to continue to successfully carry out organizational 
missions and business functions. Decisions to employ risk response mea-
sures organization-wide are typically made at Tier 1, although the decisions 
FIGURE 6.13 NIST key activities – maintaining the assessment.

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
160
are informed by risk-related information from the lower tiers. At Tier 2, alter-
native courses of corrective action are evaluated in terms of anticipated im-
pacts on organizational missions/business functions, the associated mission/
business processes supporting the missions/business functions, and resource 
requirements. At Tier 3, alternative courses of corrective action tend to be 
evaluated in terms of the system development life cycle or the maximum 
amount of time available for implementing the selected course(s) of action. 
The breadth of potential risk responses is a major factor for whether the ac-
tivity is carried out at Tier 1, 2, or 3. Risk decisions are influenced by organi-
zational risk tolerance developed as part of risk framing activities at Tier 1. 
Organizations can implement risk decisions at any of the risk management 
tiers with different objectives and utility of information produced.
Risk Response Identification
Identify alternative courses of action to respond to risk determined during 
the risk assessment. Organizations can respond to or treat risk in a variety of 
ways including risk acceptance, avoidance, mitigation, or transfer. A course 
of action is a time-phased or situation-dependent combination of risk re-
sponse measures. For example, in an emergency situation, organizations 
might accept the risk associated with unfiltered connection to an external 
communications provider for a limited time, and then avoid risk by cutting 
the connection, mitigate risk in the near term by applying security controls 
to search for malware or evidence of unauthorized access to information 
that occurred during the period of unfiltered connection, and finally miti-
gate risk in the long term by applying controls to handle such connections 
more securely.
Evaluation of Alternatives
Evaluate alternative courses of action for responding to risk. The evalua-
tion of alternative courses of action can include the expected effectiveness 
in achieving desired risk response (and how effectiveness is measured and 
monitored) and anticipated feasibility of implementation, including, for 
example, mission/business impact, political, legal, social, financial, techni-
cal, and economic considerations. Economic considerations include costs 
throughout the expected period of time during which the course of action 
is followed (e.g., cost of procurement, integration into organizational pro-
cesses at Tier 1 and/or 2, information systems at Tier 3, training, and main-
tenance). During the evaluation of alternative courses of action, trade-offs 
can be made explicit between near-term gains in mission/business effec-
tiveness or efficiency and long-term risk of mission/business harm due to 
compromise of information or information systems that are providing this 
near-term benefit.

Risk response and remediation
161
Risk Response Decision
Decide on the appropriate course of action for responding to risk. Decisions on 
the most appropriate course of action include some form of prioritization. Some 
risks may be of greater concern than other risks. In that case, more resources may 
need to be directed at addressing higher-priority risks than at other lower-priority 
risks. This does not necessarily mean that the lower-priority risks would not be 
addressed. Rather, it could mean that fewer resources might be directed at the 
lower-priority risks (at least initially), or that the lower-priority risks would be 
addressed at a later time. A key part of the risk decision process is the recognition 
that regardless of the decision, there still remains a degree of residual risk that 
must be addressed. Organizations determine acceptable degrees of residual risk 
based on organizational risk tolerance and the specific risk tolerances of particu-
lar decision makers. Impacting the decision process are some of the more intan-
gible risk-related concepts (e.g., risk tolerance, trust, and culture). The specific be-
liefs and approaches that organizations embrace with respect to these risk-related 
concepts affect the course of action selected by decision makers.
Risk Response Implementation
Implement the course of action selected to respond to risk. Once a course of 
action is selected, organizations implement the associated risk response. Given 
the size and complexity of some organizations, the actual implementation of 
risk response measures may be challenging. Some risk response measures are 
tactical in nature (e.g., applying patches to identified vulnerabilities in organi-
zational information systems) and may be implemented rather quickly. Other 
risk response measures may be more strategic in nature and reflect solutions 
that take much longer to implement. Therefore, organizations apply, and tailor 
as appropriate to a specific risk response course of action, the risk response 
implementation considerations in the risk response strategies (part of the risk 
management strategy developed during the risk framing step).
Types of Controls
As reviewed in Chapter 5, there are three categories of controls (or safeguards):
Administrative: Actions, policies, and procedures involved in the 
selection, development, implementation, and maintenance of security 
measures. These measures support the protection of information and 
assist with managing the conduct of the workforce in relation to the 
protection of information.
Physical: Physical measures to protect the organization’s electronic 
information systems, buildings, and equipment from natural and 
environmental hazards and unauthorized intrusion.
Technical: Technology and associated policy and procedures for its use to 
protect and control access to information.

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
162
Controls Related to Time
Controls related to time generally fall into three categories:
j	 Preventative
j	 Detective
j	 Corrective
Preventative
Preventative controls are designed to be implemented prior to a threat event 
and reduce and/or avoid the likelihood and potential impact of a successful 
threat event. Examples of preventative controls include policies, standards, 
processes, procedures, encryption, firewalls, and physical barriers.
Detective
Detective controls are designed to detect a threat event while it is occurring 
and provide assistance during investigations and audits after the event has oc-
curred. Examples of detective controls include security event log monitoring, 
host and network intrusion detection of threat events, and antivirus identifica-
tion of malicious code.
Corrective
Corrective controls are designed to mitigate or limit the potential impact of a 
threat event once it has occurred and recover to normal operations. Examples 
of corrective controls include automatic removal of malicious code by antivi-
rus software, business continuity and recovery plans, and host and network 
intrusion prevention of threat events.
KEY TERMS
Term
Definition
Assessment 
procedure
Consists of a set of assessment objectives, each with an associ-
ated set of potential assessment methods and assessment objects
Assessment 
objective
Includes a set of determination statements related to the security 
control under assessment
Assessment 
objects
Identify the specific items being assessed and include specifica-
tions, mechanisms, activities, and individuals
Assessment 
methods
Define the nature of the assessor actions and include examine, 
interview, and test
Examine method
The process of reviewing, inspecting, observing, studying, or 
analyzing one or more assessment objects (i.e., specifications, 
mechanisms, or activities)
Interview method
The process of holding discussions with individuals or groups of 
individuals within an organization to, once again, facilitate assessor 
understanding, achieve clarification, or obtain evidence

Key terms
163
Term
Definition
Test method
The process of exercising one or more assessment objects (i.e., 
activities or mechanisms) under specified conditions to compare 
actual with expected behavior
Preventative con-
trols
Designed to be implemented prior to a threat event and reduce 
and/or avoid the likelihood and potential impact of a successful 
threat event
Detective controls
Designed to detect a threat event while it is occurring
Corrective controls
Designed to mitigate or limit the potential impact of a threat event 
once it has occurred and recover to normal operations
Practice Exam
1.	 Risk assessments are not:
a.	 One-time activities with the hope of providing long-term and definitive 
information
b.	 Performed periodically throughout the information life cycle
c.	 Designed to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of 
information
d.	 Designed to guide and inform decision makers in their response to risks
2.	 NIST’s Special Publication 800-30:
a.	 Provides guidance for assessing the security controls in federal information 
systems and organizations and building effective security assessment plans
b.	 Provides guidance for conducting risk assessments of healthcare 
information systems and organizations
c.	 Provides guidance for interconnecting information technology systems
d.	 Provides guidance for conducting risk assessments of federal information 
systems and organizations
3.	 The intent of a risk assessment is to inform decision makers and support risk 
responses by identifying all of the following except:
a.	 Relevant threats to an organization
b.	 Internal and external vulnerabilities
c.	 Potential impact resulting from a vulnerability exploiting a threat
d.	 Likelihood that impact will occur or be realized
4.	 An assessment procedure consists of:
a.	 A set of assessment objectives
b.	 An associated set of potential assessment methods
c.	 An associated set of assessment objects
d.	 All of the above
5.	 Assessment methods define the nature of the assessor actions and include all 
of the following methods except:
a.	 Interview
b.	 Evaluate

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
164
c.	 Examine
d.	 Test
6.	 The four steps to assessing information security risk include all of the 
following except:
a.	 Prepare for the assessment.
b.	 Conduct the assessment.
c.	 Remediate assessment findings.
d.	 Maintain the assessment.
7.	 Which of the following is correct?
a.	 The Tier 1 context and the system development life cycle determine the 
purpose and define the scope of risk assessment activities at Tier 2.
b.	 At Tier 1, risk assessments support organizational strategies, policies, 
guidance, and processes for managing risk.
c.	 At Tier 3, risk assessments support the determination of mission/business 
process protection and resiliency requirements, and the allocation of those 
requirements to the enterprise architecture as part of mission/business 
segments (that support mission/business processes).
d.	 At Tier 3, risk assessments support organizational strategies, policies, 
guidance, and processes for managing risk.
8.	 Risk assessments include:
a.	 Assessment approaches (i.e., quantitative, qualitative)
b.	 Analysis approaches (i.e., threat-oriented, asset/impact-oriented, 
vulnerability-oriented)
c.	 All of the above
d.	 None of the above
9.	 Step 2 of the risk assessment process includes all of the following except:
a.	 Identifying threat sources relevant to the organization
b.	 Identifying risk model and analytic approach
c.	 Identifying vulnerabilities that could be exploited by threat sources through 
specific threat events
d.	 Determining adverse impacts resulting from vulnerability exploitation
10.	 Step 1 of the risk assessment process includes all of the following except:
a.	 Identifying threat sources relevant to the organization
b.	 Identifying purpose
c.	 Identifying risk model and analytic approach
d.	 Identifying scope
11.	 Risk monitoring provides organizations with the means to, on an ongoing 
basis:
a.	 Identify risk-impacting changes to organizational information systems and 
the environments in which those systems operate
b.	 Verify compliance
c.	 Determine the effectiveness of risk responses
d.	 All of the above

Key terms
165
12.	 Three types of controls (or safeguards) include all of the following except:
a.	 Physical
b.	 Tactical
c.	 Administrative
d.	 Technical
13.	 Controls related to time generally fall into which of the following categories?
a.	 Corrective
b.	 Detective
c.	 Preventative
d.	 All of the above
14.	 The examine method of assessment is:
a.	 The process of exercising one or more assessment objects (i.e., activities or 
mechanisms) under specified conditions to compare actual with expected 
behavior
b.	 The process of reviewing, inspecting, observing, studying, or analyzing 
one or more assessment objects (i.e., specifications, mechanisms, or 
activities)
c.	 The process of holding discussions with individuals or groups of individuals 
within an organization to, once again, facilitate assessor understanding, 
achieve clarification, or obtain evidence
d.	 a and b
15.	 The interview method of assessment is:
a.	 The process of reviewing, inspecting, observing, studying, or analyzing 
one or more assessment objects (i.e., specifications, mechanisms, or 
activities)
b.	 The process of holding discussions with individuals or groups of individuals 
within an organization to, once again, facilitate assessor understanding, 
achieve clarification, or obtain evidence
c.	 The process of exercising one or more assessment objects (i.e., activities or 
mechanisms) under specified conditions to compare actual with expected 
behavior
d.	 None of the above
16.	 The test method of assessment is:
a.	 The process of holding discussions with individuals or groups of individuals 
within an organization to, once again, facilitate assessor understanding, 
achieve clarification, or obtain evidence
b.	 The process of reviewing, inspecting, observing, studying, or analyzing 
one or more assessment objects (i.e., specifications, mechanisms, or 
activities)
c.	 The process of exercising one or more assessment objects (i.e., activities or 
mechanisms) under specified conditions to compare actual with expected 
behavior
d.	 a, b, and c

CHAPTER 6: 
Information Risk Assessment
166
Practice Exam Answers
1.	 a
2.	 d
3.	 c
4.	 d
5.	 b
6.	 c
7.	 a
8.	 c
9.	 b
10.	 a
11.	 d
12.	 b
13.	 d
14.	 d
15.	 b
16.	 c
References
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments. NIST 
Computer Security Publications – NIST Special Publications (SPs). Version SP 800-30 rev1. Web. 
June 29, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-30-rev1/sp800_30_r1.pdf>.
International Organization for Standardization, n.d. Home. ISO/IEC 27005:2011. Web. 
July 
1, 
2014. 
<http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_ics/catalogue_detail_ics.
htm?csnumber(56742>.
Health Information Trust Alliance, n.d. Common Security Framework – HITRUST. HITRUST. Web. 
July 1, 2014. <http://hitrustalliance.net/common-security-framework/>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Managing Information Security Risk. N.p., 
web. July 1, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-39/SP800-39-final.pdf>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. An Introductory Resource Guide for Imple-
menting the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Security Rule. N.p., 
web. July 1, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-66-Rev1/SP-800-66-Revi-
sion1.pdf>.
Department of Health and Human Services, n.d. Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards. 
HIPAA Security Series. Web. July 1, 2014. <http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administra-
tive/securityrule/adminsafeguards.pdf>.
HIPAA Privacy, Security, and Breach Notification Audit Program, n.d. HIPAA Privacy, Security, and 
Breach Notification Audit Program. N.p., web. July 31, 2014. <http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/pri-
vacy/hipaa/enforcement/audit/>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Guide for Assessing the Security Controls in 
Federal Information Systems and Organizations. N.p., web. July 1, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/
publications/nistpubs/800-53A-rev1/sp800-53A-rev1-final.pdf>.

167
HCISPP Study Guide
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Third-Party Risk Management
CHAPTER 7
THIS CHAPTER WILL HELP CANDIDATES:
j	 Understand definition of third parties
j	 Understand importance of third-party inventory
j	 Identify and implement third-party standards and practices
j	 Determine need for third-party assessments
j	 Coordinate incident response with third parties
j	 Establish third-party connectivity
j	 Identify and correct third-party risks
INTRODUCTION
As few healthcare organizations successfully operate without enlisting support 
from third-party service providers who will access, process, or store patient 
information, healthcare organizations must understand their responsibilities 
and proactively manage risks associated with these relationships. To do so, 
healthcare organizations must understand the definition and maintain an in-
ventory of third parties, apply management standards and practices, identify 
need for and conduct third-party assessments, implement incident response 
plans and procedures, establish secure connectivity, and oversee risk manage-
ment and completion of corrective action plans.
Knowledge Areas
After reviewing this chapter and supporting reference materials, HCISPP can-
didates should comprehend the importance and purpose of conducting third-
party risk assessments. This includes the definition of third parties, identifying 
assessment requirements, application of management standards and practices, 
incident response involving third parties, and third-party risk management ac-
tivities.

CHAPTER 7: 
Third-Party Risk Management
168
DEFINITION OF THIRD PARTIES
By law, the HIPAA Privacy Rule applies only to covered (primary) entities in-
cluding health plans, healthcare clearinghouses, and certain healthcare provid-
ers. However, most healthcare providers and health plans do not carry out all 
of their healthcare activities and functions by themselves. Instead, they often 
use the services of a variety of other persons or businesses (third parties). The 
Privacy Rule allows covered entities to disclose protected health information to 
these third parties (referred to as “business associates”) if the covered entities 
obtain satisfactory assurances that the third party will use the information only 
for the purposes for which it was engaged by the covered entity, will safeguard 
the information from misuse, and will help the covered entity comply with 
some of the covered entity’s duties under the Privacy Rule.
For the purpose of this chapter, remember the following definitions:
j	 Covered entity: The primary entity such as a health plan, healthcare 
clearinghouse, and certain healthcare providers who maintains a direct 
relationship with patients.
j	 Third parties: Also referred to as business associates, a person or entity 
that performs certain functions or activities that involve the use or 
disclosure of protected health information on behalf of, or provides 
services to, a covered entity. Third parties can also be subcontractors 
that create, receive, maintain, or transmit protected health information 
on behalf of another business associate.
INVENTORY
Covered entities are responsible for creating and maintaining an inventory 
over time of third parties involved in the processing, storage, and/or transmis-
sion of their health information. The third-party inventory should also include 
additional details of importance such as:
j	 Name of the individual or department who will be responsible for 
coordinating the execution of business associate or other agreements;
j	 List of systems and information processed, stored, and/or transmitted 
by the third party including data classification;
j	 Details regarding connectivity and/or data exchanges with the third 
party; and
j	 Description of services to be provided by the third party such as:
• Claims processing or billing;
• Data analysis;
• Utilization review;
• Quality assurance;

Management standards and practices
169
• Benefit management;
• Practice management;
• Repricing;
• Hardware maintenance; or
• All other HIPAA-regulated functions.
It is important to clearly define roles and responsibilities for the covered en-
tity relationship manager and the third party who will process, store, and/or 
transmit health information. These roles and responsibilities can be defined 
within the covered entity’s organizational policies and standards and included 
in contractual agreements (e.g., business associate) where applicable to the 
third party.
MANAGEMENT STANDARDS AND PRACTICES
When establishing third-party relationships, contractual agreements are 
required to clearly communicate roles, responsibilities, and requirements 
pertaining to protecting the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of 
health information. Under HIPAA, written contracts must be implemented 
to address:
• Permitted use: Establish the permitted and required uses and 
disclosures of protected health information by the third party
• Unauthorized disclosure: Provide that the third party will not use or 
further disclose the information other than as permitted or required by 
the contract or as required by law
• Safeguards: Require the third party to implement appropriate 
administrative, physical, and technical safeguards to prevent 
unauthorized use or disclosure of the information, including 
implementing requirements of the HIPAA Security Rule with regard to 
electronic protected health information
• Event notification: Require the third party to report to the covered 
entity any use or disclosure of the information not provided for by 
its contract, including incidents that constitute breaches of unsecured 
protected health information
• Disclosure authorization: Require the third party to disclose protected 
health information as specified in its contract to satisfy a covered 
entity’s obligation with respect to individuals’ requests for copies 
of their protected health information, as well as make available 
protected health information for amendments (and incorporate any 
amendments, if required) and accountings
• Compliance: To the extent the third party is to carry out a covered 
entity’s obligation under the Privacy Rule, require the third party to 
comply with the requirements applicable to the obligation

CHAPTER 7: 
Third-Party Risk Management
170
• Audit: Require the third party to make available to the covered entity 
and regulatory bodies its internal practices, books, and records relating 
to the use and disclosure of protected health information received from, 
or created or received by the third party on behalf of, the covered entity 
for purposes of determining the covered entity’s compliance with the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule
• Termination: At termination of the contract, if feasible, require the  
third party to return or destroy all protected health information received 
from, or created or received by the third party on behalf of, the covered 
entity
• Subcontractors: Require the third party to ensure that any 
subcontractors it may engage on its behalf that will have access 
to protected health information agree to the same restrictions 
and conditions that apply to the third party with respect to such 
information
• Right to terminate: Authorize termination of the contract by the 
covered entity if the third party violates a material term of the  
contract
It is also important to understand the specific locations/countries where  
information will be processed, stored, or transmitted. In situations where 
third-­party services involve processing, storage, or transmission of health in-
formation outside the covered entity’s home country, agreements will need 
to address jurisdictional matters and additional agreements may be required 
to ensure compliance with regulatory obligations such as the European Data 
Protection Directive.
RISK ASSESSMENT
While legal requirements will vary based on local and regional regulations, 
generally risk assessments are triggered when a third party will process, store, 
and/or transmit personal health information or by contractual requirements. 
However, in order to conduct these assessments, a covered entity will need an 
agreement in place with a third party that addresses:
j	 Assessment scope (what information is required to complete  
the assessment, will an on-site inspection of controls be required, etc.);
j	 Notification requirements (will the third party receive 30/60/90 days’ 
advance notice of an assessment);
j	 Roles and responsibilities for conducting an assessment (will the 
assessment be performed by the covered entity or an independent third 
party);
j	 Frequency assessments will be performed (annually, biannually, on 
request, etc.); and

Assessment and audit support
171
j	 Remediation of findings (how will remediation be handled, will 
findings trigger a right to terminate agreement for cause if not 
remediated, etc.).
ASSESSMENT AND AUDIT SUPPORT
While requirements for third-party information asset protection controls 
will vary by covered entity, scope of services and information, and regula-
tory requirements, they will generally align with the objectives of the covered 
entity’s information governance and risk management program. Figure 7.1 
provides a sample from NIST Special Publication 800-66 Revision 1 of the 
key administrative, physical, and technical controls and activities required 
under the HIPAA Security Rule. While all controls may not be required for 
third parties, it can serve as a guide to assist covered entities with identifying 
applicable controls, communicating requirements, and monitoring ongoing 
compliance.
Security Management Process
Key Activities
Description
Identify relevant  
information systems
j	 Identify all information systems that house EPHI
j	 Include all hardware and software that are used to  
collect, store, process, or transmit EPHI
j	 Analyze business functions and verify ownership and 
control of information system elements as necessary
Conduct risk  
assessment
j	 Conduct an accurate and thorough assessment of  
the potential risks and vulnerabilities to the confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability of EPHI held by the  
third party (refer to Chapter 6 for risk assessment 
methodology)
Implement a risk  
management program
j	 Implement security measures sufficient to reduce  
risks and vulnerabilities to a reasonable and appropriate 
level
FIGURE 7.1 Sample of NIST key activities for HIPAA Security Rule.

CHAPTER 7: 
Third-Party Risk Management
172
Security Management Process
Key Activities
Description
Acquire IT systems and 
services
j	 Although the HIPAA Security Rule does not require  
purchasing any particular technology, additional 
hardware, software, or services may be needed to 
adequately protect information. Considerations for their 
selection should include the following:	
• Applicability of the IT solution to the intended  
environment
• The sensitivity of the data
• The organization’s security policies, procedures, and 
standards
• Other requirements such as resources available for 
operation, maintenance, and training
Create and deploy policies 
and procedures
j	 Implement the decisions concerning the management, 
operational, and technical controls selected to mitigate 
identified risks
j	 Create policies that clearly establish roles and re-
sponsibilities and assign ultimate responsibility for the 
implementation of each control to particular individuals 
or offices
j	 Create procedures to be followed to accomplish par-
ticular security-related tasks
Develop and implement a 
sanction policy
j	 Apply appropriate sanctions against workforce mem-
bers who fail to comply with the security policies and 
procedures of the third party
j	 Develop policies and procedures for imposing  
appropriate sanctions (e.g., reprimand, termination)  
for noncompliance with the organization’s security  
policies
j	 Implement sanction policy as cases arise
Develop and deploy the 
information system activity 
review process
j	 Implement procedures to regularly review records of 
information system activity such as audit logs, access 
reports, and security incident tracking reports
Develop appropriate stan-
dard operating procedures
j	 Determine the types of audit trail data and monitoring 
procedures that will be needed to derive exception 
reports
Implement the information 
system activity review and 
audit process
j	 Activate the necessary review process
j	 Begin auditing and logging activity
Assigned Security Responsibilities
Key Activities
Description
Select a security official to 
be assigned responsibility 
for HIPAA security
j	 Identify the individual who has final responsibility for 
security
j	 Select an individual who is able to assess effective 
security and to serve as the point of contact for security 
policy, implementation, and monitoring

Assessment and audit support
173
Assigned Security Responsibilities
Key Activities
Description
Assign and document the 
individual’s responsibility
j	 Document the assignment to one  
individual’s responsibilities in a job description
j	 Communicate this assigned role to the entire  
organization
Workforce Security
Key Activities
Description
Implement procedures for 
authorization and/or supervi-
sion
j	 Implement procedures for the authorization and/or 
supervision of workforce members who work with EPHI 
or in locations where it might be accessed
Establish clear job descrip-
tions and responsibilities
j	 Define roles and responsibilities for all job functions
j	 Assign appropriate levels of security oversight, training, 
and access
j	 Identify in writing who has the business need – and who 
has been granted permission – to view, alter, retrieve, 
and store EPHI, and at what times, under what circum-
stances, and for what purposes
Establish criteria and proce-
dures for hiring and assign-
ing tasks
j	 Ensure that staff members have the necessary knowl-
edge, skills, and abilities to fulfill particular roles
j	 Ensure that these requirements are included as part of 
the personnel hiring process
Establish a workforce clear-
ance procedure
j	 Implement procedures to determine that the access of a 
workforce member to EPHI is appropriate
j	 Implement appropriate screening of persons who will 
have access to EPHI
j	 Implement a procedure for obtaining clearance from ap-
propriate offices or individuals where access is provided 
or terminated
Establish termination pro-
cedures
j	 Implement procedures for terminating access to EPHI 
when the employment of a workforce member ends or 
as required
j	 Develop a standard set of procedures that should be 
followed to recover access control devices (e.g., identifi-
cation badges, access cards)
j	 Deactivate computer access accounts
Information Access Management
Key Activities
Description
Isolate healthcare clearing-
house functions
j	 If a healthcare clearinghouse is part of a larger organiza-
tion, the clearinghouse must implement policies and 
procedures that protect the EPHI of the clearinghouse 
from unauthorized access by the larger organization
j	 Determine if a component of the third party constitutes a 
healthcare clearinghouse under the HIPAA Security Rule
j	 If no clearinghouse functions exist, document this find-
ing. If it does, ensure implementation of procedures for 
access consistent with the HIPAA Privacy Rule

CHAPTER 7: 
Third-Party Risk Management
174
Information Access Management
Key Activities
Description
Implement policies and 
procedures for authorizing 
access
j	 Implement policies and procedures for granting access 
to EPHI, for example, through access to a workstation, 
transaction, program, process, or other mechanism
j	 Decide how access will be granted to workforce mem-
bers within the organization
j	 Select the basis for restricting access
j	 Select an access control method (e.g., identity-based, 
role-based)
j	 Determine if direct access to EPHI will ever be appropri-
ate for individuals external to the organization (e.g., third 
parties, subcontractors)
Implement policies and pro-
cedures for access estab-
lishment and modification
j	 Implement policies and procedures that, based on the 
organization’s access authorization policies, establish, 
document, review, and modify a user’s right of access 
to a workstation, transaction, program, or process
j	 Establish standards for granting access
j	 Provide formal authorization from the appropriate au-
thority before granting access to sensitive information
Evaluate existing security 
measures related to access 
controls
j	 Evaluate the security features of access controls already 
in place, or those of any planned for implementation, as 
appropriate
j	 Determine if these security features involve alignment 
with other existing management, operational, and tech-
nical controls, such as policy standards and personnel 
procedures, maintenance and review of audit trails, 
identification and authorization of users, and physical 
access controls
Communication of Findings
Findings resulting from completed third-party assessments should be clear-
ly communicated to management at both the covered entity and third party. 
Treatment decisions and action plans should be agreed between the parties, 
documented in writing, and formally tracked until remediation has been com-
pleted.
INCIDENT NOTIFICATION AND RESPONSE
Attacks frequently compromise personal and business data, and it is critical 
to respond quickly and effectively when security incidents occur. The concept 
of incident response has become widely accepted and implemented. One of 
the benefits of having an incident response capability is that it supports re-
sponding to incidents systematically (i.e., following a consistent incident han-
dling methodology) so that appropriate actions are taken. Incident response 
helps organizations to minimize loss or theft of information and disruption 

Incident notification and response
175
of ­services, and reduce overall risk associated with incidents. Another benefit 
is the ability to use information gained during incident handling to help the 
organization better prepare for handling future incidents and provide stronger 
protection for systems and data. Sound incident response capabilities also help 
in dealing with legal issues that may arise during or after incidents.
Internal Processes for Incident Response
Organizations should define and implement policies, processes, and proce-
dures to appropriately address security incidents in a timely manner as they 
arise. As described in NIST’s Special Publication 800-61 Revision 2, Computer 
Security Incident Handling Guide, the incident response process includes sev-
eral phases. The initial phase involves establishing and training an incident 
response team, and acquiring the necessary tools and resources. During prepa-
ration, the organization also attempts to limit the number of incidents that 
will occur by selecting and implementing a set of controls based on the results 
of risk assessments. However, residual risk will inevitably persist after controls 
are implemented. Detection of security breaches is thus necessary to alert the 
organization whenever incidents occur. In keeping with the severity of the inci-
dent, the organization can mitigate the impact of the incident by containing it 
and ultimately recovering from it. During this phase, activity often cycles back 
to detection and analysis, for example, to see if additional hosts are infected by 
malware while eradicating a malware incident. After the incident is adequately 
handled, the organization issues a report that details the cause and cost of the 
incident and the steps the organization should take to prevent future incidents. 
Figure 7.2 illustrates the relationship between the various phases during the 
incident response life cycle.
FIGURE 7.2 NIST incident response life cycle.

CHAPTER 7: 
Third-Party Risk Management
176
Incident Response Relationship Between Covered Entity and 
Third Party
Strong relationships, contractually defined roles and responsibilities, and 
close coordination are critical between covered entities and third parties when 
incidents occur. Roles and responsibilities should be clearly defined and re-
quirements included within contractual agreements where appropriate such 
as:
j	 Notification point(s) of contact;
j	 Expectations regarding timely notification of incidents; and
j	 Agreements to cooperate and mitigate potential covered entity risk.
Third parties must provide a reasonable assurance of being able to report sus-
pected incidents to a covered entity in a timely manner so a covered entity can 
initiate its own incident response process and procedures.
Breach Identification, Notification, and Initial Response
Depending on where a covered entity conducts business, it may have to 
comply with various local, state, and/or federal regulations that require no-
tification of suspected incidents within a specific time frame. As a regulatory 
notification clock can start from the time an incident was identified, it is in-
creasingly important that third parties notify a covered entity of an incident 
as soon as reasonably possible. For example, the HIPAA Breach Notification 
Rule requires covered entities and their business associates to provide notifica-
tion following a breach of unsecured protected health information. Under the 
rule, notification is required to the affected individuals, the Secretary, and, in 
certain circumstances, the media. Notification also must occur without unrea-
sonable delay and within 60 days for individuals and 60 days for the Secretary 
when more than 500 individuals were impacted following the discovery of a 
breach.
As a result, third-party agreements should clearly communicate breach notifi-
cation and incident response expectations including point(s) of contact at the 
primary entity and what information must be reasonably provided to assist 
with risk assessment and appropriate response activities such as type of infor-
mation and number of records involved in the breach. Agreements should also 
address whether the primary entity or third party will be responsible for issu-
ing notifications and that both organizations agree to fully cooperate with and 
participate in an investigation should either be required.
For situations where an incident has occurred as a result of suspected illegal 
or malicious activities, law enforcement should be engaged and maintaining 
evidence chain of custody becomes increasingly important. To maintain chain 
of custody, you must document the preservation of evidence from the time it 
is collected to the time it is presented in court. To prove the chain of custody, 

Establishing connectivity
177
and ultimately show that the evidence has remained intact, prosecutors will 
generally need individuals who can testify:
j	 That the evidence offered in court is the same evidence they collected or 
received;
j	 To the time and date the evidence was received or transferred to another 
provider; and
j	 That there was no tampering with the item while it was in custody.
ESTABLISHING CONNECTIVITY
Covered entities should ensure completion of risk assessments, treatment of 
risk, and execution of contractual agreements prior to establishing third-party 
connectivity. They should also assess their level of trust for the third party and 
understand requirements for connectivity, system access, and data exchang-
es to ensure the implementation of appropriate safeguards (or standards) to 
guard against unauthorized data access.
Trust
A covered entity’s level of trust can be assessed based on the results of the 
covered entity’s risk assessment, identified deficiencies, and status of remedia-
tion plans. Organizations can also take into consideration information such 
as a third party’s historical track record of protecting information and any as-
surances provided by an independent and mutually trusted third party. Next, 
the covered entity needs to understand what (if any) information will be ex-
changed and the classification (or sensitivity) of the information, always tak-
ing care to minimize what is shared to only that which is required. Finally, the 
organization needs to understand if the third party will require direct access to 
its systems. If access is required, the third party should be required to comply 
with the covered entity’s policies and access should be granted on a role-based, 
need-to-know, and least privileged basis.
Safeguards
When establishing third-party connectivity, requirements for administrative, 
physical, and technical safeguards should be identified. Once identified, con-
trols should be appropriately implemented to protect the confidentiality, in-
tegrity, and availability of the covered entity’s information and information 
systems. Refer to Figure 7.1 or NIST Special Publication 800-66 for examples of 
activities and controls required under the HIPAA Security Rule.
Connection Agreements
Connection agreements can be used to define and mutually agree on the type 
of connectivity that will be established between the parties. The agreements 

CHAPTER 7: 
Third-Party Risk Management
178
can also address administrative, physical, and technical safeguards that either 
party must implement and maintain as a condition of establishing connec-
tivity. These can be either included within a business associate agreement or 
handled separately.
PROMOTING AWARENESS OF REQUIREMENTS
Information Flow Mapping and Scope
Healthcare organizations need to understand how information flows between 
systems and within the organization as part of the information life cycle and 
to support their mission. They also need to understand the role of third parties 
and how the information they access, process, and store fits into the equation. 
This will help improve an organization’s ability to manage risk and ensure sen-
sitive information is appropriately protected throughout its life cycle, regard-
less of where it is accessed, processed, or stored.
Data Sensitivity and Classification
To determine the value and risk associated with data, an organization must 
first assess the confidentiality, integrity, and availability requirements that per-
tain to the data. These requirements can come from the business, be driven 
by local, state, and federal regulatory requirements that apply to certain types 
of data (e.g., electronic personal health information, personally identifiable 
information), or a combination of both. Not all data types will share the same 
sensitivity or classification. For example, a patient’s name in combination with 
home address does not share a similar value and present the same risk as a 
patient’s name in combination with Social Security number (SSN). As a re-
sult, name in combination with home address might be assigned a medium 
risk classification and require less security controls than name in combination 
with SSN that might be assigned a high risk classification. Different volumes of 
information can also have an impact on classification. For example, 1 patient’s 
name in combination with SSN would have a different value and risk than the 
name and SSN of 500 patients.
Once an organization identifies the confidentiality, integrity, and availability 
of information shared with a third party, it will be better positioned to imple-
ment the required safeguards for such information based on its classification.
Privacy Requirements
The HIPAA Privacy Rule establishes national standards to protect individuals’ 
medical records and other personal health information and applies to health 
plans, healthcare clearinghouses, and those healthcare providers that conduct 
certain healthcare transactions electronically. The Rule requires appropriate 

Risk remediation
179
safeguards to protect the privacy of personal health information, and sets lim-
its and conditions on the uses and disclosures that may be made of such infor-
mation without patient authorization. The Rule also gives patients rights over 
their health information, including rights to examine and obtain a copy of 
their health records, and to request corrections. Organizations must assess pri-
vacy requirements that apply prior to sharing data with a third party to ensure 
compliance with business and regulatory requirements.
Security Requirements
The HIPAA Security Rule establishes national standards to protect individuals’ 
electronic personal health information that is created, received, used, or main-
tained by a covered entity. The Security Rule requires appropriate administra-
tive, physical, and technical safeguards to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, 
and security of electronic protected health information. Security requirements 
are closely associated with privacy and can typically be derived based on the 
classification of data. Once an organization is assigned an appropriate clas-
sification based on the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the data, 
appropriate administrative, physical, and technical safeguards can be identified 
to ensure the data are protected.
Risks Associated With Third Parties
The primary healthcare organization is ultimately responsible for the protec-
tion of data entrusted to them, whether accessed, processed, or stored internal-
ly or shared with their third parties. As such, they must conduct periodic due 
diligence on their third parties to ensure appropriate administrative, physical, 
and technical safeguards are implemented to maintain compliance with the 
primary healthcare organization’s requirements.
RISK REMEDIATION
Management, treatment, and corrective action plans associated with third-
party risks should be handled and tracked in a manner consistent with the 
primary healthcare organization’s security and privacy governance practices 
discussed in Chapters 5 and 6. Likelihood and impact of third-party findings 
should be assessed, corrective action plans developed and communicated, 
and remediation tracked as part of ongoing compliance activities by the cov-
ered entity. Third-party contractual agreements should also clearly address 
remediation requirements including who will be responsible for any costs 
associated with remediation. Once a third party provides an attestation of 
remediation being completed, the primary healthcare organization should 
review evidence to validate and ensure risks have been remediated to an ac-
ceptable level.

CHAPTER 7: 
Third-Party Risk Management
180
KEY TERMS
Term
Definition
Chain of custody
Documenting the preservation of evidence from the time it is 
collected to the time it is presented in court
Covered entity
The primary entity such as a health plan, healthcare clear-
inghouse, and certain healthcare providers who maintains a 
direct relationship with patients
Third party
Also referred to as business associates, a person or entity 
that performs certain functions or activities that involve the 
use or disclosure of protected health information on behalf 
of, or provides services to, a covered entity. Third parties 
can also be subcontractors that create, receive, maintain, or 
transmit protected health information on behalf of another 
business associate
Incident response
Process to help organizations minimize loss or theft of infor-
mation, disruption of services, and reduce overall risk associ-
ated with incidents
Level of trust
Assessed based on the results of the covered entity’s risk 
assessment, identified deficiencies, and status of remediation 
plans
Connection agreement
Used to define and mutually agree on the type of connectivity 
that will be established between the parties
HIPAA Privacy Rule
Requires appropriate safeguards to protect the privacy of 
personal health information, and sets limits and conditions on 
the uses and disclosures that may be made of such informa-
tion without patient authorization
HIPAA Security Rule
Establishes national standards to protect individuals’ elec-
tronic personal health information that is created, received, 
used, or maintained by a covered entity
Practice Exam
1.	 The HIPAA Privacy Rule applies only to covered (primary) entities including:
a.	 Health plans
b.	 Healthcare clearinghouses
c.	 Certain healthcare providers
d.	 All of the above
2.	 Under HIPAA, written contracts must be implemented to address:
a.	 Termination
b.	 Breach reimbursement
c.	 Event notification
d.	 a and c
3.	 Risk assessments are generally triggered when a third party will:
a.	 Store, process, and/or transmit personal health information
b.	 Store and/or process personal health information

Key terms
181
c.	 Transmit and/or process personal health information
d.	 Transmit and/or store personal health information
4.	 Which NIST Special Publication describes the key administrative, physical, and 
technical controls and activities required under the HIPAA Security Rule?
a.	 800-61 Revision 2
b.	 800-39
c.	 800-66 Revision 1
d.	 800-30 Revision 1
5.	 Findings resulting from completed third-party assessments should be clearly 
communicated to:
a.	 Management at the covered entity
b.	 Management at the third party
c.	 a and b
d.	 None of the above
6.	 Incident response helps organizations to:
a.	 Reduce overall risk associated with incidents
b.	 Minimize disruption of services
c.	 Minimize loss or theft of information
d.	 All of the above
7.	 Which NIST Special Publication focuses on computer security incident 
response handling?
a.	 800-61 Revision 2
b.	 800-39
c.	 800-66 Revision 1
d.	 800-30 Revision 1
8.	 Under the HIPAA Breach Notification Rule, notification is generally required to the 
affected individuals, the Secretary, and in certain circumstances, the media within:
a.	 30 days
b.	 45 days
c.	 60 days
d.	 90 days
9.	 A covered entity’s level of trust for a third party can be assessed based on the 
results of:
a.	 Identified deficiencies
b.	 The covered entity’s risk assessment
c.	 Status of remediation plans
d.	 All of the above
10.	 Connection agreements with third parties can be used to:
a.	 Address administrative, physical, and technical safeguard requirements
b.	 Define and mutually agree on the type of connectivity established between 
parties
c.	 a and b
d.	 None of the above

CHAPTER 7: 
Third-Party Risk Management
182
11.	 To determine the value and risk associated with data, an organization must 
assess data:
a.	 Confidentiality requirements
b.	 Integrity requirements
c.	 Availability requirements
d.	 All of the above
12.	 The HIPAA Privacy Rule establishes:
a.	 National standards to protect individuals’ medical records and other 
personal health information and applies to health plans, healthcare 
clearinghouses, and those healthcare providers that conduct certain 
healthcare transactions electronically
b.	 National standards to protect individuals’ electronic personal health 
information that is created, received, used, or maintained by a covered 
entity
c.	 International standards to protect individuals’ medical records and other 
personal health information and applies to health plans, healthcare 
clearinghouses, and those healthcare providers that conduct certain 
healthcare transactions electronically
d.	 International standards to protect individuals’ electronic personal health 
information that is created, received, used, or maintained by a covered 
entity
13.	 The HIPAA Security Rule establishes:
a.	 National standards to protect individuals’ medical records and other 
personal health information and applies to health plans, healthcare 
clearinghouses, and those healthcare providers that conduct certain 
healthcare transactions electronically
b.	 National standards to protect individuals’ electronic personal health 
information that is created, received, used, or maintained by a covered 
entity
c.	 International standards to protect individuals’ medical records and other 
personal health information and applies to health plans, healthcare 
clearinghouses, and those healthcare providers that conduct certain 
healthcare transactions electronically
d.	 International standards to protect individuals’ electronic personal health 
information that is created, received, used, or maintained by a covered 
entity
14.	 Who is ultimately responsible for the protection of data entrusted to a 
healthcare organization?
a.	 Patient
b.	 Third party accessing, processing, or storing healthcare data
c.	 Primary healthcare organization
d.	 Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)

Key terms
183
Practice Exam Answers
1.	 d
2.	 d
3.	 a
4.	 c
5.	 c
6.	 d
7.	 a
8.	 c
9.	 d
10.	 c
11.	 d
12.	 a
13.	 b
14.	 c
References
Breach Notification Rule, n.d. Breach Notification Rule. N.p., web. September 1, 2014. <http://
www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/breachnotificationrule/>.
Business Associates. Health Information Privacy. Department of Health & Human Services,  
­December 3, 2002. Web. August 15, 2014. <http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/­
understanding/coveredentities/businessassociates.pdf>.
Business Associate Contracts, n.d. Business Associate Contracts. N.p., web. September 1, 2014. 
<http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/coveredentities/contractprov.html>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. An Introductory Resource Guide for ­Implementing 
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Security Rule. IST Special 
Publication 800-66 Revision 1. Web. September 1, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ 
nistpubs/800-66-Rev1/SP-800-66-Revision1.pdf>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Computer Security Incident Handling 
Guide. Special Publication 800-61 Revision 2. Web. September 1, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/­
publications/nistpubs/800-61rev2/SP800-61rev2.pdf>.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, n.d. Managing Information Security Risk. N.p., 
web. July 1, 2014. <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-39/SP800-39-final.pdf>.
SART Toolkit – Develop a SART, n.d. SART Toolkit – Develop a SART. N.p., web. September 1, 
2014. <http://ovc.ncjrs.gov/sartkit/develop/issues-coc.html>.
The Security Rule, n.d. The Security Rule. N.p., web. September 1, 2014. <http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/
privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/index.html>.

185
Index
A
Access control, 62–63
discretionary access control 
(DAC), 63
mandatory access control (MAC), 63
role-based access control (RBAC), 63
types, 64
Accredited Standards 
Committee (ASC) 
X12 transactions standards, 15
Administrative controls, 64
Advanced persistent threats 
(APTs), 146
Affordable care act, 8
Ambulatory patient groups 
(APGs), 15
Ambulatory payment classifications 
(APCs), 15
American Health Information 
Management Association 
(AHIMA), 19
American Hospital Association 
(AHA), 16
American institute of certified public 
accountants (AICPA), 48
American Medical Association 
(AMA), 14
American national standards institute 
(ANSI), 15
American recovery and reinvestment 
act (ARRA) of 2009 
included, 35
data breach regulations, 37
international standards, 36
organizational-level privacy and 
security requirements, 37
penalties and fees, 38
privacy and security, culture of, 37
stimulus and recovery 
mechanisms, 35
Asset classification, example of, 111
Assumptions and constraints, 
identification, 143–146
analytic approach, 146
impacts, 145
likelihood, 145
risk tolerance and uncertainty, 145
threat events, 144
threat sources, 144
vulnerabilities and predisposing 
conditions, 144
Authorization 
elements and statements, 17
officials, 97
Availability, definition of, 62
Awareness, 67
B
Backup strategy 
advantages and disadvantages, 72
cold sites, 74
differential backup, 73
full backup, 73
hot sites, 73
incremental backup, 73
mirrored backup, 73
onsite backups, 73
remote backups, 73
warm sites, 74
Business associates, 8, 168
Business continuity, 71
C
Canada’s Office of the Privacy 
Commissioner, 76
Canada’s personal information 
protection and electronic 
documents act (PIPEDA), 36
Candidates, rest prior to 
examination, 3
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services (CMS), 6, 112
Chief information security officer 
(CISO), 97
Chief security officer (CSO), 97
Clinical decision support systems 
(CDSS), 8
Clinical research, 17
Code of Ethics, 3–4, 53
cannons, 4
preamble, 3
Coding systems, 14
Common control provider, 98
responsible for, 98
Common criteria, 47
arrangement, 47
participants in, 47
certified product categories, 47–48
for information technology 
security evaluation, 47
Common methodology for 
information technology 
security evaluation, 47
Common security framework (CSF), 48
Comprehensive risk management 
methodology, 103
Computer-based (CBT) exam, 3
Computerized physician order entry 
(CPOE), 8
Computer security 
division, 92
incident handling guide, 175
Confidentiality, integrity, and 
availability (CIA) triad, 61, 
62, 91
of information systems, 108
Connection agreements, 177
Connectivity, type of, 177
Contractual agreements, 176
execution of, 177

Index
186
Control, examples, 110
Covered entity 
definitions of, 168
level, 177
responsible for, 168
Cryptographic algorithm, 
one-way, 66
Cryptography, 65
Current procedural terminology 
(CPT) codes, 14
D
Data analytics, 9
Data anonymization, 81–82
DNA, 82
HIV research data, 82
pregnancy, 82
substance abuse, 82
Data classification schemas, 78
Data criticality analysis, 70
Data encryption, 65–66
Hash functions, 66
public key encryption, 66
secret key encryption, 65
Data handling procedures, 79
access, 79
destruction, 79
use, 79
Data interoperability and exchange, 9
foundational, 22
semantic, 22
structural, 22
Data privacy standards, 76
economic co-operation and 
development privacy 
principles, organization for, 76
generally accepted privacy 
principles, 76
personal information protection 
and electronic documents 
act, 76
UK data protection act 1998, 77
Data retention and destruction 
policies, 74
Data sharing, 19
Data use and reciprocal support 
agreement (DURSA), 40
data ownership, 41
data subjects, 41
guidelines, 44
industry-specific laws, 43
International Standards 
Organization (ISO), 46
legislative and regulatory 
updates, 41
policies, 44
practical example, 45
procedures, 44
security and privacy compliance 
frameworks, 45
standard, 44
treaties, 42
international safe harbor 
principles, 42–43
Decision-making power, 101
Designated Standards Maintenance 
Organizations (DSMOs), 15
Diagnosis-related groups (DRGs), 14
Digital imaging and communications 
in medicine (DICOM), 23
Disaster recovery plan, 71
backup procedures, 72
critical application assessment, 72
implementation procedures, 72
recovery procedures, 72
test procedures, 72
Disparate data, 79
E
Electronic data interchange (EDI), 7
diagnoses and procedures 
specific code sets for, 7
services for, 7
standard transactions, 7, 13
Electronic health information 
exchanges, 40
Electronic health record (EHR), 10, 14
adoption of, 9
benefits of, 23
legal elements of, 23
Electronic medical records (EMR), 8
Electronic personal health 
information, 179
Electronic protected health 
information (EPHI), 70
Encryption, 65
algorithms, 66
function, 65
definition of, 65
types of, 65
European Commission Data 
Protection Legislation, 36
European Data Protection 
Directive, 170
Directive 95/46/EC, 42
European economic area (EEA), 42
Exam registration, 3–4
Code of Ethics, 3–4
External third-party relationships, 
understanding of, 19
F
Federal information security 
management act (FISMA) of 
2002, 35
Federal information systems, risk 
assessments of, 133
Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), 9
G
Generally accepted privacy principles 
(GAPP), 48, 74
General practice organizations, 102
minimum requirements for, 103
General privacy principles, 74
data privacy standards, 76
12 privacy principles, 75
Good clinical research practice 
(GCP), 17
Governance structures, 100
national health service structure, 102
NIST structure, 101
H
Health and human services (HHS), 
134
Healthcare 
authorization and informed 
consent, 17
clearinghouses, 16
delivery of, 82
environments, information flow 
and life cycle in, 20
information-based 
balance of risk vs. reward when 
delivering, 50
organized physician services, 6
privacy and security in, 61–83
security fundamentals, 61–62
security principles, 62
processes, 16
providers, 5
records management, 18, 18–19
regulatory environment, 16
services, information-driven, 52
systems, 5
Healthcare coding, 13–14
medical coding systems, 14

Index
187
Healthcare industry, 5–24
authorization and informed 
consent, 17
business associates, 8
clearinghouses, 16
clinical research, 17
coding, 13–14
data analytics, 9
data interoperability and 
exchange, 9
data sharing, 19
digital imaging and 
communications in medicine 
(DICOM), 23
electronic data interchange  
(EDI), 7
electronic health record (EHR), 10
environments, information flow 
and life cycle in, 20
health data characterization, 20
health information technology 
(HIT), 8
health insurance, 11–12
exchanges, 8
health level seven international, 10
HIPAA transaction and code sets, 
15
Institutional Review Boards, 18
integrating enterprise, 10
legal medical records, 23
meaningful use regulations, 9
medical billing, 15
medical devices, 9
national provider identifier 
(NPI), 6
National Uniform Billing 
Committee (NUBC), 16
organizations, 5
organized physician services, 6
payer, 6
payment models, 13
personal health record (PHR), 10
pharmaceutical industry, 6
provider, 5
taxonomy codes, 21
code lists, 21
insurance exchange code 
lists, 21
public health reporting, 17
records management, 18–19
regulatory environment, 16
systematized nomenclature of 
medicine (SNOMED), 14
systems, 5
understanding external third-party 
relationships, 19
value-added networks (VANs), 7
workflow management, 16
Healthcare Information and 
Management Systems Society 
(HIMSS), 10
Healthcare information security and 
privacy practitioner (HCISPP) 
candidates, 92, 131, 167
information bulletin, 1
certification, 1
requirements, 2–3
Healthcare organizations, 1, 5, 20, 
38, 50, 62, 78, 131
classification of 
for-profit, 5
not-for-profit, 5
importance of information to, 91
resource for, 46
Health data characterization, 20
analytics, 21
classification, 21
taxonomy, 21
Health information 
audit, 170
compliance, 169
disclosure authorization, 169
event notification, 169
permitted use, 169
right to terminate, 170
safeguards, 169
subcontractors, 170
termination, 170
unauthorized disclosure, 169
Health information technology 
(HIT), 8
interoperability 
foundational, 22
semantic, 22
structural, 22
use of, 1
Health information technology for 
economic and clinical health 
(HITECH) act, 35, 36, 134
Health information trust alliance 
(HITRUST), 48
Health insurance, 11–12
exchanges, 8
government-managed, 11
private. See Private health 
insurance 
programs, 12
public. See Public health insurance 
in United States, 12
variety of, 12
Health insurance portability and 
accountability act of 1996 
(HIPAA), 61
breach notification rule, 33, 38, 176
changes to, 35
compliance 
business support functions’ 
relationship with, 82
contingency plan standard, 70
covered entity, 6
elements of, 34
and covers, 34
and definitions, 34–35
healthcare laws, 33
privacy rule, 8, 17, 33, 74, 79, 168
45 CFR 164.514, 39
public law 104-191, 34
relationship with HITECH, 36
secretary of health and human 
services (HHS), 13
security rule, 46, 103, 108
transaction and code sets, 15
violation and corresponding 
penaltie, 39
vulnerability program elements, 70
Health level seven international 
(HL7), 10
website, 23
Human services office for civil 
rights, 37
Hybrid approach, 101
I
Implementation, types relationship 
with control categories, 51
Incident response 
concept, 174
life cycle, 175
Industry resources 
International Organization for 
Standardization, 93
National Health Service, 94
national institute of standards and 
technology, 92
Industry-specific laws, 43
occupational safety and health act 
of 1970 (OSH Act), 43
payment card industry 
data security standards 
(PCI–DSS), 43
Sarbanes–Oxley act (SOX), 43

Index
188
Information access management, 173
Information governance (IG), 94
authorizing official, 97
designated representative, 98
chief information officer (CIO), 96
common control provider, 98
definition of, 94
head of agency (CEO), 95
owner/Steward, 96
risk executive (function), 96
and risk management, 91–122
industry resources, 92
knowledge areas, 92
security architect, 99
security control assessor, 100
senior information security 
officer, 97
system owner, 98
system security engineer, 100
system security officer, 99
toolkit, 48, 94
Information risk assessment, 131–162
knowledge areas, 131
Information risk management life 
cycle and activities, 112, 113
assess security controls, 116
assess, 117
prepare, 117
remediate, 117
report, 117
authorize information system, 118
accept, 118
package, 118
plan, 118
risk, 118
categorize information systems, 113
categorize, 113
describe, 114
register, 114
implement security controls, 116
document, 116
implement, 116
monitoring security controls, 119
disposal, 120
exception handling, 120
monitor, 119
remediate, 119
reporting and metrics, 121
risk and accept, 120
status, 120
system change, 119
update, 119
select security controls, 114
identify, 114
monitor, 115
plan, 115
select, 115
Information risk management 
program 
controls, 132
impact, 132
information life cycle, 132
key terms associated with, 132
likelihood, 132
risk, 132
acceptance, 132
assessments, 131
avoidance, 132
mitigation, 132
transfer, 132
threat, 132
vulnerability, 132
Information security architect, 99
Information security program,  
93, 96
measurement program, 121
Information Sharing and Analysis 
Centers (ISACs), 147
Information systems 
categorization of, 113
descriptions, 114
owner, responsible for, 98
Institutional review boards  
(IRBs), 18
Integrating enterprise, 10
Integrating the healthcare enterprise 
(IHE), 23
Integrity, definition of, 61
International classification of disease 
(ICD), 14
clinical modification of, 14
International Health Terminology 
Standards Development 
Organization (IHTSDO), 14
International safe harbor principles, 
42–43
access, 42
choice, 42
data integrity, 42
enforcement, 42
notice, 42
onward transfer, 42
security, 42
International Standards Organization 
(ISO), 46, 92
ISO 27799:2008, 93
ISO/IEC 27002:2005, 93
ISC, 1
(ISC)2 Code of Ethics, 53
cannons, 54
code, 53
preamble, 54
sanctions, 54
K
Key performance indicators (KPIs), 121
Key risk indicators (KRIs), 121
L
Least privilege 
NIST Special Publication 800-12, 
definition of, 71
Legal and information management, 3
Legal medical records, 23
Logical access controls, 62
M
Measurement program  
structure, 121
Medical billing, 15
Medical coding systems, 14
Medical devices, 9
class and regulatory controls, 9
Medical record, 79
Medicare and medicaid electronic 
health record (EHR), 9
N
National Health Service (NHS) 
organizations, 48
general practice 
information governance life 
cycle, 102
National institute of standards and 
technology (NIST), 46, 92
areas, 92
federal information processing 
standards (FIPS), 92
assessment scale 
likelihood of threat event 
initiation, 153
likelihood of threat event 
occurrence, 154
likelihood of threat event 
resulting in adverse 
impacts, 154
example assessment procedure, 
136, 137
example contingency plan security 
control, 136
incident response life cycle, 175

Index
189
information technology laboratory 
(ITL) bulletins, 92
interagency/internal reports, 46, 92
key activities 
assessment preparation, 149
communicating risk assessment 
information, 157
conducting the assessment, 157
for HIPAA security rule, sample 
of, 171
maintaining the assessment, 159
likelihood and impact 
relationship, 155
risk assessment process, 137
risk management hierarchy, 138
special publications 800 series 
examples, 34, 35
special publication 800-16, 67
special publication 800-30, 105
assessment maintenance, 106
assessment preparation, 105
communicate results, 106
conduct assessment, 106
special publication 800-39, 148
special publication 800-66, 177
special publication 800-53A 
revision 1, 134
special publication 800-53 rev. 
4, 68
special publication 800-61 
revision 2, 175
special publication 800-66 
revision 1, 171
step 1 checkpoint, 114
step 2 checkpoint, 116
step 3 checkpoint, 117
step 4 checkpoint, 118
step 5 checkpoint, 119
step 6 checkpoint, 120
structure, 101
centralized governance 
structures, 101
decentralized information 
security governance 
structures, 101
hybrid information security 
governance structures, 101
National plan and provider 
enumeration system (NPPES), 6
National provider identifier (NPI), 6
National Uniform Billing Committee 
(NUBC), 16
National Uniform Claim Committee 
(NUCC), 21
O
Occupational safety and health act of 
1970 (OSH Act), 43
Office for Civil Rights, 36
Organizational Code of Ethics, 53
Organization for economic 
co-operation and development 
(OECD), 76
privacy principles, 74
Organization’s healthcare security 
program, 67
Organization-specific risk models, 148
P
Paper-based exams, 3
Payer, 6
definition of, 6
Payment card industry data security 
standards (PCI–DSS), 43
Payment models, 13
comprehensive care/total cost of 
care payment, 13
episode/bundled payments, 13
fee for service, 13
pay for coordination, 13
pay for performance, 13
variety of, 13
Personal data, 77
Personal health information  
(PHI), 1, 6, 37, 91, 178
definition of, 79
possession of, 53
Personal health records (PHRs), 6, 10
vs. electronic health records (EHR), 10
Personal information protection 
and electronic documents act 
(PIPEDA), 74
Personally identifiable information 
(PII), 91
Pharmaceutical industry, 6
Physical safeguards 
definition of, 94
Physician services, 6
Primary healthcare organization, 179
Privacy 
governance, understanding, 94
governance structures, 100
information governance, 94
importance of, 1
principles, 37
relationship between, 78
12 Privacy principles, 75
access 
individual participation, 75
limitation, 75
accuracy, completeness, quality, 75
additional measures for breach 
notification, 76
consent/choice, 75
disclosure limitation/transfer to 
third parties/trans-border 
concerns, 75
limited collection/legitimate 
purpose/purpose 
specification, 75
management, designation of privacy 
officer, supervisor re-authority, 
processing authorization, 
accountability, 75
notice, purpose specification, 76
proportionality, use and retention, 
use limitation, 75
security, 75
transparency, openness, 75
Privacy rules, 18
45 CFR 164.514 
information flow mapping, 39
jurisdictional implications, 40
monitoring PHI information 
flows, 40
Private health insurance, 11
Protected health information, 35
Providers.. See Healthcare providers 
Provider taxonomy codes, 21
code lists, 21
insurance exchange code lists, 21
Public health insurance, 11
disadvantage of, 11
Public health reporting, 17
Q
Qualitative analysis, 106
asset identification and 
valuation, 108
based on media coverage, 107
controls, 110
impact, 111
leveraging likelihood and 
impact, 107
likelihood, 110
association between likelihood 
and frequency, 110
risk, 111
treatment, 112
threats, 108
vulnerability, 109

Index
190
Quantitative analysis, 106
asset identification and 
valuation, 108
controls, 110
impact, 111
likelihood, 110
association between likelihood 
and frequency, 110
risk, 111
treatment, 112
threats, 108
vulnerability, 109
Quantitative assessments 
annual loss expectancy  
(ALE), 106
annual rate of occurrence 
(ARO), 106
single loss expectancy (SLE), 106
R
Reassessments, 106
Regulatory environment, 33–54
definitions, 54
healthcare organizations 
legal issues that to information 
security and privacy for, 33
health insurance portability and 
accountability act of 1996 
(HIPAA), 33
Resource utilization groups 
(RUGs), 14
Risk assessment conduction, 149
determine impact, 154
determine likelihood, 152–153
determine risk, 155
identify threat events, 150
identify threat sources, 150
identify vulnerabilities and 
conditions, 151
Risk assessment information, 
communication, 156
Risk assessment maintenance, 156
monitor risk factors, 158
update risk assessment, 158
Risk assessment preparation, 140
identify assumptions and 
constraints, 143–146
identify information sources, 
146–147
identify purpose, 140–142
identify risk model and analytic 
approach, 148–149
identify scope, 142–143
Risk assessment procedures, 134
methods, 135
examine method, 135
interview method, 135
test method, 135
NIST example, 135
objective, 134
Risk assessment process, 105
affect on, 139
desired outcomes, 134
enable organizations to, 100
hierarchy, 137
information system, 139
mission/business process, 139
organizational level, 138–139
information security risk, 135
NIST guide for conduction, 133
ISO/IEC 27005:2011, 133
role of internal and external 
audit, 134
scope of, 139
support, 101
Risk assessment, understanding, 131
key terms, 132
life cycle and continuous 
monitoring, 132
tools, resources, and 
techniques, 133
Risk management methodology, 108
understanding, 103
assessment, 104
framing, 104
monitoring, 105
response, 104
risk assessment approach, 105
Risk response and remediation, 159
controls 
related to time, 162
corrective, 162
detective, 162
preventative, 162
types of, 161
administrative, 161
physical, 161
technical, 161
evaluation of alternatives, 160
risk response decision, 161
risk response identification, 160
risk response implementation, 161
Risk, types of, 111
acceptance, 112
avoid, 112
inherent, 111
managed, 111
mitigate, 112
residual, 111
transfer, 112
S
Safeguard healthcare information, 68
Safe harbor privacy principles, 42
Safety and welfare of society, 3
SANS critical security controls, 49
compensating controls, 50–51
administrative, 51
corrective, 51
detective, 51
logical, 51
physical, 51
preventative, 51
control variance documentation, 52
residual risk tolerance, 52
Risk-based decision making, 50
Sarbanes–Oxley act (SOX), 43
Scope, identification, 142–143
architectural/technology 
considerations, 143
effectiveness time frame, 142
organizational applicability, 142
Security 
assigned responsibilities, 172
authorization process, 97
categorization process, 113
control assessors, 100
fundamentals, 61–62
availability, 62
confidentiality, 61
integrity, 61
governance, understanding, 94
governance structures, 100
information governance, 94
importance of, 1
management process, 171
resources, 92
rules, 18
Security principles, 62
access control, 62–63
business continuity and disaster 
recovery, 71
data encryption, 65–66
data retention and destruction, 74
least privilege, 71
segregation of duties, 71
systems recovery, 70–71
application and data criticality 
analysis, 71

Index
191
data backup plan, 71
disaster recovery plan, 71
emergency mode operation 
plan, 71
testing and revision procedures, 71
training and awareness, 67–68
logging and monitoring, 68
vulnerability management, 68–70
Sensitive data 
anonymization, 81–82
de-identification, 81
and handling implications, 
disparate nature of, 78–79
protected health information 
(PHI), 79
Sensitive healthcare information, 
61, 62
Social security number (SSN), 106, 178
Systematic vulnerability management 
program, 69
Systematized nomenclature of 
medicine (SNOMED), 14
T
TCS rule, 15
Third party 
definitions of, 168
information, asset protection 
controls, 171
service providers, 167
Third-party risk management, 
167–180
assessment and audit support, 
171–174
communication of findings, 174
definition of, 168
establishing connectivity, 177
connection agreements, 177
safeguards, 177
trust, 177
incident notification and response, 
174–175
breach identification, 
notification, and initial 
response, 176
internal processes, 175
relationship between covered 
entity and third party, 176
inventory, 168
knowledge areas, 167
management standards and 
practices, 169
promoting awareness of 
requirements, 178
data sensitivity and 
classification, 178
information flow mapping and 
scope, 178
privacy requirements, 178
risks associated with third 
parties, 179
security requirements, 179
risk assessment, 170–171
risk remediation, 179
Trading partner agreement, 19
technical requirements for 
communications protocols, 20
Transaction rule, 20
U
UK data protection act 1998 (DPA), 
36, 74, 77
United Kingdom’s Information 
Commissioner’s Office 
(ICO), 77
United Kingdom’s national health 
service (NHS), 92
US computer emergency readiness 
team (US-CERT), 147
US Department of Commerce, 92
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS), 5
U.S.–EU safe harbor, 42
U.S. healthcare system, 9
V
Value-added networks (VANs), 7
Vulnerability, 109
access management, 110
backup, 109
change management, 110
management 
cycle, 69
NIST Special Publication 
800-53 Rev. 4, definition 
of, 68
mobile media, 109
system hardening, 109
system patching, 109
types of, 109
W
Workflow management, 16
Workforce security, 173
World health assembly, 14
World Health Organization 
(WHO), 9

