
Headphones: Buyer’s Guide 2015
Copyright © 2014 Conceptual Kings.
All are rights reserved. 
This book or any portion thereof may not be reproduced or used in any manner
whatsoever without the express written permission of the publisher except for the use of
brief quotations in a book review.
Introduction
Headphones can be considered loudspeakers that were specifically created to be placed
over the ears of user’s. They are electrical devices that convert electrical signals into
sounds to be heard by the user. The main function of a headphone is to provide users with
the ability to use them to privately listen to audio recordings. This is in direct contrast to a
speaker that allows everyone in close proximity to hear the sound. Sometimes headphones
can be referred to as ear speakers.
There are many different types of headphones that have different audio reproduction
abilities. They range from lightweight ear buds to heavy bass-pumping full-sized
headphones that produce amazing output. These can offer a range of sound that, to date
has remained a phenomenon. It allows audiophiles to hear every sound note and
accurately identify every pitch.
The average user will unlikely be able to differentiate the various sounds and pitches. An
experienced listener, however, is more likely to easily identify the differences. The costs
of the headphones can range from a low of $7 per unit to well over $1000; based on
available features and the quality of sound that it produces. While some users may be on a
budget when making this purchase, users who require the clear sound quality are more
likely to easily pay top dollar for the right fit.
This book seeks to explore some of the best headphones for the year 2015. Users have the
option of also viewing the specifications to see which one is most suited for their needs
and will fit into their desired price point.
1. Audio Technica (ATH M50X)
This version of the Audio Technica headphones is considered an improvement over
their previously released exceptional model. They have kept the tradition of great
headphones and it is one of the best sound-producing headphones that cost under
$200.
 
2.  Beats Studio Wireless Headphones

This type of headphone is a great wireless Bluetooth headphone designed to produce
great sound. It is an excellent choice for someone seeking a sound -producing device
and is believed to be worth every penny of the $380 it costs. These appeal to
specific buyers who are willing to support the product to receive the desired value.
 
3.  Bose Quiet Comfort 25
The Bose line of headphones is renowned for producing the industry standard
quality on noise cancelling headphones. This brand takes the standard to new
heights and creates the base on which subsequent releases must follow.
 
4.  Beyerdynamic(T51p)
This headphone device is one of the pricey ones coming in at approximately $290. It
is German made and is considered to be one of the best in the industry. The device
provides excellent sound and a perfect fit for the user.
 
5.  V-Moda Crossfade (M-100)
This headphone has various features that are particularly suited for DJ’s. It has
rugged construction and provides great detailed sound to the users. The sound also
has a heavy bass feature that offers a wonderful appeal to users; enhanced by its
great price.
 
6.  Sony MDR1R
The Sony MDR1R version of headphones though costly, is a good value for the
money. It offers high accuracy for its sound production with great style and
substance. With these incredible features and options you can be assured it is a great
deal.
 
7.  Monster iSport Victory Headphones
There may be some obvious flaws in the design of these particular headphones.
They have however, been considered to be an excellent fit. With features such as its
water resistance capabilities, it is attractive to users.  Coming in at $150, it is also
one of the best headphones currently available on the market.
 
8.  Panasonic Earbuds
The Panasonic earbuds headphones are economical disposable headphones that you
may choose to keep. Though considered to be fairly inexpensive, these headphones
offer great sound and flexibility to the user. They can be carried anywhere and

conveniently used anytime.
 
9.  JVC Flats
The JVC Flats are an inexpensive set of headphones that cost approximately $12 per
pair. The relatively small cost means that users receive excellent quality sound and
performance without the high cost normally associated with this feature. This can be
considered as a budget headphone that can be perfect for someone purchasing for
the first time.
 
10.                      Sennheiser (RS180)
The Sennheiser headphones are an awesome device unit that ranks high among
competitors. The price is also competitive; making it affordable while the user still
gets access to great features such as wireless playing while still getting a great
sound.
 
11.                      Skullcandy Hesh 2 (Wireless)
This wireless headphone is just as good as any unit in the grade of devices. This
however, is renowned for offering cheaper alternatives to others in the form of the
Bose Soundlink or Beats Headphones. As a wireless and Bluetooth headphone, it is
a great choice for someone on a budget.
 
12.                      Monster DNA Pro 2.9 (Over-Ear)
The Monster DNA headphones offer the users an advanced approach in sound
quality and design. Some users may find the ear cups somewhat narrow but for
some it still makes a great choice.
 
13.                      Master & Dynamic (MH40)
The Master and Dynamic headphones have an odd shape that will only appeal to
specific buyers. It is an over-the-ear design that may not comfortably fit everyone.
Additionally, the unit is well built and produces great sound quality.
 
14.                      HiFiMan (HE-400i)
The HiFiMan headphones are a superb brand that offers good sound quality at a
reasonable price. It is the perfect alternative for users who do not want to spend a lot
of money, but still want awesome sounds to fulfil their needs.
 

15.                      Harman Kardon Soho Wireless Headphones
These headphones are sturdily-built, compact, wireless, and Bluetooth. They are a
cheaper alternative to competitors such as Bose and Beats. As long as users
understand and appreciate that these headphones will not offer the same quality as
high end headphones, their present needs will be met.
 
16.                      JVC HA (RX900)
This version of the headphone is an over the ear model that is guaranteed to impress
listeners. This is especially so for the users who are shopping around for a low cost
headphone to be used at home or at work.
 
17.                      Creative Aurvana Live 2
This is the update version of the Aurvana Live headphones that were originally
released. It offers updated features and is considered a great value for the money.
Though it is a cheaper alternative, it is still rated as highly as a high end headphone.
 
18.                      Sennheiser (HD 202 II)
This is a great choice for users who may be on a strict budget but still require a great
unit. The budget for this is around $40; making it the ideal budget headphones. The
headphones are also known for their comfortable fit and great sound quality.
 
19.                      Beats Solo 2 Wireless
The Beats 2 headphones are loaded with great features that the users will appreciate.
They have a great design, good sound quality, and amazing colors that cater to any
user. They are however, very costly to acquire and will probably only be purchased
by specific individuals.
 
20.                      RHA T10i
The design of the headphones may not be to everyone’s taste. However, the build of
the unit creates sounds that users will be pleased with. There are extras that come
along including acoustic filters that can be interchanged.
 
21.                      Bowers and Wilkins (P5 Series 2)
This headphone is a second generation unit that has been improved over its
predecessor. The same winning design has been maintained but the sound quality
has been improved. Coming in at approximately $300 it is value for the money with

all the features.
 
22.                      Monster iSport Victory Headphones
Some users have identified flaws in the design but the Monster iSport stills offers a
great fit for most users. It has fantastic features such as water resistance and great
sound output. It is a perfect headphone for individuals who are doing sporting
activities.
 
23.                      Samsung Level On
The Samsung level on is an average headphone that can be used with many devices.
It is not the best in its class and there is nothing truly exceptional about it, however
it has Galaxy compatibility. However, as a headphone unit it does what it was
created to do, by providing premium sound output to users.
 
24.                      Beats Solo 2
Not all audiophiles may be blown away by this headphone as it caters to a specific
audience. That is, users who are looking for an exciting and fast headphones with
heavy bass. For that subset of users, this will meet their needs perfectly. Also
catering to the group of Beats headphone fans, this will be sure to please faithful
users.
 
25.                      Sol Republic Master tracks
This brand of headphones offers an amazing design that have an eye catching,
distinct look. Coupled with this, it has amazing performance with refined sound that
will be sure to delight the user. The modern design and comfortable fit is
accentuated by its strong bass response. Features like interchangeable headbands,
detachable cords, and Apple friendly microphone helps to make this a good decision
for users.
 
26.                      Beats Studio 2013
These headphones are one of the top class units that can cost as much as $300.
These are lighter and have a more durable design than previous models. The sound
that they offer is significantly better and will be noticed by the average user. Again,
the Beats brand of headphones appeal to a particular set of users that need a
particular sound quality for their music. This model will offer no less to these sound
hungry audiophiles.
 

27.                      KEF M500
The KEP M500 is a pricey headphone unit but the combination of looks and sound
makes it worth it. It comes with a sleek, comfortable design that makes it one of the
best at that price point. Choosy audiophiles will pay any price to achieve the precise
sound they are looking for.
 
28.                      Superlux HD681
The Superlux is a headphone that sits at a cheaper price point at around $35. It is not
the best in the design category but due to its price and offerings it is one of those
that looks to make its mark in 2015 with its sound quality.
 
29.                      Sony MDR7506
These are older type headphones that have been around since the early 1990’s.
Though being a bit outdated, it still offers great sound in its class and for its price. It
costs users around $100 and they will not be disappointed in their selection.
 
30.                      Bose Soundlink Around Ear Bluetooth Headphones
Users have various concerns about this headphone, which they are exploring. They
are also looking at its current price point of $250. Aside from concerns and price, it
is still a great sounding headphone that is lightweight and easy to wear for the user.
 
31.                      iLuv City Lights
These earphones are a cheaper brand that come in at around $7. These are made
particularly for the users with a cheaper budget who still want something good to
use. Even at this price point the headphones still have a lot of bass to offer.
 
32.                      Audio Technica ATH-CKP500 Sonic Sport
This headphone offers a comfortable and secure fitting unit with strong sound for a
very reasonable price. At around $45 these earphones are considered to be one of
the best in its class. These are great for people who are engaged in sports and still
want great audio that will keep them going.
 
33.                      Philips Fidelio M1
The Philips Fidelio does not offer the best sound in its class, but it is still well suited
for everyday use. The design is solid and is made to be comfortable for the user. The
unit comes in at approximately $120. The unit also allows the user to make cell

phone calls by using the inline one button remote.
 
34.                      Noontec Zoro HD True Sound
This headphone is quite affordable and is similar to the styling of the Beats Solo
unit. However, it stands on its own by offering good HD sound that is clean and well
balanced. They are comfortable to wear and can be conveniently put away in a
suitable carrying pouch.
 
35.                      HiFiMan RE-400 In- Ear Headphones
These headphones have an attractive design that is enhanced with aluminium
earpieces. They are very lightweight which makes them comfortable to wear and
still offer great, clear audio. While it does not offer a microphone for cell phone
calls it still gives an accurate sound targeting users that are on a budget.
 
36.                      Moshi Mythro
The Moshi Mythro are lightweight headphones that fit comfortably. For the
affordable price it offers good sound with an integrated microphone for making cell
phone calls.  There is no carrying case offered and no volume controls on the
remote, however this can be expected at the price point of $20.
 
37.                      Pro-Ject Audio Systems Hear It One
These headphones are considered to be very light for a full size model unit. They
have an accurate balance of tones and the manufacturers offer a two year parts and
labor warranty. Some users have an issue with the costs as there is nothing
exceptional that stands out for the $129 price tag. In fact, its design is quite similar
to some cheaper models, but some users still prefer to work with a brand they trust.
 
38.                      Harman Kardon Noise Cancelling Headphones
This headphone offers a unique design with a great finish. It fits great and has an
impressive sound production for a noise cancelling unit. There is a built in
rechargeable battery that powers the noise cancellation and it can be placed into the
carrying kit.
 
39.                      Beyerdynamic T90
This pricey unit uses advanced technology to produce the sound for the user. It uses
Tesla magnetic flux technology that gives accurate sounds and with its design it
gives great stereo features. It is great for prolonged use and can stand up to even

pricier headphones above the $1000 mark. At the lower end price point, it is
considered a flag ship model due to the combination of sound, design and comfort.
 
40.                      Tenqa Remxd
For the current price point, the Tenqa Remxd headphones offers a sturdy build with
good battery life. Also containing Bluetooth as a feature, it is a good value at the
price of $39. The headphones can also act as a wireless headphone for making calls
on a cell phone. The only drawback is that the headband will not fit smaller heads
and the headphones will not charge with a Micro USB charging cable.
 
41.                      Moshi Keramo
The design of this headphone unit is a polished ceramic finish that is considered
sleek by users. The sound delivered is clean which is great for the users along with
its convenient carrying case. It also has an inline mic for making cell phone calls.
All these features at a reasonable price of $120.
 
42.                      Incipio F38
The Incipio f38 is an over the ear headphone that has a durable and attractive design.
It is a great fit and offers great sound for the price point of $38. It doesn’t have
features such as folding or a microphone for cell phone calls it is still a solid
headphone at that price.
 
43.                      JVC Flats
The JVC Flats headphones are fairly reasonable units which are comfortable,
lightweight, and offer great sound for a cheaper price point. They can be folded flat
and come in various colors that users can choose from. Due to their cost, they are
cheaper than others and do not include carrying cases.
 
44.                      AfterShokz Sports M2
These headphones are comfortable and even better for sport enthusiasts as they are
sweat proof. They come with integrated microphones with volume controls for cell
phone calls. They utilize bone conducting technology that transmits the sounds
through your cheekbone so your ears remain uncovered. This allows the user to be
able to conduct a conversation with someone while still listening to their music.
 
45.                      Monster iSport Intensity In-Ear
These headphones are perfect for people who use them during sporting activities.

They are comfortable and are also sweat resistant. They offer an open design that
appeals to runners who may want to hear their surroundings while on the move.
They give decent sound and offer Apple friendly inline remote for making cell
phone calls.
 
46.                      Monster Diamond Tears
This brand of headphones offer a flashy, well-built design that will offer a super-rich
sound. The sound is accentuated with strong bass lines that are not overbearing. It
comes with accessories such as a carrying case and three additional cell phone
cords. Two out of the three cords provide the user with the option of making cell
phone calls for Apple and Android phones. There is a downfall as individuals with
smaller ears may find it uncomfortable over long listening sessions.
 
47.                      Nocs NS600 Crush
These headphones are lightweight and very comfortable for the user. The unit offers
good sound with great bass for audiophiles. There is an inline microphone that is
Apple friendly along with a carrying case.
 
48.                      Sennheiser HD 700
This headphone is a full size model that has a large profile for sounds. It produces
great output on digital music players which audiophiles will be satisfied with. At the
current price point of $700 the sound quality is exceptional but users may be put off
by the amount of plastic that is used in the design.
 
49.                      V-Moda Cross fade (M-100)
This headphone is feature rich and has a very durable design. It offers an inline
remote and microphone that facilitates cell phone calls which users will be pleased
with. The unit can also be folded into a compact bundle. The price tag may deter
some users who are on a budget, but users who desire this unit will be satisfied.
 
50.                      RHA SA950i
This model of headphone is lightweight and is a comfortable fit especially on ears
for users. It offers a detachable cloth covered cord that has an Apple friendly remote
and microphone. At the price point of $35 the sound is very good value for the
money. They also offer a three year warranty which makes it even
better.                                                                                                                              
 

