
Download at WoweBook.Com

Advance Praise for Head First Statistics
“Head First Statistics is by far the most entertaining, attention-catching study guide on the market.  By 
presenting the material in an engaging manner, it provides students with a comfortable way to learn an 
otherwise cumbersome subject.  The explanation of the topics is presented in a manner comprehensible 
to students of all levels.”
— Ariana Anderson, Teaching Fellow/PhD candidate in Statistics, UCLA
“Head First Statistics is deceptively friendly. Breeze through the explanations and exercises and you just 
may find yourself raising the topic of normal vs. Poisson distribution in ordinary social conversation, 
which I can assure you is not advised!”
— Gary Wolf, Contributing Editor, Wired Magazine
“Dawn Griffiths has split some very complicated concepts into much smaller, less frightening, bits of 
stuff that real-life people will find very easy to digest. Lots of graphics and photos make the material 
very approachable, and I have developed quite a crush on the attractive lady model who is asking about 
gumballs on page 458.”
— Bruce Frey, author of Statistics Hacks
“Head First is an intuitive way to understand statistics using simple, real-life examples that make learning 
fun and natural.”
— Michael Prerau, computational neuroscientist and statistics instructor, 
Boston University
“Thought Head First was just for computer nerds? Try the brain-friendly way with statistics and you’ll 
change your mind. It really works.”
— Andy Parker
“This book is a great way for students to learn statistics—it is entertaining, comprehensive, and easy to 
understand. A perfect solution!”
— Danielle Levitt
“Down with dull statistics books! Even my cat liked this one.”
— Cary Collett
Download at WoweBook.Com

Praise for other Head First books
“Kathy and Bert’s Head First Java transforms the printed page into the closest thing to a GUI you’ve ever 
seen. In a wry, hip manner, the authors make learning Java an engaging ‘what’re they gonna do next?’ 
experience.” 
—Warren Keuffel, Software Development Magazine
“Beyond the engaging style that drags you forward from know-nothing into exalted Java warrior status, Head 
First Java covers a huge amount of practical matters that other texts leave as the dreaded “exercise for the 
reader...”  It’s clever, wry, hip and practical—there aren’t a lot of textbooks that can make that claim and live 
up to it while also teaching you about object serialization and network launch protocols.  ”
—Dr. Dan Russell, Director of User Sciences and Experience Research 
IBM Almaden Research Center (and teaches Artificial Intelligence at Stanford 
University)
“It’s fast, irreverent, fun, and engaging. Be careful—you might actually learn something!”
—Ken Arnold, former Senior Engineer at Sun Microsystems 
Co-author (with James Gosling, creator of Java), The Java Programming 
Language
“I feel like a thousand pounds of books have just been lifted off of my head.”
—Ward Cunningham, inventor of the Wiki and founder of the Hillside Group
“Just the right tone for the geeked-out, casual-cool guru coder in all of us. The right reference for practi-
cal development strategies—gets my brain going without having to slog through a bunch of tired stale 
professor­-speak.”
—Travis Kalanick, Founder of Scour and Red Swoosh 
    Member of the MIT TR100
“There are books you buy, books you keep, books you keep on your desk, and thanks to O’Reilly and the 
Head First crew, there is the penultimate category, Head First books. They’re the ones that are dog-eared, 
mangled, and carried everywhere. Head First SQL is at the top of my stack. Heck, even the PDF I have 
for review is tattered and torn.”
— Bill Sawyer, ATG Curriculum Manager, Oracle
“This book’s admirable clarity, humor and substantial doses of clever make it the sort of book that helps 
even non-programmers think well about problem-solving.”
— Cory Doctorow, co-editor of Boing Boing  
Author, Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom 
and Someone Comes to Town, Someone Leaves Town
Download at WoweBook.Com

Praise for other Head First books
“I received the book yesterday and started to read it...and I couldn’t stop. This is definitely très ‘cool.’ It is 
fun, but they cover a lot of ground and they are right to the point. I’m really impressed.”
— Erich Gamma, IBM Distinguished Engineer, and co-author of Design 
Patterns
“One of the funniest and smartest books on software design I’ve ever read.”
— Aaron LaBerge, VP Technology, ESPN.com
“What used to be a long trial and error learning process has now been reduced neatly into an engaging 
paperback.”
— Mike Davidson, CEO, Newsvine, Inc.
“Elegant design is at the core of every chapter here, each concept conveyed with equal doses of 
pragmatism and wit.”
— Ken Goldstein, Executive Vice President, Disney Online
“I ♥ Head First HTML with CSS & XHTML—it teaches you everything you need to learn in a ‘fun 
coated’ format.”
— Sally Applin, UI Designer and Artist
“Usually when reading through a book or article on design patterns, I’d have to occasionally stick myself 
in the eye with something just to make sure I was paying attention. Not with this book. Odd as it may 
sound, this book makes learning about design patterns fun. 
 
“While other books on design patterns are saying ‘Buehler… Buehler… Buehler…’ this book is on the 
float belting out ‘Shake it up, baby!’”
— Eric Wuehler
“I literally love this book. In fact, I kissed this book in front of my wife.”
— Satish Kumar
Download at WoweBook.Com

Other related books from O’Reilly
Statistics HacksTM
Statistics in a Nutshell
Mind HacksTM
Mind Performance HacksTM
Your Brain: The Missing Manual
Other books in O’Reilly’s Head First series
Head First JavaTM
Head First Object-Oriented Analysis and Design (OOA&D)
Head First HTML with CSS and XHTML
Head First Design Patterns
Head First Servlets and JSP
Head First EJB
Head First PMP
Head First SQL
Head First Software Development
Head First JavaScript
Head First Ajax
Head First Physics
Head First PHP & MySQL (2008)
Head First Rails (2008)
Head First Web Design (2008)
Head First Algebra (2008)
Head First Programming (2009)
Download at WoweBook.Com

Beijing  •  Cambridge  •  Köln   •  Sebastopol  •  Taipei  •  Tokyo
Dawn Griffiths
Head First Statistics
Wouldn’t it be dreamy if 
there was a statistics book that 
was more fun than an overdue trip 
to the dentist? But it’s probably 
just a fantasy...
Download at WoweBook.Com

Head First Statistics
by Dawn Griffiths
Copyright © 2009 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly Media books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions are 
also available for most titles (safari.oreilly.com). For more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales 
department: (800) 998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Series Creators:	
	
Kathy Sierra, Bert Bates
Series Editor:	
	
Brett D. McLaughlin
Editor:	
	
	
Sanders Kleinfeld
Design Editor:	
	
Louise Barr
Cover Designers:	
	
Louise Barr, Steve Fehler
Production Editor:	 	
Brittany Smith
Indexer:	
	
	
Julie Hawks
Page Viewers:	
	
David Griffiths, Mum and Dad
Printing History:
August 2008:  First Edition.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. The Head First series designations, 
Head First Statistics, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as 
trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of a trademark 
claim, the designations have been printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and the authors assume no 
responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.
No snorers were harmed in the making of this book, although a horse lost its toupee at one point and suffered 
a minor indignity in front of the other horses. Also a snowboarder picked up a few bruises along the way, but 
nothing serious. 
 
 
 
ISBN: 978-0-596-52758-7 
[M]	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
[9/08]
David
Mum and Dad
This book uses RepKover™,  a durable and flexible lay-flat binding.
TM
TM
Download at WoweBook.Com

To David, Mum, Dad, and Carl. Thanks for the support and 
believing I could do it. But you’ll have to wait a while for the car.
Download at WoweBook.Com

viii
Author of Head First Statistics
Dawn Griffiths started life as a mathematician 
at a top UK university. She was awarded a First-Class 
Honours degree in Mathematics, but she turned down 
a PhD scholarship studying particularly rare breeds of 
differential equations when she realized people would 
stop talking to her at parties. Instead she pursued a 
career in software development, and she currently 
combines IT consultancy with writing and mathematics.
When Dawn’s not working on Head First books, you’ll 
find her honing her Tai Chi skills, making bobbin lace 
or cooking nice meals. She hasn’t yet mastered the art 
of doing all three at the same time. She also enjoys 
traveling, and spending time with her lovely husband, 
David.
Dawn has a theory that Head First Bobbin 
Lacemaking might prove to a be a big cult hit, but she 
suspects that Brett and Laurie might disagree.
Dawn Griffiths
the author
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
ix
Table of Contents (Summary)
Table of Contents (the real thing)
Your brain on statistics.   Here you are trying to learn something, while 
here your brain is doing you a favor by making sure the learning doesn’t stick.  Your 
brain’s thinking, “Better leave room for more important things, like which wild 
animals to avoid and whether naked snowboarding is a bad idea.” So how do you 
trick your brain into thinking that your life depends on knowing statistics? 
Intro
Who is this book for?	
xxviii
We know what you’re thinking	
xxix
Metacognition	
xxxi
Bend your brain into submission	
xxxiii
Read me	
xxxiv
The technical review team	
xxxvi
Acknowledgments	
xxxvii
 	
Intro	
xxvii
1	
Visualizing Information: First Impressions	
1
2	
Measuring Central Tendency: The Middle Way	
45
3	
Measuring Spread: Power Ranges	
83
4	
Calculating Probabilities: Taking Chances	
127
5	
Discrete Probability Distributions: Manage Your Expectations	
197
6	
Permutations and Combinations: Making Arrangements	
241
7	
Geometric, Binomial, and Poisson Distributions: Keeping Things Discrete	
269
8	
Normal Distribution: Being Normal	
325
9	
Normal Distribution Part II: Beyond Normal	
361
10	
Using Statistical Sampling: Taking Samples	
415
11	
Estimating Your Population: Making Predictions	
441
12	
Constructing Confidence Intervals: Guessing with Confidence	
487
13	
Using Hypothesis Tests: Look at the Evidence	
521
14	
The Chi Square Distribution: There’s Something Going on	
567
15	
Correlation and Regression: What’s My Line?	
605
i	
Appendix i: Top Ten Things We Didn’t Cover	
643
ii	
Appendix ii: Statistics Tables	
657
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents

Statistics are everywhere	
2
But why learn statistics?	
3
A tale of two charts	
4
The humble pie chart	
8
Bar charts can allow for more accuracy	
10
Vertical bar charts	
10
Horizontal bar charts	
11
It’s a matter of scale	
12
Using frequency scales	
13
Dealing with multiple sets of data	
14
Categories vs. numbers	
18
Dealing with grouped data	
19
Make a histogram	
20
Step 1: Find the bar widths	
26
Step 2: Find the bar heights	
27
Step 3: Draw your chart	
28
Introducing cumulative frequency	
34
Drawing the cumulative frequency graph	
35
Choosing the right chart	
39
First Impressions
1
visualizing information
Can’t tell your facts from your figures?   
Statistics help you make sense of confusing sets of data. They make the 
complex simple. And when you’ve found out what’s really going on, you 
need a way of visualizing it and telling everyone else. So if you want to 
pick the best chart for the job, grab your coat, pack your best slide rule, and 
join us on a ride to Statsville.
No, this 
profit’s amazing. 
Look at it soar!
Month
Profit (millions of dollars)
Company Profit per Month
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
0.5
0.0
1.0
2.0
2.5
Dec
1.5
Month
Profit (millions of dollars)
Company Profit per Month
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.5
Dec
2.3
See what I mean, the 
profit’s about the 
same each month.
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xi
The Middle Way
Sometimes you just need to get to the heart of the matter. 
It can be difficult to see patterns and trends in a big pile of figures, and finding the 
average is often the first step towards seeing the bigger picture. With averages at 
your disposal, you’ll be able to quickly find the most representative values in your 
data and draw important conclusions. In this chapter, we’ll look at several ways to 
calculate one of the most important statistics in town—mean, median, and mode—
and you’ll start to see how to effectively summarize data as concisely and usefully 
as possible.
measuring central tendency
2
Welcome to the Health Club	
46
A common measure of average is the mean	
47
Mean math	
48
Dealing with unknowns	
49
Back to the mean	
50
Back to the Health Club	
53
Everybody was Kung Fu fighting	
54
Our data has outliers	
57
The outliers did it	
58
Watercooler conversation	
60
Finding the median	
61
How to find the median in three steps:	
62
Business is booming	
65
The Little Ducklings swimming class	
66
What went wrong with the mean and median?	
69
What should we do for data like this?	
69
The Mean Exposed	
71
Introducing the mode	
73
Three steps for finding the mode	
74
Age 19
Age 21
Age 20
Age 20
Age 20
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xii
Wanted: one player	
84
We need to compare player scores	
85
Use the range to differentiate between data sets	
86
The problem with outliers	
89
We need to get away from outliers	
91
Quartiles come to the rescue	
92
The interquartile range excludes outliers	
93
Quartile anatomy	
94
We’re not just limited to quartiles	
98
So what are percentiles?	
99
Box and whisker plots let you visualize ranges	
100
Variability is more than just spread	
104
Calculating average distances	
105
We can calculate variation with the variance…	
106
…but standard deviation is a more intuitive measure	
107
Standard Deviation Exposed	
108
A quicker calculation for variance	
113
What if we need a baseline for comparison?	
118
Use standard scores to compare values across data sets	
119
Interpreting standard scores	
120
Statsville All Stars win the league!	
125
Power Ranges
3
Not everything’s reliable, but how can you tell? 
Averages do a great job of giving you a typical value in your data set, but they don’t 
tell you the full story. OK, so you know where the center of your data is, but often 
the mean, median, and mode alone aren’t enough information to go on when you’re 
summarizing a data set. In this chapter, we’ll show you how to take your data skills 
to the next level as we begin to analyze ranges and variation.
measuring variability and spread
All three players have 
the same average score 
for shooting, but I need some 
way of choosing between them. 
Think you can help?
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xiii
Fat Dan’s Grand Slam	
128
Roll up for roulette!	
129
What are the chances?	
132
Find roulette probabilities	
135
You can visualize probabilities with a Venn diagram	
136
You can also add probabilities	
142
Exclusive events and intersecting events	
147
Problems at the intersection	
148
Some more notation	
149
Another unlucky spin…	
155
Conditions apply	
156
Find conditional probabilities	
157
Trees also help you calculate conditional probabilities	
159
Handy hints for working with trees	
161
Step 1: Finding P(Black  Even)	
167
Step 2: Finding P(Even)	
169
Step 3: Finding P(Black l Even)	
170
Use the Law of Total Probability to find P(B)	
172
Introducing Bayes’ Theorem	
173
If events affect each other, they are dependent	
181
If events do not affect each other, they are independent	
182
More on calculating probability for independent events	
183
Taking Chances
Life is full of uncertainty. 
Sometimes it can be impossible to say what will happen from one minute to the 
next. But certain events are more likely to occur than others, and that’s where 
probability theory comes into play. Probability lets you predict the future by 
assessing how likely outcomes are, and knowing what could happen helps you 
make informed decisions. In this chapter, you’ll find out more about probability 
and learn how to take control of the future!
calculating probabilities
4
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xiv
Back at Fat Dan’s Casino	
198
We can compose a probability distribution for the slot machine	
201
Expectation gives you a prediction of the results…	
204
…and variance tells you about the spread of the results	
205
Variances and probability distributions	
206
Let’s calculate the slot machine’s variance	
207
Fat Dan changed his prices	
212
There’s a linear relationship between E(X) and E(Y)	
217
Slot machine transformations	
218
General formulas for linear transforms	
219
Every pull of the lever is an independent observation	
222
Observation shortcuts	
223
New slot machine on the block	
229
Add E(X) and E(Y) to get E(X + Y)…	
230
…and subtract E(X) and E(Y) to get E(X – Y)	
231
You can also add and subtract linear transformations	
232
Jackpot!	
238
Manage Your Expectations
5
Unlikely events happen, but what are the consequences? 
So far we’ve looked at how probabilities tell you how likely certain events are. What 
probability doesn’t tell you is the overall impact of these events, and what it means 
to you. Sure, you’ll sometimes make it big on the roulette table, but is it really worth it 
with all the money you lose in the meantime? In this chapter, we’ll show you how you 
can use probability to predict long-term outcomes, and also measure the certainty 
of these predictions.
using discrete probability distributions
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xv
The Statsville Derby	
242
It’s a three-horse race	
243
How many ways can they cross the finish line?	
245
Calculate the number of arrangements	
246
Going round in circles	
247
It’s time for the novelty race	
251
Arranging by individuals is different than arranging by type	
252
We need to arrange animals by type	
253
Generalize a formula for arranging duplicates	
254
It’s time for the twenty-horse race	
257
How many ways can we fill the top three positions?	
258
Examining permutations	
259
What if horse order doesn’t matter	
260
Examining combinations	
261
Combination Exposed	
262
Does order really matter?	
262
It’s the end of the race	
268
Making Arrangements
Sometimes, order is important. 
Counting all the possible ways in which you can order things is time 
consuming, but the trouble is, this sort of information is crucial for 
calculating some probabilities. In this chapter, we’ll show you a quick way 
of deriving this sort of information without you having to figure out what all 
of the possible outcomes are. Come with us and we’ll show you how to 
count the possibilities.
permutations and combinations
6
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xvi
Ouch! Rock! Ouch! 
Flag! Ouch! Tree! 
Keeping Things Discrete
7
Calculating probability distributions takes time. 
So far we’ve looked at how to calculate and use probability distributions, but wouldn’t it be 
nice to have something easier to work with, or just quicker to calculate? In this chapter, 
we’ll show you some special probability distributions that follow very definite patterns. 
Once you know these patterns, you’ll be able to use them to calculate probabilities, 
expectations, and variances in record time. Read on, and we’ll introduce you to the 
geometric, binomial and Poisson distributions.
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
We need to find Chad’s probability distribution	
273
There’s a pattern to this probability distribution	
274
The probability distribution can be represented algebraically	
277
The geometric distribution also works with inequalities	
279
The pattern of expectations for the geometric distribution	
280
Expectation is 1/p	
281
Finding the variance for our distribution	
283
A quick guide to the geometric distribution	
284
Who Wants to Win a Swivel Chair!	
287
You’ve mastered the geometric distribution	
287
Should you play, or walk away?	
291
Generalizing the probability for three questions	
293
Let’s generalize the probability further	
296
What’s the expectation and variance?	
298
Binomial expectation and variance	
301
Your quick guide to the binomial distribution	
302
Expectation and variance for the Poisson distribution	
308
So what’s the probability distribution?	
312
Combine Poisson variables	
313
The Poisson in disguise	
316
Your quick guide to the Poisson distribution	
319
Popcorn machine
Drinks machine
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xvii
Discrete data takes exact values…	
326
…but not all numeric data is discrete	
327
What’s the delay?	
328
We need a probability distribution for continuous data	
329
Probability density functions can be used for continuous data	
330
Probability = area	
331
To calculate probability, start by finding f(x)…	
332
…then find probability by finding the area	
333
We’ve found the probability	
337
Searching for a soul mate	
338
Male modelling	
339
The normal distribution is an “ideal” model for continuous data	
340
So how do we find normal probabilities?	
341
Three steps to calculating normal probabilities	
342
Step 1: Determine your distribution	
343
Step 2: Standardize to N(0, 1)	
344
To standardize, first move the mean…	
345
…then squash the width	
345
Now find Z for the specific value you want to find probability for	
346
Step 3: Look up the probability in your handy table	
349
Being Normal
Discrete probability distributions can’t handle every situation. 
So far we’ve looked at probability distributions where we’ve been able to specify exact 
values, but this isn’t the case for every set of data. Some types of data just don’t fit the 
probability distributions we’ve encountered so far. In this chapter, we’ll take a look at 
how continuous probability distributions work, and introduce you to one of the most 
important probability distributions in town—the normal distribution.
using the normal distribution
8
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xviii
Beyond Normal
9
If only all probability distributions were normal. 
Life can be so much simpler with the normal distribution. Why spend all your time 
working out individual probabilities when you can look up entire ranges in one swoop, and 
still leave time for game play? In this chapter, you’ll see how to solve more complex 
problems in the blink of an eye, and you’ll also find out how to bring some of that normal 
goodness to other probability distributions.
using the normal distribution ii
All aboard the Love Train	
363
Normal bride + normal groom	
364
It’s still just weight	
365
How’s the combined weight distributed?	
367
Finding probabilities	
370
More people want the Love Train	
375
Linear transforms describe underlying changes in values…	
376
…and independent observations describe how many values you have	 377
Expectation and variance for independent observations	
378
Should we play, or walk away?	
383
Normal distribution to the rescue	
386
When to approximate the binomial distribution with the normal	
389
Revisiting the normal approximation	
394
The binomial is discrete, but the normal is continuous	
395
Apply a continuity correction before calculating the approximation	
396
The Normal Distribution Exposed	
404
All aboard the Love Train	
405
When to approximate the binomial distribution with the normal	
407
A runaway success!	
413
Each adult is an independent 
observation of X.
X
X + X
X + X + X
X + X + X + X
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xix
Taking Samples
Statistics deal with data, but where does it come from? 
Some of the time, data’s easy to collect, such as the ages of people attending a health 
club or the sales figures for a games company. But what about the times when data isn’t 
so easy to collect? Sometimes the number of things we want to collect data about are so 
huge that it’s difficult to know where to start. In this chapter, we’ll take a look at how you 
can effectively gather data in the real world, in a way that’s efficient, accurate, and can 
also save you time and money to boot. Welcome to the world of sampling.
using statistical sampling
10
The Mighty Gumball taste test	
416
They’re running out of gumballs	
417
Test a gumball sample, not the whole gumball population	
418
How sampling works	
419
When sampling goes wrong	
420
How to design a sample	
422
Define your sampling frame	
423
Sometimes samples can be biased	
424
Sources of bias	
425
How to choose your sample	
430
Simple random sampling	
430
How to choose a simple random sample	
431
There are other types of sampling	
432
We can use stratified sampling...	
432
...or we can use cluster sampling...	
433
...or even systematic sampling	
433
Mighty Gumball has a sample	
439
Mighty Gumball, Inc.
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xx
Making Predictions
11
Wouldn’t it be great if you could tell what a population was 
like, just by taking one sample? 
Before you can claim full sample mastery, you need to know how to use your samples 
to best effect once you’ve collected them. This means using them to accurately predict 
what the population will be like and coming up with a way of saying how reliable your 
predictions are. In this chapter, we’ll show you how knowing your sample helps you 
get to know your population, and vice versa.
estimating your population
So how long does flavor really last for?	
442
Let’s start by estimating the population mean	
443
Point estimators can approximate population parameters	
444
Let’s estimate the population variance	
448
We need a different point estimator than sample variance	
449
Which formula’s which?	
451
It’s a question of proportion	
454
So how does this relate to sampling?	
459
The sampling distribution of proportions	
460
So what’s the expectation of Ps?	
462
And what’s the variance of Ps?	
463
Find the distribution of Ps	
464
Ps follows a normal distribution	
465
We need probabilities for the sample mean	
471
The sampling distribution of the mean	
472
Find the expectation for X	
474
What about the the variance of X?	
476
So how is X distributed?	
480
If n is large, X can still be approximated by the normal distribution	 481
Using the central limit theorem	
482
This is awesome! 
We have a lot of 
impressive statistics 
we can use in our 
advertising.
10 
40
people 
prefer 
pink!
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xxi
Guessing with Confidence
Sometimes samples don’t give quite the right result. 
You’ve seen how you can use point estimators to estimate the precise value of the 
population mean, variance, or proportion, but the trouble is, how can you be certain that 
your estimate is completely accurate? After all, your assumptions about the population 
rely on just one sample, and what if your sample’s off? In this chapter, you’ll see another 
way of estimating population statistics, one that allows for uncertainty. Pick up your 
probability tables, and we’ll show you the ins and outs of confidence intervals.
constructing confidence intervals
12
Mighty Gumball is in trouble	
488
The problem with precision	
489
Introducing confidence intervals	
490
Four steps for finding confidence intervals	
491
Step 1: Choose your population statistic	
492
Step 2: Find its sampling distribution	
492
Step 3: Decide on the level of confidence	
494
Step 4: Find the confidence limits	
496
Start by finding Z	
497
Rewrite the inequality in terms of m	
498
Finally, find the value of X	
501
You’ve found the confidence interval	
502
Let’s summarize the steps	
503
Handy shortcuts for confidence intervals	
504
Step 1: Choose your population statistic	
508
Step 2: Find its sampling distribution	
509
Step 3: Decide on the level of confidence	
512
Step 4: Find the confidence limits	
513
The t-distribution vs. the normal distribution	
515
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xxii
13
Not everything you’re told is absolutely certain. 
The trouble is, how do you know when what you’re being told isn’t right? Hypothesis 
tests give you a way of using samples to test whether or not statistical claims are likely 
to be true. They give you a way of weighing the evidence and testing whether extreme 
results can be explained by mere coincidence, or whether there are darker forces at 
work. Come with us on a ride through this chapter, and we’ll show you how you can use 
hypothesis tests to confirm or allay your deepest suspicions.
Statsville’s new miracle drug	
522
Resolving the conflict from 50,000 feet	
526
The six steps for hypothesis testing	
527
Step 1: Decide on the hypothesis	
528
Step 2: Choose your test statistic	
531
Step 3: Determine the critical region	
532
Step 4: Find the p-value	
535
Step 5: Is the sample result in the critical region?	
537
Step 6: Make your decision	
537
What if the sample size is larger?	
540
Let’s conduct another hypothesis test	
543
Step 1: Decide on the hypotheses	
543
Step 2: Choose the test statistic	
544
Use the normal to approximate the binomial in our test statistic	
547
Step 3: Find the critical region	
548
Let’s start with Type I errors	
556
What about Type II errors?	
557
Finding errors for SnoreCull	
558
We need to find the range of values	
559
Find P(Type II error)	
560
Introducing power	
561
using hypothesis tests
Look at the Evidence
SnoreCull
SnoreCull
48 Tablets
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xxiii
Sometimes things don’t turn out quite the way you expect. 
When you model a situation using a particular probability distribution, you have a 
good idea of how things are likely to turn out long-term. But what happens if there are 
differences between what you expect and what you get? How can you tell whether 
your discrepancies come down to normal fluctuations, or whether they’re a sign of 
an underlying problem with your probability model instead? In this chapter, we’ll 
show you how you can use the χ2 distribution to analyze your results and sniff out 
suspicious results. 
14
There may be trouble ahead at Fat Dan’s Casino	
568
Let’s start with the slot machines	
569
The 
2 test assesses difference	
571
So what does the test statistic represent?	
572
Two main uses of the 
2 distribution	
573
 represents degrees of freedom	
574
What’s the significance?	
575
Hypothesis testing with 
2	
576
You’ve solved the slot machine mystery	
579
Fat Dan has another problem	
585
The 
2 distribution can test for independence	
586
You can find the expected frequencies using probability	
587
So what are the frequencies?	
588
We still need to calculate degrees of freedom	
591
Generalizing the degrees of freedom	
596
And the formula is...	
597
You’ve saved the casino	
599
There’s Something Going On…
the 
2 distribution
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xxiv
15
Have you ever wondered how two things are connected? 
So far we’ve looked at statistics that tell you about just one variable—like men’s height, 
points scored by basketball players, or how long gumball flavor lasts—but there are other 
statistics that tell you about the connection between variables. Seeing how things are 
connected can give you a lot of information about the real world, information that you can 
use to your advantage. Stay with us while we show you the key to spotting connections: 
correlation and regression. 
Let’s analyze sunshine and attendance	
607
Exploring types of data	
608
Visualizing bivariate data	
609
Scatter diagrams show you patterns	
612
Correlation vs. causation	
614
Predict values with a line of best fit	
618
Your best guess is still a guess	
619
We need to minimize the errors	
620
Introducing the sum of squared errors	
621
Find the equation for the line of best fit	
622
Finding the slope for the line of best fit	
623
Finding the slope for the line of best fit, continued	
624
We’ve found b, but what about a?	
625
You’ve made the connection	
629
Let’s look at some correlations	
630
The correlation coefficient measures how well the line fits the data	
631
There’s a formula for calculating the correlation coefficient, r	
632
Find r for the concert data	
633
Find r for the concert data, continued	
634
What’s My Line?
correlation and regression
Feel that funky 
rhythm, baby.
Sweet! But is that 
a rain cloud I see 
up there?
Download at WoweBook.Com

table of contents
xxv
#1. Other ways of presenting data	
644
#2. Distribution anatomy	
645
#3. Experiments	
646
#4. Least square regression alternate notation	
648
#5. The coefficient of determination	
649
#6. Non-linear relationships	
650
#7. The confidence interval for the slope of a regression line	
651
#8. Sampling distributions - the difference between two means	
652
#9. Sampling distributions - the difference between two proportions	 653
#10. E(X) and Var(X) for continuous probability distributions	
654
i
The Top Ten Things (we didn’t cover)
leftovers
Even after all that, there’s a bit more.  There are just a few more 
things we think you need to know. We wouldn’t feel right about ignoring them, 
even though they only need a brief mention. So before you put the book down, 
take a read through these short but important statistics tidbits.
ii
Looking Things up
statistics tables
Where would you be without your trusty probability tables?
 Understanding your probability distributions isn’t quite enough. For some of them, you 
need to be able to look up your probabilities in standard probability tables. In this 
appendix you’ll find tables for the normal, t and Χ2 distributions so you can look up 
probabilities to your heart’s content. 
Standard normal probabilities	
658
t-distribution critical values	
660
2 critical values	
661
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

xxvii
how to use this book
Intro
In this section we answer the burning question: “So 
why DID they put that in a Statistics book?”
I can’t believe 
they put that in a 
statistics book!”
Download at WoweBook.Com

xxviii    intro
how to use this book
Who is this book for?
Who should probably back away from this book?
If you can answer “yes” to all of these:
If you can answer “yes” to any of these:
this book is for you.
this book is not for you.
[Note from marketing: this book is 
for anyone with a credit card.]
Do you need to understand statistics for a course, for 
your line of work, or just because you think it’s about 
time you learned what standard deviation means or 
how to find the probability of winning at roulette?
1
Do you want to learn, understand, and remember 
how to use probability and statistics to get the right 
results, every time?
2
Do you prefer stimulating dinner party conversation to 
dry, dull, academic lectures?
3
Are you someone who’s never studied basic algebra?
(You don’t need to be advanced, but you should 
understand basic addition and subtraction, multiplication 
and division.)
1
Are you a kick-butt statistician looking for a reference 
book?
2
Are you afraid to try something different? Would you 
rather have a root canal than mix stripes with plaid? Do 
you believe that a statistics book can’t be serious if Venn 
diagrams are anthropomorphized?
3
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    xxix
the intro
“How can this be a serious book on statistics?”
“What’s with all the graphics?”
“Can I actually learn it this way?”
Your brain craves novelty. It’s always searching, scanning, waiting for something 
unusual. It was built that way, and it helps you stay alive. 
So what does your brain do with all the routine, ordinary, normal things you 
encounter? Everything it can to stop them from interfering with the brain’s 
real job—recording things that matter. It doesn’t bother saving the boring 
things; they never make it past the “this is obviously not important” filter.
How does your brain know what’s important? Suppose you’re out for a 
day hike and a tiger jumps in front of you, what happens inside your head 
and body? 
Neurons fire. Emotions crank up. Chemicals surge. 
And that’s how your brain knows...
This must be important! Don’t forget it!
But imagine you’re at home, or in a library. It’s a safe, warm, tiger‑free zone. 
You’re studying. Getting ready for an exam. Or trying to learn some tough 
technical topic your boss thinks will take a week, ten days at the most.
Just one problem. Your brain’s trying to do you a big favor. It’s trying 
to make sure that this obviously non-important content doesn’t clutter 
up scarce resources. Resources that are better spent storing the really 
big things. Like tigers. Like the danger of fire. Like how you should 
never have posted those “party” photos on your Facebook page.
And there’s no simple way to tell your brain, “Hey brain, thank you 
very much, but no matter how dull this book is, and how little I’m 
registering on the emotional Richter scale right now, I really do want 
you to keep this stuff around.”
We know what you’re thinking
We know what your brain is thinking
Your brain thinks 
THIS is important.
Your brain thinks 
THIS isn’t worth 
saving.
Great. Only 700 
more dull, dry, 
boring pages.
Download at WoweBook.Com

xxx    intro
how to use this book
We think of a “Head First” reader as a learner.
So what does it take to learn something? First, you have to get it, then make sure 
you don’t forget it.  It’s not about pushing facts into your head. Based on the 
latest research in cognitive science, neurobiology, and educational psychology, 
learning takes a lot more than text on a page. We know what turns your brain on.
Some of the Head First learning principles:
Make it visual. Images are far more memorable than words alone, and make learning much 
more effective (up to 89% improvement in recall and transfer studies). It also makes things 
more understandable.  Put the words within or near the graphics they 
relate to, rather than on the bottom or on another page, and learners will be up 
to twice as likely to solve problems 
related to the content.
Use a conversational and personalized style. In recent 
studies, students performed up to 40% better on post-learning 
tests if the content spoke directly to the reader, using a first-person, 
conversational style rather than taking a formal tone. Tell stories 
instead of lecturing. Use casual language. Don’t take yourself too 
seriously. Which would you pay more attention to: a stimulating 
dinner party companion, or a lecture?
Get the learner to think more deeply. In other words, 
unless you actively flex your neurons, nothing much happens in 
your head.  A reader has to be motivated, engaged, curious, and inspired to solve problems, draw 
conclusions, and generate new knowledge. And for that, you need challenges, exercises, 
and thought-provoking questions, and activities that involve both sides of the brain 
and multiple senses.
Get—and keep—the reader’s attention. We’ve all had the “I really want to 
learn this but I can’t stay awake past page one” experience. Your brain pays attention 
to things that are out of the ordinary, interesting, strange, eye-catching, unexpected. 
Learning a new, tough, technical topic doesn’t have to be boring. Your brain 
will learn much more quickly if it’s not.
Touch their emotions. We now know that your ability to remember 
something is largely dependent on its emotional content.  You remember 
what you care about.  You remember when you feel something. No, we’re not talking 
heart‑wrenching stories about a boy and his dog. We’re talking emotions like surprise, 
curiosity, fun, “what the...?” , and the feeling of “I Rule!” that comes when you solve a 
puzzle, learn something everybody else thinks is hard, or realize you know something 
that “I’m more mathematically inclined than thou” Bob from class doesn’t.
S
Red
Black
We have absolutely 
nothing in common. 
We’re exclusive events
x1
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    xxxi
the intro
Metacognition: thinking about thinking
I wonder how 
I can trick my brain 
into remembering 
this stuff...
If you really want to learn, and you want to learn more quickly and more 
deeply, pay attention to how you pay attention. Think about how you think. 
Learn how you learn.
Most of us did not take courses on metacognition or learning theory when we 
were growing up. We were expected to learn, but rarely taught to learn.
But we assume that if you’re holding this book, you really want to learn 
statistics. And you probably don’t want to spend a lot of time. If you want to 
use what you read in this book, you need to remember what you read. And for 
that, you’ve got to understand it. To get the most from this book, or any book 
or learning experience, take responsibility for your brain. Your brain on this 
content. 
The trick is to get your brain to see the new material you’re learning as 
Really Important. Crucial to your well‑being. As important as a tiger. 
Otherwise, you’re in for a constant battle, with your brain doing its best to 
keep the new content from sticking.
So just how DO you get your brain to treat statistics 
like it was a hungry tiger?
There’s the slow, tedious way, or the faster, more effective way. The 
slow way is about sheer repetition. You obviously know that you are able to learn 
and remember even the dullest of topics if you keep pounding the same thing into your 
brain. With enough repetition, your brain says, “This doesn’t feel important to him, but he 
keeps looking at the same thing over and over and over, so I suppose it must be.”
The faster way is to do anything that increases brain activity, especially different 
types of brain activity. The things on the previous page are a big part of the solution, 
and they’re all things that have been proven to help your brain work in your favor. For 
example, studies show that putting words within the pictures they describe (as opposed to 
somewhere else in the page, like a caption or in the body text) causes your brain to try to 
makes sense of how the words and picture relate, and this causes more neurons to fire. 
More neurons firing = more chances for your brain to get that this is something worth 
paying attention to, and possibly recording.
A conversational style helps because people tend to pay more attention when they 
perceive that they’re in a conversation, since they’re expected to follow along and hold up 
their end. The amazing thing is, your brain doesn’t necessarily care that the “conversation” 
is between you and a book! On the other hand, if the writing style is formal and dry, your 
brain perceives it the same way you experience being lectured to while sitting in a roomful 
of passive attendees. No need to stay awake.
But pictures and conversational style are just the beginning…
Download at WoweBook.Com

xxxii    intro
how to use this book
Here’s what WE did:
We used pictures, because your brain is tuned for visuals, not text. As far as your brain’s 
concerned, a picture really is worth a thousand words. And when text and pictures work 
together, we embedded the text in the pictures because your brain works more effectively 
when the text is within the thing the text refers to, as opposed to in a caption or buried in the 
text somewhere.
We used redundancy, saying the same thing in different ways and with different media types, 
and multiple senses, to increase the chance that the content gets coded into more than one area 
of your brain. 
We used concepts and pictures in unexpected ways because your brain is tuned for novelty, 
and we used pictures and ideas with at least some emotional content, because your brain 
is tuned to pay attention to the biochemistry of emotions. That which causes you to feel 
something is more likely to be remembered, even if that feeling is nothing more than a little 
humor, surprise, or interest.
We used a personalized, conversational style, because your brain is tuned to pay more 
attention when it believes you’re in a conversation than if it thinks you’re passively listening 
to a presentation. Your brain does this even when you’re reading.
We included more than 80 activities, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember 
more when you do things than when you read about things. And we made the exercises 
challenging-yet-do-able, because that’s what most people prefer.
We used multiple learning styles, because you might prefer step-by-step procedures, while 
someone else wants to understand the big picture first, and someone else just wants to see 
an example. But regardless of your own learning preference, everyone benefits from seeing the 
same content represented in multiple ways.
We include content for both sides of your brain, because the more of your brain you 
engage, the more likely you are to learn and remember, and the longer you can stay focused. 
Since working one side of the brain often means giving the other side a chance to rest, you 
can be more productive at learning for a longer period of time. 
And we included stories and exercises that present more than one point of view, 
because your brain is tuned to learn more deeply when it’s forced to make evaluations and 
judgments. 
We included challenges, with exercises, and by asking questions that don’t always have 
a straight answer, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember when it has to work at 
something. Think about it—you can’t get your body in shape just by watching people at the 
gym. But we did our best to make sure that when you’re working hard, it’s on the right things. 
That you’re not spending one extra dendrite processing a hard-to-understand example, 
or parsing difficult, jargon-laden, or overly terse text.
We used people. In stories, examples, pictures, etc., because, well, because you’re a person. 
And your brain pays more attention to people than it does to things. 
Vital Statistics
Discrete data 
can only take 
exact values
1
2
3
4
5
2
1
3
4
5
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    xxxiii
the intro
So, we did our part. The rest is up to you. These tips are a 
starting point; listen to your brain and figure out what works 
for you and what doesn’t. Try new things.
Drink water. Lots of it.
Your brain works best in a nice bath of fluid. 
Dehydration (which can happen before you ever 
feel thirsty) decreases cognitive function. 
Make this the last thing you read before 
bed. Or at least the last challenging thing.
Practice solving problems!
There’s only one way to truly master statistics: 
practice answering questions. And that’s what 
you’re going to do throughout this book. Using 
statistics is a skill, and the only way to get good at it is 
to practice. We’re going to give you a lot of practice: 
every chapter has exercises that pose problems for 
you to solve. Don’t just skip over them—a lot of the 
learning happens when you solve the exercises. We 
included a solution to each exercise—don’t be afraid 
to peek at the solution if you get stuck! (It’s easy 
to get snagged on something small.) But try to solve 
the problem before you look at the solution. And 
definitely make sure you understand what’s going on 
before you move on to the next part of the book.
Listen to your brain.
Feel something.
Your brain needs to know that this matters. Get 
involved with the stories. Make up your own 
captions for the photos. Groaning over a bad joke 
is still better than feeling nothing at all.
Pay attention to whether your brain is getting 
overloaded. If you find yourself starting to skim 
the surface or forget what you just read, it’s time 
for a break. Once you go past a certain point, you 
won’t learn faster by trying to shove more in, and 
you might even hurt the process.
Talk about it. Out loud.
Speaking activates a different part of the brain. 
If you’re trying to understand something, or 
increase your chance of remembering it later, say 
it out loud. Better still, try to explain it out loud 
to someone else. You’ll learn more quickly, and 
you might uncover ideas you hadn’t known were 
there when you were reading about it.
Part of the learning (especially the transfer to 
long-term memory) happens after you put the 
book down. Your brain needs time on its own, to 
do more processing. If you put in something new 
during that processing time, some of what you 
just learned will be lost. 
Read the “There are No Dumb Questions”
That means all of them. They’re not optional 
sidebars—they’re part of the core content! 
Don’t skip them.
Slow down. The more you understand, 
the less you have to memorize.
Don’t just read. Stop and think. When the 
book asks you a question, don’t just skip to the 
answer. Imagine that someone really is asking 
the question. The more deeply you force your 
brain to think, the better chance you have of 
learning and remembering.
Cut this out and stick it 
on your refrigerator.
Here’s what YOU can do to bend 
your brain into submission
Do the exercises. Write your own notes.
We put them in, but if we did them for you, 
that would be like having someone else do 
your workouts for you. And don’t just look at 
the exercises. Use a pencil. There’s plenty of 
evidence that physical activity while learning 
can increase the learning. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Download at WoweBook.Com

xxxiv    intro
how to use this book
Read Me
This is a learning experience, not a reference book. We deliberately stripped out everything 
that might get in the way of learning whatever it is we’re working on at that point in the 
book. And the first time through, you need to begin at the beginning, because the book 
makes assumptions about what you’ve already seen and learned.
We begin by teaching basic ways of representing and summarizing 
data, then move on to probability distributions, and then more 
advanced techniques such as hypothesis testing.
While later topics are important, the first thing you need to tackle is fundamental building 
blocks such as charting, averages, and measures of variability. So we begin by showing you 
basic statistical problems that you actually solve yourself. That way you can immediately 
do something with statistics, and you will begin to get excited about it. Then, a bit later in 
the book, we show you how to use probability and probability distributions. By then you’ll 
have a solid grasp of statistics fundamentals, and can focus on learning the concepts. After that, 
we show you how to apply your knowledge in more powerful ways, such as how to conduct 
hypothesis tests. We teach you what you need to know at the point you need to know it 
because that’s when it has the most value.
We cover the same general set of topics that are on the AP and A 
Level curriculum.
While we focus on the overall learning experience rather than exam preparation, we 
provide good coverage of the AP and A Level curriculum. This means that while you work 
your way through the topics, you’ll gain the deep understanding you need to get a good 
grade in whatever exam it is you’re taking. This is a far more effective way of learning 
statistics than learning formulae by rote, as you’ll feel confident about what you need when, 
and how to use it.
We help you out with online resources.
Our readers tell us that sometimes you need a bit of extra help, so we provide online 
resources, right at your fingertips. We give you an online forum where you can go to seek 
help, online papers, and other resources too. The starting point is 
http://www.headfirstlabs.com/books/hfstats/
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    xxxv
the intro
The activities are NOT optional. 
The exercises and activities are not add-ons; they’re part of the core content of the book. 
Some of them are to help with memory, some are for understanding, and some will help 
you apply what you’ve learned. Don’t skip the exercises. The crossword puzzles are 
the only thing you don’t have to do, but they’re good for giving your brain a chance to 
think about the words and terms you’ve been learning in a different context.
The redundancy is intentional and important. 
One distinct difference in a Head First book is that we want you to really get it. And we 
want you to finish the book remembering what you’ve learned. Most reference books 
don’t have retention and recall as a goal, but this book is about learning, so you’ll see some 
of the same concepts come up more than once. 
The Brain Power and Brain Barbell exercises don’t have 
answers.
For some of them, there is no right answer, and for others, part of the learning 
experience of the activities is for you to decide if and when your answers are right. In 
some of the Brain Power and Brain Barbell exercises, you will find hints to point you in 
the right direction.
Download at WoweBook.Com

xxxvi    intro
the review team
Cary Collett
Dru Kleinfeld
Michael Prerau
Andy Parker
Ariana Anderson
Danielle Levitt
Ariana Anderson is teaching assistant and PhD 
Candidate in the Department of Statistics at UCLA. 
Her research interests include data-mining and pattern 
recognition.
Dru Kleinfeld is a graduate of Cornell University, class 
of 2007, with a BA in Economics. Dru currently lives 
in New York City and works in the Human Resources 
Department of Morgan Stanley.
Danielle Levitt is currently a first year medical student 
in Tel Aviv, Israel. In her free time she enjoys listening to 
music, swimming in the ocean, and spending time with 
my friends and family. 
 
Having started his career as a research physicist, Andy 
Parker thought he knew a thing or two about statistics. 
Sadly, having read this book, that turned out not to be the 
case. Andy spends most of his time now, worrying about 
what other important things he may have forgotten.
Michael J. Prerau is a researcher in Computational 
Neuroscience creating new statistical methods to analyze 
how the neurons encode information in the brain. He 
is a Ph.D. student in the Program in Neuroscience at 
Boston University, as well as a research associate in 
the Neuroscience Statistics Research Laboratory in 
the Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care at 
Massachusetts General Hospital. 
Matthew Vadeboncoeur is a graduate student studying 
ecosystem ecology at the Complex Systems Research 
Center at the University of New Hampshire.
Not pictured (but just as awesome):  
Jeffrey Maddelena and Matt Vadeboncoeur
Thanks also to Keith Fahlgren, Bruce Frey, 
and Leanne Lockhart for technical feedback.
The technical review team
Technical Reviewers:
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    xxxvii
the intro
Acknowledgments
My editor:
Heartfelt thanks go to my editor, Sanders Kleinfeld. Sanders has been 
a delight to work with, and over the course of phone calls, emails and chat 
clients has become a good friend. He’s amazingly dedicated and hard-working, 
and the advice and support I’ve received from him have been first-rate. 
Thanks Sanders! You’re awesome and I couldn’t have done this without you.
Lou Barr
Brett McLaughlin
My family and friends:
I wish there was space to mention everyone who has helped me along the way, but 
special thanks must go to David, Mum, Dad, Steve Harvey, Gill Chester, Paul Burgess, 
Andy Tatler, and Peter Walker. You guys have kept me going, and I can’t tell you how 
much I’ve appreciated your support and encouragement. Thank you.
The O’Reilly team:
A big thank you goes to Brett McLaughlin for flying me over 
to Boston for the Head First boot camp, and giving me the 
opportunity of a lifetime. Brett’s instincts for Head First are 
phenomenal, and I’ve truly appreciated all the guidance he’s 
given me over the course of the book. Thanks, Brett.
It’s hard to imagine what this book would have been like 
without Lou Barr. Lou is an amazing graphics designer 
who has sprinkled magic through all the pages of this book. 
Not only that, she’s added so much to the overall learning 
experience. No challenge has been too great for her, and I’m 
so grateful to her.
The rest of the Head First team also deserve a great big 
thank you. Catherine Nolan helped me through the early 
stages of the book and made me feel at home in Head First 
land, Brittany Smith kept production running smoothly, 
Laurie Petrycki trusted me enough to let me write this book 
(and borrow her office earlier in the year—thanks Laurie!), 
Keith McNamara did a great job organizing the tech 
review team, and Caitrin McCullough managed 
everything on the website. Thanks guys!
A special mention goes to Kathy Sierra and Bert Bates 
for being the original masterminds behind this wonderful 
series of books. It’s an honor to be part of it.
Catherine Nolan
Sanders Kleinfeld
Download at WoweBook.Com

xxxviii    intro
safari books online
Safari® Books Online
When you see a Safari® icon on the cover of your favorite 
technology book that means the book is available online 
through the O’Reilly Network Safari Bookshelf.
Safari offers a solution that’s better than e-books. It’s a virtual library that lets you 
easily search thousands of top tech books, cut and paste code samples, download 
chapters, and find quick answers when you need the most accurate, current 
information. Try it for free at http://safari.oreilly.com.
Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    
I want to look clean and pretty, 
so I give the right impression.
visualizing information
1
First Impressions
Can’t tell your facts from your figures?   
Statistics help you make sense of confusing sets of data. They make the 
complex simple. And when you’ve found out what’s really going on, you 
need a way of visualizing it and telling everyone else. So if you want to 
pick the best chart for the job, grab your coat, pack your best slide rule, and 
join us on a ride to Statsville.
Download at WoweBook.Com

    Chapter 1
Statistics are everywhere
Everywhere you look you can find statistics, whether you’re browsing the 
Internet, playing sports, or looking through the top scores of your favorite 
video game. But what actually is a statistic?
Statistics are numbers that summarize raw facts and figures in some 
meaningful way. They present key ideas that may not be immediately 
apparent by just looking at the raw data, and by data, we mean facts or figures 
from which we can draw conclusions. As an example, you don’t have to 
wade through lots of football scores when all you want to know is the league 
position of your favorite team. You need a statistic to quickly give you the 
information you need. 
The study of statistics covers where statistics come from, how to calculate them, 
and how you can use them effectively.
Gather data
Analyze
Draw conclusions
When you’ve analyzed 
your data, you make 
decisions and predictions.
Once you have data, you can analyze it 
and generate statistics. You can calculate 
probabilities to see how likely certain events 
are, test ideas, and indicate how confident 
you are about your results.
At the root of statistics is data. 
Data can be gathered by looking 
through existing sources, conducting 
experiments, or by conducting surveys.
welcome to statsville!
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    
visualizing information
You can say 
what you want with 
statistics, even lie.
This stock’s so 
hot it’s smokin’
The profit’s holding 
steady, but it’s 
nothing special.
But why learn statistics?
Understanding what’s really going on with statistics empowers you. If you 
really get statistics, you’ll be able to make objective decisions, make accurate 
predictions that seem inspired, and convey the message you want in the 
most effective way possible. 
Statistics can be a convenient way of summarizing key truths about data, 
but there’s a dark side too. 
Statistics are based on facts, but even so, they can sometimes be misleading. 
They can be used to tell the truth—or to lie. The problem is how do you 
know when you’re being told the truth, and when you’re being told lies? 
Having a good understanding of statistics puts you in a strong position. 
You’re much better equipped to tell when statistics are inaccurate or 
misleading. In other words, studying statistics is a good way of making sure 
you don’t get fooled.
As an example, take a look at the profits made by a company in the latter half 
of last year.
How can there be two interpretations of the same 
set of data? Let’s take a closer look.
Month
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Profit (millions)
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.1
2.3
2.4
You can use statistics 
to help explain things 
about the world.
Download at WoweBook.Com

    Chapter 1
A tale of two charts
So how can we explore these two different interpretations of the same data? 
What we need is some way of visualizing them. If you need to visualize 
information, there’s no better way than using a chart or graph. They can be a 
quick way of summarizing raw information and can help you get an impression 
of what’s going on at a glance. But you need to be careful because even the 
simplest chart can be used to subtly mislead and misdirect you.
Here are two time graphs showing a companies profits for six months. They’re 
both based on the same information, so why do they look so different? They 
give drastically different versions of the same information.
See what I mean, the 
profit’s about the 
same each month.
Both of these charts are 
based on the same information, 
but they look wildly different. 
What’s going on?
No, this 
profit’s amazing. 
Look at it soar!
Month
Profit (millions of dollars)
Company Profit per Month
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
0.5
0.0
1.0
2.0
2.5
Dec
1.5
Month
Profit (millions of dollars)
Company Profit per Month
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.5
Dec
2.3
differences in data presentation
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    5
visualizing information
Take a look at the two charts on the facing page. What would you 
say are the key differences? How do they give such different first 
impressions of the data?
Q: Why not just go on the data? Why chart it?
A: Sometimes it’s difficult to see what’s really going on just by 
looking at the raw data. There can be patterns and trends in the data, 
but these can be very hard to spot if you’re just looking at a heap of 
numbers. Charts give you a way of literally seeing patterns in your 
data. They allow you to visualize your data and see what’s really 
going on in a quick glance.
Q: What’s the difference between information and data?
A: Data refers to raw facts and figures that have been collected. 
Information is data that has some sort of added meaning. 
 
As an example, take the numbers 5, 6, and 7. By themselves, these 
are just numbers. You don’t know what they mean or represent. 
They’re data. If you’re then told that these are the ages of three 
children, you have information as the numbers are now meaningful.
Download at WoweBook.Com

    Chapter 1
Month
Profit (millions of dollars)
Company Profit per Month
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.5
Dec
2.3
Take a look at the two charts. What would you say are the key differences? 
How do they give such different first impressions of the data?
The first chart shows that the profit is relatively 
steady. It achieves this by having the vertical axis 
start at 0, and then plotting the profit for each 
month against this.
Look, the vertical 
axes are different 
on each chart.
The axis for this chart 
starts at 2.0, not 0. 
No wonder the profit 
looks so awesome.
The second chart gives a different impression by 
making the vertical axis start at a different place 
and adjusting the scale accordingly. At a glance, the 
profits appear to be rising dramatically each month. 
It’s only when you look closer that you see what’s 
really going on.
Both charts are based on the same underlying data, 
but they each send a different message.
Software can’t think for you.
Chart software can save you a lot of time and produce effective 
charts, but you still need to understand what’s going on.
At the end of the day, it’s your data, and it’s up to you to choose the 
right chart for the job and make sure your data is presented in the 
most effective way possible and conveys the message you want.
Software can translate data into charts, but it’s up to you to make 
sure the chart is right.
Month
Profit (millions of dollars)
Company Profit per Month
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
0.5
0.0
1.0
2.0
2.5
Dec
1.5
Why should I care about charts? 
Chart software can handle everything 
for you, that’s what it’s there for.
sharpen your pencil solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    
visualizing information
Manic Mango needs some charts
One company that needs some charting expertise is Manic 
Mango, an innovative games company that is taking the world 
by storm. The CEO has been invited to deliver a keynote 
presentation at the next worldwide games expo. He needs some 
quick, slick ways of presenting data, and he’s asked you to come 
up with the goods. There’s a lot riding on this. If the keynote 
goes well, Manic Mango will get extra sponsorship revenue, and 
you’re bound to get a hefty bonus for your efforts. 
The first thing the CEO wants to be able to do is compare the 
percentage of satisfied players for each game genre. He’s started 
off by plugging the data he has through some charting software, 
and here are the results:
Take a good look at the pie chart that the CEO has produced. What does 
each slice represent? What can you infer about the relative popularity of 
different video game genres?
Sport 
27,500
Strategy 
11,500
Action 
6,000
Shooter 
3,500
Other 
1,500
Units Sold per Genre
Download at WoweBook.Com

    Chapter 1
Sport 
27,500
Strategy 
11,500
Action 
6,000
Shooter 
3,500
Units Sold per Genre
Other 
1,500
The humble pie chart
Pie charts work by splitting your data into distinct groups or categories. 
The chart consists of a circle split into wedge-shaped slices, and each slice 
represents a group. The size of each slice is proportional to how many are 
in each group compared with the others. The larger the slice, the greater 
the relative popularity of that group. The number in a particular group is 
called the frequency.
Pie charts divide your entire data set into distinct groups. This means that 
if you add together the frequency of each slice, you should get 100%.
Let’s take a closer look at our pie chart showing the number of units sold 
per genre:
This slice is much larger than all the 
others, which means that the frequency 
is highest for this category.
The slice here is much smaller than 
the others, so this means sales are 
a lot lower for this category.
Genre
Units sold
Sports
27,500
Strategy
11,500
Action
6,000
Shooter
3,500
Other
1,500
So when are pie charts useful?
We’ve seen that the size of each slice represents the relative 
frequency of each group of data you’re showingg. Because of 
this, pie charts can be useful if you want to compare basic proportions. 
It’s usually easy to tell at a glance which groups have a high frequency 
compared with the others. Pie charts are less useful if all the slices have 
similar sizes, as it’s difficult to pick up on subtle differences between 
the slice sizes.
So what about the pie chart that the Manic Mango CEO has created?
You can label each slice 
with its frequency, or 
with a percentage.
Frequency
Frequency describes how many 
items there are in a particular 
group or interval. It’s like a 
count of how many there are.
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
anatomy of a pie chart
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    
visualizing information
Chart failure
Creating a pie chart worked out so great for displaying the units sold per genre 
that the CEO’s decided to create another to chart consumer satisfaction with 
Manic Mango’s game. The CEO needs a chart that will allow him to compare 
the percentage of satisfied players for each game genre. He’s run the data 
through the charting software again, but this time he’s not as impressed.
Take a look at the data, and think about the problems there are with this chart. 
What would be a better sort of chart for this kind of information?
Pie charts 
show 
proportions
Pie charts are used to compare the 
proportions of different groups or 
categories, but in this case there’s little 
variation between each group. 
It’s difficult to take in at a glance which category has the 
highest level of player satisfaction.
It’s also generally confusing to label pie charts with 
percentages that don’t relate to the overall proportion of 
the slice. As an example, the Sports slice is labelled 99%, 
but it only fills about 20% of the chart. Another problem 
is that we don’t know whether there’s an equal number 
of responses for each genre, so we don’t know whether 
it’s fair to compare genre satisfaction in this way.
Manic Mango’s 
CEO
What happened here? All the 
slices are the same size, but the 
percentages are all different and 
are much larger than the slices. Can 
you help me fix this chart? Now?
% Players Satisfied per Genre
Strategy 
90%
Action 
85%
Shooter 
95%
Other 
85%
Sports 
99%
Download at WoweBook.Com

10    Chapter 1
Bar charts can allow for more accuracy
A better way of showing this kind of data is with a bar chart. Just like pie 
charts, bar charts allow you to compare relative sizes, but the advantage 
of using a bar chart is that they allow for a greater degree of precision. 
They’re ideal in situations where categories are roughly the same size, as 
you can tell with far greater precision which category has the highest 
frequency. It makes it easier for you to see small differences.
On a bar chart, each bar represents a particular category, and the length 
of the bar indicates the value. The longer the bar, the greater the value. All 
the bars have the same width, which makes it easier to compare them.
Bar charts can be drawn either vertically or horizontally.
The scale for 
sales goes here.
Vertical bar charts
Vertical bar charts show categories on the horizontal axis, and either 
frequency or percentage on the vertical axis. The height of each bar 
indicates the value of its category. Here’s an example showing the sales 
figures in units for five regions, A, B, C, D, and E:
The height of each bar shows the 
sales in units for that region.
Each bar 
represents a 
region.
Sales (units)
Region
Sales (units)
A
1,000
B
5,000
C
7,500
D
8,000
E
9,500
Sales per Region in Units
Sales (units)
1000
0
3000
9000
10000
A
B
C
D
E
8000
6000
7000
5000
2000
4000
two types of bar charts
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    11
visualizing information
Horizontal bar charts
Horizontal bar charts are just like vertical bar charts except that the axes 
are flipped round. With horizontal bar charts, you show the categories on 
the vertical axis and the frequency or percentage on the horizontal axis.
Here’s a horizontal bar chart for the CEO’s genre data from page 9. 
As you can see, it’s much easier to quickly gauge which category has the 
highest value, and which the lowest.
Vertical bar charts tend to be more common, but horizontal bar charts 
are useful if the names of your categories are long. They give you lots of 
space for showing the name of each category without having to turn the 
bar labels sideways.
It depends on what message you want to convey.
Let’s take a closer look.
% Players Satisfied per Genre
Percent Satisfied
Genre
% Satisfied
Sports
99%
Strategy
90%
Action
85%
Shooter
95%
Other
80%
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
Other
Action
Sports
Shooter
Strategy
Each bar’s length 
represents the 
percentage of satisfied 
players for the genre.
Each bar 
represents 
a genre.
The percentages 
are shown on a 
horizontal scale.
All the bars are 
drawn horizontally.
% Satisfied
The vertical bar chart shows frequency, 
and the horizontal bar chart shows 
percentages. When should I use frequencies 
and when should I use percentages?
Download at WoweBook.Com

12    Chapter 1
It’s a matter of scale
Understanding scale allows you to create powerful bar charts that pick out the 
key facts you want to draw attention to. But be careful—scale can also conceal 
vital facts about your data. Let’s see how.
Using percentage scales
Let’s start by taking a deeper look at the bar chart showing player satisfaction 
per game genre. The horizontal axis shows player satisfaction as a percentage, 
the number of people out of every hundred who are satisfied with this genre.
	
       Be very wary if you’re given percentages with no frequencies, or a 
frequency with no percentage.
Sometimes this is a tactic used to hide key facts about the underlying data, as just 
based on a chart, you have no way of telling how representative it is of the data. You 
may find that a large percentage of people prefer one particular game genre, but that 
only 10 people were questioned. Alternatively, you might find that 10,000 players like sports games 
most, but by itself, you can’t tell whether this is a high or low proportion of all game players.
Here are the percentages.
% Players Satisfied per Genre
Percent Satisfied
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
0
Other
Action
Sports
Shooter
Strategy
% Satisfied
The purpose of this chart is to allow us to compare different percentages and 
also read off percentages from the chart.
There’s just one problem—it doesn’t tell us how many players there are for 
each genre. This may not sound important, but it means that we have no idea 
whether this reflects the views of all players, some of them, or even just a 
handful. In other words, we don’t know how representative this is of players as a 
whole. The golden rule for designing charts that show percentages is to try and 
indicate the frequencies, either on the chart or just next to it.
a look at scale
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    13
visualizing information
Using frequency scales
You can show frequencies on your scale instead of percentages. This 
makes it easy for people to see exactly what the frequencies are and 
compare values.
So are you telling 
me that I have to 
choose between showing 
frequency or percentages? 
What if I want both?
There are ways of drawing bar charts that give 
you more flexibility.
The problem with these bar charts is that they show either the 
number of satisfied players or the percentage, and they only show 
satisfied players.
Let’s take a look at how we can get around this problem.
This chart reflects how 
many people are satisfied 
rather than the percentage..
Normally your scale should start at 0, but watch out! Not every chart does 
this, and as you saw earlier on page , using a scale that doesn’t start at 
0 can give a different first impression of your data. This is something to 
watch out for on other people’s charts, as it’s very easy to miss and can give 
you the wrong impression of the data.
Satisfied
Number of Players Satisfied per Genre
5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
0
Other
Action
Sports
Shooter
Strategy
Number Satisfied
Download at WoweBook.Com

14    Chapter 1
The split-category bar chart
One way of tackling this is to use one bar 
for the frequency of satisfied players and 
another for those dissatisfied, for each genre. 
This sort of chart is useful if you want to 
compare frequencies, but it’s difficult to 
see proportions and percentages.
The segmented bar chart
If you want to show frequencies and 
percentages, you can try using a segmented 
bar chart. For this, you use one bar for each 
category, but you split the bar proportionally. 
The overall length of the bar reflects the 
total frequency.
This sort of chart allows you to quickly see 
the total frequency of each category—in 
this case, the total number of players for 
each genre—and the frequency of player 
satisfaction. You can see proportions at a 
glance, too.
Dealing with multiple sets of data
With bar charts, it’s actually really easy to show more than one set of data on 
the same chart. As an example, we can show both the percentage of satisfied 
players and the percentage of dissatisfied players on the same chart.
Player Satisfaction per Genre
5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
0
Other
Action
Sports
Shooter
Strategy
Frequency
Dissatisfied
Satisfied
Player Satisfaction per Genre
5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
0
Other
Action
Sports
Shooter
Strategy
Frequency
Satisfied
Dissatisfied
two data sets on one bar chart
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    15
visualizing information
The CEO needs another chart for the keynote presentation. Here’s the data; see if you 
can sketch the bar chart.
Here’s another chart generated by the software. Which genre sold 
the most in 2007? How did this genre fare in 2006?
Continent
Sales 
(units)
North America
1,500
South America
500
Europe
1,500
Asia
2,000
Oceania
1,000
Africa
500
Antarctica
1
Sales
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
0
Other
Action
Sports
Shooter
Strategy
Genre
 Sales per Genre
2006
2007
Download at WoweBook.Com

16    Chapter 1
The CEO needs another chart for the keynote presentation. Here’s the data, see if you 
can create the chart.
Here’s another chart generated by the software. Which genre sold 
the most in 2007? How did this genre fare in 2006?
Continent
Sales 
(units)
North America
1,500
South America
500
Europe
1,500
Asia
2,000
Oceania
1,000
Africa
500
Antarctica
1
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
0
Other
Action
Sports
Shooter
Strategy
Sales
Genre
 Sales per Genre
2006
2007
The Sports genre sold the most in 2007. 
It sold 27,500 units.
In 2006 it only sold 14,000, so not as 
many. In 2006, the Strategy genre sold 
more units than any other genre.
Sales
200
600
1400 1600 1800 2000
0
Sales per Continent
Sales (units)
400
800 1000 1200
South America
Oceania
Antarctica
Europe
Africa
Asia
North America
Continent
exercise solutions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    17
visualizing information
This data looks different from the other 
types of data we’ve seen so far. I wonder if 
that means we treat it differently?
Look back through the chapter. How do you think 
this type of data is different? What impact do you 
think this could have on charts?
Nice work! Those charts are going to be a big hit at 
the expo. I’ve got another assignment for you. We’ve 
been testing a new game with a group of volunteers, 
and we need a chart to show the breakdown of 
scores per game. Here’s the data:
Score
Frequency
0-199
5
200-399
29
400-599
56
600-799
17
800-999
3
People can score between 
0 and 999, and the 
data is broken into 
groups. As an example, 
players scored between 0 
and 199 on 5 occasions.
The frequency is the 
number of times a 
score within each 
range was achieved.
Your bar charts rock
The CEO is thrilled with the bar charts 
you’ve produced, but there’s more data 
he needs to present at the keynote.
Download at WoweBook.Com

18    Chapter 1
Categories vs. numbers
When you’re working with charts, one of the key things you need to figure out is what sort 
of data you’re dealing with. Once you’ve figured that out, you’ll find it easier to make key 
decisions about what chart you need to best represent your data.
Categorical or qualitative data
Most of the data we’ve seen so far is categorical. The 
data is split into categories that describe qualities or 
characteristics. For this reason, it’s also called qualitative 
data. An example of qualitative data is game genre; each 
genre forms a separate category.
The key thing to remember with qualitative data is that 
the data values can’t be interpreted as numbers.
Numerical or quantitative data
Numerical data, on the other hand, deals with numbers. 
It’s data where the values have meaning as numbers, and 
that involves measurements or counts. Numerical data is 
also called quantitative data because it describes quantities.
So what impact does this have on the chart for Manic Mango?
weight
length
time
breed of dog
type of dessert
categorical and numerical data
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    19
visualizing information
No. Games
Dealing with grouped data
The latest set of data from the Manic Mango CEO is numeric and, 
what’s more, the scores are grouped into intervals. So what’s the best 
way of charting data like this?
Score
Frequency
0-199
5
200-399
29
400-599
56
600-799
17
800-999
3
The scores are 
numeric and 
grouped into 
intervals
That’s easy, don’t we just 
use a bar chart like we did 
before? We can treat each 
group as a separate category.
We could, but there’s a better way.
Rather than treat each range of scores as a separate category, we 
can take advantage of the data being numeric, and present the data 
using a continuous numeric scale instead. This means that instead 
of using bars to represent a single item, we can use each bar to 
represent a range of scores.
To do this, we can create a histogram.
Histograms are like bar charts but with two key differences. The 
first is that the area of each bar is proportional to the frequency, and 
the second is that there are no gaps between the bars on the chart. 
Here’s an example of a histogram showing the average number of 
games bought per month by households in Statsville:
Values are shown on a 
continuous numeric scale.
There are no gaps 
between the bars.
The area of each 
bar is proportional 
to the frequency.
frequency
2
1
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
-1
6
No. Games Bought per Month
Download at WoweBook.Com

20    Chapter 1
The first step to creating a histogram is to look at each of the intervals and 
work out how wide each of them needs to be, and what range of values 
each one needs to cover. While doing this, we need to make sure that there 
will be no gaps between the bars on the histogram.
Let’s start with the first two intervals, 0–199 and 200–399. At face value, 
the first interval finishes at score 199, and the second starts at score 200. 
The problem with plotting it like this, however, is that it would leave a gap 
between score 199 and 200, like this:
Score
Frequency
0–199
5
200–399
29
400–599
56
600–799
17
800–999
3
Histograms shouldn’t have gaps between the bars, so to get around this, 
we extend their ranges slightly. Instead of one interval ending at score 
199 and the next starting at score 200, we make the two intervals meet 
at 199.5, like this:
Doing this forms a single boundary and makes sure that there are no gaps 
between the bars on the histogram. If we complete this for the rest of the 
intervals, we get the following boundaries:
0-199
200-399
400-599
600-799
800-999
Each interval covers 200 scores, and the width of each interval is 200. Each 
interval has the same width.
As all the intervals have the same width, we create the histogram by drawing 
vertical bars for each range of scores, using the boundaries to form the start 
and end point of each bar. The height of each bar is equal to the frequency.
To make a histogram, start by finding bar widths
199
200
199.5
199.5
-0.5
399.5
599.5
799.5
999.5
building a histogram
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    21
visualizing information
Here’s a reminder of the data for Manic Mango.
See if you can use the class boundaries to create a histogram for this data. 
Remember, the frequency goes on the vertical axis.
Score
Frequency
0–199
5
200–399
29
400–599
56
600–799
17
800–999
3
20
10
30
0
100
200
300
400
500
1000
600
700
800
900
50
40
60
Download at WoweBook.Com

22    Chapter 1
Here’s a reminder of the data for Manic Mango.
Score
Frequency
0–199
5
200–399
29
400–599
56
600–799
17
800–999
3
See if you can use the class boundaries to create a histogram for this data. 
Remember, the frequency goes on the vertical axis.
Frequency
Score
Scores per game
You use the boundaries of every 
interval to give you the bar widths. 
The bar for scores 600-799 goes 
from 599.5 to 799.5.
The frequency gives you 
the height of each bar.
20
10
30
0
100
200
300
400
500
1000
600
700
800
900
50
40
60
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    23
visualizing information
The frequency is a statistical way of saying how many 
items there are in a category.
Pie charts are good for showing basic proportions.
Bar charts give you more flexibility and precision.
Numerical data deals with numbers and quantities; 
categorical data deals with words and qualities.
Horizontal bar charts are used for categorical data, 
particularly where the category names are long.
Vertical bar charts are used for numerical data, or 
categorical data if the category names are short.






You can show multiple sets of data on a bar chart, 
and you have a choice of how to do this. You can 
compare frequencies by showing related bars side-
by-side on a split-category bar chart. You can show 
proportions and total frequencies by stacking the bars 
on top of each other on a segmented bar chart.
Bar chart scales can show either percentages or 
frequencies.
Each chart comes in a number of different varieties.



Q: So is a histogram basically for grouped numeric data?
A: Yes it is. The advantage of a histogram is that because 
its numeric, you can use it to show the width of each interval as 
well as the frequency.
Q: What about if the intervals are different widths? Can 
you still use a histogram?
A: Absolutely. It’s more common for the interval widths to be 
equal size, but with a histogram they don’t have to be. There 
are a couple more steps you need to go through to create a 
histogram with unequal sized intervals, but we’ll show you that 
very soon.
Q: Why shouldn’t histograms have gaps between the 
bars?
A: There are at least two good reasons. The first is to show 
that there are no gaps in the values, and that every value is 
covered. The second is so that the width of the interval reflects 
the range of the values you’re covering. As an example, if we 
drew the interval 0–199 as extending from value 0 to value 199, 
the width on the chart would only be 199 – 0 = 199.
Q: So why do we make the bars meet midway between 
the two?
A: The bars have to meet, and it’s usually at the midway 
point, but it all comes down to how you round your values. When 
you round values, you normally round them to the nearest whole 
number. This means that the range of values from -0.5 to 0.5 all 
round to 0, and so when we show 0 on a histogram, we show it 
using the range of values from -0.5 to 0.5.
Q: Are there any exceptions to this?
A: Yes, age is one exception. If you have to represent the age 
range 18–19 on a histogram, you would normally represent this 
using an interval that goes from 18 to 20. The reason for this is 
that we typically classify someone as being 19, for example, up 
until their 20th birthday. In effect, we round ages down.
Download at WoweBook.Com

24    Chapter 1
Hours
Frequency
0–1
4,300
1–3
6,900
3–5
4,900
5–10
2,000
10–24
2,100
This is the number of 
hours people play for
Manic Mango needs another chart
The CEO is very pleased with the histogram you’ve created for him—so 
much so, that he wants you to create another histogram for him. This time, 
he wants a chart showing for how long Manic Mango players tend to play 
online games over a 24-hour period. Here’s the data:
This is frequency with 
which people play for this 
lengh of time
There’s something funny 
about that data. It’s 
grouped like last time, but 
the intervals aren’t all the 
same width.
He’s right, the interval widths aren’t all equal.
If you take a look at the intervals, you can see that they’re different widths. 
As an example, the 10–24 range covers far more hours than the 0–1 range.
If we had access to the raw data, we could look at how we could construct 
equal width intervals, but unfortunately this is all the data we have. We 
need a way of drawing a histogram that makes allowances for the data 
having different widths.
For histograms, the frequency is proportional to the 
area of each bar. How would you use this to create 
a histogram for this data? What do you need to be 
aware of?
a problem with unequal interval widths
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    25
visualizing information
I think we can just create this in the same way 
we did before—it’s no big deal. We draw bars 
on a numeric scale; it’s just that this time the 
bars are different widths.
Do you think she’s right?
Here’s a sketch of the chart, using frequency on the vertical scale 
and drawing bar widths proportional to their interval size. Do you 
see any problems?
The problem with this chart is that making the width of each bar 
reflect the width of each interval has made some of the bars look 
disproportionately large. Just glancing at the chart, you might be left 
with a misleading impression about how many hours per day people 
really play games for. As an example, the bar that takes up the largest 
area is the bar showing game play of 10–24 hours, even though most 
people don’t play for this long.
As this is a histogram, we need to make the bar area proportional to the 
frequency it represents. As the bars have unequal widths, what should 
we do to the bar height?
A histogram’s bar area must be proportional to frequency
Hours Spent Gaming per Day
Hours
Frequency
2000
1000
3000
5000
4000
6000
7000
23
0
24
21
22
19
20
17
18
15
16
13
14
11
12
9
10
8
6
7
4
5
2
3
0
1
Why is this 
column so BIG?
Download at WoweBook.Com

26    Chapter 1
Up until now, we’ve been able to use the height of each bar to 
represent the frequency of a particular number or category. 
This time around, we’re dealing with grouped numeric data where 
the interval widths are unequal. We can make the width of each bar 
reflect the width of each interval, but the trouble is that having bars 
of different widths affects the overall area of each bar. 
We need to make sure the area of each bar is proportional to its 
frequency. This means that if we adjust bar width, we also need to 
adjust bar height. That way, we can change the widths of the bars so 
that they reflect the width of the group, but we keep the size of each 
bar in line with its frequency.
Let’s go through how to create this new histogram.
Step 1: Find the bar widths
We find how wide our bars need to be by looking at the range of values 
they cover. In other words, we need to figure out how many full hours 
are covered by each group.
Let’s take the 1–3 group. This group covers 2 full hours, 1–2 and 2–3. 
This means that the width of the bar needs to be 2, with boundaries of 
1 and 3.
Hours
Frequency
Width
0–1
4,300
1
1–3
6,900
2
3–5
4,900
2
5–10
2,000
5
10–24
2,100
14
For histograms, 
the frequency is 
represented by 
bar area
Here’s the 1-3 group; it covers 2 
full hours so the width is 2.
If we calculate the rest of the widths, we get:
Now that we’ve figured out the bar widths, we can 
move onto working out the heights.
Make the area of histogram bars proportional to frequency
100
200
300
adjusting bar area
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    27
visualizing information
Step 2: Find the bar heights
Now that we have the widths of all the groups, we can use these to find the 
heights the bars need to be. Remember, we need to adjust the bar heights 
so that the overall area of each bar is proportional to the group’s frequency.
First of all, let’s take the area of each bar. We’ve said that frequency and 
area are equivalent. As we already know what the frequency of each group 
is, we know what the areas should be too:
Area of bar = Frequency of group
We were given these right at the start, 
so we know what area we’re aiming for.
Now each bar is basically just a rectangle, which means that the area of 
each bar is equal to the width multiplied by the height. As the area gives 
us the frequency, this means:
Frequency = Width of bar × Height of bar
We found the widths of the bars in the last step, which means that we 
can use these to find what height each bar should be. In other words,
Height of bar =   Frequency
	
	
    Width of bar
The height of the bar is used to measure how concentrated the 
frequency is for a particular group. It’s a way of measuring how 
densely packed the frequency is, a way of saying how thick or thin 
on the ground the numbers are. The height of the bar is called the 
frequency density.
What should the height of each bar be? Complete the table.
Hours
Frequency
Width
Height (Frequency Density)
0–1
4,300
1
4,300 ÷ 1 = 4,300
1–3
6,900
2
3–5
4,900
2
5–10
2,000
5
10–24
2,100
14
Area = frequency
Height
Width
Download at WoweBook.Com

28    Chapter 1
What should the height of each bar be? Complete the table.
Hours
Frequency
Width
Height (Frequency Density)
0–1
4,300
1
4,300 ÷ 1 = 4,300
1–3
6,900
2
6,900 ÷ 2 = 3,450
3–5
4,900
2
4,900 ÷2 = 2,450
5–10
2,000
5
2,000 ÷ 5 = 400
10–24
2100
14
2,100 ÷ 14 = 150
Step 3: Draw your chart—a histogram
Now that we’ve worked out the widths and heights of each bar, we 
can draw the histogram.We draw it just like before, except that this 
time, we use frequency density for the vertical axis and not frequency.
Here’s our revised histogram.
Hours
Frequency Density
Hours Spent Gaming per Day
Represents 1000 Days
2000
1000
3000
5000
4000
0
24
10
5
3
0
1
Look, no gaps 
between the bars.
The bars are drawn on the 
continuous numeric scale.
The amount of space the 
bars take up are now in 
proportion to the data.
This legend makes it easier 
to see what the area 
represents. It’s optional.
Even though the bar for 1-3 
has a higher frequency, the 
frequency density is actually 
lower than for 0-1.
draw the histogram
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    29
visualizing information
Frequency density refers to the concentration of values in 
data. It’s related to frequency, but it’s not the same thing. 
Here’s an analogy to demonstrate the relationship between 
the two.
Imagine you have a quantity of juice that you’ve poured 
into a glass like this:
Here’s all your juice in the glass. 
It comes up to this level.
What if you then pour the same quantity of juice into a 
different sized glass, say one that’s wider? What happens to the 
level of the juice? This time the glass is wider, so the level 
the juice comes up to is lower. 
The level of the juice varies in line with the width of the 
glass; the wider the glass, the lower the level. The converse is 
true too; the narrower the glass, the higher the level of juice.
The glass 
is wider, so 
the level 
isn’t as high.
Juice = Frequency
Imagine that instead of pouring juice into glasses, you’re “pouring” 
frequency into the bars on your chart. Just as you know the width of the 
glass, you know what width your bars are. And just like the space the juice 
occupies in the glass (width x height) tells you the quantity of juice in the 
glass, the area of the bar on the graph is equivalent to its frequency.
The frequency density is then equal to the height of the bar. Keeping 
with our analogy, it’s equivalent to the level your juice comes to in each 
glass. Just as a wider glass means the juice comes to a lower level, a wider 
bar means a lower frequency density.
Bar
Juice
Frequency
Frequency Density
So what does juice have to do with frequency density?
Frequency Density Up Close
Download at WoweBook.Com

30    Chapter 1
Q: Why do we use area to represent frequency when 
we’re graphing histograms?
A: It’s a way of making sure the relative sizes of each group 
stay in proportion to the data, and stay honest. With grouped 
data, we need a visual way of expressing the width of each 
group and also its frequency. Changing the width of the bars is 
an intuitive way of reflecting the group range, but it has the side 
effect of making some of the bar sizes look disproportionate.  
 
Adjusting the bar height and using the area to represent 
frequency is a way around this. This way, no group is 
misrepresented by taking up too much or too little space.
Q: What’s frequency density again?
A: Frequency density is a way of indicating how 
concentrated values are in a particular interval. It gives you a 
way of comparing different intervals that may be different widths. 
It makes the frequency proportional to the area of a bar, rather 
than height. 
 
To find the frequency density, take the frequency of an interval, 
and divide it by the width.
Q: If I have grouped numeric data, but all the intervals 
are the same width, can I use a normal bar chart?
A: Using a histogram will better represent your data, as 
you’re still dealing with grouped data. You really want your 
frequency to be proportional to its area, not height.
Q: Do histograms have to show grouped data? Can 
you use them for individual numbers as well as groups of 
numbers?
A: Yes, you can. The key thing to remember is to make sure 
there are no gaps between the bars and that you make each 
bar 1 wide. Normally you do this by positioning your number in 
the center of the bar. 
 
As an example, if you wanted to draw a bar representing the 
individual number 1, then you’d draw a bar ranging from 0.5 to 
1.5, with 1 in the center.
Frequency density relates to how concentrated the 
frequencies are for grouped data. It’s calculated using 
 
	
Frequency density = Frequency 
	
	
	
 Group width
A histogram is a chart that specializes in grouped 
data. It looks like a bar chart, but the height of each bar 
equates to frequency density rather than frequency.


When drawing histograms, the width of each bar is 
proportional to the width of its group. The bars are 
shown on a continuous numeric scale.
In a histogram, the frequency of a group is given by the 
area of its bar.
A histogram has no gaps between its bars.



bullet points and no dumb questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    31
visualizing information
Here’s a histogram representing the number of levels completed in each game of Cows Gone 
Wild. How many games have been played in total? Assume each level is a whole number.
-0.5 to 0.5 represents 0 levels, as all 
values within this range round to 0.
Level
Represents 10 games
0
1
2
3
4
5
-1
6
Frequency Density
No. Levels Completed per Game
20
50
40
30
10
Download at WoweBook.Com

32    Chapter 1
Here’s a histogram representing the number of levels completed in each game of Cows Gone 
Wild. How many games have been played in total? Assume each level is a whole number.
Level
Width
Frequency Density
Frequency
0
1
10
1x10 = 10
1
1
30
1x30 = 30
2
1
50
1x50 = 50
3
1
30
1x30 = 30
4–5
2
10
2x10 = 20
We need to find the total number of games played, which means we need to find the total frequency.
The total frequency is equal to the area of each bar added together. In other words, we multiply the width 
of each bar by its frequency density to get the frequency, and then add the whole lot up together.
Total Frequency = 10 + 30 + 50 + 30 + 20
	
        = 140
Each level is a whole 
number, so the bar 
for level 3 goes from 
2.5 to 3.5.
Level
Represents 10 games
0
1
2
3
4
5
-1
6
Frequency Density
No. Levels Completed per Game
20
50
40
30
10
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    33
visualizing information
Histograms can’t do everything
What sort of information do you think we should show on the chart? What sort 
of information should we plot? Write your answer below.
It’s tricky to see at a glance what the running totals are in this 
chart. In order to find the frequency of players playing for up to 
5 hours, we need to add different frequencies together. We need 
another sort of chart…but what?
I’d really like to be able to see at a glance how many 
people play for less than a certain number of hours. 
Like, instead of seeing how many people play for 
between 3 and 5 hours, could we have a graph that 
shows how many people play for up to 5 hours?
Let’s see if we can help the CEO out. Here’s the 
histogram we had before.	
While histograms are an excellent way to display 
grouped numeric data, there are still some 
kinds of this data they’re not ideally suited for 
presenting—like running totals…
The histogram tells us the frequency density of 
particular groups. It’s not so hot at giving us 
information about how many players play for less 
than a certain amount of hours.
Hours
Frequency Density
Hours Spent Gaming per Day
Represents 1000 Days
2000
1000
3000
5000
4000
0
24
10
5
3
0
1
Download at WoweBook.Com

34    Chapter 1
The CEO needs some sort of chart that will show him the total 
frequency below a particular value: the cumulative frequency. 
By cumulative frequency, we basically mean a running total.
What we need to come up with is some sort of graph that shows 
hours on the horizontal axis and cumulative frequency on the 
vertical axis. That way, the CEO will be able to take a value and 
read off the corresponding frequency up to that point. He’ll be able 
to find out how many people play for up to 5 hours, 6 hours, or 
whatever other number of hours he’s most interested in at the time.
Before we can draw the chart, we need to know what exactly 
we need to plot on the chart. We need to calculate cumulative 
frequencies for each of the intervals that we have, and also work 
out the upper limit of each interval.
Let’s start by looking at the data.
So what are the cumulative frequencies?
First off, let’s suppose the CEO needs to plot the cumulative frequency, or 
total frequency, of up to 1 hour. If we look at the data, we know that the 
frequency of the 0–1 group is 4300, and we can see that is the upper limit of 
the group. This means that the cumulative frequency of hours up to 1 is 4300.
Next, let’s look at the total frequency up to 3. We know what the frequencies 
are for the 0–1 and 1–3 groups, and 3 is again the upper limit. To find the 
total frequency of hours up to 3, we add together the frequency of the 0–1 
group and the 1–3 group.
Can you see a pattern? If we take the upper limit of each of the groups of 
hours, we can find the total frequency of hours up to that value by adding 
together the frequencies. Applying this to all the groups gives us
Hours
Frequency
0–1
4,300
1–3
6,900
3–5
4,900
5–10
2,000
10–24
2,100
Here’s the data.
Hours
Frequency
Upper limit
Cumulative frequency
0
0
0
0
0–1
4,300
1
4,300
1–3
6,900
3
4,300+6,900 = 11,200
3–5
4,900
5
4,300+6,900+4,900 = 16,100
5–10
2,000
10
4,300+6,900+4,900+2,000 = 18,100
10–24
2,100
24
4,300+6,900+4,900+2,000+2,100 = 20,200
We’ve added in 0, as 
you can’t play games 
for LESS than 0 
hours a week.
Introducing cumulative frequency
Cumulative 
Frequency
The total frequency up to 
certain value. It’s basically a 
running total of the frequencies.
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
cumulative frequency graphs
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    35
visualizing information
Hours
Cumulative Frequency
Running Total of Hours Played
0
5
10
15
20
10000
0.0
15000
20000
22500
25
17500
12500
5000
2500
7500
Drawing the cumulative frequency graph
Now that we have the upper limits and cumulative frequencies, we 
can plot them on a chart. Draw two axes, with the vertical one for the 
cumulative frequency and the horizontal one for the hours. Once you’ve 
done that, plot each of the upper limits against its cumulative frequency, 
and then join the points together with a line like this:
Always start your chart 
where the cumulative 
frequency is 0.
You plot this point by 
plotting 10 hours against 
a cumulative frequency of 
18,100.
The CEO wants you to find the number of instances of people 
playing online for up to 4 hours. See if you can estimate this 
using the cumulative frequency diagram.
	
       Cumulative 
frequencies 
can never 
decrease. 
If your cumulative 
frequency decreases at 
any point, check your 
calculations.
Download at WoweBook.Com

36    Chapter 1
0
5
10000
15000
5000
2500
7500
0.0
Q: What’s a cumulative frequency?
A: The cumulative frequency of a value 
is the sum of the frequencies up to and 
including that value. It tells you the total 
frequency up to that point. 
 
As an example, suppose you have data 
telling you how old people are. The 
cumulative frequency for value 27 tells 
you how many people there are up to and 
including age 27.
Q: Are cumulative frequency graphs 
just for grouped data?
A: Not at all; you can use them for 
any sort of numeric data. The key thing 
is whether you want to know the total 
frequency up to a particular value, or 
whether you’re more interested in the 
frequencies of particular values instead.
Q: On some charts you can show 
more than one set of data on the same 
chart. What about for cumulative 
frequency graphs?
A: You can do this for cumulative 
frequency graphs by drawing a separate 
line for each set of data. If, say, you wanted 
to compare the cumulative frequencies by 
gender, you could draw one line showing 
males and the other females. It would be 
far more effective to show both lines on one 
chart, as it makes it easier to compare the 
two sets of data.
Q: Is there a limit to how many lines 
you can show on one chart?
A: There’s no specific limit, as it all 
depends on your data. Don’t have so many 
lines that the graph becomes cluttered 
and you can no longer use it to read off 
cumulative frequencies and compare sets 
of data.
Q: Remind me, how do I find the 
cumulative frequency of a value?
A: You can find the cumulative frequency 
by reading it straight off the graph. You 
locate the value you want to find the 
cumulative frequency for on the horizontal 
axis, find where this meets the cumulative 
frequency curve, and then read the value of 
cumulative frequency off the vertical axis.
Q: If I already know the cumulative 
frequency, can I use the graph to find the 
corresponding value?
A: Yes you can. Look for the cumulative 
frequency on the vertical axis, find where it 
meets the cumulative frequency curve, and 
then read off the value.
To do this, we find 4 on the horizontal axis, find where 
this value meets the line of the graph, and read off the 
corresponding cumulative frequency on the vertical axis.
This gives us an answer of approximately 13,750. In other 
words, there are approximately 13,750 instances of 
people playing online for under 4 hours.
The CEO wants you to find the number of instances of people 
playing online for less than 4 hours. See if you can estimate this 
using the cumulative frequency diagram.
4
13750
12500
sharpen solution and no dumb questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    37
visualizing information
During the Manic Mango keynote, the CEO wants to explain how he wants to target particular age 
groups. He has a cumulative frequency graph showing the cumulative frequency of the ages, but 
he needs the frequencies too, and the dog ate the piece of paper they were written on. See if you 
can use the cumulative frequency graph to estimate what the frequencies of each group are.
Age group
Upper limit
Cumulative frequency
Frequency
<0
0
0
0
0–17
18
18–24
25–39
40–54
55–79
80–99
The upper limit is 18 because someone is classed as being 17 
from the point of their 17th birthday up until the point 
they turn 18. Ages are generally rounded down.
Hours
Cumulative Frequency
Number of Players Under a Particular Age
0
10
20
30
40
10000
0.0
50
5000
2500
7500
60
70
80
90
100
Download at WoweBook.Com

38    Chapter 1
During the Manic Mango keynote, the CEO wants to explain how he wants to target particular age 
groups. He has a cumulative frequency graph showing the cumulative frequency of the ages, but 
he needs the frequencies too, and the dog ate the piece of paper they were written on. See if you 
can use the cumulative frequency graph to piece together what the frequencies of each group are.
Age group
Upper limit
Cumulative frequency
Frequency
<0
0
0
0
0–17
18
2,000
2,000
18–24
25
4,500
4,500 - 2,000 = 2,500
25–39
40
6,500
6,500 - 4,500 = 2,000
40–54
55
8,500
8,500 - 6,500 = 2,000
55–79
80
9,400
9,400 - 8,500 = 900
80–99
100
9,500
9,500 - 9,400 = 100
Use the chart to 
find the cumulative 
frequencies.
You can find the frequencies by 
taking the current cumulative 
frequency, and subtracting the 
previous one.
Don’t worry if you get slightly 
different results—they’re just 
estimates.
Hours
Cumulative Frequency
Number of Players Under a Particular Age
0
10
20
30
40
10000
0.0
50
5000
2500
7500
60
70
80
90
100
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    39
visualizing information
Choosing the right chart
The CEO is really happy with your work on cumulative frequency graphs, and 
your bonus is nearly in the bag. He’s nearly finished preparing for the keynote, 
but there’s just one more thing he needs: a chart showing Manic Mango profits 
compared with the profits of their main rivals. Which chart should he use?
Here are two possible charts that the CEO could use in his keynote. Your 
task is to annotate each one, and say what you think the strengths and 
weaknesses are of each one relative to the other. Which would you pick?
Profit in dollars
Year
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
400
0.0
600
500
200
100
300
Competitor
Manic Mango
Profit (thousands)
Profit in dollars
Year
400
0
600
500
200
100
300
Profit (thousands)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Competitor
Manic Mango
Download at WoweBook.Com

40    Chapter 1
Here are two possible charts that the CEO could use in his keynote. Your task is to annotate 
each one, and say what you think the strengths and weaknesses are of each one relative to the 
other. Which would you pick?
The bar chart does a good job of 
comparing the profit on a year‑by‑year 
basis, and it’s great if you want to 
compare profits in an individual year. As 
an example, we can see that up to 2007, 
the competitor made a bigger profit, but 
in 2007 Manic Mango did.
A weaknesses of this chart is that if the 
CEO suddenly decided to add a third 
competitor, it might make the chart a 
bit harder to take in at a single glance.
The line chart is better at showing a 
trend, the year-on-year profits for each 
company. The trend line for each company 
is well-defined, which means we easily see 
the pattern profits: Manic Mango profits 
are climbing well, where its competition 
is beginning to slacken off. It would also 
be easy to add another company without 
swamping the chart.
A weakness is that you can also compare 
year-by-year profit, but perhaps the bar 
chart is clearer.
We’d choose the line chart, as the 
overall trend is clearer than on 
the bar chart. But don’t worry if 
you chose the other; the chart you 
use depends on which key facts you 
want to emphasize.
Profit in dollars
Year
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
400
0.0
600
500
200
100
300
Competitor
Manic Mango
Profit (thousands)
Profit in dollars
Year
400
0
600
500
200
100
300
Profit (thousands)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Competitor
Manic Mango
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    41
visualizing information
Line Charts Up Close
Line charts are good at showing trends in your data. For each set of data, you plot your 
points and then join them together with lines. You can easily show multiple sets of data 
on the same chart without it getting too cluttered. Just make sure it’s clear which line is 
which.
As with other sorts of charts, you have a choice of showing frequency or percentages on 
the vertical axis. The scale you use all depends on what key facts you want to draw out.
Line charts are often used to show time measurements. Time always goes on the 
horizontal axis, and frequency on the vertical. You can read off the frequency for any 
period of time by choosing the time value on the horizontal axis, and reading off the 
corresponding frequency for that point on the line.
Line charts should be used for numerical data 
only, and not categorical. This is because it 
makes sense to compare different categories, 
but not to draw a trend line. Only use a line 
chart if you’re comparing categories over some 
numerical unit such as time, and in that case 
you’d use a separate line for each category.
This trend line isn’t meaningful. 
What would happen if you 
rearranged the categories?
Profit in dollars
Year
400
0
600
500
200
100
300
Profit (thousands)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Eye Color
4
2
1
3
Frequency
Blue
Brown Green
Red
Download at WoweBook.Com

42    Chapter 1
Cumulative frequency is the total frequency up to a 
particular value. It’s a running total of the frequencies.
Use a cumulative frequency graph to plot the upper limit 
of each group of data against cumulative frequency.
Use a line chart if you want to show trends, for example 
over time.
You can show more than one set of data on a line chart. 
Use one line for each set of data, and make sure it’s 
clear which line is which.




You can use line charts to make basic predictions as it’s 
easy to see the shape of the trend. Just extend the trend 
line, trying to keep the same basic shape.
Don’t use line charts to show categorical data unless 
you’re showing trends for each category, for example 
over time. If you do this, draw one line per category.


Q: Are line charts the same thing as 
time series charts? I think I’ve heard that 
name used before.
A: A time series chart is really a line chart 
that focuses on time intervals, just like the 
examples we used. A line chart doesn’t have 
to focus on just time, though.
Q: Are there any special varieties of 
line charts?
A: Yes. In fact, you’ve encountered one 
of them already. The cumulative frequency 
graph is a type of line chart that shows the 
total frequency up to a certain value 
. 
 
Q: Can line charts show categorical 
data as well as data that’s numeric?
A: Line charts should only be used to 
show categorical data if you’re showing 
trends for each category, and use a separate 
line for each category.  
 
What you shouldn’t do is use a line chart to 
draw lines from category to category. 
Q: So line charts are better for 
showing overarching trends, and bar 
charts are better for comparing values or 
categories?
A: That’s right. Which chart you use really 
comes down to what message you want to 
put across, and what key facts you want to 
minimize.
Q: Now that I know how to create 
charts properly, can I use charting 
software to do the heavy lifting?
A: Absolutely! Charting software can save 
you a lot of time and hard work, and the 
results can be excellent. 
 
The key thing with using software to produce 
your charts is to remember that the software 
can’t think for you. You still have to decide 
which chart best represents your key facts, 
and you have to check that the software 
produces exactly what you expect it to.
bullet points and no dumb questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    43
visualizing information
Manic Mango conquered the games market!
You’ve helped produce some killer charts for Manic Mango, and thanks to you, 
the keynote was a huge success. Manic Mango has gained tons of extra publicity 
for their games, and money from sponsorship and advertising is rolling in. The 
only thing left for you to do is think about all the things you could do and the 
places you could go with your well-earned bonus.
You’ve had your first taste of how statistics can help you and what you can achieve 
by understanding what’s really going on. Keep reading and we’ll show you more 
things you can do with statistics, and really start to flex those statistics muscles.
Nice work with those 
charts! We’ve got investors 
lining up outside the office. 
Take a long vacation, on me!
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    45
measuring central tendency
2
The Middle Way
Sometimes you just need to get to the heart of the matter. 
It can be difficult to see patterns and trends in a big pile of figures, and finding the 
average is often the first step towards seeing the bigger picture. With averages at 
your disposal, you’ll be able to quickly find the most representative values in your 
data and draw important conclusions. In this chapter, we’ll look at several ways to 
calculate one of the most important statistics in town—mean, median, and mode—
and you’ll start to see how to effectively summarize data as concisely and usefully 
as possible.
People say I’m just an 
average golfer, but I’ll 
show them I’m really mean.
Download at WoweBook.Com

46    Chapter 2
Welcome to the Health Club
The Statsville Health Club prides itself on its ability to find 
the perfect class for everyone. Whether you want to learn 
how to swim, practice martial arts, or get your body into 
shape, they have just the right class for you.
The staff at the health club have noticed that their 
customers seem happiest when they’re in a class with 
people their own age, and happy customers always come 
back for more. It seems that the key to success for the health 
club is to work out what a typical age is for each of their 
classes, and one way of doing this is to calculate the 
average. The average gives a representative age for each 
class, which the health club can use to help their customers 
pick the right class.
Here are the current attendees of the Power Workout class:
Age 19
Age 21
Age 20
Age 20
Age 20
How do we work out the average age of the Power Workout class?
statsville health club uses averages
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    47
measuring central tendency
A common measure of average is the mean
It’s likely that you’ve been asked to work out averages before. One way to find the 
average of a bunch of numbers is to add all the numbers together, and then divide 
by how many numbers there are.
In statistics, this is called the mean.
What’s wrong with just calling 
it the average? It’s what I’m 
used to.
Because there’s more than one sort of average.
You have to know what to call each average, so you can easily 
communicate which one you’re referring to. It’s a bit like going to your 
local grocery store and asking for a loaf of bread. The chances are 
you’ll be asked what sort of bread you’re after: white, whole-grain, etc. 
So if you’re writing up your sociology research findings, for example, 
you’ll be expected to specify exactly what kinds of average calculations 
you did.
Likewise, if someone tells you what the average of a set of data is, 
knowing what sort of average it is gives you a better understanding of 
what’s really going on with the data. It can give you vital clues about 
what information is being conveyed—or, in some cases, concealed.
We’ll be looking at other types of averages, besides the mean, later in 
this chapter.
Download at WoweBook.Com

48    Chapter 2
Mean math
If you want to really excel with statistics, you’ll need to 
become comfortable with some common stats notation. It 
may look a little strange at first, but you’ll soon get used to it. 
Letters and numbers
Almost every statistical calculation involves adding a bunch of 
numbers together. As an example, if we want to find the mean of 
the Power Workout class, we first have to add the ages of all the 
class attendees together.
The problem statisticians have is how to generalize this. We don’t 
necessarily know in advance how many numbers we’re dealing with, 
or what they are. We currently know how many people are in the 
Power Workout class and what their ages are, but what if someone 
else joins the class? If we could only generalize this, we’d have a 
way of showing the calculation without rewriting it every time the 
class changes.
Statisticians get around this problem by using letters to represent 
numbers. As an example, they might use the letter x to represent 
ages in the Power Workout class like this:
Specific ages of class attendees
	
19  20  20  20  21
General ages of class attendees
	
x1  x2  x3  x4  x5
Each x represents the age of a separate person in the class. It’s a 
bit like labeling each person with a particular number x.
Each x represents one 
of the class ages.
We use x1 as a general way of 
representing this particular girl’s 
age. She’s 19 at the moment, but 
when she becomes 20, we’ll still 
know her age as x1. We won’t have 
to rewrite any of our calculations.
x1
Now that we have a general way of writing 
ages, we can use our x’s to represent them in 
calculations. We can write the sum of the 5 ages 
in the class as
Sum = x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5
But what if we don’t know how 
many numbers we have to sum? 
What if we don’t know how many 
people are in the class?
statistics notation
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    49
measuring central tendency
Dealing with unknowns
Statisticians use letters to represent unknown numbers. But what if we don’t 
know how many numbers we might have to add together? Not a problem—
we’ll just call the number of values n. If we didn’t know how many people were 
in the Power Workout class, we’d just say that there were n of them, and write 
the sum of all the ages as:
Sum = x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 + ... + xn
In this case, xn represents the age of the nth person in the class. If there were 18 
people in the class, this would be x18, the age of the 18th person.
We can take another shortcut.
Writing x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + ... + xn is a bit like saying “add age 
1 to age 2, then add age 3, then add age 4, and keep on adding 
ages up to age n.” In day-to-day conversation it’s unlikely we’d 
phrase it like this. We’re far more likely to say “add together all 
of the ages.” It’s quicker, simpler, and to the point.
We can do something similar in math notation by using the 
summation symbol Σ, which is the Greek letter Sigma. We can 
use Σx (pronounced “sigma x”) as a quick way of saying “add 
together the values of all the x’s.”
The “...” is a quick way of 
saying “and so on.” In other 
words, just keep on adding x’s.
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 + ... + xn = Σx
Do you see how much quicker and simpler this is? It’s just 
a mathematical way of saying “add your values together” 
without having to explicitly say what each value is.
Now that we know some handy math shortcuts, let’s see how 
we can apply this to the mean.
It all adds 
up now...
Writing out all 
those x’s looks like it 
could get arduous...
Download at WoweBook.Com

50    Chapter 2
I’m mean. Some people 
say I’m average, but 
deep down, I’m mean.
Back to the mean
We can use math notation to represent the mean.
To find the mean of a group of numbers, we add them all together, 
and then divide by how many there are. We’ve already seen how to 
write summations, and we’ve also seen how statisticians refer to the 
total count of a set of numbers as n.
If we put these together, we can write the mean as:
Σx
 n
Add all the numbers 
together...
...then divide by however 
many there are.
In other words, this is just a math shorthand way of saying “add 
together all of the numbers, and then divide by how many 
numbers there are.”
The mean has its own symbol
The mean is one of the most commonly used statistics around, 
and statisticians use it so frequently that they’ve given it a symbol 
all of its own: . This is the Greek letter mu (pronounced “mew”). 
Remember, it’s just a quick way of representing the mean.
μ = Σx
 n
The mean is one of 
the most frequently 
used statistics. It 
can be represented 
with the symbol μ. 
mean formulas
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    51
measuring central tendency
Have a go at calculating the mean age of the Power Workout 
class?  Here are their ages.
Age
19
20
21
Frequency
1
3
1
How many people 
there are of each age
The Case of the Ambiguous Average
The staff at a local company are feeling mutinous about 
perceived unfair pay. Most of them are paid $500 per week, a 
few managers are on a higher salary, and the CEO takes home 
$49,000 per week.
“The average salary here is $2,500 per week, and we’re only 
paid $500,” say the workers. “This is unfair, and we 
demand more money.”
One of the managers overhears this and joins in with the 
demands. “The average salary here is $10,000 per week, 
and I’m only paid $4,000. I want a raise.”
The CEO looks at them all. “You’re all wrong; the average 
salary is $500 per week. Nobody is underpaid. Now get back to 
work.”
What’s going on with the average? Who do you 
think is right?
Five Minute 
Mystery
Five Minute 
Mystery
Download at WoweBook.Com

52    Chapter 2
Have a go at calculating the mean age of the Power Workout 
class?  Here are their ages.
Age
19
20
21
Frequency
1
3
1
To find μ, we need to add all the people’s ages, and divide by how many there are.
This gives us	
μ = 19 + 20 + 20 + 20 + 21
	
	
	
       5
	
	
   = 100
	
	
       5
	
	
   = 20
The mean age of the class is 20.
Remember that there 
are 3 people of age 20.
Sum of the frequencies
Multiply each number by 
its frequency, then add 
the results together.
Handling frequencies
When you calculate the mean of a set of numbers, you’ll often find that 
some of the numbers are repeated. If you look at the ages of the Power 
Workout class, you’ll see we actually have 3 people of age 20.
It’s really important to make sure that you include the frequency of each 
number when you’re working out the mean. To make sure we don’t 
overlook it, we can include it in our formula.
If we use the letter f to represent frequency, we can rewrite the mean as
μ = Σfx
 Σf
This is just another way of writing the mean, but this time explicitly 
referring to the frequency. Using this for the Power Workout class gives us
	
	
μ = 1 × 19 + 3 × 20 + 1 × 21
	
	
	
          5
	
	
   = 20
It’s the same calculation written slightly differently.
mean and frequency
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    53
measuring central tendency
Back to the Health Club
Here’s another hopeful customer looking for the perfect 
class. Can you help him find one?
I want a nice quiet class on a Tuesday 
evening where I can meet people my age.  
Do you think you can help me?
This sounds easy enough to sort out. According to the 
brochure, the Health Club has places available in three 
of its Tuesday evening classes. The first class has a mean 
age of 17, the second has a mean of 25, and the mean 
age of the third one is 38. Clive needs to find the class 
with an average student age that’s closest to his own.
Meet Clive, a man in his late 
fifties who wants an exercise 
class composed of other 
middle-aged folks.
Look at the mean ages for each class. 
Which class should Clive attend?
Download at WoweBook.Com

54    Chapter 2
 Mean
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
 =    x	
    
n
 =    fx	    
  f
What could have gone wrong?
The last thing Clive expected (or wanted) was a 
class that was primarily made up of teenagers. 
Why do you think this happened?
We need to examine the data to find out. Let’s 
see if sketching the data helps us see what the 
problem is.
Everybody was Kung Fu fighting
Clive went along to the class with the mean age of 38. He was 
expecting a gentle class where he could get some nonstrenuous 
exercise and meet other people his own age. Unfortunately...
I ended up in the Kung Fu 
class with lots of young ‘uns and 
a few ancient masters. My back 
will never be the same again.
when good means go bad
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    55
measuring central tendency
Sketch the histograms for the Kung Fu and Power Workout classes. (If you need a refresher on 
histograms, flip back to Chapter 1.) How do the shapes of the distributions compare? Why was 
Clive sent to the wrong class?
Power Workout Classmate Ages
Age
19
20
21
Frequency
1
3
1
Kung Fu Classmate Ages
Age
19
20
21
145
147
Frequency
3
6
3
1
1
Download at WoweBook.Com

56    Chapter 2
Sketch the histograms for the Kung Fu and Power Workout classes. (If you need a refresher on 
histograms, flip back to Chapter 1.) How do the shapes of the distributions compare? Why was 
Clive sent to the wrong class?
Power Workout Classmate Ages
Age
19
20
21
Frequency
1
3
1
Kung Fu Classmate Ages
Age
19
20
21
145
147
Frequency
3
6
3
1
1
Do you think the mean can ever be the highest value 
in a set of numbers? Under what circumstances?
We left out the ages 
between 0 and 18 to 
save space.
exercise solutions
Age of Power Workout classmates
2
1
3
18
19
20
21
22
23
frequency
age
0
0
Age of Kung Fu classmates
4
2
6
19
20
21
22
145
146
frequency
age
147
148
0
0
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    57
measuring central tendency
Our data has outliers
Did you see the difference in the shape of the charts for the Power 
Workout and Kung Fu classes? The ages of the Power Workout 
class form a smooth, symmetrical shape. It’s easy to see what a 
typical age is for people in the class.
The shape of the chart for the Kung Fu class isn’t as straightforward. 
Most of the ages are around 20, but there are two masters whose 
ages are much greater than this. Extreme values such as these are 
called outliers.
What would the mean have been if the ancient 
masters weren’t part of the class? Compare this 
with the actual mean. What does this tell you 
about the effect of the outliers?
4
2
6
19
20
21
22
145
146
age
147
148
μ = 38
The ages over here are outliers. They’re 
extreme values that don’t really fit in 
with the bulk of the data.
The mean is 38, but nobody in 
the class is around that age. Is it 
really representative of the class?
0
0
Age of Kung Fu students
frequency
Most of the people in the 
class are around age 20.
Download at WoweBook.Com

58    Chapter 2
Can you see how the outliers have pulled the mean higher? This 
effect is caused by outliers in the data. When this happens, we say 
the data is skewed.
The Kung Fu class data is skewed to the right because if you line 
the data up in ascending order, the outliers are on the right.
Let’s take a closer look at this.
If you look at the data and chart of the Kung Fu class, it’s easy to 
see that most of the people in the class are around 20 years old. In 
fact, this would be the mean if the ancient masters weren’t in the 
class.
We can’t just ignore the ancient masters, though; they’re still part of 
the class. Unfortunately, the presence of people who are way above 
the “typical” age of the class distorts the mean, pulling it upwards.
Do you think the mean can ever be the highest value in a set of 
numbers? Under what circumstances?
Yes it can.  The mean is the highest value if all of the numbers in the data set are the same.
The  butler
outliers 
did it
introducing outliers
Skewed Data
When outliers “pull” the data 
to the left or right
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Outlier
An extreme high or low value 
that stands out from the 
rest of the data
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Age of Kung Fu students
μ = 38
Without the ancient 
masters, the mean would 
be around here.
If we include the ancient 
masters, the mean is 
skewed way over to the 
right.
4
2
6
19
20
21
22
145
146
age
147
148
0
0
frequency
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    59
measuring central tendency
Skewed Data Up Close
Skewed to the right
Data that is skewed to the right has a “tail” of 
high outliers that trail off to the right. If you 
look at a right-skewed chart, you can see this 
tail. The high outliers in the Kung Fu class data 
distort the mean, pulling it higher—that is, to 
the right.
Skewed to the left
Here’s a chart showing data that is skewed to the left. Can 
you see the tail of outliers on the left? This time the outliers 
are low, and they pull the mean over to the left. In this 
situation, the mean is lower than the majority of values.
Symmetric data
In an ideal world, you’d expect data to be symmetric. 
If the data is symmetric, the mean is in the middle. 
There are no outliers pulling the mean in either 
direction, and the data has about the same shape on 
either side of the center.
The data here is 
symmetrical. The mean is 
not influenced by outliers.
This data is skewed 
to the left. These 
low values are pulling 
the mean to the left.
Here’s the tail 
of outliers on 
the right.
Most values are 
around here, but 
the mean is higher.
Download at WoweBook.Com

60    Chapter 2
Watercooler conversation
Clive: They told me the average age for the class is about 38, so 
I thought I’d fit in alright. I had to sit down after 5 minutes before 
my legs gave out.
Bendy Girl: But I didn’t see anyone that age in the class, so 
there must have been some sort of mistake in their calculations. 
Why would they tell you that?
Clive: I don’t think their calculations were wrong; they just didn’t 
tell me what I really needed to know. I asked them what a typical 
sort of age is for the class, and they gave me the mean, 38.
Bendy Girl: And that’s not really typical, is it? I mean, just 
looking at the people in the class, I would’ve thought that a 
younger age would be a bit more representative.
Clive: If only they’d left the Ancient Masters out of their 
calculations, I would’ve known not to go to the class. That’s what 
did it; I’m sure of it. They distorted their whole calculation.
Bendy Girl: Well, if the Ancient Masters are such a big 
problem, why can’t they just ignore them? Maybe that way they 
could come up with a more typical age for the class...
Hey Clive!  I heard you joined the Kung Fu 
class. That’s really unexpected...
mean conversation
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    61
measuring central tendency
Finding the median
If the mean becomes misleading because of skewed data and outliers, 
then we need some other way of saying what a typical value is. We can 
do this by, quite literally, taking the middle value. This is a different 
sort of average, and it’s called the median.
To find the median of the Kung Fu class, line up all the ages in 
ascending order, and then pick the middle value, like this:
19	
19	
20	
20	
20	
21	
21	
100	
102
Here’s the number in the 
middle. This is the median, 20.
If you line all the ages up in ascending order, the value 20 is exactly 
halfway along. Therefore, the median of the Kung Fu class is 20.
What if there had been an even number of people in the class?
19	
20	
20	
20	
21	
21	
100	
102
If there’s an even number of 
people in the class, there will 
be no single middle number.
If you have an even set of numbers, just take the mean of the two 
middle numbers (add them together, and divide by 2), and that’s 
your median. In this case, the median is 20.5.
We’ve seen that if you have 9 numbers, the median is the number at position 
5. If you have 8 numbers, it’s the number at position 4.5 (halfway between 
the numbers at position 4 and 5). What about if you have n numbers?
The median 
is always in 
the middle.
It’s the 
middle value.
Download at WoweBook.Com

62    Chapter 2
How to find the median in three steps:
1.  Line your numbers up in order, from smallest to largest.
2.  If you have an odd number of values, the median is the one 
in the middle.  If you have n numbers, the middle number is 
at position (n + 1) / 2.
3.  If you have an even number of values, get the median by 
adding the two middle ones together and dividing by 2.  
You can find the midpoint by calculating (n + 1) / 2. The 
two middle numbers are on either side of this point.
Q: Is it still OK to use the mean with skewed data if I really 
want to?
A: You can, and people often do. However, in this situation the 
mean won’t give you the best representation of what a typical value 
is. You need the median.
Q: You say that, but surely the whole point of the mean is 
that it gives a typical value. It’s the average.
A: The big danger is that the mean will give a value that doesn’t 
exist in the data set. Take the Kung Fu class as an example. If you 
were to go into the class and pick a person at random, the chances 
are that person would be around 20 years old because most people 
in the class are that sort of age. Just going with the mean doesn’t 
give you that impression. Finding the median can give you a more 
accurate perspective on the data.  
 
But sometimes even the median will give a value that’s not in the 
data set, like our example on the previous page. That’s precisely why 
there’s more than one sort of average; sometimes you need to use 
different methods in order to accurately say what a typical value is.
Q: So is the median better than the mean?
A: Sometimes the median is more appropriate than the mean, 
but that doesn’t make it better. Most of the time you’ll need to use 
the mean because it usually offers significant advantages over the 
median. The mean is more stable when you are sampling data. We’ll 
come back to this later in the book.
Q: How do I use the mean or median with categorical data? 
What about examples like the data on page 9 of Chapter 1?
A: You can only find the mean and median of numerical data. 
Don’t worry, though, there’s another sort of average that deals with 
just this problem that we’ll explore later on.
Q: I always get right- and left-skewed data mixed up. How do 
I remember which is which?
A: Skewed data has a “tail” of outliers. To see which direction 
the data is skewed in, find the direction the tail is pointing in. For 
example, right-skewed data has a tail that points to the right.
calculating the median: step-by-step
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    63
measuring central tendency
Values
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
4
6
4
4
3
2
1
1
Values
1
4
6
8
9
10
11
12
Frequency
1
1
2
3
4
4
5
5
BE the data
Your job is to play like you’re the data, and 
say what the median is for each set, whether 
the data is skewed, and whether the mean 
is higher or lower than the median. 
Give reasons why.
BE the data
Download at WoweBook.Com

64    Chapter 2
Values
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
4
6
4
4
3
2
1
1
Values
1
4
6
8
9
10
11
12
Frequency
1
1
2
3
4
4
5
5
There are 25 numbers, and if you line them all up, the median is half way 
along, i.e., 13 numbers along. The median is 3. The data is skewed to the 
right, which pulls the mean higher. Therefore, the mean is higher than the 
median.
The median here is 10. The data is skewed to the left, so the mean is 
pulled to the left. Therefore, the mean is lower than the median.
If the data is skewed to the 
right, the mean is to the 
right of the median (higher).
If the data is skewed to 
the left, the mean is to the 
left of the median (lower).
BE the data Solution
Your job is to play like you’re the data, and 
say what the median is for each set, whether 
the data is skewed, and whether the mean 
is higher or lower than the median. 
Give reasons why.
be the data solution
Mean
Median
Median
Mean
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    65
measuring central tendency
Business is booming
Your work on averages is really paying off. More and more people are 
turning up for classes at the Health Club, and the staff is finding it 
much easier to find classes to suit the customers.
This teenager is after a swimming class where he can make new 
friends his own age.
The swimming 
class you have for 
teenagers sounds cool!  
Sign me up right now.
The swimming class has a mean age of 17, and 
coincidentally, that’s the median too. It sounds like this 
class will be perfect for him.
Let’s see what happens...
Swimming Class 
Median age: 17
Download at WoweBook.Com

66    Chapter 2
The Little Ducklings swimming class
The Little Ducklings class meets at the swimming pool twice a 
week. In this class, parents teach their very young children how to 
swim, and they all have lots of fun splashing about in the water.
Look who turned up for lessons...
Stop! Where’s 
your baby?
What the 
heck?
What do you think might have gone wrong this time?
when good medians go bad
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    67
measuring central tendency
Frequency Magnets
Here are the ages of people who go to the Little Ducklings class, but 
some of the frequencies have fallen off.  Your task is to put them in the 
right slot in the frequency table. Nine children and their parents go to 
the class, and the mean and median are both 17.  
3
4
4
Age
1
2
3
31
32
33
Frequency 3
2
2
When you’ve figured out the frequencies for the Little Ducklings 
class, sketch the histogram.  What do you notice?
Download at WoweBook.Com

68    Chapter 2
Age
1
2
3
31
32
33
Frequency 3
2
2
Frequency Magnets
Here are the ages of people who go to the Little Ducklings class, but 
some of the frequencies have fallen off.  Your task is to put them in the 
right slot in the frequency table. Nine children and their parents go to 
the class, and the mean and median are both 17.  
3
4
4
We’re told there are 9 children, 
so the frequencies of the 
children must add up to 9. There 
must be 4 children of age 2.
The mean is 17. If we substitute in a and b for the 
unknown frequencies, we get
1x3 + 2x4 + 3x2 + 31x2 + 32a + 33b = 17
	
	
18
3 + 8 + 6 + 62 + 32a + 33b = 17x18 = 306
32a + 33b = 306 - (3 + 8 + 6 + 62) = 306 - 79
32a + 33b = 227
As 32a + 33b is odd, this means that b must be 3, 
and a must be 4.
Multiply both 
sides by 18.
When you’ve figured out the frequencies for the Little Ducklings 
class, sketch the histogram.  What do you notice?
exercise solutions
Age of Little Duckling classmates
2
1
3
1
2
3
4
31
32
33
34
4
frequency
age
0
One group of 
data here
Another group 
of data here
The mean and 
median are here.
It doesn’t look like one set of data, but two: one for the parents and one for the children.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    69
measuring central tendency
What went wrong with the mean and median?
Let’s take a closer look at what’s going on.
Here are the ages of people who go to the Little Ducklings class.
1   1   1   2   2   2   2   3   3   31   31   32   32   32    32   33   33   33
There’s an even number of values, so the 
median is halfway between 3 and 31. Take 
the mean of these two numbers—(3 +31)/2—
and you get 17.
The mean and median for the class are both 17, even though there are 
no 17-year-olds in the class!
But what if there had been an odd number of people in the class. Both 
the mean and median would still have been misleading. Take a look:
1   1   1   2   2   2   2   2   3   3   31   31   32   32   32    32   33   33   33
If we add another 2-year-old 
to the class, the median becomes 
3. But what about the adults?
If another 33-year-old were added to the class instead, the median 
would be 31. But that fails to reflect all the kids in the class.
Whichever value we choose for the average age, it seems misleading.
What should we do for data like this?
1   1   1   2   2   2   2   2   3   31   31   31   32   32   32    32   33   33   33
If we add another 31-year-old 
to the class, the median instead 
becomes 31. This time, we ignore 
the kids!
If another two-year-old were to join the class, like we see above, the 
median would still be 3. This reflects the age of the children, but 
doesn’t take the adults into account.
Download at WoweBook.Com

70    Chapter 2
Here’s where you have to really think about how you can best 
give a representative age (or ages) for the Little Ducklings class. 
Here’s a reminder of the data:
Age
1
2
3
31
32
33
Frequency
3
4
2
2
4
3
1. Why do you think the mean and median both failed for this data? Why are they misleading?
2. If you had to pick one age to represent this class, what would it be? Why?
3. What if you could pick two ages instead? Which two ages would you pick, and why?
sharpen your pencil
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    71
measuring central tendency
Head First: Hey, Average, great to have you on the 
show...
Mean: Please, call me Mean.
Head First: Mean? But I thought you were 
Average. Did we mix up the guest list?
Mean: Not at all. You see, there’s more than one 
type of Average in Statsville, and I’m one of them, 
the Mean.
Head First: There’s more than one Average? That 
sounds kinda complicated.
Mean: Not really, not once you get used to it. You 
see, we all say what a typical value is for a set of 
numbers, but we have different opinions about how 
to say what that is.
Head First: So which one of you is the real 
Average? You know, the one where you add all the 
numbers together, and then divide by however many 
numbers there are?
Mean: That’s me, but please don’t call me the “real” 
Average; the other guys might get offended. The 
truth is that a lot of people new to Statsville see me 
as being Mr. Average. I have the same calculation 
that students see when they first encounter Averages 
in basic arithmetic. It’s just that in Statsville, I’m 
called Mean to differentiate between the other sorts 
of Average.
Head First: So do you have any other names?
Mean: Well, I do have a symbol, . All the rock stars 
have them. Well, some of them do. I do anyway. It’s 
Greek, so that makes me exotic.
Head First: So why are any of the other sorts of 
Average needed?
Mean: I hate to say it, but I have weaknesses. I lose 
my head a bit when I deal with data that has outliers. 
Without the outliers I’m fine, but then when I see 
outliers, I get kinda mesmerized and move towards 
them. It’s led to a few problems. I can sometimes 
end up well away from where most of the values are. 
That’s where Median comes in.
Head First: Median?
Mean: He’s so level-headed when it comes to 
outliers. No matter what you throw at him, he always 
stays right in the middle of the data. Of course, the 
downside of the Median is that you can’t calculate 
him as such; you can only work out what position he 
should be in. It makes him a bit less useful further 
down the line.
Head First: Do the two of you ever have the same 
value?
Mean: We do if the data’s symmetric; otherwise, 
there tends to be differences between us. As a general 
rule, if there are outliers, then I tend to wander 
towards them, while Median stays where he is.
Head First: We’re running out of time, so here’s 
one final question. Are there any situations where 
both you and Median have problems saying what a 
typical value is?
Mean: I’m afraid there is. Sometimes we need a 
little helping hand from another sort of Average. He 
doesn’t get out all that much, but he’s a useful guy to 
know. Stick around, and I’ll show you some of the 
things he’s up to.
Head First: Sounds great!
The Mean Exposed
This week’s interview:
The many types of average
The Mean Exposed
This week’s interview:
The many types of average
Download at WoweBook.Com

72    Chapter 2
Here’s where you have to really think about how you can best 
give a representative age (or ages) for the Little Ducklings class. 
Here’s a reminder of the data:
Age
1
2
3
31
32
33
Frequency
3
4
2
2
4
3
1. Why do you think the mean and median both failed for this data? Why are they misleading?
2. If you had to pick one age to represent this class, what would it be? Why?
3. What if you could pick two ages instead? Which two ages would you pick, and why?
Both the mean and median are misleading for this set of data because neither fully 
represents the typical ages of people in the class. The mean suggests that teenagers 
go to the class, when in fact there are none. The median also has this problem, but it 
can fluctuate wildly if other people join the class.
It’s not really possible to pick a single age that fully represents the ages in the class. 
The class is really made up of two sets of ages, those of the children and those of 
the parents. You can’t really represent both of these groups with a single number.
As it looks like there are two sets of data, it makes sense to pick two ages to 
represent the class, one for the children and one for the parents. We’d choose 2 
and 32, as these are the two age groups with the most people in them
sharpen your pencil solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    73
measuring central tendency
Age of Little Duckling classmates
Introducing the mode
In addition to the mean and median, there’s a third type of 
average called the mode. The mode of a set of data is the most 
popular value, the value with the highest frequency. Unlike the 
mean and median, the mode absolutely has to be a value in the 
data set, and it’s the most frequent value.
Sometimes data can have more than one mode. If there is 
more than one value with the highest frequency, then each 
one of these values is a mode. If the data looks as though it’s 
representing more than one trend or set of data, then we can 
give a mode for each set. If a set of data has two modes, then we 
call the data bimodal.
This is exactly the situation we have with the Little Ducklings 
class. There are really two sets of ages we’re looking at, one for 
parents and one for children, so there isn’t a single age that’s 
totally representative of the entire class. Instead, we can say 
what the mode is for each set of ages. In the Little Ducklings 
class, ages 2 and 32 have the highest frequency, so these ages are 
both modes. On a chart, the modes are the ones with the highest 
frequencies.
Age
1
2
3
31
32
33
Frequency
3
4
2
2
4
3
These two values are the most 
popular, so they are both modes.
Here are the modes; they 
have the highest frequencies.
It even works with categorical data
The mode doesn’t just work with numeric data; it works 
with categorical data, too. In fact, it’s the only sort of average 
that works with categorical data. When you’re dealing with 
categorical data, the mode is the most frequently occurring 
category.
You can also use it to specify the highest frequency group of 
values. The category or group with the highest frequency is 
called the modal class.
Swimming Class 
Median age: 17 
Mode ages: 2 and 32
This data is bimodal 
because there are 2 
modes.
2
1
3
2
3
4
31
32
frequency 
density
age
33
34
1
4
frequency
class
Number of sessions by class type
2
6
14
16
18
0
Number of Sessions
4
8
10
12
Little Ducklings
Kung Fu
Power 
Workout
Download at WoweBook.Com

74    Chapter 2
Find the mode for the following sets of data.
Three steps for finding the mode:
1.  Find all the distinct categories or values in your set of data.
2.  Write down the frequency of each value or category.
3.  Pick out the one(s) with the highest frequency to get the mode.
Values
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
4
6
4
4
3
2
1
1
When do you think the mode is most useful?  
When is the mode least useful?
Values
1
2
3
4
5
Frequency
2
3
3
3
3
Category
Blue
Red
Green
Pink
Yellow
Frequency
4
5
8
1
3
calculating the mode: step-by-step
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    75
measuring central tendency
Congratulations!
Your efforts at the Health Club are proving to be a huge success, 
and demand for classes is high.
My mean golf 
score is two under par. 
But don’t tell the ladies 
my median score is two 
over par.
I kick butt 
at soccer and 
statistics.
Three cheers for  
M-O-D-E! Most of the class 
is the same age as me! 
An experienced 
tennis coach like 
me earns a median 
salary of $33/hour.
I can run a 
mile in a mean of 25 
minutes, but that includes 
a stop at Starbuzz Coffee 
on the way. 
Median time spent 
underwater each day: 
24 minutes
I lose a mean of 7 teeth 
per hockey match.
Download at WoweBook.Com

76    Chapter 2
Find the mode for the following sets of data.
Values
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
4
6
4
4
3
2
1
1
When do you think the mode is most useful?  
Values
1
2
3
4
5
Frequency
2
3
3
3
3
Category
Blue
Red
Green
Pink
Yellow
Frequency
4
5
8
1
3
When is the mode least useful?
The mode here is 2, as it has the 
highest frequency.
This time the mode is Green.
This set of data has several modes: 2, 3, 4, and 5.
When the data set has a low number of modes, or when the 
data is categorical instead of numerical. Neither the mean nor 
the median can be used with categorical data.
When there are many modes
sharpen your pencil solution
Mode
The mode has to be in the data 
set.  It’s the only average that 
works with categorical data.
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    77
measuring central tendency
Complete the table below. For each type of average we’ve encountered in the chapter, write 
down how to calculate it, and then give the circumstances in which you should use each one. Try 
your hardest to fill this out without looking back through the chapter.
Average
How to calculate
When to use it
Mean (μ)
When the data is fairly symmetric 
and shows just the one trend.  
Median
Mode
Download at WoweBook.Com

78    Chapter 2
Complete the table below. For each type of average we’ve encountered in the chapter, write 
down how to calculate it, and then give the circumstances in which you should use each one. Try 
your hardest to fill this out without looking back through the chapter.
Average
How to calculate
When to use it
Mean (μ)
Use either
               x
              n
or
               fx
               f  
When the data is fairly symmetric 
and shows just the one trend. 
Median
Line up all the values in ascending order.
If there are an odd number of values, the 
median is the one in the middle.
If there are an even number of values, 
add the two middle ones together, and 
divide by two.
When the data is skewed because of 
outliers.
Mode
Choose the value(s) with the highest 
frequency.
If the data is showing two clusters of 
data, report a mode for each group.
When you’re working with categorical 
data.
When the data shows two or more 
clusters of data.
x is each value.
n is the number 
of values.
f is the 
frequency of 
each x.
The only type of average you can 
calculate for categorical data is 
the mode.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    79
measuring central tendency
The generous CEO of Starbuzz Coffee wants to give all his employees a 
pay raise.  He’s not sure whether to give everyone a straight $2,000 raise, 
or whether to increase salaries by 10%.  The mean salary is $50,000, the 
median is $20,000, and the mode is $10,000.
a)  What happens to the mean, median, and mode if everyone at Starbuzz is given a $2,000 pay raise?
b)  What happens to the mean, median, and mode if everyone at Starbuzz is given a 10% pay raise instead?
c)  Which sort of pay raise would you prefer if you were earning the mean wage?  What about if you were on 
the same wage as the mode?
Download at WoweBook.Com

80    Chapter 2
a)  What happens to the mean, median, and mode if everyone at Starbuzz is given a $2,000 pay raise?
b)  What happens to the mean, median, and mode if everyone at Starbuzz is given a 10% pay raise instead?
Mean: If x represents the original wages, and n the number of employees, 
	
μ =   (x + 2000)
	
	
  n
	
   =    x +    2000
	
       n	         n
	
   = 50,000 + 2000 n
	
	
	
  n
	
   = $52,000
This time, all of the wages are multiplied by 1.1 (which is 100% + 10%).
Mean:  μ =   (1.1x)
	
       n
	
 = 1.1   x
	
       n
	
 = 1.1 x 50,000 
	
 = $55,000
c)  Which sort of pay raise would you prefer if you were earning the mean wage?  What about if you 
were on the same wage as the mode?
If you earn the mean wage, you’ll get a larger pay increase if you get 
a 10% pay raise. If you earn the mode wage, you’ll get more money if 
you ask for the straight $2,000 pay increase.
Median: Every wage has $2,000 added to 
it, and this includes the middle value—the 
median. The new median is  
$20,000 + $2,000 = $22,000. 
Mode: The most common wage or mode is 
$10,000, and with the $2,000 pay raise, 
this becomes  
$10,000 + $2000 = $12,000.
There are n 
lots of 2000.
The original 
mean
Median: Every wage is multiplied by 1.1, and 
this includes the middle value—the median. 
The new median is  
$20,000 x 1.1 = $22,000. 
Mode: The most common wage or mode is 
$10,000, and if we multiply this by 1.1, it 
becomes  
$10,000 x 1.1 = $12,000.
The generous CEO of Starbuzz Coffee wants to give all his employees a 
pay rise.  He’s not sure whether to give everyone a straight $2,000 raise, 
or whether to increase salaries by 10%.  The mean salary is $50,000, the 
median is $20,000, and the mode is $10,000.
Adding $2,000 to 
everyone’s salary 
increases the mean, 
median, and mode by 
$2,000.
Increasing 
everyone’s salary 
by 10% increases 
the mean, median, 
and mode by 
10%.
sharpen your pencil solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    81
measuring central tendency
The Case of the Ambiguous Average: Solved
What’s going on with the average? Who do you think 
is right?
The workers, the managers, and the CEO are 
each using a different sort of average.
The workers are using the median, which 
minimizes the effect of the CEO’s salary. 
The managers are using the mean. The large 
salary of the CEO is skewing the data to the right, 
which is making the mean artificially high. 
The CEO is using the mode. Most workers are paid $500 per week, 
and so this is the mode of the salaries.
So who’s right? In a sense, they all are, although it has to be said 
that each group of people are using the average that best supports 
what they want. Remember, statistics can be informative, but 
they can also be misleading. For balance, we think that the most 
appropriate average to use in this situation is the median because 
of the outliers in the data.
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    83
measuring variability and spread
3
Power Ranges
Not everything’s reliable, but how can you tell? 
Averages do a great job of giving you a typical value in your data set, but they 
don’t tell you the full story. OK, so you know where the center of your data 
is, but often the mean, median, and mode alone aren’t enough information 
to go on when you’re summarizing a data set. In this chapter, we’ll show you 
how to take your data skills to the next level as we begin to analyze ranges 
and variation.
Don’t worry about the dinner, 
Mother. When you have an oven 
with a lower standard deviation, 
you’ll never burn anything again.
Download at WoweBook.Com

84    Chapter 3
Wanted: one player
The Statsville All Stars are the hottest basketball team in the 
neighborhood, and they’re the favorite to win this year’s league. 
There’s only one problem—due to a freak accident, they’re a 
player down. They need a new team member, and fast.
The new recruit must be good all-round, but what the coach 
really needs is a reliable shooter. If he can trust the player’s 
ability to get the ball in the basket, they’re on the team.
The coach has been conducting trials all week, and he’s down 
to three players. The question is, which one should he choose?
All three players have 
the same average score 
for shooting, but I need some 
way of choosing between them. 
Think you can help?
The Statsville 
All Stars coach
All three players had 
the same average 
score in the trials, 
so how should the 
coach decide which 
to pick?
introducing the statsville all stars
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    85
measuring variability and spread
What information in addition to the average 
would help the coach make his decision?
Points scored per game
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Frequency
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
Here are the scores of the three players:
Each player has a mean, median, and mode score of 10 points, but if you look at 
their scores, you’ll see they’ve all achieved it in different ways. There’s a difference in 
how consistently the players have performed, which the average can’t measure.
What we need is a way of differentiating between the three sets of scores so that we 
can pick the most suitable player for the team. We need some way of comparing the 
sets of data in addition to the average—but what?
Points scored per game
7
9
10
11
13
Frequency
1
2
4
2
1
Here, frequency tells us the number of games 
where the player got each score. This player 
scored 9 points in 2 games, and 12 points in 
1 game.
Points scored per game
3
6
7
10
11
13
30
Frequency
2
1
2
3
1
1
1
We need to compare player scores
Download at WoweBook.Com

86    Chapter 3
Use the range to differentiate between 
data sets
So far we’ve looked at calculating averages for sets of data, but quite 
often, the average only gives part of the picture. Averages give us a way of 
determining where the center of a set of data is, but they don’t tell us how 
the data varies. Each player has the same average score, but there are clear 
differences between each data set. We need some other way of measuring 
these differences.
We can differentiate between each set of data by looking at the way in which 
the scores spread out from the average. Each player’s scores are distributed 
differently, and if we can measure how the scores are dispersed, the coach 
will be able to make a more informed decision.
Lower 
bound
Upper 
bound
Range
To calculate the range, we subtract the lower bound from the upper 
bound. Looking at the data, the smallest value is 7, which means that 
this is the lower bound. Similarly, the upper bound is the largest value, 
or 13. Subtracting the lower bound from the upper bound gives us:
	
Range = upper bound - lower bound
	
           = 13 - 7
	
           = 6
so the range of this set of data is 6.
The range is a simple and easy way of measuring how spread out 
values are, and it gives us another way of comparing sets of data.
7   8   9   9   10   10   11   12   13
We can measure the 
center of the data by 
looking at averages.
The mean tells us nothing 
about how spread out the 
data is, so we need some 
other measure to tell us this.
Measuring the range
We can easily do this by calculating the range. The range tells us over 
how many numbers the data extends, a bit like measuring its width. To 
find the range, we take the largest number in the data set, and then 
subtract the smallest. 
The smallest value is called the lower bound, and the largest value is 
the upper bound.
Let’s take a look at the set of scores for one of the players and see how 
this works. Here are the scores:
frequency
score
Basketball player scores
range measures data width
Range
The range is a way of 
measuring how spread out a 
set of values are. It’s given by
  Upper bound - Lower bound
where the upper bound is the 
highest value, and the lower 
bound the lowest.
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    87
measuring variability and spread
Work out the mean, lower bound, upper bound, and range for the following sets of data, and 
sketch the charts. Are values dispersed in the same way? Does the range help us describe 
these differences?
Score
8
9
10
11
12
Frequency
1
2
3
2
1
Score
8
9
10
11
12
Frequency
1
0
8
0
1
Download at WoweBook.Com

88    Chapter 3
Work out the mean, lower bound, upper bound, and range for the following sets of basketball 
scores, and sketch the charts. Are values dispersed in the same way? Does the range help us 
describe these differences?
Score
8
9
10
11
12
Frequency
1
2
3
2
1
Score
8
9
10
11
12
Frequency
1
0
8
0
1
μ = 10
Lower bound = 8
Upper bound = 12
Range = 12 - 8
        = 4
μ = 10
Lower bound = 8
Upper bound = 12
Range = 12 - 8
        = 4
The range only describes the width of the data, 
not how it’s dispersed between the bounds.
Both sets of data above have the same range, but the second 
set has outliers—extreme high and low values. It looks like the 
range can measure how far the values are spread out, but it’s 
difficult to get a real picture of how the data is distributed.
Remember outliers? 
There are two here.
Both data sets above have the same 
range, but the values are distributed 
differently. I wonder if the range really gives 
us the full story about measuring spread?
Look, these results are the same 
even though the data’s different.
4
2
8
6
7.5
8.5
9.5
10.5
11.5
12.5
2
1
3
7.5
8.5
9.5
10.5
11.5
12.5
frequency
frequency
score
score
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    89
measuring variability and spread
The problem with outliers
The range is a simple way of saying what the spread of a set of 
data is, but it’s often not the best way of measuring how the data 
is distributed within that range. If your data has outliers, using 
the range to describe how your values are dispersed can be very 
misleading because of its sensitivity to outliers. Let’s see how.
Imagine you have a set of numbers as follows:
1  1  1  2  2  2  2  3  3  3  3  3  4  4  4  4  5  5  5
Here, numbers are fairly evenly distributed between the lower 
bound and upper bound, and there are no outliers for us to worry 
about. The range of this set of numbers is 4.
But what happens if we introduce an outlier, like the number 10?
Here’s the data on a vertical line 
chart (a type of bar chart that 
uses lines instead of bars). Each 
line represents the frequency of 
each number in the data set.
1  1  1  2  2  2  2  3  3  3  3  3  4  4  4  4  5  5  5  10
Here’s the outlier 
on the chart.
Our lower bound is the same, but the upper bound has gone up to 
10, giving us a new range of 9. The range has increased by 5 just 
because we added one extra number, an outlier.
Without the outlier, the two sets of data would be identical, so why 
should there be such a big difference in how we describe how the 
values are distributed? 
Lower bound 
of 1
Upper bound 
of 5
The lower bound 
is still 1.
But the upper bound 
has increased to 10.
Can you think of a way in which we can construct 
a range that’s less sensitive to outliers?
1
2
3
4
5
2
1
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
2
1
3
4
5
10
Download at WoweBook.Com

90    Chapter 3
So is it a bad idea to 
use the range then?
The range is a great quick-and-dirty way to get an idea 
of how values are distributed, but it’s a bit limited.
The range tells you how far apart your highest and lowest values are, but 
that’s about it. It only provides a very basic idea of how the values are 
distributed.
The primary problem with the range is that it only describes the width of 
your data. Because the range is calculated using the most extreme values 
of the data, it’s impossible to tell what that data actually looks like—and 
whether it contains outliers. There are many different ways of constructing 
the same range, and sometimes this additional information is important.
Mainly because it’s so simple.
The range is so simple that it’s easily understood by lots 
of people, even those who have had very little exposure 
to statistics. If you talk about a range of ages, for 
example, people will easily understand what you mean.
Be careful, though, because there’s danger in its pure 
simplicity. As the range doesn’t give the full picture of 
what’s going on between the highest and lowest values, 
it’s easy for it to be used to give a misleading impression 
of the underlying data.
If the range is 
so limited, why do 
people use it?
range: uses and limitations
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    91
measuring variability and spread
Wait a sec, do you mean 
we pretend the outliers 
don’t exist? That doesn’t 
sound very scientific.
We need to get away from outliers
The main problem with the range is that, by definition, it includes outliers. If 
data has outliers, the range will include them, even though there may be only 
one or two extreme values. What we need is a way of negating the impact of 
these outliers so that we can best describe how values are dispersed.
One way out of this problem is to look at a kind of mini range, one that 
ignores the outliers. Instead of measuring the range of the whole set of data, 
we can find the range of part of it, the part that doesn’t contain outliers.
Ignore the 
outliers here.
Take the range 
of these values.
We need a consistent way of doing this.
One of the problems with ignoring outliers on an ad hoc basis is 
that it’s difficult to compare sets of data. How do we know that 
all sets of data are omitting outliers in exactly the same way? 
We need to make sure that we use the same mini range definition 
for all the sets of data we’re comparing. But how?
frequency
score
Download at WoweBook.Com

92    Chapter 3
1  1  1  2  2          2  2  3  3  3           3  3  4  4  4         4  5  5  5  10
This is the same data 
as before, but this time 
it’s split into quarters.
We can then construct a range using the values that fall between the two outer splits:
The values that split the data into equal chunks are known as quartiles, 
as they split the data into quarters. Finding quartiles is a bit like finding 
the median. Instead of finding the value that splits the data in half, we’re 
finding the values that split the data into quarters. 
The lowest quartile is known as the lower quartile, or first quartile 
(Q1), and the highest quartile is known as the upper quartile, or third 
quartile (Q3). The quartile in the middle (Q2) is the median, as it splits 
the data in half. The range of the values in these two quartiles is called the 
interquartile range (IQR).
Taking the range between these values 
gives us a brand new “mini” range.
Interquartile range =  
Upper quartile – Lower quartile
The interquartile range gives us a standard, 
repeatable way of measuring how values are 
dispersed. It’s another way in which we can 
compare different sets of data. But what about 
outliers? Does the interquartile range help us 
deal with these too? Let’s take a look.
Quartiles come to the rescue
One way of constructing a mini range is to just use values around the center of 
the data. We can construct a range in this way by first lining up the values in 
ascending order, and then splitting the data into four equally sized chunks, with 
each chunk containing one quarter of the data.
1  1  1  2  2          2  2  3  3  3          3  3  4  4  4         4  5  5  5  10
	
       Some textbooks 
refer to 
quartiles as the 
set of values 
within each 
quarter of the data.
We’re not. We’re using the term 
quartile to specifically refer to 
the values that split the data 
into quarters.
Q1                     Q2                   Q3
quartiles and the interquartile range
Quartiles
Quartiles are values that split your data into 
quarters. The lowest quartile is called the 
lower quartile, and the highest quartile is 
called the upper quartile.
The middle quartile is the median.
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    93
measuring variability and spread
The interquartile range excludes outliers
The good thing about the interquartile range is that it’s a lot less 
sensitive to outliers than the range is.
The upper and lower quartiles are positioned so that the lower quartile 
has 25% of the data below it, and the upper quartile has 25% of the 
data above it. This means that the interquartile range only uses the 
central 50% of the data, so outliers are disregarded. As we’ve said 
before, outliers are extreme high or low values in the data, so by only 
considering values around the center of the data, we automatically 
exclude any outliers. 
Here’s our data again. Can you see how the interquartile range 
effectively ignores any outliers?
As the interquartile range only uses the central 50% of the data, 
outliers are excluded irrespective of whether they are extremely high or 
extremely low. They can’t be in the middle. This means that any outliers 
in the data are effectively cut out.
...but excludes the two outer 
quarters where any outliers live.
The interquartile range includes 
the middle part of the data...
Outliers are always extreme high 
or low values, and the interquartile 
range cuts these out. 
Excluding the outliers with the interquartile range means 
that we now have a way of comparing different sets of data 
without our results being distorted by outliers. Before we can 
figure out the interquartile range, though, we have to work 
out what the quartiles are. Flip the page, and we’ll show you 
how it’s done.
1  1  1  2  2          2  2  3  3  3          3  3  4  4  4          4  5  5  5  10
25% of the 
data in the 
set
25% of the 
data in the 
set
Q1                      Q2                   Q3
Interquartile Range
A “mini range” that’s less sensitive to 
outliers. You find it by calculating
Upper quartile - Lower quartile
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

94    Chapter 3
Median
Upper 
bound
Lower 
bound
Lower 
quartile
Upper 
quartile
Quartile anatomy
Finding the quartiles of a set of data is a very similar process to finding the median. 
If you line all of your values up in ascending order, the median is the value right in 
the very center. If you have n numbers, it’s the number that’s at position (n + 1) ÷ 2, 
and if this falls halfway between two numbers, you take their average.
If we then further split the data into quarters, the quartiles are the values at each of 
these splits. The lowest is the lower quartile, and the highest is the upper quartile:
Finding the position of the quartiles is slightly trickier than finding the position of the 
median, as we need to make sure the values we choose keep the data split into the 
right proportions. There is a way of doing it though; let’s start with the lower quartile.
Finding the position of the lower quartile
Finding the position of the upper quartile
Q1                Q2               Q3
a closer look at quartiles
First, start off by calculating n ÷ 4. 
1
If n ÷ 4 is not an integer, then round it up. This gives you the position of 
the lower quartile. 
3
If this gives you an integer, then the lower quartile is positioned halfway 
between this position and the next one. Take the average of the 
numbers at these two positions to get your lower quartile.
2
As an example, if you have 6 numbers, start off by calculating 6 ÷ 4, which 
gives you 1.5. Rounding this number up gives you 2, which means that the lower 
quartile is at position 2.
Start off by calculating 3n ÷ 4.
1
If it’s an integer, then the upper quartile is positioned halfway between 
this position and the next. Add the two numbers at these positions 
together and divide by 2.
2
If 3n ÷ 4 is not an integer, then round it up. This new number gives you 
the position of the upper quartile. 
3
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    95
measuring variability and spread
It’s time to put your quartile skills into practice. Here are the scores for one of the players:
Points scored per game
3
6
7
10
11
13
30
Frequency
2
1
2
3
1
1
1
1. What’s the range of this set of data?
2. What are the lower and upper quartiles?
3. What’s the interquartile range?
Download at WoweBook.Com

96    Chapter 3
Here are the scores for one of the players:
Points scored per game
3
6
7
10
11
13
30
Frequency
2
1
2
3
1
1
1
1. What’s the range of this set of data?
2. What are the lower and upper quartiles?
3. What’s the interquartile range?
The lower bound of this set of data is 3, as that’s the lowest number of points scored. The upper 
bound is 30, as that’s the highest. This gives us
	
Range = upper bound - lower bound
	
        = 30 - 3
	
        = 27
3    3    6    7    7    10    10    10    11    13    30
Let’s start with the lower quartile. There are 11 numbers, and calculating 11 ÷ 4 gives us 2.75. 
Rounding this number up gives us the position of the lower quartile, so the lower quartile is at position 
3. This means that the lower quartile is 6.
Now let’s find the upper quartile. 3 x 11 ÷ 4 gives us 8.25, and rounding this up gives us 9 - the 
upper quartile is at position 9. This means that the upper quartile is 11.
Lower quartile
Upper quartile
Median
The interquartile range is the lower bound subtracted from the upper bound.
Interquartile range = upper bound - lower bound
	
	
  = 11 - 6
	
	
  = 5
This is MUCH lower than the 
range, as it excludes outliers.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    97
measuring variability and spread
Q: I get why mean, median, and mode are useful, but why 
do I need to know how the data is spread out?
A: Averages offer you only a one-dimensional view of your 
data. They tell you what the center of your data is, but that’s it. 
While this can be useful, it’s often not enough. You need some 
other way of summarizing your data in addition to the average.
Q: So is the median the same as the interquartile range?
A: No. The median is the middle value of the data, and the 
interquartile range is the range of the middle 50% of the values.
Q: What’s the point of all this quartiles stuff? It seems like 
a really tedious way to calculate ranges.
A: The problem with using the range to measure how your 
data is dispersed is that it’s very sensitive to outliers. It gives you 
the difference between the lower and upper bounds of your data, 
but just one outlier can make a huge difference to the result. 
 
We can get around this by focusing only on the central 50% of the 
data, as this excludes outliers. This means finding quartiles, and 
using the interquartile range. So even though finding quartiles 
is trickier than finding the lower and upper bounds, there are 
definite advantages.
Q: Should I always use the interquartile range to measure 
the spread of data?
A: In a lot of cases, the interquartile range is more meaningful 
than the range, but it all depends on what information you 
really need. There are other ways of measuring how values are 
dispersed that you might want to consider too; we’ll come to 
these later.
Q: Would I ever want to look at just one quartile of my 
data instead of the range or the interquartile range?
A: It’s possible. For example, you might be interested in what 
the high values look like, so you’d just look at what values are in 
the upper quarter of your data set, using the upper quartile as a 
cut-off point.
Q: Would I ever want to break my data into smaller pieces 
than quarters? How about breaking my data into, say, 10 
pieces instead of 4?
A: Yes, there are times when you might want to do this. Turn 
the page, and we’ll show you more...
The upper and lower bounds of the data are 
the highest and lowest values in the data set.
The range is a simple way of measuring how 
values are dispersed. It’s given by: 
 
range = upper bound - lower bound
The range is very sensitive to outliers.
The interquartile range is less sensitive to 
outliers than the range.




Quartiles are values that split your data 
into quarters. The highest quartile is called 
the upper quartile, and the lowest quartile is 
called the lower quartile. The middle quartile 
is the median.
The interquartile range is the range of 
the central 50% of the data. It’s given by 
calculating 
 
   upper quartile - lower quartile


Download at WoweBook.Com

98    Chapter 3
We’re not just limited to quartiles
So far we’ve looked at how the range and interquartile range give us 
ways of measuring how values are dispersed in a set of data. The range 
is the difference between the highest number and the lowest, while the 
interquartile range focuses on the middle 50% of the data.
So are they the only 
sorts of ranges I can use? 
Do I get any other options?
There are other sorts of ranges we can use in 
addition to the range and interquartile range.
Our original problem with the range was that it’s extremely sensitive to 
outliers. To get around this, we divided the data into quarters, and we 
used the interquartile range to provide us with a cut-down range of the 
data.
While the interquartile range is quite common, it’s not the only way of 
constructing a mini range. Instead of splitting the data into quarters, 
we could have split it into some other sort of percentage and used that 
for our range instead.
As an example, suppose we’d divided our set of data into tenths instead 
of quarters so that each segment contains 10% of the data. We’d have 
something like this:
This is the same set of data, but it’s 
now split into 10 equally sized chunks. 
Each chunk contains 10% of the data.
If you break up a set of data into percentages, the values that split the 
data are called percentiles. In the case above, our data is split into 
tenths, so the values are called deciles.
We can use percentiles to construct a new range called the 
interpercentile range. 
We can use these divisions to create a brand new mini range.
1  1       1  2      2  2      2  3      3  3      3  3     4  4       4  4      5  5      5  10
splitting data into percentiles
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    99
measuring variability and spread
So what are percentiles?
Percentiles are values that split your data into percentages in the same way that quartiles split data 
into quarters. Each percentile is referred to by the percentage with which it splits the data, so the 10th 
percentile is the value that is 10% of the way through the data. In general, the xth percentile is the 
value that is k% of the way through the data. It’s usually denoted by Pk.
k%
Pk
Pk is the value k% of the 
way through your data.
Percentile uses
Even though the interpercentile range isn’t that commonly used, the 
percentiles themselves are useful for benchmarking and determining 
rank or position. They enable you to determine how high a particular 
value is relative to all the others. As an example, suppose you heard you 
scored 50 on your statistics test. With just that number by itself, you’d 
have no idea how well you’d done relative to anyone else. But if you 
were told that the 90th percentile for the exam was 50, you’d know that 
you scored the same as or better than 90% of the other people.
50
P90
If you scored 50 and knew 
that P90 = 50, you’d have 
beaten or matched the score 
of 90% of other people.
Finding percentiles 
You can find percentiles in a similar way to how you find quartiles.
Quartiles are actually a type of percentile. The lower quartile is P25, 
and the upper quartile is P75. The median is P50.
frequency
score
Statistics test scores
First of all, line all your values up in ascending order.
1
To find the position of the kth percentile out of n numbers, 
start off by calculating	
       .
2
If this gives you an integer, then your percentile is halfway 
between the value at position	
    and the next number 
along. Take the average of the numbers at these two positions 
to give you your percentile.
3
If  	
    is not an integer, then round it up. This then gives 
you the position of the percentile. 
As an example, if you have 125 numbers and want to find the 10th 
percentile, start off by calculating 10 × 125 ÷ 100. This gives you a 
value of 12.5. Rounding this number up gives you 13, which means 
that the 10th percentile is the number at position 13.
4
Percentile
The kth percentile is the 
value that’s k% of the way 
through your data. It’s 
denoted by
	
     Pk
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
k
n
100)
(
k
n
100)
(
k
n
100)
(
Download at WoweBook.Com

100    Chapter 3
We’ve talked a lot about different sorts of ranges, and it would be 
useful to be able to compare the ranges of different sets of data in a 
visual way. There’s a chart that specializes in showing different types 
of ranges: the box and whisker diagram, or box plot.
A box and whisker diagram shows the range, interquartile range, and 
median of a set of data. More that one set of data can be represented 
on the same chart, which means it’s a great way of comparing data 
sets. 
To create a box and whisker diagram, first you draw a box against a 
scale with the left and right sides of the box representing the lower 
and upper quartiles, respectively. Then, draw a line inside the box to 
mark the value of the median. This box shows you the extent of the 
interquartile range. After that, you draw “whiskers” to either side of 
your box to show the lower and upper bounds and the extent of the 
range. Here’s a box and whisker diagram for the scores of our player 
from page 95:
Lower bound
Upper 
bound
Median
Lower 
quartile
Upper quartile
Interquartile range
Range
If your data has outliers, the range will be wider. On a box 
and whisker diagram, the length of the whiskers increases in 
line with the upper and lower bounds. You can get an idea of 
how data is skewed by looking at the whiskers on the box and 
whisker diagram. 
If the box and whisker diagram is symmetric, this means that 
the underlying data is likely to be fairly symmetric, too.
So box and whisker 
diagrams are really just 
a neat way of showing 
ranges and quartiles.
3  3  6  7  7  10  10  10  11  13  30
Here’s a reminder of 
the data.
Score
Player
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
Box and whisker plots let you visualize ranges
Basketball player scores
box and whisker plots
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    101
measuring variability and spread
Here are box and whisker diagrams for two more basketball players. Compare the ranges of 
their scores. If you had to choose between having player A or player B on the team, which would 
you pick? Why?
Player A
Player B
Score
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Basketball Player A and B scores
Q: I’m sure I’ve seen box and whisker diagrams that look a 
bit different than this.
A: There are actually several versions of box and whisker 
diagrams. Some have deliberately shorter whiskers and explicitly 
show outliers as dots or stars extending beyond the whiskers. This 
makes it easier to see how many outliers there are and how extreme 
they really are. Other diagrams show the mean as a dot, so you can 
see where it’s positioned in relation to the median. If you’re taking a 
statistics course, it would be a good idea to check which version of 
the box and whisker diagram is likely to be used.
Q: So if you show the mean as a dot, is it to the left or right 
of the median?
A: If the data is skewed to the right, then the mean will be to the 
right of the median, and the whisker on the right will be longer than 
that of the left. If the data is skewed to the left, the mean will be to 
the left of the median, and the whisker on the left will be the longest.
Download at WoweBook.Com

102    Chapter 3
Player A
Player B
Here are box and whisker diagrams for each basketball player. Compare the ranges of their 
scores. If you had to choose between having player A or player B on the team, which would you 
pick? Why?
Player A has a relatively small range, and his median score is a bit higher 
than Player B’s.
Player B has a very large range. Sometimes this player scores a lot 
higher than Player A, but sometimes a lot lower.
Player A plays more consistently and usually scores higher than Player B 
(compare the medians and interquartile range), so we’d pick Player A.
Percentiles split your data into percentages. 
They’re useful for benchmarking.
The kth percentile is k% of the way through 
your data. It’s denoted by Pk.
An interpercentile range is like the 
interquartile range but, this time, between two 
percentiles.



Box and whisker diagrams, or box plots, are 
a useful way of showing ranges and quartiles 
on a chart. A box shows where the quartiles 
and interquartile range are, and the whiskers 
give the upper and lower bounds. More than 
one set of data can be shown on the same 
chart, so they’re useful for comparisons.

Score
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Basketball Player A and B scores
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    103
measuring variability and spread
The coach doesn’t just need to compare the range of the 
players’ scores; he needs some way of more accurately 
measuring where most of the values lie to help him 
determine which player he can truly rely on come game day. 
In other words, he needs to find the player whose scores vary 
the least.
The problem with the range and interquartile range is that 
they only tell you the difference between high and low values. 
What they don’t tell you is how often the players get these high 
or low scores versus scores closer to the center—and that’s 
important to the coach.
The coach needs a team of players he can rely on. The last 
thing he wants is an erratic player who will play well one 
week and score badly the next. 
What can we do to help the coach make his decision?
How can we more accurately measure variability?
The interquartile range looks useful, but 
what about players who sometimes get really 
low scores? If a player messes up on game day, 
it could cost us the league! I’m not sure that the 
range or the interquartile range tell me which 
player is really the most consistent.
Download at WoweBook.Com

104    Chapter 3
Variability is more than just spread
We don’t just want to measure the spread of each set of scores; 
we want some way of using this to see how reliable the player is. 
In other words, we want to be able to measure the variability of 
the players’ scores.
One way of achieving this is to look at how far away each value 
is from the mean. If we can work out some sort of average 
distance from the mean for the values, we have a way of 
measuring variation and spread. The smaller the result, the closer 
values are to the mean. Let’s take a look at this.
The values here are spread out quite a long way from 
the mean. If the coach picks this player for the team, 
he’s unlikely to be able to predict how the player will 
perform on game day. The player may achieve a 
very high score if he’s having a good day. On a bad 
day, however, he may not score highly at all, and that 
means he’ll potentially lose the game for the team.
The values for this second set of data are much closer 
to the mean and vary less. If the coach picks this 
player, he’ll have a good idea of how well the player 
is likely to perform in each game.
Let’s find out.
So does that mean we 
just calculate the average 
distance from the mean?
exploring variability
μ
μ
frequency
score
frequency
score
Player 1’s basketball scores
Player 2’s basketball scores
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    105
measuring variability and spread
Calculating average distances
Imagine you have three numbers: 1, 2, and 9. The mean 
is 4. What happens if we find the average distance of 
values from the mean?
Average distance  = (1 to μ) + (2 to μ) + (9 to μ)
	
	
	
          3
	
	
= 3 + 2 + (-5)
	
	
            3
	
	
= 0
These distances cancel 
each other out.
The average distance of values from the mean is always 
0. The positive and negative distances cancel each other 
out. So what can we do now?
Q: Why do we have -5 in that 
equation? I would have thought the 
distance would be 5. Why is it negative?
A: The distance from 9 to μ is negative 
because μ is less than 9. 1 and 2 are both 
less than μ, so the distance is positive for 
both of them. That’s why the distances 
cancel each other out.
Q: Can’t we just take the positive 
distances and average those?
A: That sounds intuitive, but in practice, 
statisticians rarely do this. There’s another 
way of making sure that the distances don’t 
cancel out, and you’ll see that very soon. 
This other way of determining how close 
typical values are to the mean is used a lot 
in statistics, and you’ll see it through most of 
the rest of the book.
Q: Surely the distances don’t cancel 
out for all values. Maybe we were just 
unlucky.
A: No matter what values you choose, the 
distances to the mean will always cancel out. 
 
Here’s a challenge for you: take a group of 
numbers, work out the mean, work out the 
distance of each value from the mean, and 
then add the distances together. The result 
will be 0 every time.
Q: Can’t I use the interquartile range 
to see how reliable the scores are?
A: The interquartile range only uses part 
of the data for measuring spread. If a player 
has one bad score, this will be excluded 
by the interquartile range. In order to truly 
determine reliability and consistency, we 
need to consider all the scores.
Q: The range uses all the scores. Why 
can’t we use that then?
A: The range is only really good for 
describing the difference between the 
highest and lowest number. As you saw 
earlier, this doesn’t represent how the values 
are actually distributed. We need another 
measure to do this.
1
μ = 4
9
2
distance = 2
distance = 3
distance = -5
The positive and 
negative distances 
from the mean 
cancel each other 
out.
Download at WoweBook.Com

106    Chapter 3
We need a way of making all the 
numbers positive. Maybe it’ll work if 
we square the distances first. Then 
each number is bound to be positive.
Let’s try this with the same three numbers.
Average (distance)2 = (1 to μ)2  + (2 to μ)2 + (9 to μ)2
	
	
	
             3
	
	
  = 32 + 22 + (-5)2
	
	
	
 3
	
	
  = 9 + 4 + 25
	
	
             3
	
	
  = 12.67 (to 2 decimal places)
This time we get a meaningful number, as the distances don’t 
cancel each other out. Every number we add together has to 
be non-negative because we’re squaring the distance from the 
mean. Adding these numbers together gives us a non-negative 
result—every time. 
This method of measuring spread is called the variance, and 
it’s a very common way of describing the spread of a set of data. 
Here’s a general form of the equation:
The variance is 
the average of 
the distances from 
the mean squared.
We want a way to measure the average distance of values from 
the mean in a way that stops the distances from cancelling each 
other out.
Remember that μ = 4.
This time we’re 
adding together three 
positive numbers.
We can calculate variation with the variance…
variance and standard deviation measure variability
(x - )
2
n
Variance = 
Variance
The variance is a way of 
measuring spread, and it’s the 
average of the distance of 
values from the mean squared.
	
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
(x - )
2
	
	
  n
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    107
measuring variability and spread
But why should I have to think about 
distances squared? I hardly call that 
intuitive. Isn’t there another way?
Statisticians use the variance a lot as a means of measuring the 
spread of data. It’s useful because it uses every value to come up 
with the result, and it can be thought of as the average of the 
distances from the mean squared.
Standard deviation know-how
We’ve seen that the standard deviation is a way of saying how far 
typical values are from the mean. The smaller the standard deviation, 
the closer values are to the mean. The smallest value the standard 
deviation can take is 0.
Like the mean, the standard deviation has a special symbol, σ. This is 
the Greek character lowercase Sigma. (We saw uppercase Sigma, S, in 
Chapter 2 to represent summation.) 
To find σ, start off by calculating the variance, and then 
take the square root.
…but standard deviation is a more intuitive measure
σ2 = variance
What we really want is a number that gives the spread 
in terms of the distance from the mean, not distance 
squared.
The problem with the variance is that it can be quite difficult to think about 
spread in terms of distances squared. 
There’s an easy way to correct this. All we need to do is take the square root 
of the variance. We call this the standard deviation.
Let’s work out the standard deviation for the set of numbers we had before. 
The variance is 12.67, which means that
	
Standard deviation = √12.67
	
	
	
   = 3.56 (to 2 decimal places)
In other words, typical values are a distance of 3.56 away from the mean.
σ = √variance
σ
I’m the standard 
deviation. If you need to 
measure distances from 
the mean, give me a call.
Download at WoweBook.Com

108    Chapter 3
Head First: Hey, Standard Deviation, great to see 
you.
Standard Deviation: It’s a real pleasure, Head 
First.
Head First: To start off, I was wondering if you 
could tell me a bit more about yourself and what you 
do.
Standard Deviation: I’m really all about measuring 
the spread of data. Mean does a great job of telling 
you what’s going on at the center, but quite often, 
that’s not enough. Sometimes Mean needs support to 
give a more complete picture. That’s where I come in. 
Mean gives the average value, and I say how values 
vary.
Head First: Without meaning to be rude, why 
should I care about how values vary? Is it really all 
that important? Surely it’s enough to know just the 
average of a set of values.
Standard Deviation: Let me give you an example. 
How would you feel if you ordered a meal from the 
local diner, and when it arrived, you saw that half of it 
was burnt and the other half raw?
Head First: I’d probably feel unhappy, hungry, and 
ready to sue the diner. Why?
Standard Deviation: Well, according to Mean, 
your meal would have been cooked at the perfect 
temperature. Clearly, that’s not the full picture; what 
you really need to know is the variation. That’s where 
I come in. I look at what Mean thinks is a typical 
value, and I say how you can expect values to vary 
from that number.
Head First: I think I get it. Mean gives the average, 
and you indicate spread. How do you do that, though?
Standard Deviation: That’s easy. I just say how 
far values are from the mean, on average. Suppose 
the standard deviation of a set of values is 3 cm. You 
can think of that as saying values are, on average, 3 
cm away from the mean. There’s a bit more to it than 
that, but if you think along those lines, you’re on the 
right track.
Head First: Speaking of numbers, Standard 
Deviation, is it better if you’re large or small?
Standard Deviance: Well, that really all depends 
what you’re using me for. If you’re manufacturing 
machine parts, you want me to be small, so you can 
be sure all the pieces are about the same. If you’re 
looking at wages in a large company, I’ll naturally be 
quite large.
Head First: I see. Tell me, do you have anything to 
do with Variance?
Standard Deviation: It’s funny you should ask that. 
Variance is just an alter ego of mine. Square me, and I 
turn into Variance. Take the square root of Variance, 
and there I am again. We’re a bit like Clark Kent and 
Superman, but without the cape.
Head First: Just one more question. Do you ever feel 
overshadowed by Mean? After all, he gets a lot more 
attention than you.
Standard Deviation: Of course not. We’re great 
friends, and we support each other. Besides, that 
would make me sound negative. I’m never negative. 
Head First: Standard Deviation, thank you for your 
time.
Standard Deviation: It’s been a pleasure.
Standard Deviation Exposed
This week’s interview:
Getting the measure of Standard Deviation
interview with standard deviation
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    109
measuring variability and spread
It’s time for you to flex those standard deviation muscles. Calculate the mean and standard 
deviation for the following sets of numbers.
1   2   3   4   5   6   7
1   2   3   4   5   6
Download at WoweBook.Com

110    Chapter 3
Variance = (1-3.5)2 + (2-3.5)2 + (3-3.5)2 + (4-3.5)2 + (5-3.5)2 + (6-3.5)2 
	
	
	
     6
	
= 2.52 + 1.52 + 0.52 + (-0.5)2 + (-1.5)2 + (-2.5)2 
	
	
	
     6
	
= 6.25 + 2.25 + 0.25 + 0.25 + 2.25 + 6.25
	
	
           6
	
= 17.5
	
    6
	
= 2.92 (to 2 decimal places)	
	
=  2.92
	
	
	
	
	
	
= 1.71 (to 2 d.p.)
It’s time for you to flex those standard deviation muscles. Calculate the mean and standard 
deviation for the following sets of numbers.
1   2   3   4   5   6   7
Let’s start off by calculating the mean.
μ = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7
	
	
7
   = 28
       7
   = 4
1   2   3   4   5   6
μ = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6
	
         6
   = 21
       6
   = 3.5
The standard deviation calculation 
can quickly become complicated.
To find the standard deviation, you first have to 
calculate variance, finding  (x - μ)2 for every value of x. 
But there is a much simpler formula for variance 
that produces the same result.The equation’s on 
the opposite page, but first you’ll need to rescue the 
derivation from the pool.
exercise solution
Those calculations were tricky. 
Isn’t there an easier way?
σ
Variance = (1-4)2 + (2-4)2 + (3-4)2 + (4-4)2 + (5-4)2 + (6-4)2 + (7-4)2
	
                                 7
	
= 32 + 22 + 12 + 02 + (-1)2 + (-2)2 + (-3)2
	
	
	
     7
	
= 9 + 4 + 1 + 0 + 1 + 4 + 9
	
	
         7
	
= 28
	
    7
	
= 4	
	
=   4  = 2
σ
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    111
measuring variability and spread
Pool Puzzle
There’s an easier calculation for calculating the 
variance, but what is it? Your job is to take 
equation snippets from the pool, and 
place them into the blank lines in the 
derivation. Each snippet will be used 
only once, but you won’t need to use 
every one. Your goal is to get to the 
equation at the end.
Note: each snippet 
from the pool can only 
be used once!
- 2μx
+ 2μx
Σμ2
 μ
See if you can 
get from here...
to here.
 μ
Σμ
Psst - here’s a hint. 
Remember that Σx = μ.
n
Σ(x - μ)2
      n
=
Σ(x - μ) (x - μ)
           n
=
Σ(x2                    + μ2)
                 n
=
Σx2 - μ2
  n
=
   n
-
2μ Σx
    n
+
Σx2
  n
=
   nμ2
    n 
- 2μ  
+
Σx2
  n
Σx
  n
Download at WoweBook.Com

112    Chapter 3
You didn’t need 
these snippets.
+ 2μx
 μ
Σμ
Σ(x - μ)2
      n
=
Σ(x - μ) (x - μ)
           n
=
Σ(x2                    + μ2)
                 n
=
Σx2 - μ2
  n
=
   n
-
2μ Σx
    n
+
Σx2
  n
Σμ2
=
   nμ2
    n 
- 2μ  
+
 μ
There are n 
of these.
The n’s here cancel 
each other out.
Pool Puzzle Solution
There’s an easier calculation for calculating the 
variance, but what is it? Your job is to take 
equation snippets from the pool, and 
place them into the blank lines in the 
derivation. Each snippet will be used 
only once, but you won’t need to use 
every one. Your goal is to get to the 
equation at the end.
pool puzzle solution
Σx
  n
Σx2
  n
- 2μx  
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    113
measuring variability and spread
A quicker calculation for variance
As you’ve seen, the standard deviation is a good way of measuring 
spread, but the necessary variance calculation quickly becomes 
complicated. The difficulty lies in having to calculate (x - μ)2 for 
every value of x. The more values you’re dealing with, the easier it 
is to make a mistake—particularly if μ is a long decimal number.
Here’s a quicker way to calculate the variance:
The advantage of this method is that you don’t have to calculate 
(x - μ)2. Which means that, in practice, it’s less tricky to deal with, 
and there’s less of a chance you’ll make mistake.
Q: So which form of the variance 
equation should I use?
A: If you’re performing calculations, it’s 
generally easier to use the second form, 
which is: 
 
	
 
 
This is particularly important if you have a 
mean with lots of decimals.
Q: How do I work out the standard 
deviation with this form of the variance 
equation?
A: Exactly the same way as before. Taking 
the square root of the variance gives you the 
standard deviation. 
 
 
 
Q: What if I’m told what the standard 
deviation is, can I find the variance?
A: Yes, you can. The standard deviation 
is the square root of the variance, which 
means that the variance is the square of the 
standard deviation. To find the variance from 
the standard deviation, square the value of 
the standard deviation.
Q: I find the standard deviation really 
confusing. What is it again?
A: The standard deviation is a way of 
measuring spread. It describes how far typical 
values are from the mean. 
 
If the standard deviation is high, this means 
that values are typically a long way from the 
mean. If the standard deviation is low, values 
tend to be close to the mean. 
 
 
 
Q: Can the standard deviation ever be 0?
A: Yes, it can. The standard deviation is 
0 if all of the values are the same. In other 
words, if each value is a distance of 0 away 
from the mean, the standard deviation will 
be 0.
Q: What units is standard deviation 
measured in?
A: It’s measured in the same units as 
your data. If your measurements are in 
centimeters, and the standard deviation 
is 1, this means that values are typically 1 
centimeter away from the mean.
Q: I’m sure I’ve seen formulas for 
variance where you divide by (n - 1) 
instead of n. Is that wrong?
A: It’s not wrong, but that form of the 
variance is really used when you’re dealing 
with samples. We’ll show you more about this 
when we talk about sampling later in the book.
Variance = 
x
2
 - 
2
n
 x
2 - 
2
n
Variance
Here’s the quicker way of 
calculating the variance
	
	
    
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
x
2 - 
2
	  
n
Download at WoweBook.Com

114    Chapter 3
Score
7
9
10
11
13
Frequency
1
2
4
2
1
Player 1
BE the coach
Here are the scores for the 
three players. The mean for 
each of them is 10. Your job 
is to play like you’re the 
coach, and work out the 
standard deviation for each 
player. Which player is the 
most reliable one for your team?
Score
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Frequency
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
Player 3
Player 2
Score
3
6
7
10
11
13
30
Frequency
2
1
2
3
1
1
1
be the coach
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    115
measuring variability and spread
The generous CEO of Starbuzz Coffee wants to give all his employees a pay raise. He’s not sure 
whether to give everyone a straight $2,000 raise or increase salaries by 10%.
a)  What happens to the standard deviation if everyone at Starbuzz is given a $2,000 pay raise?
b)  What happens to the standard deviation if everyone at Starbuzz is given a 10% pay raise instead?
Download at WoweBook.Com

116    Chapter 3
Score
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Frequency
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
Player 3
Player 2
Variance =   72 + 2(92) + 4(102) + 2(112) + 132
	
	
	
      10
	
=   49 + 162 + 400 + 242 + 169
	
	
	
   10 
	
=  2.2
Standard Deviation =  2.2 = 1.48
Player 1 and Player 2 both have small standard deviations, so the values are 
clustered around the mean. But Player 3 has a standard deviation of 7.02, 
meaning scores are typically 7.02 points away from the mean. So Player 1 is the 
most reliable, and Player 3 is the least.
BE the coach Solution
Here are the scores for the 
three players. The mean for 
each of them is 10. Your job 
is to play like you’re the 
coach, and work out the 
standard deviation for each 
player. Which player is the 
most reliable one for your team? 
Score
3
6
7
10
11
13
30
Frequency
2
1
2
3
1
1
1
Score
7
9
10
11
13
Frequency
1
2
4
2
1
Player 1
be the coach solution
-100
-100
Variance =   72 + 82 + 2(92) + 2(102) + 2(112) + 122 + 132
	
	
	
      10
	
=   49 + 64 + 162 + 200 + 242 + 144 + 169
	
	
	
   10 
	
=  3
Standard Deviation =  3 = 1.73
-100
-100
Variance =   2(32) + 62 + 2(72) + 3(102) + 112 + 132 + 302
	
	
	
      11
	
=   18 + 36 + 98 + 300 + 121 + 169 + 900
	
	
	
   11 
	
=  49.27
Standard Deviation =  49.27 = 7.02
-100
-100
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    117
measuring variability and spread
The generous CEO of Starbuzz Coffee wants to give all his employees a pay raise. He’s not sure 
whether to give everyone a straight $2,000 raise or increase salaries by 10%. 
a)  What happens to the standard deviation if everyone at Starbuzz is given a $2,000 pay raise?
b)  What happens to the standard deviation if everyone at Starbuzz is given a 10% pay raise instead?
The standard deviation is multiplied by 110%, or 1.1. The figures are stretched, 
so the standard deviation increases.
standard deviation =     ((1.1x) - (1.1μ))
2
	
	
	
      
	
	
  =     1.1
2 (x - μ)
2
	
	
	
    
	
	
  = 1.1      (x - μ)
2
	
	
	
     
	
	
  = 1.1 times original standard deviation
n
n
n
The standard deviation stays exactly the same. The figures are, in effect, picked up 
and moved sideways, so the standard deviation doesn’t change.
standard deviation =     ((x + 2000) - (μ + 2000))
2
	
	
	
	
	
	
  =     (x + 2000 - μ -2000) 
2
	
	
	
	
	
	
  =     (x - μ)
2
	
	
	
	
	
  = original standard deviation
n
n
n
Download at WoweBook.Com

118    Chapter 3
That’s easy—Player 1 
does best. Player 1 scores 75% 
of the time, and Player 2 only 
scores 55% of the time.
What if we need a baseline for comparison?
We’ve seen how the standard deviation can be used to measure how variable a 
set of values are, and we’ve used it to pick out the most reliable player for the 
Statsville All Stars. The standard deviation has other uses, too.
Imagine a situation in which you have two basketball players of different ability. 
The first player gets the ball into the net an average of 70% of the time, and he 
has a standard deviation of 20%. The second player has a mean of 40% and a 
standard deviation of 10%.
In a particular practice session, Player 1 gets the ball into the net 75% of the 
time, and Player 2 makes a basket 55% of the time. Which player does best 
against their personal track record?
Just looking at the percentages doesn’t give  
the full picture.
75% sounds like a high percentage, but we’re not taking into account the 
mean and standard deviation of each player. Each player has scored more 
than their personal mean, but which has fared better against their personal 
track record? How can we compare the two players?
The two players have different 
means and standard deviations, 
so how can we compare their 
personal performance?
Does this sort of situation sound impossible? Don’t worry, we can achieve 
this with the standard score, or z-score.
Player 1
Player 2
μ = 70
μ = 40
σ = 20
σ = 10
55
75
Percentage
Percentage
standard scores
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    119
measuring variability and spread
Standard scores give you a way of comparing values across different sets of data 
where the mean and standard deviation differ. They’re a way of comparing 
related data values in different circumstances. As an example, you can use 
standard scores to compare each player’s performance relative to his personal 
track record—a bit like a personal trainer would.
You find the standard score of a particular value using the mean and standard 
deviation of the entire data set. The standard score is normally denoted by the 
letter z, and to find the standard score of a particular value x, you use the formula:
Calculating standard scores
Let’s start by calculating z1, the standard score of Player 1.
	
z1 = 75 - 70
	
           20
	
    = 5
	
       20
	
    = 0.25
So using the mean and standard deviation to standardize the score, 
Player 1 gets 0.25. What about the score for Player 2?
	
z2 = 55 - 40
	
           10
	
    = 15
	
        10
	
    = 1.5
This gives us a standard score of 1.5 for Player 2, compared with a 
standard score of 0.25 for Player 1. But what does this actually mean?
These are the mean and 
standard deviation of the 
set of data containing the 
value x.
Let’s calculate the standard scores for each player, and see what those 
scores tell us.
Use standard scores to compare values across data sets
x -    
z =
Download at WoweBook.Com

120    Chapter 3
Interpreting standard scores
Standard scores give us a way of comparing values across different data sets even when the 
sets of data have different means and standard deviations. They’re a way of comparing 
values as if they came from the same set of data or distribution.
So what does this mean for our basketball players?
Each player’s shooting success rate has a different mean and standard deviation, which 
makes it difficult to compare how the players are performing relative to their own track 
record. We can see that in a particular practice, one player got the ball in the net more 
times than the other. We also notice that both players are scoring at a higher rate than their 
average. The difficulty lies in comparing performances relative to the personal track record 
of each player.
The standard score makes such comparisons possible by transforming each set of data into 
a more generic distribution. We can find the standard score of each player at the practice 
session, and then transform and compare them.
So what does this tell us about the players?
The standard score for Player 1 is 0.25, while the standard 
score for Player 2 is 1.5. In other words, when we 
standardize the scores, the score for Player 2 is higher. 
This means that even though Player 1 is generally a better 
shooter and put balls into the net at a higher rate than 
Player 2, Player 2 performed better relative to his own track 
record. Player 2 performed better…for him.
interpreting standard scores
Player 1
Player 2
Z
μ = 70
μ = 40
σ = 20
σ = 10
55
75
It’s difficult to 
compare these two 
data sets directly.
But we can 
compare them with 
z-scores.
z1 = 0.25
z2 = 1.5
Super-generic data 
distribution Z
These are the 
standard scores 
for the two 
players.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    121
measuring variability and spread
Standard Scores Up Close
Standard scores work by transforming sets of data into a new, theoretical distribution 
with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. It’s a generic distribution that can 
be used for comparisons. Standard scores effectively transform your data so that it 
fits this model while making sure it keeps the same basic shape.
Standard scores can take any value, and they indicate position relative to the mean. 
Positive z-scores mean that your value is above the mean, and negative z-scores 
mean that your value is below it. If your z-score is 0, then your value is the mean 
itself. The size of the number shows how far away the value is from the mean.
Standard deviations from the mean
Sometimes statisticians express the relative position of a particular value in terms 
of standard deviations from the mean. As an example, a statistician may 
say that a particular value is within 1 standard deviation of the mean. It’s really 
just another way of indicating how close values are to the mean, but what does it 
mean in practice?
We’ve seen that using z-scores transforms your data set into a generic distribution 
with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. If a value is within 1 standard 
deviation of the mean, this tells us that the standard score of the value is between 
-1 and 1. Similarly, if a value is within 2 standard deviations of the mean, the 
standard score of the value would be somewhere between -2 and 2.
Standard 
score = number 
of standard 
deviations from 
the mean.
μ
σ
μ = 0
σ = 1
-1      0      1
If a value is within 1 standard 
deviation of the mean, it’s 
within this area here—the 
central part of the data.
μ
Download at WoweBook.Com

122    Chapter 3
The variance and standard deviation measure 
how values are dispersed by looking at how far 
values are from the mean.
The variance is calculated using 
 
	
 
An alternate form is 
 
	



The standard deviation is equal to the square root 
of the variance, and the variance is the standard 
deviation squared.
Standard scores, or z-scores, are a way of 
comparing values across different sets of data 
where the means and standard deviations are 
different. To find the standard score of a value x, 
use:


 x
2 
- 
2
n
Q: So variance and standard deviation both measure the 
spread of your data. How are they different from the range?
A: The range is quite a simplistic measure of the spread of your 
data. It tells you the difference between the highest and lowest 
values, but that’s it. You have no way of knowing how the data is 
clustered within it. 
 
The variance and standard deviation are a much better way 
of measuring the variability of your data and how your data is 
dispersed, as they take into account how the data is clustered. 
They look at how far values typically are from the center of 
your data.
Q: And what’s the difference between variance and 
standard deviation? Which one should I use?
A: The standard deviation is the square root of the variance, 
which means you can find one from the other. 
 
The standard deviation is probably the most intuitive, as it tells you 
roughly how far your values are, on average, from the mean.
Q: How do standard scores fit into all this?
A: Standard scores use the mean and standard deviation to 
convert values in a data set to a more generic distribution, while at 
the same time, making sure your data keeps the same basic shape.  
 
They’re a way of comparing different values across different data 
sets even when the data sets have different means and standard 
deviations. They’re a way of measuring relative standing.
Q: Do standard scores have anything to do with detecting 
outliers?
A: Good question! Determining outliers can be subjective, but 
sometimes outliers are defined as being more than 3 standard 
deviations of the mean. Statisticians have different opinions about 
this though, so be warned.
no dumb questions
 (x
 - )
2
n
x
 - 
z =
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    123
measuring variability and spread
Complete the table below. Name each type of measure of dispersion we’ve encountered 
in the chapter, and show how to calculate it. Try your hardest to fill this out without 
looking back through the chapter.
Statistic
How to calculate
Range 
 
Upper quartile - Lower quartile
Standard Deviation (σ)
Standard Score
Download at WoweBook.Com

124    Chapter 3
Complete the table below. Name each type of measure of dispersion we’ve encountered 
in the chapter, and show how to calculate it. Try your hardest to fill this out without 
looking back through the chapter.
Statistic
How to calculate
Range
Upper bound - Lower bound
Interquartile range 
Upper quartile - Lower quartile
Standard Deviation (σ)
             (x - μ)2
              
Standard Score
z = x - μ
        
Both of these give 
the same result.
exercise solution
x2  -  μ2
n
n
σ
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    125
measuring variability and spread
Let’s hear it for the 
standard deviation, 
our new team mascot!
Statsville All Stars win the league!
All the basketball matches for the season have now been played, 
and the Statsville All Stars finished at the top of the league. You 
clearly helped the coach pick the best player for the team.
Just remember: you owe it all to the friendly neighborhood 
standard deviation.
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    127
calculating probabilities
4
Taking Chances
Life is full of uncertainty. 
Sometimes it can be impossible to say what will happen from one minute to the 
next. But certain events are more likely to occur than others, and that’s where 
probability theory comes into play. Probability lets you predict the future by 
assessing how likely outcomes are, and knowing what could happen helps you 
make informed decisions. In this chapter, you’ll find out more about probability 
and learn how to take control of the future!
What’s the probability he’s 
remembered I’m allergic to 
non-precious metals?
Download at WoweBook.Com

128    Chapter 4
Are you ready to play?
Fat Dan’s Grand Slam
Fat Dan’s Casino is the most popular casino in the 
district. All sorts of games are offered, from roulette 
to slot machines, poker to blackjack.
It just so happens that today is your lucky day. Head 
First Labs has given you a whole rack of chips to 
squander at Fat Dan’s, and you get to keep any 
winnings. Want to give it a try? Go on—you know 
you want to.
These are all your poker 
chips; looks like you’re in 
for a fun time.
There’s a lot of activity over at the roulette wheel, 
and another game is just about to start. Let’s see 
how lucky you are.
One of Fat Dan’s croupiers
welcome to fat dan’s casino
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    129
calculating probabilities
Roll up for roulette!
You’ve probably seen people playing roulette in movies even 
if you’ve never tried playing yourself. The croupier spins a 
roulette wheel, then spins a ball in the opposite direction, and 
you place bets on where you think the ball will land.
The roulette wheel used in Fat Dan’s Casino has 38 pockets 
that the ball can fall into. The main pockets are numbered 
from 1 to 36, and each pocket is colored either red or black. 
There are two extra pockets numbered 0 and 00. These 
pockets are both green. 
You can place all sorts of bets with roulette. For instance, 
you can bet on a particular number, whether that number 
is odd or even, or the color of the pocket. You’ll hear more 
about other bets when you start playing. One other thing to 
remember: if the ball lands on a green pocket, you lose.
Roulette boards make it easier to keep track of which 
numbers and colors go together.
Lightest gray = green 
black = black, 
medium gray = red,
Roulette wheel
Roulette board. (See 
page 130 for a larger 
version.)
You place bets on the 
pocket the ball will 
fall into on the wheel 
using the board.
If the ball falls 
into the 0 or 00 
pocket, you lose!
Download at WoweBook.Com

130    Chapter 4
Your very own roulette board
You’ll be placing a lot of roulette bets in this chapter. 
Here’s a handy roulette board for you to cut out and 
keep. You can use it to help work out the probabilities in 
this chapter.
roulette board
Just be careful with those scissors.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    131
calculating probabilities
Place your bets now!
Have you cut out your roulette board? The game is 
just beginning. Where do you think the ball will land? 
Choose a number on your roulette board, and then 
we’ll place a bet.
Right, before placing any bets, it makes 
sense to see how likely it is that you’ll win. 
Maybe some bets are more likely than others. It sounds 
like we need to look at some probabilities...
What things do you need to think about 
before placing any roulette bets? Given 
the choice, what sort of bet would you 
make? Why?
Hold it right there! 
You want me to just make 
random guesses? I stand 
no chance of winning if I 
just do that.
Download at WoweBook.Com

132    Chapter 4
Impossible
Equal chance of 
happening or not
Certain
What are the chances?
Have you ever been in a situation where you’ve wondered “Now, 
what were the chances of that happening?” Perhaps a friend has 
phoned you at the exact moment you’ve been thinking about them, 
or maybe you’ve won some sort of raffle or lottery. 
Probability is a way of measuring the chance of something 
happening. You can use it to indicate how likely an occurrence is 
(the probability that you’ll go to sleep some time this week), or how 
unlikely (the probability that a coyote will try to hit you with an 
anvil while you’re walking through the desert). In stats-speak, an 
event is any occurrence that has a probability attached to it—in 
other words, an event is any outcome where you can say how likely 
it is to occur.
Probability is measured on a scale of 0 to 1. If an event is 
impossible, it has a probability of 0. If it’s an absolute certainty, 
then the probability is 1. A lot of the time, you’ll be dealing with 
probabilities somewhere in between.
Here are some examples on a probability scale.
A freak coyote anvil 
attack is quite unlikely; 
let’s put it here.
Falling asleep at some 
point during a 168-
hour period is almost 
certain.
Throwing a coin and 
it landing heads up 
happens in about half 
of all tosses.
Can you see how probability 
relates to roulette?
If you know how likely the ball is to land on a 
particular number or color, you have some way 
of judging whether or not you should place a 
particular bet. It’s useful knowledge if you want 
to win at roulette.
0
0.5
1
finding probability
Event
An outcome or occurrence that 
has a probability assigned to it
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    133
calculating probabilities
Let’s try working out a probability for roulette, the probability of 
the ball landing on 7. We’ll guide you every step of the way.
1. Look at your roulette board. How many pockets are there for the ball to land in?
2. How many pockets are there for the number 7?
3. To work out the probability of getting a 7, take your answer to question 2 and divide it by your 
answer to question 1. What do you get?
4. Mark the probability on the scale below. How would you describe how likely it is that you’ll get a 7?
0
0.5
1
Download at WoweBook.Com

134    Chapter 4
You had to work out a probability for roulette, the probability of 
the ball landing on 7. Here’s how you calculate the solution, step 
by step.
1. Look at your roulette board. How many pockets are there for the ball to land in?
2. How many pockets are there for the number 7?
3. To work out the probability of getting a 7, take your answer to question 2 and divide it by your 
answer to question 1. What do you get?
4. Mark the probability on the scale below? How would you describe how likely it is that you’ll get a 7?
There are 38 pockets.
Just 1
Probability of getting 7 = 1
	
	
	
38
	
	
        = 0.026
The probability of getting a 7 is 0.026, so it 
falls around here. It’s not impossible, but not 
very likely.
Don’t forget that the ball can land in 
0 or 00 as well as the 36 numbers.
0
0.5
1
sharpen solution
Our answer to 3 decimal places
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    135
calculating probabilities
Find roulette probabilities
Let’s take a closer look at how we calculated that probability.
Here are all the possible outcomes from spinning the roulette 
wheel. The thing we’re really interested in is winning the 
bet—that is, the ball landing on a 7.
There’s just one event 
we’re really interested 
in: the probability of 
the ball landing on a 7.
These are all possible 
outcomes, as the ball 
could land in any of 
these pockets.
To find the probability of winning, we take the number of 
ways of winning the bet and divide by the number of possible 
outcomes like this:
	
Probability = 	 number of ways of winning
	
	
       	
number of possible outcomes
We can write this in a more general way, too. For the 
probability of any event A:
There’s one way of getting a 
7, and there are 38 pockets.
P(A) = n(A)
           n(S)
Number of ways of 
getting an event A
The number of 
possible outcomes
S is known as the possibility space, or sample space. It’s 
a shorthand way of referring to all of the possible outcomes. 
Possible events are all subsets of S.
Probability of event 
A occurring
Download at WoweBook.Com

136    Chapter 4
S
A
S
A
AI
Probabilities can quickly get complicated, so it’s often 
very useful to have some way of visualizing them. 
One way of doing so is to draw a box representing 
the possibility space S, and then draw circles for each 
relevant event. This sort of diagram is known as a Venn 
diagram. Here’s a Venn diagram for our roulette 
problem, where A is the event of getting a 7.
1
37
Here’s the event for 
getting a 7. It has a 
1 in it, as there’s one 
way of getting a 7.
There’s a 37 here, as 
there are 37 other 
possible events: the 
pockets that aren’t 
part of event A.
Very often, the numbers themselves aren’t shown on the 
Venn diagram. Instead of numbers, you have the option 
of using the actual probabilities of each event in the 
diagram. It all depends on what kind of information you 
need to help you solve the problem.
Complementary events
There’s a shorthand way of indicating the event 
that A does not occur—AI. AI is known as the 
complementary event of A.
There’s a clever way of calculating P(AI). AI  covers every 
possibility that’s not in event A, so between them, A and 
AI must cover every eventuality. If something’s in A, it 
can’t be in AI, and if something’s not in A, it must be in 
AI. This means that if you add P(A) and P(AI) together, 
you get 1. In other words, there’s a 100% chance that 
something will be in either A or AI. This gives us 
	
P(A) + P(AI) = 1
or
P(AI) = 1 - P(A)
In A
Not in A
Probability 1
probabilities and venn diagrams
You can visualize probabilities with a Venn diagram
The actual size of the circle isn’t important 
and doesn’t indicate the relative probability 
of an event occurring. The key thing is what 
it includes and excludes.
In this diagram, A’ is used 
instead of 37 to indicate 
all the possible events 
that aren’t in A
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    137
calculating probabilities
P(9)
P(Black)
P(Green)
P(38)
BE the croupier
Your job is to imagine you’re 
the croupier and work out the 
probabilities of various events. 
For each event below, write down 
the probability of a successful 
outcome.
Download at WoweBook.Com

138    Chapter 4
P(9)
P(Black)
P(Green)
P(38)
BE the croupier Solution
Your job was to imagine you’re 
the croupier and work out the 
probabilities of various events. 
For each event you should have 
written down the probability of 
a successful outcome.
2 of the pockets are green, and there are 
38 pockets total, so:
Probability = 2
	
      38
	
   = 0.053 (to 3 decimal places)
The probability of getting a 9 is exactly the same 
as getting a 7, as there’s an equal chance of the 
ball falling into each pocket.
Probability = 1
	
     38
	
   = 0.026 (to 3 decimal places)
18 of the pockets are black, and there are 38 
pockets, so:
Probability = 18
	
      38
	
   = 0.474 (to 3 decimal places)
This event is actually impossible—there 
is no pocket labeled 38. Therefore, the 
probability is 0.
The most likely event out of all these is 
that the ball will land in a black pocket.
be the roulette wheel solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    139
calculating probabilities
Bet:
      Black
Let’s see what 
happens.
Q: Why do I need to know about 
probability? I thought I was learning 
about statistics.
A: There’s quite a close relationship 
between probability and statistics. A lot 
of statistics has its origins in probability 
theory, so knowing probability will take your 
statistics skills to the next level. Probability 
theory can help you make predictions about 
your data and see patterns. It can help you 
make sense of apparent randomness. You’ll 
see more about this later.
Q: Are probabilities written as 
fractions, decimals, or percentages? 
A: They can be written as any of these. 
As long as the probability is expressed in 
some form as a value between 0 and 1, it 
doesn’t really matter.
Q: I’ve seen Venn diagrams before in 
set theory. Is there a connection?
A: There certainly is. In set theory, the 
possibility space is equivalent to the set of 
all possible outcomes, and a possible event 
forms a subset of this. You don’t have to 
already know any set theory to use Venn 
diagrams to calculate probability, though, as 
we’ll cover everything you need to know in 
this chapter. 
Q: Do I always have to draw a Venn 
diagram? I noticed you didn’t in that last 
exercise.
A: No, you don’t have to. But sometimes 
they can be a useful tool for visualizing 
what’s going on with probabilities. You’ll see 
more situations where this helps you later on.
Q: Can anything be in both events A 
and AI?
A: No. AI means everything that isn’t in 
A. If an element is in A, then it can’t possibly 
be in AI. Similarly, if an element is in AI, then 
it can’t be in A. The two events are mutually 
exclusive, so no elements are shared 
between them.
It’s time to play!
A game of roulette is just about to begin.
Look at the events on the previous page. 
We’ll place a bet on the one that’s most 
likely to occur—that the ball will land in a 
black pocket.
Download at WoweBook.Com

140    Chapter 4
And the winning number is...
Oh dear! Even though our most likely probability was 
that the ball would land in a black pocket, it actually 
landed in the green 0 pocket. You lose some of your 
chips. 
There must be a fix! The probability 
of getting a black is far higher than 
getting a green or 0. What went wrong? I 
want to win!
Probabilities are only indications of how likely 
events are; they’re not guarantees.
The important thing to remember is that a probability indicates 
a long-term trend only. If you were to play roulette thousands 
of times, you would expect the ball to land in a black pocket 
in 18/38 spins, approximately 47% of the time, and a green 
pocket in 2/38 spins, or 5% of the time. Even though you’d 
expect the ball to land in a green pocket relatively infrequently, 
that doesn’t mean it can’t happen.
No matter how 
unlikely an event is, if 
it’s not impossible, it 
can still happen.
The ball landed in 
the 0 pocket, so 
you lost some chips.
probabilities aren’t guarantees
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    141
calculating probabilities
That’s a lot of pockets to 
count. We’ve already worked out 
P(Black) and P(Green). Maybe we 
can use one of these instead.
We can use the probabilities we already 
know to work out the one we don’t know.
Take a look at your roulette board. There are only three 
colors for the ball to land on: red, black, or green. As we’ve 
already worked out what P(Green) is, we can use this value to 
find our probability without having to count all those black 
and red pockets.
	
P(Black or Red) = P(GreenI)
	
	
            = 1 - P(Green)
	
	
            = 1 - 0.053
	
	
            = 0.947 (to 3 decimal places)
Don’t just take our word for it. Calculate the probability of getting 
a black or a red by counting how many pockets are black or red 
and dividing by the number of pockets.
Let’s look at the probability of an event that should be more 
likely to happen. Instead of betting that the ball will land in 
a black pocket, let’s bet that the ball will land in a black or a 
red pocket. To work out the probability, all we have to do is 
count how many pockets are red or black, then divide by the 
number of pockets. Sound easy enough?
Let’s bet on an even more likely event
Bet:
Red or Black
Download at WoweBook.Com

142    Chapter 4
S
Black
Red
Don’t just take our word for it. Calculate the probability of getting 
a black or a red by counting how many pockets are black or red 
and dividing by the number of pockets.
P(Black or Red) = 36
	
	
  38
	
          = 0.947 (to 3 decimal places)
So P(Black or Red) = 1- P(Green)
You can also add probabilities
There’s yet another way of working out this sort of 
probability. If we know P(Black) and P(Red), we can find 
the probability of getting a black or red by adding these two 
probabilities together. Let’s see.
A pocket can’t be both 
black and red; they’re 
separate events.
18
2
P(Black or Red) = 18 + 18
	
	
     38
	
            = 18 + 18
	
	
 38     38
	
            = P(Black) + P(Red)
In this case, adding the probabilities gives exactly 
the same result as counting all the red or black 
pockets and dividing by 38.
Adding the probabilities gives 
the same result as adding 
the number of black or red 
pockets and dividing by 38.
18
S is the possibility 
space, the box 
containing all the 
possibilities
Two of the pockets are 
neither red nor black, so 
we’ve put 2 out here.
adding probabilities
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    143
calculating probabilities
Q: It looks like there are three ways of dealing with this sort 
of probability. Which way is best?
A: It all depends on your particular situation and what information 
you are given. 
 
Suppose the only information you had about the roulette wheel was 
the probability of getting a green. In this situation, you’d have to 
calculate the probability by working out the probability of not getting 
a green: 
	
	
1 - P(Green) 
 
On the other hand, if you knew P(Black) and P(Red) but didn’t know 
how many different colors there were, you’d have to calculate the 
probability by adding together P(Black) and P(Red).
Q: So I don’t have to work out probabilities by counting 
everything?
A: Often you won’t have to, but it all depends on your situation. It 
can still be useful to double-check your results, though.
Q: If some events are so unlikely to happen, why do people 
bet on them?
A: A lot depends on the sort of return that is being offered. In 
general, the less likely the event is to occur, the higher the payoff 
when it happens. If you win a bet on an event that has a high 
probability, you’re unlikely to win much money. People are tempted to 
make bets where the return is high, even though the chances of them 
winning is negligible. 
Q: Does adding probabilities together like that always work?
A: Think of this as a special case where it does. Don’t worry, we’ll 
go into more detail over the next few pages.
Probability
To find the probability of an 
event A, use
P(A) = n(A)
	
n(S)
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
AI
AI is the complementary event of 
A. It’s the probability that event 
A does not occur.
P(AI) = 1 - P(A)
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

144    Chapter 4
Bet:
Black or Even
You win!
This time the ball landed in a red pocket, the number 7, so 
you win some chips.
That’s easy. We just 
add the black and even 
probabilities together.
Sometimes you can add together 
probabilities, but it doesn’t work in 
all circumstances.
We might not be able to count on being able to do 
this probability calculation in quite the same way 
as the previous one. Try the exercise on the next 
page, and see what happens.
This time, you picked a 
winning pocket: a red one.
Time for another bet
Now that you’re getting the hang of calculating 
probabilities, let’s try something else. What’s the 
probability of the ball landing on a black or even pocket?
a new bet
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    145
calculating probabilities
Let’s find the probability of getting a black or even 
(assume 0 and 00 are not even).
1. What’s the probability of getting a black?
2. What’s the probability of getting an even number?
3. What do you get if you add these two probabilities together?
4. Finally, use your roulette board to count all the holes that are either black or even, then divide 
by the total number of holes. What do you get?
Download at WoweBook.Com

146    Chapter 4
Let’s find the probability of getting a black or even (assume 0 and 
00 are not even).
1. What’s the probability of getting a black?
2. What’s the probability of getting an even number?
3. What do you get if you add these two probabilities together?
4. Finally, use your roulette board to count all the holes that are either black or even, then divide by 
the total number of holes. What do you get?
18 / 38 = 0.474
18 / 38 = 0.474
0.947
26 / 38 = 0.684
Uh oh! Different answers
I don’t get it. Adding 
probabilities worked OK last 
time. What went wrong?
Let’s take a closer look...
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    147
calculating probabilities
What sort of effect do you think 
this intersection could have 
had on the probability?
S
Black
Even
Some of the pockets 
are both black and even.
8
8
10
12
When we were working out the probability of the ball landing in a 
black or red pocket, we were dealing with two separate events, the 
ball landing in a black pocket and the ball landing in a red pocket. 
These two events are mutually exclusive because it’s impossible for 
the ball to land in a pocket that’s both black and red.
S
Black
Red
We have absolutely 
nothing in common. 
We’re exclusive events.
What about the black and even events? This time the events 
aren’t mutually exclusive. It’s possible that the ball could land in 
a pocket that’s both black and even. The two events intersect.
I guess this means 
we’re sharing
If two events 
are mutually 
exclusive, only 
one of the two 
can occur.
If two events 
intersect, it’s 
possible they 
can occur 
simultaneously.
Exclusive events and intersecting events
Download at WoweBook.Com

148    Chapter 4
10
8
Black
10
8
Black
Even
8
10
10
8
Problems at the intersection
Calculating the probability of getting a black or even went 
wrong because we included black and even pockets twice. 
Here’s what happened.
First of all, we found the probability of getting a black 
pocket and the probability of getting an even number.
Black
P(Black) = 18
	
   38
	
= 0.474
Even
8
P(Even) = 18
	
   38
	
= 0.474
When we added the two probabilities together, we 
counted the probability of getting a black and even 
pocket twice.
+
The intersection here 
was included twice
To get the correct answer, we need to subtract the 
probability of getting both black and even. This gives 
us
We only need 
one of these, so 
let’s subtract 
one of them.
P(Black or Even) = P(Black) + P(Even) - P(Black and Even)
=
10
10
Even
8
10
intersection and union
We can now substitute in the values we just calculated to find P(Black or Even):
P(Black or Even) = 18/38 + 18/38 - 10/38 = 26/38 = 0.684
P(Black ∩ Even) = 10
	
                38
	
= 0.263
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    149
calculating probabilities
Some more notation
There’s a more general way of writing this using some 
more math shorthand.
First of all, we can use the notation A ∩ B to refer to 
the intersection between A and B. You can think of 
this symbol as meaning “and.” It takes the common 
elements of events.
A ∪ B, on the other hand, means the union of A and B. 
It includes all of the elements in A and also those in B. 
You can think of it as meaning “or.”
If A ∪ B =1, then A and B are said to be exhaustive. 
Between them, they make up the whole of S. They 
exhaust all possibilities.
i∩tersection
∪nion
On the previous page, we found that
(P(Black or Even) = P(Black) + P(Even) - P(Black and Even)
Write this equation for A and B using ∩ and ∪ notation.
S
A
B
The entire shaded 
area is A ∪ B.
S
A
B
The intersection 
here is A ∩ B.
If there are no elements that aren’t 
in either A, B, or both, like in this 
diagram, then A and B are exhaustive.
Here the white bit is empty.
Download at WoweBook.Com

150    Chapter 4
P(A ∪ B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A ∩ B)
On the previous page, we found that
(P(Black or Even) = P(Black) + P(Even) - P(Black and Even)
Write this equation for A and B using ∩ and ∪ notation.
P(A or B)
P(A and B)
It’s not actually that different.
Mutually exclusive events have no elements in common with each 
other. If you have two mutually exclusive events, the probability of 
getting A and B is actually 0—so P(A ∩ B) = 0. Let’s revisit our black-
or-red example. In this bet, getting a red pocket on the roulette wheel 
and getting a black pocket are mutually exclusive events, as a pocket 
can’t be both red and black. This means that P(Black ∩ Red) = 0, so 
that part of the equation just disappears.
	
       There’s a difference 
between exclusive 
and exhaustive.
If events A and B are 
exclusive, then
	
P(A ∩ B) = 0
If events A and B are exhaustive, then
	
P(A ∪ B) = 1
So why is the equation for exclusive 
events different? Are you just giving 
me more things to remember?
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    151
calculating probabilities
S
A
B
S
A
B
S
A
B
P(A ∩ B) + P(A ∩ BI)
P(AI ∩ BI)
P(A ∪ B) - P(B)
BE the probability
Your job is to play like you’re the 
probability and shade in the area 
that represents each of the following 
probabilities on the Venn 
diagrams.
Download at WoweBook.Com

152    Chapter 4
S
A
B
S
A
B
S
A
B
P(A ∩ B) + P(A ∩ BI)
P(AI ∩ BI)
P(A ∪ B) - P(B)
BE the probability Solution
Your job was to play like you’re the probability 
and shade in the area that represents each of 
the probabilities on the Venn diagrams.
be the probability solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    153
calculating probabilities
50 sports enthusiasts at the Head First Health Club are asked whether they play baseball, 
football, or basketball. 10 only play baseball. 12 only play football. 18 only play basketball. 6 play 
baseball and basketball but not football. 4 play football and basketball but not baseball.
Draw a Venn diagram for this probability space. How many enthusiasts play baseball in total? 
How many play basketball? How many play football?
Are any sports’ rosters mutually exclusive? Which sports are exhaustive (fill up the possibility 
space)?
A or B
To find the probability of getting event 
A or B, use
P(A ∪ B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A ∩ B)
∪ means OR
∩ means AND
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

154    Chapter 4
50 sports enthusiasts at the Head First Health Club are asked whether they play baseball, football 
or basketball. 10 only play baseball. 12 only play football. 18 only play basketball. 6 play baseball 
and basketball but not football. 4 play football and basketball but not baseball.
Draw a Venn diagram for this probability space. How many enthusiasts play baseball in total? How 
many play basketball? How many play football?
Are any sports’ rosters mutually exclusive? Which sports are exhaustive (fill up the possibility 
space)?
This information 
looks complicated, 
but drawing a 
Venn diagram 
will help us to 
visualize what’s 
going on.
By adding up the values in each circle in the Venn diagram, we can determine that there 
are 16 total baseball players, 28 total basketball players, and 16 total football players.
The baseball and football events are mutually exclusive. Nobody plays both baseball and 
football, so P(Baseball ∩ Football) = 0
The events for baseball, football, and basketball are exhaustive. Together, they fill the 
entire possibility space, so P(Baseball ∪ Football ∪ Basketball) = 1
Q: Are A and AI mutually exclusive or 
exhaustive?
A: Actually they’re both. A and AI can 
have no common elements, so they are 
mutually exclusive. Together, they make 
up the entire possibility space so they’re 
exhaustive too. 
 
 
 
 
Q: Isn’t P(A ∩ B) + P(A ∩ BI) just a 
complicated way of saying P(A)?
A: Yes it is. It can sometimes be useful 
to think of different ways of forming the 
same probability, though. You don’t always 
have access to all the information you’d 
like, so being able to think laterally about 
probabilities is a definite advantage. 
 
 
 
Q: Is there a limit on how many events 
can intersect?
A: No. When you’re referring to the 
intersection between several events, use 
more ∩‘s. As an example, the intersection of 
events A, B, and C is A ∩ B ∩ C. 
 
Finding probabilities for multiple 
intersections can sometimes be tricky. We 
suggest that if you’re in doubt, draw a Venn 
diagram and take a good, hard look at which 
probabilities need to be added together and 
which need to be subtracted.
S
Baseball
Football
Basketball
10
12
18
4
6
The numbers we’ve 
been given all add 
up to 50, the 
total number of 
sports lovers.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    155
calculating probabilities
…but it’s time for another bet
Even with the odds in our favor, we’ve been unlucky with the outcomes at 
the roulette table. The croupier decides to take pity on us and offers a little 
inside information. After she spins the roulette wheel, she’ll give us a clue 
about where the ball landed, and we’ll work out the probability based on 
what she tells us. 
Here’s your next 
bet…and a hint about 
where the ball landed. 
Shh, don’t tell Fat Dan...
Bet: Even
Clue: The ball 
landed in a 
black pocket
Another unlucky spin…
We know that the probability of the ball landing on black or even 
is 0.684, but, unfortunately, the ball landed on 23, which is red and 
odd.
Should we take this bet?
How does the probability of getting even given that 
we know the ball landed in a black pocket compare 
to our last bet that the ball would land on black or 
even. Let’s figure it out.
Download at WoweBook.Com

156    Chapter 4
10
8
10
10
8
8
10
Conditions apply
The croupier says the ball has landed in a black pocket. 
What’s the probability that the pocket is also even?
S
Black
Even
12
We already know 
the pocket is black.
We want the probability 
that the pocket is even, 
given that it’s black.
But we’ve 
already done this; 
it’s just the probability of 
getting black and even.
This is a slightly different problem
We don’t want to find the probability of getting a pocket 
that is both black and even, out of all possible pockets. 
Instead, we want to find the probability that the pocket is 
even, given that we already know it’s black.
We can ignore these 
areas—we know that 
the pocket is black.
In other words, we want to find out how many pockets 
are even out of all the black ones. Out of the 18 black 
pockets, 10 of them are even, so
Black
Even
	
P(Even given Black) = 10
	
	
	
       18
	
	
	
    = 0.556 (to 3 decimal places)
10 out of 
18 are even.
introducing conditional probability
It turns out that even with some inside information, our odds are 
actually lower than before. The probability of even given black is 
actually less than the probability of black or even. 
However, a probability of 0.556 is still better than 50% odds, so 
this is still a pretty good bet. Let’s go for it.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    157
calculating probabilities
P(A | B) = P(A ∩ B)
	
	
    P(B)
S
B
A
I’m a given
P(A ∩ B)
P(B)
We can rewrite this equation to give us a way of finding P(A ∩ B)
	
P(A ∩ B) = P(A | B) × P(B)
It doesn’t end there. Another way of writing P(A ∩ B) is P(B ∩ A). 
This means that we can rewrite the formula as
	
P(B ∩ A) = P(B | A) × P(A)
In other words, just flip around the A and the B.
Find conditional probabilities
So how can we generalize this sort of problem? First of 
all, we need some more notation to represent conditional 
probabilities, which measure the probability of one event 
occurring relative to another occurring. 
If we want to express the probability of one event happening 
given another one has already happened, we use the “|” symbol 
to mean “given.” Instead of saying “the probability of event A 
occurring given event B,” we can shorten it to say
	
	
P(A | B)
So now we need a general way of calculating P(A | B). What 
we’re interested in is the number of outcomes where both A and 
B occur, divided by all the B outcomes. Looking at the Venn 
diagram, we get:
It looks like it can be difficult to show 
conditional probability on a Venn diagram. 
I wonder if there’s some other way.
Venn diagrams aren’t always the best way of 
visualizing conditional probability. 
Don’t worry, there’s another sort of diagram you can use—a 
probability tree.
Because we’re trying to find the 
probability of A given B, we’re only 
interested in the set of events 
where B occurs.
The probability of A given 
that we know B has happened.
Download at WoweBook.Com

158    Chapter 4
It’s not always easy to visualize conditional probabilities with 
Venn diagrams, but there’s another sort of diagram that really 
comes in handy in this situation—the probability tree. 
Here’s a probability tree for our problem with the roulette 
wheel, showing the probabilities for getting different colored 
and odd or even pockets.
Black
Red
Green
Even
Odd
Even
Odd
00
0
18/38
18/38
2/38
8/18
8/18
10/18
10/18
1/2
1/2
These are branches, 
like the branches 
of a tree.
Here are the first set of 
exclusive events, the colors. The 
probabilities for each event go 
along the relevant branch.
These are all the 
second set of events.
The probabilities for 
each set of branches 
must add up to 1.
P(Green)
P(00 | Green)
The first set of branches shows the probability of each 
outcome, so the probability of getting a black is 18/38, or 
0.474. The second set of branches shows the probability 
of outcomes given the outcome of the branch it is 
linked to. The probability of getting an odd pocket given 
we know it’s black is 8/18, or 0.444.
probability trees
You can visualize conditional probabilities with a probability tree
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    159
calculating probabilities
B
A
P(B)
P(A | B)
Probability trees don’t just help you visualize probabilities; they can help 
you to calculate them, too. 
Let’s take a general look at how you can do this. Here’s another 
probability tree, this time with a different number of branches. It shows 
two levels of events: A and AI and B and BI. AI refers to every possibility 
not covered by A, and BI refers to every possibility not covered by B.
You can find probabilities involving intersections by multiplying the 
probabilities of linked branches together. As an example, suppose you 
want to find P(A ∩ B). You can find this by multiplying P(B) and P(A | B) 
together. In other words, you multiply the probability on the first level B 
branch with the probability on the second level A branch.
P(A ∩ B) = P(A | B) × P(B)
BI
AI
P(AI | B)
P(AI ∩ B) = P(AI | B) × P(B)
A
P(A | BI)
P(A ∩ BI) = P(A | BI) × P(BI)
AI
P(AI | BI)
P(AI ∩ BI) = P(AI | BI) × P(BI)
P(BI)
To find P(A ∩ B), just multiply 
the probabilities for these two 
branches together.
The probability of not 
getting A given that B 
hasn’t happened
This is the same equation you 
saw earlier—just multiply the 
adjoining branches together.
The probability of 
not getting event B
Using probability trees gives you the same results you saw earlier, and 
it’s up to you whether you use them or not. Probability trees can be time-
consuming to draw, but they offer you a way of visualizing conditional 
probabilities.
Trees also help you calculate conditional probabilities
Download at WoweBook.Com

160    Chapter 4
Donuts
Coffee
DonutsI
CoffeeI
Coffee
CoffeeI
Probability Magnets
Duncan’s Donuts are looking into the probabilities of their customers buying 
donuts and coffee. They drew up a probability tree to show the probabilities, 
but in a sudden gust of wind, they all fell off. Your task is to pin the 
probabilities back on the tree. Here are some clues to help you.
3/4
1/4
2/5
3/5
1/3
2/3
P(Donuts) = 3/4                    P(Coffee | DonutsI) = 1/3                    P(Donuts ∩ Coffee) = 9/20
probability magnets
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    161
calculating probabilities
Handy hints for working with trees
1. Work out the levels
Try and work out the different levels of probability that you need. 
As an example, if you’re given a probability for P(A | B), you’ll 
probably need the first level to cover B, and the second level A.
2. Fill in what you know
If you’re given a series of probabilities, put them onto the tree in 
the relevant position.
3. Remember that each set of branches sums to 1
If you add together the probabilities for all of the branches 
that fork off from a common point, the sum should equal 1. 
Remember that P(A) = 1 - P(AI).
4. Remember your formula
You should be able to find most other probabilities by using
	
	
P(A | B) = P(A ∩ B)
	
	
	
         P(B)
Download at WoweBook.Com

162    Chapter 4
Donuts
Coffee
DonutsI
CoffeeI
Coffee
CoffeeI
3/4
1/4
2/5
3/5
1/3
2/3
These must 
add up to 1.
These must add 
up to 1 as well.
P(Coffee | Donuts) = P(Coffee ∩ Donuts)
	
	
	
P(Donuts)
	
	
   = 9/20
	
	
       3/4
	
	
   = 3/5
These need to 
add up to 1.
Probability Magnets Solution
Duncan’s Donuts are looking into the probabilities of their customers 
buying Donuts and Coffee. They drew up a probability tree to show the 
probabilities, but in a sudden gust of wind they all fell off. Your task is to pin 
the probabilities back on the tree. Here are some clues to help you.
P(Donuts) = 3/4                    P(Coffee | DonutsI) = 1/3                    P(Donuts ∩ Coffee) = 9/20
probability magnets solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    163
calculating probabilities
1. P(DonutsI)
3. P(CoffeeI | Donuts)
5. P(Donuts | Coffee)
2. P(DonutsI ∩ Coffee)
4. P(Coffee)
We haven’t quite finished with Duncan’s Donuts! Now that you’ve completed 
the probability tree, you need to use it to work out some probabilities.
Hint: maybe some of your 
other answers can help you.
Hint: How many ways are 
there of getting coffee? 
(You can get coffee with or 
without donuts.)
Download at WoweBook.Com

164    Chapter 4
1. P(DonutsI)
3. P(CoffeeI | Donuts)
5. P(Donuts | Coffee)
2. P(DonutsI ∩ Coffee)
4. P(Coffee)
1/4
1/12
2/5
8/15
27/32
Your job was to use the completed probability tree to work out some probabilities.
We can read this one off the tree. 
We were given 
P(Donuts) = 3/4, 
so P(DonutsI) must be 1/4.
We can read this 
off the tree.
You’ll only be able to do this if you found P(Coffee).
P(Donuts | Coffee) = P(Donuts ∩ Coffee) / P(Coffee). 
This gives us (9/20) / (8 / 15) = 27/32.
We can find this by multiplying together 
P(DonutsI) and P(Coffee | DonutsI). We’ve 
just found P(DonutsI) = 1/4, and looking 
at the tree, P(Coffee | DonutsI) = 1/3. 
Multiplying these together gives 1/12.
This probability is tricky, so don’t worry if you 
didn’t get it.
To get P(Coffee), we need to add together 
P(Coffee ∩ Donuts) and P(Coffee ∩ DonutsI). 
This gives us 1/12 + 9/20 = 8/15.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    165
calculating probabilities
Conditions
P(A | B) = P(A ∩ B)
	
         P(B) 
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Q: I still don’t get the difference 
between P(A ∩ B) and P(A | B).
A: P(A ∩ B) is the probability of getting 
both A and B. With this probability, you can 
make no assumptions about whether one 
of the events has already occurred. You 
have to find the probability of both events 
happening without making any assumptions. 
 
P(A | B) is the probability of event A given 
event B. In other words, you make the 
assumption that event B has occurred, and 
you work out the probability of getting A 
under this assumption.
Q: So does that mean that P(A | B) is 
just the same as P(A)?
A: No, they refer to different probabilities. 
When you calculate P(A | B), you have to 
assume that event B has already happened. 
When you work out P(A), you can make no 
such assumption. 
Q: Is P(A | B) the same as P(B | A)? 
They look similar.
A: It’s quite a common mistake, but they 
are very different probabilities. P(A | B) 
is the probability of getting event A given 
event B has already happened. P(B | A) 
is the probability of getting event B given 
event A occurred. You’re actually finding 
the probability of a different event under a 
different set of assumptions.
Q: Are probability trees better than 
Venn diagrams?
A: Both diagrams give you a way of 
visualizing probabilities, and both have their 
uses. Venn diagrams are useful for showing 
basic probabilities and relationships, while 
probability trees are useful if you’re working 
with conditional probabilities. It all depends 
what type of problem you need to solve.
Q: Is there a limit to how many sets of 
branches you can have on a probability 
tree?
A: In theory there’s no limit. In practice 
you may find that a very large probability 
tree can become unwieldy, but you may still 
find it easier to draw a large probability tree 
than work through complex probabilities 
without it.
Q: If A and B are mutually exclusive, 
what is P(A | B)?
A: If A and B are mutually exclusive, then 
P(A ∩ B) = 0 and P(A | B) = 0. This makes 
sense because if A and B are mutually 
exclusive, it’s impossible for both events 
to occur. If we assume that event B has 
occurred, then it’s impossible for event A to 
happen, so P(A | B) = 0.
Download at WoweBook.Com

166    Chapter 4
Bad luck!
You placed a bet that the ball would land in an even pocket 
given we’ve been told it’s black. Unfortunately, the ball landed 
in pocket 17, so you lose a few more chips.
Maybe we can win some chips back with another bet. This 
time, the	 croupier says that the ball has landed in an even 
pocket. What’s the probability that the pocket is also black?
We can reuse the probability calculations we 
already did.
Our previous task was to figure out P(Even | Black), and we 
can use the probabilities we found solving that problem to 
calculate P(Black | Even). Here’s the probability tree we used 
before:
This is the opposite 
of the previous bet.
Black
Red
Green
Even
Odd
Even
Odd
00
0
18/38
18/38
2/38
8/18
8/18
10/18
10/18
1/2
1/2
But that’s a similar problem to the 
one we had before. Do you mean we have 
to draw another probability tree and work 
out a whole new set of probabilities? Can’t 
we use the one we had before?
a new conditional probability
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    167
calculating probabilities
So how do we find P(Black | Even)? There’s still a way of calculating 
this using the probabilities we already have even if it’s not immediately 
obvious from the probability tree. All we have to do is look at the 
probabilities we already have, and use these to somehow calculate the 
probabilities we don’t yet know.
Let’s start off by looking at the overall probability we need to find, 
P(Black | Even).
Using the formula for finding conditional probabilities, we have
P(Black | Even) = P(Black ∩ Even)
	
	
	
   P(Even)
If we can find what the probabilities of P(Black ∩ Even) and P(Even) are, 
we’ll be able to use these in the formula to calculate P(Black | Even). All 
we need is some mechanism for finding these probabilities.
Sound difficult? Don’t worry, we’ll guide you through how to do it.
Use the 
probabilities 
you have to 
calculate the 
probabilities 
you need
Step 1: Finding P(Black ∩ Even)
Let’s start off with the first part of the formula, P(Black ∩ Even). 
Take a look at the probability tree on the previous page. How can 
you use it to find P(Black ∩ Even)?
Hint: P(Black ∩ Even) = P(Even ∩ Black)
We can find P(Black l Even) using the probabilities we already have
Download at WoweBook.Com

168    Chapter 4
Take a look at the probability tree opposite. How can you use it to 
find P(Black ∩ Even)?
You can find P(Black ∩ Even) by multiplying together P(Black) and P(Even | Black). This gives us
P(Black ∩ Even) = P(Black) x P(Even | Black)
	
          = 18 x 10
	
	
  38    18
	
          = 10
	
	
   38
	
          = 5
	
	
  19
Take another look at the probability tree on page 168. How do you think we 
can use it to find P(Even)?
P(Black | Even) = P(Black ∩ Even)
	
	
	
   P(Even)
So where does this get us?
We want to find the probability P(Black | Even). We can do 
this by evaluating
So far we’ve only looked at the first part of the formula,  
P(Black ∩ Even), and you’ve seen that you can calculate 
this using 
So how do we find the next part of the formula, P(Even)?
P(Black ∩ Even) = P(Black) × P(Even | Black)
This gives us
P(Black | Even) = P(Black) × P(Even | Black)
	
	
	
	
P(Even)
These two quantities are 
equivalent…
…so we can substitute P(Black) x P(Even | Black) 
for P(Black ∩ Even) in our original formula.
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    169
calculating probabilities
This gives us
	
P(Even) = P(Black ∩ Even) + P(Red ∩ Even)
	
              = P(Black) × P(Even | Black) + P(Red) × P(Even | Red)
	
	
= 18 × 10   +  18 × 8
	
	
    38    18        38    18
	
	
= 18
	
	
    38
	
	
=  9
	
	
   19
Step 2: Finding P(Even)
The next step is to find the probability of the ball landing in an even 
pocket, P(Even). We can find this by considering all the ways in which 
this could happen.
A ball can land in an even pocket by landing in either a pocket that’s 
both black and even, or in a pocket that’s both red and even. These are 
all the possible ways in which a ball can land in an even pocket.
This means that we find P(Even) by adding together P(Black ∩ Even) 
and P(Red ∩ Even). In other words, we add the probability of the 
pocket being both black and even to the probability of it being both red 
and even. The relevant branches are highlighted on the probability tree.
These probabilities 
come from the 
probability tree.
Black
Red
Green
Even
Odd
Even
Odd
00
0
18/38
18/38
2/38
8/18
8/18
10/18
10/18
1/2
1/2
To find the probability 
of the ball landing in an 
even pocket, add these 
probabilities together.
All the ways of the ball landing 
in an even pocket
Download at WoweBook.Com

170    Chapter 4
Step 3: Finding P(Black l Even)
Can you remember our original problem? We wanted to find  
P(Black | Even) where
P(Black | Even) = P(Black ∩ Even)
	
	
         P(Even)
	
            = 	
        P(Black) × P(Even | Black)
	
	
 P(Black) × P(Even | Black) + P(Red) × P(Even | Red)
	
            =  5  ÷  9
	
	
 19     19
	
            =  5  ×  19
	
	
 19       9
	
            = 5
	
	
 9
This means that we now have a way of finding new conditional 
probabilities using probabilities we already know—something that can 
help with more complicated probability problems.
Let’s look at how this works in general.
P(Black | Even) = P(Black ∩ Even)
	
	
	
   P(Even)
P(Black ∩ Even) = P(Black) × P(Even | Black)
We started off by finding an expression for P(Black ∩ Even)
After that we moved on to finding an expression for P(Even), and 
found that
P(Even) = P(Black) × P(Even | Black) + P(Red) × P(Even | Red)
Putting these together means that we can calculate P(Black | Even) 
using probabilities from the probability tree
This is what we just calculated 
using the probability tree.
We calculated these 
earlier, so we can 
substitute in our results.
generalizing reverse conditional probabilities
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    171
calculating probabilities
These results can be generalized to other problems
Imagine you have a probability tree showing events A and B like 
this, and assume you know the probability on each of the branches.
Now imagine you want to find P(A | B), and the information shown 
on the branches above is all the information that you have. How 
can you use the probabilities you have to work out P(A | B)?
We can start with the formula we had before:
We need to find both 
of these probabilities 
to get P(A | B).
Take a good look at the probability tree. How would you use it to find P(B)?
These branches are 
mutually exclusive and 
exhaustive.
A
B
P(A)
P(B | A)
AI
BI
P(BI | A)
B
P(B | AI)
BI
P(BI | AI)
P(AI)
P(A | B) = P(A ∩ B)
	
         P(B)
Now we can find P(A ∩ B) using the probabilities we have on the 
probability tree. In other words, we can calculate P(A ∩ B) using
	
	
P(A ∩ B) = P(A) × P(B | A) 
But how do we find P(B)?
Download at WoweBook.Com

172    Chapter 4
Use the Law of Total Probability to find P(B)
To find P(B), we use the same process that we used to find P(Even) earlier; we 
need to add together the probabilities of all the different ways in which the 
event we want can possibly happen.
There are two ways in which even B can occur: either with event A, or without 
it. This means that we can find P(B) using:
P(B) = P(A ∩ B) + P(AI ∩ B)
Add together both of the 
intersections to get P(B).
We can rewrite this in terms of the probabilities we already know from the 
probability tree. This means that we can use:
	
	
	
P(A ∩ B) = P(A) × P(B | A)
	
	
	
P(AI ∩ B) = P(AI) × P(B | AI)  
 
This gives us:
P(B) = P(A) × P(B | A) + P(AI) × P(B | AI)
This is sometimes known as the Law of Total Probability, as it gives 
a way of finding the total probability of a particular event based on 
conditional probabilities. 
To find P(B), add the 
probabilities of these 
branches together
Now that we have expressions for P(A ∩ B) and P(B), we can put 
them together to come up with an expression for P(A | B).
A
B
P(A)
P(B | A)
AI
BI
P(BI | A)
B
P(B | AI)
BI
P(BI | AI)
P(AI)
law of total probability
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    173
calculating probabilities
	
	
     Bayes’ Theorem is 
one of the most 
difficult aspects of 
probability.
 
Don’t worry if it looks complicated—this 
is as tough as it’s going to get. And even 
though the formula is tricky, visualizing the 
problem can help.
This is called Bayes’ Theorem. It gives you a means of finding reverse 
conditional probabilities, which is really useful if you don’t know every 
probability up front.
P(A | B) =  		
   P(A) × P(B | A)
	
       P(A) × P(B | A) + P(AI) × P(B | AI)
Introducing Bayes’ Theorem
We started off by wanting to find P(A | B) based on probabilities 
we already know from a probability tree. We already know P(A), 
and we also know P(B | A) and P(B | AI). What we need is a 
general expression for finding conditional probabilities that are 
the reverse of what we already know, in other words P(A | B).
We started off with:
...divide the probability 
of this branch...
...by the probability 
of these two 
branches added 
together.
Here’s A. To find  
P(A | B)...
P(A | B) = P(A ∩ B)
	
         P(B)
On page 127, we found P(A ∩ B) = P(A) × P(B | A). And on the 
previous page, we discovered P(B) = P(A) × P(B | A) + P(A') × P(B | 
A').
If we substitute these into the formula, we get:
A
B
P(A)
P(B | A)
AI
BI
P(BI | A)
B
P(B | AI)
BI
P(BI | AI)
P(AI)
With substitution, 
this formula…
…becomes this 
formula.
Download at WoweBook.Com

174    Chapter 4
The Manic Mango games company is testing two brand-new games. They’ve asked a group of 
volunteers to choose the game they most want to play, and then tell them how satisfied they 
were with game play afterwards.
80 percent of the volunteers chose Game 1, and 20 percent chose Game 2. Out of the Game 
1 players, 60 percent enjoyed the game and 40 percent didn’t. For Game 2, 70 percent of the 
players enjoyed the game and 30 percent didn’t.
Your first task is to fill in the probability tree for this scenario.
long exercise
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    175
calculating probabilities
Manic Mango selects one of the volunteers at random to ask if she enjoyed playing the game, and she 
says she did. Given that the volunteer enjoyed playing the game, what’s the probability that she played 
game 2? Use Bayes’ Theorem.
Hint: What’s the probability of someone choosing game 2 and being satisfied? 
What’s the probability of someone being satisfied overall? Once you’ve found 
these, you can use Bayes Theorem to obtain the right answer.
Download at WoweBook.Com

176    Chapter 4
s
The Manic Mango games company is testing two brand-new games. They’ve asked a group of 
volunteers to choose the game they most want to play, and then tell them how satisfied they 
were with game play afterwards.
80 percent of the volunteers chose Game 1, and 20 percent chose Game 2. Out of the Game 
1 players, 60 percent enjoyed the game and 40 percent didn’t. For Game 2, 70 percent of the 
players enjoyed the game and 30 percent didn’t.
Your first task is to fill in the probability tree for this scenario.
We know the probability that a player chose each 
game, so we can use these for the first set of 
branches.
We also know the probability of a player being 
satisfied or dissatisfied with the game they 
chose
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.7
Game 1
Game 2
Dissatisfied
Satisfied
Dissatisfied
Satisfied
0.2
long exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    177
calculating probabilities
Manic Mango selects one of the volunteers at random to ask if she enjoyed playing the game, and she says she 
did. Given that the volunteer enjoyed playing the game, what’s the probability that she played game 2? Use Bayes’ 
Theorem.
We need to use Bayes’ Theorem to find P(Game 2 | Satisfied). This means we need to use
	
P(Game 2 | Satisfied) = 	 	
       P(Game 2) P(Satisfied | Game 2)
	
	
	
        P(Game 2) P(Satisfied | Game 2) + P(Game 1) P(Satisfied | Game 1)
Let’s start with P(Game 2) P(Satisfied | Game 2)
We’ve been told that P(Game 2) = 0.2 and P(Satisfied | Game 2) = 0.7. This means that
	
P(Game 2) P(Satisfied | Game 2) = 0.2 x 0.7
	
	
	
	
        = 0.14
The next thing we need to find is P(Game 1) P(Satisfied | Game 1). We’ve been told that  
P(Satisfied | Game 1) = 0.6, and also that P(Game 1) = 0.8. This means that
	
P(Game 1) P(Satisfied | Game 1) = 0.8 x 0.6
	
	
	
	
           = 0.48
Substituting this into the formula for Bayes’ Theorem gives us
	
P(Game 2 | Satisfied) = 	 	
       P(Game 2) P(Satisfied | Game 2)
	
	
	
        P(Game 2) P(Satisfied | Game 2) + P(Game 1) P(Satisfied | Game 1)
	
	
	
     = 	   0.14
	
	
	
        0.14 + 0.48
	
	
	
     = 0.14
	
	
	
         0.62
	
	
	
     = 0.226
Download at WoweBook.Com

178    Chapter 4
Bayes’ Theorem
If you have n mutually exclusive and exhaustive 
events, A1 through to An, and B is another 
event, then
P(A | B) =          P(A) P(B | A)
               P(A) P(B | A) + P(AI) P(B | AI)
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Law of Total Probability
If you have two events A and B, then
P(B) = P(B ∩ A) + P(B ∩ AI) 
      = P(A) P(B | A) + P(AI) P(B | AI)
The Law of Total Probability is the denominator of Bayes’ Theorem.
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
vital statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    179
calculating probabilities
We have a winner!
Congratulations, this time the ball landed on 10, a pocket 
that’s both black and even. You’ve won back some chips.
Q: So when would I use Bayes’ 
Theorem?
A: Use it when you want to find 
conditional probabilities that are in the 
opposite order of what you’ve been given.
Q: Do I have to draw a probability 
tree?
A: You can either use Bayes’ Theorem 
right away, or you can use a probability 
tree to help you. Using Bayes’ Theorem 
is quicker, but you need to make sure you 
keep track of your probabilities. Using a 
tree is useful if you can’t remember Bayes’ 
Theorem. It will give you the same result, 
and it can keep you from losing track of 
which probability belongs to which event.
Q: When we calculated P(Black | Even) 
in the roulette wheel problem, we didn’t 
include any probabilities for the ball 
landing in a green pocket. Did we make a 
mistake?
A: No, we didn’t. The only green pockets 
on the roulette board are 0 and 00, and we 
don’t classify these as even. This means that 
P(Even | Green) is 0; therefore, it has no 
effect on the calculation.
Q: The probability P(Black|Even) turns 
out to be the same as P(Even|Black): 
they’re both 5/9. Is that always the case? 
A: True, it happens here that 
P(Black | Even) and P(Even | Black) have the 
same value, but that’s not necessarily true for 
other scenarios.  
 
If you have two events, A and B, you can’t 
assume that P(A | B) and P(B | A) will 
give you the same results. They are two 
separate probabilities, and making this sort of 
assumption could actually cost you valuable 
points in a statistics exam. You need to use 
Bayes’ Theorem to make sure you end up with 
the right result.
Q: How useful is Bayes’ Theorem in real 
life?
A: It’s actually pretty useful. For example, 
it can be used in computing as a way of 
filtering emails and detecting which ones 
are likely to be junk. It’s sometimes used in 
medical trials too.
Download at WoweBook.Com

180    Chapter 4
It’s time for one last bet
Before you leave the roulette table, the croupier has 
offered you a great deal for your final bet, triple or 
nothing. If you bet that the ball lands in a black pocket 
twice in a row, you could win back all of your chips.
Here’s the probability tree. Notice that the probabilities 
for landing on two black pockets in a row are a bit 
different than they were in our probability tree on page 
166, where we were trying to calculate the likelihood 
of getting an even pocket given that we knew the pocket 
was black.
Black
Red
Green
Green
Black
Green
Black
Green
Black
18/38
18/38
2/38
Red
Red
Red
18/38
18/38
2/38
18/38
18/38
2/38
18/38
18/38
2/38
dependent events
Bet: Black 
twice in a row
Are you 
feeling lucky?
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    181
calculating probabilities
The probability of getting black followed by black is a slightly 
different problem from the probability of getting an even 
pocket given we already know it’s black. Take a look at the 
equation for this probability:
P(Even | Black) = 10/18 = 0.556
For P(Even | Black), the probability of getting an even pocket 
is affected by the event of getting a black. We already know 
that the ball has landed in a black pocket, so we use this 
knowledge to work out the probability. We look at how many 
of the pockets are even out of all the black pockets.
If we didn’t know that the ball had landed on a black pocket, 
the probability would be different. To work out P(Even), we 
look at how many pockets are even out of all the pockets
P(Even) = 18/38 = 0.474
P(Even | Black) gives a different result from P(Even). In other 
words, the knowledge we have that the pocket is black changes 
the probability. These two events are said to be dependent.
In general terms, events A and B are said to be dependent if 
P(A | B) is different from P(A). It’s a way of saying that the 
probabilities of A and B are affected by each other.
These two probabilities 
are different
You being here 
changes everything. 
I’m different when 
I’m with you.
A
B
Look at the probability tree on the previous page 
again. What do you notice about the sets of 
branches? Are the events for getting a black in the 
first game and getting a black in the second game 
dependent? Why?
If events affect each other, they are dependent
Download at WoweBook.Com

182    Chapter 4
Well, you make no 
difference to me either. I 
don’t care whether you’re 
there or not. I guess this 
means we’re independent
You think I care about 
your outcomes? They’re 
irrelevant to me. I just carry 
on like you’re not there.
Not all events are dependent. Sometimes events remain completely 
unaffected by each other, and the probability of an event occurring 
remains the same irrespective of whether the other event happens or 
not. As an example, take a look at the probabilities of P(Black) and  
P(Black | Black). What do you notice? 
	
P(Black) = 18/38 = 0.474
	
P(Black | Black) = 18/38 = 0.474 
These two probabilities have the same value. In other words, the 
event of getting a black pocket in this game has no bearing on the 
probability of getting a black pocket in the next game. These events 
are independent.
Independent events aren’t affected by each other. They don’t influence 
each other’s probabilities in any way at all. If one event occurs, the 
probability of the other occurring remains exactly the same.
A
B
P(A | B) = P(A)
If events A and B are independent, then the probability of event A is 
unaffected by event B. In other words
These probabilities are the same. 
The events are independent.
for independent events.
We can also use this as a test for independence. If you have two events 
A and B where P(A | B) = P(A), then the events A and B must be 
independent.
independent events
If events do not affect each other, they are independent
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    183
calculating probabilities
for independent events. In other words, if two events are 
independent, then you can work out the probability of 
getting both events A and B by multiplying their individual 
probabilities together.
P(A ∩ B) = P(A) × P(B)
It’s easier to work out other probabilities for independent 
events too, for example P(A ∩ B).
We already know that 
	
P(A | B) = P(A ∩ B)
	
	
        P(B)
If A and B are independent, P(A | B) is the same as P(A). 
This means that 
	
P(A) = P(A ∩ B)
	
	
  P(B)
or
It’s time to calculate another probability. What’s the probability of 
the ball landing in a black pocket twice in a row?
More on calculating probability for independent events
	
       If A and B are 
mutually exclusive, 
they can’t be 
independent, and 
if A and B are 
independent, they can’t be 
mutually exclusive.
If A and B are mutually exclusive, 
then if event A occurs, event 
B cannot. This means that the 
outcome of A affects the outcome of 
B, and so they’re dependent.
Similarly if A and B are independent, 
they can’t be mutually exclusive.
Download at WoweBook.Com

184    Chapter 4
Q: What’s the difference between 
being independent and being mutually 
exclusive?
A: Imagine you have two events, A and B.  
 
If A and B are mutually exclusive, then if 
event A happens, B cannot. Also, if event B 
happens, then A cannot. In other words, it’s 
impossible for both events to occur. 
 
If A and B are independent, then the 
outcome of A has no effect on the outcome 
of B, and the outcome of B has no effect on 
the outcome of A. Their respective outcomes 
have no effect on each other.
Q: Do both events have to be 
independent? Can one event be 
independent and the other dependent?
A: No. The two events are independent 
of each other, so you can’t have two events 
where one is dependent and the other one is 
independent.
Q: Are all games on a roulette wheel 
independent? Why?
A: Yes, they are. Separate spins of the 
roulette wheel do not influence each other. 
In each game, the probabilities of the ball 
landing on a red, black, or green remain the 
same.
Q: You’ve shown how a probability 
tree can demonstrate independent events. 
How do I use a Venn diagram to tell if 
events are independent?
A: A Venn diagram really isn’t the 
best way of showing dependence. Venn 
diagrams are great if you need to examine 
intersections and show mutually exclusive 
events. They’re not great for showing 
independence though.
It’s time to calculate another probability. What’s the probability of 
the ball landing in a black pocket twice in a row?
We need to find P(Black in game 1 ∩ Black in game 2). As the events are independent, the result is
	
18/38 x 18/38 = 324/1444
	
	
        = 0.224 (to 3 decimal places)
Independence
If two events A and B are 
independent, then
	
P(A | B) = P(A)
If this holds for any two 
events, then the events must 
be independent. Also
  P(A ∩ B) = P(A) x P(B)
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    185
calculating probabilities
The Case of the Two Classes
The Head First Health Club prides itself on its ability to find a class for 
everyone. As a result, it is extremely popular with both young and old.
The Health Club is wondering how best to market its new yoga class, 
and the Head of Marketing wonders if someone who goes swimming 
is more likely to go to a yoga class. “Maybe we could offer some sort of 
discount to the swimmers to get them to try out yoga.”
The CEO disagrees. “I think you’re wrong,” he says. “I think 
that people who go swimming and people who go to yoga are 
independent. I don’t think people who go swimming are any 
more likely to do yoga than anyone else.”
They ask a group of 96 people whether they go to the swimming 
or yoga classes. Out of these 96 people, 32 go to yoga and 72 go 
swimming. 24 people are exceptionally eager and go to both.
So who’s right? Are the yoga and swimming classes 
dependent or independent?
Five Minute 
Mystery
Five Minute 
Mystery
Download at WoweBook.Com

186    Chapter 4
Tonight’s talk: Dependent and Independent discuss their 
differences
Dependent:
Independent, glad you could show up. I’ve been 
wanting to catch up with you for some time.
Well, I hear you keep getting fledgling statisticians 
into trouble. They’re doing fine until you show up, 
and then, whoa, wrong probabilities all over the 
place! That ∩ guy has a particularly poor opinion 
of you.
 
 
 
 
It’s that simplistic attitude of yours that gets people 
into trouble. They think, “Hey, that Independent 
guy looks easy. I’ll just use him for this probability.” 
The next thing you know, ∩ has his probabilities all 
in a twist. That’s just not the right way of dealing 
with dependent events.
 
 
You don’t understand the seriousness of the 
situation. If people use your way of calculating ∩’s 
probability, and the events are dependent, they’re 
guaranteed to get the wrong answer. That’s just not 
good enough. For dependent events, you only 
get the right answer if you take that | guy into 
account—he’s a given.
Independent:
 
Really, Dependent? How come?
 
 
 
 
I’m a little hurt that ∩’s been saying bad things 
about me; I thought I made life easy for him. 
You want to work out the probability of getting 
two independent events? Easy! Just multiply the 
probabilities for the two events together and job 
done.
 
 
 
 
 
You’re blowing this all out of proportion. Even if 
people do decide to use me instead of you, I don’t 
see that it can make all that much difference.
 
 
 
 
 
 
I can’t say I pay all that much attention to him. 
With independent events, probabilities just turn out 
the same.
fireside chat: dependent versus independent
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    187
calculating probabilities
Dependent:
You’re doing it again; you’re oversimplifying things. 
Well, I’ve had enough. I think that people need to 
think of me first instead of you; that would sort out 
all of these problems.
By really thinking through whether events are 
dependent or not. Let me give you an example. 
Suppose you have a deck of 52 cards, and thirteen 
of them are diamonds. Imagine you choose a card 
at random and it’s a diamond. What would be the 
probability of that happening?
What if you pick out a second card? What’s the 
probability of pulling out a second diamond?
No! The events are dependent. You can no longer 
say there are 13 diamonds in a pack of 52 cards. 
You’ve just removed one diamond, so there are 
12 diamonds left out of 51 cards. The probability 
drops to 12/51, or 4/17.
 
 
 
 
But they weren’t. When people think about you 
first, it leads them towards making all sorts of 
inappropriate assumptions. No wonder ∩ gets so 
messed up.
 
Think nothing of it. Just make sure you think things 
through a bit more carefully next time.
Independent:
 
 
 
Yeah? Like how?
 
 
 
 
 
That’s easy. It’s 13/52, or 1/4.
 
It’s the same isn’t it? 1/4.
 
 
 
 
Not fair, I assumed you put the first card back! 
That would have meant the probability of getting a 
diamond would have been the same as before, and I 
would have been right. The events would have been 
independent.
 
 
 
Well, thanks for the chat, Dependent, I’m glad we 
had a chance to sort things out.
Download at WoweBook.Com

188    Chapter 4
Solved: The Case of the Two Classes
Are the yoga and swimming classes dependent or 
independent?
The CEO’s right—the classes are independent. 
Here’s how he knows.
32 people out of 96 go to yoga classes, so 
	
P(Yoga) = 1/3
72 people go swimming, so
	
P(Swimming) = 3/4
24 people go to both classes, so
	
P(Yoga ∩ Swimming) = 1/4
So how do we know the classes are independent? Let’s multiply 
together P(Yoga) and P(Swimming) and see what we get.
	
P(Yoga) × P(Swimming) = 1/3 × 3/4
	
	
	
          = 1/4
As this is the same as P(Yoga ∩ Swimming), we know that the 
classes are independent.
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
five minute mystery solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    189
calculating probabilities
Here are a bunch of situations and events. Your task is to say which of 
these are dependent, and which are independent.
Dependent
Independent
Throwing a coin and getting heads twice 
in a row.
Removing socks from a drawer until you 
find a matching pair.
Choosing chocolates at random from a box 
and picking dark chocolates twice in a row.
Choosing a card from a deck of cards, and 
then choosing another one.
Choosing a card from a deck of cards, 
putting the card back in the deck, and then 
choosing another one.
The event of getting rain given it’s a 
Thursday.
Dependent or 
Independent?
Download at WoweBook.Com

190    Chapter 4
Here are a bunch of situations and events. Your task was to say which 
of these are dependent, and which are independent.
Dependent
Independent
Throwing a coin and getting heads twice 
in a row.
Removing socks from a drawer until you 
find a matching pair.
Choosing chocolates at random from a box 
and picking dark chocolates twice in a row.
Choosing a card from a deck of cards, and 
then choosing another one.
Choosing a card from a deck of cards, 
putting the card back in the deck, and then 
choosing another one.
The event of getting rain given it’s a 
Thursday.
Dependent or 
Independent?
Solution
The second coin throw isn’t 
affected by the first.
When you remove one sock, there are fewer socks to choose 
from the next time, and this affects the probability.
It’s no more or less likely to rain just 
because it’s Thursday, so these two events 
are independent.
dependent or independent solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    191
calculating probabilities
It’s great that we know our chances 
of winning all these different bets, but 
don’t we need to know more than just 
probability to make smart bets?
Winner! Winner!
On both spins of the wheel, the ball landed on 30, a red 
square, and you doubled your winnings.
You’ve learned a lot about probability over at Fat Dan’s 
roulette table, and you’ll find this knowledge will come in 
handy for what’s ahead at the casino. It’s a pity you didn’t 
win enough chips to take any home with you, though.
Besides the chances of winning, you 
also need to know how much you 
stand to win in order to decide if the 
bet is worth the risk. 
Betting on an event that has a very low probability 
may be worth it if the payoff is high enough to 
compensate you for the risk. In the next chapter, 
we’ll look at how to factor these payoffs into our 
probability calculations to help us make more 
informed betting decisions.
[Note from Fat Dan: 
That’s a relief.]
Download at WoweBook.Com

192    Chapter 4
The Absent-Minded Diners
Three absent-minded friends decide to go out for a meal, but 
they forget where they’re going to meet. Fred decides to throw a 
coin. If it lands heads, he’ll go to the diner; tails, and he’ll go to the 
Italian restaurant. George throws a coin, too; heads, it’s the Italian 
restaurant; tails, it’s the diner. Ron decides he’ll just go to the 
Italian restaurant because he likes the food.
What’s the probability all three friends meet? What’s the 
probability one of them eats alone?
probability puzzle
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    193
calculating probabilities
Here are some more roulette probabilities for you to work out.
1. The probability of the ball having landed on the number 17 given the pocket is black.
2. The probability of the ball landing on pocket number 22 twice in a row.
3. The probability of the ball having landed in a pocket with a number greater than 4 given that 
it’s red.
4. The probability of the ball landing in pockets 1, 2, 3, or 4.
Download at WoweBook.Com

194    Chapter 4
Diner
Diner
Italian
Italian
Diner
Italian
Italian
Ron
George
Fred
1
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
If all friends meet, it must be at the Italian 
restaurant. We need to find
P(Ron Italian ∩ Fred Italian ∩ George Italian)
= 1 x 0.5 x 0.5 = 0.25
1 person eats alone if Fred and George go to the Diner. 
Fred goes to the Diner while George goes to Italian 
restaurant, or George goes to the Diner and Fred gets 
Italian..
(0.5 x 0.5) + (0.5 x 0.5) + (0.5 x 0.5) = 0.75
Three absent-minded friends decide to go out for a meal, but 
they forget where they’re going to meet. Fred decides to throw a 
coin. If it lands heads, he’ll go to the diner; tails, and he’ll go to the 
Italian restaurant. George throws a coin, too; heads, it’s the Italian 
restaurant; tails, it’s the diner. Ron decides he’ll just go to the 
Italian restaurant because he likes the food.
What’s the probability all three friends meet? What’s the 
probability one of them eats alone?
The Absent-Minded Diners solution
puzzle solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    195
calculating probabilities
Here are some more roulette probabilities for you to work out.
1. The probability of the ball having landed on the number 17 given the pocket is black.
2. The probability of the ball landing on pocket number 22 twice in a row.
3. The probability of the ball having landed in a pocket with a number greater than 4 given that 
it’s red.
4. The probability of the ball landing in pockets 1, 2, 3, or 4.
There are 18 black pockets, and one of them is numbered 17. 
P(17 | Black) = 1/18 = 0.0556 (to 3 decimal places)
We need to find P(22 ∩ 22). As these events are independent, this is 
equal to P(22) x P(22). The probability of getting a 22 is 1/38, so 
P(22 ∩ 22) = 1/38 x 1/38 = 1/1444 = 0.00069 (to 5 decimal places)
P(Above 4 | Red) = 1 - P(4 or below | Red)
There are 2 red numbers below 4, so this gives us
1 - (1/18 + 1/18) = 8/9 = 0.889 (to 3 decimal places)
The probability of each pocket is 1/38, so the probability of this event 
is 4 x 1/38 = 4/38 = 0.105 (to 3 decimal places)
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    197
OK, so falling out the tree was 
unexpected, but you have to take 
a long-term view of these things.
using discrete probability distributions
5
Manage Your Expectations
Unlikely events happen, but what are the consequences? 
So far we’ve looked at how probabilities tell you how likely certain events are. What 
probability doesn’t tell you is the overall impact of these events, and what it means 
to you. Sure, you’ll sometimes make it big on the roulette table, but is it really worth it 
with all the money you lose in the meantime? In this chapter, we’ll show you how you 
can use probability to predict long-term outcomes, and also measure the certainty 
of these predictions.
Download at WoweBook.Com

198    Chapter 5
$1 for each game
	
	
  = $20
	
	
  (any order) = $15
	
	
  = $10
	
	
= $5
Back at Fat Dan’s Casino
Have you ever felt mesmerized by the 
flashing lights of a slot machine? Well, 
you’re in luck. At Fat Dan’s Casino, there’s 
a full row of shiny slot machines just waiting 
to be played. Let’s play one of them, which 
costs $1 per game (pull of the lever). Who 
knows, maybe you’ll hit jackpot!
The slot machine has three windows, and 
if all three windows line up in the right way, 
the cash will come cascading out.
The amount of money 
you can win looks tempting, but 
I’d like to know the probability of 
getting any of these combinations 
before playing.
This sounds like something we can calculate. 
Here are the probabilities of a particular image 
appearing in a particular window:
$
Cherry
Lemon
Other
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.5
The three windows are independent of each other, 
which means that the image that appears in one of 
the windows has no effect on the images that appear 
in any of the others.
The probability of a cherry 
appearing in this window is 
0.2.
slot machine payouts
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    199
using discrete probability distributions
BE the gambler
Take a look at the poster for the slot machine on the 
facing page. Your job is to play like you’re the 
gambler and work out the probability of getting 
each combination on the poster. What’s the 
probability of not winning anything?
probability of winning nothing
probability of
probability of
probability of
probability of
(any order)
Download at WoweBook.Com

200    Chapter 5
P($, $, $) = P($) x P($) x P($)
	
 = 0.1 x 0.1 x 0.1
	
 = 0.001
There are three ways of getting this:
P($, $, cherry) + P($, cherry, $) + P(cherry, $, $) 
      = (0.12 x 0.2) + (0.12 x 0.2) + (0.12 x 0.2)
= 0.006
P(cherry, cherry, cherry) = P(cherry) x P(cherry) x P(cherry)
	
                   = 0.2 x 0.2 x 0.2
	
                   = 0.008
P(lemon, lemon, lemon) = P(lemon) x P(lemon) x P(lemon)
	
                = 0.2 x 0.2 x 0.2
	
                = 0.008
This means we get none of the winning combinations.
P(losing) = 1 - P($, $, $) - P($, $, cherry (any order)) - P(cherry, cherry, cherry) - P(lemon, lemon, lemon)
	
= 1 - 0.001 - 0.006 - 0.008 - 0.008
	
= 0.977
Rather than work out all the possible ways in which 
you could lose, you can say P(losing) = 1 - P(winning).
probability of winning nothing
probability of
probability of
probability of
probability of
(any order)
These are the four probability values we 
calculated above.
The probability of a 
dollar sign appearing in 
a window is 0.1
A lemon appearing in a window 
is independent of ones 
appearing in the other two 
windows, so you multiply the 
three probabilities together.
BE the gambler solution
Take a look at the poster for the slot machine on the 
facing page. Your job is to play like you’re the 
gambler and work out the probability of getting 
each combination on the poster. What’s the 
probability of not winning anything?
be the gambler solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    201
using discrete probability distributions
Here are the probabilities of the different winning combinations 
on the slot machine.
Combination
None
Lemons
Cherries
$s/cherry
Dollars
Gain
-$1
$4
$9
$14
$19
Probability
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
We don’t just want to know the probability of 
winning, we want to know how much we stand to 
win.
The probabilities are currently written in terms of combinations of 
symbols, which makes it hard to see at a glance what out gain will be.
We don’t have to write them like this though. Instead of writing the 
probabilities in terms of slot machine images, we can write them in 
terms of how much we win or lose on each game. All we need to do 
is take the amount we’ll win for each combination, and subtract the 
amount we’ve paid for the game.
Combination
None
Lemons
Cherries
Dollars/cherry
Dollars
Probability
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
The table gives us the probability distribution of the 
winnings, a set of the probabilities for every possible gain 
or loss for our slot machine.
This is just a summary of the 
probabilities we just worked out.
This looks useful, but I wonder if we can take it one 
step further. We’ve found the probabilities of getting 
each of the winning combinations, but what we’re 
really interested in is how much we’ll win or lose.
These are the same 
probabilities, just written in 
terms of how much we’ll gain.
We lose $1 if we don’t hit a 
winning combination.
Our gain for hitting each winning 
combination: the payoff minus the $1 
we paid to play.
We can compose a probability distribution for the slot machine
Download at WoweBook.Com

202    Chapter 5
Combination
None
Lemons
Cherries
$s/cherry
Dollars
x
-1
4
9
14
19
P(X = x)
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
Probability Distributions Up Close
When you derived the probabilities of the slot machine, you calculated the 
probability of making each gain or loss. In other words, you calculated the 
probability distribution of a random variable, which is a variable that can 
takes on a set of values, where each value is associated with a specific probability. 
In the case of Fat Dan’s slot machine, the random variable represents the 
amount we’ll gain in each game.
When we want to refer to a random variable, it’s usual to represent it by a capital 
letter, like X or Y. The particular values that the variable can take are represented 
by a lowercase letter—for example, x or y. Using this notation, P(X = x) is a way 
of saying “the probability that the variable X takes a particular value x.”
Here’s our slot machine probability distribution written using this notation:
X is the variable.
The value of each 
combination’s 
winnings is 
represented by x.
Here x is 19.
The probability that the 
variable X is 9—in other 
words, that the value of 
the winnings is $9.
The variable is discrete. This means that it can only take exact values.
As well as giving a table of the probability distribution, we can also show the 
distribution on a chart to help us visualize it. Here is a bar chart showing the slot 
machine probabilities.
Slot Machine Probabilities
x
0
4
9
14
19
-1
P(X = x)
The probabilities for winning 
$4, $9, $14, and $19 are so 
tiny, they barely register on 
the graph.
The probability 
of losing $1 is 
nearly 1.
probability distributions in depth
In this type of bar chart, 
the bars are so thin 
they’re just lines
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    203
using discrete probability distributions
Why should I care about probability 
distributions? All I want to know is 
how much I’ll win on the slot machine. 
Can I calculate that?
Once you’ve calculated a probability 
distribution, you can use this information 
to determine the expected outcome. 
In the case of Fat Dan’s slot machine, we can use our 
probability distribution to determine how much you can 
expect to win or lose long-term.
Q: Why couldn’t we have just used 
the symbols instead of winnings? I’m not 
sure we’ve really gained that much.
A: We could have, but we can do more 
things if we have numeric data because we 
can use it in calculations. You’ll see shortly 
how we can use numeric data to work out 
how much we can expect to win on each 
game, for instance. We couldn’t have done 
that if we had just used symbols.
Q: What if I want to show probability 
distributions on a Venn diagram?
A: It’s not that appropriate to show 
probability distributions like that. Venn 
diagrams and probability trees are useful if 
you want to calculate probabilities. With a 
probability distribution, the probabilities have 
already been calculated.
Q: Can you use any letter to represent 
a variable?
A: Yes, you can, as long as you don’t 
confuse it with anything else. It’s most 
common to use letters towards the end of 
the alphabet, though, such as X and Y.
Q: Should I use the same letter for the 
variable and the values? Would I ever use 
X for the variable and y for the values?
A: Theoretically, there’s nothing to 
stop you, but in practice you’ll find it more 
confusing if you use different letters. It’s best 
to stick to using the same letter for each.
Q: You said that a discrete random 
variable is one where you can say 
precisely what the values are. Isn’t that 
true of every variable?
A: No, it’s not. With the slot machine 
winnings, you know precisely what the 
winnings are going to be for each symbol 
combination. You can’t get any more precise, 
and it wouldn’t matter how many times you 
played. For each game the possible values 
remain the same. 
 
Sometimes you’re given a range of values 
where any value within the range is possible. 
As an example, suppose you were asked to 
measure pieces of string that are between 
10 inches and 11 inches long. The length 
could be literally any value within that range. 
 
Don’t worry about the distinction too much 
for now; we’ll look at this in more detail 
later on in the book. For now, every random 
variable we look at will be discrete.
Download at WoweBook.Com

204    Chapter 5
You have a probability distribution for the amount you could 
gain on the slot machines, but now you need to know how much 
you can expect to win or lose long-term. You can do this by 
calculating how much you can typically expect to win or lose in 
each game. In other words, you can find the expectation. 
The expectation of a variable X is a bit like the mean, but 
for probability distributions. You even calculate it in a similar 
way. To find the expectation, you multiply each value x by the 
probability of getting that value, and then sum the results.
The expectation of a variable X is usually written E(X), but 
you’ll sometimes see it written as μ, the symbol for the mean. 
Think of the expectation and mean as twins separated at birth.
Here’s the equation for working out E(X):
x
-1
4
9
14
19
P(X = x)
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
E(X) = xP(X = x)
E(X) is the 
expectation of X
E(X) = μ
I’m the 
expectation. 
Treat me like 
I’m mean.
Multiply each value by its probability.
Once you’ve done 
multiplying, add the 
whole lot up together.
Let’s use this to calculate the expectation of the slot machine 
gain. Here’s a reminder of our probability distribution:
E(X) = (-1 × 0.977) + (4 × 0.008) + (9 × 0.008) + (14 × 0.006) + (19 × 0.001)
         = -0.977 + 0.032 + 0.072 + 0.084 + 0.019
         = -0.77
In other words, over a large number of games, you can expect 
to lose $0.77 for each game. This means that if you played the 
slot machine 100 times, you could expect to lose $77.
This is the amount in $’s you can expect 
to gain on each pull of the lever—and it’s 
negative!
Expectation gives you a prediction of the results…
expectation and variance of discrete probability distributions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    205
using discrete probability distributions
The expectation tells you how much on average you can expect to win or 
lose with each game. If you lost this amount every single time, where would 
the fun be, and who would play? 
Just because you can expect to lose each time you play doesn’t mean there 
isn’t a small chance you’ll win big. Just like the mean, the expectation doesn’t 
give the full story as the amount you stand to gain on each game could vary 
a lot. How do you think we can measure this?
The amount you could win 
or lose each time varies.
Here’s the jackpot - tempted?
I wonder...if expectation 
is like the mean, can we 
use some sort of variance? 
That’s what we did before.
Probability distributions have variance.
The expectation gives the typical or average value of 
a variable but it doesn’t tell you anything about how 
the values are spread out. For our slot machine, this 
will tell us more about the variation of our potential 
winnings.
Just like we did in Chapter 3, we can use variance to 
measure this spread. Let’s see how we can do this.
x
0
4
9
14
19
-1
P(X = x)
P(X = x)
Slot Machine Probabilities
…and variance tells you about the spread of the results
Download at WoweBook.Com

206    Chapter 5
Back in Chapter 3, we calculated the variance of a set of numbers. We worked 
out (x - μ)2 for each number, and then we took the average of these results.
We can do something similar to work out the variance of a variable X. Instead 
of finding the average of (X - μ)2, we find its expectation. We use this 
formula:
Var(X) = E(X - μ)2
μ is the alternative way of 
writing E(X).
This is the variance. A 
shorthand way of referring to 
the variance of X is Var(X).
We need to find the expectation 
of (X - μ)2—but how?
Variances and probability distributions
There’s just one problem: how do we find the expectation of (X - μ)2?
So how do we calculate E(X - μ)2?
Finding E(X - μ)2 is actually quite similar to finding E(X).
When we calculate E(X), we take each value in the probability distribution, 
multiply it by its probability, and then add the results together. In other 
words, we use the calculation
 
	
	
	
E(X) = xP(X = x) 
When we calculate the variance of X, we calculating (x - μ)2 for every value 
x, multiply it by the probability of getting that value x, and then add the 
results together.
E(X - μ)2 = (x - μ)2P(X = x)
Go through each value x and 
work out what (x - μ)2 is. Then 
multiply it by the probability of 
getting x…
…and then add these 
results together.
In other words, instead of multiplying x by its probability, you multiply 
(x - μ)2 by the probability of getting that value of x.
Var(X) measures how 
widely my payouts vary.
calculating variance for discrete probability distributions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    207
using discrete probability distributions
Let’s see if we can use this to calculate the variance of 
the slot machine. To do this, we subtract μ from each 
value, square the result, and then multiply each one by 
the probability. As a reminder, E(X) or μ is -0.77.
Var(X) = E(X - μ)2
            = (-1+0.77)2 × 0.977 + (4+0.77)2 × 0.008 + (9+0.77)2 × 0.008 + (14+0.77)2 × 0.006 + (19+0.77)2 × 
0.001
            = (-0.23)2 × 0.977 + 4.772 × 0.008 + 9.772 × 0.008 + 14.772 × 0.006 + 19.772 × 0.001
            = 0.0516833 + 0.1820232 + 0.7636232 + 1.3089174 + 0.3908529
x
-1
4
9
14
19
P(X = x)
0.977 0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
Here’s a reminder of the slot 
machine probabilities.
This means that while the expectation of our winnings is -0.77, the 
variance is 2.6971.
(X-μ)2 x P(X=x)
What about the standard deviation? 
Can we calculate that too?
Let’s calculate the slot machine’s variance
Would you prefer to play on a slot machine 
with a high or low variance? Why?
We can use the same symbol for 
standard deviation as before.
As well as having a variance, probability 
distributions have a standard deviation. 
It serves a similar function to the standard deviation of a set of values. 
It’s a way of measuring how far away from the center you can expect 
your values to be.
As before, the standard deviation is calculated by taking the square 
root of the variance like this:
σ =  Var(X)
This means that the standard deviation of the slot machine winnings is 
√2.6971, or 1.642. This means that on average, our winnings per game  
will be 1.642 away from the expectation of -0.77.
We found E(X) = -0.77 
back on page 204
Download at WoweBook.Com

208    Chapter 5
Q: So expectation is a lot like the 
mean. Is there anything for probability 
distributions that’s like the median or 
mode?
A: You can work out the most likely 
probability, which would be a bit like the 
mode, but you won’t normally have to do this. 
When it comes to probability distributions, 
the measure that statisticians are most 
interested in is the expectation.
Q: Shouldn’t the expectation be one of 
the values that X can take?
A: It doesn’t have to be. Just as the mean 
of a set of values isn’t necessarily the same 
as one of the values, the expectation of a 
probability distribution isn’t necessarily one 
of the values X can take.
Q: Are the variance and standard 
deviation the same as we had before 
when we were dealing with values?
A: They’re the same, except that this time 
we’re dealing with probability distributions. 
The variance and standard deviation of a 
set of values are ways of measuring how 
far values are spread out from the mean. 
The variance and standard deviation of 
a probability distribution measure how 
the probabilities of particular values are 
dispersed.
Q: I find the concept of E(X - μ)2 
confusing. Is it the same as finding  
E(X - μ) and then squaring the end result?
A: No, these are two different calculations. 
E(X - μ)2 means that you find the square of  
X - μ for each value of X, and then find the 
expectation of all the results. If you calculate 
E(X - μ) and then square the result, you’ll get 
a completely different answer. 
 
Technically speaking, you’re working out 
E((X - μ)2), but it’s not often written that way.
Q: So what’s the difference between a 
slot machine with a low variance and one 
with a high variance?
A: A slot machine with a high variance 
means that there’s a lot more variability in 
your overall winnings. The amount you could 
win overall is less predictable. 
 
In general, the smaller the variance is, the 
closer your average winnings per game are 
likely to be to the expectation. If you play on 
a slot machine with a larger variance, your 
overall winnings will be less reliable.
there are no dumb questions
Variance
Use the following formula to 
calculate the variance 
     Var(X) = E(X - μ)2
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Expectation
Use the following formula to find 
the expectation of a variable X:
      E(X) =   xP(X = x)
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    209
using discrete probability distributions
Here’s the probability distribution of a random variable X:
x
1
2
3
4
5
P(X = x)
0.1
0.25
0.35
0.2
0.1
1. What’s the value of E(X)?
2. What’s the value of Var(X)?
Download at WoweBook.Com

210    Chapter 5
Here’s the probability distribution of a random variable X:
x
1
2
3
4
5
P(X = x)
0.1
0.25
0.35
0.2
0.1
1. What’s the value of E(X)?
E(X) = xP(X=x)
       = 1x0.1 + 2x0.25 + 3x0.35 + 4x0.2 + 5x0.1
       = 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.05 + 0.8 + 0.5
       = 2.95
2. What’s the value of Var(X)?
Var(X)2 = E(X - μ)2
	
= (x - μ)2P(X=x)
	
= (1-2.95)2x0.1 + (2-2.95)2x0.25 + (3-2.95)2x0.35 + (4-2.95)2x0.2 + (5-2.95)2x0.1
	
= (-1.95)2x0.1 + (-0.95)2x0.25 + (0.05)2x0.35 + (1.05)2x0.2 + (2.05)2x0.1
	
= 3.8025x0.1 + 0.9025x0.25 + 0.0025x0.35 + 1.1025x0.2 + 4.2025x0.1
	
= 0.38025 + 0.225625 + 0.000875 + 0.2205 + 0.42025
	
= 1.2475
Multiply each value by 
the probability of it 
occurring, and take the 
sum of all the results.
Go through each value x and work out 
what (x - μ)2 is. Then multiply it by the 
probability of getting x. Once you’ve done 
that, add the whole lot up together.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    211
using discrete probability distributions
The Case of the Moving Expectation
Statsville broadcasts a number of popular quiz shows, and among these 
is Seal or No Seal. In this show, the contestant is shown a number of 
boxes containing different amounts of money, and they have to choose 
one of them, without looking inside. The remaining boxes are opened 
one by one, and with each one that’s opened, the contestant is offered 
the chance to keep the money in the box they’ve chosen, sight unseen, 
or accept another offer based on the amount of money contained 
in the rest of the unopened boxes. The Statsville Seal Sanctuary 
get a donation based on any winnings the contestant gets.
The latest contestant is an amateur statistician, and he figures 
he’ll be in a better position to win if he knows what the expectation 
is of all the boxes. He’s just finished calculating the expectation when 
the producer comes over to him.
“You’re on in three minutes,” says the producer, “and we’ve changed all 
the values in the boxes. They’re now worth twice as much, minus $10.”
The contestant stares at the producer in horror. Are all his calculations 
for nothing? He can’t possibly work out the expectation from scratch in 
three minutes. What should he do?
How can the contestant figure out the new expectation 
in record time?
Five Minute 
Mystery
Five Minute 
Mystery
Download at WoweBook.Com

212    Chapter 5
Now pays 
5 times 
more!
$2 for each game
	
	
  = $100
	
	
  (any order) = $75
	
	
  = $50
	
	
= $25
In the past few minutes, Fat Dan has changed the cost 
and prizes of the slot machine. Here’s the new lineup.
Instead of paying $1 for each game, 
the price has now gone up to $2.
The prizes are 5 
times the original.
The cost of one game (pull of the lever) on the slot machine 
is now $2 instead of $1, but the prizes are now five times 
greater. If we win, we’ll be able to make a lot more money 
than before.
Here’s the new probability distribution.
y
-2
23
48
73
98
P(Y = y)
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
This time we’re 
using Y, not X.
Fat Dan changed his prices
If we knew what the expectation 
and variance were, we’d have an idea 
of how much we could win long-term.
a new probability distribution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    213
using discrete probability distributions
What’s the expectation and variance of the new probability 
distribution? How do these values compare to the previous payout 
distribution’s expectation of -0.77 and variance of 2.6971?
y
-2
23
48
73
98
P(Y = y)
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
Download at WoweBook.Com

214    Chapter 5
What’s the expectation and variance of the new probability 
distribution? How do these values compare to the previous payout 
distribution’s expectation of -0.77 and variance of 2.6971?
y
-2
23
48
73
98
P(Y = y)
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
E(Y) = (-2) x 0.977 + 23 x 0.008 + 48 x 0.008 + 73 x 0.006 + 98 x 0.001
       = -1.954 + 0.184 + 0.384 + 0.438 + 0.098
       = -0.85
Var(Y) = E(Y - μ)2
         = (y - μ)2P(Y=y)
         = (-2+0.85)2x0.977 + (23+0.85)2x0.008 + (48+0.85)2x0.008 + (73+0.85)2x0.006 +
	
  (98+0.85)2x0.001
         = (-1.15)2x0.977 + (23.85)2x0.008 + (48.85)2x0.008 + (73.85)2x0.006 + (98.85)2x0.001
         = 1.3225x0.977 + 568.8225x0.008 + 2386.3225x0.008 + 5453.8225x0.006 + 
	
  9771.3225x0.001
         = 1.2920825 + 4.55058 + 19.09058 + 32.722935 + 9.7713225
         = 67.4275
The expectation is slightly lower, so in the long term, we can expect to lose $0.85 each game. The variance is 
much larger. This means that we stand to lose more money in the long term on this machine, but there’s less 
certainty.
Do you mean to tell me we have to 
run through complicated calculations 
each time Fat Dan changes his prices? 
The old and new gains are related.
The cost of each game has gone up to $2, and the prizes are 
now five times higher than they were. As there’s a relationship 
between the old and new gains, maybe their expectations and 
variance are related too.
Let’s find the relationship.
sharpen your pencil solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    215
using discrete probability distributions
Pool Puzzle
It’s time for a bit of algebra. Your job is 
to take numbers from the pool and 
place them into the blank lines in 
the calculations. You may not use 
the same number more than once, 
and you won’t need to use all the 
numbers. Your goal is to come up 
with an expression for the new gains 
on the slot machine in terms of the old. X 
represents the old gains, Y the new.
Note: each thing from 
the pool can only be 
used once!
X = (original win) - (original cost)
   = (original win) - 
(original win) =                         + 
Y = 5 (original win) - (new cost)
   = 5(                       +                       ) - 
   = 5                       +                       - 
   =                                                 + 
1
1
X
X
1
2
X
2
5
5
X
3
Download at WoweBook.Com

216    Chapter 5
Pool Puzzle Solution
It’s time for a bit of algebra. Your job is 
to take numbers from the pool and 
place them into the blank lines in 
the calculations. You may not use 
the same number more than once, 
and you won’t need to use all the 
numbers. Your goal is to come up 
with an expression for the new gains 
on the slot machine in terms of the old. X 
represents the old gains, Y the new.
Note: each thing from 
the pool can only be 
used once!
X = (original win) - (original cost)
   = (original win) - 
(original win) =                         + 
Y = 5 (original win) - (new cost)
   = 5(                       +                       ) - 
   = 5                       +                       - 
   =                                                + 
1
1
X
X
1
2
X
2
5
5
X
3
The original game cost $1
This gives us the winnings of the 
original game in terms of X.
We can substitute in 
our expression for the 
original winnings.
So Y = 5X + 3. There’s a definite 
relationship between X and Y.
pool puzzle solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    217
using discrete probability distributions
We’ve found that we can relate the new gains to the old using 
Y = 5X + 3, where Y refers to the new gains, and X refers to 
the old. What we want to do now is see if there’s a relationship 
between E(X) and E(Y), and Var(X) and Var(Y).
If there is a relationship, this will save us lots of time if Fat 
Dan changes his prices again. As long as we know what the 
relationship is between the old and the new, we’ll be able to 
quickly calculate the new expectation and variance.
Let’s see whether there’s a pattern in the relationship between 
E(X) and E(Y), and Var(X) and Var(Y).
1. E(X) is -0.77 and E(Y) = -0.85. What is 5 x E(X)? What is 5 x E(X) + 3? How does this relate to E(Y)?
2. Var(X) = 2.6971 and Var(Y) = 67.4275. What is 5 x Var(X)? What is 52 x Var(X)? How does this relate to Var(Y)?
3. How could you generalize this for any probability distribution where Y = aX + b?
There’s a linear relationship between E(X) and E(Y)
Download at WoweBook.Com

218    Chapter 5
Let’s see whether there’s a pattern in the relationship between 
E(X) and E(Y), and Var(X) and Var(Y).
1. E(X) is -0.77 and E(Y) = -0.85. What is 5 x E(X)? What is 5 x E(X) + 3? How does this relate to E(Y)?
2. Var(X) = 2.6971 and Var(Y) = 67.4275. What is 5 x Var(X)? What is 52 x Var(X)? How does this relate to Var(Y)?
3. How could you generalize this for any probability distribution aX + b?
5 x E(X) = -3.85
5 x E(X) + 3 = -0.85
E(Y) = 5 x E(X) + 3.
5 x Var(X) = 13.4855
52 x Var(X) = 67.4275
Var(Y) = 52 x Var(X)
E(aX + b) = a E(X) + b
Var(aX + b) = a2  Var(X)
Slot machine transformations
So what did you accomplish over the past few pages?
First of all, you found the expectation and variance of X, where 
X is the amount of money you stand to make in each game.
You then wanted to know the effect of Fat Dan’s price changes 
but without having to recalculate the expectation and variance 
from scratch. You did this by working out the relationship 
between the old and the new gains, and then using the 
relationship to work out the new expectation and variance. 
You found that:
E(5X + 3) = 5E(X) + 3
Var(5X + 3) = 52Var(X)
Now pays 
5 times 
more!
another sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    219
using discrete probability distributions
E(aX + b) = aE(X) + b
Var(aX + b) = a2Var(X)
We can generalize this for any random variable. For any 
random variable X
This is called a linear transform, as we are dealing with 
a linear change to X. In other words, the underlying 
probabilities stay the same but the values are changed into 
new values of the form aX + b.
Square the a and multiply it 
by the variance of X (drop 
the b).
Q: Do a and b have to be constants?
A: Yes they do. If a and b are variables, then this result won’t hold 
true.
Q: Where did the b go in the variance?
A: Adding a constant value to the distribution makes no difference 
to the overall variance, only to the expectation. 
 
When you add a constant to a variable, it in effect moves the 
distribution along while keeping the same basic shape. This means 
that the expectation shifts along by b, but as the shape remains 
unchanged, the variance says the same.
Q: I’m surprised I have to multiply the variance by a2. Why’s 
that?
A: When you multiply a variable by a constant, you multiply all its 
underlying values by that constant. 
 
When you calculate the variance, you perform calculations based 
on the square of the underlying values. And as these have been 
multiplied by a, the end result is that you multiply the variance by a2.
Q: Do I really have to remember how to do linear transforms? 
Are they important?
A: Yes, they are. They can save you a lot of time in the long 
run, as they eliminate the need for you to have to calculate the 
expectation and variance of a probability distribution every time the 
values change. Rather than calculating a new probability distribution, 
then calculating the expectation and variance from scratch, you can 
just plug the expectation and variance you already calculated into the 
equations above. 
 
Knowing linear transforms can also help you out in exams. First of 
all, you can save valuable time if you know what shortcuts you can 
take. Furthermore, exam papers don’t always give you the underlying 
probability distribution. You might be told the expectation of variable, 
and you may have to transform it based on very basic information.
Q: I tried calculating the expectation and variance the long 
way round and came up with a different answer. Why?
A: You’ve seen by now that it’s easy to make mistakes when you 
calculate expectations and variances. If you calculate these longhand, 
there’s a good chance you made a mistake somewhere along the line. 
You’re always better off using statistical shortcuts where possible.
General formulas for linear transforms
Multiply the expectation by a, and 
then add b.
Download at WoweBook.Com

220    Chapter 5
Solved: The Case of the Moving Expectation.
How can the contestant figure out the new expectation in record 
time?
The contestant looks around in panic for a brief moment and 
then relaxes. The change in values isn’t such a big problem 
after all.
The contestant has already spent time calculating the 
expectation of the original values of all the boxes, and this has 
given him an idea of how much money is available for him to win.
The producer has told him that the new prizes are ten dollars less than twice 
the original prizes. In other words, this is a linear transform. If X represents the 
original prize money and Y the new, the values are transformed using Y = 2X – 10.
The contestant finds E(Y) using E(2X –10) = 2E(X) – 10. This means that all 
he has to do to find the new expectation is double his original expectation and 
subtract 10.
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Probability distributions describe the probability of all 
possible outcomes of a given variable.
The expectation is the expected average long-term 
outcome. It’s represented as either E(X) or µ, and is 
calculated using E(X) = xP(X=x).
The expectation of a function of X is given by 
E(f(X)) = f(x)P(X=x)
The variance of a probability distribution is given by 
Var(X) = E(X - µ)2




The standard deviation of a probability distribution 
is given by  = √ Var(X)
Linear transforms are when a variable X is transformed 
into aX + b, where a and b are constants. The expectation 
and variance are given by: 
   E(aX + b) = aE(X) + b 
   Var(aX + b) = a2Var(X)


mystery solved!
Linear Transforms
If you have a variable X and 
numbers a and b, then:
      E(aX + b) = aE(X) + b
      Var(aX + b) = a2Var(X)
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    221
using discrete probability distributions
So do linear transforms give me a quick way 
of calculating the expectation and variance 
when I want to play multiple games?
There’s a difference between using linear transforms and 
playing multiple games.
With linear transforms, all of the probabilities stay the same, but the possible values 
change. The values are transformed, but not the probabilities. There are still the same 
number of possible values.
When you play multiple games, both the values and the probabilities are different, 
and even the number of possible values can change. It’s not possible to just transform 
the values, and working out the probabilities can quickly become complicated.
Let’s look at a simple example. Imagine you were playing on a very simple slot 
machine with probability distribution X.
What if you were going to play two games on 
the slot machine? You’d need to work out the 
probability distribution from scratch by considering 
all the possible outcomes from both games.
The amounts here are 
multiplied by 2. The 
probabilities stay the same 
as before.
To find the probability distribution of 2X, you just need 
to multiply the x values by 2. The underlying values 
change because the potential gains have doubled.
x
-1
5
P(X = x)
0.9
0.1
2x
-2
10
P(2X = 2x)
0.9
0.1
w
-2
4
10
P(W = w)
0.81
0.18
0.01
This time, both the probabilities and values have 
changed. So how can we find the expectation and 
variance for this situation?
This is like pulling the handle 
twice. The possible gains and 
probabilities are different.
y=4 when you by 
get -1 in one game 
and 5 in the other.
Now pays 
double!
y=-2 if you lose 
both games.
y=10 if you 
win both 
games.
W represents 
the outcome 
of two games
Download at WoweBook.Com

222    Chapter 5
x
-1
5
P(X = x)
0.9
0.1
When we play multiple games on the slot machine, each game 
is called an event, and the outcome of each game is called an 
observation. Each observation has the same expectation and 
variance, but their outcomes can be different. You may not gain 
the same amount in each game.
We need some way of differentiating between the different 
games or observations. If the probability distribution of the slot 
machine gains is represented by X, we call the first observation 
X1 and the second observation X2.
Each game is called 
an event.
The outcome of each 
game is called an 
observation.
X1
X2
We have the same 
expectation and 
variance, but we’re 
separate events.
Observation for game 1
Observation for game 2
X1 and X2 have the same probabilities, possible values, 
expectation and variance as X. In other words, they have the 
same probability distribution, even though they are separate 
observations and their outcomes can be different.
x1
-1
5
P(X1 = x1)
0.9
0.1
x2
-1
5
P(X2 = x2)
0.9
0.1
X1 and X2 base 
themselves on me, 
I’m their role model.
Grand Master probability 
distribution X
When we want to find the expectation and variance of two 
games on the slot machine, what we really want to find is 
the expectation and variance of X1 + X2. Let’s take a look at 
some shortcuts.
So that’s where we get our 
probability distributions from.
Every pull of the lever is an independent observation
introducing independent observations
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    223
using discrete probability distributions
E(X1 + X2) = E(X1) + E(X2)
	
    = E(X) + E(X)
	
    = 2E(X)
Variance
So what about Var(X1 + X2)? Here’s the calculation.
Var(X1 + X2) = Var(X1) + Var(X2)
	
       = Var(X) + Var(X)
	
       = 2Var(X)
This means that if we were to play two games on a slot machine where 
Var(X) = 2.6971, the variance would be 2.6971×2, or 5.3942.
 We can extend this for any number of independent observations. If we 
have n independent observations of X 
Var(X1 + X2 + ... Xn) = nVar(X)
Observation shortcuts
Let’s find the expectation and variance of X1 + X2.
E(X1) and E(X2) are both 
equal to E(X) as X1 and X2 
follow the same probability 
distribution as X
In other words, if we have the expectation of two observations, we 
multiply E(X) by 2. This means that if we were to play two games 
on a slot machine where E(X) = -0.77, the expectation would be 
-0.77×2, or -1.54.
We can extend this to deal with multiple observations. If we want to 
find the expectation of n observations, we can use
E(X1 + X2 + ... Xn) = nE(X)
If there are n observations, 
we just multiply E(X) by n.
In other words, to find the expectation and variance of multiple 
observations, just multiply E(X) and Var(X) by the number of observations.
Multiply Var(X) by n, the 
number of observations.
Var(X1) and Var(X2) are the same as Var(X) as X1 
and X2 follow the same probability distribution as X.
Expectation
First of all, let’s deal with E(X1 + X2).
	
       X1 + X2 is not 
the same as 2X.
X1 + X2 means you 
are considering 
two observations 
of X. 2X means you have one 
observation, but the possible 
values have doubled.
Download at WoweBook.Com

224    Chapter 5
Q: Isn’t E(X1 + X2) the same as E(2X)?
A: They look similar but they’re actually 
two different concepts. 
 
With E(2X), you want to find the expectation 
of a variable where the underlying values 
have been doubled. In other words, there’s 
only one variable, but the values are twice 
the size. 
 
With E(X1 + X2), you’re looking at two 
separate instances of X, and you’re looking 
at the joint expectation. As an example, if X 
represents the distribution of a game, then 
X1 + X2 represents the distribution of two 
games.
Q: So are X1 and X2 the same?
A: They follow the same distribution, but 
they’re different instances or observations. 
As an example, X1 could refer to game 
1, and X2 to game 2. They both have the 
same probability distribution, but the actual 
outcome of each might be different. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: I see that the new variance is 
nVar(X) and not n2Var(X) like we had for 
linear transforms. Why’s that?
A: This time we have a series of 
independent observations, all distributed the 
same way. This means that we can find the 
overall variance by adding the variance of 
each one together. If we have n independent 
observations, then this gives us nVar(X). 
 
When we calculate the variance of Var(nX), 
we multiply the underlying values by n. As 
the variance is formed by squaring the 
underlying values, this means that the 
resulting variance is n2Var(X).
Probability distributions describe the probability of 
all possible outcomes of a given random variable.
The expectation of a random variable X is the 
expected long-term average. It’s represented as 
either E(X) or μ. It’s calculated using 
 
	
E(X) = xP(X=x)
The variance of a random variable X is given by 
 
	
Var(X) = E(X - μ)2



The standard deviation σ is the square root of the 
variance.
Linear transforms are when a random variable 
X is transformed into aX + b, where a and b are 
numbers. The expectation and variance are given 
by 
 
	
E(aX + b) = aE(X) + b 
	
Var(aX + b) = a2Var(X)


no dumb questions
Independent Observations
Use the following formula to calculate the 
variance 
      E(X1 + X2 + ... + Xn) = nE(X)
      Var(X1 + X2 + ... + Xn) = nVar(X)
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    225
using discrete probability distributions
The amount of coffee in an extra 
large cup of coffee; X is the amount 
of coffee in a normal-sized cup.
Below are a series of scenarios. Assuming you know the distribution 
of each X, and your task is to say whether you can solve each problem 
using linear transforms or independent observations.
Linear 
transform
Independent 
observation
Finding the net gain from a lottery 
ticket after the price of tickets 
goes up; X is the net gain of buying 
1 lottery ticket.
Drinking an extra cup of coffee 
per day; X is the amount of coffee 
in a cup.
Finding the net gain from buying 10 
lottery tickets; X is the net gain of 
buying 1 lottery ticket.
Buying an extra hen to lay eggs 
for breakfast; X is the number of 
eggs laid per week by a certain 
breed of hen.
Linear Transform 
or Independent 
Observation?
Download at WoweBook.Com

226    Chapter 5
The amount of coffee in an extra 
large cup of coffee; X is the amount 
of coffee in a normal-sized cup.
Below are a series of scenarios. Assuming you know the distribution 
of each X, and your task is to say whether you can solve each problem 
using linear transforms or independent observations.
Linear 
transform
Independent 
observation
Finding the net gain from a lottery 
ticket after the price of tickets 
goes up; X is the net gain of buying 
1 lottery ticket.
Drinking an extra cup of coffee 
per day; X is the amount of coffee 
in a cup.
Finding the net gain from buying 10 
lottery tickets; X is the net gain of 
buying 1 lottery ticket.
Buying an extra hen to lay eggs 
for breakfast; X is the number of 
eggs laid per week by a certain 
breed of hen.
Linear Transform 
or Independent 
Observation?
Solution
The winnings from each 
lottery ticket are 
independent of the others.
Changing the price of a ticket 
changes the expected winnings, but 
not the probability of winning, 
so this can be solved with linear 
transforms.
linear transform or independent observation solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    227
using discrete probability distributions
The local diner has started selling fortune cookies at $0.50 per cookie. Hidden within 
each cookie is a secret message. Most messages predict a good future for the buyer, 
but others offer money off at the diner. The probability of getting $2 off is 0.1, the 
probability of getting $5 off is 0.07, and the probability of getting $10 off is 0.03.
If X is the net gain, what’s the probability distribution of X? What are the values of E(X) 
and Var(X)?
The diner decides to put the price of the cookies up to $1. What are the new expectation and variance?
Download at WoweBook.Com

228    Chapter 5
The local diner has started selling fortune cookies at $0.50 per cookie. Hidden within 
each cookie is a secret message. Most messages predict a good future for the buyer, 
but others offer money off at the diner. The probability of getting $2 off is 0.1, the 
probability of getting $5 off is 0.07, and the probability of getting $10 off is 0.03.
If X is the net gain, what’s the probability distribution of X? What are the values of E(X) 
and Var(X)?
x
-0.5
1.5
4.5
9.5
P(X = x)
0.8
0.1
0.07
0.03
Here’s the probability distribution of X:
E(X) = (-0.5)x0.8 + 1.5x0.1 + 4.5x0.07 + 9.5x0.03
       = -0.4 + 0.15 + 0.315 + 0.285
       = 0.35
Var(X)  = E(X - μ)2
	
= (x - μ)2P(X=x)
	
= (-0.5-0.35)2x0.8 + (1.5-0.35)2x0.1 + (4.5-0.35)2x0.07 + (9.5-0.35)2x0.03
	
= (-0.85)2x0.8 + (1.15)2x0.1 + (4.15)2x0.07 + (9.15)2x0.03
	
= 0.7225x0.8 + 1.3225x0.1 + 17.2225x0.07 + 83.7225x0.03
	
= 0.578 + 0.13225 + 1.205575 + 2.511675
	
= 4.4275
The diner decides to put the price of the cookies up to $1. What are the new expectation and variance?
The diner puts the price of the cookies up by $0.50, which means that 
the new net gains are modelled by X - 0.5
E(X - 0.5) = E(X) - 0.5
	
    = 0.35 - 0.5
	
    = -0.15
Var(X - 0.5) = Var(X)
	
      = 4.4275
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    229
using discrete probability distributions
New slot machine on the block
Fat Dan has brought in a new model slot machine. Each 
game costs more, but if you win you’ll win big. Here’s the 
probability distribution:
x
-5
395
P(X = x)
0.99
0.01
Each game costs more 
than the other slot 
machine, but just look 
at the jackpot!
We’ve looked at the expectation and variance of playing a 
single machine, and also for playing several independent games 
on the same machine. What happens if we play two different 
machines at once?
In this situation, we have two different, independent probability 
distributions for our machines:
y
-2
23
48
73
98
P(Y = y)
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
These are the 
current gains of our 
original slot machine.
So how can we find the expectation and variance of playing 
one game each on both machines?
We could work out the probability 
distribution of X + Y, but that would be time-
consuming, and we might make a mistake. I 
wonder if we can take another shortcut?
New!
x
-5
395
P(X = x)
0.99
0.01
These are the current 
gains of Fat Dan’s new 
slot machine.
Download at WoweBook.Com

230    Chapter 5
Add E(X) and E(Y) to get E(X + Y)…
We want to find the expectation and variance of playing one game each 
on both of the slot machines. In other words, we want to find E(X + Y) 
and Var(X + Y) where X and Y are random variables representing the 
two machines. X and Y are independent.
One way of doing this would be to calculate the probability distribution 
of X + Y, and then calculate the expectation and variance.
x
y
x + y
Can you imagine how long 
it would take us to work 
this out, and how many 
mistakes we’d make?
Fortunately we don’t have to do this. To find E(X + Y), all we 
need to do is add together E(X) and E(Y).
Intuitively this makes sense. If, for example, you were playing 
two games where you would expect to win $5 in one game 
and $10 in the other, you would expect to win $15 overall—
$5 + $10.
We can do something similar with the variance. To find 
Var(X +Y), we add the two variances together. This works for 
all independent random variables.
E(X + Y) = E(X) + E(Y)
Var(X + Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y)
	
       Adding the 
variances 
together only 
works for 
independent 
random variables
If X and Y are not independent, 
then Var(X + Y) is no longer 
equal to Var(X) + Var(Y).
E(X)
E(Y)
E(X + Y)
Var(X)
Var(Y)
Var(X + Y)
=
+
The variance increases—the 
probability distribution 
varies more.
0
0
0
Don’t worry, we’re not asking 
you to calculate this.
addition and subtraction of random variables
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    231
using discrete probability distributions
You’re not just limited to adding random variables; you 
can also subtract one from the other. Instead of using the 
probability distribution of X + Y, we can use X – Y.
If you’re dealing with the difference between two random 
variables, it’s easy to find the expectation. To find E(X – Y), 
we subtract E(Y) from E(X).
Finding the variance of X – Y is less intuitive. To find  
Var(X – Y), we add the two variances together.
E(X - Y) = E(X) – E(Y)
Var(X - Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y)
But that doesn’t make 
sense. Why should we 
add the variances?
Because the variability increases.
When we subtract one random variable 
from another, the variance of the probability 
distribution still increases.
When we subtract independent random variables, the 
variance is exactly the same as if we’d added them together. 
The amount of variability can only increase.
	
       If you’re 
subtracting 
two random 
variables, add 
the variances.
It’s easy to make this 
mistake as at first glance it 
seems counterintuitive. Just 
remember that if the two 
variables are independent, 
Var(X - Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y)
We add the variances, so be careful!
The variance increases, 
even though we’re 
subtracting variables.
E(X)
E(Y)
Var(X)
Var(Y)
-
0
0
E(X - Y)
Var(X - Y)
=
Subtracting independent 
random variables still 
increases the variance.
…and subtract E(X) and E(Y) to get E(X – Y)
Download at WoweBook.Com

232    Chapter 5
It doesn’t stop there. As well as adding and subtracting random variables, 
we can also add and subtract their linear transforms.
Imagine what would happen if Fat Dan changed the cost and prizes on both 
machines, or even just one of them. The last thing we’d want to do is work 
out the entire probability distribution in order to find the new expectations 
and variances.
Fortunately, we can take another shortcut.
Suppose the gains on the X and Y slot machines are changed so that the 
gains for X become aX, and the gains for Y become bY. a and b can be any 
number.
X
Y
aX
bY
To find the expectation and variance for combinations of aX and bY, 
we can use the following shortcuts.
E(aX + bY) = aE(X) + bE(Y)
Var(aX + bY) = a2Var(X) + b2Var(Y)
Adding aX and bY
If we want to find the expectation and variance of 
aX + bY, we use
Subtracting aX and bY
If we subtract the random variables and calculate 
E(aX - bY) and Var(aX - bY), we  use
E(aX - bY) = aE(X) - bE(Y)
Var(aX - bY) = a2Var(X) + b2Var(Y)
It’s a linear transform, so 
we square the numbers here.
Just as before, we add the variances, even though 
we’re subtracting the random variables.
Remember to add the variances.
We square the numbers because it’s a linear 
transform, just like before.
a and b can be any number.
You can also add and subtract linear transformations
adding and subtracting linear transformations
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    233
using discrete probability distributions
Q: So if X and Y are games, does  
aX + bY mean a games of X and b games 
of Y?
A: aX + bY actually refers to two linear 
transforms added together. In other words, 
the underlying values of X and Y are 
changed. This is different from independent 
observations, where each game would be an 
independent observation.
Q: I can’t see when I’d ever want to 
use X – Y. Does it have a purpose?
A: X – Y is really useful if you want to find 
the difference between two variables.  
E(X – Y) is a bit like saying “What do you 
expect the difference between X and Y to 
be”, and Var(X – Y) tells you the variance.
Q: Why do you add the variances for  
X – Y? Surely you’d subtract them?
A: At first it sounds counterintuitive, 
but when you subtract one variable from 
another, you actually increase the amount 
of variability, and so the variance increases. 
The variability of subtracting a variable is 
actually the same as adding it. 
 
Another way of thinking of it is that 
calculating the variance squares the 
underlying values. Var(X + bY) is equal to 
Var(X) + b2Var(Y), and if b is -1, this gives us 
Var(X - Y). As (-1)2 = 1, this means that  
Var(X - Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y). 
 
Q: Can we do this if X and Y aren’t 
independent?
A: No, these rules only apply if X and 
Y are independent. If you need to find the 
variance of X + Y where there’s dependence, 
you’ll have to calculate the probability 
distribution from scratch.
Q: It looks like the same rules apply 
for X + Y as X1 + X2. Is this correct?
A: Yes, that’s right, as long as X, Y, X1 
and X2 are all independent.
Independent observations of X are different instances 
of X. Each observation has the same probability 
distribution, but the outcomes can be different.
If X1, X2, ..., Xn are independent observations of X then: 
 
	
E(X1 + X2 + ... + Xn) = nE(X) 
	
Var(X1 + X2 + ... Xn) = nVar(X) 
If X and Y are independent random variables, then: 
 
	
E(X + Y) = E(X) + E(Y) 
	
E(X - Y) = E(X) - E(Y) 
	
Var(X + Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y) 
	
Var(X - Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y)



The expectation and variance of linear transforms of X 
and Y are given by 
 
	
E(aX + bY) = aE(X) + bE(Y) 
	
E(aX - bY) = aE(X) - bE(Y) 
	
Var(aX + bY) = a2Var(X) + b2Var(Y) 
	
Var(aX - bY) = a2Var(X) + b2Var(Y)

Download at WoweBook.Com

234    Chapter 5
Below you’ll see a table containing expectations and variances. Write the formula or shortcut for 
each one in the table. Where applicable, assume variables are independent.
Statistic
Shortcut or formula
   E(aX + b)
   Var(aX + b)
   E(X)
   E(f(X))
   Var(aX - bY)
   Var(X)
   E(aX - bY)
   E(X1 + X2 + X3)
   Var(X1 + X2 + X3)
   E(X2)
   Var(aX - b)
expectation and variance exercises
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    235
using discrete probability distributions
A restaurant offers two menus, one for weekdays and the other for weekends. Each menu offers 
four set prices, and the probability distributions for the amount someone pays is as follows:
x
10
15
20
25
P(X = x)
0.2
0.5
0.2
0.1
Weekday:
y
15
20
25
30
P(Y = y)
0.15
0.6
0.2
0.05
Weekend:
Who would you expect to pay the restaurant most: a group of 20 eating at the weekend, or a 
group of 25 eating on a weekday?
Download at WoweBook.Com

236    Chapter 5
Below you’ll see a table containing expectations and variances. Write the formula or shortcut for 
each one in the table. Where applicable, assume variables are independent.
Statistic
Shortcut or formula
   E(aX + b)
aE(X) + b
   Var(aX + b)
a2Var(X)
   E(X)
xP(X = x)
   E(f(X))
f(x)P(X = x)
   Var(aX - bY)
a2Var(X) + b2Var(Y)
   Var(X)
E(X - μ)2 = E(X2) - μ2
   E(aX - bY)
aE(X) - bE(Y)
   E(X1 + X2 + X3)
3E(X)
   Var(X1 + X2 + X3)
3Var(X)
   E(X2)
x2P(X = x)
   Var(aX - b)
a2Var(X)
exercise solutions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    237
using discrete probability distributions
A restaurant offers two menus, one for weekdays and the other for weekends. Each menu offers 
four set prices, and the probability distributions for the amount someone pays is as follows:
x
10
15
20
25
P(X = x)
0.2
0.5
0.2
0.1
Weekday:
y
15
20
25
30
P(Y = y)
0.15
0.6
0.2
0.05
Weekend:
Who would you expect to pay the restaurant most: a group of 20 eating at the weekend, or a 
group of 25 eating on a weekday?
Let’s start by finding the expectation of a weekday and a weekend. X represents 
someone paying on a weekday, and Y represents someone paying at the weekend.
E(X) = 10x0.2 + 15x0.5 + 20x0.2 + 25x0.1
       = 2 + 7.5 + 4 + 2.5
       = 16
E(Y) = 15x0.15 + 20x0.6 + 25x0.2 + 30x0.05
       = 2.25 + 12 + 5 + 1.5
       = 20.75
Each person eating at the restaurant is an independent observation, and to find the 
amount spent by each group, we multiply the expectation by the number in each group.
25 people eating on a weekday gives us 25xE(X) = 25x16 = 400
20 people eating at the weekend gives us 20xE(Y) = 20x20.75 = 415
This means we can expect 20 people eating at the weekend to pay more than 25 
people eating on a weekday.
Download at WoweBook.Com

238    Chapter 5
Jackpot!
You’ve covered a lot of ground in 
this chapter. You learned how to use 
probability distributions, expectation, 
and variance to predict how much you 
stand to win by playing a specific slot 
machine. 
And you discovered how to use 
linear transforms and independent 
observations to anticipate how much 
you’ll win when the payout structure 
changes or when you play multiple 
games on the same machine.
you’re an expectation expert!
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    239
using discrete probability distributions
Sam likes to eat out at two restaurants. Restaurant A is generally more expensive than 
restaurant B, but the food quality is generally much better.
Below you’ll find two probability distributions detailing how much Sam tends to spend at each 
restaurant. As a general rule, what would you say is the difference in price between the two 
restaurants? What’s the variance of this?
x
20
30
40
45
P(X = x)
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.1
Restaurant A:
y
10
15
18
P(Y = y)
0.2
0.6
0.2
Restaurant B:
Download at WoweBook.Com

240    Chapter 5
Let’s start by finding the expectation and variance of X and Y.
E(X) = 20x0.3 + 30x0.4 + 40x0.2 + 45x0.1
       = 6 + 12 + 8 + 4.5
       = 30.5
Var(X) = (20-30.5)2x0.3 + (30-30.5)2x0.4 + 
	
  (40-30.5)2x0.2 + (45-30.5)2x0.1
         = (-10.5)2x0.3 + (-0.5)2x0.4 + 9.52x0.2 + 14.52x0.1
         = 110.25x0.3 + 0.25x0.4 + 90.25x0.2 + 210.25x0.1
         = 33.075 + 0.1 + 18.05 + 21.025
         = 72.25
E(Y) = 10x0.2 + 15x0.6 + 18x0.2
       = 2 + 9 + 3.6
       = 14.6
Var(Y) = (10-14.6)2x0.2 + (15-14.6)2x0.6 + 
	
  (18-14.6)2x0.2
         = (-4.6)2x0.2 + 0.42x0.6 + 3.42x0.2
         = 21.16x0.2 + 0.16x0.6 + 11.56x0.2
         = 4.232 + 0.096 + 2.312
         = 6.64
The difference between X and Y is modeled by X - Y.
E(X - Y) = E(X) - E(Y)
	
   = 30.5 - 14.6
	
   = 15.9
Var(X - Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y)
	
    = 72.25 + 6.64
	
    = 78.89
Sam likes to eat out at two restaurants. Restaurant A is generally more expensive than 
restaurant B, but the food quality is generally much better.
Below you’ll find two probability distributions detailing how much Sam tends to spend at each 
restaurant. As a general rule, what would you say is the difference in price between the two 
restaurants? What’s the variance of this?
x
20
30
40
45
P(X = x)
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.1
Restaurant A:
y
10
15
18
P(Y = y)
0.2
0.6
0.2
Restaurant B:
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    241
permutations and combinations
6
Making Arrangements
Sometimes, order is important. 
Counting all the possible ways in which you can order things is time 
consuming, but the trouble is, this sort of information is crucial for 
calculating some probabilities. In this chapter, we’ll show you a quick way 
of deriving this sort of information without you having to figure out what all 
of the possible outcomes are. Come with us and we’ll show you how to 
count the possibilities.
If I try every permutation, 
sooner or later I’ll get through 
to Tom’s Tattoo Parlor.
Download at WoweBook.Com

242    Chapter 6
The Statsville Derby
One of the biggest sporting events in Statsville is the Statsville Derby. 
Horses and jockeys travel from far and wide to see which horse can 
complete the track in the shortest time, and you can place bets on the 
outcome of each race. There’s a lot of money to be made if you can 
predict the top three finishers in each race.
The opening set of races is for rookies, horses that have never 
competed in a race before. This time, no statistics are available for 
previous races to help you anticipate how well each horse will do. 
This means you have to assume that each horse has an equal chance 
of winning, and it all comes down to simple probability.
The first race of the day, the three-horse race, is just about to begin, 
and the Derby is taking bets. You have $500 of winnings from Fat 
Dan’s Casino to spend at the Derby. If you can correctly predict the 
order in which the three horses finish, the payout is 7:1, which means 
you’ll win 7 times your bet, or $3,500.
Should we take this bet? Let’s work out some probabilities and find 
out.
Want to join in with the fun? 
If you know a thing or two 
about probability, you could do 
very well indeed.
Statsville Derby Races:	 	
Payouts:
Three-Horse	
	
	
7:1
Novelty	
	
	
	
15:1
Twenty-Horse	
	
	
1,500:1
A 15:1 payout means that if 
you win, you’ll earn 15 times 
the amount you bet!
at the racetrack
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    243
permutations and combinations
It’s a three-horse race
The first race is a very simple one between three horses, and in order 
to make the most amount of money, you need to predict the exact 
order in which horses finish the race. Here are the contenders.
How many different ways are there in which the horses can finish 
the race? (Assume there are no ties and that every horse finishes.) 
What’s the probability of winning a bet on the correct finishing 
order? 
Calculate your expected winnings for this bet.
Cheeky Sherbet
Ruby Toupee
Frisky Funboy
Hint: Find the probability 
distribution for this event. 
Then use this to calculate 
the expectation.
Download at WoweBook.Com

244    Chapter 6
How many different ways are there in which the horses can finish 
the race? (Assume there are no ties and that every horse finishes.) 
What’s the probability of winning a bet on the correct finishing 
order? 
Calculate your expected winnings for this bet.
There are 6 different ways in which the race can be finished: 
 
Cheeky Sherbet, Ruby Toupee, Frisky Funboy
Cheeky Sherbet, Frisky Funboy, Ruby Toupee
Ruby Toupee, Cheeky Sherbet, Frisky Funboy
Ruby Toupee, Frisky Funboy, Cheeky Sherbet
Frisky Funboy, Cheeky Sherbet, Ruby Toupee
Frisky Funboy, Ruby Toupee, Cheeky Sherbet
The probability of getting the order right is therefore 1/6. 
 
Here’s the probability distribution for amount of money you can expect 
to win if you bet $500 with odds of 7:1
A three-horse race? How 
likely is that? Most races will 
have far more horses taking part.
Exactly, most races will have more than three horses.
So what we need is some quick way of figuring out how many finishing orders 
there are for each race, one that works irrespective of how many horses are 
racing.
Working out the number of ways in which three horses can finish a race is 
straightforward; there are only 6 possibilities. The trouble is, the more horses 
there are taking part in the race, the harder and more time consuming it is to 
work out every possible finishing order.
Let’s take a closer look at the different ways of ordering the three horses we have 
for the race and see if we can spot a pattern. We can do this by looking at each 
position, one by one.
x
-500
3,500
P(X = x)
0.833
0.167
Three-horse race:
E(X) = -500x0.833 + 3,500x0.167
       = 168
We can expect to win $168 each time this race is won.
Yes, you can expect to win 
$168 on this bet, but the house 
is still going to win 5/6 times 
you play. Do you feel lucky?
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    245
permutations and combinations
Let’s start by looking at the first position of the race. 
One of the horses has to win the race, and this 
can be any one of the three horses taking part. 
This means that there are three ways of filling the 
number one position.
3 ways
How many ways can they cross the finish line?
So what about the second position in the race?
If one of the horses has finished the race, this 
means there are two horses left. Either of these can 
come second in the race. This means that there are 
two ways of filling the number two position, no 
matter which horse came first.
Only one horse can 
cross the finish line 
first, but it can be 
any of the three 
horses.
Once two horses have finished the race, there’s 
only one position left for the final horse—third 
place.
One horse has 
already finished the 
race, so there are 
only two horses that 
can finish second.
So how does this help us calculate all the possible 
finishing orders?
2 ways
1 way
Only one horse hasn’t 
finished the race, so 
there’s only one position 
left for him: last.
Download at WoweBook.Com

246    Chapter 6
So what if there are n horses?
You’ve seen that there are 3 × 2 × 1 ways of ordering 3 horses. You can 
generalize this for any number n. If you want to work out the number 
of ways there are of ordering n separate objects, you can get the right 
result by calculating:
n! = n × (n - 1) × (n - 2) × ... × 3 × 2 × 1
This means that if you have to work out the number of ways in which 
you can order n separate objects, you can come up with a precise figure 
without having to figure out every possible arrangement.
This type of calculation is called the factorial of a number. In math 
notation, factorials are represented as an exclamation point. For 
example, the factorial of 3 is written as 3!, and the factorial of n is n!. 
You pronounce it “n factorial.”
So when we write n!, this is just a shorthand way of saying “take all 
the numbers from n down to 1, and multiply them together.” In other 
words, perform the following calculation:
Calculate the number of arrangements
We just saw that there were 3 ways of filling the first position, and for 
each of these, there are 2 ways of filling the second position. And no 
matter how those first two slots are filled, there’s only one way of filling 
the last position. In other words, the number of ways in which we can fill 
all three positions is:
3 × 2 × 1 = 6
This means that we can tell there are 6 different ways of ordering the 
three horses, without us having to figure out each of the arrangements.
3 ways of filling the 
1st position
2 ways of filling the 2nd position
6 ways of filling all 3 positions
n × (n - 1) × (n - 2) × ... × 3 × 2 × 1
The advantage of n! is that a lot of calculators have this as an available 
function. If, for example, you want to find the number of arrangements 
of 4 separate objects, all you have to do is calculate 4!, giving you  
4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 24 separate arrangements.
1 way of filling 
the 3rd position
making arrangements
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    247
permutations and combinations
Going round in circles
There’s one exception to this rule, and that’s if you’re arranging 
objects in a circle.
Here’s an example. Imagine you want to stand four horses in a circle, 
and you want to find the number of possible ways in which you can 
order them. Now, let’s focus on arrangements where Frisky Funboy 
has Ruby Toupee on his immediate right, and Cheeky Sherbet on his 
immediate left. Here are two of the four possible arrangements of this.
The key here is to fix the position of one of the horses, say Frisky Funboy. 
With Frisky Funboy standing in a fixed position, you can count the 
number of ways in which the remaining 3 horses can be ordered, and this 
will give you the right result without any duplicates.
In general, if you have n objects you need to arrange in a circle, the 
number of possible arrangements is given by
(n - 1)!
The number of ways of arranging n 
objects in a circle
At first glance, these two arrangements look different, but they’re actually 
the same. The horses are in exactly the same positions relative to each 
other, the only difference is that in the second arrangement, the horses 
have walked a short distance round the circle. This means that some of 
the ways in which you can order the horses are actually the same.
So how do we solve this sort of problem?
For both of these, Frisky Funboy 
has Ruby Toupee on his right, and 
Cheeky Sherbet on his left
Cheeky Sherbet
Ruby Toupee
Frisky Funboy
Other
Other
Ruby Toupee
Frisky Funboy
Cheeky Sherbet
Download at WoweBook.Com

248    Chapter 6
Q: How do I pronounce n!?
A: You pronounce it as “n factorial.” The 
! symbol is used to indicate a mathematical 
operation, and not to indicate any sort of 
exclamation. 
Q: Are factorials just used when 
you’re arranging objects?
A: Not at all. Factorials also come into 
play in other branches of mathematics, 
like calculus. In general, they’re a useful 
math shorthand, and you’ll see the factorial 
symbol whenever you’re faced with this sort 
of multiplication task. 
 
All the factorial symbol really means is 
“take all the numbers from n down to 1 and 
multiply them together.”
Q: What if I have a value 0? How do I 
find 0!?
A: 0! is actually 1. This may seem like a 
strange result, but it’s a bit like saying there’s 
only one way to arrange 0 objects.
Q: What about if you want to find the 
factorial of a negative number? Or one 
that’s not an integer?
A: Factorials only work with positive 
integers, so you can’t find the factorial of a 
negative number, or one that’s not an integer. 
 
One way of looking at this is that it doesn’t 
make sense to arrange bits of objects. Each 
thing you’re arranging is classed as a whole 
object. Equally, you can’t have a negative 
number of objects.
Q: Can the result of a factorial ever be 
an odd number?
A: There are only two occasions where 
this can be true, when n is 0 or when n is 1. 
In both these cases, n! = 1.  
 
For all other values of n, n! is even. This is 
because if n is greater than or equal to 2, 
the calculation must include the number 2. 
Any integer multiplied by 2 is even, so this 
means that n! is even if n is greater than or 
equal to 2.
Q: Calculating factorials for large 
numbers seems like a pain. If I want to 
find 10!, I have to multiply 10 numbers 
(10×9×8×7×6×5×4×3×2×1), and the result 
gets really big. Is there an easier way.
A: Yes, many scientific and graphing 
calculators have a factorial key (typically 
labeled n!) that will perform this calculation 
for you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: If I’m arranging n objects in a 
circle, there are (n - 1)! arrangements. 
What if clockwise and counterclockwise 
arrangements are considered to be the 
same?
A: In this case, the number of 
arrangements is (n - 1)!/2. Calculating 
(n - 1)! gives you twice the number of 
arrangements you actually need as it gives 
you both clockwise and counterclockwise 
arrangements. Dividing by 2 gives you the 
right answer.
Q: What if I’m arranging objects in a 
circle and absolute position matters?
A: In this case the number of 
arrangements is given by n!. In that situation, 
it’s exactly the same as arranging n objects.
Formulas for arrangements
If you want to find the number of possible 
arrangements of n objects, use n! where
n! = n x (n-1) x ... x 3 x 2 x 1
In other words, multiply together all the numbers 
from n down to 1.
If you are arranging n objects in a circle, then 
there are (n - 1)! possible arrangements.
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
no dumb questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    249
permutations and combinations
Paula wants to telephone the Statsville Health Club, but she has a very poor memory. She 
knows that the telephone number contains the numbers 1,2,3,4,5,6 and 7, but she can’t 
remember the order. What’s the probability of getting the right number at random?
Paula has just been reminded that the first three numbers is some arrangement of the 
numbers 1, 2 and 3, and the last four numbers is some arrangement of the numbers 4, 5, 6, 
and 7. She can’t remember the order of each set of numbers though. What’s the probability 
of getting the right telephone number now? 
The Statsville Derby is organizing a parade for the end of the season. 
10 horses are taking part, and they will parade round the race track 
in a circle. The exact horse order will be chosen at random, and if you 
guess the horse order correctly, you win a prize.
What’s the probability that if you make a guess on the exact horse 
order, you’ll win the prize?
Hint: This time you need 
to arrange two groups of 
numbers.
Download at WoweBook.Com

250    Chapter 6
Paula wants to telephone the Statsville Health Club, but she has a very poor memory. She 
knows that the telephone number contains the numbers 1,2,3,4,5,6 and 7, but she can’t 
remember the order. What’s the probability of getting the right number at random?
Paula has just been reminded that the first three numbers is some arrangement of the numbers 
1, 2 and 3, and the last four numbers is some arrangement of the numbers 4, 5, 6, and 7. She 
can’t remember the order of each set of numbers though. What’s the probability of getting the 
right telephone number now? Hint: This time you need to arrange two groups of numbers.
There are 7 numbers so there are 7! possible arrangements. 7! = 7x6x5x4x3x2x1 = 5040. 
The probability of getting the right number is therefore 1/5040 = 0.0002
The probability of getting the right number is therefore 1/144 = 0.0069
The Statsville Derby are organizing a parade for the end of the season. 
10 horses are taking part, and they will parade round the race track 
in a circle. The exact horse order will be chosen at random, and if you 
guess the horse order correctly, you win a prize.
What’s the probability that if you make a guess on the exact horse 
order, you’ll win the prize?
10 horses will be parading in a circle, which means there are 9! possible orders for the horses. 
9! = 362880, which means there are 362880 possible orders for the parade.
The probability of guessing correctly is 1/9! - which is a number very close to 0.
We start by splitting the numbers into two groups, one for the first three numbers (1, 2, 3), 
and another for the last four (4, 5, 6, 7). This gives us 
To find the total number of possible arrangements, we multiply together the number of ways 
of arranging each group. This gives
Number of ways of arranging 1, 2, 3 is 3! = 3x2x1 = 6 
Number of ways of arranging 4, 5, 6, 7 is 4! = 4x3x2x1 = 24
Total number of possible arrangements is 3!x4! = 6x24 = 144
exercise solutions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    251
permutations and combinations
In the last race, you had a 1/6 
probability of predicting the top 
finishers correctly. But let’s see how 
you fare in the novelty race; it’s a 
Statsville tradition.
It’s time for the novelty race
The Statsville Derby is unusual in that not all of the animals 
taking part in the races have to be horses. In the next race, 
three of the contenders are zebras, and they’re racing 
against three horses.
In this race, it’s the type of animal that matters rather 
than the particular animal itself. In other words, all we’re 
interested in is which sort of animal finishes the race in 
which position. The question is, how many ways are there 
of ordering all the animals by species?
The Derby’s offering a special bet: if you can predict 
whether a horse or zebra will finish in each place, the payout 
is 15:1. The question is, should you make this bet?
How would you go about solving this sort of problem? Write down your ideas 
in the space below.
Download at WoweBook.Com

252    Chapter 6
So if there are three horses and three zebras in today’s 
novelty race, how can we calculate how many different 
orderings there are of horses and zebra. 
This time we’re only interested in the type of animal, 
and not the particular animal itself.
So far we’ve only looked at the number of ways in which we can order 
unique objects such as horses, and calculating 6! would be the correct 
result if this was what we needed on this occasion.
This time around it’s different. We no longer care about which particular 
horse or zebra is in a particular position; we only care about what type 
of animal it is.
As an example, if we looked at an arrangement where the three zebras 
came first and the three horses came last, we wouldn’t want to count all 
of the ways of arranging those three horses and three zebras. It doesn’t 
matter which particular zebra comes first; it’s enough to know it’s a 
zebra.
For this sort of problem, we 
care about which type of 
animal is in which position, 
but we don’t care about the 
name of the animal itself.
I’ll knock the stripes 
off those zebras.
That’s easy. There are 6 animals, so 
there are 6! ways of ordering them.
Arranging by individuals is different than arranging by type 
arranging by type
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    253
permutations and combinations
We need to arrange animals by type
There are 6! ways of ordering the 6 animals, but the problem with this result is that it 
assumes we want to know all possible arrangements of individual horses and zebras.
Let’s start by looking at the zebras. There are 3! ways of arranging the three 
zebras, and the result 6! includes each of these 3! arrangements. But since we’re 
not concerned about which individual zebra goes where, these arrangements are all 
the same. So, to eliminate these repetitions, we can just divide the total number of 
arrangements by 3!
We’re classing the 3 zebras as 
being alike, so we divide the 
number of arrangements by 3!
Next, let’s take the horses. There are 3! ways of arranging the three horses, and the number of 
arrangements we have so far includes each of these 3! arrangements. As with the zebras, we 
divide the end result by 3! to eliminate duplicate orderings.
This time we’re classing the 3 
horses as being alike. There are 
3! ways of arranging the horses, 
so we divide the total number of 
arrangements by 3!
This means that the number of ways of arranging the 6 animals according 
to species is
In other words, the probability of betting correctly on the right order in 
which the different species finish the race is 1/20. 
Turn the page and we’ll look at this in more detail.
 6!  =  720
3!3!   6 × 6
    = 720
        36
    = 20
There’s a 1/20 chance of 
winning, but the payout’s 
only 15: 1. I’d stay away 
from this bet.
There are 6! animals 
altogether...
...but the 3 zebras and 3 
horses are alike, so we divide 
by the number of ways we 
can arrange these like animals
Download at WoweBook.Com

254    Chapter 6
n!
k!
 n!
j!k!
We can take this further. 
Imagine you want to arrange n objects, where k of one type are alike, and j of 
another type are alike, too. You can find the number of possible arrangements by 
calculating:
If you have n objects where k are alike the number of 
arrangements is given by n!/k!
Imagine you need to count the number of ways in which n objects can be 
arranged. Then imagine that k of the objects are alike. 
To find the number of arrangements, start off by calculating the number of 
arrangements for the n objects as if they were all unique. Then divide by 
the number of ways in which the k objects (the ones that are alike) can be 
arranged. This gives you:
There are n objects in total.
k of the objects are alike.
There are n objects in total.
j of one type of object are alike, 
and so are k of another type.
The number of ways of arranging n objects where j of one 
type are alike, and so are k of another type.
In general, when calculating arrangements 
that include duplicate objects, divide the total 
number of arrangements (n!) by the number of 
arrangements of each set of alike objects (j!, k!, 
and so on).
Generalize a formula for arranging duplicates
general formula for arranging by type
Arranging by type
If you want to arrange n objects where 
j of one type are alike, k of another 
type are alike, so are m of another type 
and so on, the number of arrangements 
is given by
	
	
 n!
	
         j!k!m!...
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    255
permutations and combinations
The Statsville Derby have decided to experiment with their races. They’ve decided to hold a race 
between 3 horses, 2 zebras and 5 camels, where all the animals are equally likely to finish the 
race first.
1. How many ways are there of finishing the race if we’re interested in individual animals?
2. How many ways are there of finishing the race if we’re just interested in the species of animal in each position?
3. What’s the probability that all 5 camels finish the race consecutively if each animal has an equal chance of 
winning? (Assume we’re interested in the species in each position, not the individual animals themselves.)
Download at WoweBook.Com

256    Chapter 6
The Statsville Derby have decided to experiment with their races. They’ve decided to hold a race 
between 3 horses, 2 zebras and 5 camels, where all the animals are equally likely to finish the 
race first.
1. How many ways are there of finishing the race if we’re interested in individual animals?
2. How many ways are there of finishing the race if we’re just interested in the species of animal in each position?
3. What’s the probability that all 5 camels finish the race consecutively if each animal has an equal chance of 
winning? (Assume we’re interested in the species in each position, not the individual animals themselves.)
There are 10 animals so there are 10! = 3,628,800 different arrangements.
There are 3 horses, 2 zebras and 5 camels.
Number of arrangements =   10!
	
	
	
 3!2!5!
	
	
        = 3,628,800
	
	
	
 6x2x120
	
	
        = 3,628,800
	
	
	
  1,440
	
	
        = 252
First of all, let’s find the number of ways in which the 5 camels can finish the race together. To do 
this, we class the 5 camels as one single object. That way, we’re guaranteed to keep them together. 
This means that if we add our 1 group of camels to the 3 horses and 2 zebras, we actually need to 
arrange 6 objects
Number of arrangements =  6!
	
	
	
 3!2!
	
	
        = 720
	
	
	
 6x2
	
	
        = 720
	
	
	
  12
	
	
        = 60
Then, to find the probability of this occurring, we just need to divide the number of ways the camels 
finish together by all the possible ways the animal types can finish the race, which we calculated above.
The probability of all 5 camels finishing together is therefore 60/252 = 5/21
There are 10 animals.
We treat the 3 horses as being alike, and the 2 
zebras, and also the 5 camels.
We treat the 3 horses as being alike, and the 2 
zebras. We don’t need to divide by 5! for the 5 
camels, as we’re counting them as 1 object.
1 group of camels + 3 horses + 2 zebras
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    257
permutations and combinations
Q: Why did you treat the 5 camels as 
one object in the last part of the exercise? 
Surely they’re individual camels.
A: They’re individual camels, but in the 
last part of that problem we need to make 
sure we keep the camels together. To do this, 
we bundle all the camels together and treat 
them as one object. 
Q: It seems like the number of 
arrangements for the different objects 
has a lot to do with how you group them 
into like groups.
A: That’s right. Mastering arrangements 
is a skill, but a lot depends on how you think 
things through. 
 
The key thing is to think really carefully about 
what sort of problem you’re actually trying to 
solve and to get lots of practice.
Q: Are there many races where horses, 
zebras and camels all race together?
A: It’s unlikely. But hey, this is Statsville, 
and the Statsville Derby runs its own events.
It’s time for the twenty-horse race
The novelty race is over, with the zebras taking the lead.
The next race is between 20 horses.
How would you go about finding the number of ways in which you can pick 
three horses out of twenty?
Think you can predict 
the top three horses? 
If you can, the payout’s 
a whopping 1,500 to 1.
Download at WoweBook.Com

258    Chapter 6
The main race is about to begin. There are twenty horses racing, and we need to find 
the number of possible arrangements of the top three horses. This way, we can work 
out the probability of guessing the exact order correctly.
We can work out the solution the same way we did earlier, by looking at how many 
ways there are of filling the first three positions. 
Let’s start with the first position. There are 20 horses in total, so this means there are 
20 different ways of filling the first position. Once this position has been filled, that 
leaves 19 ways of filling the second position and 18 ways of filling the third. 
There are 20 horses, so this 
means there are 20 ways of 
filling the first position, 19 ways 
of filling the second, and 18 ways 
of filling the third.
20 × 19 × 18 = 6,840
We need a more concise way of solving this sort of 
problem.
At the moment we only have three numbers to multiply together, but 
what if there were more?
We need to generalize a formula that will allow us to find the total 
number of arrangements of a certain number of horses, drawn from a 
larger pool of horses.
So the probability of guessing the precise order in which the top three horses 
finish the race is 1/6,840.
In this race, we’re not interested in how the rest of the positions are filled, it’s 
only the first three positions that concern us. This means that the total number 
of arrangements for the top three horses is
That gives us the right answer, but it could get complicated if 
there were more horses, or if we wanted to fill more positions.
introducing permutations
How many ways can we fill the top three positions?
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    259
permutations and combinations
Examining permutations
So how can we rewrite the calculation in terms of factorials?
The number of arrangements is 20 × 19 × 18. Let’s rewrite it and see 
where it gets us.
This is the total 
number of objects
This is the number of 
positions we want to fill
nPr =  n!
	
 (n - r)!
20 × 19 × 18 = 20 × 19 × 18 × (17 × 16 × ... × 3 × 2 × 1)
	
	
                    (17 × 16 × ... × 3 × 2 × 1)
	
    = 20!
	
        17!
If we multiply it by 17!/17!, this 
will still give us the same answer.
This is the same expression 
written in terms of factorials.
This is the same expression that we had before, but this time written in 
terms of factorials.
The number of arrangements of 3 objects taken from 20 is called the 
number of permutations. As you’ve seen, this is calculated using
In general, the number of permutations of r objects taken from n is the 
number of possible way in which each set of r objects can be ordered. 
It’s generally written 
nPr, where
I never said anything about the 
horse order. Just guess which 
horses are in the top three and 
I’ll make it worth your while...
So if you want to know how many ways there are of ordering r objects 
taken from a pool of n, permutations are the key.
Permutations give 
the total number 
of ways you can 
order a certain 
number of objects 
(r), drawn from 
a larger pool of 
objects (n).
   20!
(20 - 3)!
2,432,902,008,176,640,000
   355,687,428,096,000
6,840
= 
=
This is the same 
answer we got 
earlier
Download at WoweBook.Com

260    Chapter 6
What if horse order doesn’t matter
So far we’ve found the number of permutations of ordering three horses taken from a group of 
twenty. This means that we know how many exact arrangements we can make.
This time around, we don’t want to know how many different permutations there are. We want 
to know the number of combinations of the top three horses instead. We still want to know 
how many ways there are of filling the top three positions, but this time the exact arrangement 
doesn’t matter.
We don’t need to know the 
precise order in which the 
horses finish the race, it’s 
enough to know which horses 
are in the top three.
So how can we solve this sort of problem?
At the moment, the number of permutations includes the number of ways of 
arranging the 3 horses that are in the top three. There are 3! ways of arranging each 
set of 3 horses, so let’s divide the number of permutations by 3!. This will give us the 
number of ways in which the top three positions can be filled but without the exact 
order mattering.
The result is 
 20!     6,840
3!17!	
3!
     = 1,140
This means that there are 6,840 permutations for filling the first three places in the 
race, but if you’re not concerned about the order, there are 1,140 combinations.
With a 1/1,140 chance of winning here, 
the odds are way against you. But the 
payout is also huge at 1,500:1, so you can 
actually expect to come out ahead. It all 
depends on how much of a risk taker you are.
introducing combinations
=
=
=
=
=
=
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    261
permutations and combinations
Examining combinations
Earlier on we found a general way of calculating permutations. Well, 
there’s a way of doing this for combinations too.
In general, the number of combinations is the number of ways of 
choosing r objects from n, without needing to know the exact order of the 
objects. The number of combinations is written 
nCr, where 
nCr =   n!
	
 r! (n - r)!
This is the total 
number of objects.
This is the number of 
positions we want to fill.
You divide by an extra r! if it’s a combination.
This bit is calculated in the same way 
as a permutation.
So what’s the difference between a combination and a permutation? 
These are 
the same 
combination.
Combination: order doesn’t matter.
=
≠
Permutation: order matters.
Combinations
 
A combination is the number of ways in which you 
can choose objects from a pool, without caring about 
the exact order in which you choose them. It’s a lot 
more general than a permutation as you don’t need to 
know how each position has been filled. It’s enough to 
know which objects have been chosen.
Permutations
 
A permutation is the number of ways in which you 
can choose objects from a pool, and where the order in 
which you choose them counts. It’s a lot more specific 
than a combination as you want to count the number 
of ways in which you fill each position.
These are 
separate 
permutations.
Download at WoweBook.Com

262    Chapter 6
Head First: Combination, great to have you on the 
show.
Combination: Thanks for inviting me, Head First.
Head First: Now, let’s get straight onto business. A 
lot of people have noticed that you and Permutation 
are very similar to each other. Is that something 
you’d agree with?
Combination: I can see why people might think 
that because we deal with very similar situations. 
We’re both very much concerned with choosing a 
certain number of objects from a pool. Having said 
that, I’d say that’s where the similarity ends.
Head First: So what makes you different?
Combination: Well, for starters we both have very 
different attitudes. Permutation is very concerned 
about order, and really cares about the exact order in 
which objects are picked. Not only does he want to 
select objects, he wants to arrange them too. I mean, 
come on!
Head First: I take it you don’t?
Combination: No way! I’m sure permutation 
shows a lot of dedication and all that, but quite 
frankly, life’s too short. As far as I’m concerned, if an 
object’s picked from the pool, then that’s all anyone 
needs to know.
Head First: So are you better than permutation?
Combination: I wouldn’t like to say that either one 
of us is better as such; it just depends which of us is 
the most appropriate for the situation. Take music 
players, for instance.
Head First: Music players?
Combination: Yes. Lots of music players have 
playlists where you can choose which songs you want 
to play. 
Head First: I think I see where you’re headed...
Combination: Now, both Permutation and I 
are both interested in what’s on the playlist, but in 
different ways. I’m happy just knowing what songs 
are on it, but Permutation takes it way further. 
He doesn’t just want to know what songs are on 
the playlist, he wants to know the exact order too. 
Change the order of the songs, and it’s the same 
Combination, but a different Permutation.
Head First: Tell me a bit about your calculation. 
Is calculating a Combination similar to how you’d 
calculate a Permutation?
Combination: It’s similar, but there’s a slight 
difference. With Permutation, you find n!, and then 
divide it by (n-r)!. My calculation is similar, except 
that you divide by an extra r!. This makes me 
generally smaller—which makes sense because I’m 
not as fussy as Permutation.
Head First: Generally smaller?
Combination: I’ll phrase that differently. 
Permutation is never smaller than me.
Head First: Combination, thank you for your time.
Combination: It’s been a pleasure.
Combination Exposed
This week’s interview:
Does order really matter?
Combination Exposed
This week’s interview:
Does order really matter?
interview with a combination
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    263
permutations and combinations
Q: I’ve heard of something called 
“choose.” What’s that?
A: It’s another term for the combination.  
nCr. basically means “you have n objects, 
choose r,” so it’s sometimes called the 
choose function. 
Q: Can a permutation ever be smaller 
than a combination?
A: Never. To calculate a combination, you 
divide by an extra number, so the end result 
is smaller. 
 
The closest you get to this is when a 
permutation and combination are identical. 
This is only ever the case when you’re 
choosing 0 objects or 1.
Q: Which is a permutation and which 
is a combination? I get confused.
A: A permutation is when you care about 
the number of possible arrangements of 
the objects you’ve chosen. A combination 
is when you don’t mind about their precise 
order; it’s enough that you’ve chosen them.
Q: I get confused. If I want to find the 
number of combinations of choosing r 
objects from n, do I write that nCr or rCn?
A: It’s nCr. One way of remembering this is 
that the higher of the two numbers is higher 
up in the shorthand.
Q: Are there other ways of writing 
this? I think I’ve seen combinations 
somewhere else, but they didn’t look like 
that.
A: There are different ways of writing 
combinations. We’ve used the shorthand nCr, 
but an alternative is 
 
	
       (
n)
 
	
          r
Q: Are permutations and combinations 
really important?
A: They are, particularly combinations. 
You’ll see more of these a bit later on in the 
book, so look out for when you might need 
them.
Q: Dealing with permutations and 
combinations looks similar to when 
you’re dealing with like objects. Is that 
right?
A: It’s a similar process. When you’re 
dealing with like objects, you divide the total 
number of arrangements by the number of 
ways in which you can divide the like objects. 
 
For permutations, it’s as though you’re 
treating all the objects you don’t choose as 
being alike, so you divide n! by (n-r)!. For 
combinations, it’s as though the objects you 
pick are alike, too. This means you divide 
the number of permutations by r!.
Permutations
If you choose r objects from a pool of n, 
the number of permutations is given by
	
nPr =   n!
	
       (n-r)! 
 
Combinations 
 
If you choose r objects from a pool of n, 
the number of combinations is given by 
 
	
nCr =   n!
	
       r!(n-r)!
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

264    Chapter 6
The Statsville All Stars are due to play a basketball match. There are 12 players in the roster, 
and 5 are allowed on the court at any one time.
1. How many different arrangements are there for choosing who’s on the court at the same time?
2. The coach classes 3 of the players as expert shooters. What’s the probability that all 3 of these players will be on 
the court at the same time, if they’re chosen at random?
combinations exercise
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    265
permutations and combinations
It’s time for you to work out some poker probabilities. See how you get on.
A poker hand consists of 5 cards and there are 52 cards in a pack. How many different 
arrangements are there?
A royal flush is a hand that consists of a 10, Jack, Queen, King and Ace, all of the same suit. What’s the probability of 
getting this combination of cards? Use your answer above to help you.
Four of a kind is when you have four cards of the same denomination. Any extra card makes up the hand. What’s the 
probability of getting this combination?
A flush is where all 5 cards belong to the same suit. What’s the probability of getting this?
Download at WoweBook.Com

266    Chapter 6
The Statsville All Stars are due to play a basketball match. There are 12 players in the roster, 
and 5 are allowed on the court at any one time.
1. How many different arrangements are there for choosing who’s on the court at the same time?
2. The coach classes 3 of the players as expert shooters. What’s the probability that all 3 of these players will be on 
the court at the same time, if they’re chosen at random?
There are 12 players in the roster, and we need to count the number of ways of choosing 5 of them. We 
don’t need to consider the order in which we pick the players, so we can work this out using combinations.
12C5 =    12!
        5!(12-5)!
     = 12!
        5!7!
     = 792
Let’s start by finding the number of ways in which the three shooters can be on the court at the 
same time.
If the three expert shooters are on the court at the same time, this means that there are 2 more 
places left for the other players. We need to find the number of combinations of filling these 2 places 
from the remaining 9 players.
9C2 =     9!
        2!(9-2)!
     =  9!
        2!7!
     = 36
This means that the probability of all 3 shooters being on the court at the same time is  
36/792 = 1/22.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    267
permutations and combinations
It’s time for you to work out some poker probabilities. See how you get on.
A poker hand consists of 5 cards and there are 52 cards in a pack. How many different 
arrangements are there?
There are 52 cards in a pack, and we want to choose 5.
52C5 =   52!  = 2,598,960
         47!5! 
A royal flush is a hand that consists of a 10, Jack, Queen, King and Ace, all of the same suit. What’s the probability of 
getting this combination of cards? Use your answer above to help you.
There’s one way of getting this combination for each suit, and there are 4 suits. This means that the 
number of ways of getting a royal flush is 4.
P(Royal Flush) =      4
	
	
2,598,960
	
       = 1/649,740
	
       = 0.0000015
Four of a kind is when you have four cards of the same denomination. Any extra card makes up the hand. What’s the 
probability of getting this combination?
Let’s start with the 4 cards of the same denomination. There are 13 denominations in total, which means 
there are 13 ways of combining these 4 cards. Once these 4 cards have been chosen, there are 48 cards 
left. This means the number of ways of getting this hand is 13x48 = 624.
P(Four of a Kind) =    624
	
	
    2,598,960
	
	
 = 1/4165
	
	
 = 0.00024
A flush is where all 5 cards belong to the same suit. What’s the probability of getting this?.
To find the number of possible combinations, find the number of ways of choosing a suit, and then choose 5 
cards from the suit. There are 13 cards in each suit. This means the number of combinations is
4 x 13C5 = 4 x  13!
	
         8!5!
	
= 4 x 1287 = 5148
P(Flush) =   5148
	
   2,598,960
	
= 33/16660
	
= 0.00198
Download at WoweBook.Com

268    Chapter 6
It’s the end of the race
The race between the twenty horses is over, and the 
overall winner is Ruby Toupee, followed by Cheeky 
Sherbet and Frisky Funboy. If you decided to bet on 
these three horses, you just won big!
In this chapter, you’ve learned how to cope with different 
arrangements, and how to quickly count the number of 
possible combinations and permutations without having to 
work out each and every possibility.
The sort of knowledge you’ve gained gives you enormous 
probability and statistical power. Keep reading, and we’ll 
show you how to gain even greater mastery.
Winner of this year’s 
Statsville Derby: 
Ruby Toupee
2nd place: 
Cheeky Sherbet
3rd place:
Frisky Funboy
hooray for toupee!
Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    269
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
7
Keeping Things Discrete
Calculating probability distributions takes time. 
So far we’ve looked at how to calculate and use probability distributions, but wouldn’t it be 
nice to have something easier to work with, or just quicker to calculate? In this chapter, 
we’ll show you some special probability distributions that follow very definite patterns. 
Once you know these patterns, you’ll be able to use them to calculate probabilities, 
expectations, and variances in record time. Read on, and we’ll introduce you to the 
geometric, binomial and Poisson distributions.
Calculating probability distributions takes time. 
So far we’ve looked at how to calculate and use probability distributions, but wouldn’t it be 
nice to have something easier to work with, or just quicker to calculate? In this chapter, 
we’ll show you some special probability distributions that follow very definite patterns. 
Once you know these patterns, you’ll be able to use them to calculate probabilities, 
expectations, and variances in record time. Read on, and we’ll introduce you to the 
geometric, binomial and Poisson distributions.
Download at WoweBook.Com

270    Chapter 7
Meet Chad, the hapless snowboarder
Chad likes to snowboard, but he’s accident-prone. If there’s a lone 
tree on the slopes, you can guarantee it will be right in his path. Chad 
wishes he didn’t keep hitting trees and falling over; his insurance is 
costing him a fortune.
Ouch! Rock! Ouch! 
Flag! Ouch! Tree! 
Chad’s about here—just 
follow the tree damage 
to see how well his first 
run went.
There’s a lot riding on Chad’s performance on the slopes: his ego, his 
success with the ski bunnies on the trail, his insurance premiums. If it’s 
likely he’ll make it down the slopes in less than 10 tries, he’s willing to 
risk embarrassment, broken bones, and a high insurance deductible to 
try out some new snowboarding tricks.
The probability of Chad making a clear run down the slope is 0.2, and 
he’s going to keep on trying until he succeeds. After he’s made his first 
successful run down the slopes, he’s going to stop snowboarding, and 
head back to the lodge triumphantly.
Chad
watch out for that tree!
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    271
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
It’s time to exercise your probability skills. The probability of Chad 
making a successful run down the slopes is 0.2 for any given trial 
(assume trials are independent). What’s the probability he’ll need 
two trials? What’s the probability he’ll make a successful run down 
the slope in one or two trials? Remember, when he’s had his first 
successful run, he’s going to stop.
Hint: You may want to draw a 
probability tree to help visualize 
the problem.
Chad is remarkably resilient, 
and any collisions in a given run 
don’t affect his performance in 
future trials.
Download at WoweBook.Com

272    Chapter 7
It’s time to exercise your probability skills. The probability of Chad 
making a successful run down the slopes is 0.2 for any given trial 
(assume trials are independent). What’s the probability he’ll need 
two trials? What’s the probability he’ll make a successful run down 
the slope in one or two trials? Remember, when he’s had his first 
successful run, he’s going to stop..
Success
Fail
0.2
0.8
Trial 1
Success
Fail
0.2
0.8
Trial 2
As soon as Chad makes 
a successful run down 
the slope, he’ll stop.
Chad fails on his 
first attempt, so he 
tries again.
Here’s a probability tree for the first two trials, as these are all that’s needed to work out the 
probabilities.
If we say X is the number of trials needed to get down the slopes, then
P(X = 1) = P(Success in trial 1)
	
 = 0.2
P(X = 2) = P(Success in trial 2 ∩ Failure in trial 1)
	
  = 0.2 x 0.8
	
  = 0.16
P(X ≤ 2) = P(X = 1) + P(X = 2)
	
  = 0.2+0.16
	
  = 0.36
We can add these 
probabilities because 
they’re independent.
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    273
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
Hang on. If we have to work 
out every single probability, we’ll 
be here forever.
So you expect me to come up 
with the probability distribution 
of something that’s neverending? Is 
that your idea of a joke?
There’s a problem because the number of possibilities 
is neverending.
Chad will continue with his attempts to make it down the slope until he is 
successful. This could take him 1 attempt, 10 attempts, 100 attempts, or 
even 1,000 attempts. There are no guarantees about exactly when Chad 
will first successfully make it down the slopes.
Even though it’s neverending, there’s still a way of 
figuring out this type of probability distribution.
This is actually a special kind of probability distribution, with special 
properties that makes it easy to calculate probabilities, along with the 
expectation and variance.
Let’s see if we can figure it out.
So far you’ve found the probability that Chad will need fewer than three 
attempts to make it down the slope. But what if you needed to look at the 
probability of him needing fewer than 10 attempts (for insurance reasons), 
or even 20 or 100?
Rather than work out the probabilities from scratch every time, it would 
be useful if we could use a probability distribution. To do this, we need 
to work out the probability for every single possible number of attempts 
Chad needs to get down the slope.
We need to find Chad’s probability distribution
Download at WoweBook.Com

274    Chapter 7
Let’s define the variable X to be the number of trials needed for 
Chad to make a successful run down the slope. Chad only needs 
to make one successful run, and then he’ll stop.
Let’s start off by examining the first four trials so that we can 
calculate probabilities for the first four values of X. By doing this, 
we can see if there’s some sort of pattern that will help us to easily 
work out the probabilities of other values.
Success
Fail
0.2
0.8
Trial 1
Success
Fail
0.2
0.8
Trial 2
Success
Fail
0.2
0.8
Trial 3
Success
Fail
0.2
0.8
Trial 4
Here are the probabilities for the first four values 
of X.
...
P(X = 1) is the 
probability of Chad 
being successful in 
trial 1.
x
P(X = x)
1
0.2
2
0.8 × 0.2 = 0.16
3
0.8 × 0.8 × 0.2 = 0.128
4
0.8 × 0.8 × 0.8 × 0.2 = 0.1024
P(X = 3) is the probability 
of Chad being successful 
in trial 3—that is, failing 
in the first two trials, but 
being successful in the third.
These probabilities are 
calculated using the 
probability tree.
There’s a pattern to this probability distribution
Notice each probability is 
composed by multiplying 
different powers of 0.8 and 
0.2 together.
chad’s probability tree
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    275
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
Here’s a table containing the the probabilities of X for different values. Complete the table, filling 
out the probability that there will be x number of trials, and indicating what the power of 0.8 and 
0.2 are in each case (the number of times.0.8 and 0.2 appear in P(X = x)).
x
P(X = x)
Power of 0.8
Power of 0.2
1
0.2
0
1
2
0.8 × 0.2
1
1
3
0.82 × 0.2
2
4
5
r
r is a particular value of x but 
we’re not saying which one. Can you 
guess what the probability will be in 
terms of r?
We’ve left extra space here for your calculations.
Download at WoweBook.Com

276    Chapter 7
They refer to two different things.
When we use P(X = x), we’re using it to demonstrate x taking on any value 
in the probability distribution. In the table above, we show various values 
of x, and we calculate the probability of getting each of these values.
When we use P(X = r), x takes on the particular value r. We’re looking 
for the probability of getting this specific value. It’s just that we haven’t 
specified what the value of r is so that we can come up with a generalized 
calculation for the probability.
It’s a bit like saying that x can take on any value, including the fixed value r.
Here’s a table containing the the probabilities of X for different values. Complete the table, filling 
out the probability that there will be x number of trials, and indicating what the power of 0.8 and 
0.2 are in each case (the number of times.0.8 and 0.2 appear in P(X = x)).
x
P(X = x)
Power of 0.8
Power of 0.2
1
0.2
0
1
2
0.8 × 0.2
1
1
3
0.82 × 0.2
2
1
4
0.83 x 0.2
3
1
5
0.84 x 0.2
4
1
r
0.8 r-1 x 0.2
r - 1
1
For X = 4, Chad fails three times and succeeds on his fourth attempt. 
P(X = 4) is therefore 0.8 x 0.8 x 0.8 x 0.2, as the probability of failing on a particular run is 0.8 and the 
probability of success is 0.2.
For X = 5, Chad fails on his first four attempts. and succeeds on his fifth. This means 
P(X = 5) = 0.8 x 0.8 x 0.8 x 0.8 x 0.2. 
So what if P(X = r)? For Chad to be successful on his r’th attempt, he must have failed in his first (r-1) 
attempts, before succeeding in his r’th. Therefore 
P(X = r) = 0.8 x 0.8 x ... x 0.8 x 0.2, which means that in our expression, 0.8 is taken to the (r-1)th power.
First you say P(X = x), 
then you say P(X = r). I wish 
you’d make your mind up.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    277
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
As you can see, the probabilities of Chad’s snowboarding trials follow a 
particular pattern. Each probability consists of multiples of 0.8 and 0.2. 
You can quickly work out the probabilities for any value r by using:
	
	
P(X = r) = 0.8 r-1 × 0.2
In other words, if you want to find P(X = 100), you don’t have to draw an 
enormous probability tree to work out the probability, or think your way 
through exactly what happens in every trial. Instead, you can use:
	
	
P(X = 100) = 0.899 × 0.2
We can generalize this even further. If the probability of success in a trial 
is represented by p and the probability of failure is 1 - p, which we’ll call 
q, we can work out any probability of this nature by using:
P(X = r) = qr - 1 p
This formula is called the geometric distribution. 
q
I’m a failure <sniff>  
q is equal to 1 - p. If p 
represents the probability 
of success, then q represents 
the probability of failure.
Q: What’s the point in generalizing 
this? It’s just one particular problem 
we’re dealing with.
A: We’re generalizing it so that we can 
apply the results to other similar problems. If 
we can generalize the results for this kind of 
problem, it will be quicker to use it for other 
similar situations in the future.
Q: You said we needed to find an 
expression for P(X = r). What’s r?
A: P(X = r) means “the probability that X 
is equal to value r,” where r is the number of 
trials we need to get the first success. 
 
If you wanted to find, say, P(X = 20), you 
could substitute r for 20. This would give you 
a quick way of finding the probability.
Q: Why is it the letter r? Why not some 
other letter?
A: We used the letter r so that we could 
generalize the result for any particular 
number. We could have used practically any 
other letter, but using r is common.
Q: How can we have a probability 
distribution if the number of possibilities 
is endless?
A: We don’t have to specify a probability 
distribution by physically listing the 
probability of every possible outcome. The 
key thing is that we need a way of describing 
every possibility, which we can do with a 
formula for computing the probability. 
Q: Wouldn’t Chad’s snowboarding 
skills eventually improve? Is it realistic to 
say the probability of success is 0.2 for 
every trial?
A: That may be a fair assumption. But 
in this problem, Chad is truly hapless when 
it comes to snowboarding, and we have to 
assume that his skills won’t improve—which 
means his probability of success on the 
slopes will follow the geometric distribution.
(r - 1) failures and 1 success. 
In our case, p = 0.2 and  
q = 0.8.
The probability distribution can be represented algebraically
Download at WoweBook.Com

278    Chapter 7
P(X = r) = p q r - 1
Let’s use the variable X to represent the number of trials needed to 
get the first successful outcome—in other words, the number of trials 
needed for the event we’re interested in to happen.
To find the probability of X taking a particular value r, you can get a quick 
result by using:
You run a series of independent trials.
1
There can be either a success or failure for each trial, and the 
probability of success is the same for each trial.
2
The main thing you’re interested in is how many trials are needed in 
order to get the first successful outcome.
3
where p is the probability of success, and q = 1 – p, the probability of failure. 
In other words, to get a success on the rth attempt, there must first have been 
(r – 1) failures.
So if you have a situation that matches this set of criteria, you can use the 
geometric distribution to help you take a few shortcuts. The important thing 
to be aware of is that we use the word “success” to mean that the event 
we’re interested in happens. If we’re looking for an event that has negative 
connotations, in statistical terms it’s still counted as a success.
The geometric distribution has a distinctive shape. 
P(X = r) is at its highest when r = 1, and it gets lower and 
lower as r increases. Notice that the probability of getting 
a success is highest for the first trial. This means that the 
mode of any geometric distribution is always 1, 
as this is the value with the highest probability. 
This may sound counterintuitive, but it’s most likely that 
only one attempt will be needed for a successful outcome.
Geometric Distribution Up Close
We said that Chad’s snowboarding exploits are an example of the geometric 
distribution. The geometric distribution covers situations where:
This is the general shape of 
the geometric distribution. 
The mode is always 1.
x
P(X = x)
geometric distribution in depth
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    279
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
X ~ Geo(p)
P(X ≤ r) = 1 - qr
P(X > r) = qr
We can use this to find P(X  r), the probability that r or fewer trials are 
needed in order for there to be a successful outcome.
If we add together P(X  r)  and P(X > r), the total must be 1. This means that
If a variable X follows a geometric distribution where the probability of 
success in a trial is p, this can be written as
As well as finding exact probabilities for the geometric distribution, there’s also 
a quick way of finding probabilities that deal with inequalities.
Let’s start with P(X > r).
P(X > r) is the probability that more than r trials will be needed in order to get 
the first successful outcome. In order for more than r trials to be needed, this 
means that the first r trials must have ended in failure. This means that you 
find the probability by multiplying the probability of failure together r times.
For the number of trials needed for a success to be greater 
than r, there must have been r failures.
	
P(X  r) + P(X > r) = 1
or
	
P(X  r) = 1 - P(X > r)
This gives us
This is because P(X ≤ r) is the opposite of P(X > r). 
P(X ≤ r) = 1 - P(X > r).
This is a quick way of saying “X follows a geometric 
distribution where the probability of success is p.”
I’m getting bruised! How 
many attempts do you 
expect me to have to make 
before I make it down the 
slope OK?
The geometric distribution also works with inequalities
From above, we know that P(X > r).=qr 
so we substitute in qr for P(X > r) to 
get this formula.
We don’t need p in this formula because 
we don’t need to know exactly which trial 
was successful, just that there must be 
more than r trials.
Download at WoweBook.Com

280    Chapter 7
So far we’ve found probabilities for the number of attempts Chad 
needs to make before successfully makes it down the slope, but what 
if we want to find the expectation and variance? If we know the 
expectation, for instance, we’ll be able to say how many attempts we 
expect Chad to make before he’s successful.
Can you remember how we found expectations earlier in the book? 
We find E(X) by calculating xP(X = x). The probabilities in this 
case go on forever, but let’s start by working out the first few values to 
see if there’s some sort of pattern.
Here are the first few values of x, where X ~ Geo(0.2)
Can you see what happens to the values of xP(X = x)? 
The values of xP(X = x) start off small, and then they get larger until x = 5. When 
x is larger than 5, the values start decreasing again, and keep on decreasing as x 
gets larger. As x gets larger, xP(X = x) becomes smaller and smaller until it makes 
virtually no difference to the running total.
We can see this more clearly if we chart the cumulative total of xP(X = x):
x
P(X = x)
xP(X = x)
xP(X ≤ x)
1
0.2
0.2
0.2
2
0.8 × 0.2 = 0.16
0.32
0.52
3
0.82 × 0.2 = 0.128
0.384
0.904
4
0.83 × 0.2 = 0.1024
0.4096
1.3136
5
0.84 × 0.2 = 0.08192
0.4096
1.7232
6
0.85 × 0.2 = 0.065536
0.393216
2.116416
7
0.86 × 0.2 = 0.0524288
0.3670016
2.4834176
8
0.87 × 0.2 = 0.04194304
0.33554432
2.81894608
This is the running total of 
xP(X = x)
ΣxP(X ≤ x)
x
As a reminder, expectation is the average 
value that you expect to get, a bit like the 
mean but for probability distributions.
Variance is a measure of how much you can 
expect this to varies by.
The pattern of expectations for the geometric distribution
geometric expectation
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    281
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
Let’s see if we can find an expression for the variance of the 
geometric distribution in the same way that we did for the 
expectation. Complete the table below. What do you notice?
Expectation is 1/p
Drawing the chart for the running total of xP(X = x) shows you that as x gets 
larger, the running total gets closer and closer to a particular value, 5. In fact, the 
running total of xP(X = x) for an infinite number of trials is 5 itself. This means 
that
	
	
E(X) = 5
This makes intuitive sense. The probability of a successful outcome is 0.2. This is a 
bit like saying that 1 in 5 attempts tend to be successful, so we can expect Chad to 
make 5 attempts before he is successful.
We can generalize this for any value p. If X ~ Geo(p) then
E(X) = 
We’re not just limited to finding the expectation of the geometric distribution, 
we can find the variance too.
Remember, the variance is 
given by E(X2) - E2(X).
x
P(X = x)
x2P(X = x)
x2P(X ≤ x)
1
0.2
2
0.8 × 0.2 = 0.16
3
0.82 × 0.2 = 0.128
4
0.83 × 0.2 = 0.1024
5
0.84 × 0.2 = 0.08192
6
0.85 × 0.2 = 0.065536
7
0.86 × 0.2 = 0.0524288
8
0.87 × 0.2 = 0.04194304
9
0.88 × 0.2 = 0.033554432
10
0.89 × 0.2 = 0.0268435456
The expectation is 1 divided by 
the probability of success.
1 
p
I can expect to 
make it down in 5 
tries? Not bad!
Download at WoweBook.Com

282    Chapter 7
Values start off small, get larger, 
and then decrease again.
Let’s see if we can find an expression for the variance of the 
geometric distribution in the same way that we did for the 
expectation. Complete the table below. What do you notice?
x
P(X = x)
x2P(X = x)
x2P(X ≤ x)
1
0.2
0.2
0.2
2
0.8 × 0.2 = 0.16
0.64
0.84
3
0.82 × 0.2 = 0.128
1.152
1.992
4
0.83 × 0.2 = 0.1024
1.6384
3.6304
5
0.84 × 0.2 = 0.08192
2.048
5.6784
6
0.85 × 0.2 = 0.065536
2.359296
8.037696
7
0.86 × 0.2 = 0.0524288
2.5690112
10.6067072
8
0.87 × 0.2 = 0.04194304
2.68435456
13.29106176
9
0.88 × 0.2 = 0.033554432
2.717908992
16.00897075
10
0.89 × 0.2 = 0.0268435456
2.68435456
18.69332531
This time x2P(X = x) increases until x reaches 10. When x reaches 10 it starts to go down again.
I get it, so x2P(X = x) gets larger 
for a while, but after that, it gets 
smaller and smaller as x gets larger 
and larger.
That’s right.
x2P(X = x) gets larger and larger up until a certain point, and then it starts 
decreasing again. Eventually it becomes very close to 0.
x
x2P(X = x)
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    283
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
Var(X) = 
q
p2
Finding the variance for our distribution
So how does this help us find the variance of the number of trials it takes 
Chad to make a successful run down the slopes?
We find the variance of a probability distribution by calculating
This means that we calculate x2P(X = x), and then subtract E(X) squared. 
By graphing the resulting values against the values of x, you can see the 
pattern of Var(X) as x increases. Here’s the graph of x2P(X  x) - E2(X)
Var(X) = E(X2) – E2(X)
x
x2P(X ≤ x) - E2(X)
As x gets larger, the value of x2P(X  x) – E2(X) gets closer and closer to a 
particular value, this time 20.
As with the expectation, we can generalize this. If X ~ Geo(p) then
Even though there’s no fixed number of 
trials, you can still work out what the 
expectation and variance are.
20
Download at WoweBook.Com

284    Chapter 7
A quick guide to the geometric distribution
Here’s a quick summary of everything you could possibly need to know about the Geometric distribution
When do I use it?
Use the Geometric distribution if you’re running independent trials, each one can have a success or failure, and 
you’re interested in how many trials are needed to get the first successful outcome
How do I calculate probabilities?
Use the following handy formulae. p is the probability of success in a trial, q = 1 - p, and X is the number of 
trials needed in order to get the first successful outcome. We say X ~ Geo(p).
P(X = r) = p q r - 1
P(X ≤ r) = 1 - qr
P(X > r) = qr
What about the expectation and variance?
Just use the following
E(X) = 1/p
Var(X) = q/p2 
Q: Can I trust these formulae? Can 
I use them any time I need to find 
probabilities and expectations?
A: You can use these shortcuts whenever 
you’re dealing with the geometric distribution, 
as they’re shortcuts for that probability 
distribution. If you’re dealing with a situation 
that can’t be modelled by the geometric 
distribution, don’t use these shortcuts. 
 
Remember, the geometric distribution is 
used for situations where you’re running 
independent trials (so the probability stays 
the same for each one), each trial ends in 
either success or failure, and the thing you’re 
interested in is how many trials are needed 
to get the first successful outcome.
Q: What about if my circumstances 
are different? What if I have a fixed 
number of trials and I want to find the 
number of successful outcomes?
A: You can’t use the geometric 
distribution to model this sort of situation, but 
don’t worry, there are other methods.
Q: Do I have to learn all of these 
shortcuts?
A: If you have to deal with the geometric 
distribution, knowing the formulae will 
save you a lot of time. If you’re sitting for a 
statistics exam, check whether your exam 
syllabus covers it.
Q: Why does the distribution use the 
letters p and q?
A: The letter p stands for probability. In 
this case, it’s the probability of getting a 
successful outcome in one trial. 
 
The letter q is often used in statistics to 
represent 1 - p, or pI. You’ll see quite a lot 
of it through the rest of this chapter and the 
rest of the book.
The probability of the first 
success being in the r’th trial
The probability you’ll need more than 
r trials to get your first success
The probability you’ll need r trials 
or less to get your first success
geometric distribution cheat sheet
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    285
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
BE the snowboarder
The probability that another 
snowboarder will make it down 
the slope without falling over is 
0.4. Your job is to play like you’re 
the snowboarder and work out the 
following probabilities for 
your slope success.
1. The probability that you will be successful on your second attempt, while failing on your first.
2. The probability that you will be successful in 4 attempts or fewer.
3. The probability that you will need more than 4 attempts to be successful.
4. The number of attempts you expect you’ll need to make before being successful.
5. The variance of the number of attempts.
Download at WoweBook.Com

286    Chapter 7
BE the snowboarder solution
The probability that another 
snowboarder will make it down 
the slope without falling over is 
0.4. Your job is to play like you’re 
the snowboarder and work out the 
following probabilities for 
your slope success.
1. The probability that you will be successful on your second attempt, while failing on your first.
P(X = 2) = p x q
	
  = 0.4 x 0.6
	
  = 0.24
Let’s use X ~ Geo(0.4), where X 
is the number of trials needed by 
this second snowboarder to make a 
clean run down the slope.
2. The probability that you will be successful in 4 attempts or fewer.
P(X ≤ 4) = 1 - q4
	
  = 1 - 0.64
	
  = 1 - 0.1296
	
  = 0.8704
3. The probability that you will need more than 4 attempts to be successful.
P(X > 4) = q4
	
  = 0.64
	
  = 0.1296
4. The number of attempts you expect you’ll need to make before being successful.
E(X) = 1/p
       = 1/0.4
       = 2.5
4. The variance of the number of attempts.
Var(X) = q/p2
         = 0.6/0.42
         = 0.6/0.16
         = 3.75
Or you could have found this by 
using P(X> 4) = 1 - P(X ≤ 4) 
= 1 - 0.8704 = 0.1296
be the snowboarder solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    287
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
You’ve mastered the geometric 
distribution
Thanks to your skills with the geometric distribution, Chad not only 
knows the probability of him making a clear run down the slopes after 
any number of tries, but also how many times he can expect it to take to 
get down the hill successfully, and how much variability there is.
With an expectation of 5 tries to make it down the slopes, and a 
variance of 20, he feels much more confident he can impress the ladies 
without serious bodily harm. 
Now let’s move on to…
Ladies And GentleMen, 
We Interrupt This Chapter 
To Bring You 
An Exciting Installment 
of Statsville’s Favorite 
Quiz Show:
Who Wants To Win A 
Swivel Chair!
Let’s hit the slopes!
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

Hello, and welcome to Who Wants To 
Win A Swivel Chair, Statville’s favorite 
quiz show. We’ve got some fiendishly 
difficult questions on the show tonight. 
I hope you’re feeling lucky.
Download at WoweBook.Com

290    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
D: Intelligence
B: Charm
C: Sense of Humor
3. What do people like most about him?
A: Good looks
D: April
B: February
C: March
2. In what month is his birthday?
A: January
Here are the questions for Round One. The 
questions are all about the game show host. 
Put a check mark next to the correct answer.
We’ve got some great questions for you today, 
so let’s get started. In Round One I’m going to ask you 
three questions, and for each question there are four possible 
answers. You can quit now and walk away with the consolation 
prize, but if you play on and beat your competitors, you’ll move 
on to the next round and be one step closer to winning a swivel 
chair. The title of Round One is “All About Me.” Good luck!
Q: What’s a quiz show doing in the middle of my chapter? I 
thought we were talking about probability distributions.
A: We still are. This situation is ideal for another sort of probability 
distribution. Keep reading and everything will become clear.
Q: I don’t know the answers to these questions. What should 
I do?
A: If you don’t know the answers you’ll have to answer them at 
random. Give it your best shot - you might win a swivel chair.
D: Yellow
B: Blue
C: Green
1. What’s his favorite color?
A: Red
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    291
What are the probabilities for this problem?  What sort of pattern 
can you see? We’re using X to represent the number of questions 
you get correct out of three.
x
P(X = x)
Power of 0.75
Power of 0.25
0
0.753  
3
0
1
2
3
Should you play, or walk away?
It’s unlikely you’ll know the game show host well enough to answer these 
questions, so let’s see if we can find the probability distribution for the number 
of questions you’ll get correct if you choose answers at random. That should 
help you decide whether or not to play on.
Here’s a probability tree for the three questions:
Incorrect
Correct
0.75
0.25
Incorrect
Incorrect
Correct
0.75
0.25
Correct
0.75
0.25
Incorrect
Incorrect
Incorrect
Incorrect
Correct
0.75
0.25
Correct
0.75
0.25
Correct
0.75
0.25
Correct
0.75
0.25
Question 1
Question 2
Question 3
Download at WoweBook.Com

292    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
0.75
x
P(X = x)
Power of 0.75
Power of 0.25
0
0.753  = .422
3
0
1
3 x 0.752 x 0.25 = .422
2
1
2
3 x 0.75 x 0.252 = .141
1
2
3
0.253  = .015
0
3
Incorrect
Correct
0.75
0.25
Incorrect
Incorrect
Correct
0.75
0.25
Correct
0.75
0.25
Incorrect
Incorrect
Incorrect
Incorrect
Correct
0.25
Correct
0.75
0.25
Correct
0.75
0.25
Correct
0.75
0.25
Question 1
Question 2
Question 3
What are the probabilities for this problem?  What sort of pattern 
can you see? We’re using X to represent the number of questions 
you get correct out of three.
Think back to when you looked at permutations 
and combinations in Chapter 6. How do you think 
they might help you with this sort of problem?
There are 3 
different ways 
you can get one 
question right, and 
all of them have 
a probability of 
0.752 x 0.25.
You’ve got a 42% chance of 
getting one question right, and a 
14% chance of getting two right. 
Those aren’t bad odds. I suggest 
you go for it and guess.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    293
P(X = r) = ? × 0.25
r × 0.75
3 - r
So far we’ve looked at the probability distribution of X, the number of 
questions we answer correctly out of three.
Just as with the geometric distribution, there seems to be a pattern in 
the way the probabilities are formed. Each probability contains different 
powers of 0.75 and 0.25. As x increases, the power of 0.75 decreases 
while the power of 0.25 increases.
In general, P(X = r) is given by:
In other words, to find the probability of getting exactly r questions right, 
we calculate 0.25r, multiply it by 0.753-r, and then multiply the whole lot by 
some number. But what?
The probability of getting a question right
The probability of getting a question wrong
There are 3 questions
r is the number of 
questions we get right
What’s the missing number?
For each probability, we need to answer a certain number of questions 
correctly, and there are different ways of achieving this. As an example, 
there are three different ways of answering exactly one question correctly 
out of three questions. Another way of looking at this is that there are 3 
different combinations.
Just to remind you, a combination nCr is the number of ways of choosing r 
objects from n, without needing to know the exact order. This is exactly the 
situation we have here. We need to choose r correct questions from 3.
This means that the probability of getting r questions correct out of 3 is 
given by
P(X = r) = 
3Cr × 0.25
r × 0.75
3 - r
What’s this?
We covered this back in Chapter 6; 
look back if you need a reminder.
Generalizing the probability for three questions
Let’s see how well 
you did in Round 
One, “All About Me.”
So, by this formula, the probability of getting 1 question 
correct is:
P(X = r) = 
3C1 × 0.25 × 0.75
3 - 1
	
= 3!/(3-1)! × 0.25 × 0.5625
	
= 6/2 × 0.0625 × 0.75
	
=0.422
This is the same result we got using 
our chart on the previous page.
Download at WoweBook.Com

294    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
Here are the questions for Round One. The questions are all 
about the game show host.
Looks like you tied 
with another contender. 
Congratulations, you’re 
through to the next round.
D: Intelligence
B: Charm
C: Sense of Humor
3. What do people like most about him?
A: Good looks
D: April
B: February
C: March
2. In what month is his birthday?
A: January
D: Yellow
B: Blue
C: Green
1. What’s his favorite color?
A: Red
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    295
It looks like these questions are just as obscure as the ones in the previous round, so 
you’ll have to answer questions at random again.
Let’s see if we can work out the probability distribution for this new set of questions.
Here are the questions for Round Two. The 
questions are all about the game show host.
D: Releasing an album
B: Winning Mr Statsville 2008
C: Raising $1000 for the seal sanctuary
3. What is his greatest achievement?
A: Hosting a quiz show
D: A hovercraft
B: A tin dog
C: A horse
2. What would be an ideal gift for him?
A: A statue
D: May
B: Marie
C: Maggie
1. What was the name of his first girlfriend?
A: Mary
D: To have his own hair care range
B: To release an exercise DVD
C: To launch his own range of menswear
4. What is his secret ambition?
A: To launch a range of sports equipment
D: 2008
B: 2006
C: 2007
5. In what year was he abducted by aliens?
A: 2005
Round Two of Who Wants To Win A Swivel Chair 
is called “More About Me.” This time I’ll ask you five 
questions. As before, there are four possible answers 
to each question. Do you want to play on?
Download at WoweBook.Com

296    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
Let’s generalize the probability further
So far you’ve seen that the probability of getting r questions correct out 
of 3 is given by
where the probability of answering a question correctly is 0.25, and the 
probability of answering incorrectly is 0.75.
The next round of Who Wants To Win A Swivel Chair has 5 questions 
instead of 3. Rather than rework this probability for 5 questions, let’s 
rework it for n questions instead. That way we’ll be able to use the same 
formula for every round of Who Wants To Win A Swivel Chair. 
So what’s the formula for the probability of getting r questions right out of 
n? It’s actually
What if the probability of getting a 
question right changes? I wonder if we 
can generalize this further.
P(X = r) = 
nCr × pr × qn - r
This sort of problem is called the binomial distribution. Let’s take a 
closer look.
P(X = r) = 
3Cr × 0.25
r × 0.75
3 - r
P(X = r) = 
nCr × 0.25
r × 0.75
n - r
Yes, we can generalize this further.
Imagine the probability of getting a question right is given by p, and 
the probability of getting a question wrong is given by 1 – p, or q. The 
probability of getting r questions right out of n is given by
Just replace the 3 with n.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    297
Guessing the answers to the questions on Who Wants To Win A Swivel 
Chair is an example of the binomial distribution. The binomial 
distribution covers situations where
P(X = r) = 
nCr pr qn - r
p is the probability of a successful outcome in each trial, and n is the number 
of trials. We can write this as
You’re running a series of independent trials.
1
There can be either a success or failure for each trial, and the 
probability of success is the same for each trial.
2
There are a finite number of trials.
3
These two are like the 
Geometric distribution.
Just like the geometric distribution, you’re running a series of independent 
trials, and each one can result in success or failure. The difference is that 
this time you’re interested in the number of successes.
Let’s use the variable X to represent the number of successful 
outcomes out of n trials. To find the probability there are r successes, 
use:
X ~ B(n, p)
This is different.
nCr =      n!
         r! (n - r)!
Binomial Distribution Up Close
where
The exact shape of the binomial distribution varies 
according to the values of n and p. The closer to 0.5 p is, 
the more symmetrical the shape becomes. In general it is 
skewed to the right when p is below 0.5, and skewed to the 
left when p is greater than 0.5.
The shape of the binomial 
distribution depends on the 
values of n and p.
x
P(X = x)
Download at WoweBook.Com

298    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
What’s the expectation and variance?
So far we’ve looked at how to use the binomial distribution to find basic 
probabilities, which allows us to calculate the probability of getting a certain 
number of questions correct. But how many questions can we actually expect to 
get right if we choose the answers at random? That will help you better decide 
whether we should answer the next round of questions.
Let’s see if we can find a general expression for the expectation and variance. 
We’ll start by working out the expectation and variance for a single trial, and then 
see if we can extend it to n independent trials.
x
0
1
P(X = x)
q
p
Let’s look at one trial
Suppose we conduct just one trial. Each trial can only result in success or 
failure, so in one trial, it’s possible to have 0 or 1 successes. If X ~ B(1, p), 
the probability of 1 success is p, and the probability of 0 successes is q.
We can use this to find the expectation and variance of X. Let’s start with the expectation. 
	
E(X) = 0q + 1p
	
         = p
	
Var(X) = E(X2) - E(X)2
	
            = (0q + 1p) - p2
	
            = p - p2
	
            = p(1 - p)
	
            = pq 
So for a single trial, E(X) = p and Var(X) = pq. But what if there are n trials?
E(X2)
E(X) = p, so E(X)2 = p2
This is the probability distribution 
of X where X ~ B(1, p).
In general, what happens to the expectation and variance when there are n 
independent observations? How can this help us now?
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    299
Pool Puzzle
Let’s see if you can derive the expectation 
and variance for Y ~ B(n, p). Your job 
is to take elements from the pool 
and place them into the blank lines 
of the calculations. You may not 
use the same element more than 
once, and you won’t need to use all 
the elements.
Note: each element in 
the pool can only be 
used once!
	
E(X) = E(X1) + E(X2) + ... + E(Xn)
	
         = 	          E(Xi)
	
         = 
Hint: Each Xi is a separate trial. E(Xi) = p, 
and Var(Xi) = pq
You need to find the expectation and variance 
of n independent trials.
n
np
	
Var(X) = Var(X1) + Var(X2) + ... + Var(Xn)
	
            =             Var(Xi)
	
            = 
n
npq
n2
n2pq
Download at WoweBook.Com

300    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
Pool Puzzle Solution
Let’s see if you can derive the expectation 
and variance for Y ~ B(n, p). Your job 
is to take elements from the pool 
and place them into the blank lines 
of the calculations. You may not 
use the same element more than 
once, and you won’t need to use all 
the elements.
	
E(X) = E(X1) + E(X2) + ... + E(Xn)
	
         = 	          E(Xi)
	
         = 
Hint: Each Xi is a separate trial. E(Xi) = p, 
and Var(Xi) = pq
You need to find the expectation and variance 
of n independent trials.
n
np
	
Var(X) = Var(X1) + Var(X2) + ... + Var(Xn)
	
            =             Var(Xi)
	
            = 
n
npq
n2
n2pq
If X ~ B(n, p), then
E(X) = np
Var(X) = npq
You didn’t need 
these elements.
Since the trials are independent, E(X1) = E(X2) = E(X3), 
and so on.
Since the trials are independent,  
Var(X1) = Var(X2) = Var(X3), and so on.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    301
These formulae work for any 
binomial distribution.
E(X) = np
Var(X) = npq
Binomial expectation and variance
Let’s summarize what we just did. First of all, we took at one trial, where 
the probability of success is p, and where the distribution is binomial. 
Using this, we found the expectation and variance of a single trial.
We then considered n independent trials, and used shortcuts to find the 
expectation and variance of n trials. We found that if X ~ B(n, p), 
This is useful to know as it gives us a quick way of finding the expectation 
and variance of any probability distribution, without us having to work out 
lots of individual probabilities.
Q: The geometric distribution and the 
binomial distribution seem similar. What’s 
the difference between them? Which one 
should I use when?
A: The geometric and binomial 
distributions do have some things 
in common. Both of them deal with 
independent trials, and each trial can result 
in success or failure. The difference between 
them lies in what you actually need to find 
out, and this dictates which probability 
distribution you need to use.  
 
If you have a fixed number of trials and you 
want to know the probability of getting a 
certain number of successes, you need to 
use the binomial distribution. You can also 
use this to find out how many successes you 
can expect to have in your n trials. 
 
If you’re interested in how many trials you’ll 
need before you have your first success, 
then you need to use the geometric 
distribution instead.
Q: The geometric distribution has a 
mode. Does the binomial distribution?
A: Yes, it does. The mode of a probability 
distribution is the value with the highest 
probability. If p is 0.5 and n is even, the 
mode is np. If p is 0.5 and n is odd it has two 
modes, the two values either side of np. For 
other values of n and p, finding the mode is 
a matter of trial and error, but it’s generally 
fairly close to np.
Q: So for both the geometric and the 
binomial distributions you run a series 
of trials. Does the probability of success 
have to be the same for each trial?
A: In order for the geometric or binomial 
distribution to be applicable, the probability 
of success in each trial must be the same. 
If it’s not, then neither the geometric nor 
binomial distribution is appropriate.
Q: I’ve tried calculating E(X) and 
it’s not a value that’s in the probability 
distribution. Did I do something wrong?
A: When you calculate E(X), the result 
may not be a possible value in your 
probability distribution. It may not be a value 
that can actually occur. If you get a result 
like this, it doesn’t mean that you’ve made a 
mistake, so don’t worry. 
Q: Are there any other sorts of 
probability distribution?
A: Yes, there are. Keep reading and you’ll 
find out more.
Download at WoweBook.Com

302    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
Your quick guide to the binomial distribution
Here’s a quick summary of everything you could possibly need to know about the binomial distribution
When do I use it?
Use the binomial distribution if you’re running a fixed number of independent trials, each one can have a success 
or failure, and you’re interested in the number of successes or failures
How do I calculate probabilities?
Use
What about the expectation and variance?
E(X) = np
Var(X) = npq 
P(X = r) = 
nCr pr qn - r
nCr =      n!
         r! (n - r)!
where p is the probability of success in a trial, q = 1 - p, n is the number of trials, and X is the number of 
successes in the n trials.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    303
In the latest round of Who Wants To Win A Swivel Chair, there are 5 questions. The probability of 
getting a successful outcome in a single trial is 0.25
1. What’s the probability of getting exactly two questions right?
4. What’s the probability of getting no questions right?
2. What’s the probability of getting exactly three questions right?
5. What are the expectation and variance?
3. What’s the probability of getting two or three questions right?
Download at WoweBook.Com

304    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
In the latest round of Who Wants To Win A Swivel Chair, there are 5 questions. The probability of 
getting a successful outcome in a single trial is 0.25
1. What’s the probability of getting exactly two questions right?
If X represents the number of questions answered correctly, then X ~ B(n, p)
P(X = 2) = 5C2 x 0.252 x 0.753
	
  =  5!	 x 0.0625 x 0.421875
	
     3!2!
	
  = 10 x 0.0264
	
  = 0.264
4. What’s the probability of getting no questions right?
P(X = 0) = 0.755
	
  = 0.237
2. What’s the probability of getting exactly three questions right?
P(X = 3) = 5C3 x 0.253 x 0.752
	
  =  5!	 x .0.015625 x 0.5625
	
     2!3!
	
  = 10 x 0.00879
	
  = 0.0879
5. What are the expectation and variance?
E(X) = np
       = 5 x 0.25
       = 1.25
3. What’s the probability of getting two or three questions right?
P(X = 2 or X = 3) = P(X = 2) + P(X = 3)
	
	
   = 0.264 + 0.0879
	
	
   = 0.3519
Var(X) = npq
         = 5 x 0.25 x 0.75
         = 0.9375
So, you can 
expect to get 
less than 2 questions 
correct? I think now’s 
about time to quit. 
Sorry you won’t win the 
swivel chair, though.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    305
Here are the questions for Round Two. The questions are all about 
the game show host.
D: Releasing an album
B: Winning Mr Statsville 2008
C: Raising $1000 for the seal sanctuary
3. What is his greatest achievement?
A: Hosting a quiz show
D: A hovercraft
B: A tin dog
C: A horse
2. What would be an ideal gift for him?
A: A statue
D: May
B: Marie
C: Maggie
1. What was the name of his first girlfriend?
A: Mary
D: To have his own hair care range
B: To release an exercise DVD
C: To launch his own range of menswear
4. What is his secret ambition?
A: To launch a range of sports equipment
D: 2008
B: 2006
C: 2007
5. In what year was he abducted by aliens?
A: 2005
It’s been great having you as a contestant on the 
show, and we’d love to have you back later on. But 
we’ve just had a phone call from the Statsville 
cinema. Some problem about popcorn...?
Download at WoweBook.Com

306    Chapter 7
So how do we find probabilities?
The trouble with this sort of problem is that while we know the mean 
number of popcorn machine malfunctions per week, the actual number 
of breakdowns varies each week. On the whole we can expect 3 or 4 
malfunctions per week, but in a bad week there’ll be far more, and in a good  
week there might be none at all.
We need to find the probability that the popcorn machine won’t break down 
next week.
Sound difficult? Don’t worry, there’s a probability distribution that’s 
designed for just this sort of situation. It’s called the Poisson distribution.
Where’s my popcorn? 
I want popcorn now! 
Give me my popcorn!
The Statsville Cinema has a problem
It’s a fact of life that cinemagoers like popcorn.
The trouble is that the popcorn machine at the Statsville Cinema keeps 
breaking down, and the customers aren’t happy.
The cinema has a big promotion on next week, and the cinema manager 
needs everything to be perfect. He doesn’t want the popcorn machine to 
break down during the week, or people won’t come back.
The mean number of popcorn machine malfunctions per week, or rate of 
malfunctions, is 3.4. What’s the probability that it won’t break down at all 
next week?
If they expect the machine to break down more than a few times next week, 
the Statsville Cinema will buy a new popcorn machine, but if not, they’ll 
stick with the current one and run the risk of a breakdown.
It’s a different sort of distribution
This is a different sort of problem from the ones we’ve encountered so far. 
This time there’s no series of attempts or trials. Instead, we have a situation 
where we know the rate at which malfunctions happen, and where 
malfunctions occur at random.
introducing the poisson distribution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    307
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
Poisson Distribution Up Close
The Poisson distribution covers situations where:
Let’s use the variable X to represent the number of occurrences in 
the given interval, for instance the number of breakdowns in a week. If 
X follows a Poisson distribution with a mean of λ occurrences per interval 
or rate, we write this as:
Individual events occur at random and independently in a given 
interval. This can be an interval of time or space—for example, 
during a week, or per mile.
1
You know the mean number of occurrences in the interval or the 
rate of occurrences, and it’s finite. The mean number of occurrences 
is normally represented by the Greek letter λ (lambda).
2
X ~ Po(λ)
P(X = r) = e
-λ λ
r
	
	
 r!
The formula for the probability uses the exponential function ex, where x 
is some number. It’s a standard function available on most calculators, so 
even though the formula might look daunting at first, it’s actually quite 
straightforward to use in practice.
As an example, if X ~ Po(2)
We’re not going to derive it here, but to find the probability that there are r 
occurrences in a specific interval, use the formula:
	
P(X = 3) = e-2 × 23
	
	
        3!
	
	
 = e-2 × 8
	
	
        6
	
	
 = e-2 × 1.333
	
	
 = 0.180
Use the formula and substitute 
in r = 3 and λ = 2.
Don’t let appearances put you off. 
It’s pretty straightforward to 
calculate in practice.
So if X follows a Poisson distribution, what’s its expectation and variance? 
It’s easier than you might think...
e is a mathematical 
constant. It always 
stands for 2.718, so you 
can just substitute in 
this number for e in the 
Poisson formula. Many 
scientific calculators 
have an ex key that will 
calculate powers of e 
for you.
Download at WoweBook.Com

308    Chapter 7
   E(X) = λ	 	
Var(X) = λ
Finding the expectation and variance for the Poisson distribution is a lot easier 
than finding it for other distributions.
If X ~ Po(λ), E(X) is the number of occurrences we can expect to have in a 
given intervals, so for the popcorn machine, it’s the number of breakdowns we 
can expect to have in a typical week. In other words, E(X) is the mean number 
of occurrences in the given interval.
Now, if X ~ Po(λ), then the mean number of occurrences is given by λ. In 
other words, E(X) is equal to λ, the parameter that defines our Poisson 
distribution.
To make things even simpler, the variance of the Poisson distribution is also 
given by λ, so if X ~ Po(λ), 
In other words, if you’re given a Poisson distribution Po(λ), you don’t have to 
calculate anything at all to find the expectation and variance. It’s the parameter  
of the Poisson distribution itself.
What does the Poisson distribution look like?
The shape of the Poisson distribution varies depending on the value of λ. If 
λ is small, then the distribution is skewed to the right, but it becomes more 
symmetrical as λ gets larger.
If λ is an integer, then there are two modes, λ and λ - 1. If λ is not an integer, 
then the mode is λ.
The shape of the Poisson distribution 
depends on the value of λ.
x
P(X = x)
λ
I tell you everything 
you need to know about 
the Poisson distribution. 
Expectation, variance, 
the lot.
Expectation and variance for the Poisson distribution
finding expectation and variance for poisson
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    309
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
BE the popcorn machine
Your job is to play like you’re 
the popcorn machine and say 
what the probability is of you 
malfunctioning a particular 
number of times next week. 
Remember, the mean number of 
times you break down in a week 
is 3.4.
1. What’s the probability of the machine not malfunctioning next week?
2. What’s the probability of the machine malfunctioning three times next week?
3. What’s the expectation and variance of the machine malfunctions?
Download at WoweBook.Com

310    Chapter 7
1. What’s the probability of the machine not malfunctioning next week?
Let’s use X to represent the number of 
times the popcorn machine malfunctions in 
a week. We have
X ~ Po(3.4)
If there are no malfunctions, then X must be 0.
P(X = 0) = e-λ λr
	
       r!
	
  = e-3.4 x 3.40
	
          0!
	
  = e-3.4 x 1
	
        1
	
  = 0.033
P(X = 3) = e-3.4 x 3.43
	
          3!
	
  = e-3.4 x 39.304
	
	
  6
	
  = 0.033 x 6.55
	
  = 0.216
2. What’s the probability of the machine malfunctioning three times next week?
3. What’s the expectation and variance of the machine malfunctions?
E(X) = λ
       = 3.4
Var(X) = λ
         = 3.4
Looks like we can 
expect the machine to break 
down only 3.4 times next week, 
so we’ll risk it and skip that new 
machine. Don’t tell the moviegoers.
be the popcorn machine solution
BE the popcorn machine solution
Your job is to play like you’re 
the popcorn machine and say 
what the probability is of you 
malfunctioning a particular 
number of times next week. 
Remember, the mean number of 
times you break down in a week 
is 3.4.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    311
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
Q: How come we use λ to represent 
the mean for the Poisson distribution? 
Why not use μ like we do elsewhere?
A: We use λ because for the Poisson 
distribution, the parameter of the distribution, 
expectation and variance are all the same. 
It’s a way of making sure we keep everything 
neutral.
Q: Where does the formula for the 
Poisson distribution come from?
A: It can actually be derived from the 
other distributions, but the mathematics 
are quite involved. In practice it’s best to 
just accept the formula, and remember the 
situations in which it’s useful.
Q: What’s the difference between 
the Poisson distribution and the other 
probability distributions?
A: The key difference is that the Poisson 
distribution doesn’t involve a series of 
trials. Instead, it models the number of 
occurrences in a particular interval.
Q: Does λ have to be an integer?
A: Not at all. λ can be any non-negative 
number. It can’t be negative as it’s the mean 
number of occurrences in an interval, and 
it doesn’t make sense to have a negative 
number of occurrences.
Q: What’s that “e” in the formula all 
about?
A: e is a constant in mathematics that 
stands for the number 2.718. So you can 
substitute in 2.718 for e in the formula for 
calculating Poisson probabilities. 
 
 
 
The constant e is used frequently in calculus, 
and it also has many other applications 
in everything from calculating compound 
interest to advanced probability theory. 
Further discussion of e is outside the scope 
of this book, though.
Q: I keep getting the wrong answer 
when I try to calculate probabilities using 
the Poisson distribution. Where am I 
going wrong?
A: There are two main areas where it’s 
easy to trip up. The first thing is to make 
sure you’re using the right formula. It’s easy 
to get the r and the λ mixed up, so make 
sure you’ve got them the right way round. 
 
The second thing is to make sure you’re 
using the ex function correctly on your 
calculator. One way of doing this is to leave 
the e-λ calculation until the end. Calculate 
everything else first, then multiply by e-λ.
Where’s my drink? I want 
a drink to go with my popcorn. 
Give me my drink now!
The Statsville Cinema has another problem.
It’s not just the popcorn machine that keeps breaking down, now the drinks 
machine has begun malfunctioning too. The mean number of breakdowns 
per week of the drinks machine is 2.3.
The cinema manager can’t afford for anything to go wrong next week when 
the promotion is on. What’s the probability that there will be no breakdowns 
next week, either with the popcorn machine nor the drinks machine?
What’s the probability distribution of the drinks 
machine? How can we find the probability that 
neither the popcorn machine nor the drinks 
machine go wrong next week?
Download at WoweBook.Com

312    Chapter 7
So what’s the probability distribution?
Let’s take a closer look at this situation.
We have two machines, a popcorn machine and a drinks machine, and we know 
the mean number of breakdowns of each machine in a week. We want to find 
the probability that there will be no breakdowns next week.
Here are the distributions of the two machines:
Popcorn machine
X ~ Po(3.4)
Y ~ Po(2.3)
Drinks machine
The mean number of 
breakdowns per week of 
the popcorn machine is 3.4.
The mean number of 
breakdowns per week of 
the drinks machine is 2.3.
If X represents the number of breakdowns of the popcorn machine and Y 
represents the number of breakdowns of the drinks machine, then both X and 
Y follow Poisson distributions. What’s more, X and Y are independent. In other 
words, the popcorn machine breaking down has no impact on the probability 
that the drinks machine will malfunction, and the drinks machine breaking down 
has no impact on the probability that the popcorn machine will malfunction.
We need to find the probability that the total number of malfunctions next week 
is 0. In other words, we need to find 
P(X + Y = 0)
Think back to the chapter on probabilities. If X and Y are independent variables, 
how can we find probabilities for X + Y?
x + y poisson distribution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    313
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
Combine Poisson variables
You saw in previous chapters that if X and Y are independent random 
variables, then
	
	
P(X + Y) = P(X) + P(Y)
	
	
E(X + Y) = E(X) + E(Y)
This means that if X ~ Po(λx) and Y ~ Po(λy),
X + Y ~ Po(λx + λy)
This means that if X and Y both follow Poisson distributions, then so does  
X + Y. In other words, we can use our knowledge of the way both X and Y 
are distributed to find probabilities for X + Y. 
If X is the number of times the popcorn machine malfunctions 
and Y is the number of times the drinks machine malfunctions, 
then X ~ Po(3.4) and Y ~ Po(2.3).
1. What’s the distribution of X + Y?
2. Once you’ve found how X + Y is distributed, you can use it to find probabilities. What’s P(X + Y = 0)?
Download at WoweBook.Com

314    Chapter 7
If X is the number of times the popcorn machine malfunctions 
and Y is the number of times the drinks machine malfunctions, 
then X ~ Po(3.4) and Y ~ Po(2.3).
1. What’s the distribution of X + Y?
λx + λy = 3.4 + 2.3
         = 5.7
X + Y ~ Po(5.7)
2. Once you’ve found how X + Y is distributed, you can use it to find probabilities. What’s P(X + Y = 0)?
P(X + Y = 0) = e-λ λr
	
            r!
	
        = e-5.7 x 5.70
	
                0!
	
        = e-5.7 x 1
	
               1
	
        = 0.003
Q: Does that mean that the probability 
and expectation shortcuts we saw 
earlier in the book work for the Poisson 
distribution too?
A: Yes they do. X and Y are independent 
random variables, because the popcorn 
machine malfunctioning does not affect 
the probability that the drinks machine will 
malfunction, and vice versa. This means that 
we can use all of the shortcuts that apply to 
independent variables.
Q: Why does X + Y follow a Poisson 
distribution?
A: X + Y follows a Poisson distribution 
because both X and Y are independent, and 
they both follow a Poisson distribution. 
 
Both the popcorn machine and drinks 
machine each malfunction at random but at 
a mean rate. This means that together they 
also breakdown at random and at a mean 
rate. Together, they still meet the criteria for 
the Poisson distribution.
Q: So can we use the distribution of 
X + Y in the same we would any other 
Poisson distribution?
A: Yes, we use it in exactly the same way, 
so once you know what the parameter λ is, 
you can use it to find probabilities.
Only a .003 chance 
of no breakdowns next 
week? Guess we better 
get some new machines 
after all.
sharpen your pencil solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    315
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
The Case of the Broken Cookies
Kate works at the Statsville cookie factory, and her job is to make sure 
that boxes of cookies meet the factory’s strict rules on quality control. 
Kate know that the probability that a cookie is broken is 0.1, and her 
boss has asked her to find the probability that there will be 15 broken 
cookies in a box of 100 cookies. “It’s easy,” he says. “Just use the 
binomial distribution where n is 100, and p is 0.1.”
Kate picks up her calculator, but when she tries to calculate 100!, 
her calculator displays an error because the number is too big. 
“Well,” says her boss, “you’ll just have to calculate it manually. 
But I’m going home now, so have a nice night.”
Kate stares at her calculator, wondering what to do. Then she smiles. 
“Maybe I can leave early tonight, after all.”
Within a minute, Kate’s calculated the probability. She’s managed 
to find the probability and has managed to avoid calculating 100! 
altogether. She picks up her coat and walks out the door.
How did Kate find the probability so quickly, and avoid  
the error on her calculator?
Five Minute 
Mystery
Five Minute 
Mystery
Download at WoweBook.Com

316    Chapter 7
The Poisson in disguise
The Poisson distribution has another use too. Under certain 
circumstances it can be used to approximate the binomial distribution.
Why should I care? Why 
would I want to do that?
Sometimes it’s simpler to use the Poisson 
distribution than the binomial.
As an example, imagine if you had to calculate a binomial 
probability where n is 3000. At some point you’d need to calculate 
3000!, which would be difficult even with a good calculator.  
Because of this, it’s useful to know when you can use the Poisson 
distribution to accurately approximate the answer instead.
So under what circumstances can we use this, and how?
Imagine we have a variable X where X ~ B(n, p). We want to find 
a set of circumstances where B(n, p) is similar to Po(λ).
Let’s start off by looking at the expectation and variance of the 
two distributions. We want to find the circumstances in which the 
expectation and variance of the Poisson distribution are like those 
of the Binomial distribution. In other words, we want
λ
np
λ
npq
to be like
to be like
np
npq
to be like
Expectation
Variance
np and npq are close to each other if q is close to 1 and n is large. 
In other words:
X ~ B(n, p) can be approximated by X ~ Po(np) 
if n is large and p is small
The approximation is typically very close if n is larger than 50, and p is less 
than 0.1.
approximating with the poisson distribution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    317
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
A student needs to take an exam, but hasn’t done any revision for it. He needs to guess the 
answer to each question, and the probability of getting a question right is 0.05. There are 50 
questions on the exam paper. What’s the probability he’ll get 5 questions right? Use the Poisson 
approximation to the binomial distribution to find out.
Q: Why would I ever want to use the 
Poisson distribution to approximate the 
binomial distribution?
A: When n is very large, it can be difficult 
to calculate nCr. Some calculators run out 
of memory, and the results can be so large 
they’re just unwieldy. Using the Poisson 
distribution in this way is a way round this 
sort of problem.
Q: So when can I use this 
approximation?
A: You can use it when n is large (say 
over 50) and p is small (say less than 
0.1). When this is the case, the binomial 
distribution and the Poisson distribution are 
approximately the same.
Q: Why do we use np as the 
parameter for the Poisson distribution?
A: The Poisson distribution takes one 
parameter, λ, and E(X) = λ. This means that 
if we have use the Poisson approximation 
of the binomial distribution, we can 
substitute in the expectation of the binomial 
distribution, np.
Download at WoweBook.Com

318    Chapter 7
Solved: The Case of the Broken Cookies
How did Kate find the probability so quickly, and avoid 
the Out of Memory error on her calculator?
Kate spotted that even though she needed to use the 
binomial distribution, her values of n and p were 
such that she could approximate the probability using 
the Poisson distribution instead.
A lot of calculators can’t cope with high factorials, 
and this can sometimes make the binomial distribution 
unwieldy. Knowing how to approximate it with the Poisson distribution 
can sometimes save you quite a bit of time.
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
A student needs to take an exam, but hasn’t done any revision for it. He needs to guess the 
answer to each question, and the probability of getting a question right is 0.05. There are 50 
questions on the exam paper. What’s the probability he’ll get 5 questions right? Use the Poisson 
approximation to the binomial distribution to find out.
Let’s use X to represent the number of questions the student gets right. In this problem, n = 50 
and p = 0.05, np = 2.5. This means we can use X ~ Po(2.5) to approximate the probability.
P(X = 5) =  e-λ λr
	
       r!
	
  = e-2.5 x 2.55
	
          5!
	
  = e-2.5 x 97.65625
	
            120
	
  = e-2.5 x 0.8138
	
  = 0.067
exercise and mystery solutions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    319
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
Anyone for popcorn?
You’ve covered a lot of ground in this chapter.  You’ve built on your 
existing knowledge of probability and statistics by tackling three of the 
most important discrete probability distributions. Moreover, you’ve 
gained a deeper understanding of how probability distributions work 
and the sort of shortcuts you can make to save yourself time and 
produce reliable results, skills that will come in useful in the rest of the 
book.
So sit back and enjoy the popcorn — you’ve earned it.
Your quick guide to the Poisson distribution
Here’s a quick summary of everything you could possibly need to know about the Poisson distribution
When do I use it?
Use the Poisson distribution if you have independent events such as malfunctions occurring in a given interval, 
and you know λ, the mean number of occurrences in a given interval. You’re interested in the number of 
occurrences in one particular interval.
How do I calculate probabilities, and the expectation and variance?
Use
How do I combine independent random variables?
If X ~ Po(λx) and Y ~ Po(λy), then
E(X) = λ
Var(X) = λ 
P(X = r) = e
-λ λ
r
	
	
 r!
X + Y ~ Po(λx + λy)
What connection does it have to the binomial distribution?
If X ~ B(n, p), where n is large and p is small, then X can be approximated using
X ~ Po(np)
Download at WoweBook.Com

320    Chapter 7
Here are some scenarios. Your job is to say which distribution each of them follows, say what 
the expectation and variance are, and find any required probabilities.
1. A man is bowling. The probability of him knocking all the pins over is 0.3. If he has 10 shots, what’s the probability he’ll 
knock all the pins over less than three times?
long exercise
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    321
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
2. On average, 1 bus stops at a certain point every 15 minutes. What’s the probability that no buses will turn up in 
a single 15 minute interval?
3. 20% of cereal packets contain a free toy. What’s the probability you’ll need to open fewer than 4 cereal packets 
before finding your first toy?
Download at WoweBook.Com

322    Chapter 7
Here are some scenarios. Your job is to say which distribution each of them follows, say what 
the expectation and variance are, and find any required probabilities.
1. A man is bowling. The probability of him knocking all the pins over is 0.3. If he has 10 shots, what’s the probability he’ll 
knock all the pins down less than three times?
If X is the number of times the man knocks all the pins over, then X ~ B(10, 0.3) 
E(X) = np
       = 10 x 0.3
       = 3
For a general probability, P(X = r) = nCr x pr x qn-r
P(X = 0) = 10C0 x 0.30 x 0.710
	
  = 1 x 1 x 0.028
	
  = 0.028
P(X = 1) = 10C1 x 0.31 x 0.79
	
  = 10 x 0.3 x 0.04035
	
  = 0.121
P(X = 2) = 10C2 x 0.32 x 0.78
	
  = 45 x 0.09 x 0.0576
	
  = 0.233
P(X < 3) = P(X = 0) + P(X = 1) + P(X = 2)
	
 = 0.028 + 0.121 + 0.233
	
 = 0.382
Var(X) = npq
         = 10 x 0.3 x 0.7
         = 2.1
long exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    323
geometric, binomial, and poisson distributions
2. On average, 1 bus stops at a certain point every 15 minutes. What’s the probability that no buses will turn up in 
a single 15 minute interval?
3. 20% of cereal packets contain a free toy. What’s the probability you’ll need to open fewer than 4 cereal packets 
before finding your first toy?
If X is the number of buses that stop in a 15 minute interval, then X ~ Po(1) 
E(X) = λ
       = 1
For a general probability, P(X = r) = e-λ λr
	
	
	
	
     r!
P(X = 0) = e-1 x 10
	
        0!
	
  = e-1 x 1
	
        1
	
  = 0.368
If X is the number of cereal packets that need to be opened in order to find your first toy, then X ~ Geo(0.2)
E(X) = 1/p
       = 1/0.2
       = 5
For a general probability, P(X ≤ r) = 1 - qr
P(X ≤ 3) = 1 - qr
	
  = 1 - 0.83
	
  = 1 - 0.512
	
  = 0.488
Var(X) = λ
         = 1
Var(X) = q/p2
         = 0.8/0.22
         = 0.8/0.04
         = 20
Download at WoweBook.Com

324    Chapter 7
The geometric distribution 
applies when you run a series of 
independent trials, there can be 
either a success or failure for each 
trial, the probability of success is 
the same for each trial, and the 
main thing you’re interested in 
is how many trials are needed in 
order to get your first success.
If the conditions are met for the 
geometric distribution, X is the 
number of trials needed to get the 
first successful outcome, and p is 
the probability of success in a trial, 
then 
 
	
X ~ Geo(p) 
The following probabilities apply if 
X ~ Geo(p): 
 
	
P(X = r) = pqr - 1 
	
P(X > r) = qr 
	
P(X ≤ r) = 1 - qr 
If X ~ Geo(p) then 
 
	
E(X) = 1/p 
	
Var(X) = q/p2




The binomial distribution applies 
when you run a series of finite 
independent trials, there can be 
either a success or failure for each 
trial, the probability of success is 
the same for each trial, and the 
main thing you’re interested in is 
the number of successes in the n 
independent trials.
If the conditions are met for the 
binomial distribution, X is the 
number of successful outcomes 
out of n trials, and p is the 
probability of success in a trial, 
then 
 
	
X ~ B(n, p) 
If X ~ B(n, p), you can calculate 
probabilities using 
 
	
P(X = r) = nCr pr qn - r 
 
where 
 
	
nCr =      n! 
	
         r! (n - r)! 
If X ~ B(n, p), then 
 
	
E(X) = np 
	
Var(X) = npq




The Poisson distribution applies 
when individual events occur at 
random and independently in a 
given interval, you know the mean 
number of occurrences in the 
interval or the rate of occurrences 
and this is finite, and you want to 
know the number of occurrences in 
a given interval.
If the conditions are met for 
the Poisson distribution, X is 
the number of occurrences in a 
particular interval, and λ is the rate 
of occurrences, then 
 
	
X ~ Po(λ) 
If X ~ Po(λ) then 
 
	
P(X = r) = e-λ λr 
	
	
    r! 
	
E(X) = λ 
	
Var(X) = λ 
If X ~ Po(λx), Y ~ Po(λy) and X and 
Y are independent, 
 
	
X + Y ~ Po(λx + λy) 
If X ~ B(n, p) where n is large and 
p is small, you can approximate it 
with X ~ Po(np).





bullet points
Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    325
using the normal distribution
8
Being Normal
Discrete probability distributions can’t handle every situation. 
So far we’ve looked at probability distributions where we’ve been able to specify exact 
values, but this isn’t the case for every set of data. Some types of data just don’t fit the 
probability distributions we’ve encountered so far. In this chapter, we’ll take a look at 
how continuous probability distributions work, and introduce you to one of the most 
important probability distributions in town—the normal distribution.
Discrete probability distributions can’t handle every situation. 
So far we’ve looked at probability distributions where we’ve been able to specify exact 
values, but this isn’t the case for every set of data. Some types of data just don’t fit the 
probability distributions we’ve encountered so far. In this chapter, we’ll take a look at 
how continuous probability distributions work, and introduce you to one of the most 
important probability distributions in town—the normal distribution.
Whoever told you that’s 
normal was kidding.
Download at WoweBook.Com

326    Chapter 8
Discrete data takes exact values…
So far we’ve looked at probability distributions where the data is 
discrete. By this we mean the data is composed of distinct numeric 
values, and we’re been able to calculate the probability of each of 
these values. As an example, when we looked at the probability 
distribution for the winnings on a slot machine, the possible amounts 
we could win on each game were very precise. We knew exactly what 
amounts of money we could win, and we knew we’d win one of them.
Discrete data 
can only take 
exact values
If data is discrete, it’s numeric and can take only exact values. It’s 
often data that can be counted in some way, such as the number of 
gumballs in a gumball machine, the number of questions answered 
correctly in a game show, or the number of breakdowns in a particular 
period. 
You can think of discrete data 
as being like a series of stepping 
stones. You can step from value 
to value, and there are definite 
breaks between each value.
1
2
3
4
5
2
1
3
4
5
discrete data vs. continuous data
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    327
using the normal distribution
But why should I care 
about continuous data?
…but not all numeric data is discrete
It’s not always possible to say what all the values should be in a set of 
data. Sometimes data covers a range, where any value within that range 
is possible. As an example, suppose you were asked to accurately measure 
pieces of string that are between 10 inches and 11 inches long. You could 
have measurements of 10 inches, 10.1 inches, 10.01 inches, and so on, as the 
length could be anything within that range.
Numeric data like this is called continuous. It’s frequently data that is 
measured in some way rather than counted, and a lot depends on the degree 
of precision you need to measure to.
The type of data you have affects how you find probabilities.
So far we’ve only looked at probability distributions that deal with discrete data.  
Using these probability distributions, we’ve been able to find the probabilities of 
exact discrete values. 
The problem is that a lot of real-world problems involve continuous data, and 
discrete probability distributions just don’t work with this sort of data. To find 
probabilities for continuous data, you need to know about continuous data and 
continuous probability distributions.
Meanwhile, someone has a problem...
Continuous data is like a 
smooth, continuous path 
you can cycle along.
Continuous data can 
take countless values.
1
2
3
4
5
2
1
3
4
5
Download at WoweBook.Com

328    Chapter 8
What’s the delay?
Julie is a student, and her best friend keeps trying to get her fixed up on 
blind dates in the hope that she’ll find that special someone. The only 
trouble is that not many of her dates are punctual—or indeed turn up.
Julie hates waiting alone for her date to arrive, so she’s made herself a rule: 
if her date hasn’t turned up after 20 minutes, then she leaves.
I have another date tonight. 
I definitely won’t wait for more than 20 
minutes, but I hate standing around, What’s 
the probability I’ll be left waiting for more 
than 5 minutes? Can you help?
Minutes
Frequency
This is when 
Julie arrives.
This is when Julie leaves.
Here’s a sketch of the frequency showing the amount of time Julie 
spends waiting for her date to arrive:
We need to find probabilities for the amount of time Julie spends waiting for 
her date. Is the amount of time discrete or continuous? Why? How do you 
think we can go about finding probabilities?
Statsville men on blind dates aren’t 
punctual; they could arrive at any time.
frequency and continuous data
0
20
Meet Julie, a girl on a mission 
to find the perfect partner 
for herself.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    329
using the normal distribution
We need to find the probability that Julie will have to wait for more than 5 
minutes for her date to turn up. The trouble is, the amount of time Julie has to 
wait is continuous data, which means the probability distributions we’ve learned 
thus far don’t apply.
When we were dealing with discrete data, we were able to produce a specific 
probability distribution. We could do this by either showing the probability of 
each value in a table, or by specifying whether it followed a defined probability 
distribution, such as the binomial or Poisson distribution. By doing this, we 
were able to specify the probability of each possible value. As an example, when 
we found the probability distribution for the winnings per game for one of Fat 
Dan’s slot machines, we knew all of the possible values for the winnings and 
could calculate the probability of each one..
With discrete data, we could give 
the probability of each value.
For continuous data, it’s a different matter. We can no longer give the probability 
of each value because it’s impossible to say what each of these precise values is. 
As an example, Julie’s date might turn up after 4 minutes, 4 minutes 10 seconds, 
or 4 minutes 10.5 seconds. Counting the number of possible options would be 
impossible. Instead, we need to focus on a particular level of accuracy and the 
probability of getting a range of values.
I get it. For discrete probability 
distributions, we look at the probability of 
getting a particular value; for continuous 
probability distributions, we look at the 
probability of getting a particular range.
x
-1
4
9
14
19
P(X = x)
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
We need a probability distribution for continuous data
Download at WoweBook.Com

330    Chapter 8
We can describe the probability distribution of a continuous random 
variable using a probability density function. 
A probability density function f(x) is a function that you can use to find the 
probabilities of a continuous variable across a range of values. It tells us 
what the shape of the probability distribution is.
Here’s a sketch of the probability density function for the amount of time 
Julie spends waiting for her date to turn up:
This line is the probability density function for 
the amount of time Julie waits for her dates. 
The probability is constant for the first 20 
minutes, and then it drops to 0 because she leaves.
Hello? I thought we 
were going to find 
some probabilities. 
How does this help?
Can you see how it matches the shape of the frequency? This isn’t 
just a coincidence. 
Probability is all about how likely things are to happen, and the 
frequency tells you how often values occur. The higher the relative 
frequency, the higher the probability of that value occurring. As 
the frequency for the amount of time Julie has to wait is constant 
across the 20 minute period, this means that the probability density 
function is constant too.
These are the 
same basic shape.
Minutes
Frequency
0
20
x
f(x)
0
20
f(x)
probability density functions
Probability density functions can be used for continuous data
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    331
using the normal distribution
Probability = area
For continuous random variables, probabilities are given by area. To find the 
probability of getting a particular range of values, we start off by sketching the 
probability density function. The probability of getting a particular range of values 
is given by the area under the line between those values.
As an example, we want to find the probability that Julie has to wait for between 5 
and 20 minutes for her date to turn up. We can find this probability by sketching 
the probability density function, and then working out the area under it where x is 
between 5 and 20.
The total area under the line must be equal to 1, as the total area represents the 
total probability. This is because for any probability distribution, the total probability 
must be equal to 1, and, therefore, the area must be too.
Let’s use this to help us find the probability that Julie will need to wait for over 5 
minutes for her date to arrive.
The total area under the line must be 1. What’s the value of f(x)?
x
f(x)
0
20
5
P(X > 5) is equal 
to the area here.
This area represents the total 
probability so it must be equal 
to 1.
x
f(x)
0
20
Hint: It’s a 
constant value.
Download at WoweBook.Com

332    Chapter 8
Before we can find probabilities for Julie, we need to find f(x), the probability 
density function.
So far, we know that f(x) is a constant value, and we know that the total area under 
it must be equal to 1. If you look at the sketch of f(x), the area under it forms 
a rectangle where the width of the base is 20. If we can find the height of the 
rectangle, we’ll have the value of f(x).
We find the area of a rectangle by multiplying its width and height together. 
This means that
        1 = 20 × height
height = 1/20
           = 0.05
This means that f(x) must be equal to 0.05, as that ensures the total area under it 
will be 1. In other words,
f(x) = 0.05	
where x between 0 and 20
Here’s a sketch:
Now that we’ve found the probability density function, we can find P(X > 5).
This area must be equal to 1.
x
f(x)
0
20
f(x) = 0.05 where x 
is between 0 and 20.
x
f(x)
0
20
0.05
finding f(x)
To calculate probability, start by finding f(x)…
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    333
using the normal distribution
Do I have to use area to find 
probability?  Can’t I just pick all the 
exact values in that range and add their 
probabilities together? That’s what we 
did for discrete probabilities.
…then find probability by finding the area
The area under the probability density line between 5 and 20 is a rectangle. 
This means that calculating the area of this rectangle will give us the probability 
P(X > 5). 
	
P(X > 5) = (20 - 5) × 0.05
	
	
 = 0.75 
So the probability that Julie will have to wait for more than 5 minutes is 0.75.
5
20
0.05
That doesn’t work for continuous probabilities.
For continuous probabilities, we have to find the probability by calculating the 
area under the probability density line.  
We can’t add together the probability of getting each value within the range 
as there are an infinite number of values. It would take forever.  
The only way we can find the probability for continuous probability 
distributions is to work out the area underneath the curve formed by the 
probability density function.
Area of rectangle = base x height.
When x is 5, f(x) = 0.05.
When dealing with 
continuous data, you 
calculate probabilities 
for a range of values.
Download at WoweBook.Com

334    Chapter 8
Q: So there’s a function called the 
probability density function. What’s 
probability density?
A: Probability density tells you how 
high probabilities are across ranges, and 
it’s described by the probability density 
function. It’s very similar to frequency density, 
which we encountered back in Chapter 1. 
Probability density uses area to tell you 
about probabilities, and frequency density 
uses area to tell you about frequencies.
Q: So aren’t probability density and 
probability the same thing?
A: Probability density gives you a 
means of finding probability, but it’s not the 
probability itself. The probability density 
function is the line on the graph, and the 
probability is given by the area underneath it 
for a specific range of values.
Q: I see, so if you have a chart 
showing a probability density function, 
you find the probability by looking at area, 
instead of reading it directly off the chart.
A: Exactly. For continuous data, you 
need to find probability by calculating area. 
Reading probabilities directly off a chart only 
works for discrete probabilities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: Doesn’t finding the probability 
get complicated if you have to calculate 
areas?  I mean, what if the probability 
density function is a curve and not a 
straight line?
A: It’s still possible to do it, but you 
need to use calculus, which is why we’re 
not expecting you to do that in this book. 
The key thing is that you see where the 
probabilities come from and how to interpret 
them. 
 
If you’re really interested in working out 
probabilities using calculus, by all means, 
give it a go. We don’t want to hold you back.
Q: You’ve talked a lot about 
probability ranges. How do I find the 
probability of a precise value?
A: When you’re dealing with continuous 
data, you’re really talking about acceptable 
degrees of accuracy, and you form a range 
based on these values. Let’s look at an 
example: 
 
Suppose you wanted a piece of string that’s 
10 inches long to the nearest inch. It would 
be tempting to say that you need a piece of 
string that’s exactly 10 inches long, but that’s 
not entirely accurate. What you’re really after 
is a piece of string that’s between 9.5 inches 
and 10.5 inches, as you want string that 10 
inches in length to the nearest inch.  In other 
words, you want to find the probability of the 
length being in the range 9.5 inches to 10.5 
inches. 
 
 
 
Q: But what if I want to find the 
probability of a precise single value?
A: This may not sound intuitive at first, 
but it’s actually 0. What you’re really talking 
about is the probability that you have a 
precise value to an infinite number of 
decimal places. 
 
If we go back to the string length example, 
what would happen if you needed a piece 
of string exactly 10 inches long? You would 
need to have a length of string measuring 
10 inches long to the nearest atom and 
examined under a powerful microscope.   
 
The probability of the string being precisely 
10 inches long is virtually impossible.
Q: But I’m sure that degree of 
accuracy isn’t needed. Surely it would 
be enough to measure it to the nearest 
hundredth of an inch?
A: Ah, but that brings us back to the 
degree of accuracy you need in order for 
the length to pass as 10 inches, rather 
than finding the probability of a value to an 
infinite degree of precision. You use your 
degree of accuracy to construct your range 
of acceptable measurements so that you can 
work out the probability.
no dumb questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    335
using the normal distribution
BE the probability density function
A bunch of probability density functions 
have lost track of their probabilities.  
Your job is to play like you’re the 
probability density function and 
work out the probability between 
the specified ranges.  Draw a sketch 
if you think that will help.
2.  f(x) = 1 where 0 < x < 1
Find P(X < 0.5)
4.  f(x) = 0.1 – 0.005x where 0 < x < 20
Find P(X > 5)
3.  f(x) = 1 where 0 < x < 1
Find P(X > 2)
1.  f(x) = 0.05 where 0 < x < 20
Find P(X < 5)
Download at WoweBook.Com

336    Chapter 8
BE the probability density function solution
A bunch of probability density functions 
have lost track of their probabilities.  
Your job is to play like you’re the 
probability density function and 
work out the probability between 
the specified ranges.  Draw a sketch 
if you think that will help.
2.  f(x) = 1 where 0 < x < 1
Find P(X < 0.5)
4.  f(x) = 0.1 – 0.005x where 0 < x < 20
Find P(X > 5)
When x = 5, f(x) = 0.075. This means we have to find 
the area of a right-angled triangle with height 0.075 
and width 15.
3.  f(x) = 1 where 0 < x < 1
Find P(X > 2)
The upper limit of x for this probability 
density function is 1, which means that 
it’s 0 above this. 
P(X > 2) = 0
1.  f(x) = 0.05 where 0 < x < 20
Find P(X < 5)
P(X < 5) = 5 x 0.05
	
 = 0.25
P(X < 5) is equal 
to the area here
f(x)
0
20
5
x
0.05
P(X < 0.5) = 1 x 0.5
	
    = 0.5
x
f(x)
0
0.5
1
1
The probability density 
is 0 where X > 1.
x
2
f(x)
0
1
1
P(X > 5) = (0.075 x 15)/2
	
 = 1.125/2
	
 = 0.5625
x
20
5
f(x)
0
0.1
0.075
The area of a triangle is 
1/2 the base multiplied 
by the height.
be the probability density function solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    337
using the normal distribution
Discrete data is composed of 
distinct numeric values.
Continuous data covers a range, 
where any value within that range is 
possible. It’s frequently data that is 
measured in some way, rather than 
counted.
Continuous probability distributions 
can be described with a probability 
density function.



You find the probability for a range 
of values by calculating the area 
under the probability density function 
between those values. So to find  
P(a < X < b), you need to calculate 
the area under the probability density 
function between a and b.
The total area under the probability 
density function must equal 1.


We’ve found the probability
So far, we’ve looked at how you can use probability density functions 
to find probabilities for continuous data. We’ve found that the 
probability that Julie will have to wait for more than 5 minutes for her 
date to turn up is 0.75.
That’s great, at least 
now I have an idea of 
how long I’ll be waiting. 
But what about my shoes?
Download at WoweBook.Com

338    Chapter 8
Searching for a soul mate
As well as preferring men who are punctual, Julie has preconceived ideas 
about what the love of her like should be like.
I need a man who’ll be taller 
than me when I wear my 
highest heels. Shoes definitely 
come first.
Julie loves wearing high-heeled shoes, and the higher the heel, the 
happier she is. The only problem is that she insists that her dates 
should be taller than her when she’s wearing her most extreme set of 
heels, and she’s running out of suitable men.
Unfortunately, the last couple of times Julie was sent on a blind date, 
the guys fell short of her expectations. She’s wondering how many 
men out there are taller than her and what the probability is that her 
dates will be tall enough for her high standards.
So how can we work out the probability this time?
sole
height probabilities
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    339
using the normal distribution
Male modelling
So far we’ve looked at very simple continuous distributions, but it’s 
unlikely these will model the heights of the men Julie might be dating.  
It’s likely we’ll have several men who are quite a bit shorter than average, 
a few really tall ones, and a lot of men somewhere in between.  We can 
expect most of the men to be average height.
Most men will be 
around average height.
There’ll be a few men 
who are much shorter 
than the average.
We can expect some 
men to be extra tall.
Given this pattern, the probability density of the height of the men is likely 
to look something like this.
There are fewer shorter 
guys, so the probability 
density is low.
Most men will be 
average height.
There’ll be a smaller 
number of tall guys.
This shape of distribution is actually fairly common and can be 
applied to lots of situations.  It’s called the normal distribution.  
Download at WoweBook.Com

340    Chapter 8
The normal distribution is called normal because it’s seen as an ideal. It’s 
what you’d “normally” expect to see in real life for a lot of continuous data 
such as measurements.
The normal distribution is in the shape of a bell curve. The curve is 
symmetrical, with the highest probability density in the center of the curve.  
The probability density decreases the further away you get from the mean.  
Both the mean and median are at the center and have the highest probability 
density.
The normal distribution is defined by two parameters, μ and σ2. μ tells you 
where the center of the curve is, and σ gives you the spread. If a continuous 
random variable X follows a normal distribution with mean μ and standard 
deviation σ, this is generally written X ~ N(μ, σ2).
It’s great being 
normal. In an ideal world, 
everyone would be like me.
μ
σ2
The greatest probability 
density is around the 
mean, so values around 
here are most likely.
X ~ N(μ, σ2)
The further you get 
from the mean, the lower 
the probability density.
So what effect do μ and σ really have on the shape of the normal distribution?
We said that μ tells you where the center of the curve is, and σ2 indicates the 
spread of values. In practice, this means that as σ2 gets larger, the flatter and 
wider the normal curve becomes. 
σ2 is large.
σ2 is small.
The larger σ2 becomes, 
the wider and flatter the 
curve becomes.
μ
σ2
μ
σ2
The normal distribution is an “ideal” model for continuous data
introducing the normal distribution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    341
using the normal distribution
As with any other continuous probability distribution, you find 
probabilities by calculating the area under the curve of the 
distribution. The curve gives the probability density, and the 
probability is given by the area between particular ranges. If, for 
instance, you wanted to find the probability that a variable X lies 
between a and b, you’d need to find the area under the curve between 
points a and b.
If the probability density 
decreases the further you get 
from μ, when does it reach 0?
No matter how far you go out on the graph, the 
probability density never equals 0.
The probability density gets closer and closer to 0, but never quite 
reaches it. If you looked at the probability density curve a very long 
way from μ, you’d find that the curve just skims above 0.
Another way of looking at this is that events become more and more 
unlikely to occur, but there’s always a tiny chance they might.
Sound complicated? Don’t worry, it’s easier than you might think.
Working out the area under the normal curve would be difficult if you had to 
do it all by yourself, but fortunately you have a helping hand in the form of 
probability tables. All you need to do is work out the range of the area you 
want to find, and then look up the corresponding probability in the table.  
So how do we find normal probabilities?
a
b
The shaded area gives the 
probability between that X is 
between a and b.
Download at WoweBook.Com

342    Chapter 8
Grab your distribution and range
Standardize it
Look up the probabilities
There are a few  steps you need to take in order to find normal 
probabilities. We’ll guide you through the process, but for now here’s 
a roadmap of where we’re headed.
If the normal distribution applies to 
your situation, see if you can find what 
the mean and standard deviation are.  
You’ll need these before you can find 
your probabilities. You also need to 
figure out what area you need to find.
Don’t worry about this for now; 
we’ll show you how to do this 
really soon.
Once you’ve transformed your 
normal curve, you can look 
up probabilities using handy 
probability tables. Job done!
Three steps to calculating normal probabilities
finding normal probabilities
1
2
3
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    343
using the normal distribution
Step 1: Determine your distribution
The first thing we need to do is determine the distribution of the data.
Julie has been given the mean and standard deviation of the heights of eligible 
men in Statsville. The mean is 71 inches, and the variance is 20.25 inches. This 
means that if X represents the heights of the men, X ~ N(71, 20.25).
We also need to know which range of values will give us the right probability 
area.  In this case, we need to find the probability that Julie’s blind date will be 
sufficiently tall.
That’s easy. Julie wants her date to be taller 
than her, so we can work out probabilities based 
on her height.
Julie is 64 inches tall, so we’ll find the probability that her date is taller. 
Here’s a sketch:
The probability of Julie’s 
date being over 64 inches 
tall is given by this area 
here: P(X > 64).
σ2 = 20.25
X ~ N(71, 20.25)
μ = 71
μ = 71
64
This is shorthand for “The variable 
X follows a normal distribution, and 
has a mean of 71 and a variance of 
20.25.”
This is the graph of 
X ~ N(71, 20.25).
Here’s where X = 64 inches.
Download at WoweBook.Com

344    Chapter 8
Step 2: Standardize to N(0, 1)
The next step is to standardize our variable X so that the mean becomes 0 
and the standard deviation 1. This gives us a standardized normal variable 
Z where Z ~ N(0, 1).
Is that your idea of fun?  
Why would I want to do that?
Probability tables only give probabilities for N(0, 1).
Probability tables focus on giving the probabilities for N(0, 1) distributions, as 
it would be impossible to produce probability tables for every single normal 
distribution curve. There are an infinite number of possible values for μ and 
σ2, and as the normal curve uses these as parameters to indicate the center 
and spread of the curve, there are also an infinite number of possible normal 
distribution curves. 
There’s an infinite number of possible 
values for μ and σ2, so there are an 
infinite number of possible curves for 
the normal distribution
Being able to use a standard normal distribution means that we can use the 
same set of probability tables for all possible values of μ and σ2. There’s just 
one question—how do we convert out normal distribution into a standard 
form?
How do you think we might be able to standardize our normal distribution?
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
m = 0; s2 = 0.2
m = 0, s2 = 5.0
m = -2, s2 = 0.5
standardizing normal variables
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    345
using the normal distribution
To standardize, first move the mean…
Let’s start off by transforming our normal distribution so that the mean 
becomes 0 rather than 71. To do this, we move the curve to the left by 71.
Move to the left by 71
This gives us a new distribution of 
	
X - 71 ~ N(0, 20.25)
…then squash the width
We also need to adjust the variance. To do this, we “squash” our distribution 
by dividing by the standard deviation. We know the variance is 20.25, so the 
standard deviation is 4.5.
Recall that the standard 
deviation is the square root of 
the variance.
“Squash” the distribution 
by dividing by the 
standard deviation.
Doing this gives us X - 71 ~ N(0, 1)
	
	
    4.5
or Z ~ N(0, 1) where 
	
	
Z = X - 71
	
	
         4.5
Z = X - μ	
	
        σ
Look familiar? This is the standard score we encountered when 
we first looked at the standard deviation in Chapter 3. In general, 
you can find the standard score for any normal variable X using
μ = 0
μ = 71
μ = 0
σ = 1
The mean of X
X is the variable 
we’re trying to find 
probabilities for.
The standard deviation 
of X
Download at WoweBook.Com

346    Chapter 8
Standard Score
To find the standard score 
of a value, use
	
Z = X - μ
	
	
σ
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
So far we’ve looked at how our probability distribution can be standardized to 
get from X ~ N(μ, σ2) to Z ~ N(0, 1). What we’re most interested in is actual 
probabilities. What we need to do is take the range of values we want to find 
probabilities for, and find the standard score of the limit of this range. Then 
we can look up the probability for our standard score using normal probability 
tables.
In our situation, we want to find the probability that Julie’s date is taller than 
her. Since Julie is 64 inches tall, we need to find P(X > 64). The limit of this 
range is 64, so if we calculate the standard score z of 64, we’ll be able to use 
this to find our probability.
z = x - μ
        σ
    = 64 - 71
          4.5
    = -1.56 (to 2 decimal places)
Let’s find the standard score of 64.
64
These areas are the same, but we 
don’t know the value of z yet.  
We can find it by calculating the 
standard score of 64.
We need to convert this...             ...to this
N(71, 20.25)
N(0, 1)
So -1.56 is the standard score of 64, using the mean and standard 
deviation of the men’s heights in Statsville.
Now that we have this, we can move onto the final step, using 
tables to look up the probability.
z
μ = 0
Now find Z for the specific value you want to find probability for
finding Z
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    347
using the normal distribution
It’s time to standardize.  We’ll give you a distribution and value, 
and you have to tell us what the standard score is.
Q: Is this the same standard score that we saw before?
A: Yes it is. It has more uses than just the normal distribution, but 
it’s particularly useful here as it allows us to use standard normal 
probability tables. 
 
 
Q: Is the probability for my standardized range really the 
same as for my original distribution? How does that work?
A: The probabilities work out the same, but using the probability 
tables is a lot more convenient. 
 
When we standardize our original normal distribution, everything 
keeps the same proportion. The overall area doesn’t grow or shrink, 
and as it’s area that gives the probability, the probability stays the 
same too.
1.  N(10, 4), value 6
2.  N(6.3, 9), value 0.3
3.  N(2, 4).  If the standard score is 0.5, what’s the value?
4.  The standard score of value 20 is 2. If the variance 
is 16, what’s the mean?
Download at WoweBook.Com

348    Chapter 8
σ
It’s time to standardize.  We’ll give you a distribution and value, 
and you have to tell us what the standard score is.
1.  N(10, 4), value 6
2.  N(6.3, 9), value 0.3
3.  N(2, 4). If the standard score is 0.5, what’s the value?
4.  The standard score of value 20 is 2.  If the 
variance is 16, what’s the mean?
z = x - μ
   = 6 - 10
         2
   = -2
z = x - μ
   = 0.3 - 6.3
           3
   = -2
z = x - μ
0.5 = x - 2
         2
0.5 x 2 = x - 2
x = 1 + 2
   = 3
This is the reverse of previous problems. We’re 
given the standard score, and we have to find the 
original value. We can do this by substituting in the 
values we know, and finding x.
z = x - μ
2 = 20 - μ
         4
2 x 4 = 20 - μ
μ = 20 - 8
   = 12
This is a similar problem to question 3. We have to 
substitute in the values we know to find μ.
sharpen solution
So we’ve found our 
distribution, standardized it, 
and found Z. Now can we find 
the probability of my blind date 
being taller than me?
σ
σ
σ
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    349
using the normal distribution
Now that we have a standard score, we can use probability tables to find 
our probability. Standard normal probability tables allow you to look up 
any value z, and then read off the corresponding probability P(Z < z).
z
P(Z < z) is this area here.
z
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
–3.4
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0002
–3.3
.0005
.0005
.0005
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0003
–3.2
.0007
.0007
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0005
.0005
.0005
–3.1
.0010
.0009
.0009
.0009
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0007
.0007
–3.0
.0013
.0013
.0013
.0012
.0012
.0011
.0011
.0011
.0010
.0010
–2.9
.0019
.0018
.0018
.0017
.0016
.0016
.0015
.0015
.0014
.0014
–2.8
.0026
.0025
.0024
.0023
.0023
.0022
.0021
.0021
.0020
.0019
–2.7
.0035
.0034
.0033
.0032
.0031
.0030
.0029
.0028
.0027
.0026
–2.6
.0047
.0045
.0044
.0043
.0041
.0040
.0039
.0038
.0037
.0036
–2.5
.0062
.0060
.0059
.0057
.0055
.0054
.0052
.0051
.0049
.0048
–2.4
.0082
.0080
.0078
.0075
.0073
.0071
.0069
.0068
.0066
.0064
Z ~ N(0, 1)
So how do you use probability tables?
Start off by calculating z to 2 decimal places. This is the value that you 
will need to look up in the table.
To look up the probability, you need to use the first column and the top 
row to find your value of z. The first column gives the value of z to 
1 decimal place (without rounding), and the top row gives the second 
decimal place. The probability is where the two intersect.
As an example, if you wanted to find P(Z < –3.27), you’d find –3.2 
in the first column, .07 in the top row, and read off a probability of 
0.0005.
Here’s the 
row for  
z = -3.2x, 
where x is 
some number.
Here’s the column for 
.07, the second decimal 
place for z.
This is where 
-3.2 and .07 
meet. It gives 
the value of 
P(Z < z).
Step 3: Look up the probability in your handy table
	
	
     We’ve put all 
the probability 
tables you need in 
Appendix ii of the 
book.
Just flip to pages 658-659 for the normal 
distribution tables you need to find 
probabilities in this chapter.
Download at WoweBook.Com

350    Chapter 8
Julie’s probability is in the table
Let’s go back to our problem with Julie. We want to find P(Z > -1.56), so let’s 
look up -1.56 in the probability table and see what this gives us.
So, looking up the value of –1.56 in the probability table gives us a probability of 
0.0594.  In other words, P(Z < –1.56) = 0.0594.  This means that
	
P(Z > –1.56) = 1 - P(Z < –1.56)
	
	
       = 1 – 0.0594
	
	
       = 0.9406
In other words, the probability that Julie’s date is taller than her is 0.9406.
You can find normal probability 
tables in the appendix at the 
back of the book.
z
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
–3.4
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0002
–3.3
.0005
.0005
.0005
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0003
–3.2
.0007
.0007
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0005
.0005
.0005
–3.1
.0010
.0009
.0009
.0009
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0007
.0007
–3.0
.0013
.0013
.0013
.0012
.0012
.0011
.0011
.0011
.0010
.0010
–2.9
.0019
.0018
.0018
.0017
.0016
.0016
.0015
.0015
.0014
.0014
–2.8
.0026
.0025
.0024
.0023
.0023
.0022
.0021
.0021
.0020
.0019
–2.7
.0035
.0034
.0033
.0032
.0031
.0030
.0029
.0028
.0027
.0026
–2.6
.0047
.0045
.0044
.0043
.0041
.0040
.0039
.0038
.0037
.0036
–2.5
.0062
.0060
.0059
.0057
.0055
.0054
.0052
.0051
.0049
.0048
–2.4
.0082
.0080
.0078
.0075
.0073
.0071
.0069
.0068
.0066
.0064
–2.3
.0107
.0104
.0102
.0099
.0096
.0094
.0091
.0089
.0087
.0084
–2.2
.0139
.0136
.0132
.0129
.0125
.0122
.0119
.0116
.0113
.0110
–2.1
.0179
.0174
.0170
.0166
.0162
.0158
.0154
.0150
.0146
.0143
–2.0
.0228
.0222
.0217
.0212
.0207
.0202
.0197
.0192
.0188
.0183
–1.9
.0287
.0281
.0274
.0268
.0262
.0256
.0250
.0244
.0239
.0233
–1.8
.0359
.0351
.0344
.0336
.0329
.0322
.0314
.0307
.0301
.0294
–1.7
.0446
.0436
.0427
.0418
.0409
.0401
.0392
.0384
.0375
.0367
–1.6
.0548
.0537
.0526
.0516
.0505
.0495
.0485
.0475
.0465
.0455
–1.5
.0668
.0655
.0643
.0630
.0618
.0606
.0594
.0582
.0571
.0559
–1.4
.0808
.0793
.0778
.0764
.0749
.0735
.0721
.0708
.0694
.0681
–1.3
.0968
.0951
.0934
.0918
.0901
.0885
.0869
.0853
.0838
.0823
–1.2
.1151
.1131
.1112
.1093
.1075
.1056
.1038
.1020
.1003
.0985
–1.1
.1357
.1335
.1314
.1292
.1271
.1251
.1230
.1210
.1190
.1170
Here’s the 
row for  
z = -1.5x, 
where x is 
some number.
Here’s the column for 
.06, the second decimal 
place for z.
This is where 
-1.5 and .06 
meet. It gives 
the value of 
P(Z < z).
The total probability is 1, so the total area under the curve is 1.
using probability tables
There’s a 94% 
chance my date 
will be taller than 
me? I like those 
odds!
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    351
using the normal distribution
z
Probability tables allow you to look up the probability P(Z < z) where 
z is some value. The problem is you don’t always want to find this 
sort of probability; sometimes you want to find the probability that a 
continuous random variable is greater than z, or between two values.  
How can you use probability tables to find the probability you need?
The big trick is to find a way of using the probability tables to get to 
what you want, usually by finding a whole area and then subtracting 
what you don’t need.
Probability tables give 
us this probability.
Finding P(Z > z)
We can find probabilities of the form P(Z > z) using
In other words, take the area where Z < z away from the total probability.
Finding P(a < Z < b)
Finding this sort of probability is slightly more complicated to calculate, 
but it’s still possible. You can calculate this sort of probability using
	
In other words, calculate P(Z < b), and take away the area for P(Z < a).
=
–
=
–
P(a < Z < b)
P(Z < b)
P(Z < a)
P(Z > z)
1
P(Z < z)
We’ve already used this to find 
the probability that Julie is 
taller than her date.
P(Z > z) = 1 - P(Z < z)
P(a < Z < b) = P(Z < b) - P(Z < a)
Probability Tables Up Close
You could use this to find the 
probability that the height of Julie’s 
date is within a particular range.
z
z
a
b
b
a
Download at WoweBook.Com

352    Chapter 8
Q: I’ve heard of the term “Gaussian.” 
What’s that?
A: Another name for the normal 
distribution is the Gaussian distribution. If 
you hear someone talking about a Gaussian 
distribution, they’re talking about the same 
thing as the normal distribution.
Q: Are all normal probability tables the 
same?
A: All normal probability tables give the 
same probabilities for your values. However, 
there’s some variation between tables as to 
what’s actually covered by them.
Q: Variation? What do you mean?
A: Some tables and exam boards use 
different degrees of accuracy in their 
probability tables. Also, some show the 
tables in a slightly different format, but still 
give the same information.
Q: So what should I do if I’m taking a 
statistics exam?
A: First of all, check what format of 
probability table will be available to you while 
you’re sitting the exam. Then, see if you can 
get a copy. 
 
Once you have a copy of the probability 
tables used by your exam board, spend time 
getting used to using them. That way you’ll 
be off to a flying start when the exam comes 
around.
Q: Finding the probability of a range 
looks kinda tricky. How do I do it?
A: The big thing here is to think about 
how you can get the area you want using 
the probability tables. Probability tables 
generally only give probabilities in the form 
P(Z < z) where z is some value. The big trick, 
then, is to rewrite your probability only in 
these terms. 
 
If you’re dealing with a probability in the form 
P(a < Z < b)—that is, some sort of range— 
you’ll have two probabilities to look up, one 
for P(Z < a) and the other for P(Z < b). Once 
you have these probabilities, subtract the 
smallest from the largest.
Q: Do continuous distributions have 
a mode? Can you find the mode of the 
normal distribution?
A: Yes. The mode of a continuous 
probability distribution is the value where 
the probability density is highest. If you draw 
the probability density, it’s the value of the 
highest point of the curve. 
 
If you look at the curve of the normal 
distribution, the highest point is in the middle. 
The mode of the normal distribution is μ. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: What about the median?
A: The median of a continuous probability 
distribution is the value a where  
P(X < a) = 0.5.  In other words, it’s the value 
that area of the probability density curve in 
half. 
 
For the normal distribution, the median is 
also μ. The median and mode don’t get used 
much when we’re dealing with continuous 
probability distributions. Expectation and 
variance are more important.
Q: What’s a standard score?
A: The standard score of a variable is 
what you get if you subtract its mean and 
divide by its standard deviation. It’s a way 
of standardizing normal distributions so 
that they are transformed into a N(0, 1) 
distribution, and that gives you a way of 
comparing them. Standard scores are 
useful when you’re dealing with the normal 
distribution because it means you can look 
up the probability of a range using standard 
normal probability tables. 
 
The standard score of a particular value also 
describes how many standard deviations 
away from the mean the value is, which 
gives you an idea of its relative proximity to 
the mean.
no dumb questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    353
using the normal distribution
It’s time to put your probability table skills to the test.  See if you 
can solve the following probability problems.
1.  P(Z < 1.42)
2.  P(-0.15 < Z < 0.5)
3.  P(Z > z) = 0.1423.  What’s z?
Download at WoweBook.Com

354    Chapter 8
It’s time to put your probability table skills to the challenge.  See 
if you can solve the following probability problems.
1.  P(Z < 1.42)
We can find this probability by looking up 1.42 in the 
probability tables. This gives us
	
P(Z < 1.42) = 0.9222
2.  P(-0.15 < Z < 0.5)
For this one, look up P(Z < 0.5), and subtract P(Z < -0.15)
	
P(-0.15 < Z < 0.5 = P(Z < 0.5) - P(Z < -0.15)
	
	
	
  = 0.6915 - 0.4404
	
	
	
  = 0.2511
3.  P(Z > z) = 0.1423.  What’s z?
P(Z > z) = 0.1423
This is a slightly different problem.  We’re given the 
probability, and need to find the value of z.
We know that P(Z > z) = 0.1423, which means that
	
P(Z < z) = 1 - 0.1423
	
	
 = 0.8577
The next thing to do is find which value of z has 
a probability of 0.8577.  Looking this up in the 
probability tables gives us
	
z = 1.07
so
	
P(Z > 1.07) = 0.1423
1.42
0.5
-.015
z
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    355
using the normal distribution
Julie has a problem. When we calculated the probability of her date 
being taller than her, we failed to take her high heels into account. 
See if you can find the probability of Julie’s date being taller than 
her while she’s wearing shoes with 5 inch heels.
As a reminder, Julie is 64 inches tall and X ~ N(71, 20.25) where X 
is the height of men in Statsville.
Wait a sec, if I wear my 
5-inch heels, I’m much taller. 
Won’t that affect the probability 
that my date is taller than me?
Download at WoweBook.Com

356    Chapter 8
Julie has a problem. When we calculated the probability of her date being taller than her, we 
failed to take her high heels into account. See if you can find the probability of Julie’s date being 
taller than her while she’s wearing shoes with 5 inch heels.
As a reminder, Julie is 64 inches tall and X ~ N(71, 20.25) where X is the height of men in 
Statsville.
When Julie is wearing 5 inch high heels, her height is 69 inches.  We need to find P(X > 69).
We need to start by finding the standard score of 178 so that we can use probability tables to look up the 
probabilities.
	
Z = X - μ
	
    = 69 - 71
	
         4.5
	
    = -2
	
       4.5
	
    = -0.44 (to 2 decimal places)
Now we’ve found z, we need to find P(Z > z) i.e. P(Z > -0.44)
	
P(Z > -0.44) = 1 - P(Z < -0.44)
	
	
      = 1 - 0.3300
	
	
      = 0.67
So the probability that Julie’s date is taler than her when she’s wearing shoes with a 5 inch heel is 0.67.
The variance is 20.25, so the standard 
deviation is the square root, 4.5.
-0.44
exercise solution
So, I can wear my highest heels, 
and there’s still a 67% chance 
he’ll be taller? Sweet!
σ
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    357
using the normal distribution
The Case of the Missing Parameters
Will at Manic Mango Games has a problem. He needs to give his 
boss the mean and standard deviation of the number of minutes 
people take to complete level one of their new game. This shouldn’t 
be difficult, but unfortunately a ferocious terrier has eaten the piece of 
paper he wrote them on.
Will only has three clues to help him.
First of all, Will knows that the number of minutes people spend 
playing level one follows a normal distribution.
Secondly, he knows that the probability of a player playing for 
less than 5 minutes is 0.0045.
Finally, the probability of someone taking less than 15 minutes to 
complete level one is 0.9641.
How can Will find the mean and standard deviation?
Five Minute 
Mystery
Five Minute 
Mystery
Download at WoweBook.Com

358    Chapter 8
The Case of the Missing Parameters: Solved
How can Will find the mean and standard deviation?
Will can use probability tables and standard scores to get expressions for 
the mean and standard deviation that he can then solve.
First of all, we know that P(X < 5) = 0.0045. From 
probability tables, P(X < z1) where z1 = -2.61, which 
means that the standard score of 5 is -2.61.  If we put 
this into the standard score formula, we get
	
 -2.61 = 5 - μ
	
	
  σ
Similarly, P(X < 15) = 0.9641, which means that the standard score of 
15 is 1.8. This gives us
	
1.8 = 15 - μ
	
	
σ
This gives us two equations we can solve to find μ and σ.
	
-2.61σ = 5 - μ
	
   1.8σ = 15 - μ
If we subtract the first equation from the second, we get
	
1.8σ + 2.61σ = 15 - μ - 5 + μ
	
            4.41σ = 10
	
	
     σ = 2.27
If we then substitute this into the second equation, we get
	
1.8 × 2.27 = 15 - μ
	
              μ = 15 - 4.086
	
	
   = 10.914
In other words,
	
	
μ = 10.914
	
	
σ = 2.27	
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
This is a pair of equations 
we can now solve.
These are the values of μ and σ.
five minute mystery solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    359
using the normal distribution
And they all lived happily ever after
Just as the odds predicted, Julie’s latest blind date was a success! Julie had 
to make sure her intended soulmate was compatible with her shoes, so she 
made sure she wore her highest heels to put him to the test. What’s more, 
he was already at the venue when she arrived, so she didn’t have to wait 
around.
The first thing he said to me 
was how much he liked my shoes.  
We’re clearly made for each other.
We’re not entirely sure 
whether she’s referring to 
her date or her shoes, but 
at least she’s happy.
But it doesn’t stop there. 
Keep reading and we’ll show you more things you can do 
with the normal distribution. You’ve only just scratched the 
surface of what you can do.
The normal distribution forms the shape of a 
symmetrical bell curve. It’s defined using N(μ, σ2).
To find normal probabilities, start by identifying the 
probability range you need. Then find the standard score 
for the limit of this range using 
 
 	
        Z = X - μ	
where Z ~ N(0, 1). 
	
                 σ 


You find normal probabilities by looking up your standard 
score in probability tables. Probability tables give you 
the probability of getting this value or lower.

Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    361
using the normal distribution ii
9
Beyond Normal
If only all probability distributions were normal. 
Life can be so much simpler with the normal distribution. Why spend all your time 
working out individual probablities when you can look up entire ranges in one swoop, and 
still leave time for game play? In this chapter, you’ll see how to solve more complex 
problems in the blink of an eye, and you’ll also find out how to bring some of that normal 
goodness to other probability distributions.
If only all probability distributions were normal. 
Life can be so much simpler with the normal distribution. Why spend all your time 
working out individual probablities when you can look up entire ranges in one swoop, and 
still leave time for game play? In this chapter, you’ll see how to solve more complex 
problems in the blink of an eye, and you’ll also find out how to bring some of that normal 
goodness to other probability distributions.
Download at WoweBook.Com

362    Chapter 9
Love is a roller coaster
The wedding market is big business nowadays, and Dexter has an idea for 
making that special day truly memorable. Why get married on the ground when 
you can get married on a roller coaster?  
Dexter’s convinced there’s a lot of money to be made from his innovative Love 
Train ride, if only it passes the health and safety regulations.
Before Dexter can go any further, he needs to make 
sure that his special ride can cope with the weight 
of the bride and groom, and he’s asked if you can 
help him.  
The ride he has in mind can cope with combined weights of up to 380 
pounds. What’s the probability that the combined weight will be less 
than this?
I need to make sure 
the combined weight of 
the bride and groom won’t 
be above 380 pounds. 
Think you can help?
I dooooOOOooooo!
Dexter
come on, ride the love train
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    363
using the normal distribution ii
All aboard the Love Train
Before we start, we need to know how the weights of brides and grooms in 
Statsville are distributed, taking into account the weight of all their wedding 
clothes. Both follow a normal distribution, with the bride weight distributed 
as N(150, 400) and the groom weight as N(190, 500). Their weights are 
measured in pounds.
How do you think we can find the probability 
distribution for the combined weights of the bride and 
groom? What sort of distribution do you think this 
might be? Why?
We need to use these two probability distributions to somehow work out 
the probability that the weight of a bride and groom will be less than the 
maximum weight allowance on the ride. If the probability is sufficiently 
high, we can be confident the ride is feasible.
We can calculate 
this probability if we 
know what the combined 
probability distribution is, 
but what’s that?
Bride ~ N(150, 400)
150
Groom ~ N(190, 500)
190
Download at WoweBook.Com

364    Chapter 9
Normal bride + normal groom
Let’s start by taking a closer look at how the weights of the bride and groom 
are distriuted.
As you know, the weights follow normal distributions like this:
Most brides will have 
a weight around here
And most grooms 
will have a weight 
close to here.
Brides can be lighter or 
heavier than the mean, and  
this applies to the grooms too.
What we’re really after, though, is the probability distribution of the 
combined weight of the bride and groom. In other words, we want to find 
the probability distribution of the weight of the bride added to the weight 
of the groom.
Bride weight + Groom weight ~ ?
Assuming the weights of the bride and groom are independent, the 
shape of the distribution should look something like this:
Most couples will have 
a joint weight around 
here.
There’s a lot of variation in 
combined weight, though.
150
190
Bride μ
Groom μ
Bride + Groom μ
m
adding two normal distributions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    365
using the normal distribution ii
It’s time for a trip down memory lane. Can you remember the 
discrete shortcuts for the following formulas? Assume X and Y are 
independent.
1.  E(X + Y)
3.  E(X - Y)
2.  Var(X + Y)
4.  Var(X - Y)
It’s still just weight
Can you remember when we first looked at continuous data and looked at how data 
such as height and weight tend to be distributed? We found that data such as height 
and weight are continuous, and they also tend to follow a normal distribution.
This time we’re looking at the combined weight of the happy couple. Even though 
it’s combined weight, it’s still just weight, and we already know how weight tends to be 
distributed. The combined weight is still continuous. What’s more, the combined 
weight is still distributed normally. In other words, the combined weight of the 
bride and groom follows a normal distribution.
Knowing that the combined weight of the bride and groom follows a normal 
distribution helps us a lot. It means that we’ll be able to use probability tables just 
like we did before to look up probabilities, which means we’ll be able to look up the 
probability that the combined weight is less than 380 pounds—just what we need for 
the ride.
There’s only one problem—before we can go any further, we need to know the mean 
and variance of the combined weight of the bride and groom. How can we find this?
Bride weight + Groom weight ~ N(?, ?)
The combined weight 
of the bride and 
groom follows a normal 
distribution, but what’s 
the mean and variance?
Download at WoweBook.Com

366    Chapter 9
It’s time for a trip down memory lane. Can you remember the 
discrete shortcuts for the following formulas? Assume X and Y are 
independent.
I don’t see how these 
shortcuts help us. They’re 
for discrete data, and we’re 
dealing with continuous now.
The shortcuts apply to continuous data too.
When we originally encountered these shortcuts, we were dealing with discrete data.  
Fortunately, the same rules and shortcuts also apply to continuous data.
1.  E(X + Y)
3.  E(X - Y)
2.  Var(X + Y)
4.  Var(X - Y)
E(X + Y) = E(X) + E(Y)
E(X - Y) = E(X) - E(Y)
Var(X + Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y)
Var(X + Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y)
Remember that we 
ADD the variances, even 
though it’s for X - Y.
How do you think we can use these shortcuts to find the probability 
distribution of the weight of the bride + the weight of the groom?
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    367
using the normal distribution ii
How’s the combined weight distributed?
So far, we’ve found that the combined weight of the bride and groom are 
normally distributed, and this means we can use probability tables to look up 
the probability of the combined weight being less than a certain amount.  
Let’s try rewriting the bride and groom weight distributions in terms of X 
and Y. If X represents the weight of the bride and Y the weight of the groom, 
and X and Y are independent, then we want to find μ and σ where
X + Y ~ N(μ, σ2)
X + Y means “the weight of the bride + the 
weight of the groom.” But how do we know 
what the mean and variance are?
In other words, before we go any further we need to find the mean and variance of 
X + Y.  But how?
Take a look at the answers to the last exercise. When we were working with discrete 
probability distributions, we saw that as long as X and Y are independent we could 
work out E(X + Y) and Var(X + Y) by using  
	
E(X + Y) = E(X) + E(Y)	
and	
Var(X + Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y) 
So if we know what the expectation and variance of X and Y are, we can use these 
to work out the expectation and variance of X + Y.
That means that if we 
know the distribution of X 
and Y, we can figure out the 
distribution of X + Y too.
We can use what we already know to figure out 
what we don’t.
Because we know how the weight of the bride and the weight of the 
groom are distributed, we can find the distribution of the combined 
weight of the bride and groom.
Let’s look at this in more detail.
Download at WoweBook.Com

368    Chapter 9
X + Y Distribution Up Close
Being able to find the distribution of X + Y is useful if you’re working 
with combinations of normal variables. If independent random variables 
X and Y are normally distributed, then X + Y is normal too. What’s 
more, you can use the mean and variance of X and Y to calculate the 
distribution of X + Y.
To find the mean and variance of X + Y, you can use the same formulae 
that we used for discrete probability distributions. In other words, if
	
X ~ N(μx, σx
2)	
and	
Y ~ N(μy, σy
2)
then
where
μ = μx + μy	
	
σ2 = σx
2 + σy
2
X + Y ~ N(μ, σ2)
If you add the means of X and Y together, 
you get the mean of X + Y. Similarly, 
summing the variances of X and Y gives you 
the variance of X + Y
In other words, the mean of X + Y is equal to the mean of X plus the 
mean of Y, and the variance of X + Y is equal to the variance of X plus 
the variance of Y.  
Let’s look at a sketch of this.  What do you notice about the variance of 
X + Y?
The variance of X + Y is greater than the variance of X and also 
greater than the variance of Y, which means that the curve of X + Y 
is more elongated than either. This is true for any normal X and Y.  
By adding the two variables together, you are in effect increasing the 
amount of variability, and this elongates the shape of the distribution. 
This in turn means that the shape of the distribution gets flatter so that 
the total area under the curve is still 1.
Remember, two variables are 
independent if they have no impact 
on each other’s probabilities.
We can use these shortcuts if 
X and Y are independent, which 
makes life very easy indeed
X ~ N(μx, σx
2)
X + Y ~ N(μx + μy, σx
2 + σy
2)
Y ~ N(μy, σy
2)
+
=
μx
μy
μx + μy
x + y and x – y in depth
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    369
using the normal distribution ii
where
Sometimes X + Y just won’t give you the sorts of probabilities you’re 
after.  If you need to find probabilities involving the difference between two 
variables, you’ll need to use X - Y instead.  
X - Y follows a normal distribution if X and Y are independent random 
variables and are both normally distributed. This is exactly the same 
criteria as for X + Y.  
To find the mean and variance, we again use the same shortcuts that we 
used for discrete probability distributions.  If
	
X ~ N(μx, σx
2)	
and	
Y ~ N(μy, σy
2)
then
μ = μx - μy		
σ2 = σx
2 + σy
2
X - Y ~ N(μ, σ2)
In other words, the mean of X – Y is equal to the mean of Y subtracted 
from the mean of X, and you find the variance of X – Y by adding the X 
and Y variances together.  
We ADD the variances together, 
just like we did for discrete 
probability distributions.
X ~ N(μx, σx
2)
X - Y ~ N(μx - μy, σx
2 + σy
2)
Y ~ N(μy, σy
2)
–
=
Subtract the mean, 
add the variance.
Adding the variances together may not make intuitive sense at first, 
but it’s exactly the same as when we worked with discrete probability 
distributions. Even though we’re subtracting Y from X, we’re actually 
still increasing the amount of variability. Adding the variances together 
reflects this. As with the X + Y distribution, this leads to a flatter, more 
elongated shape than either X or Y
If you look at the actual shape of the X - Y distribution, it’s the same 
shape curve as for X + Y distribution, except that the center has moved. 
The two distributions have the same variances, but different means.
Look at the shape.  It’s the same 
shape as for X + Y but with the 
center of the curve in a different 
place. They have the same shape 
because they have the same variance.
X – Y Distribution Up Close
μx
μy
μx - μy
Download at WoweBook.Com

370    Chapter 9
Q: Remind me, why did we need to 
find the distribution of X + Y?
A: We’re looking for the probability that 
the combined weight of a bride and groom 
will be less than 380 pounds, which means 
we need to know how the combined weight 
is distributed. We’re using X to represent the 
weight of the bride, and Y to represent the 
weight of the groom, which means we need 
to use the distribution of X + Y.
Q: You say we can look up 
probabilities for X + Y using probability 
tables. How?
A: In exactly the same way as we did 
before. We take our probability distribution, 
calculate the standard score, and then look 
this value up in probablity tables.   
 
Looking up probabilities for X + Y is no 
different from looking up probabilities for 
anything else. Just find the standard score, 
look it up, and that gives you your probability.
Q: So do all of the shortcuts we 
learned for discrete data apply to 
continuous data too?
A: Yes, they do. This means we have an 
easy way of combining random variables 
and finding out how they’re distributed, 
which in turn means we can solve more 
complex problems. 
 
The key thing to remember is that these 
shortcuts apply as long as the random 
variables are independent. 
 
Q: Can you remind me what 
independent means?
A: If two variables are independent, then 
their probabilities are not affected by each 
other. In our case, we’re assuming that the 
weight of the bride is not influenced by the 
weight of the groom.
Q: What if X and Y aren’t independent?  
What then?
A: If X and Y aren’t independent, then 
we can’t use these shortcuts. We’d need to 
do a lot more work to find out how X + Y is 
distributed because you’d have to find out 
what the relationship is between X and Y.
Finding probabilities
Now that we know how to calculate the distribution of X + Y, we 
can look at how to use it to calculate probabilities.  Here are the 
steps you need to go through.
Work out the distribution and range
Standardize it
Look up the probabilities
Sound familiar? These are exactly the same steps that 
we went through in the previous chapter for the normal 
distribution.
We know we need to use X + Y, and 
we have a way of working out the 
mean and variance.
Once we know the distribution 
and the range, we standardize it.
We can then look up the 
probability in standard 
normal probability tables.
calculating probabilities for x + y
1
3
2
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    371
using the normal distribution ii
Find the probability that the combined weight of the bride and 
groom is less than 380 pounds using the following three steps.
1. X is the weight of the bride and Y is the weight of the groom, where X ~ N(150, 400) and Y ~ N(190, 500). With this 
information, find the probability distribution for the combined weight of the bride and groom.
2. Then, using this distribution, find the standard score of 380 pounds.
3. Finally, use the standard score to find P(X + Y < 380).
Download at WoweBook.Com

372    Chapter 9
Find the probability that the combined weight of the bride and 
groom is less than 380 pounds using the following three steps.
1. X is the weight of the bride and Y is the weight of the groom, where X ~ N(150, 400) and Y ~ N(190, 500). With this 
information, find the probability distribution for the combined weight of the bride and groom.
We need to find the probability distribution of X + Y. To find the mean and variance of X + Y, we add 
the means and variances of the X and Y distributions together. This gives us
	
X + Y ~ N(340, 900)
2. Then, using this distribution, find the standard score of 380 pounds.
z = (x + y) - μ
   = 380 - 340
	
30
   = 40
      30
   = 1.33 (to 2 decimal places)
3. Finally, use the standard score to find P(X + Y < 380)
If we look 1.33 up in standard normal probability tables, we get a probability of 0.9082. This means that
	
P(X + Y < 380) = 0.9082
Remember how before we used z = x - μ ?
	
	
	
	
 σ
This time around we’re using the distribution 
of X + Y, so we use z = (x + y) - μ
	
	
	
     σ
sharpen solution
σ
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    373
using the normal distribution ii
Julie’s matchmaker is at it again. What’s the probability that a man will be at least 5 inches taller 
than a woman?
In Statsville, the height of men in inches is distributed as N(71, 20.25), and the height of women 
in inches is distributed as N(64, 16).
Download at WoweBook.Com

374    Chapter 9
Julie’s matchmaker is at it again. What’s the probability that a man will be at least 5 inches taller 
than a woman?
In Statsville, the height of men in inches is distributed as N(71, 20.25), and the height of women 
in inches is distributed as N(64, 16).
Let’s use X to represent the height of the men and Y to represent the height of the women. This means that
X ~ N(71, 20.25) and Y ~ N(64, 16).
We need to find the probability that a man is at least 5 inshes taller than a woman. This means we need to find
	
P(X > Y + 5)
or
	
P(X - Y > 5)
To find the mean and variance of X - Y, we take the mean of Y from the mean  of X, and add the variances 
together. This gives us
	
X - Y ~ N(7, 36.25)
We need to find the standard score of 5 inches
	
z = (x - y) - μ
	
	
σ
	
   = 5 - 7
	
       6.02
	
   = -0.33 (to 2 decimal places)
We can use this to find P(X - Y > 5).
	
P(X - Y > 5) = 1 - P(X - Y < 5)
	
	
       = 1 - 0.3707
	
	
       = 0.6293
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    375
using the normal distribution ii
More people want the Love Train
It looks like there’s a good chance that the combined weight of the happy 
couple will be less than the maximum the ride can take. But why restrict 
the ride to the bride and groom?
Let’s see what happens if we add another car for four more members of 
the wedding party. These could be parents, bridesmaids, or anyone else 
the bride and groom want along for the ride.
The car will hold a total weight of 800 pounds, and we’ll assume the 
weight of an adult in pounds is distributed as
	
	
	
X ~ N(180, 625) 
where X represents the weight of an adult. But how can we work out the 
probability that the combined weight of four adults will be less than 800 
pounds?
Think back to the shortcuts you can use when you calculate expectation 
and variance. What’s the difference between independent observations and 
linear transformations? What effect does each have on the expectation and 
variance? Which is more appropriate for this problem?
Customers are demanding 
that we allow more members of the 
wedding party to join the ride, and 
they’ll pay good money. That’s great, but 
will the Love Train be able to handle 
the extra load?
Download at WoweBook.Com

376    Chapter 9
Let’s start off by looking at the probability distribution of 4X, where X is 
the weight of one adult. Is 4X appropriate for describing the probability 
distribution for the weight of 4 people?
The distribution of 4X is actually a linear transform of X. It’s a 
transformation of X in the form aX + b, where a is equal to 4, and b is equal 
to 0. This is exactly the same sort of transform as we encountered earlier with 
discrete probability distributions.
Linear transforms describe underlying changes to the size of the values in the 
probability distribution. This means that 4X actually describes the weight of 
an individual adult whose weight has been multiplied by 4.
So what’s the distribution of a linear transform?
Suppose you have a linear transform of X in the form aX + b, where  
X ~ N(μ, σ2). As X is distributed normally, this means that aX + b is distributed 
normally too. But what’s the expectation and variance?
Let’s start with the expectation. When we looked at discrete probability 
distributions, we found that E(aX + b) = aE(X) + b. Now, X follows a normal 
distribution where E(X) = μ, so this gives us E(aX + b) = aμ + b.
We can take a similar approach with the variance. When we looked at discrete 
probability distributions, we found that Var(aX + b) = a2 Var(X). We know that 
Var(X) in this case is given by Var(X) = σ2, so this means that Var(aX + b) = a2σ2. 
Putting both of these together gives us
aX + b ~ N(aμ + b, a2σ2)
The new variance is the SQUARE 
of a multiplied by the original 
variance.
In other words, the new mean becomes aμ + b, and the new variance becomes a2σ2.
So what about independent observations?
1X
2X
4X
The 4X probability 
distribution describes 
adults whose weights have 
been multiplied by 4. The 
weight is changed, not the 
number of adults.
Linear transforms describe underlying changes in values…
What we wanted was 4 adults, 
not 1 adult 4 times actual size.
linear transforms vs. independent observations
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    377
using the normal distribution ii
Rather than transforming the weight of each adult, what we really need 
to figure out is the probability distribution for the combined weight of 
four separate adults. In other words, we need to work out the probability 
distribution of four independent observations of X.  
The weight of each adult is an observation of X, so this means that the 
weight of each adult is described by the probability distribution of X. We 
need to find the probability distribution of four independent observations of 
X, so this means we need to find the probability distribution of
	
	
X1 + X2 + X3 + X4
where X1, X2, X3 and X4 are independent observations of X.
Each adult’s weight is an 
independent observation of X.
Each adult is an independent 
observation of X.
X
X + X
X + X + X
X + X + X + X
X1
X2
X3
X4
…and independent observations describe how many values you have
Download at WoweBook.Com

378    Chapter 9
When we looked at the expectation and variance of independent observations of 
discrete random variables, we found that
	
E(X1 + X2 + ... Xn) = nE(X)
and
	
Var(X1 + X2 + ... + Xn) = nVar(X)
As you’d expect, these same calculations work for continuous random variables too. 
This means that if X ~ N(μ, σ2), then
X1 + X2 + ... + Xn ~ N(nμ, nσ2)
Q: So what’s the difference between 
linear transforms and independent 
observations?
A: Linear transforms affect the underlying 
values in your probability distribution. As 
an example, if you have a length of rope of 
a particular length, then applying a linear 
transform affects the length of the rope. 
 
Independent observations have to do with 
the quantity of things you’re dealing with. 
As an example, if you have n independent 
observations of a piece of rope, then you’re 
talking about n pieces of rope. 
 
In general, if the quantity changes, you’re 
dealing with independent observations. If the 
underlying values change, then you’re dealing 
with a transform. 
 
 
 
Q: Do I really have to know which is 
which? What difference does it make?
A: You have to know which is which 
because it make a difference in your 
probability calculations. You calculate 
the expectation for linear transforms and 
independent observations in the same 
way, but there’s a big difference in the way 
the variance is calculated. If you have n 
independent observations then the variance 
is n times the original. If you transform your 
probability distribution as aX + b, then your 
variance becomes a2 times the original.
Q: Can I have both independent 
observations and linear transforms in the 
same probability distribution?
A: Yes you can. To work out the probability 
distribution, just follow the basic rules for 
calculating expectation and variance. You 
use the same rules for both discrete and 
continuous probability distributions.
If X ~ N(μx, σ2
x) and  
Y ~ N(μy, σ2
y), and X and Y 
are independent, then 
 
X + Y ~ N(μx + μy, σ2
x + σ2
y) 
 
X - Y ~ N(μx - μy, σ2
x + σ2
y) 
If X ~ N(μ, σ2) and a and b are 
numbers, then 
 
aX + b ~ N(aμ + b, a2σ2) 
If X1, X2, ..., Xn are 
independent observations of 
X where X ~ N(μ, σ2), then 
 
X1 + X2 + ... + Xn ~ N(nμ, nσ2) 



finding expectation and variance
Expectation and variance for independent observations
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    379
using the normal distribution ii
Let’s solve Dexter’s Love Train dilemma. What’s the probability that the combined weight of 4 
adults will be less than 800 pounds? Assume the weight of an sdult is distributed as N(180, 625).
Download at WoweBook.Com

380    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
Let’s solve Dexter’s Love Train dilemma. What’s the probability that the combined weight of 4 
adults will be less than 800 pounds? Assume the weight of an sdult is distributed as N(180, 625).
If we represent the weight of an adult as X, then X ~ N(180, 625). We need to start by finding 
how the weight of 4 adults is distributed. To find the mean and variance of this new distribution, 
we multiply the mean and variance of X by 4. This gives us
	
X1 + X2 + X3 + X4 ~ N(720, 2500)
To find P(X1 + X2 + X3 + X4< 800), we start by finding the standard score.
	
z = x - μ
	
   = 800 - 720
	
	
50
	
   = 80
	
      50
	
   = 1.6
Looking this value up in standard normal probability tables gives us a value of 0.9452. This means 
that
	
P(X1 + X2 + X3 + X4< 800) = 0.9452
exercise solution
σ
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    381
We interrupt this chapter to bring you...
Hello, and welcome back to Who Wants 
To Win A Swivel Chair, Statsville’s favorite 
quiz show. We’ve got some more fiendishly 
difficult questions on tonight’s show.
Download at WoweBook.Com

382    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
We’ve got some more great questions lined 
up for you today, so let’s get on with the show. In 
this round I’m going to ask you forty questions, and you 
need to get thirty or more right to get through to the 
next round. Or you can walk away and take a consolation 
prize. For each question there are four possible answers. 
The title of this round is “Even More About Me.” 
Good luck!
Here are the first five questions for Round Two. 
The questions are all about the game show host.
D: $4,000
B: $2,000
C: $3,000
3. On average, how much does he spend on suits each month
A: $1,000
D: Bird on a Wire
B: Curse of the Were-Rabbit
C: Mousehunt
2. What is the favorite film of his cat
A: A Fish Called Wanda
D: All the President’s Men
B: The Italian Job
C: Lawrence of Arabia
1. What is his favorite film
A: The Day of The Jackal
D: Four times a month
B: Twice a month
C: Three times a month
4. How often does he have his hair cut?
A: Once a month
D: www.starbuzzcoffee.com
B: www.gregs-list.net
C: www.you-cube.net
5. What is his favorite web site
A: www.fatdanscasino.com
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    383
How would you find the probability of getting at least 30 out of 
40 questions correct? What steps would you need to go through 
to get the right answer? How would you find the mean and 
variance?
We’re not asking you to find the probability—just say how you’d 
go about finding it.
Should we play, or walk away?
As before, it’s unlikely you’ll know the game show host well enough to 
answer questions about him. It looks like you’ll need to give random 
answers to the questions again.
So what’s the probability of getting 30 or more questions right out of 40? 
That will help us determine whether to keep playing, or walk away.
Download at WoweBook.Com

384    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
How would you find the probability of getting at least 30 out of 
40 questions correct? What steps would you need to go through 
to get the right answer? How would you find the mean and 
variance?
We’re not asking you to find the probability—just say how you’d 
go about finding it.
There are 40 questions, which means there are 40 trials. The outcome of each trial can be a success or failure, 
and we want to find the probability of getting a certain number of successes. In order to do this, we need to use 
the binomial distribution. We use n = 40, and as each question has four possible answers, p is 1/4 or 0.25..
If X is the number of questions we get right, then we want to find P(X > 30). This means we have to calculate 
and add together the probabilities for P(X = 30) up to P(X = 40).
We can find the mean and variance using n, p and q, where q = 1 - p. The mean is equal to np, and the variance is 
equal to npq. This gives us a mean of 40 x 0.25 = 10, and a variance of 40 x 0.25 x 0.75 = 7.5.
But doing all of those 
calculations is going to be 
horrible. Isn’t there an 
easier way?
Using the binomial distribution can be a lot of work.
In order to find the probability that we answer 30 or more questions 
correctly, we need to add together 11 individual probabilities. Each of 
these probabilities is tricky to find, and it would be very easy to make a 
mistake somewhere along the way.
What we really need is an easier way of calculating binomial 
probabilities.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    385
Wouldn't it be dreamy if there was a 
way of making other distributions as easy 
to work with as the normal? But I know it's 
just a fantasy… 
Download at WoweBook.Com

386    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
Normal distribution to the rescue
We’ve seen that life with the binomial distribution can be tough at times. Some of 
the calculations can be tricky and repetitive, which in turn means that it’s easy to 
make mistakes and spend a lot of time only to come up with the wrong answer.
Sound hopeless? Don’t worry, there’s an easy way out.
In certain circumstances, you can use the normal distribution to approximate the 
binomial distribution.
You’re saying the normal 
distribution can approximate 
the binomial? I thought the 
Poisson did that. What gives?
The Poisson distribution can approximate the binomial in 
some situations, but the normal can in others.
Knowing how to approximate the binomial distribution with other distributions is 
useful because it can cut down on all sorts of complexities, and in some situations 
the Poisson distribution can help us work out some tricky binomial probabilities.
In certain other circumstances, we can use the normal distribution to approximate 
the binomial instead. There are some huge advantages with this, as it means that 
instead of performing calculations, we can use normal probability tables to simply 
look up the probabilities we need.
All we need to do is figure out the circumstances under which this works.
It’s been a while since we looked at how we could use the 
Poisson distribution to approximate the binomial. Under what 
circumstances is it appropriate?
B(n, p) can be approximated by the Poisson when n > 50 and p < 0.1.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    387
BE the Distribution
Below you’ll see some binomial 
distributions for different values of n 
and p. Your job is to play like you’re 
the distribution and say 
which one you think can best 
be approximated by the normal. 
Take a good look at the shape of 
each distribution and say which 
one is most normal.
n = 5
p = 0.1
1
2
3
4
5
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
n = 5
p = 0.5
1
2
3
4
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4
0
5
n = 20
p = 0.1
1
2
3
4
0.2
0.1
0.3
0
5
6
7
8
9
10
17
15
13
11
10
12
9
7
3
5
n = 20
p = 0.5
2
4
6
8
0.2
0.1
0.3
0
14
16
18
20
1
19
21
Download at WoweBook.Com

388    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
BE the Distribution Solution
Below you’ll see some binomial 
distributions for different values of n 
and p. Your job is to play like you’re 
the distribution and say which 
one you think can best be 
approximated by the normal.  
Take a good look at the shape of 
each distribution and say which 
one is most normal.
Out of all these distributions, this is the one that can best be 
approximated by the normal distribution. When n = 20 and p = 0.5, 
the shape of the distribution is very similar to that of the normal.
This distribution is symmetrical, but it’s 
difficult to pick out a smooth bell-shaped 
curve. It’s unlikely that using the normal 
distribution to approximate this would be 
accurate enough.
n = 5
p = 0.1
1
2
3
4
5
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
n = 20
p = 0.1
1
2
3
4
0.2
0.1
0.3
0
5
6
7
8
9
10
n = 5
p = 0.5
1
2
3
4
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4
0
5
17
15
13
11
10
12
9
7
3
5
n = 20
p = 0.5
2
4
6
8
0.2
0.1
0.3
0
14
16
18
20
1
19
21
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    389
Under certain circumstances, the shape of the binomial distribution looks 
very similar to the normal distribution. In these situations, we can use the 
normal distribution in place of the binomial to give a close approximation of its 
probabilities. Instead of calculating lots of individual probabilities, we can look up 
whole ranges in standard normal probability tables.
So under what circumstances can we do this?
We saw in the last exercise that the binomial distribution looks very similar to the 
normal distribution where p is around 0.5, and n is around 20. As a general rule, 
you can use the normal distribution to approximate the binomial when np and nq 
are both greater than 5. 
Finding the mean and variance
Before we can use normal probability tables to look up probabilities, we need to know what the 
mean and variance is so that we can calculate the standard score. We can take these directly from 
the binomial distribution. When we originally looked at the binomial distribution, we found that: 
	
μ = np	 	
  and	
	
σ2 = npq 
We can use these as parameters for our normal approximation.
Approximating the Binomial Distribution
If X ~ B(n, p) and np > 5 and nq > 5, you can use X ~ N (np, npq) to 
approximate it.
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
When to approximate the binomial distribution with the normal
	
       Some text 
books use a 
criteria of 
np > 10 and 
nq > 10.
If you’re taking a statistics 
exam, make sure you 
check the criteria used by 
your exam board.
n is the number of values, 
p is the probability of 
success, and q is 1 - p.
We can use the normal distribution to 
approximate binomial probabilities when np 
and nq are both greater than 5. These 
values of n, p, and q give us a nice, smooth 
shape that’s pretty close to the normal.
np
npq
Download at WoweBook.Com

390    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
Before we use the normal distribution for the full 40 questions for Who Wants To Win A Swivel 
Chair, let’s tackle a simpler problem to make sure it works. Let’s try finding the probability that 
we get 5 or fewer questions correct out of 12, where there are only two possible choices for 
each question.
Let’s start off by working this out using the binomial distribution. Use the binomial distribution 
to find P(X < 6) where X ~ B(12, 0.5).
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    391
Now let’s try using the normal approximation to the binomial and check that we get the same 
result. First of all, if X ~ B(12, 0.5), what normal distribution can we use to approximate this? 
Once you’ve found that, what’s P(X < 6)?
Download at WoweBook.Com

392    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
To find individual probabilities, we use the formula
P(X = r) = nCrprqn-r
where
We need to find P(X < 6) where X ~ B(12, 0.5). To do this, we need to find  
P(X = 0) through P(X = 5), and then add all the probabilities together.
The individual probabilities are
nCr = 	   n!
         r!(n - r)!
P(X = 0) = 12C0 x 0.512 = 0.512
P(X = 1) = 12C1 x 0.5 x 0.511 = 12 x 0.512
P(X = 2) = 12C2 x 0.52 x 0.510 = 66 x 0.512
P(X = 3) = 12C3 x 0.53 x 0.59 = 220 x 0.512
P(X = 4) = 12C4 x 0.54 x 0.58 = 495 x 0.512
P(X = 5) = 12C5 x 0.55 x 0.57 = 792 x 0.512
Adding these together gives us an overall probability of 
P(X < 6) = (1 + 12 + 66 + 220 + 495 + 792) x 0.512
	
 = 1586 x 0.512
	
 = 0.387 (to 3 decimal places)
Before we use the normal distribution for the full 40 questions for Who Wants To Win A Swivel 
Chair, let’s tackle a simpler problem to make sure it works. Let’s try finding the probability that 
we get 5 or fewer questions correct out of 12, where there are only two possible choices for 
each question.
Let’s start off by working this out using the binomial distribution. Use the binomial distribution 
to find P(X < 6) where X ~ B(12, 0.5).
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    393
What do you think could have gone wrong? How 
do you think we could fix it?
Did I miss something?  
In what way was that a 
good approximation?
The two methods of calculating the probability have given 
quite different results.
Using the binomial distribution, P(X < 6) comes to 0.387, but using the normal 
distribution it comes to 0.5. We should have been able to use the normal 
distribution in place of the binomial, but the results aren’t close enough.
Now let’s try using the normal approximation to the binomial and check we get the same result. 
First of all, if X ~ B(12, 0.5), what normal distribution can we use to approximate this? Once 
you’ve found that, what’s P(X < 6)?
X ~ B(12, 0.5), which means that n = 12, p = 0.5 and q = 0.5. A good approximation to this is  
X ~ N(np, npq), or X ~ N(6, 3).
We want to find P(X < 6), so we start by calculating the standard score.
z = x - μ
        σ
   = 6 - 6
       3
   = 0
Looking this up in probability tables gives us
P(X < 6) = 0.5
Download at WoweBook.Com

394    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
Revisiting the normal approximation
So what went wrong? Let’s take a closer look at the problem and see if we can 
figure out what happened and also what we can do about it.
First off, here’s the probability distribution for X ~ B(12, 0.5). We wanted to find 
the probability of getting fewer than 6 questions correct, and we achieved this by 
calculating P(X < 6).
We then approximated the distribution by using X ~ N(6, 3), and as needed to find 
P(X < 6) for the binomial distribution, we calculated P(X < 6) using the normal 
distribution:
Take a really close look at the two probability distributions. It’s tricky to spot, but 
there’s a crucial difference between the two—the ranges we used to calculate the 
two probabilities are slightly different. We actually used a slightly larger range when 
we used the normal distribution, and this accounts for the larger probability.
We’ll look at this in more detail on the next page.
11
P(X < 6) is this area here.
0.1
0.5
0.15
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.20
7
8
9
10
11
0.1
0.5
0.15
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.20
7
8
9
10
We found P(X < 6) 
by adding all these 
together.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    395
5	
5.5	
 6	
6.5	
7
Can you see where the problem lies?
When we take integers from a discrete probability distribution and translate them onto a 
continuous scale, we don’t just look at those precise values in isolation. Instead, we look 
at the range of numbers that round to each of the values.
Let’s take the discrete value 6 as an example. When we translate the number 6 to a 
continuous scale, we need to consider all of the numbers that round to it—in other 
words, the entire range of numbers from 5.5 to 6.5. 
There’s one thing we overlooked when we calculated the two probabilities—we didn’t 
make allowances for one distribution being discrete (the binomial), and the other being 
continuous (the normal). This is important, as the probability range we use can make a 
big difference to the resulting probabilities.
Here are the probability distributions for X ~ B(12, 0.5) and N(6, 3), both shown on the 
same chart. We’ve highlighted where the probability range we used with the normal 
distribution extends beyond the range we used for the binomial distribution.
All of these 
values round to 6.
So how does this apply to our probability problem?
When we tried using the normal distribution to approximate the probability of getting 
fewer than 6 questions correct, we didn’t look at how the discrete value 6 translates onto a 
continuous scale. The discrete value 6 actually covers a range from 5.5 to 6.5, so instead of 
using the normal distribution to find P(X < 6), we should have tried calculating  
P(X < 5.5) instead.
This adjustment is called a continuity correction. A continuity correction is the small 
adjustment that needs to be made when you translate discrete values onto a continuous scale.
The binomial is discrete, but the normal is continuous
We didn’t include this area when we calculated 
P(X < 6) using the binomial distribution, but we 
did when we calculated P(X < 6) using the normal 
distribution.
0.1
0.5
0.15
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.20
7
8
9
10
11
Download at WoweBook.Com

396    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
Let’s try finding P(X < 5.5) where X ~ N(6, 3), and see how good an approximation 
this is for the probability of getting five or fewer questions correct. Using the binomial 
distribution we found that the probability we’re aiming for is around 0.387. 
Let’s see how close an approximation the normal distribution gives us. 
We want to find P(X < 5.5) where X ~ (6, 3), so let’s start by calculating the standard score.
	
z = x - μ
	
         σ
	
   = 5.5 - 6
	
          3
	
   = -0.29 (to 2 decimal places)
We want to find the probability given by the area Z < -0.29, and looking this up in 
standard normal probability tables gives us a probability of 0.3859. In other words,
	
P(X < 5.5) = 0.3859
This is really close to the probability we came up with using the binomial distribution. The 
binomial distribution gave us a probability of 0.387, so the normal distribution gives us a 
pretty close approximation.
In particular circumstances you can 
use the normal distribution to 
approximate the binomial. If  
X ~ B(n, p) and np > 5 and nq > 5 
then you can approximate X using  
X ~ N(np, npq)

If you’re approximating the binomial 
distribution with the normal 
distribution, then you need to apply a 
continuity correction to make sure 
your results are accurate.

Look at these two 
probabilities. They’re 
really close, so it looks 
like the continuity 
correction did the trick.
Apply a continuity correction before calculating the approximation
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    397
You need to use  
P(X < 3.5) to 
approximate  
P(X < 3).
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1.5
3.5
The big trick with using the normal distribution to approximate binomial probabilities 
is to make sure you apply the right continuity correction. As you’ve seen, small 
changes in the probability range you choose can lead to significant errors in the actual 
probabilities. This might not sound like too big a deal, but using the wrong probability 
could lead to you making the wrong decisions. 
Let’s take a look at the kinds of continuity corrections you need to make for different 
types of probability problems.
Finding ≤ probabilities
When you work with probabilities of the form P(X ≤ a), the key thing you 
need to make sure of is that you choose your range so that it includes the 
discrete value a. On a continuous scale, the discrete value a goes up to  
(a + 0.5). This means that if you’re using the normal distribution to find  
P(X ≤ a), you actually need to calculate P(X < a + 0.5) to come up with a 
good approximation. In other words, you add an extra 0.5.
Finding “between” probabilities
Probabilities of the form P(a ≤ X ≤ b) need continuity corrections to make 
sure that both a and b are included. To do this, we need to extend the range 
out by 0.5 either side. To approximate this probability using the normal 
distribution, we need to find P(a - 0.5 < X < b + 0.5). This is really just a 
combination of the two types above.
3.5
7
8
9
10
11
8.5
Finding ≥ probabilities
If you need to find probabilities of the form P(X ≥ b), you need to make 
absolutely sure that your range includes the discrete value b. The value b 
extends down to (b - 0.5) on a continuous scale so you need to use a range of 
P(X > b - 0.5) to make sure that you include it. In other words, you need to 
subtract an extra 0.5.
This time, we subtract 
0.5 and use P(X > 8.5) 
to find P(X > 9).
We use P(1.5 < X < 3.5) 
to find P(2 < X < 3).
Continuity Corrections Up Close
Download at WoweBook.Com

398    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
Q: Does it really save time to 
approximate the binomial distribution 
with the normal?
A: It can save a lot of time. Calculating 
binomial probabilities can be time-consuming 
because you generally have to work out the 
probability of lots of different values. You 
have no way of simply calculating binomial 
probabilities over a range of values. 
 
If you approximate the binomial distribution 
with the normal distribution, then it’s a lot 
quicker. You can look probabilities up in 
standard tables and also deal with whole 
ranges at once.
Q: So is it really accurate?
A:Yes, It’s accurate enough for most 
purposes. The key thing to remember is that 
you need to apply a continuity correction. 
If you don’t then your results will be less 
accurate.
Q: What about continuity corrections 
for < and >? Do I treat those the same 
way as the ones for ≤ and ≥?
A: There’s a difference, and it all comes 
down to which values you want to include 
and exclude. 
 
When you’re working out probabilities using 
≤ and ≥, you need to make sure that you 
include the value in the inequality in your 
probability range. So if, say, you need to 
work out P(X ≤ 10), you need to make sure 
your probability includes the value 10. This 
means you need to consider P(X < 10.5). 
 
When you’re working out probabilities using 
< or >, you need to make sure that you 
exclude the value in the inequality from your 
probability range. This means that if you 
need to work out P(X < 10), you need to 
make sure that your probability excludes 10. 
You need to consider P(X < 9.5). 
Q: You can approximate the binomial 
distribution with both the normal and 
Poisson distributions. Which should I 
use?
A: It all depends on your circumstances. 
If X ~ B(n, p), then you can use the normal 
distribution to approximate the binomial 
distribution if np > 5 and nq > 5. 
 
You can use the Poisson distribution to 
approximate the binomial distribution if  
n > 50 and p < 0.1
Remember, you need to apply a continuity correction when you 
approximate the binomial distribution with the normal distribution.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    399
Pool Puzzle
Your job is to take snippets from the 
pool and place them into the blank 
lines so that you get the right 
continuity correction for each 
dscrete probability range. You 
may use the same snippet more 
than once, and you won’t need to 
use all the snippets.
Note: each thing from 
the pool can be used 
more than once!
X < 3
X > 3
X ≥ 3
X ≤ 3
X > 0
X = 0
3 ≤ X ≤ 10
3 < X ≤ 10
3 ≤ X < 10
3 < X < 10
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
<
>
2.5
2.5
10.5
9.5
0.5
-
0.5
0
3.5
10.5
0.5
0
2.5
9.5
Download at WoweBook.Com

400    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
<
Pool Puzzle
Your job is to take snippets from the 
pool and place them into the blank 
lines so that you get the right 
continuity correction for each 
dscrete probability range. You 
may use the same snippet more 
than once, and you won’t need to 
use all the snippets.
Note: each thing from 
the pool can  be used 
more than once!
X < 3
X > 3
X ≥ 3
X ≤ 3
X > 0
X = 0
3 ≤ X ≤ 10
3 < X ≤ 10
3 ≤ X < 10
3 < X < 10
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
>
>
>
2.5
3.5
2.5
2.5
3.5
9.5
0.5
-
0.5
3.5
2.5
10.5
0.5
0
3.5
9.5
All the numbers from -0.5 
to 0.5 round to 0, so they 
must be included in the 
range.
Here, we’re looking 
for values less than 
3. 2.5 rounds to 3, 
so we only want to 
include values less 
than 2.5 in  
our range.
Here, we’re looking 
for values less 
than or equal to 
3. All the numbers 
between 2.5 and 
3.5 round to 3, so 
we need to include 
values less than 
3.5 in our range.
< 10.5
X 
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    401
What’s the probability of you winning the jackpot on today’s edition of Who Wants to Win a 
Swivel Chair? See if you can find the probability of getting at least 30 questions correct out of 40, 
where each question has a choice of 4 possible answers.
Download at WoweBook.Com

402    WHO WANTS TO WIN A SWIVEL CHAIR
What’s the probability of you winning the jackpot on today’s edition of Who Wants to Win a 
Swivel Chair? See if you can find the probability of getting at least 30 questions correct out of 40, 
where each question has a choice of 4 possible answers.
If X is the number of questions we get right, then we want to find P(X > 30) where X ~ B(40, 0.25).
As np and nq are both greater than 5, it’s appropriate for us to use the normal distribution to approximate 
this probability. np = 10 and npq = 30, which means we need to find P(X > 29.5) where X ~ N(10, 30).
Let’s start by finding the standard score.
z = x - μ
   = 29.5 - 10
	
30
   = 19.5
       30
   = 0.65
Looking up 0.65 in probability tables gives us a probability of 0.7422. This means that
	
P(X > 29.5) = 1 - 0.7422
	
	
     = 0.2578
So, looks like 
you’ve only got about a 
26% chance at that swivel chair. 
If you lose, you’ll miss out on our 
great consolation prize. Why don’t 
you take the prize and run?
σ
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    403
Sorry to see you go. It’s been great 
having you back as a contestant on the show, 
but we’ve just had an urgent email from 
someone called Dexter...
Here are the first five questions for Round Two. 
The questions are all about the game show host.
D: $4,000
B: $2,000
C: $3,000
3. On average, how much does he spend on suits each month
A: $1,000
D: Bird on a Wire
B: Curse of the Were-Rabbit
C: Mousehunt
2. What is the favorite film of his cat
A: A Fish Called Wanda
D: All the President’s Men
B: The Italian Job
C: Lawrence of Arabia
1. What is his favorite film
A: The Day of The Jackal
D: Four times a month
B: Twice a month
C: Three times a month
4. How often does he have his hair cut?
A: Once a month
D: www.starbuzzcoffee.com
B: www.gregs-list.net
C: www.you-cube.net
5. What is his favorite web site
A: www.fatdanscasino.com
Download at WoweBook.Com

404    Chapter 9
Head First: Hey, Normal, glad you could make it 
on the show. 
Normal: Thanks for inviting me, Head First.
Head First: Now, my first question is about your 
name. Why are you called Normal?
Normal: It’s really because I’m so representative 
of a lot of types of data. They have a probability 
distribution that has a distinctive shape and a 
smooth, bell-curved shape, and that’s me. I’m 
something of an ideal.
Head First: Can you give me an example?
Normal: Sure. Imagine you have a baker’s shop that 
sells loaves of bread. Now, each loaf of a particular 
sort of bread should theoretically weigh about the 
same, but in practice, the actual weight of each loaf 
of bread will vary.
Head First: But surely they’ll all weigh about the 
same?
Normal: More or less, but with variation. I model 
that variation.
Head First: So why’s that so important?
Normal: Well, it means that you can use me to work 
out probabilities. Say you want to find the probability 
of a randomly chosen loaf of bread being below a 
particular weight. That sounds like something that 
could be quite difficult, but with me, it’s easy.
Head First: Easy? How do you mean?
Normal: With a lot of the other probability 
distributions, there can be lots of complicated 
calculations involved. With Binomial you have 
factorials, and with Poisson you have to work with 
exponentials. With me there’s none of that. Just look 
me up in a table and away you go.
Head First: Surely it’s not quite as simple as that?
Normal: Well, you do have to convert me to a 
standard score first, but that’s nothing, not in the 
grand scheme of things.
Head First: So tell me, do you think you’re better 
than the other probability distributions?
Normal: I wouldn’t say that I’m better as such, 
but I’m a lot more flexible, and I’m useful in lots 
of situations. I’m also a lot more robust. When 
the numbers get high for Poisson and Binomial 
distributions, they run into trouble. Mind you, I do 
what I can to help out.
Head First: You do? How?
Normal: Well under certain circumstances both 
Binomial and Poisson look like me. It’s uncanny; 
they’re often stopped at parties by people asking 
them if they’re Normal. I tell them to take it as a 
compliment.
Head First: So how does that help?
Normal: Well, because they look like me, it means 
that you can actually use my probability tables to 
work out their probabilities. How cool is that? No 
more late nights slaving over a calculator; just look it 
up.
Head First: I’m afraid that’s all we’ve got time for 
tonight. Normal, thanks for coming along, it’s been a 
pleasure.
Normal: You’re welcome, Head First.
The Normal Distribution Exposed
This week’s interview:
Why Being Normal Isn’t Dull
interview with the normal distribution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    405
using the normal distribution ii
All aboard the Love Train
Remember Dexter’s Love Train? He’s started running trials of the ride, and everyone 
who’s given it a trial run thinks it’s great. There’s just one problem: sometimes the ride 
breaks down and causes delays, and delays cost money.
Dexter’s found some statistics on the Internet about the model of roller coaster he’s been 
trying out, and according to one site, you can expect the ride to break down 40 times a 
year.
40 times a year?! If the ride 
breaks down on someone’s 
wedding day, they’ll sue!
Given the huge profit the Love Train is bound to make, Dexter thinks that 
it’s still worth going ahead with the ride if there’s a high probability of it 
breaking down less than 52 times a year.
So how do we work out that probability?
What sort of probability distribution does this follow? How would 
you work out the probability of the ride breaking down less than 
52 times in a year?
Download at WoweBook.Com

406    Chapter 9
What sort of probability distribution does this follow? How would 
you work out the probability of the ride breaking down less than 
52 times in a year?
Situations where you’re dealing with things breaking down at a mean rate follow a Poisson distribution, 
taking a parameter of the mean. If X represents the number of breakdowns in a year, then X ~ Po(40).
We need to find P(X < 52). To find this, we’d need to find each individual probability for all values of X 
up to 52 .
Working out that probability 
is gonna be tricky and time-
consuming. I wonder if we can take 
a shortcut like we did with the 
binomial.
Under certain circumstances, the shape of the 
Poisson distribution resembles that of the normal.
The advantage of this is we can use standard normal probability tables 
to work out whole ranges of probabilities. This means that we don’t 
have to calculate lots of individual probabilities in order to find what 
we need.
Approximating the Poisson distribution with the normal is very similar 
to when you use the normal in place of the binomial. Once you have 
the right set of circumstances, you take the Poisson mean and variance, 
and use them as parameters in a normal distribution. 
If X ~ Po(λ), this means that the corresponding normal 
approximation is X ~ N(λ, λ). But when is this true?
It all comes down to the shape of the distribution.
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    407
using the normal distribution ii
We can use the normal distribution to approximate the Poisson whenever the 
Poisson distribution adopts a shape that’s like the normal, but when does this 
happen? Let’s take a look.
When λ is small...
When λ is small, the shape of the Poisson distribution is different from 
that of the normal distribution. The shape isn’t symmetrical, and the 
curve looks as though it’s “pulled” over to the right.
As the Poisson distribution doesn’t resemble the normal for small values 
of λ, the normal distribution isn’t a suitable approximation for the 
poisson distribution where λ is small.
When λ is large...
As λ gets larger, the shape of the Poisson distribution looks increasingly 
like that of the normal distribution. The main part of the shape is 
reasonably symmetrical, and it forms a smooth curve that’s just like the 
one for the normal.
This means that as λ gets larger, the normal distribution can be used to 
give a better and better approximation of it.
So how large is large enough?
We’ve seen that the Poisson resembles the normal distribution when λ is large, but how 
big does it have to be before we can use the normal?
λ actually gets sufficiently large when λ is greater than 15. This means that if X ~ Po(λ) 
and λ > 15, we can approximate this using X ~ N(λ, λ).
The shape of the 
distribution is skewed, 
so we can’t use a normal 
approximation
Approximating the Poisson Distribution
If X ~ Po(l) and l > 15, you can use X ~ N (l, l) to 
approximate it.
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
When to approximate the binomial distribution with the normal
The shape here is 
more like the normal, 
so we can use the 
normal distribution 
to approximate it.
Download at WoweBook.Com

408    Chapter 9
The number of breakdowns on Dexter’s Love Train follows a Poisson distribution where λ = 40. 
What’s the probability that there will be fewer than 52 breakdowns in the first year?
Hint: Use a normal approximation, 
and remember your continuity 
corrections.
approximation exercise
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    409
using the normal distribution ii
It’s time to test your statistical knowledge. Complete the table below, saying what normal 
distribution suits each situation, and what conditions there are.
Situation
Distribution
Condition
 
X + Y
X ~ N(μx, σ2
x), Y ~ (μy, σ2
y) 
 
 
X + Y ~ N(μx + μy, σ2
x + σ2
y)
 
 
X, Y are independent
 
X - Y
X ~ N(μx, σ2
x), Y ~ (μy, σ2
y) 
 
 
 
aX + b
X ~ N(μ, σ2) 
 
 
 
X1 + X2 + ... + Xn
X ~ N(μ, σ2) 
 
 
 
Normal approximation of X
X ~ B(n, p) 
 
 
 
Normal approximation of X
X ~ Po(λ) 
 
 
Download at WoweBook.Com

410    Chapter 9
The number of breakdowns on Dexter’s Love Train follows a Poisson distribution where λ = 40. 
What’s the probability that there will be fewer than 52 breakdowns in the first year?
If we use X to represent the number of breakdowns in a year, then X ~ Po(40)
As λ is large, we can use the normal distribution to approximate this. In other words, we use  
X ~ N(40, 40)
We need to find the probability that there are fewer than 52 breakdowns. As we’re approximating a discrete 
probability distribution with a continuous one, we have to apply a continuity correction. We don’t want to 
include 52, so we need to find P(X ≤ 51.5).
Before we can find the probability using standard normal tables, we need to calculate the standard score.
	
z = x - μ
	
       σ
	
   = 51.5 - 40
	
         6.32
	
   = 1.82 (to 2 decimal places)
Looking this up in probability tables gives us 0.9656. This means that the probability of there being fewer 
than 52 breakdowns in a year is 0.9656.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    411
using the normal distribution ii
It’s time to test your statistical knowledge. Complete the table below, saying what normal 
distribution suits each situation, and what conditions there are.
Situation
Distribution
Condition
 
X + Y
X ~ N(μx, σ2
x), Y ~ (μy, σ2
y) 
 
 
X + Y ~ N(μx + μy, σ2
x + σ2
y)
 
 
X, Y are independent
 
X - Y
X ~ N(μx, σ2
x), Y ~ (μy, σ2
y) 
 
 
X - Y ~ N(μx - μy, σ2
x + σ2
y)
 
 
X, Y are independent
 
aX + b
X ~ N(μ, σ2) 
 
 
aX + b ~ N(aμ + b, a2σ2)
 
 
a, b are constant values
 
X1 + X2 + ... + Xn
X ~ N(μ, σ2) 
 
 
X1 + X2 + ... + Xn ~ N(nμ, nσ2)
 
 
X1, X2, ..., Xn are independent 
observations of X
 
Normal approximation of X
X ~ B(n, p) 
 
 
X ~ N(np, npq)
np > 5, npq > 5
Continuity correction required
 
Normal approximation of X
X ~ Po(λ) 
 
 
X ~ N(λ, λ)
λ > 15
Continuity correction required
Download at WoweBook.Com

412    Chapter 9
Q: You can approximate the binomial 
and Poisson distributions with the 
normal, but what about the geometric 
disribution? Can the normal distribution 
ever approximate that?
A: We were able to use the normal 
distribution in place of the binomial and 
Poisson distributions because under 
particular circumstances, these distributions 
adopt the same shape as the normal. 
 
The geometric distribution, on the other hand, 
never looks like the normal, so the normal 
can never effectively approximate it. 
Q: Do I have to use a continuity 
correction if I approximate the Poisson 
distribution with the normal distribution?
A: Yes. This is because you’re 
approximating a discrete probability 
distribution with a continuous one. This 
means that you need to apply a continuity 
correction, just as you would for the binomial 
distribution. 
 
 
 
 
Q: What’s the advantage of 
approximating the binomial or poisson 
distribution with the normal? Won’t my 
results be more accurate if I just use the 
original distribution?
A: Your results will be more accurate if 
you use the original distribution, but using 
them can be time consuming. If you wanted 
to find the probability of a range of values 
using the binomial or poisson distribution, 
you’d need to find the probability of every 
single value within that range. Using the 
normal distribution, on the other hand, you 
can look up probabilities for whole ranges, 
and so they’re a lot easier to find. 
In particular circumstances you 
can use the normal distribution to 
approximate the Poisson. 
If  X ~ Po(λ) and λ > 15 then you can 
approximate X using  X ~ N(λ, λ) 


If you’re approximating the Poisson 
distribution with the normal 
distribution, then you need to apply 
a continuity correction to make sure 
your results are accurate.

Use a continuity correction if you approximate the Poisson distribution 
with the normal distribution.
bullet points and no dumb questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    413
using the normal distribution ii
A runaway success!
Thanks to your savvy statistical analysis,the Love Train is open for business, and 
demand has outstripped Dexter’s highest expectations. Here are some of Dexter’s 
happy customers:
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    415
using statistical sampling
10
Taking Samples
Statistics deal with data, but where does it come from? 
Some of the time, data’s easy to collect, such as the ages of people attending a health 
club or the sales figures for a games company. But what about the times when data isn’t 
so easy to collect? Sometimes the number of things we want to collect data about are so 
huge that it’s difficult to know where to start. In this chapter, we’ll take a look at how you 
can effectively gather data in the real world, in a way that’s efficient, accurate, and can 
also save you time and money to boot. Welcome to the world of sampling.
Statistics deal with data, but where does it come from? 
Some of the time, data’s easy to collect, such as the ages of people attending a health 
club or the sales figures for a games company. But what about the times when data isn’t 
so easy to collect? Sometimes the number of things we want to collect data about are so 
huge that it’s difficult to know where to start. In this chapter, we’ll take a look at how you 
can effectively gather data in the real world, in a way that’s efficient, accurate, and can 
also save you time and money to boot. Welcome to the world of sampling.
Stay nice and relaxed, 
and this won’t hurt a bit.
Download at WoweBook.Com

416    Chapter 10
Please, no more gumballs! 
I’m running out of teeth
Well, gumball #1,466 ran 
out of flavor after 55 minutes, 
but gumball #1,467 is still going 
strong after an hour...
The Mighty Gumball taste test
Mighty Gumball is the leading vendor of a wide variety of candies and chocolates. Their 
signature product is their super-long-lasting gumball. It comes in all sorts of colors to suit 
all tastes.
Mighty Gumball plans to run a series of television commercials to attract even more 
customers, and as part of this, they want to advertise just how long the flavor of their 
gumballs lasts for. The problem is, how do they get the data?
They’ve decided to implement a taste test, and they’ve hired a bunch of tasters to help 
with the tests. There are just two problems: the tasters are using up all of the gumballs, 
and their dental plans are costing the company a fortune.
mighty gumball’s flavor dilemma
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    417
using statistical sampling
They’re running out of gumballs
The fatal flaw with the Mighty Gumball taste test is that the tasters are trying out 
all of the gumballs. Not only is this having a bad effect on the tasters’ teeth, it 
also means that there are no gumballs left to sell. After all, they can hardly reuse 
their gumballs once the tasters have finished with them.
The whole point of the taste test is for Mighty Gumball to figure out how long 
the flavor lasts for. But does this really mean that the tasters have to try out every 
single gumball?
What would you do to establish how long the gumball 
flavor lasts for? What do you need to consider? Write 
your answer below in as much detail as possible.
Mighty Gumball, Inc.
Download at WoweBook.Com

418    Chapter 10
Mighty Gumball is running into problems because they’re tasting every single gumball 
as part of their taste test. It’s costing them time, money, and teeth, and they have no 
gumballs left to actually sell to their customers. 
So what should Mighty Gumball do differently? Let’s start by looking at the difference 
between populations and samples.
Gumball samples
You don’t have to taste every gumball to get an idea of how long the 
flavor lasts for. Instead of testing the entire population, you can test a 
sample instead.
A statistical sample is a selection of items taken from a population. You 
choose your sample so that it’s fairly representative of the population as a 
whole; it’s a representative subset of the population. For Mighty Gumball, 
a sample of gumballs means just a small selection of gumballs rather 
than every single one of them.
A study or survey involving just a sample of the population is called a 
sample survey. A lot of the time, conducting a survey is more practical 
than a census. It’s usually less time-consuming and expensive, as you don’t 
have to deal with the entire population. And because you don’t use the 
whole population, taking a sample survey of the gumballs means that 
there’ll be plenty left over when you’re done.
Gumball populations
At the moment, Mighty Gumball is carrying out their taste test using every single 
gumball that they have available. In statistical terms, they are conducting their test 
using an entire population.
A statistical population refers to the entire group of things that you’re trying to 
measure, study, or analyze. It can refer to anything from humans to scores to gumballs. 
The key thing is that a population refers to all of them.
A census is a study or survey involving the entire population, so in the case of Mighty 
Gumball, they’re conducting a census of their gumball population by tasting every 
single one of them. A census can provide you with accurate information about your 
population, but it’s not always practical. When populations are large or infinite, it’s 
just not possible to include every member.
So how can you use samples to find out about a population? Let’s see.
A population of gumballs 
refers to all of them.
A sample is a 
subset of the 
population, so 
just some of 
the gumballs.
populations vs. samples
Test a gumball sample, not the whole gumball population
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    419
using statistical sampling
How sampling works
The key to creating a good sample is to choose one that is as close a match to your 
population as possible. If your sample is representative, this means it has similar 
characteristics to the population. And this, in turn, means that you can use your 
sample to predict what characteristics the population will have.
Suppose you use a representative sample of gumballs to test how long the flavor of 
each gumball lasts for. The distribution of the results might look something like this:
Population Chart
duration
frequency
Sampling Chart
duration
frequency
Here’s the chart for the population. Can you 
see how closely the sample and population 
distributions agree?
If you compare the two charts, the overall shape 
is very similar, even though one is for all of the 
gumballs and the other is for just some of them. 
They share key characteristics such as where the 
center of the data is, and this means you can use 
the sample data to make predictions about the 
population.
Most of the gumballs 
last for this long
Although it’s not 
exactly the same, the 
results of the gumball 
population are a 
similar shape to that 
of the sample.
Even though you’ve only tried a small sample of 
gumballs, you still have an impression of the shape 
of the distribution, and the more gumballs you try, 
the clearer the shape is. As an example, you can 
get a rough impression of where the center of the 
population distribution is by looking at the shape of 
the sample distribution.
Let’s compare this with the actual population:
So are you saying that 
all samples resemble 
their parent populations?
Download at WoweBook.Com

420    Chapter 10
When sampling goes wrong
If only we could guarantee that every sample was a close match to the 
population it comes from. Unfortunately, not every sample closely resembles its 
population. This may not sound like a big deal, but using a misleading sample 
can actually lead you to draw the wrong conclusions about your population.
As an example, imagine if you took a sample of gumballs to find out how long 
flavor typically lasts for, but your sample only contained red gumballs. Your 
sample might be representative of red gumballs, but not so representative of 
all gumballs in the population. If you used the results of this sample to gather 
information about the general gumball population, you could end up with a 
misleading impression about what gumballs are generally like.
Sample Gone Wrong
duration
frequency
Representative Sample
duration
frequency
Sample and population 
are distributed 
differently.
Sample and 
population have a 
similar shape.
Using the wrong sample could lead you to draw wrong conclusions about 
population parameters, such as the mean or standard deviation. You might be left 
with a completely different view of your data, and this could lead you to make 
the wrong decisions.
The trouble is, you might not know this at the time. You might think your 
population is one thing when in fact it’s not. We need to make sure we have some 
mechanism for making sure our samples are a reliable representation of the 
population.
We want this:
Instead of this:
This sample…
…might not be the most 
accurate representation of this 
population.
not all samples are reliable
Sample
Population
Sample
Population
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    421
using statistical sampling
The Case of the Lost Coffee Sales
The Starbuzz CEO has an idea for a brand-new coffee he wants to 
sell in his coffee shops, but he’s not sure how popular it’s going to be 
with his customers. He asks his new intern to conduct a survey to help 
predict the customers’ opinions. The intern will ask customers to taste 
the new brew, and tell him what they think. 
The intern is really happy to be given such a great opportunity. 
First off, he’s been told that if he does the job well, he stands to 
get a bonus at the end of the month. Secondly, he gets to give 
out free coffee to friendly Starbuzz customers and hear lots of 
positive things. Thirdly, he’s been looking for an excuse to talk to 
one particular girl who’s a regular visitor to his local coffee shop, 
and this could be just the break he needs.
After the intern conducts his survey, he’s delighted to tell the CEO 
that everyone loves the new coffee, and it’s bound to be a huge success. 
“That’s great,” says the CEO. “We’ll launch it next season.”
When the new coffee is finally launched, sales are poor, and the CEO 
has to cancel the range. What do you think went wrong?
Why didn’t the new coffee sell well?
Five Minute 
Mystery
Five Minute 
Mystery
Download at WoweBook.Com

422    Chapter 10
How to design a sample
You use samples to make inferences about the population in general, and to 
make sure you get accurate results, you need to choose your sample wisely. Let’s 
start off by pinning down what your population really is, so you can get as 
representative a sample as possible.
Define your sampling units
Once you’ve defined your target population, you need to decide what sort of object 
you’re going to sample. Normally these will be the sorts of things you described when 
you defined your target population. As an example, this could be a single gumball or 
maybe a packet of gumballs.
Define your target population
The first thing to be clear about is what your target population is so that you know 
where you’re collecting your sample from. By target population, we mean the group 
that you’re reseraching and want to collect results for. The target population you 
choose depends, to a large extent, on the purpose of your study. For example, do you 
want to gather data about all the gumballs in the world, one particular brand, or one 
particular type?
Try to be as precise as possible, as that way it’s easier to make your sample as 
representative of your population as possible.
We need data about Mighty 
Gumball’s super-long-lasting 
gumballs, so your target 
population is all of the gumballs.
The sampling unit in the taste 
test is a single Mighty Gumball 
super-long-lasting gumball.
designing a sample
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    423
using statistical sampling
Define your sampling frame
Finally, you need a list of all the sampling units within 
your target population, preferably with each sampling 
unit either named or numbered. This is called the 
sampling frame. It’s basically a list from which you can 
choose your sample.
Sometimes it’s not possible to come up with a list that covers 
the entire target population. As an example, if you want to 
collect the views of people living within a certain area, people 
moving in or out of an area can affect who you have on your 
list of names. If you’re dealing with similar objects such as 
gumballs, it might not be possible or practical to name or 
number each one.
This seems like a 
waste of time. Do I have to 
do all of these things? Can’t 
I just sample gumballs?
If you don’t design your sample well, 
your sample may not be accurate.
Designing your sample can take a bit of extra 
preparation time, but this is much better than 
spending time and money on a survey only to find 
the results are inaccurate. You will have lost time 
and money doing the survey, and what’s more, 
someone might make wrong decisions based on it.
A poorly designed sample can introduce bias. 
Let’s look at this in more detail.
Naming or numbering 
each gumball maybe 
isn’t that practical.
Gumball #1897652
Gumball #1897653
Gumball #1897654
Gumball #1897655
Gumball #1897656
Gumball #1897657
Gumball #1897658
Gumball #1897659
Gumball #1897660
Gumball #1897661
Gumball #1897662
Gumball #1897663
Gumbal4 Gumball #1897670
Gumball #1897671
Gumball #1897672
Gumball #18976
Gumball #189
Gumball #1
Gumball
Gumb
Gu
Download at WoweBook.Com

424    Chapter 10
Sometimes samples can be biased
Not every sample is fair. Unless you’re very careful, some sort of bias can creep 
in to the sample, which can distort your results. Bias is a sort of favoritism that 
you can unwittingly (or maybe knowingly) introduce into your sample, meaning 
that your sample is no longer randomly selected from your population
If a sample is unbiased, then it’s representative of the population. It’s a fair 
reflection of what the population is like.
Both means are 
the same.
Unbiased samples
An unbiased sample is representative of 
the target population. This means that it has 
similar characteristics to the population, and 
we can use these to make inferences about 
the population itself. 
The shape of the distribution of an unbiased 
sample is similar to the shape of the 
population it comes from. If we know the 
shape of the sample distribution, we can 
use it to predict that of the population to a 
reasonable level of confidence.
Biased samples
A biased sample is not representative of 
the target population. We can’t use it to make 
inferences about the population because 
the sample and population have different 
characteristics. If we try to predict the shape 
of the population distribution from that of 
the sample, we’d end up with the wrong 
result. 
bias in sampling
Biased Sample
duration
frequency
Unbiased Sample
duration
frequency
Sample mean
Population mean
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    425
using statistical sampling
Sources of bias
So how does bias creep into samples? Through any of the following and more:
A sampling frame where items have been left off, such that 
not everything in the target population is included. If it’s not in your 
sampling frame, it won’t be in your sample.
An incorrect sampling unit. Instead of individual gumballs, maybe 
the sampling unit should have been boxes of gumballs instead.
Individual sampling units you chose for your sample weren’t 
included in your actual sample. As an example, you might send 
out a questionnaire that not everybody responds to.
Poorly designed questions in a questionnaire. Design your 
questions so that they’re neutral and everyone can answer them. An 
example of a biased question is “Mighty Gumball candy is tastier than 
any other brand, do you agree?” It would be better to ask the person 
being surveyed for the name of their favorite brand of confectionary.
Samples that aren’t random. As an example, if you’re conducting 
a survey on the street, you may avoid questioning anyone that looks too 
busy to stop, or too aggressive. This means that you exclude aggressive 
or busy-looking people from your survey.
This sounds hopeless. How can I be certain I 
avoid bias? Where does it come from anyway?
You mean I can’t just 
try the pink ones???
As you can see, there are lots of sources of bias, and a lot 
of it comes down to how you choose your sample. 
We need to take a look at ways in which you can choose your sample to minimize 
the chances of introducing bias.
Download at WoweBook.Com

426    Chapter 10
Q: So is the sampling frame a list of 
everything that we’re sampling?
A: The sampling frame lists all the 
individual units in the population, and it’s 
used as a basis for the sample. It’s not the 
sample itself, as we don’t sample everything 
on it.
Q: How do I put together the sampling 
frame?
A: How you do it and what you use 
depends on your target population. As an 
example, if your target population is all car 
owners, then you can use a list of registered 
car owners. If your target population is all 
the students attending a particular college, 
you can use the college registrar.
Q: How about things like telephone 
listings? Can I use those for my sampling 
frame?
A: It all depends on your target population. 
Telephone listings exclude households 
without a telephone, and there may also 
be households who have elected not to be 
listed. If your target population is households 
with a listed telephone number, then using 
telephone lists is a good idea. If your target 
population is all households with a telephone 
or even all telephones, then your sampling 
frame won’t be entirely accurate—and that 
can introduce bias.
Q: Can I always compile a sampling 
frame?
A: Not always. Imagine if you had to 
survey all the fish in the sea. It would be 
impossible to name and number every 
individual fish.
Q: Will I always have to have a target 
population?
A: Yes. You need to know what your 
target population is so that you can make 
sure your sample is representative of it. 
Thinking carefully about what your target 
population is can help you avoid bias. 
 
If you’re sampling for someone else, get 
as much detail as possible about who the 
target population should be. Make sure you 
know exactly what is included and what is 
excluded.
Q: Why is bias so bad?
A: Bias is bad because it can mislead 
you into drawing wrong conclusions about 
your target population, which in turn can 
lead you into making wrong decisions. If, for 
example, you only sampled pink gumballs, 
your survey results might be accurate for 
all pink gumballs, but not for all gumballs in 
general. There may be significant differences 
between the different color gumballs.  
Q: How can the questions in a 
questionnaire cause bias? 
A: Bias often creeps in through the 
phrasing of questions. 
 
First off, if you present a series of statements 
and ask respondents to agree or disagree, 
it’s more likely that people will agree unless 
they have strong negative feelings. This 
means that the results of your survey will be 
biased towards people agreeing. 
 
Bias can also occur if you give a set of 
possible answers that don’t cover all 
eventualities. As an example, imagine you 
need to ask people how often they exercise 
in a typical week. You would introduce bias 
if you give answers such as “more than 5 
times a week,” “3–5 times a week,” “1–2 
times a week,” and “I don’t value my health, 
so I don’t exercise.” Someone may not 
exercise, but disagree with the statement 
that they don’t value their health. This would 
mean that they wouldn’t be able to answer 
the question.
there are no dumb questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    427
using statistical sampling
Look at the following scenarios. What would you choose as a 
target population? What’s the sampling unit? How would you 
develop a sampling frame? What other things might you need to 
consider when forming your sample?
1. Choc-O-Holic Inc. manufactures chocolates, and they have just finished a limited-
edition run of chocolates for the holiday season. They want to check the quality of 
those chocolates. 
2. The Statsville Health Club wants to conduct a survey to see what their customers 
think of their facilities.
Download at WoweBook.Com

428    Chapter 10
Look at the following scenarios. What would you choose as a 
target population? What’s the sampling unit? How would you 
develop a sampling frame? What other things might you need to 
consider when forming your sample?
1. Choc-O-Holic Inc. manufactures chocolates, and they have just finished a limited-
edition run of chocolates for the holiday season. They want to check the quality of 
those chocolates. 
2. The Statsville Health Club wants to conduct a survey to see what their customers 
think of their facilities.
The target population is all the chocolates in the limited edition run.
The sampling unit is one chocolate.
The sampling frame needs to cover all of the chocolates;  as it’s a limited-edition run, it’s possible that 
Choc-O-Holic has records of how many chocolates are in the run, including numbers of each type of 
chocolate.
When forming the sample, you need to make sure that it is representative of the target population and 
unbiased. If there are different types of chocolate in the run, you’d need to make sure that you included 
each sort of chocolate.
The target population is all the customers of the Statsville Health Club.
The sampling unit is one customer.
The sampling frame needs to cover all of the customers. It’s likely that the health club has a list of 
registered customers, so you could use this as the sampling frame.
As before, you need to make sure that your sample is representative of the population and unbiased. You’d 
need to make sure that each of the classes is fairly represented by customer gender, customer age group, 
and so on.
sharpen your pencil solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    429
using statistical sampling
Solved: The Case of the Lost Coffee Sales
Why didn’t the coffee sell well?
We don’t know for certain, but there’s a very good chance that the 
sample of people surveyed by the intern wasn’t 
representative of the target population.
First of all, the intern was looking forward to giving 
away free coffee to friendly Starbuzz customers and 
hearing positive things. Does this mean he only spoke 
to customers who looked friendly to him? Did he get their 
real opinions about the coffee, or did he only ask them whether they 
agreed it tasted nice?
The intern also hoped to use the job as an opportunity to speak to a girl 
at his local coffee shop. Did he spend most of his time in this particular 
coffee shop? Did the girl influence his sample choice?
Finally, the CEO launched the new coffee in a different season from the 
one in which the survey took place, and this may have affected sales too.
Any or all of these factors could have lead to the sample being 
misleading, which in turn led to the wrong decision being made.
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Download at WoweBook.Com

430    Chapter 10
How to choose your sample
We’ve looked at how to design your sample and explored types of bias that need 
to be avoided. Now we need to select our actual sample from the sample frame. 
But how should we go about this?
Simple random sampling
One option is to choose the sample at random. Imagine you have a 
population of N sampling units, and you need to pick a sample of n 
sampling units. Simple random sampling is where you choose a 
sample of n using some random process, and all possible samples of size 
n are equally likely to be selected. 
With simple random sampling, you have two options. You can either 
sample with replacement or without replacement. 
Sampling without replacement
Sampling without replacement means that the sampling unit isn’t 
replaced back into the population. An example of this is the gumball 
taste test; you wouldn’t want to put gumballs that have been tasted back 
into the population.
Sampling with replacement
Sampling with replacement means that when you’ve selected each 
unit and recorded relevant information about it, you put it back into the 
population. By doing this, there’s a chance that a sampling unit might 
be chosen more than once. You’d be sampling with replacement if you 
decided to question people on the street at random without checking 
if you had already questioned them before. If you stop a person for 
questioning and then let them go once you’ve finished asking them 
questions, you are in effect releasing them back into the population. It 
means that you may question them more than once.
You wouldn’t want to replace 
gumballs once you’ve tasted them, 
so this would be simple random 
samping without replacement.
simple random sampling
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    431
using statistical sampling
How to choose a simple random sample
There are two main ways of using simple random sampling: by drawing lots or 
using random numbers.
Drawing lots
Drawing lots is just like pulling names out of a hat. You write the 
name or number of each member of the sampling frame on a piece 
of paper or ball, and then place them all into a container. You then 
draw out n names or numbers at random so that you have enough 
for your sample.
Random number generators
If you have a large sampling frame, drawing lots might not be 
practical, so an alternative is to use a random number generator, 
or random number tables. For this, you give each member of the 
sampling frame a number, generate a set of n random numbers, 
and then pick the members of the set whose assigned numbers 
correspond to the random numbers that were generated.
It’s important to make sure that each number has an equal chance 
of occuring so that there’s no bias.
Simple random sampling isn’t without its problems. What do you think 
could go wrong with it?
Download at WoweBook.Com

432    Chapter 10
There are other types of sampling
Even simple random sampling has its problems.
With simple random sampling, there’s still a chance that your sample will not 
represent the target population. For example, you might end up randomly 
drawing only yellow gumballs for your sample, and the other colors would be left 
out.
So how can we avoid this?
We can use stratified sampling...
An alternative to simple random sampling is stratified sampling. With this type of 
sampling, the population is split into similar groups that share similar characteristics. 
These charateristics or groups are called strata, and each individual group is called 
a stratum. As an example, we could split up the gumballs into the different colors, 
yellow, green, red, and pink, so that each color forms a different stratum.
Once you’ve done this, you can perform simple random sampling on each stratum to 
ensure that each group is represented in your overall sample. To do this, look at the 
proportions of each stratum within the overall population and take a proportionate 
number from each. As an example, if 50% of the gumballs that Mighty Gumball 
produce are red, half of your sample should consist of red gumballs.
Each color is a 
separate stratum.
We sample a proportionate 
number from each stratum.
stratified, cluster, and systematic sampling
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    433
using statistical sampling
...or we can use cluster sampling...
Cluster sampling is useful if the population has a number of similar 
groups or clusters. As an example, gumballs might be sold in packets, 
with each packet containing a similar number of gumballs with similar 
colors. Each packet would form a cluster.
With cluster sampling, instead of taking a simple random sample of 
units, you draw a simple random sample of clusters, and then 
survey everything within each of these clusters. As an example, you 
could take a simple random sample of packets of gumballs, and then 
taste all the gumballs in these packets.
Cluster sampling works because each cluster is similar to the others, 
and an added advantage is that you don’t need a sampling frame of 
the whole population in order to achieve it. As an example, if you were 
surveying trees and used particular forests as your cluster, you would 
only need to know about each tree within only the forests you’d selected.
The problem with cluster sampling is that it might not be entirely 
random. As an example, it’s likely that all of the gumballs in a packet 
will have been produced by the same factory. If there are differences 
between the factories, you may not pick these up.
...or even systematic sampling
With systematic sampling, you list the population in some sort of order, 
and then survey every kth item, where k is some number. As an example, 
you could choose to sample every 10th gumball.
Systematic sampling is relatively quick and easy, but there’s one key 
disadvantage. If there’s some sort of cyclic pattern in the population, 
your sample will be biased. As an example, if gumballs are produced 
such that every 10th gumball is red, you will end up only sampling red 
gumballs, and this could lead to you drawing misleading conclusions 
about your population.
Each packet forms a cluster.
You can pick every 10th gumball to get a systematic sample.
Download at WoweBook.Com

434    Chapter 10
Q: Does using one of these methods 
of sampling guarantee that the sample 
won’t be biased?
A: They don’t guarantee that the sample 
won’t be biased, but they do minimize the 
chances of this happening. By really thinking 
about your target population and how you 
can make your sample representative of it, 
you stand a much better chance of coming 
up with an unbiased, representative sample.
Q: Do I have to use any of these 
methods? Can’t I just choose items at 
random.
A: Choosing items at random is simple 
random sampling. Yes, this is one approach 
you can take, but one thing to be aware of is 
that there is a chance your sample will not 
be representative of the population at large.
Q: But why? Surely if I choose items 
at random, then my sample is bound to 
be representative of the target population.
A: Not necessarily. You see, if you choose 
sampling units at random, then there’s a 
chance that purely at random, you could 
choose a sample that doesn’t effectively 
represent the target population. As an 
example, if you choose customers of the 
Statsville Health Club completely at random, 
there’s a chance that you might choose only 
attendees of one particular class, or of one 
particular gender. 
     
  
There might also be a case where you think 
you’re sampling at random, when really 
you’re not. As an example, if you conduct a 
survey to find out customer satisfaction, but 
leave it up to customers whether or not they 
respond, you may well end up with a biased 
sample as customers have to be sufficiently 
motivated to respond. The customers who 
are most motivated to take part in the survey 
will be those who are either strongly satisfied 
or strongly dissatisfied. You are less likely to 
hear from those customers without strong 
feelings, yet those people may make up the 
bulk of the population.
Q: How about if I just increase the size 
of my sample? Will that get around bias?
A: The larger your sample, the less 
chance there is of your sample being 
biased, and this is one way of minimizing the 
chances of getting a biased sample using 
simple random sampling. The trouble is, the 
larger your sample, the more cumbersome 
and time-consuming it can be to gather data.
Q: What’s the difference between 
stratified sampling and clustered 
sampling?
A: With stratified sampling, you divide 
the population into different groups or strata, 
where all the units within a stratum are as 
similar to each other as possible. In other 
words, you take some characteristic or 
property such as gender, and use this as the 
basis for the strata. Once you’ve split the 
population into strata, you perform simple 
random sampling on each stratum. 
  
With clustered sampling, your aim is to 
divide the population into clusters, trying to 
make the clusters as alike as possible. You 
then use simple random sampling to choose 
clusters, and then sample everything in 
those clusters.
Q: I see. So with stratified sampling, 
you make each stratum as different as 
possible, and with clustered sampling, 
you make each cluster as similar as 
possible.
A: Exactly.
Q: So what about systematic 
sampling?
A: With systematic sampling, you choose 
a number, k, and then choose every kth 
item for your sample. This way of sampling 
is fairly quick and easy, but it doesn’t mean 
that your sample will be representative of 
the population. In fact, this sort of sampling 
can only be used effectively if there are no 
repetitive patterns or organization in the 
sampling frame
Q: Drawing lots sounds antiquated. 
Do people still do that?
A: It’s not as common as it used to be, 
but it’s still a way of sampling.
there are no dumb questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    435
using statistical sampling
1. How could you apply simple random sampling to this problem?
2. How could you apply stratified sampling?
3. What about cluster sampling?
You’ve been given 10 boxes of chocolates and been asked to sample the chocolates in them. 
There are whilte, milk, and dark chocolates in the boxes. Your target population is all of the 
chocolates, and the sampling unit is one chocolate.
Download at WoweBook.Com

436    Chapter 10
1. How could you apply simple random sampling to this problem?
2. How could you apply stratified sampling?
3. What about cluster sampling?
You’ve been given 10 boxes of chocolates and been asked to sample the chocolates in them. 
There are whilte, milk, and dark chocolates in the boxes. Your target population is all of the 
chocolates, and the sampling unit is one chocolate.
You could apply simple random sampling by choosing chocolates at random, either through drawing 
lots or using random numbers. That way, each chocolate stands an equal chance of being sampled.
For stratified smpling, you divide the chocolates into strata and apply simple random sampling to 
each one. Each strata comprises of a group of chocolates with similar characteristics, so you could 
use the different types of chocolate. One stratum could be white chocolates, another one could be 
milk chocolates, and the final one could be dark chocolates.
For cluster sampling, you divide the chocolates into groups, but this time each group needs to be 
similar. Assuming each box of chocolates is similar, you could take one of the boxes, and sample all of 
the chocolates in it.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    437
using statistical sampling
How would you go about conducting a sample survey of Mighty Gumball’s super-long-lasting 
gumballs? The gumballs come in four different colors, and they’re all made in the same factory. 
Assume you have to start your sample from scratch.
Download at WoweBook.Com

438    Chapter 10
How would you go about conducting a sample survey of Mighty Gumball’s super-long-lasting 
gumballs? The gumballs come in four different colors, and they’re all made in the same factory. 
Assume you have to start your sample from scratch.
A population is the entire collection 
of things you are studying. 
A sample is a relatively small 
selection taken from the population 
that you can use to draw conclusions 
about the population itself.
To take a sample, start off by defining 
your target population, the population 
you want to study. Then decide on 
your sampling units, the sorts of 
things you need to sample. Once 
you’ve done that, draw up a sampling 
frame, a list of all the sampling units 
in your target population.
A sample is biased if it isn’t 
representative of your target 
population.
Simple random sampling is where 
you choose sampling units at random 
to form your sample. This can be 





with or without replacement. You can 
perform simple random sampling by 
drawing lots or using random number 
generators.
Stratified sampling is where you 
divide the population into groups of 
similar units or strata. Each stratum 
is as different from the others as 
possible. Once you’ve done this, you 
perform simple random sampling 
within each stratum.
Cluster sampling is where you 
divide the population into clusters 
where each cluster is as similar 
to the others as possible. You use 
simple random sampling to choose 
a selection of clusters. You then 
sample every unit in these clusters.
Systematic sampling is where you 
choose a number, k, and sample 
every kth unit.



The target population is all of Mighty Gumball’s super-long-lasting gumballs, and the sampling unit is an 
individual gumball. For the sampling frame, we ideally need some sort of numbered list of the gumballs, but 
it’s likely that this isn’t practical. Instead, we’ll settle for a list showing how many gumballs there are in the 
population for each color.
The type of sampling you use is subjective, but we’d choose to use stratified sampling, as this may be the best 
way of coming up with an unbiased sample. We’d divide the gumballs into their different colors and then use 
simple random sampling to choose a proportionate number of each of the four colors. We would then use these 
for our sample.
Don’t worry if you got a different answer. The key thing is to think through how you can best make your 
survey representative of the population, and you may have different ideas.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    439
using statistical sampling
Mighty Gumball has a sample
With your help, Mighty Gumball has gathered a sample of their 
super-long-lasting gumballs. This means that rather than perform 
taste tests on the entire gumball population, they can use their 
sample instead.
That’s great! It 
means we’ll save time, 
money, and teeth.
So what’s next?
We’ve looked at how we can put together a representative sample, 
but what we haven’t looked at is how we can use it. We know that 
an unbiased sample shares the same characteristics as its parent 
population, but what’s the best way of analyzing this?
Keep reading, and we’ll show you how in the next chapter.
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    441
estimating populations and samples
11
Making Predictions
...I mean, men! They’re all 
the same. Once you’ve met 
one, you’ve met them all!
Wouldn’t it be great if you could tell what a population was 
like, just by taking one sample? 
Before you can claim full sample mastery, you need to know how to use your samples 
to best effect once you’ve collected them. This means using them to accurately predict 
what the population will be like and coming up with a way of saying how reliable your 
predictions are. In this chapter, we’ll show you how knowing your sample helps you get to 
know your population, and vice versa.
Download at WoweBook.Com

442    Chapter 11
So how long does flavor really last for?
With your help, Mighty Gumball has pulled together an unbiased 
sample of super-long-lasting gumballs. They’ve tested each of the 
gumballs in the sample and collected lots of data about how long 
gumball flavor within the sample lasts.
There’s just one problem...
I don’t care how long flavor lasts in the sample. 
What I do care about is flavor duration in the 
population. That way, I can say how much longer our 
gumballs last than the competing brand.
To satisfy the CEO, we’re going to need to find both the mean 
and the variance of flavor duration in the whole Mighty Gumball 
population. 
Here’s the data we gathered from the sample. How do you think 
we can use it to tell us what the mean of the population is?
Take a look at the data. How would you use this data to estimate the mean 
and variance of the population? How reliable do you think your estimate will 
be? Why?
61.9   62.6   63.3   64.8   65.1
66.4   67.1   67.2   68.7   69.9
Here’s how long 
flavor lasts for 
in minutes
making estimates using a sample
Mighty Gumball’s pugilistic CEO
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    443
estimating populations and samples
So how can we use the results of the sample taste test to tell us the mean 
amount of time gumball flavor lasts for in the general gumball population?
The answer is actually pretty intuitive. We assume that the mean flavor 
duration of the gumballs in the sample matches that of the population. In 
other words, we find the mean of the sample and use it as the mean for the 
population too.
Here’s a sketch showing the distribution of the sample, and what you’d 
expect the distribution of the population to look like based on the sample. 
You’d expect the distribution of the population to be a similar shape to 
that of the sample, so you can assume that the mean of the sample and 
population have about the same value.
So are you saying that 
the mean of the sample 
exactly matches the mean 
of the population?
We can’t say that they exactly match, but 
it’s the best estimate we can make.
Based on what we know, the mean of the sample is the best 
estimate we can make for the mean of the population. It’s 
the most likely value for the population mean that we can 
come up with based on the information that we have.
The mean of the sample is called a point estimator for 
the population mean. In other words, it’s a calculation 
based on the sample data that provides a good estimate for 
the mean of the population.
You’d expect the 
population and sample mean 
to be about the same
Sample vs. Population
flavor duration
frequency
Sample
Population
Let’s start by estimating the population mean
Download at WoweBook.Com

444    Chapter 11
Up until now, we’ve been dealing with actual values of population parameters 
such as the mean, μ, or the variance, σ2. We’ve either been able to calculate 
these for ourselves, or we’ve been told what they are.
This time around we don’t know the exact value of the population parameters. 
Instead of calculating them using the population, we estimate them using 
the sample data instead. To do this, we use point estimators to come up with a 
best guess of the population parameters. 
A point estimator of a population parameter is some function or calculation 
that can be used to estimate the value of the population parameter. As an 
example, the point estimator of the population mean is the mean of the sample, 
as we can use the sample mean to estimate the population mean.
Point estimators use 
sample data...
...to estimate the 
population parameters.
We differentiate between an actual population parameter and its point 
estimator using the ^ symbol. As an example, we use the symbol μ to represent 
the population mean, and  to represent its estimator. So to show that you’re 
dealing with the point estimator of a particular population parameter, take the 
symbol of the population parameter, and top it with a ^.
μ
I’m the population 
mean, the real thing.
See this hat I’m wearing? 
It means I’m a point estimator. 
If you don’t have the exact 
value of the mean, then I’m the 
next best thing.
μ^
The point estimator for the 
population mean looks like the mean 
itself, except it’s topped with a ^.
Point estimators can approximate population parameters
all about point estimators
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    445
estimating populations and samples
x = Σx
       n
x is the mean of 
the sample.
Add together the numbers 
in the sample, and divide by 
how many there are.
It occurs to me that we have a 
symbol for the population mean and 
one for its point estimator. Is there 
a symbol for the sample mean too?
There’s a shorthand way of writing the sample mean.
The symbol μ has a very precise meaning. It’s the mean of the population. 
We have a different way to represent the mean of the sample so that we 
don’t get confused about which mean we’re talking about. To represent the 
sample mean, we use the symbol x (pronounced “x bar”). That way, we 
know that if someone refers to μ, they’re referring to the population mean, 
and if they refer to x, they’re referring to the sample mean.
x is the sample equivalent of μ, and you calculate it in the same way you 
would the population mean. You add together all the data in your sample, 
and then divide by however many items there are. In other words, if your 
sample size is n,
We can use this to write a shorthand expression for the point estimator for 
the population. Since we can estimate the population mean using the mean 
of the sample, this means that
 = x
Use the sample data to estimate the value of the population 
mean. Here’s a reminder of the data:
61.9   62.6   63.3   64.8   65.1   66.4   67.1   67.2   68.7   69.9
We estimate the mean 
of the population...
...using the mean of the sample.
Download at WoweBook.Com

446    Chapter 11
Use the sample data to estimate the value of the population 
mean. Here’s a reminder of the data:
Q: Surely the mean is just the mean. 
Why are there so many different symbols 
for it?
A: There are three different concepts at 
work. There’s the mean of the population, 
the mean of the sample, and the point 
estimator for the population mean. 
 
The population mean is represented 
by μ. This is the sort of mean that we’ve 
encountered throughout the book so far, and 
you find it by adding together all the data in 
the population and dividing by the size of the 
population. 
 
The sample mean is represented by x. 
You find it in the same way that you find μ, 
except that this time your data comes from 
a sample. To calculate x, you add together 
the data in your sample, and divide by the 
size of it. 
 
 
 
 
 
The point estimator for μ is represented by 
μ. It’s effectively a best guess for what you 
think the population mean is, based on the 
sample data.
Q: So does that mean that we can find 
μ by just taking the mean of a sample?
A: We can’t find the exact value of 
μ using a sample, but if the sample is 
unbiased, it gives us a very good estimate. 
In other words, we can use the sample data 
to find μ, not the true value of μ itself.
Q: But what about if the sample is 
biased? How do we come up with an 
estimate for μ then?
A: This is where it’s important to make 
your sample as unbiased as possible. If all 
the data you have comes from your sample, 
then that’s what you need to use as the 
basis for your estimate. If your sample is 
biased, then this means that your estimate 
for μ is likely to be inaccurate, and it may 
lead you into making wrong decisions.
Q: Does the size of the sample matter?
A: In general, the larger the size of 
your sample, the more accurate your point 
estimator is likely to be.
61.9   62.6   63.3   64.8   65.1   66.4   67.1   67.2   68.7   69.9
We can estimate the population mean by calculating the mean of the sample.
μ = x = 61.9 + 62.6 + 63.3 + 64.8 + 65.1 + 66.4 + 67.1 + 67.2 + 68.7 + 69.9
	
	
	
	
	
10
        = 657/10
        = 65.7
^
^
^
solutions and questions
μ is the mean of the 
population, x is the 
mean of the sample, 
and μ is the point 
estimator for μ.
^
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    447
estimating populations and samples
A point estimator is an estimate for the value of a 
population parameter, derived from sample data.
The ^ symbol is added to the population parameter 
when you’re talking about its point estimator. As an 
example, the point estimator for μ is μ.
The mean of a sample is represented as x. To find the 
mean of the sample, use the formula 
 
	
	
x = Σx 
	
	
       n 
 
where x represents the values in the sample, and n is 
the sample size.



The point estimator for the population mean is found by 
calculating x. In other words, 
 
	
	
μ = x 
 
This means that if you want a good estimate for the true 
value of the population mean, you can use the mean of 
the sample.

^
^
This looks great! We can use your 
work in our television commercials to say 
how long gumball flavor lasts for, and it 
beats our main rival, hands down. Just one 
question: how much variation do you expect 
there to be?
You’ve come up with a good estimate 
for the population mean, but what 
about the variance?
If we can come up with a good estimate for the 
population variance, then the CEO will be able to 
tell how much variation in flavor duration there’s 
likely to be in the gumball population, based on 
the results of the sample data. 
Download at WoweBook.Com

448    Chapter 11
The variance of the data in the sample may not be 
the best way of estimating the population variance.
You already know that the variance of a set of data measures the way in 
which values are dispersed from the mean. When you choose a sample, 
you have a smaller number of values than with the population, and since 
you have fewer values, there’s a good chance they’re more clustered 
around the mean than they would be in the population. More extreme 
values are less likely to be in your sample, as there are generally fewer of 
them.
That’s easy. The variance of the 
sample is bound to be the same 
as that of the population. We can 
use the sample variance to estimate 
the population variance.
Let’s estimate the population variance
So far we’ve seen how we can use the sample mean to estimate the mean 
of the population. This means that we have a way of estimating what the 
mean flavor duration is for the super-long-lasting gumball population.
To satisfy the Mighty Gumball CEO, we also need to come up with a good 
estimate for the population variance.
So what can we use as a point estimator for the population variance? In 
other words, how can we use the sample data to find 2?
So what would be a better estimate of the population variance?
Sample vs. Population
flavor duration
frequency
Sample
Population
There are fewer values 
in the sample, so there’s 
a good chance that 
more extreme values will 
be excluded.
point estimator for population variance
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    449
estimating populations and samples
The problem with using the sample variance to estimate that of the population 
is that it tends to be slightly too low. The sample variance tends to be slightly 
less than the variance of the population, and the degree to which this holds 
depends on the number of values in the sample. If the number in the sample 
is small, there’s likely to be a bigger difference between the sample and 
population variances than if the size of the sample is large.
What we need is a better way of estimating the variance of the population, 
some function of the sample data that gives a slightly higher result than the 
variance of all the values in the sample.
In other words, we take each item in the sample, subtract the sample mean, and 
then square the result. We then add all of the results together, and divide by the 
number of items in the sample minus 1. This is just like finding the variance of 
the values in the sample, but dividing by n – 1 instead of n.
So what is the estimator?
Rather than take the variance of all the data in the sample to estimate the 
population variance, there’s something else we can use instead. If the size of 
the sample is n, we can estimate the population variance using
σ2 = Σ(x - x)2
	
  n - 1
^
So how is that a 
better estimate?
This formula is a closer match to the value of the 
population variance.
Dividing a set of numbers by n – 1 gives a higher result than 
dividing by n, and this difference is most noticeable when n is fairly 
small. This means that the formula is similar to the variance of the 
sample data, but gives a slightly higher result.
The population variance tends to be higher than the variance of 
the data in the sample. This means that this formula is a slightly 
better point estimator for the population variance.
Take each item in the sample, subtract the sample mean, 
square the result, then add the lot together.
Divide by the number in the sample minus 1.
Estimator for the 
population variance
We need a different point estimator than sample variance
Download at WoweBook.Com

450    Chapter 11
Variance Up Close
Estimating the population variance
If you need to estimate the variance of a population using sample data, use
σ2 = Σ(x - x)2
	
  n - 1
n - 1, not n, where n is the size of the 
sample. This time it’s an estimate..
Instead of calculating the variance of an actual population of n values, you 
have to estimate the variance of the population, based on the sample of data 
you have. To make you estimate a bit more accurate, you divide by n - 1 
instead of n, as this gives a slightly higher result.
The formula for the population variance point estimator is usually written 
s2, so
Sample mean
Point estimator for 
the population variance, 
based on your sample.
Knowing what formula you should use to find the variance can be confusing. 
There’s one formula for population variance σ2, and a slightly different one 
for its point estimator σ2. So which formula should you use when?
Population variance
If you want to find the exact variance of a population and you have data for 
the whole population, use 
σ2 = Σ(x - μ)2
	
     n
Population mean
Size of the population
In this situation, you have all the data for your population. You know what 
the mean is for your population, and you want to find the variance of all of 
these values. This is the calculation that you’ve seen throughout this book 
so far.
Population variance
^
^
s2 = Σ(x - x)2
	
  n - 1
where
σ2 = s2
^
This is similar to using x to represent the sample mean.
Point estimator 
for the 
population 
variance
s2 gives the 
formula based on 
the sample data
variance in depth
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    451
estimating populations and samples
	
       Some books tell you to 
divide by n – 1 for a 
sample, and some tell 
you to divide by n.
This is because different 
books make different assumptions about 
what you’re using your sample for. If 
you’re using the sample to estimate the 
population variance, then you need to 
divide by n – 1. You only need to divide 
by n if you want to calculate the variance 
of that exact set of values.
If you’re taking a statistics exam, check 
the approach that your exam board takes.
Which formula’s which?
Sometimes it can be tricky deciding whether you should 
divide by n for the variance, or whether you should divide by 
n – 1. The golden rule to remember is that dividing by n gives 
you the actual variance for the set of data that you 
have.
If you have the data for the entire population, then dividing 
by n gives you the actual variance of the population. You 
need to use the formula for σ2 and divide by n.
If you have a sample of data from the population, then 
chances are you’ll want to use this to estimate the variance of 
the population. This means that you need to use the formula 
for s2 and divide by n – 1.
Here’s a reminder of the data from the Mighty Gumball sample. 
What do you estimate the population variance to be?
61.9   62.6   63.3   64.8   65.1   66.4   67.1   67.2   68.7   69.9
Download at WoweBook.Com

452    Chapter 11
Here’s a reminder of the data from the Mighty Gumball sample. 
What do you estimate the population variance to be?
61.9   62.6   63.3   64.8   65.1   66.4   67.1   67.2   68.7   69.9
We can estimate the population variance by calculating s2.
σ2 = s2
    =   (x - x)2
          n - 1
    = (-3.8)2 + (-3.1)2 + (-2.4)2 + (-0.9)2 + (-0.6)2 + (0.7)2 + (1.4)2 + (1.5)2 + (3)2 + (4.2)2
	
	
	
	
	
    9
    = 14.44 + 9.61 + 5.76 + 0.81 + 0.36 + 0.49 + 1.96 + 2.25 + 9 + 17.64
	
	
	
	
       9
    = 62.32/9
    = 6.92 (to 2 decimal places)
^
Q: Why do I divide by n – 1 for the 
sample variance? Why can’t I divide by 
n?
A: You divide by n – 1 for a sample 
because most of the time, you use your 
sample data to estimate the variance of the 
population. Dividing by n – 1 gives you a 
slightly more accurate result than dividing by 
n. This is because the variance of values in 
the sample is likely to be slightly lower than 
the population variance.  
 
Q: Is there some mathematical basis 
for this?
A: Yes there is. It’s something that we’re 
going to touch upon at the end of the chapter, 
but hold onto that thought; it’s a good one.
Q: How do I remember which symbols 
are used for the population, and which 
are used for the sample?
A: In general, Greek letters are used for 
the population, and normal Roman letters 
are used for the mean and variance for the 
sample.
Q: Is there a point estimator for the 
standard deviation in the same way that 
there is for the variance? How do I find it?
A: If you need to estimate the standard 
deviation, start by calculating the estimator 
for the variance. The estimator for the 
standard deviation is the square root of this. 
more solutions and questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    453
estimating populations and samples
Mighty Gumball has done more sampling
The Mighty Gumball CEO is so inspired by the results of the taste test that 
he’s asked for another sampling exercise that he can use for his television 
advertisements. This time, the CEO wants to be able to say how popular 
Mighty Gumball’s candy is compared with that of their main rival.
The Mighty Gumball staff have asked a random sample of people whether 
they prefer gumballs produced by Mighty Gumball or whether they prefer 
those of their main rival. They’re hoping they can use the results to predict 
what proportion of the population is likely to prefer Mighty Gumball.
Mighty Gumball has found that in a sample of 40 people, 32 of them prefer 
their gumballs. The other 8 prefer those of their rival.
How would you find the proportion of people in the sample who prefer Mighty 
Gumball’s candy? What distribution do you think this follows? How do you think 
you could apply this to the population?
Ewww! These 
gumballs are gross.
I’ll choose Mighty 
Gumball over any 
other manufacturer.
Download at WoweBook.Com

454    Chapter 11
It’s a question of proportion
For the latest Mighty Gumball sample, the thing the CEO is interested in is 
whether or not each person prefers Mighty Gumball confectionery to that of 
their chief rival. In other words, every person who prefers Mighty Gumball 
candy can be classified as a success. 
So how do we use the sample data to predict the proportion of successes in 
the population?
Predicting population proportion
If we use X to represent the number of successes in the population, then X 
follows a binomial distribution with parameters n and p. n is the number of 
people in the population, and p is the proportion of successes. 
In the same way that our best estimate of the population mean is the 
mean of the sample, our best guess for the proportion of successes in the 
population has to be the proportion of successes in the sample. This means 
that if we can find the proportion of people in the sample who prefer Mighty 
Gumball’s treats, we’ll have a good estimate for the proportion of people who 
prefer Mighty Gumball in the general population.
We can find the proportion of successes in the sample by taking the total 
number of people who prefer Mighty Gumball, and then dividing by 
the total number of people in the sample. If we use ps to represent the 
proportion of successes in the sample, then we can estimate the proportion of 
successes in the population using
p = ps
^
In other words, we can use the proportion of successes in the sample as a 
point estimator for the proportion of successes in the population. In the case 
of the company’s latest sample, 32 out of 40 people prefer Mighty Gumball 
confectionery, which means that ps = 0.8. Therefore, the point estimator for 
the proportion of successes in the population is also 0.8.
where
ps = number of successes
	
  number in sample
Proportion of successes in the 
sample
Point estimator for the proportion 
of successes in the population
point estimators for proportions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    455
estimating populations and samples
Probability and proportion are related
There’s actually a very close relationship between probability and 
proportion. 
Imagine you have a population for which you want to find the 
proportion of successes. To calculate this proportion, you take the 
number of successes, and divide by the size of the population.
Now suppose you want to calculate the probability of choosing a 
success from the population at random. To derive this probability, 
you take the number of successes in the population, and divide 
by the size of the population. In other words, you derive the 
probability of getting a success in exactly the same way 
as you derive the proportion of successes. 
We use the letter p to represent the probability of success in the 
population, but we could easily use p to represent proportion 
instead—they have the same value.
p = probability = proportion
So am I right in thinking that 
probability and proportion are 
related? They’re both represented by 
p, and they sound like they’re similar.
Mighty Gumball takes another sample of their super-long-lasting 
gumballs, and finds that in the sample, 10 out of 40 people prefer 
the pink gumballs to all other colors. What proportion of people 
prefer pink gumballs in the population? What’s the probability of 
choosing someone from the population who doesn’t prefer pink 
gumballs?
Download at WoweBook.Com

456    Chapter 11
Mighty Gumball takes another sample of their super-long-lasting 
gumballs, and finds that in the sample, 10 out of 40 people prefer 
the pink gumballs to all other colors. What proportion of people 
prefer pink gumballs in the population? What’s the probability of 
choosing someone from the population who doesn’t prefer pink 
gumballs?
We can estimate the population proportion with the sample proportion. This gives us
p = ps = 10/40
        = 0.25
The probability of choosing someone from the population who doesn’t prefer pink gumballs is
P(Preference not Pink) = 1 - p
	
	
       = 1 - 0.25
	
	
       = 0.75
^
^
Q: So is proportion the same thing as 
probability?
A: The proportion is the number of 
successes in your population, divided by 
the size of your population. This is the 
same calculation you would use to calculate 
probability for a binomial distribution.
Q: Does proportion just apply to the 
binomial distribution? What about other 
probability distributions?
A: Out of all the probability distributions 
we’ve covered, the only one which has 
any bearing on proportion is the binomial 
distribution. It’s specific to the sorts of 
problems you have with this distribution. 
Q: Is the proportion of the sample the 
same as the proportion of the population?
A: The proportion of the sample can be 
used as a point estimator for the proportion 
of the population. It’s effectively a best 
guess as to what the value of the population 
proportion is.
Q: Is that still the case if the sample is 
biased in some way? How do I estimate 
proportion from a biased sample?
A: The key here is to make sure that 
your sample is unbiased, as this is what you 
base your estimate on. If your sample is 
biased, this means that you will come with 
an inaccurate estimate for the population 
proportion. This is the case with other point 
estimators too.
Q: So how do I make sure my sample 
is unbiased?
A: Going through the points we 
raised in the previous chapter is a good 
way of making sure your sample is as 
representative as possible. The hard work 
you put in to preparing your sample is 
worth it because it means that your point 
estimators are a more accurate reflection of 
the population itself.
yet more solutions and questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    457
estimating populations and samples
This is awesome! 
We have a lot of 
impressive statistics 
we can use in our 
advertising.
10 
40
people 
prefer 
pink!
The point estimator for the population 
variance is given by 
 
	
	
σ2 = s2 
 
where s2 is given by 
 
	
	
Σ(x - x)2 
	
	
   n - 1 
The population proportion is represented 
using p. It’s the proportion of successes within 
the population.


The point estimator for p is given by ps, 
where ps is the proportion of successes in the 
sample. 
 
	
	
p = ps 
You calculate ps by dividing the number of 
successes in the sample by the size of the 
sample.  
 
	
ps = number of successes 
	
          number in sample


^
^
Download at WoweBook.Com

458    Chapter 11
Buy your gumballs here!
Remember the Statsville Cinema? They’re recently been authorized 
to sell Mighty Gumball products to film-goers, and it’s a move that’s 
proving popular with most of their customers.
The trouble is, not everybody’s happy.
I really like red gumballs, 
and I’d rather not eat the 
other colors. How many red 
gumballs come in the box?
Introducing new jumbo boxes
The cinema sells mixed boxes of gumballs, and this weekend, 
they’re putting on a film marathon of classic films.
The event looks like it’s going to be popular, and tickets are selling 
well. The trouble is, some people get cranky if they don’t get their 
fix of red gumballs.
A jumbo box of gumballs is meant for sharing, and each box 
contains 100 gumballs. 25% of gumballs in the entire gumball 
population are red.
I need 40 red gumballs to 
make it through the movie. 
Is that likely? If there 
aren’t enough red gumballs in 
the box, I’ll get another snack 
instead.
We need to find the probability that in one 
particular jumbo box, 40 or more of the 
gumballs will be red.
Since there are 100 gumballs per box, that means we need 
to find the probability that 40% of the gumballs in this box 
are red, given that 25% of the gumball population is red.
finding sample probabilities
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    459
estimating populations and samples
So how does this relate to sampling?
So far, we’ve looked at how to put together an unbiased sample, and 
how to use samples to find point estimators for population parameters.
This time around, the situation’s different. Here, we’re told what the 
population parameters are, and we have to work out probabilities 
for one particular jumbo box of gumballs. In other words, instead 
of working out probabilities for the population, we need to work out 
probabilities for the sample proportion.
Isn’t that the sort of thing 
that we were doing before? 
What’s the big deal?
This time, we’re looking for probabilities for a 
sample, not a population.
Rather than work out the probability of getting particular frequencies 
or values in a probability distribution, this time around we need to find 
probabilities for the sample proportion itself. We need to figure 
out the probability of getting this particular result in this particular box 
of gumballs. 
Before we can work out probabilities for this, we need to figure out the 
probability distribution for the sample proportion. Here’s what we need 
to do:
Look at all possible samples the same size as the one we’re 
considering.
If we have a sample of size n, we need to consider all possible samples of 
size n. There are 100 gumballs in the box, so in this case n is 100.
1
Look at the distribution formed by all the samples, and 
find the expectation and variance for the proportion.
Every sample is different, so the proportion of red gumballs in each box 
of gumballs will probably vary.
2
Once we know how the proportion is distributed, use it to 
find probabilities.
Knowing how the proportion of successes in a sample is distributed 
means we can use it to find probabilities for the proportion in a random 
sample—in this case, a jumbo box of gumballs.
3
Let’s take a look at how to do this.
Download at WoweBook.Com

460    Chapter 11
Sample
The sampling distribution of proportions
So how do we find the distribution of the sample proportions?
Let’s start with the gumball population. We’ve been told what the 
proportion of red gumballs is in the population, and we can represent 
this as p. In other words, p = 0.25.
Each jumbo box of gumballs is effectively a sample of gumballs taken from the 
population. Each box contains 100 gumballs, so the sample size is 100. Let’s 
represent this with n. 
If we use the random variable X to represent the number of red gumballs in 
the sample, then X ~ B(n, p), where n = 100 and p = 0.25. 
The proportion of red gumballs in the sample depends on X, the number of 
red gumballs in the sample. This means that the proportion itself is a random 
variable. We can write this as Ps, where Ps = X/n
Ps = X
        n
X ~ B(n, p)
We don’t know the exact number 
of red gumballs in the sample, but 
we know its distribution.
Ps represents the proportion 
of successes in the sample.
25% of gumballs in the 
gumball population are red, 
so p = 0.25.
Population of gumballs
distribution of sample proportions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    461
estimating populations and samples
There are many possible samples we could have taken of size n. Each 
possible sample would comprise n gumballs, and the number of red 
gumballs in each would follow the same distribution. For each sample, the 
number of red gumballs is distributed as B(n, p), and the proportion of 
successes is given by X/n. 
Each sample contains 
n elements, just like 
the previous one.
Different samples
X ~ B(n, p) 
Ps = X/n
We can form a distribution out of all the sample proportions using all of the 
possible samples. This is called the sampling distribution of proportions, 
or the distribution of Ps.
X ~ B(n, p) 
Ps = X/n
X ~ B(n, p) 
Ps = X/n
I get it. The sampling distribution of proportions 
is really a probability distribution made up of 
the proportions of all possible samples of size n. 
If we know how the proportions are distributed, 
we’ll be able to use it to find probabilities for the 
proportion of one particular sample.
Using the sampling distribution of proportions, 
you can find probabilities for the proportion 
of successes in a sample of size n, chosen at 
random. 
This means that we can use it to find the probability that the 
proportion of red gumballs in one particular jumbo box of gumballs 
will be at least 40%.
But before we can do that, we need to know what the expectation 
and variance is for the distribution.
Download at WoweBook.Com

462    Chapter 11
So what’s the expectation of Ps?
So far we’ve seen how we can form a distribution from the proportions of all 
possible samples of size n. Before we can use it to calculate probabilities, we need 
to know more about it. In particular, we need to know what the expectation and 
variance is of the distribution. 
Let’s start with the expectation. Intuitively, we’d expect the proportion of red 
gumballs in the sample to match the proportion of red gumballs in the population. 
If 25% of the gumball population is red, then you’d expect 25% of the gumballs in 
the sample to be red also. 
E(Ps) = E(X)
	
n
         = np
             n
         = p
Now X is the number of red gumballs in the sample. If we count the number of 
red gumballs as the number of successes, then X ~ B(n, p). 
You’ve already seen that for a binomial distribution, E(X) = np. This means that
E(Ps ) = E(
X)
	
     n 
         = E(X)
	
 n
E(X) = np
Intuitively, you’d expect 
the proportion of red 
gumballs to be the same 
both in the sample and the 
population.
So what’s the expectation of Ps?
We want to find E(Ps), where Ps = X/n. In other words, we want to find the expected 
value of the sample proportion, where the sample proportion is equal to the number 
of red gumballs divided by the total number of gumballs in the sample. This gives us
This result ties in with what we intuitively expect. We can expect the proportion of 
successes in the sample to match the proportion of successes in the population.
expectation and variance of Ps
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    463
estimating populations and samples
And what’s the variance of Ps?
Before we can find out any probabilities for the sample proportion, we also 
need to know what the variance is for Ps. We can find the variance in a similar 
way to how we find the expectation.
So what’s Var(Ps)? Let’s start as we did before by using Ps = X/n.
Var(Ps) = Var(
X)
	
           n 
           = Var(X)
	
     n2
As we’ve said before, X is the number of number of red gumballs in 
the sample. If we count the number of red gumballs as the number of 
successes, then X ~ B(n, p). This means that Var(X) = npq, as this is the 
variance for the binomial distribution. This gives us
Taking the square root of the variance gives us the standard deviation of Ps, 
and this tells us how far away from p the sample proportion is likely to be. It’s 
sometimes called the standard error of proportion, as it tells you what the 
error for the proportion is likely to be in the sample.
Standard error of proportion = √
pq
	
	
	
	
	
    n
The standard error of proportion gets smaller as n gets larger. This means 
that the more items there are in your sample, the more reliable your sample 
proportion becomes as an estimator for p.
So how can we use the expectation and variance values we found to calculate 
probabilities for the proportion? Let’s take a look.
This comes from Var(aX) = a2Var(X). 
In this case, a = 1/n.
Var(Ps) = Var(X)
	
     n2
            = npq
	
   n2
            = pq
	
  n
Var(X) = npq
Download at WoweBook.Com

464    Chapter 11
Find the distribution of Ps
So far we’ve found the expectation and variance for Ps, the sampling 
distribution of proportions. We’ve found that if we form a distribution from 
all the sample proportions, then
E(Ps) = p	
	
Var(Ps) = pq
	
	
	
	
     n
We can use this to help us find the probability that the proportion of red 
gumballs in a sample of 100 is at least 40%.
But how? Don’t we need to 
know what the distribution 
of Ps is first?
Right, the distribution of Ps actually depends on 
the size of the samples. 
Here’s a sketch of the distribution for Ps when n is large.
Take a look at the sketch for the distribution of Ps where n is large. How do you 
think Ps is distributed?
Expectation = p
distribution of Ps
variance = pq
n
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    465
estimating populations and samples
Ps follows a normal distribution
When n is large, the distribution of Ps becomes approximately normal. 
By large, we mean greater than 30. The larger n gets, the closer the 
distribution of Ps gets to the normal distribution.
We’ve already found the expectation and variance of Ps, so this means 
that if n is large, 
Ps ~ N(p,
 pq)
	
        n
As Ps follows a normal distribution for n > 30, this means that we can use 
the normal distribution to solve our gumball problem. We can use the 
normal distribution to calculate the probability that the proportion of red 
gumballs in a jumbo box of gumballs will be at least 40%.
There’s just one thing to remember: the sampling distribution needs a 
continuity correction. 
In other words, if you use the normal distribution to approximate 
probabilities for Ps, make sure you apply a continuity correction of 
±1/2n. The exact continuity correction depends on the value of n.
Ps—continuity correction required
The number of successes in each of the samples is discrete, and as it’s 
used to calculate proportion, you need to apply a continuity correction 
when you use the normal distribution to find probabilities. 
We’ve seen before that if X represents the number of successes in the 
sample, then Ps = X/n. The normal continuity correction for X is ±(1/2).
If we substitute this in place of X in the formula Ps = X/n, this means 
that the continuity correction for Ps is given by
Continuity correction = ±(1/2)
	
	
                n
	
	
       = ±1
	
	
           2n
	
	
     If n is very 
large, the 
continuity 
correction can 
be left out.
As n gets larger, the 
continuity correction becomes very 
small, and this means that it makes 
very little difference to the overall 
probability. Some textbooks omit the 
continuity correction altogether.
	
       Sometimes 
statisticians 
disagree about 
how large n 
needs to be.
If you’re taking a statistics exam, 
make sure that you check how 
your exam board defines this.
Download at WoweBook.Com

466    Chapter 11
Q: What’s a sampling distribution?
A: A sampling distribution is what you get 
if you take lots of different samples from a 
single population, all of the same size and 
taken in the same way, and then form a 
distribution out of some key characteristic of 
each sample. This means that the sampling 
distribution of proportions is what you get if 
you form a sampling distribution out of the 
proportions for each of the samples.
Q: Do we actually have to gather all 
possible samples?
A: No, we don’t have to physically form all 
of the samples. Instead we imagine that we 
do, and then come up with expressions for 
the expectation and variance. 
 
Q: So a sampling distribution has an 
expectation and variance? Why?
A: A sampling distribution is a probability 
distribution in the same way as any 
other probability distribution, so it has an 
expectation and variance.  
 
The expectation of the sampling population 
of proportions is like the average value of 
a sample proportion; it’s what you expect 
the proportion of a sample taken from a 
particular population to be.
Q: Why isn’t the variance of Ps the 
same as the population variance σ2?
A: The variance for the sampling 
distribution of proportions describes how 
the sample proportions vary. It doesn’t 
describe how the values themselves vary. 
The variance has a different value because it 
describes a different concept.
Q: So what use does the sampling 
distribution of proportions have?
A: It allows you to work out probabilities 
for the proportion of a sample taken from a 
known population. It gives you an idea of 
what you can expect a sample to be like.
Q: What does the standard error of 
proportion really mean?
A: The standard error is the square root 
of the variance for the sampling distribution. 
In effect, it tells you how far away you can 
expect the sample proportion to be from the 
true value of the population proportion. This 
means it tells you what sort of error you can 
expect to have.
The sampling distribution of proportions is 
what you get if you consider all possible samples 
of size n taken from the same population and form 
a distribution out of their proportions. We use Ps to 
represent the sample proportion random variable.
The expectation and variance of Ps are defined as 
 
	
	
E(Ps) = p 
 
	
	
Var(Ps) = pq/n 
 
where p is the population proportion. 
 


The standard error of proportion is the standard 
deviation of this distribution. It’s given by 
 
	
	
√Var(Ps) 
If n > 30, then Ps follows a normal distribution, so 
 
	
	
Ps ~ N(p, pq/n) 
 
for large n. When working with this, you need to 
apply a continuity correction of 
 
	
	
±  1 
	
	
   2n


no dumb questions and bullet points
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    467
estimating populations and samples
25% of the gumball population are red. What’s the probability that in a box of 100 gumballs, at 
least 40% will be red? We’ll guide you through the steps.
1. If Ps is the proportion of red gumballs in the box, how is Ps distributed?
2. What’s the value of P(Ps ≥ 0.4)? 
Hint: Remember to apply a 
continuity correction.
Download at WoweBook.Com

468    Chapter 11
25% of the gumball population are red. What’s the probability that in a box of 100 gumballs, at 
least 40% will be red? We’ll guide you through the steps.
Let’s use p to represent the probability that a gumball is red. In other words, p = 0.25.
Let’s use Ps to represent the proportion of gumballs in the box that are red.
Ps ~ N(p, pq/n), where p = 0.25, q = 0.75, and n = 100. As pq/n is equal to 0.25 x 0.75 / 100 = 0.001875, 
this gives us
Ps ~ N(0.25, 0.001875)
1. If Ps is the proportion of red gumballs in the box, how is Ps distributed?
2. What’s the value of P(Ps ≥ 0.4)? Hint: Remember that you need to apply a continuity correction.
P(Ps ≥ 0.4) = P(Ps > 0.4 - 1/(2 x 100))
	
     = P(Ps > 0.395)
As Ps ~ N(0.25, 0.001875), we need to find the standard score of 0.395 so that we can look up the result in 
probability tables. This gives us 
z = 0.395 - 0.25
       √0.001875
   = 3.35
P(Z > z) = 1 - P(Z < 3.35)
	
 = 1 - 0.9996
	
 = 0.0004
In other words, the probability that in a box of 100 gumballs, at least 40% will be red, is 0.0004.
A probability of 
0.0004? Forget it. I’m 
getting popcorn instead.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    469
estimating populations and samples
Sampling Distribution of Proportions Up Close
The sampling distribution of proportions is the distribution formed by 
taking the proportions of all possible samples of size n. The proportion 
of successes in a sample is represented by Ps, and it is is distributed as
E(Ps) = p
Var(Ps) = pq
	
     n
When n is large, say bigger than 30, the distribution of Ps becomes 
approximately normal, so
Ps ~ N(p,
 pq)
	
        n
Knowing the probability distribution of Ps is useful because it means that 
given a particular population, we can calculate probabilities for the proportion 
of successes in the sample. We can approximate this with the normal 
distribution, and the larger the size of the sample, the more accurate the 
approximation.
The sampling distribution continuity correction
When you use the normal distribution in this way, it’s important to apply 
a continuity correction. This is because the number of successes in the 
sample is discrete, and it’s used in the calculation of proportion. 
If X represents the number of successes in the sample, then Ps = X/n. The 
continuity correction for X is ±(1/2), so this means the continuity correction is 
given by 
Continuity correction = ±1
	
	
	
      2n
In other words, if you use the normal distribution to approximate 
probabilities for the sampling proportion, make sure you apply a continuity 
correction of ±1/2n.
p
Variance = pq
	
    n
Download at WoweBook.Com

470    Chapter 11
How many gumballs?
Using the sampling distribution of proportions, you’ve successfully 
managed to find the probability of getting a certain proportion of 
successes in one particular sample. This means that you can now use 
samples to predict what the population will be like, and also use your 
knowledge of the population to make predictions about samples.
There’s just one more problem...
The Mighty Gumball CEO has one more problem for you to work on. In 
addition to selling jumbo boxes, gumballs are also sold in handy pocket-
sized packets that you can carry with you wherever you go. 
According to Mighty Gumball’s statistics for the population, the mean 
number of gumballs in each packet is 10, and the variance is 1. The 
trouble is they’ve had a complaint. One of their most faithful customers 
bought 30 packets of gumballs, and he found that the average number of 
gumballs per packet in his sample is only 8.5.
The CEO is concerned that he will lose one of his best customers, and he 
wants to offer him some form of compensation. The trouble is, he doesn’t 
want to compensate all of his customers. He needs to know what the 
probability is of this happening again.
I’m impressed. Really 
impressed. Now, there’s 
just one more thing that 
needs sorting out...
What do you need to know in order to solve this sort of problem?
distribution of sample means
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    471
estimating populations and samples
This is a slightly different problem from last time. We’re told what the 
population mean and variance are for the packets of gumballs, and 
we have a sample of packets we need to figure out probabilities for. 
Instead of working out probabilities for the sample proportion, this 
time we need to work out probabilities for the sample mean.
Before we can work out probabilities for the sample mean, we need to 
figure out its probability distribution. Here’s what we need to do:
Look at all possible samples the same size as the one we’re 
considering.
If we have a sample of size n, we need to consider all possible samples of 
size n. There are 30 packets of gumballs, so in this case, n is 30.
1
Look at the distribution formed by all the samples, and 
find the expectation and variance for the sample mean.
Every sample is different, and the number of gumballs in each packet 
varies.
2
Once we know how the sample mean is distributed, use it to 
find probabilities.
If we know how the means of all possible samples are distributed, we can 
use it to find probabilities for the mean in a random sample, in this case 
the, packets of gumballs.
3
Let’s take a look at how to tackle this.
The population in this case is 
all the packets of gumballs.
The sample comprises 30 
such packets.
We need probabilities for the sample mean
Download at WoweBook.Com

472    Chapter 11
Sample of X
X
E(X) = μ 
Var(X) = σ2
The sampling distribution of the mean
So how do we find the distribution of the sample means? 
Let’s start with the population of gumball packets. We’ve been told what 
the mean and variance is for the population, and we’ll represent these with 
μ and σ2. We can represent the number of gumballs in a packet with X.
Each packet chosen at random is an independent observation of X, 
so each gumball packet follows the same distribution. In other words, if 
Xi represents the number of gumballs in a packet chosen at random, then 
each Xi has an expectation of μ and variance σ2.
Now let’s take a sample of n gumball packets. We can label the number of 
gumballs in packet X1 through Xn. Each Xi is an independent observation 
of X, which means that they follow the same distribution. Each Xi has an 
expectation of μ and variance σ2.
We can represent the mean of gumballs in these n packets of gumballs with 
X. The value of X depends on how many gumballs are in each packet of 
the n pockets, and to calculate it, you add up the total number of gumballs 
and divide by n.
X = X1 + X2 + ... + Xn
	
      n
The number of gumballs 
in each packet follows 
the same distribution.
X represents the 
number of gumballs 
in a packet.
Xi 
E(Xi) = μ 
Var(Xi) = σ2
Xn 
E(Xn) = μ 
Var(Xn) = σ2
Each Xi is an independent 
observation of X, so each 
packet has the same 
expectation and variance 
for the number of gumballs.
This is the mean of the sample, 
the mean number of gumballs in 
the packets.
X1 
E(X1) = μ 
Var(X1) = σ2
distribution of sample means in depth
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    473
estimating populations and samples
There are many possible samples we could have taken of size n. Each 
possible sample comprises n packets, which means that each sample 
comprises n independent observations of X. The number of gumballs 
in each randomly chosen packet follows the same distribution as all the 
others, and we calculate the mean number of gumballs for each sample in 
the same way.
Each sample contains 
n packets, just like 
the previous one.
Samples of X
Sample mean X
Sample mean X
Sample mean X
We can form a distribution out of all the sample means from all possible 
samples. This is called the sampling distribution of means, or the 
distribution of X. 
So does this really help 
us? What does it give us?
This is the mean number 
of gumballs per packet in 
this sample
The sampling distribution of means gives us a way of 
calculating probabilities for the mean of a sample.
Before you can work out the probability of any variable, you need to 
know about its probability distribution, and this means that if you want 
to calculate probabilities for the sample mean, you need to know how the 
sample means are distributed. In our particular case, we want to know 
what the probability is of there being a mean of 8.5 gumballs or fewer in a 
sample of 30 packets of gumballs.
Just as with the sampling distribution of proportions, before we can start 
calculating probabilities, we need to know what the expectation and 
variance are of the distribution.
Download at WoweBook.Com

474    Chapter 11
Find the expectation for X
So far, we’ve looked at how to construct the sampling distribution of 
means. In other words, we consider all possible samples of size n and 
form a distribution out of their means.
Before we can use it to find probabilities, we need to find the 
expectation and variance of X. Let’s start by finding E(X).
Now X is the mean number of gumballs in each packet of gumballs in 
our sample. In other words, 
X = X1 + X2 + ... + Xn
	
      n
where each Xi represents the number of gumballs in the i’th packet of 
gumballs. We can use this to help us find E(X).
E(X) = E(
X1 + X2 + ... + Xn)
	
	
   
n
         = E(
1 
X1 +
 1 
X2 + ... +
 1 
Xn)
	
    n          n                 n
         = E(
1
 X1) + E(
1 
X2) + ... + E(
1
 Xn)
	
    n                   n                           n
          
= 1  ( E( X1) + E(X2) + ... + E(Xn) )
              
n
These two expressions are 
the same, just written in a 
different way.
We can split this into n separate 
expectations because  
E(X + Y) = E(X) + E(Y).
Every expectation includes 1/n, 
so we can take it out of the 
expression. This comes from  
E(aX) = aE(X).
This means that if we know what the expectation is for each Xi, we’ll have 
an expression for E(X).
Now each Xi is an independent observation of X, and we already know 
that E(X) = μ. This means that we can substitute μ for each E(Xi) in the 
above expression.
So where does this get us?
expectation of x
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    475
estimating populations and samples
The expectation of X is μ. 
E(Xi) = μ for every i.
This means that E(X) = μ. In other words, the average of all the possible 
sample means of size n is the mean of the population they’re taken from. 
You’re, in effect, finding the mean of all possible means.
This is actually quite intuitive. It means that overall, you’d expect the average 
number of gumballs per packet in a sample to be the same as the average 
number of gumballs per packet in the population. In our situation, the mean 
number of gumballs in each packet in the population is 10, so this is what 
we’d expect for the sample too.
There are n of these
Let’s replace each E(Xi) with μ.
E(X) = 1 ( μ + μ + ... + μ )
             
n
          = 1 (nμ)
              
n
          = μ
What else do we need to know in order to find probabilities for the sample 
mean? How do you think we can find this?
If the population mean is 10 gumballs 
per packet, you can expect the sample 
mean to be 10 gumballs per packet too.
Download at WoweBook.Com

476    Chapter 11
What about the the variance of X?
So far we know what E(X) is, but before we can figure out any 
probabilities for the sample mean, we need to know what Var(X) is. 
This will bring us one step closer to finding out what the distribution 
of X is like.
Why do we need to find 
Var(X)? Isn’t it the same 
as Var(X)? Isn’t it just σ2?
The distribution of X is different from the 
distribution of X.
X represents the number of gumballs in a packet. We’ve been 
told what the mean number of gumballs in a packet is, and 
we’ve also been given the variance.
The mean number of 
gumballs per packet is 10, 
and the variance is 1.
X represents the mean number of gumballs in a sample, so the 
distribution of X represents how the means of all possible samples are 
distributed. E(X) refers to the mean value of the sample means, and 
Var(X) refers to how they vary.
Finding Var(X) is actually a very similar process to finding E(X).
variance of x
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    477
estimating populations and samples
               = Var(                                                             )
Statistics Magnets
Here are some equations for finding an expression for the variance of the sample mean. 
Unfortunately, some parts of the equations have fallen off. Your task is to fill in the blanks 
below by putting the magnets back in the right positions and derive the variance of the 
sample mean.
σ2 + σ2 + ... + σ2
 1 
X1 +
 1 
X2 + ... + 
1 
Xn
 n       n            n 
 1 
X1
 n
 1 
X2
 n
 1 
Xn
 n
= Var(                                                        ) + Var(                                                      ) + ... + Var(                                                     )
=
                                                        
( Var( X1) + Var(X2) + ... + Var(Xn) )
= 1  (
                                                        
)
   
n2
= n x 1 σ2
          n2
= 
                                                        
σ2
n
Var(X) = Var(
X1 + X2 + ... + Xn)
                                       
n
Hint: Look back at how we 
found E(X). It might help 
you.
1
n
2
( )
Download at WoweBook.Com

478    Chapter 11
 1 
X1 +
 1 
X2 + ... + 
1 
Xn
 n       n            n 
               = Var(                                                             )
= Var(                                                        ) + Var(                                                      ) + ... + Var(                                                     )
=
                                                        
( Var( X1) + Var(X2) + ... + Var(Xn) )
= 1  (
                                                        
)
   
n2
= 
                                                        
Var(X) = Var(
X1 + X2 + ... + Xn)
                                       
n
Statistics Magnets Solution
Here are some equations for finding the variance of the sample mean. Unfortunately, some 
parts of the equations have fallen off. Your task is to put the magnets back in the right 
positions and derive the variance of the sample mean.
Well done if you got this far. The 
derivation was a bit tricky, but 
we’ve found out what the variance 
of X is. We know how much the 
sample mean might vary.
σ2 + σ2 + ... + σ2
 1 
X2
 n
 1 
Xn
 n
σ2
n
statistics magnets solution
	
	
     Don’t worry if you 
didn’t complete 
this exercise; it’s 
hard.
Most exam boards won’t ask 
you to derive this, and in real 
life, you’ll just need to remember the result. 
We’re just showing you where it comes from.
 1 
X1
 n
= n x 1 σ2
          n2
1
n
2
( )
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    479
estimating populations and samples
X Distribution
gumballs per packet
frequency
Sampling Distribution of the Means Up Close
Let’s take a closer look at the sampling distribution of means.
We started off by looking at the distribution of a population X. The mean of X 
is given by μ, and the variance by σ2, so E(X) = μ and Var(X) = σ2.
We then took all possible samples of size n taken from the population X and 
formed a distribution out of all the sample means, the distribution of X. The 
mean and variance of this distribution are given by:
The standard deviation of X is the square root of the variance. The standard 
deviation tells you how far away from μ the sample mean is likely to be, so it’s 
known as the standard error of the mean.
E(X) = μ
Var(X) = σ2
	
    n
The standard error of the mean gets smaller as n gets larger. This means that 
the more items there are in your sample, the more reliable your sample mean 
becomes as an estimator for the population mean.
Large n
Small n
The larger n gets, the 
smaller the standard 
error becomes.
Standard error of the mean =  σ
	
	
	
	
     √n
Download at WoweBook.Com

480    Chapter 11
So how is X distributed?
So far we’ve found what the expectation and variance is for X. Before 
we can find probabilities, though, we need to know exactly how X is 
distributed. 
Let’s start by looking at the distribution of X if X is normal.
Here’s a sketch of the distribution for X for different values of μ, σ2, and n, 
where X is normally distributed. What do you notice?
For each of these combinations, the distribution of X is normal. In other 
words
If X ~ N(μ, σ2), then X ~ N(μ, σ2/n)
These are the mean and 
variance of X that we found 
earlier.
But is the number of 
gumballs in a packet 
distributed normally? 
What if it’s not?
X might not follow a normal distribution.
We need to know how X is distributed so that we can 
work out probabilities for the sample mean. The trouble 
is, we don’t know how X is distributed.
We need to know what distribution X follows if X isn’t 
normal.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
μ = 0; σ2 = 0.2
μ = 0, σ2 = 5.0
μ = -2, σ2 = 0.5
distribution of x
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    481
estimating populations and samples
As n gets larger, X gets closer and closer to a normal distribution. We’ve 
already seen that X is normal if X is normal. If X isn’t normal, then we can 
still use the normal distribution to approximate the distribution of X if n is 
sufficiently large. 
In our current situation, we know what the mean and variance are for the 
population, but we don’t know what its distribution is. However, since our 
sample size is 30, this doesn’t matter. We can still use the normal distribution 
to find probabilities for X. 
This is called the central limit theorem.
Introducing the Central Limit Theorem
The central limit theorem says that if you take a sample from a non-normal 
population X, and if the size of the sample is large, then the distribution of 
X is approximately normal. If the mean and variance of the population are 
μ and σ2, and n is , say, over 30, then
X ~ N(μ, σ2/n)
Does this look familiar? It’s the same distribution that we had when X 
followed a normal distribution. The only difference is that if X is normal, 
it doesn’t matter what size sample you use.
This is the mean 
and variance of X.
If n is large, X can still be approximated by the normal distribution
By the central limit theorem, if your sample of X is 
large, then X’s distribution is approximately normal.
Download at WoweBook.Com

482    Chapter 11
Using the central limit theorem
So how does the central limit theorem work in practice? Let’s take a look.
The binomial distribution
Imagine you have a population represented by X ~ B(n, p) where n is greater 
than 30. As we’ve seen before, μ = np, and σ2 = npq.
The central limit theorem tells us that in this situation, X ~ N(μ, σ2/n). To find 
the distribution of X, we substitute in the values for the population. This means 
that if we substitute in values for μ = np and σ2 = npq, we get
X ~ N(np, pq)
For the binomial distribution, the mean of the population is 
np, and the variance is npq. If we substitute this into the 
sampling distribution, we get X ~ N(np, pq).
The Poisson distribution
Now suppose you have a population that follows a Poisson distribution of  
X ~ Po(λ), again where n is greater than 30. For the Poisson distribution,  
μ = σ2 = λ.
As before, we can use the normal distribution to help us find probabilities for X. 
If we substitute population parameters into X ~ N(μ, σ2/n), we get:
X ~ N(λ, λ/n)
Finding probabilities
Since X follows a normal distribution, this means that you can use standard 
normal probability tables to look up probabilities. In other words, you can 
find probabilities in exactly the same way you would for any other normal 
distribution.
In general, you take the distribution X ~ N(μ, σ2/n) and substitute in values for 
μ and σ2.
For the Poisson distribution, the mean and variance 
are both λ. If we substitute this into the sampling 
distribution, we get X ~ N(λ, λ/n).
central limit theorem
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    483
estimating populations and samples
Let’s apply this to Mighty Gumball’s problem.
The mean number of gumballs per packet is 10, and the variance is 1. If you take a sample of 30 
packets, what’s the probability that the sample mean is 8.5 gumballs per packet or fewer? We’ll 
guide you through the steps.
1. What’s the distribution of X?
2. What’s the value of P(X < 8.5)?
Download at WoweBook.Com

484    Chapter 11
Let’s apply this to Mighty Gumball’s problem.
The mean number of gumballs per packet is 10, and the variance is 1. If you take a sample of 30 
packets, what’s the probability that the sample mean is 8.5 gumballs per packet or fewer? We’ll 
guide you through the steps.
1. What’s the distribution of X?
We know that X ~ N(μ, σ2/n), μ = 10, σ2 = 1, and n = 30, and 1/30 = 0.0333. So this gives us
X ~ N(10, 0.0333)
2. What’s the value of P(X < 8.5)?
As X ~ N(10, 0.0333), we need to find the standard score of 8.5 so that we can look up the result in 
probability tables. This gives us 
z = 8.5 - 10
       0.0333
   = -8.22 (to 2 decimal places)
P(Z < z) = P(Z < -8.22)
This probability is so small that it doesn’t appear on the probability tables. We can assume that an event with a 
probability this small will hardly ever happen.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    485
estimating populations and samples
Q: Do I need to use any continuity 
corrections with the central limit 
theorem?
A: Good question, but no you don’t. 
You use the central limit theorem to find 
probabilities associated with the sample 
mean rather than the values in the sample, 
which means you don’t need to make any 
sort of continuity correction.
Q: Is there a relationship between 
point estimators and sampling 
distributions?
A: Yes, there is.  
 
Let’s start with the mean. The point estimator 
for the population mean is x, which means 
that μ = x. Now, if we look at the expectation 
for the sampling distribution of means, we 
get E(X) = μ. The expectation of all the 
sample means is given by μ, and we can 
estimate μ with the sample mean. 
 
 
Similarly, the point estimator for the 
population proportion is ps, the sample 
proportion, which means that p = ps. If 
we take the expectation of all the sample 
proportions, we get E(Ps) = p. The 
expectation of all the sample proportions is 
given by p, and we can estimate p with the 
sample proportion. 
 
We’re not going to prove it, but we get a 
similar result for the variance. We have  
σ2 = s2, and E(S2) = σ2.
Q: So is that a coincidence?
A: No, it’s not. The estimators are chosen 
so that the expectation of a large number 
of samples, all of size n and taken in the 
same way, is equal to the true value of 
the population parameter. We call these 
estimators unbiased if this holds true. 
 
An unbiased estimator is likely to be 
accurate because on average across all 
possible samples, it’s expected to be the 
value of the true population parameter.
Q: How does standard error come into 
this?
A: The best unbiased estimator for a 
population parameter is generally one with 
the smallest variance. In other words, it’s the 
one with the smallest standard error.
The sampling distribution of means is what 
you get if you consider all possible samples of 
size n taken from the same population and form 
a distribution out of their means. We use X to 
represent the sample mean random variable.
The expectation and variance of X are defined as 
 
	
	
E(X) = μ 
 
	
	
Var(X) = σ2/n 
 
where μ and σ2 are the mean and variance of the 
population.


The standard error of the mean is the standard 
deviation of this distribution. It’s given by 
 
	
	
  Var(X) 
If X ~ N(μ, σ2), then X ~ N(μ, σ2/n).
The central limit theorem says that if n is large 
and X doesn’t follow a normal distribution, then 
 
	
	
X ~ N(μ, σ2/n) 
 



^
Download at WoweBook.Com

486    Chapter 11
Sampling saves the day!
The work you’ve done is awesome! My top customer 
found an average of 8.5 gumballs in a sample of 30 
packets, and you’ve told me the probability of getting 
that result is extremely unlikely. That means I 
don’t have to worry about compensating disgruntled 
customers, which means more money for me!
You’ve made a lot of progress
Not only have you been able to come up with point 
estimators for population parameters based on a single 
sample, you’ve also been able to use population to calculate 
probabilities in the sample. That’s pretty powerful.
hooray for gumball sampling
Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    487
constructing confidence intervals
12
Guessing with Confidence
Sometimes samples don’t give quite the right result. 
You’ve seen how you can use point estimators to estimate the precise value of the 
population mean, variance, or proportion, but the trouble is, how can you be certain that 
your estimate is completely accurate? After all, your assumptions about the population 
rely on just one sample, and what if your sample’s off? In this chapter, you’ll see another 
way of estimating population statistics, one that allows for uncertainty. Pick up your 
probability tables, and we’ll show you the ins and outs of confidence intervals.
I put this in the 
oven for 2.5 hours, but 
if you bake yours for 
1—5 hours, you should 
be fine.
Download at WoweBook.Com

488    Chapter 12
Mighty Gumball is in trouble
We’re in trouble. Someone 
else has conducted 
independent tests and come 
up with a different result. 
They’re threatening to sue, 
and that will cost me money.
Mighty Gumball used a sample of 100 gumballs to come up with a 
point estimator of 62.7 minutes for the mean flavor duration, and 
25 minutes for the population variance. The CEO announced on 
primetime television that gumball flavor lasts for an average of 62.7 
minutes. It’s the best estimate for flavor duration that could possibly 
have been made based on the evidence, but what if it gave a slightly 
wrong result?
If Mighty Gumball is sued because of the accuracy of their claims, 
they could lose a lot of money and a lot of business. They need your 
help to get them out of this.
The Mighty Gumball CEO has gone ahead with a range of 
television advertisements, and he’s proudly announced exactly 
how long the flavor of the super-long-lasting gumballs lasts for, 
right down to the last second. 
Unfortunately...
What do you think could have gone wrong? Should Mighty Gumball 
have used the precise value of the point estimator in their advertising? 
Why? Why not?
They need you to save them
another flavor favor
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    489
constructing confidence intervals
The problem with precision
As you saw in the last chapter, point estimators are the best estimate 
we can possibly give for population statistics. You take a representative 
sample of data and use this to estimate key statistics of the population 
such as the mean, variance, and proportion. This means that the point 
estimator for the mean flavor duration of super‑long‑lasting gumballs 
was the best possible estimate we could possibly give.
The problem with deriving point estimators is that we rely on the 
results of a single sample to give us a very precise estimate. We’ve 
looked at ways of making the sample as representative as possible by 
making sure the sample is unbiased, but we don’t know with absolute 
certainty that it’s 100% representative, purely because we’re dealing 
with a sample.
Now hold it right there! 
Are you saying that point 
estimators are no good? 
After all that hard work?
Point estimators are valuable, but they may give 
slight errors.
Because we’re not dealing with the entire population, all we’re doing 
is giving a best estimate. If the sample we use is unbiased, then the 
estimate is likely to be close to the true value of the population. The 
question is, how close is close enough?
Rather than give a precise value as an estimate for the population 
mean, there’s another approach we can take instead. We can specify 
some interval as an estimation of flavor duration rather than a very 
precise length of time. As an example, we could say that we expect 
gumball flavor to last for between 55 and 65 minutes. This still gives 
the impression that flavor lasts for approximately one hour, but it 
allows for some margin of error.
The question is, how do we come up with the interval? It all depends 
how confident you want to be in the results...
Download at WoweBook.Com

490    Chapter 12
Introducing confidence intervals
Up until now, we’ve estimated the mean amount of time that gumball flavor 
lasts for by using a point estimator, based upon a sample of data. Using the 
point estimator, we’ve been able to give a very precise estimate for the mean 
duration of the flavor. Here’s a sketch showing the distribution of flavor 
duration in the sample of gumballs.
With point estimators, we 
estimate the population mean 
using the mean of the samples.
So what happens if we specify an interval for the population mean instead? 
Rather than specify an exact value, we can specify two values we expect 
flavor duration to lie between. We place our point estimator for the mean 
in the center of the interval and set the interval limits to this value plus or 
minus some margin of error.
Rather than give a precise estimate for 
the population mean, we can say that the 
population mean is between values a and b.
The interval limits are chosen so that there’s a specified probability of the 
population mean being between a and b. As an example, you may want to 
choose a and b so that there’s a 95% chance of the interval containing the 
population mean. In other words, you choose a and b so that  
	
	
	
P(a < μ < b) = 0.95 
We represent this interval as (a, b). As the exact value of a and b depends 
on the degree of confidence you want to have that the interval contains the 
population mean, (a, b) is called a confidence interval.
So how do we find the confidence interval for the population mean?
μ = x
^
b
a
μ = x
^
all about confidence intervals
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    491
constructing confidence intervals
Four steps for finding confidence intervals
Here are the broad steps involved in finding confidence intervals. Don’t 
worry if you don’t get what each step is about just yet, we’ll go through 
them in more detail soon.
Q: So can you construct a confidence 
interval for any population statistic?
A: Broadly speaking, you can construct 
a confidence interval for any population 
statistic where you know what the sampling 
distribution is like. We’ve looked at sampling 
distributions for the mean and proportion, so 
we can construct confidence intervals for 
both of these. 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: What about the variance? Can we 
construct a confidence interval for that?
A: Theoretically, yes, but we haven’t 
covered the sampling distribution for the 
variance, and we’re not going to. It’s more 
common to construct confidence intervals 
for the mean and proportion, and these are 
what tend to be covered by statistics exams.
Q: Do these steps relate to the 
confidence interval for the mean or the 
confidence interval for the proportion?
A: They’re general steps that apply to 
either. You can use them for the population 
mean and for the population proportion.
Q: Does it matter how the population 
is distributed?
A: The key thing is the sampling 
distribution of the statistic you’re trying to 
construct a confidence interval for. If you 
want a confidence interval for the mean, you 
need to know the sampling distribution of 
means, and if you want a confidence interval 
for the proportion, you need to know the 
sampling distribution of proportions. 
 
The main impact the population distribution 
has on the confidence interval is the effect it 
has on the sampling distribution. We’ll see 
how later on.
This is the population statistic 
you want to construct a 
confidence interval for.
Let’s see if we can construct a confidence interval for the Mighty Gumball 
CEO that he can use in his television commercials. Let’s find a confidence 
interval for the mean amount of time gumball flavor lasts for.
You encountered 
sampling distributions in 
the last chapter.
To find the confidence limits, we 
need to know the level of confidence 
and the sampling distribution.
Choose your population statistic
1
Find its sampling distribution
2
Decide on the level of confidence
3
Find the confidence limits
4
The probability that your interval 
contains the statistic
Download at WoweBook.Com

492    Chapter 12
Step 1: Choose your population statistic
The first step is to pick the statistic you want to construct a confidence 
interval for. This all depends on the problem you want to solve.
We want to construct a confidence interval for the mean amount of 
time that gumball flavor lasts for, so in this case, we want to construct a 
confidence interval for the population mean, μ.
Now that we’ve chosen the population statistic, we can move onto the 
next step.
Step 2: Find its sampling distribution
To find a confidence interval for the population mean, we need to know 
what the sampling distribution is for the mean. In other words, we 
need to know what the expectation and variance of X is, and also what 
distribution it follows.
Let’s start with the expectation and variance. If we go back to the work 
we did in the last chapter, then the sampling distribution of means has 
the following expectation and variance:
 
	
	
E(X) = μ		
Var(X) = σ2
	
	
	
	
	
  
 
In order to use this to find the confidence interval for μ, we substitute in 
values for the population variance, σ2, and the sample size, n.
But what about μ? Why 
don’t we substitute in a 
value for μ?
We don’t substitute in a value for μ as this is what 
we’re trying to find a confidence interval for.
We’re using the sampling distribution to help us find a confidence interval 
for μ, so this means that we substitute in values for everything except for μ. 
By substituting in the values for σ2 and n, we can use the distribution of X 
to help us find the confidence interval. We’ll show you how really soon.
There’s just one problem. We don’t know what the true value of σ2 is. All 
we have to go on is estimates based on the sample.
constructing confidence intervals: step by step
n
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    493
constructing confidence intervals
Point estimators to the rescue
So what can we use as the value for σ2?
Even though we don’t know what the true value is for the population 
variance, σ2, we can estimate its value using its point estimator. Rather 
than use σ2, we can use 2 in its place, or s2. 
This means that the expectation and variance for the sampling 
distribution of means is
 
	
	
E(X) = μ		
Var(X) = s2
	
	
	
	
	
 n
 
Mighty Gumball used a sample of 100 gumballs to come up with their 
estimates, and they have calculated that s2 = 25. This means that
 
	
	
	
Var(X) = s2
	
	
	
	
 n
	
	
	
            =  25
	
	
	
	
 100
	
	
	
            = 0.25 
There’s still one thing we have left to do. Before we can find the 
confidence interval for μ, we need to know exactly how X is distributed.
This is the point estimator for the variance. We don’t know 
what the true value of the population variance is, so we use the 
sample variance to estimate it instead..
Assume that X ~ N(μ, σ2) and that the number in the sample is 
large. What distribution does X follow? Use E(X) and Var(X) above 
to help you.
Download at WoweBook.Com

494    Chapter 12
Assume that X ~ N(μ, σ2) and that the number in the sample is 
large. What distribution does X follow? Use E(X) and Var(X) above 
to help you.
If X follows a normal distribution, then X does too. Substituting in the point estimator for σ2, we get:
	
X ~ N(μ, s2/n)
or:
	
X ~ N(μ, 0.25)
We’ve found the distribution for X
Now that we know how X is distributed, we have enough information to 
move onto the next step.
Step 3: Decide on the level of confidence
The level of confidence lets you say how sure you want to be that the 
confidence interval contains your population statistic. As an example, 
suppose we want a confidence level of 95% for the population mean. 
This means that the probability of the population mean being inside the 
confidence interval is 0.95. 
The confidence level is the probability 
of the population mean being inside the 
confidence interval. For a confidence level 
of 95%, the probability here is 0.95.
How do you think the level of confidence affects the size of the confidence 
interval? 
a
b
μ = x
^
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    495
constructing confidence intervals
So who decides what the level of confidence should be? What’s the right 
level of confidence?
The answer to this really depends on your situation and how confident 
you need to be that your interval contains the population statistic. A 95% 
confidence level is common, but sometimes you might want a different 
one, such as 90% or 99%. As an example, the Mighty Gumball CEO 
might want to have a higher degree of confidence that the population 
mean falls inside the confidence interval, as he intends to use it in his 
television advertisements.
The key thing to remember is that the higher the confidence level is, 
the wider the interval becomes, and the more chance there is of the 
confidence interval containing the population statistic.
Well, why don’t we just make the 
confidence interval really wide? 
That way we’re bound to include 
the population statistic. 
The trouble with making the confidence interval 
too wide is that it can lose meaning.
As an extreme example, we could say that that the mean duration of 
gumball flavor is between 0 minutes and 3 days. While this is true, it 
doesn’t give you an idea how long gumball flavor really lasts for. You 
don’t know whether it lasts for seconds, minutes, or hours.
The key thing is to make the interval as narrow as possible, but 
wide enough so you can be reasonably sure the true mean is in the 
interval.
Let’s use a 95% confidence level for Mighty Gumball. That way, 
there’ll be a high probability that it contains the population mean.
Now that we have the confidence level, we can move onto the final step: 
finding the confidence limits.
How to select an appropriate confidence level
Download at WoweBook.Com

496    Chapter 12
Step 4: Find the confidence limits
The final step is to find a and b, the limits of the confidence interval, 
which indicate the left and right borders of the range in which there’s 
a 95% probability of the mean falling. The exact value of a and b 
depends on the sampling distribution we need to use and the level of 
confidence that we need to have.
For this problem, we need to find the 95% confidence level for the mean 
duration of gumball flavor. Meaning, there must be a .95 probability 
that μ lies between the a and b that we find. We also know that X 
follows a normal distribution, where X ~ N(μ, 0.25). 
Here’s a sketch of what we need:
We want to choose a and b so that this 
area represents a probability of 0.95.
These two areas need to add up to a 
probability of 0.05, so that’s 0.025 
for each tail.
We can find the values of a and b using the distribution of X. In other 
words, we can use the distribution of X ~ N(μ, 0.25) to find a and b, such 
that P(X < a) = 0.025 and P(X > b) = 0.025.
So does that mean we use 
the normal distribution to 
find the confidence interval 
for μ?
As X follows a normal distribution, we can use the 
normal distribution to find the confidence interval.
We can do this in a similar way to how we’ve solved other problems in 
the past. We calculate a standard score, and we use standard normal 
probability tables to help us get the result we need.
a
μ = x
^
b
confidence limits
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    497
constructing confidence intervals
We need to find za and zb , such that P(za < Z < zb) = 0.95.
We need to find za and zb where P(za < Z < zb) = 0.95. In other words, 
the standardized confidence limits are given by za and zb where  
P(Z < za) = 0.025 and P(Z > zb) = 0.025. We can find the values of za 
and zb using probability tables.
2.  Use probability tables to find the value of zb where P(Z > zb) = 0.025.
1.  Use probability tables to find the value of za where P(Z < za) = 0.025.
Start by finding Z
Before we can use normal probability tables, we need to standardize X. 
We know that X ~ N(μ, 0.25), so this means that if we standardize, we get
 
	
Z = X - μ	
        where	
     Z ~ N(0, 1)
	
      √0.25
 
Here’s a sketch of the standardized version of the confidence interval.
za
zb
0
0.025
0.025
0.95
Download at WoweBook.Com

498    Chapter 12
We need to find za and zb such that P(za < Z < zb) = 0.95.
If we look up the probability 0.025 in standard normal probability tables, this gives us za = -1.96
To find zb, we need to look up a value of 0.975. This gives us zb = 1.96.
Rewrite the inequality in terms of m
So far, we’ve found a standardized version of the confidence interval. 
We’ve found that P(-1.96 < Z < 1.96) = 0.95. In other words, 
	
	
P(-1.96 <  
X - μ 
 < 1.96) = 0.95
	
	
	
       
0.5
2.  Use probability tables to find the value of zb where P(Z > zb) = 0.025.
1.  Use probability tables to find the value of za where P(Z < za) = 0.025.
But don’t we need a 
confidence interval 
for μ? How do find it?
We can find the confidence interval for μ by 
rewriting the inequality in terms of μ.
If we can rewrite
 
	
	
-1.96 <  
X - μ 
 < 1.96
	
	
	
 
0.5
in the form
 
	
	
           a < μ < b
 
We’ll have our confidence limits for μ.
sharpen solution
This will give us 
a confidence 
interval for µ.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    499
constructing confidence intervals
Pool Puzzle
Your job is to rewrite  
-1.96 < (X - μ)/0.5 < 1.96 and come 
up with a confidence interval for 
μ. Take snippets from the pool 
and place them into the blank 
lines. You may not use the same 
snippet more than once.
Note: Each thing from 
the pool can only be 
used once!
-1.96 <  
X - μ 
 < 1.96
               
0.5
            -1.96 <  
X - μ 
                            
0.5 
 
-1.96 ×           < X - μ 
               + μ < X   
                   μ <
      X - μ 
 < 1.96
       
0.5 
 
       
X - μ <              × 0.5 
             X <               + μ 
                < μ
0.5
-0.98
 X + 0.98 
1.96
0.98
X - 0.98
X - 0.98 < μ < X + 0.98
This gives you the lefthand 
side of the inequality
This gives you the righthand side
This is what you get if you 
put the two sides of the 
inequality together again
Download at WoweBook.Com

500    Chapter 12
Pool Puzzle Solution
Your job is to rewrite  
-1.96 < (X - μ)/0.5 < 1.96 and come 
up with a confidence interval for 
μ. Take snippets from the pool 
and place them into the blank 
lines. You may not use the same 
snippet more than once.
Note: Each thing from 
the pool can only be 
used once!
-1.96 <  
X - μ 
 < 1.96
               
0.5
            -1.96 <  
X - μ 
                            
0.5 
 
-1.96 ×           < X - μ 
               + μ < X   
                   μ <
      X - μ 
 < 1.96
       
0.5 
 
       
X - μ <              × 0.5 
             X <               + μ 
                < μ
0.5
-0.98
 X + 0.98 
1.96
0.98
X - 0.98
X - 0.98 < μ < X + 0.98
This gives you the left 
hand side of the inequality.
This gives you the right hand side.
pool puzzle solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    501
constructing confidence intervals
Finally, find the value of X
Now that we’ve rewritten the inequality, we’re very close to finding a 
confidence interval for μ that describes the amount of time gumball 
flavor typically lasts for. In other words, we use
 
	
	
P(X - 0.98 < μ < X + 0.98) = 0.95
 
Here’s a quick sketch.
Our confidence limits are given by X – 0.98 and X + 0.98. If we knew 
what to use as a value for X, we’d have values for the confidence limits.
I wonder if we can use the 
Mighty Gumball sample in 
some way. Maybe we can use 
the mean of the sample.
X is the distribution of sample means, so we can 
use the value of x from the Mighty Gumball sample.
The confidence limits are given by X – 0.98 and X + 0.98. For the 
Mighty Gumball sample, x is given by 62.7. Use this to come up 
with values for the confidence limits.
     - 0.98
    + 0.98
0.025
0.025
0.95
X
X
Download at WoweBook.Com

502    Chapter 12
You’ve found the confidence interval
Congratulations! You’ve found your first confidence interval. You 
found that there’s a 95% chance that the interval  
(61.72, 63.68) contains the population mean for flavor duration.
That’s fantastic news! That 
means I can update the fine 
print on our advertisements. 
That should handle any lawsuits.
Using confidence intervals in the television advertisement rather 
than point estimators means that the CEO can give an accurate and 
precise estimate for how long flavor lasts, but without having to give 
a precise figure. It makes allowances for any margin of error there 
might be in the sample.
The confidence limits are given by X - 0.98 and X + 0.98. For the 
Mighty Gumball sample, x is given by 62.7. Use this to come up 
with values for the confidence limits.
The confidence limits are given by X - 0.98 and X + 0.98. If we substitute in the mean of the sample, we get 
confidence limits of 62.7 - 0.98 and 62.7 + 0.98. In other words, our confidence interval is (61.72, 63.68).
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    503
constructing confidence intervals
So does that mean I have to 
go through the same process 
every single time I want to 
construct a confidence interval?
We can take some shortcuts.
Constructing confidence intervals can be a repetitive process, so there 
are some shortcuts you can take. It all comes down to the level of 
confidence you want and the distribution of the test statistic.
Let’s take a look at some of the shortcuts we can take.
Let’s summarize the steps
Let’s look back at the steps we went through in order to construct the 
confidence interval.
The first thing we did was choose the population statistic that 
we needed to construct a confidence interval for. We needed to find a 
confidence interval for the mean duration of gumball flavor, and this 
meant that we needed to construct a confidence interval for μ.
Once we’d figured out which population we needed to construct a 
confidence interval for, we had to find its sampling distribution. 
We found the expectation and variance of the sampling distribution of 
means, substituting in values for every statistic except for μ. We then 
figured out that we could use a normal distribution for X.
After that, we decided on the level of confidence we needed for the 
confidence interval. We decided to use a confidence level of 95%.
Finally, we had to find the confidence limits for the confidence 
interval. We used the level of confidence and sampling distribution to 
come up with a suitable confidence interval.
Download at WoweBook.Com

504    Chapter 12
Handy shortcuts for confidence intervals
Here are some of the shortcuts you can take when you calculate confidence 
intervals. All you need to do is look at the population statistic you want to 
find, look at the distribution of the population and the conditions, and then 
slot in the population statistic or its estimator. The value c depends on the 
level of confidence
Population 
statistic
Population 
distribution
Conditions
Confidence interval
μ
Normal
You know what σ2 is 
n is large or small 
x is the sample mean
(x - c  σ, x + c  σ) 
             n            n
μ
Non-normal
You know what σ2 is 
n is large (at least 30) 
x is the sample mean
(x - c  σ, x + c  σ) 
             n            n
μ
Normal or non-normal
You don’t know what σ2 is 
n is large (at least 30) 
x is the sample mean 
s2 is the sample variance (x - c  s, x + c   s) 
             n            n
p
Binomial
n is large 
ps is the sample proportion 
qs is 1 - ps
(ps - c  psqs, ps + c  psqs) 
                n                 n
Level of confidence
Value of c
90%
1.64
95%
1.96
99%
2.58
The value of c depends on the level of 
confidence you need. These values work 
whenever you use the normal distribution 
as the basis of your test statistic.
What’s the interval in general?
In general, the confidence interval is given by
statistic ± (margin of error)
The margin of error is given by the value of c multiplied 
by the standard deviation of the test statistic.
margin of error = c × (standard deviation of statistic)
confidence interval cheat sheet
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    505
constructing confidence intervals
Mighty Gumball took a sample of 50 gumballs and found that in the sample, the proportion of red 
gumballs is 0.25. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the proportion of red gumballs in the 
population.
Download at WoweBook.Com

506    Chapter 12
Mighty Gumball took a sample of 50 gumballs and found that in the sample, the proportion of red 
gumballs is 0.25. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the proportion of red gumballs in the 
population.
 
ps - c  psqs, ps + c  psqs 
             n            n
The confidence interval for the population proportion is given by
We need to find the 99% confidence interval so c = 2.58. The proportion of red gumballs is 0.25, so 
ps = 0.25 and qs = 0.75. n = 50. This gives us
 
ps - c  psqs, ps + c  psqs 
             n            n
=  
0.25 - 2.58  0.25 x 0.75 , 0.25 + 2.58  0.25 x 0.75
 
                         50                               50
= (0.25 - 2.58 x 0.0612, 0.25 + 2.58 x 0.0612)
= (0.25 - 0.158, 0.25 + 0.158)
= (0.092, 0.408)
exercise solution
(
(
(
)
)
)
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    507
constructing confidence intervals
Q: When we found the expectation 
and variance for X earlier, why did we 
substitute in the point estimator for σ2 
and not μ?
A: We didn’t substitute x for μ because 
we needed to find the confidence interval 
for μ. We needed to find some sort of 
expression involving μ that we could use to 
find the confidence interval.
Q: Why did we use x as the value of 
X?
A: The distribution of X is the sampling 
distribution of means. You form it by taking 
every possible sample of size n from the 
population, and then forming a distribution 
out of all the sample means. 
 
x is the particular value of the mean taken 
from our sample, so we use it to help us find 
the confidence interval.
Q: What’s the difference between the 
confidence interval and the confidence 
level?
A: The confidence interval is the 
probability that your statistic is contained 
within the confidence interval. It’s normally 
given as a percentage, for example, 95%. 
The confidence interval gives the lower and 
upper limit of the interval itself, the actual 
range of numbers.
Q: We’ve found that the 95% 
confidence interval for μ is (61.72, 63.68). 
What does that really mean?
A: What it means is that if you were to 
take many samples of the same size and 
construct confidence intervals for all of them, 
then 95% of your confidence intervals would 
contain the true population mean. You know 
that 95% of the time, a confidence interval 
constructed in this way will contain the 
population mean.
Q: In the shortcuts, do the values of c 
apply to every confidence interval?
A: They apply to all of the shortcuts 
we’ve shown you so far because all of 
these shortcuts are based on the normal 
distribution. This is because the sampling 
distribution in all of these cases follows the 
normal distribution.
Q: I’ve sometimes seen “a” instead 
of “c” in the shortcuts for the confidence 
intervals. Is that wrong?
A: Not at all. The key thing is that whether 
you refer to it as “a” or “c”, it represents 
a value that you can substitute into your 
confidence interval to give you the right 
confidence level. The values stay the same 
no matter what you call it.
Q: So are all confidence intervals 
based on the normal distribution?
A: No, they’re not. We’ll look at intervals 
based on other distributions later on.
Q: Why did we go through all those 
steps when all we have to do is slot 
values into the shortcuts?
A: We went through the steps so that you 
could see what was going on underneath 
and understand how confidence intervals 
are constructed. Most of the time, you’ll just 
have to substitute in values.
Q: Do I need continuity corrections 
when I’m working with confidence 
intervals?
A: Theoretically, you do, but in practice, 
they’re generally omitted. This means 
that you can just substitute values into 
the shortcuts to come up with confidence 
intervals.
I have one more 
problem I need your 
help with. Think you can 
help me out?
Download at WoweBook.Com

508    Chapter 12
Just one more problem...
Mighty Gumball has one last problem for you to sort out. One of the 
candy stores selling gumballs wants to determine how much gumballs 
typically weigh, as they find that their customers often buy gumballs 
based on weight rather than quantity. If the store can figure out the 
typical weight of a gumball, they can use this information to boost sales.
Mighty Gumball has taken a representative sample of 10 
gumballs and weighed each one. In their sample, x = 0.5 oz and 
s2 = 0.09. 
How do we find the confidence interval?
Assuming the weight of each gumball in the population follows a normal 
distribution, how would you go about creating a 95% confidence interval for 
this data? Hint: look at the table of confidence interval shortcuts and see which 
situation we have here.
Step 1: Choose your population statistic
The first step is to pick the statistic we want to construct a confidence 
interval for. We want to construct a confidence interval for the mean 
weight of gumballs, so we need to construct a confidence interval for the 
population mean, μ.
As we need to find the confidence interval for μ, this means that the next 
step is to find its sampling distribution, the distribution of X.
That means I need you to come up with 
a confidence interval for gumball weight, 
but as it’s just for one store, I don’t want 
to sample a large number of gumballs.
confidence interval dilemma: part deux
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    509
constructing confidence intervals
That’s easy. X is normal, so 
that means that X has to follow 
a normal distribution, too.
The normal distribution isn’t a good approximation 
for every situation.
All of the sampling distributions we’ve seen so far either follow a 
normal distribution or can be approximated by it. The trouble is that 
we can’t use the normal distribution for every single confidence interval. 
Unfortunately, this situation is one of them.
So why can’t we use the normal distribution here?
When sample sizes are large, the normal distribution is ideal for finding 
confidence intervals. It gives accurate results, irrespective of how the 
population itself is distributed.
Here we have a different situation. Even though X itself is distributed 
normally, X isn’t.
So what’s the distribution of X?
There are two key reasons.
The first is that we don’t know what the true variance is of the 
population, so this means we have to estimate σ2 using the 
sample data. We can easily do this using point estimators, but 
there’s a problem: the size of the sample is so small that there are 
likely to be significant errors in our estimate, much larger errors 
than if we used a larger sample of gumballs. The potential errors 
we’re dealing with mean that the normal distribution won’t give 
us accurate enough probabilities for X, which means it won’t give 
us an accurate confidence interval.
So what sort of distribution does X follow? It actually follows a 
t-distribution. Let’s find out more.
But why not? 
That doesn’t 
make sense to me.
Step 2: Find its sampling distribution
Download at WoweBook.Com

510    Chapter 12
0
The t-distribution
The exact shape of the t-
distribution depends on the size 
of the sample and the value of ν. 
The two are related.
T ~ t(ν)
Small values of 
ν always make 
my tail look big.
The t-distribution is a probability distribution that specializes in exactly the 
sort of situation we have here. It’s the distribution that X follows where the 
population is normal, σ2 is unknown, and you only have a small sample at 
your disposal.
The t-distribution looks like a smooth, symmetrical curve, and it’s exact 
shape depends on the size of the sample. When the sample size is large, it 
looks like the normal distribution, but when the sample size is small, the 
curve is flatter and has slightly fatter tails. It takes one parameter, ν, where 
ν is equal to n – 1. n is the size of the sample, and ν is called the number 
of degrees of freedom.
Let’s take a look at this. Here’s a sketch of the t-distribution for different 
values of ν. Can you see how the value of ν affects the shape of the 
distribution?
A shorthand way of saying that T follows the t-distribution with ν 
degrees of freedom is
t(ν) means we’re using the t-distribution 
with ν degrees of freedom. ν = n - 1.
The t-distribution works in a similar way to the normal distribution. We 
start off by converting the limit of the probability area into a standard 
score, and then we use probability tables to get the result we want.
Let’s start with the standard score.
large v
small v
T is the test statistic. You’ll see how 
to calculate it on the next page
introducing t-distributions
X follows the t-distribution when the sample is small
We’ll look at degrees of 
freedom in more depth 
in Chapter 14.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    511
constructing confidence intervals
We calculate the standard score for the t-distribution in the same way we 
did for the normal distribution. As with the the normal distribution, we 
standardize by subtracting the expectation of the sampling distribution 
and then dividing by its standard deviation. The only difference is that 
we represent the result with T instead of Z, as we’re going to use it with 
the t-distribution.
We need to find the distribution of X, so this means we need to use the 
expectation and standard deviation of X. The expectation of X is μ, and 
the standard deviation is σ/n. As we need to estimate the value of σ 
with s, this means that the standard score for the t-distribution is given by
This is the standard deviation of X.
This is the same formula as for 
Z—subtract the mean and divide 
by the standard deviation.
This is the population mean we’re 
finding a confidence interval for.
Let’s see if you can apply this to the Mighty Gumball 
sample. There are 10 gumballs in the sample, where 
x = 0.5oz and s2 = 0.09. What’s the value of ν and 
what’s T?
All we need to do is substitute in the values for X, , and n.
T = X - μ
      s/√n
Find the standard score for the t-distribution
Download at WoweBook.Com

512    Chapter 12
Step 3: Decide on the level of confidence
So what level of confidence should we use for Mighty Gumball? 
Remember, the level of confidence says how sure you want to be that 
the confidence interval contains the population statistic, and it helps us 
figure out how wide the confidence interval needs to be. As before, let’s 
have a confidence level of 95% for the population mean. This means 
that the probability of the population mean being inside the confidence 
interval is 0.95.
For a confidence level of 95%, the 
probability here is 0.95.
Now that we have the level of confidence, we can move onto the final 
step, finding the confidence interval for μ.
There are 10 gumballs in the sample, and ν = n - 1. This means that the value of ν is 9.
T is given by 
T = X - μ
      s/√n
   =    X - μ
      √0.09/10
   =  X - μ
      0.0949
Let’s see if you can apply this to the Mighty Gumball 
sample. There are 10 gumballs in the sample, where 
x = 0.5oz and s2 = 0.09. What’s the value of ν, and 
what’s T?
b
a
μ = x
^
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    513
constructing confidence intervals
Using t-distribution probability tables
t-distribution probability tables give you the value of t where  
P(T > t) = p. In our case, p = 0.025.
To find t, use the first column to look up ν, and the top row to look up 
p. The place where they intersect gives the value of t. As an example, 
if we look up ν = 7 and p = 0.05, we get t = 1.895.
Once you’ve found the value of t, you can use it to find your 
confidence interval.
Step 4: Find the confidence limits
You find confidence limits with the t-distribution in a similar way to 
how you find them with the normal distribution. Your confidence 
interval is given by
(
x - t  s  , x + t   s) 
           √n            √n
where
P(-t ≤ T ≤ t) = 0.95
We can find the value of t using t-distribution probability tables.
This is the same as we had 
before, just replace c with t.
This is 0.95, as we 
want to find the 95% 
confidence interval.
Tail probability p
ν
.25
.20
.15
.10
.05
.025
.02
.01
.005
.0025
.001
.0005
1
1.000
1.376
1.963
3.078
6.314
12.71
15.89
31.82
63.66
127.3
318.3
636.6
2
.816
1.061
1.386
1.886
2.920
4.303
4.849
6.965
9.925
14.09
22.33
31.60
3
.765
.978
1.250
1.638
2.353
3.182
3.482
4.541
5.841
7.453
10.21
12.92
4
.741
.941
1.190
1.533
2.132
2.776
2.999
3.747
4.604
5.598
7.173
8.610
5
.727
.920
1.156
1.476
2.015
2.571
2.757
3.365
4.032
4.773
5.893
6.869
6
.718
.906
1.134
1.440
1.943
2.447
2.612
3.143
3.707
4.317
5.208
5.959
7
.711
.896
1.119
1.415
1.895
2.365
2.517
2.998
3.499
4.029
4.785
5.408
8
.706
.889
1.108
1.397
1.860
2.306
2.449
2.896
3.355
3.833
4.501
5.041
9
.703
.883
1.100
1.383
1.833
2.262
2.398
2.821
3.250
3.690
4.297
4.781
10
.700
.879
1.093
1.372
1.812
2.228
2.359
2.764
3.169
3.581
4.144
4.587
p = 0.05
This is where 7 and .05 meet.
ν = 7
-t
t
0
T ~ t(ν)
0.95
0.025
0.025
t
0
T ~ t(ν)
p
Download at WoweBook.Com

514    Chapter 12
See if you can find the 95% confidence interval for the average weight of gumballs. 
There are 10 gumballs in the sample where x = 0.5oz and s2 = 0.09.
1. The confidence interval for μ is given by (x - t s/√n, x + t s/√n). 
Use standard probability tables to find the value of t.
2. Use this to find the confidence interval for μ.
confidence interval exercise
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    515
constructing confidence intervals
The t-distribution vs. the normal distribution
So why did we use the 
t‑distribution for this problem? 
Why couldn’t we have used the 
normal distribution instead?
The t-distribution is more accurate when we 
have to estimate the population variance for 
small samples.
The problem with basing our estimate of σ2 on just a small 
sample is that it may not accurately reflect the true value of 
the population variance. This means we need to make some 
allowance for this in our confidence interval by making the 
interval wider.
The shape of the t-distribution varies in line with the value of 
ν. As it takes the size of the sample into account, this means that 
it allows for any uncertainty we may feel about the accuracy of 
our estimate for σ2. When n is small, the t-distribution gives a 
wider confidence interval than the normal distribution, which 
makes it more appropriate for small-sized samples.
Handy shortcuts for confidence intervals - the t-distribution
Here’s a quick reminder of when you need to use the t-distribution, and what the 
confidence interval is for μ. Just substitute in your values.
To find t(ν), you need to look it up in t-distribution probability tables. To do this, use  
ν = n - 1 and your level of confidence to find the critical region.
Population 
statistic
Population 
distribution
Conditions
Confidence interval
μ
Normal or non-normal
You don’t know what σ2 is 
n is small (less than 30) 
x is the sample mean 
s2 is the sample variance (x - t(ν)  s, x +  t(ν)  s ) 
              √n              √n
Download at WoweBook.Com

516    Chapter 12
See if you can find the 95% confidence interval for the average weight of gumballs. 
There are 10 gumballs in the sample where x = 0.5oz and s2 = 0.09.
exercise solution
We find the confidence interval by substituting values for x, t, s, and n into (x - t s/√n, x + t s/√n). 
This gives us
(x - t s/√n, x + t s/√n) = (0.5 - 2.262 x √(0.09/10), 0.5 + 2.262 x √(0.09/10))
	
	
	
= (0.5 - 2.262 x 0.0949, 0.5 + 2.262 x 0.0949)
	
	
	
= (0.5 - 0.215, 0.5 + 0.215)
	
	
	
= (0.285, 0.715)
1. The confidence interval for μ is given by (x - t s/√n, x + t s/√n). 
Use standard probability tables to find the value of t.
There are 10 gumballs in the sample, so ν = 9. We want to find the 95% confidence interval, so this means 
we look up 0.025 in the t-distribution probability table, with 9 degrees of freedom. This gives us t = 
2.262.
2. Use this to find the confidence interval for μ.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    517
constructing confidence intervals
Mighty Gumball has noticed a problem with their gumball dispensers. They have taken a sample 
of 30 machines, and found that the mean number of malfunctions is 15. Construct a 99% 
confidence interval for the number of malfunctions per month.
Download at WoweBook.Com

518    Chapter 12
Mighty Gumball has noticed a problem with their gumball dispensers. They have taken a sample 
of 30 machines, and found that the mean number of malfunctions is 15. Construct a 99% 
confidence interval for the number of malfunctions per month.
Q:Does X follow a t-distribution?
A: X follows a t-distribution when the population is normal, the 
sample size is small, and you need to estimate the population 
variance using the sample data.
Q: In general, what happens to my confidence interval if the 
confidence level changes?
A: If your confidence level goes down, then your confidence 
interval gets narrower. If your confidence level goes up, then your 
confidence interval gets wider. As an example, a 95% confidence 
interval will be narrower than a 99% confidence interval for the same 
set of data.
Q: What happens to the confidence interval if the size of the 
sample, n, changes?
A: If n decreases, then your confidence interval gets wider, and if 
n increases, your confidence interval gets narrower. 
 
Confidence intervals take the form 
 
	
	
statistic ± margin of error 
 
where the margin of error is equal to c times the standard deviation 
of the statistic.  
 
The standard deviation of the statistic depends on the size of the 
sample, and it gets smaller as n gets larger. In other words, the 
margin of error gets smaller as n gets larger, and larger as n gets 
smaller. 
 
In general, a smaller sample leads to a wider confidence interval, and 
a larger sample to a narrower one.
exercise solution
The number of breakdowns per month is modelled by a Poisson distribution. As there are 30 machines, we can 
find the confidence interval using (x - cs/√n, x + cs/√n).
We need to find the 99% confidence interval, which means that c = 2.58. For the poisson distribution, the 
expectation and variance are both equal to λ, so x = 15 and s2 = 15.
The confidence interval is given by
(x - cs/√n, x + cs/√n) = (15 - 2.58 x √(15/30), 15 + 2.58 x √(15/30))
	
	
        = (15 - 2.58 x √(15/30), 15 + 2.58 x √(15/30))
	
	
        = (15 - 2.58 x 0.707, 15 + 2.58 x 0.707)
	
	
        = (15 - 1.824, 15 + 1.824)
	
	
        = (13.176, 16.824)
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    519
constructing confidence intervals
You’ve found the confidence intervals!
You’ve made a lot of progress in this chapter, and the result of it is 
that you now know two ways of estimating population statistics.
The first way of estimating population statistics is to use point 
estimators. Point estimators give you a way of estimating the 
precise value for the population statistics. It’s the best guess you can 
possibly make based on the sample data.
You also know how to come up with confidence intervals for 
the population statistics. Rather than come up with a very precise 
estimate for the population statistics, you now know how to find a 
range of values for the population statistic that you can feel truly 
confident about.
You’re great! I’ll tell the candy shop what the 
confidence interval is for the mean weight of 
gumballs, as that’s just what they wanted to 
know. They’ll be able to sell more gumballs to their 
customers, and that means increased profits!
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    521
using hypothesis tests
13
Look At The Evidence
I thought you 
said these were 
real horses.
Not everything you’re told is absolutely certain. 
The trouble is, how do you know when what you’re being told isn’t right? Hypothesis 
tests give you a way of using samples to test whether or not statistical claims are likely 
to be true. They give you a way of weighing the evidence and testing whether extreme 
results can be explained by mere coincidence, or whether there are darker forces at 
work. Come with us on a ride through this chapter, and we’ll show you how you can use 
hypothesis tests to confirm or allay your deepest suspicions.
Download at WoweBook.Com

522    Chapter 13
Statsville’s new miracle drug
Statsville’s leading drug company has produced a new remedy for 
curing snoring. Frustrated snorers are flocking to their doctors in 
hopes of finding nightly relief.
The drug company claims that their miracle drug cures 90% of 
people within two weeks, which is great news for the people with 
snoring difficulties. The trouble is, not everyone’s convinced.
Is your snoring getting you down?
Then you need new SnoreCull, 
the ultimate remedy for snoring. 
SnoreCull cures 90% 
of snorers within 2 weeks.
Cull those snores with new SnoreCull
SnoreCull
SnoreCull
48 Tablets
the ultimate snoring remedy?
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    523
using hypothesis tests
The doctor at the Statsville Surgery has been prescribing SnoreCull 
to her patients, but she’s disappointed by the results. She decides to 
conduct her own trial of the drug. 
She takes a random sample of 15 snorers and puts them on a course 
of SnoreCull for two weeks. After two weeks, she calls them back in 
to see whether their snoring has stopped.
Here are the results:
If the drug cures 90% of people, how many people in the sample 
of 15 snorers would you expect to have been cured? What sort of 
distribution do you think this follows?
I’m not sure these claims are 
true. If they were, more of 
my patients would be cured.
Cured?
Yes
No
Frequency
11
4
All the doctor records is 
whether or not the patients 
snoring has been cured.
Doctor
Download at WoweBook.Com

524    Chapter 13
If the drug cures 90% of people, how many people in the sample 
of 15 snorers would you expect to have been cured? How does 
this compare with the doctors results? What sort of distribution 
do you think this follows?
11
12
13
14
10
15
This is how many people should 
have been cured, according to 
the drug company.
90% of 15 is 13.5, so you’d expect 14 people to be cured. Only 11 people in the doctors sample were cured, which is 
much lower than the result you’d expect
There are a specific number of trials and the doctor is interested in the number of successes, so the number of 
successes follows a binomial distribution. If X is the number of successes then X ~ B(15, 0.9).
So what’s the problem?
Here’s the probability distribution for how many people the drug 
company says should have been cured by the snoring remedy.
The number of people cured by SnoreCull in the doctor’s sample 
is actually much lower than you’d expect it to be. Given the claims 
made by the drug company, you’d expect 14 people to be cured, 
but instead, only 11 people have been.
So why the discrepancy?
P(X = x)
x
This is how many people were 
actually cured by SnoreCull.
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    525
using hypothesis tests
But can we really be certain 
that the drug company is at fault? 
Maybe the doctor was unlucky.
The drug company’s claims might actually be accurate.
Rather than the drug company being at fault, it’s always possible that the 
patients in the doctor’s sample may not have been representative of the 
snoring population as a whole. It’s always possible that the snoring remedy does 
cure 90% of snorers, but the doctor just happens to have a higher proportion 
of people in her sample whom it doesn’t cure. In other words, her sample might 
be biased in some way, or it could just come down to there being a small 
number of patients in the sample.
Does that mean that the drug 
company is telling lies about their 
product? Shouldn’t the drug have 
cured more of the doctor’s patients?
The drug company might not be deliberately telling lies, 
but their claims might be misleading.
It’s possible that the tests of the drug company were flawed, and this might 
have resulted in misleading claims being made about SnoreCull. They may 
have inadvertent conducted flawed or biased tests on SnoreCull, which 
resulted in them making inaccurate predictions about the population. 
If the success rate of SnoreCull is actually lower than 90%, this would explain 
why only 11 people in the sample were cured.
How do you think we can resolve this? How can we 
determine whether to trust the claims of the drug 
company, or accept the doctor’s doubts instead?
Download at WoweBook.Com

526    Chapter 13
Resolving the conflict from 50,000 feet
So how do we resolve the conflict between the doctor and the drug 
company? Let’s take a very high level view of what we need to do.
We can resolve the conflict between the drug company and the doctor by 
putting the claims of the drug company on trial. In other words, we’ll accept 
the word of the drug company by default, but if there’s strong evidence 
against it, we’ll side with the doctor instead.
Here’s what we’ll do:
Take the claim of 
the drug company.
See how much evidence we need to 
reject the drug company’s claim, and 
check this against the evidence we 
have. We do this by looking at how 
rare the doctors results would be if 
the drug company is correct.
Depending on the evidence, 
accept or reject the claims of 
the drug company. 
In general, this process is called hypothesis testing, as you take a 
hypothesis or claim and then test it against the evidence. Let’s look at 
the general process for this.
Examine the claim
Examine the evidence
Make a decision
SnoreCull
SnoreCull
48 Tablets
the hypothesis testing process
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    527
using hypothesis tests
The six steps for hypothesis testing
Here are the broad steps that are involved in hypothesis testing. We’ll go 
through each one in detail in the following pages.
Why all the 
formality? It’s 
obvious there’s 
something going on.
We need to make sure we properly test the drug 
claim before we reject it.
That way we’ll know we’re making an impartial decision either way, 
and we’ll be giving the claim a fair trial. What we don’t want to to do 
is reject the claim if there’s insufficient evidence against it, and this 
means that we need some way of deciding what constitutes sufficient 
evidence.
Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test
Choose your test statistic
Find the p-value of the test statistic
Determine the critical region for your decision
See whether the sample result is within the 
critical region
Make your decision
1
2
3
4
5
6
This is the 
claim that we’re 
putting on trial
We need to pick the statistic that 
best tests the claim.
We need a 
certain level of 
certainty.
We need to see how rare our results 
are, assuming the claims are true.
We then see if it’s within 
our bounds of certainty.
Download at WoweBook.Com

528    Chapter 13
H0
So what’s the null hypothesis for SnoreCull?
The null hypothesis for SnoreCull is the claim of the drug company: that it 
cures 90% of patients. This is the claim that we’re going to go along with, 
unless we find strong evidence against it.
We need to test whether at least 90% of patients are cured by the drug, so this 
means that the null hypothesis is that p = 90%.
The drug company’s claim
According to the drug company, SnoreCull cures 90% of patients within 
2 weeks. We need to accept this position unless there is sufficiently strong 
evidence to the contrary.
The claim that we’re testing is called the null hypothesis. It’s represented 
by H0, and it’s the claim that we’ll accept unless there is strong evidence 
against it.
I’m the null 
hypothesis. I’m the 
default position. If you 
think I’m wrong, gimme 
the evidence.
Step 1: Decide on the hypothesis
Let’s start with step one of the hypothesis test, and look at the key claim we 
want to test. This claim is called a hypothesis.
The null hypothesis is the claim you’re 
going to test. It’s the claim you’ll accept 
unless there’s strong evidence against it.
H0: p = 0.9
This is the null hypothesis 
for the SnoreCull trial.
Decide on the 
hypothesis you’re going 
to test
Choose your test 
statistic
Determine the critical 
region for your decision
Find the p-value of the 
test statistic
See whether the 
sample result is within 
the critical region
Make your decision
You 
are 
Here
SnoreCull
SnoreCull
48 Tablets
You have to assume I cure 
90% of people unless you 
can come up with good 
evidence that I don’t.
null and alternate hypotheses
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    529
using hypothesis tests
The doctor’s perspective
The doctor’s view is that the claims of the drug company are too good to be 
true. She doesn’t think that as many as 90% of patients are cured. She thinks 
it’s far more likely that the cure rate is actually less than 90%.
The counterclaim to the null hypothesis is called the alternate hypothesis. 
It’s represented by H1, and it’s the claim that we’ll accept if there’s strong 
enough evidence to reject H0.
I’m the alternate 
hypothesis. If H0 let’s 
you down, then you’ll 
have to accept that 
you’re better off with 
Now that we have the null and alternate hypotheses for the SnoreCull 
hypothesis test, we can move onto step 2.
So what’s the alternative?
We’ve looked at what the claim is we’re going to test, the null hypothesis, but 
what if it’s not true? What’s the alternative?
H1
The alternate hypothesis is the 
claim you’ll accept if you reject H0.
The alternate hypothesis for SnoreCull
The alternate hypothesis for SnoreCull is the claim you’ll accept if the drug 
company’s claim turns out to be false. If there’s sufficiently strong evidence 
against the drug company, then it’s likely that the doctor is right. 
The doctor believes that SnoreCull cures less than 90% of people, so this 
means that the alternate hypothesis is that p < 90%.
H1: p < 0.9
This is the alternate 
hypothesis for the 
SnoreCull trial
Download at WoweBook.Com

530    Chapter 13
Q: Why are we assuming the null hypothesis is 
true and then looking for evidence that it’s false?
A: When you conduct a hypothesis test, you, in effect, 
put the claims of the null hypothesis on trial. You give 
the null hypothesis the benefit of the doubt, but then you 
reject it if there is sufficient evidence against it. It’s a bit 
like putting a prisoner on trial in front of a jury. You only 
sentence the prisoner if there is strong enough evidence 
against him.
Q: Do the null hypothesis and alternate 
hypothesis have to be exhaustive? Should they 
cover all possible outcomes?
A: No, they don’t. As an example, our null hypothesis 
is that p = 0.9, and our alternate hypothesis is that 
p < 0.9. Neither hypothesis allows for p being greater 
than 0.9.
Q: Isn’t the sample size too small to do this 
hypothesis test?
A: Even though the sample size is small, we can still 
perform hypothesis tests. It all comes down to what test 
statistic you use — and we’ll come to that on the next 
page.
Q: So are hypothesis tests used to prove whether 
or not claims are true?
A: Hypothesis tests don’t give absolute proof. They 
allow you to see how rare your observed results actually 
are, under the assumption that your null hypothesis 
is true. If your results are extremely unlikely to have 
happened, then that counts as evidence that the null 
hypothesis is false. 
no dumb questions
When hypothesis testing, you assume the null hypothesis 
is true. If there’s sufficient evidence against it, you reject 
it and accept the alternate hypothesis.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    531
using hypothesis tests
Step 2: Choose your test statistic
Now that you’ve determined exactly what it is you’re going to test, you 
need some means of testing it. You can do this with a test statistic.
The test statistic is the statistic that you use to test your hypothesis. It’s 
the statistic that’s most relevant to the test.
What’s the test statistic for SnoreCull?
In our hypothesis test, we want to test whether SnoreCull cures 90% of 
people or more. To test this, we can look at the probability distribution 
according to the drug company, and see whether the number of 
successes in the sample is significant.
If we use X to represent the number of people cured in the sample, this 
means that we can use X as our test statistic. There are 15 people in the 
sample, and the probability of success according to the drug company 
is 0.9. As X follows a binomial distribution, this means that the test 
statistic is actually:
X ~ B(15, 0.9)
I’m confused. Why are 
we saying the probability 
of success is 0.9? Surely 
we don’t know that yet.
We choose the test statistic according to H0, the null 
hypothesis.
We need to test whether there is sufficient evidence against the null 
hypothesis, and we do this by first assuming that H0 is true. We then look 
for evidence that contradicts H0. For the SnoreCull hypothesis test, we 
assume that the probability of success is 0.9 unless there is strong evidence 
against this being true.
To do this, we look at how likely it is for us to get the results we did, 
assuming the probability of success is 0.9. In other words, we take the 
results of the sample and examine the probability of getting that result. 
We do this by finding a critical region.
This is the test statistic 
for our hypothesis test.
Decide on the 
hypothesis you’re going 
to test
Choose your test 
statistic
Determine the critical 
region for your decision
Find the p-value of the 
test statistic
See whether the 
sample result is within 
the critical region
Make your decision
You 
are 
Here
We came up with this 
test statistic back 
on page 524.
Download at WoweBook.Com

532    Chapter 13
If 90% of people in the sample had 
been cured, we could easily have assumed 
that the drug company’s claims are 
correct.
The fewer people who are cured, 
the more likely it is that the 
drug company claims are wrong.
The critical region of a hypothesis test is the set of values that present the 
most extreme evidence against the null hypothesis. 
Let’s see how this works by taking another look at the doctor’s sample. If 90% 
or more people had been cured, this would have been in line with the claims 
made by the drug company. As the number of people cured decreases, the 
more unlikely it becomes that the claims of the drug company are true.
Here’s the probability distribution:
Step 3: Determine the critical region
At what point can we reject the drug company claims?
The fewer people there are in the sample who are successfully cured by 
SnoreCull, the stronger the evidence there is against the claims of the drug 
company. The question is, at what point does the evidence become so strong 
that we confidently reject the null hypothesis? At what point can we reject the 
claim that SnoreCull cures 90% of snorers? 
What we need is some way of indicating at what point we can reasonably 
reject the null hypothesis, and we can do this by specifying a critical region. 
If the number of snorers cured falls within the critical region, then we’ll say 
there is sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis. If the number of 
snorers cured falls outside the critical region, then we’ll accept that there isn’t 
sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis, and we’ll accept the claims 
of the drug company. We’ll call the cut off point for the critical region c, the 
critical value.
So how do we choose the critical region?
11
12
13
14
10
15
c
If the number of people cured by SnoreCull falls in 
this area, then we don’t have sufficient evidence 
to reject H0. We’re only checking whether there’s 
evidence that p < 0.9.
If the number of people cured by SnoreCull falls 
in this critical region, then we can safely reject 
the claims of the drug company, H0. Our alternate 
hypothesis is that p < 0.9, so we look to this region 
for evidence.
Cutoff point, 
or critical 
value
Decide on the 
hypothesis you’re going 
to test
Choose your test 
statistic
Determine the critical 
region for your decision
Find the p-value of the 
test statistic
See whether the 
sample result is within 
the critical region
Make your decision
You 
are 
Here
finding critical regions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    533
using hypothesis tests
Before we can find the critical region of the hypothesis test, we first 
need to decide on the significance level. The significance level of 
a test is a measure of how unlikely you want the results of the sample 
to be before you reject the null hypothesis Ho. Just like the confidence 
level for a confidence interval, the significance level is given as a 
percentage.
As an example, suppose we want to test the claims of the drug 
company at a 5% level of significance. This means that we choose 
the critical region so that the probability of fewer than c snorers 
being cured is less than 0.05. It’s the lowest 5% of the probability 
distribution.
c
5%
95%
Critical region
If the number of snorers cured by 
SnoreCull falls in the critical region, then 
we’ll reject the null hypothesis.
The significance level is normally represented by the Greek letter α. The 
lower α is, the more unlikely the results in your sample need to be before 
we reject Ho. 
So what significance level should we use?
Let’s use a significance level of 5% in our hypothesis test. This 
means that if the number of snorers cured in the sample 
is in the lowest 5% of the probability distribution, then we 
will reject the claims of the drug company. If the number of 
snorers cured lies in the top 95% of the probability distribution, 
then we’ll decide there isn’t enough evidence to reject the null 
hypothesis, and accept the claims of the drug company.
If we use X to represent the number of snorers cured, then we 
define the critical region as being values such that
P(X < c) < α
where
α = 5%
Significance level
The significance level is 
represented by α. It’s a 
way of saying how unlikely 
you want your results to be 
before you’ll reject H0.
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
To find the critical region, first decide on the significance level
If H0 is true, we are 95% certain that the number 
of snorers cured will fall within this region
Download at WoweBook.Com

534    Chapter 13
Critical Regions Up Close
When you’re constructing a critical region for your test, another thing you need to 
be aware of is whether you’re conducting a one-tailed or two-tailed test. Let’s 
look at the difference between the two, and what impact this has on the critical 
region?
One-tailed tests
A one-tailed test is where the critical region falls at one end 
of the possible set of values in your test. You choose the level 
of the test—represented by α—and then make sure that the 
critical region reflects this as a corresponding probability.
The tail can be at either end of the set of possible values, and 
the end you use depends on your alternate hypothesis H1. 
If your alternate hypothesis includes a < sign, then use the 
lower tail, where the critical region is at the lower end of the 
data.
If your alternate hypothesis includes a > sign, then use the 
upper tail, where the critical region is at the upper end of 
the data.
We’re using a one-tailed test for the SnoreCull hypothesis 
test with the critical region in the lower tail, as our alternate 
hypothesis is that p < 0.9.
c
α
100% - α
A one-tailed test 
at the α level
Here we’re using the lower tail.
c
α
100% - α
The critical region this 
time is in the upper tail, 
still at the α level.
Two-tailed tests
A two-tailed test is where the critical region is split over both 
ends of the set of values. You choose the level of the test α, 
and then make sure that the overall critical region reflects this 
as a corresponding probability by splitting it into two. Both 
ends contain α/2, so that the total is α.
You can tell if you need to use a two-tailed test by looking 
at the alternate hypothesis H1. If H1 contains a ≠ sign, then 
you need to use a two-tailed test as you are looking for some 
change in the parameter, rather than an increase or decrease. 
We would have used a two-tailed test for our SnoreCull if our 
alternate hypothesis had been p ≠ 0.9. We would have had to 
check whether significantly more or significantly fewer than 
90% of patients had been cured
c2
100% - α
c1
α/2
α/2
This is a two-tailed test, where 
the critical region is split over 
the two tails.
critical regions in depth
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    535
using hypothesis tests
Step 4: Find the p-value
Now that we’ve looked at critical regions, we can move on to step 4, finding 
the p-value.
A p-value is the probability of getting a value up to and including the one 
in your sample in the direction of your critical region. It’s a way of taking 
your sample and working out whether the result falls within the critical 
region for your hypothesis test. In other words, we use the p-value to say 
whether or not we can reject the null hypothesis.
How do we find the p-value?
How we find the p-value depends on our critical region and our test statistic. 
For the SnoreCull test, 11 people were cured, and our critical region is 
the lower tail of the distribution. This means that our p-value is P(X  11), 
where X is the distribution for the number of people cured in the sample.
As the significance level of our test is 5%, this means that if P(X  11) is 
less than 0.05, then the value 11 falls within the critical region, and we can 
reject the null hypothesis.
c
0.05
0.95
If P(X ≤ 11) is less than 0.05, then that means that 11 is 
inside the critical region, and we can reject H0.
We know from step 2 that X ~ B(15, 0.9). What’s P(X ≤ 11)?
Decide on the 
hypothesis you’re going 
to test
Choose your test 
statistic
Determine the critical 
region for your decision
Find the p-value of the 
test statistic
See whether the 
sample result is within 
the critical region
Make your decision
You 
are 
Here
Download at WoweBook.Com

536    Chapter 13
We know from step 2 that X ~ B(15, 0.9). What’s P(X ≤ 11)? Is 11 
inside or outside the critical region?
P(X ≤ 11) = 1 - P(X ≥ 12)
	
   = 1 - (15C12x0.13x0.912 + 15C13x0.12x0.913 + 15C14x0.1x0.914 + 0.915)
	
   = 1 - (0.1285 + 0.2669 + 0.3432 + 0.2059)
	
   = 1 - 0.9445
	
   = 0.0555
We’ve found the p-value
To find the p-value of our hypothesis test, we had to find P(X  11). This 
means that the p-value is 0.0555.
Do I always calculate 
p-values in the same way? 
What if my critical region 
had been the upper tail?
A p-value is the probability of getting the results in the 
sample, or something more extreme, in the direction of 
the critical region.
In our hypothesis test for SnoreCull, the critical region is the lower tail of 
the probability distribution. In order to see whether 11 people being cured 
of snoring is in the critical region, we calculated P(X  11), as this is the 
probability of getting a result at least as extreme as the results of our sample 
in the direction of the lower tail.
c
0.05
0.95
We want to find whether 11 people being cured is in the 
critical region here, so we use P(X ≤ 11) to evaluate this.
Had our critical region been the upper tail of the probability distribution 
instead, we would have needed to find P(X  11). We would have counted 
more extreme results as being greater than 11, as these would have been 
closer to the critical region.
sharpen solution
15C15 = 1, and so does 0.10, 
so we’re just left with 0.915.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    537
using hypothesis tests
SnoreCull
SnoreCull
48 Tablets
Now that we’ve found the p-value, we can use it to see whether the result 
from our sample falls within the critical region. If it does, then we’ll have 
sufficient evidence to reject the claims of the drug company.
Our critical region is the lower tail of the probability distribution, and 
we’re using a significance level of 5%. This means that we can reject the 
null hypothesis if our p-value is less that 0.05. As our p-value is 0.0555, this 
means that the number of people cured by SnoreCull in the sample doesn’t 
fall within the critical region.
I win!
c
5%
95%
This is the 
critical region.
The p-value is 0.056, so it’s 
just outside the critical region.
Step 6: Make your decision
We’ve now reached the final step of the hypothesis test. We can decide 
whether to accept the null hypothesis, or reject it in favor of the alternative.
The p-value of the hypothesis test falls just outside the critical region of 
the test. This means that there isn’t sufficient evidence to reject the null 
hypothesis. In other words:
We accept the claims of the drug company
Step 5: Is the sample result in the critical region?
Decide on the 
hypothesis you’re going 
to test
Choose your test 
statistic
Determine the critical 
region for your decision
Find the p-value of the 
test statistic
See whether the 
sample result is within 
the critical region
Make your decision
You 
are 
Here
Decide on the 
hypothesis you’re going 
to test
Choose your test 
statistic
Determine the critical 
region for your decision
Find the p-value of the 
test statistic
See whether the 
sample result is within 
the critical region
Make your decision
You 
are 
Here
Download at WoweBook.Com

538    Chapter 13
But those results 
aren’t what the doctor 
wants. Can’t we test at a 
different level?
Once you’ve fixed the significance level of the test, 
you can’t change it.
The test needs to be completely impartial. This means that you decide 
what level you need the test to be at, based on what level of evidence 
you require, before you look at what evidence you actually have.
If you were to look at the amount of evidence you have before deciding 
on the level of the test, this could influence any decisions you made. 
You might be tempted to decide on a specific level of test just to get the 
result you want. This would make the outcome of the test biased, and 
you might make the wrong decision.
So what did we just do?
Let’s summarize what we just did.
First of all, we took the claims of the drug company, which the doctor had 
misgivings about. We used these claims as the basis of a hypothesis test. We 
formed a null hypothesis that the probability of curing a patient is 0.9, and 
then we applied this to the number of people in the doctors sample. 
We then decided to conduct a test at the 5% level, using the success rate in 
the doctor’s sample. We looked at the probability of 11 people or fewer being 
cured, and checked to see whether the probability of this was less than 5%, 
or 0.05. In other words, we looked at the probability of getting a result this 
extreme, or even more so.
Finally, we found that at the 5% level, there wasn’t strong enough evidence to 
reject the claims of the drug company.
hypothesis testing in review
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    539
using hypothesis tests
Q: What significance level should I normally test at?
A: It all depends how strong you want the evidence to be before 
you reject the null hypothesis. The stronger you want the evidence to 
be, the lower your significance level needs to be. 
 
The most common significance level is 5%, although you sometimes 
see tests at the 1% level. Testing at the 1% means that you require 
stronger evidence than if you test at the 5% level. 
 
 
Q: Does the significance level have anything in common with 
the level of confidence for confidence intervals?
A: Yes, they have0 a lot in common. When you construct a 
confidence interval for a population parameter, you want to have 
a certain degree of confidence that the population parameter lies 
between two limits. As an example, if you have a 95% level of 
confidence, this means that the probability that the population 
parameter lies between the two limits is 0.95. 
 
The level of significance reflects the probability that values will lie 
outside a certain limit. As an example, a significance level of 5% 
means that your critical region must have a probability of 0.05.
I still have doubts. 
I wonder what would 
happen if I took a 
larger sample...
In a hypothesis test, you take a claim and test it 
against statistical evidence.
The claim that you’re testing is called the null 
hypothesis test. It’s represented as H0, and it’s the 
claim that’s accepted unless there’s strong statistical 
evidence against it.
The alternate hypothesis is the claim we’ll accept 
if there’s strong enough evidence against  H0. It’s 
represented by H1.
The test statistic is the statistic you use to test your 
hypothesis. It’s the statistic that’s most relevant to 
the test. You choose the test statistic by assuming 
that H0 is true.
The significance level is represented by α. It’s a way 
of saying how unlikely you want your results to be 
before you’ll reject H0.





The critical region is the set of values that presents 
the most extreme evidence against the null 
hypothesis test. You choose your critical region by 
considering the significance level and how many tails 
you need to use.
A one-tailed test is when your critical region lies 
in either the upper or the lower tail of the data. A 
two-tailed test is when it’s split over both ends. 
You choose your tail by looking at your alternate 
hypothesis.
A p-value is the probability of getting the result 
of your sample, or a result more extreme in the 
direction of your critical region.
If the p-value lies in the critical region, you have 
sufficient reason to reject your null hypothesis. If 
your p-value lies outside your critical region, you 
have insufficient evidence.




Download at WoweBook.Com

540    Chapter 13
What if the sample size is larger?
So far the doctor has conducted her trial using a sample of just 15 people, 
and on the basis of this, there was insufficient evidence to reject the 
claims of the drug company.
It’s possible that the size of the sample wasn’t large enough to get an 
accurate result. The doctor might get more reliable results by using a 
larger sample.
Here are the results from the doctor’s new trial:
What’s the null hypothesis of this new problem? 
What’s the alternate hypothesis?
We want to determine whether the new data will 
make a difference in the outcome of the test.
Let’s run through another hypothesis test, this time with the larger 
sample.
Cured?
Yes
No
Frequency
80
20
I want to conduct a new 
hypothesis test using 
these new results.
a new sample for hypothesis testing
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    541
using hypothesis tests
Hypothesis Magnets
It’s time to do another hypothesis test. There are a number of steps 
you need to run through to perform the hypothesis test, but can you 
remember what the order is? Put the magnets into the right order. 
Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test
See whether the test statistic is within the critical region
Find the p-value of the test statistic
Choose your test statistic
Determine the critical region for your decision
Make your decision
Download at WoweBook.Com

542    Chapter 13
Hypothesis Magnets Solution
It’s time to do another hypothesis test. There are a number of steps 
you need to run through to perform the hypothesis test, but can you 
remember what the order is? Put the magnets into the right order. 
Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test
See whether the test statistic is within the critical region
Find the p-value of the test statistic
Choose your test statistic
Determine the critical region for your decision
Make your decision
hypothesis magnets solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    543
using hypothesis tests
SnoreCull
SnoreCull
48 Tablets
Step 1: Decide on the hypotheses
We need to start off by finding the null hypothesis and alternate 
hypothesis of the SnoreCull trial. As a reminder, the null hypothesis is the 
claim that we’re testing, and the alternate hypothesis is what we’ll accept if 
there’s sufficient evidence against the null hypothesis.
So what are the null and alternate hypotheses?
It’s still the same problem
For the last test, we took the claims made by the drug company and used 
these as the basis for the null hypothesis. We’re testing the same claims, so the 
null hypothesis is still the same. We have 
H0: p = 0.9
H1: p < 0.9
The alternate hypothesis is the same too. If there is strong evidence 
against the claims made by the drug company, then we’ll accept that the 
drug cures fewer than 90% of the patients. This gives us an alternate 
hypothesis of:
So you still don’t 
believe me? Think you 
can have another shot 
at me? Bring it on!
Let’s conduct another hypothesis test
The doctor still has misgivings about the claims made by the drug company. 
Let’s conduct a hypothesis test based on the new data.
Decide on the 
hypothesis you’re going 
to test
Choose your test 
statistic
Determine the critical 
region for your decision
Find the p-value of the 
test statistic
See whether the 
sample result is within 
the critical region
Make your decision
Download at WoweBook.Com

544    Chapter 13
As before, the next step is to choose the test statistic. In other words, we 
need some statistic that we can use to test the hypothesis.
For the previous hypothesis test, we conducted the test by looking at the 
number of successes in the sample and seeing how significant the result 
was. We used the binomial distribution to find the probability of getting a 
result at least as extreme as the value we got in the sample. In other words, 
we used a test statistic of X ~ B(15, 0.9) to test whether P(X  11) was less 
than 0.05, the level of significance.
This time the number of people in the sample is 100, and we’re testing 
the same claim, that probability of successfully curing someone is 0.9. 
This means that our new test statistic is X ~ B(100, 0.9).
Step 2: Choose the test statistic
Are you kidding me? 
If we have to calculate 
probabilities using the 
binomial distribution, we’ll 
be here forever.
We can use another probability distribution instead 
of the binomial.
Using the binomial distribution for this sort of problem would be time 
consuming, as we’d have to calculate lots of probabilities. 
Fortunately, there’s another way. Rather than use the binomial 
distribution, we can use some other distribution instead. 
What probability distribution could you use to approximate X ~ B(100, 0.9)?
Decide on the 
hypothesis you’re going 
to test
Choose your test 
statistic
Determine the critical 
region for your decision
Find the p-value of the 
test statistic
See whether the 
sample result is within 
the critical region
Make your decision
pick the test statistic
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    545
using hypothesis tests
To get the most out of hypothesis tests, you need to know how different variables and 
parameters are distributed. What distributions would you use to find probabilities for the 
following situations?
1. X ~ B(n, p). What probability distribution could you use to approximate this if n is large, np > 5 and nq > 5?
2. X ~ N(μ, σ2). You know the value of μ and σ2. What’s the distribution of X?
3. X ~ N(μ, σ2), and you know what μ is, but you don’t know what the value of σ2 is. The sample size is large. What’s 
the distribution of X given the data you have? 
4. X ~ N(μ, σ2), you know what μ is, but you don’t know what the value of σ2 is. The sample size is small. What’s the 
distribution of X given the data you have?
Hint: We covered all of these earlier in 
the book. If you get stuck, look back 
through the chapters
Download at WoweBook.Com

546    Chapter 13
To get the most out of hypothesis tests, you need to know how different variables and parameters 
are distributed. What distributions would you use to find probabilities for the following situations?
Hint: We covered all of these earlier in the book. If you get stuck, look back through the chapters.
1. X ~ B(n, p). What probability distribution could you use to approximate this if n is large, np > 5 and nq > 5?
If n is large, then we can approximate X ~ B(n, p) using the normal distribution. As E(X) = np and  
Var(X) = npq, this means we can use X ~ N(np, npq). This assumes that np > 5 and nq > 5.
2. X ~ N(μ, σ2). You know the value of μ and σ2. What’s the distribution of X?
3. X ~ N(μ, σ2), and you know what μ is, but you don’t know what the value of σ2 is. The sample size is large. What’s 
the distribution of X given the data you have?
If we know what the value is of σ2, X ~ N(μ, σ2/n).
If we don’t know what the value is of σ2, we estimate it using s2. So, X ~ N(μ, s2/n).
4. X ~ N(μ, σ2), you know what μ is, but you don’t know what the value of σ2 is. The sample size is small. What’s the 
distribution of X given the data you have? 
If we don’t know what the value is of σ2, we estimate it using s2. If the sample size is small, we need to use 
the t-distribution T ~ t(n - 1) where T = X - μ
	
	
	
	
          s/√n
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    547
using hypothesis tests
We still need to find a test statistic we can use in our hypothesis test, and 
as the number in the sample is large, this means that using the binomial 
distribution will be time consuming and complicated.
There are 100 people in the sample, and the proportion of successes 
according to the drug company is 0.9. In other words, the number of 
successes follows a binomial distribution, where n = 100 and p = 0.9.
As n is large, and both np and nq are greater than 5, we can use  
X ~ N(np, npq) as our test statistic, where X is the number of patients 
successfully cured. In other words, we can use
X ~ N(90, 9)
to approximate any probabilities that we may need. 
If we standardize this, we get
This means that for our test statistic we can use 
Z = X - 90	
	
Z ~ N(0, 1)
          3
Here we’re standardizing 
X ~ N(90, 9).
I get it. So our test 
statistic is the variable 
we use for our test.
You use the test statistic to work out probabilities 
you can use as evidence.
This means that we use Z as our test statistic, as we can easily use it to 
look up probabilities and see how unlikely the results of our sample 
are given the claims of the drug company. We substitute our value of 
80 in place of X, so we can use it to find the probability of 80 or fewer 
being cured.
Use the normal to approximate the binomial in our test statistic
Z = X - 90
          9
    = X - 90
           3
We can use this because n is 
large, np > 5 and nq is large.
X is the number of patients 
cured, in our case 80.
Download at WoweBook.Com

548    Chapter 13
Step 3: Find the critical region
Now that we have a test statistic for our test, we need to come up 
with a critical region. As our alternate hypothesis is p < 0.9, this 
means that our critical region lies in the lower tail just as before. 
The critical region also depends on the significance level of the 
test. Let’s choose the same significance level as before, so let’s test 
at the 5% level.
5%
As our test statistic follows a standard normal distribution, we 
can use probability tables to find the critical value, c. The critical 
value is the boundary between whether we have strong enough 
evidence to reject the null hypothesis or not.
As our significance level is 5%, this means that our critical 
value c is the value where P(Z < c) = 0.05. If we look up the 
probability 0.05 in the probability tables, this gives us a value for 
c of -1.64. In other words,
c
Z ~ N(0, 1)
P(Z < -1.64) = 0.05
This means that if our test statistic is less than -1.64, we have strong 
enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis.
If the test statistic lies 
in this region, then there’s 
enough evidence to reject 
the null hypothesis
Decide on the 
hypothesis you’re going 
to test
Choose your test 
statistic
Determine the critical 
region for your decision
Find the p-value of the 
test statistic
See whether the 
sample result is within 
the critical region
Make your decision
-1.64
Z ~ N(0, 1)
find another critical region
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    549
using hypothesis tests
Think you can go through the remaining steps of the hypothesis test? See if you can find the 
following:
Step 4: Find the p-value
The critical region is in the lower tail of the distribution. 80 people were cured, 
and Z = (X - 90)/3. Use this to find the p-value.
Step 5: See whether the test statistic is within the critical region
Remember that the significance level for the hypothesis test is 5%.
Step 6: Make your decision
Do you accept or reject the null hypothesis based on the evidence?
Download at WoweBook.Com

550    Chapter 13
Think you can go through the remaining steps of the hypothesis test? See if you can find the 
following:
Step 4: Find the p-value
The critical region is in the lower tail of the distribution. 80 people were cured, 
and Z = (X - 90)/3. Use this to find the p-value.
Let’s start by finding the standard score of 80.
	
z = (80 - 90)/3
	
   = -10/3
	
   = -3.33
The p-value is given by P(Z < z) = P(Z < -3.33). Looking this up in probability tables gives us
	
p-value = 0.0004
Step 5: See whether the test statistic is within the critical region
Remember that the significance level for the hypothesis test is 5%.
The test statistic is on the critical region if the p-value is less than 0.05. As the p-value is equal 
to 0.0004, this means that the test statistic is within the critical region.
Step 6: Make your decision
Do you accept or reject the null hypothesis based on the evidence?
As the test statistic is within the critical region for the hypothesis test, this means that we have 
sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis at the 5% significance level.
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    551
using hypothesis tests
SnoreCull
SnoreCull
48 Tablets
SnoreCull failed the test
This time when we performed a hypothesis test on SnoreCull, 
there was sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis. 
In other words, we can reject the claims made by the drug 
company.
Busted...
Hypothesis tests require evidence.
With a hypothesis test, you accept a claim and then put it on trial. You 
only reject it if there’s enough evidence against it. This means that the 
tests are impartial, as you only make a decision based on whether or 
not there’s sufficient evidence.
If we had just accepted the doctor’s opinion in the first place, we 
wouldn’t have properly considered the evidence. We would have 
made a decision without considering whether the results could have 
been explained away by mere coincidence. As it is, we have enough 
evidence to show that the results of the sample are extreme enough 
to justify rejecting the null hypothesis. The results are statistically 
significant, as they’re unlikely to have happened by chance.
So does this guarantee that the claims of the drug company 
are wrong?
Shouldn’t we have 
just accepted the doctor’s 
opinion in the first place?
Download at WoweBook.Com

552    Chapter 13
Of course it is. We’ve 
done a hypothesis test, and 
we’ve used it to prove that 
the drug company is lying.
Mistakes can happen
So far we’ve looked at how we can use the results of a sample as evidence in 
a hypothesis test. If the evidence is sufficiently strong, then we can use it to 
justify rejecting the null hypothesis.
We’ve found that there is strong evidence that the claims of the drug 
company are wrong, but is this guaranteed?
Even though the evidence is strong, we can’t absolutely 
guarantee that the drug company claims are wrong.
Even though it’s unlikely, we could still have made the wrong decision. We can 
examine evidence with a hypothesis, and we can specify how certain we want 
to be before rejecting the null hypothesis, but it doesn’t prove with absolute 
certainty that our decision is right. 
The question is, how do we know?
Conducting a hypothesis test is a bit like putting a prisoner on trial in front 
of a jury. The jury assumes that the prisoner is innocent unless there is strong 
evidence against him, but even considering the evidence, it’s still possible for 
the jury to make wrong decisions. Have a go at the exercise on the next page, 
and you’ll see how.
Q: How can we make the wrong decision if we’re conducting 
a hypothesis test? Don’t we do a hypothesis test to make sure 
we don’t?
A: When you conduct a hypothesis test, you can only make a 
decision based on the evidence that you have. Your evidence is 
based on sample data, so if the sample is biased, you may make the 
wrong decision based on biased data.
Q: I’ve heard of something called significance tests. What are 
they?
A: Some people call hypothesis tests significance tests. This is 
because you test at a certain level of significance.
our hypothesis might still be wrong
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    553
using hypothesis tests
A prisoner is on trial for a crime, and you’re on the jury. The jury’s 
task is to assume the prisoner is innocent, but if there’s enough 
evidence against him, they need to convict him.
1. In the trial, what’s the null hypothesis?
2. What’s the alternate hypothesis?
3. In what ways can the jury make a verdict that’s correct?
4. In what ways can the jury make a verdict that’s incorrect?
Download at WoweBook.Com

554    Chapter 13
A prisoner is on trial for a crime, and you’re on the jury. The jury’s 
task is to assume the prisoner is innocent, but if there’s enough 
evidence against him, they need to convict him.
1. In the trial, what’s the null hypothesis?
2. What’s the alternate hypothesis?
3. In what ways can the jury make a verdict that’s correct?
4. In what ways can the jury make a verdict that’s incorrect?
The null hypothesis is that the prisoner is innocent, as that is what we have to 
assume until there’s proof otherwise.
The alternate hypothesis is that the prisoner is guilty. In other words, if there’s sufficient proof 
that the prisoner is not innocent, then we’ll accept that he’s guilty and convict him.
We can make a correct verdict if:
	
The prisoner is innocent, and we find him innocent.
	
The prisoner is guilty, and we find him guilty.
We can make an incorrect verdict if
	
The prisoner is innocent, and we find him guilty.
	
The prisoner is guilty, and we find him innocent.
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    555
using hypothesis tests
The errors we can make when conducting a hypothesis 
test are the same sort of errors we could make when 
putting a prisoner on trial.
Hypothesis tests are basically tests where you take a claim and put it on trial 
by assessing the evidence against it. If there’s sufficient evidence against it, 
you reject it, but if there’s insufficient evidence against it, you accept it.
You may correctly accept or reject the null hypothesis, but even considering 
the evidence, it’s also possible to make an error. You may reject a valid null 
hypothesis, or you might accept it when it’s actually false.
Statisticians have special names for these types of errors. A Type I error is 
when you wrongly reject a true null hypothesis, and a Type II error is when 
you wrongly accept a false null hypothesis.
The power of a hypothesis test is the probability that that you will correctly 
reject a false null hypothesis.
So what does 
putting prisoners on 
trial have to do with 
hypothesis testing?
Accept H0
Reject H0
H0 True
Type I error
H0 False
Type II error
Decision from hypothesis test
Actual 
situation
This gives you the 
power of your test.
These are both 
types of errors
How do you think we can find the probability of making a Type I error? How do 
you think we can find the probability of making a Type II error?
Download at WoweBook.Com

556    Chapter 13
Let’s start with Type I errors
A Type I error is what you get when you reject the null hypothesis when 
the null hypothesis is actually correct. It’s like putting a prisoner on trial 
and finding him guilty when he’s actually innocent.
But I’m 
innocent
A Type I error is when you reject 
H0 when actually it’s correct.
So what’s the probability of 
getting a Type I error?
If you get a Type I error, then this means that 
the null hypothesis must have been rejected. 
In order for the null hypothesis to have been 
rejected, the results of your sample must be in 
the critical region.
The probability of getting a Type I error is the probability of your 
results being in the critical region. As the critical region is defined by the 
significance level of the test, this means that if the significance level of 
your test is α, the probability of getting a Type I error must be also be α.
In other words,
If you get a Type I error, 
your test statistic must be 
here in the critical region.
P(Type I error) = α
where α is the significance level of the test.
type i and type ii errors
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    557
using hypothesis tests
What about Type II errors?
A Type II error is what you get when you accept the null hypothesis, 
and the null hypothesis is actually wrong. It’s like putting a prisoner on 
trial and finding him innocent when he’s actually guilty.
Got away 
with it
A Type II error is when you accept 
H0 when actually it’s wrong.
The probability of getting a Type II error is normally represented by 
the Greek letter β.
P(Type II error) = β
So how do we find β?
Finding the probability of a Type II error is more difficult than finding 
the probability of getting a Type I error. Here are the steps that are 
involved, and we’ll show you how to go through them on the next page.
Check that you have a specific value for H1.
Without this, you can’t calculate the probability of getting a Type II error.
1
Find the range of values outside the critical region of your test.
If your test statistic has been standardized, the range of values must be de-standardized.
2
Find the probability of getting this range of values, assuming H1 is true.
In other words, we find the probability of getting the range of values outside the critical 
region, but this time, using the test statistic described by H1 rather than H0.
3
Download at WoweBook.Com

558    Chapter 13
Finding errors for SnoreCull
Let’s see if we can find the probability of getting Type I and Type II errors for 
the SnoreCull hypothesis test. As a reminder, our standardized test statistic is
Z = X - 90
            3
where X is the number of people cured in the sample. The significance level of 
the test is 5%.
Let’s start with the Type I error
A Type I error is what you get when you reject the null hypothesis when 
actually it’s true. The probability of getting this sort of error is the same as the 
significance level of the test, so this means that
P(Type I error) = 0.05
So what about the Type II error?
A Type II error is what you get when you accept the null hypothesis when the 
alternate hypothesis is true. We can only calculate this if H1 specifies a single 
specific value, so let’s use an alternate hypothesis of p = 0.8, as this is the 
proportion of successes in the doctor’s sample. This means that our hypotheses 
become 
	
	
	
	
H0: p = 0.9
	
	
	
	
H1: p = 0.8 
The reason why H1 must specify an exact value for p is so that we can calculate 
probabilities using it. If we used an alternate hypothesis of p < 0.9, we wouldn’t 
be able to use it to calculate the probability of getting a Type II error.
	
	
     If you need to calculate the 
probability of getting a Type II error 
in an exam, you’ll be given H1.
This means that you won’t have to decide on the 
alternate hypothesis yourself. If you need to calculate 
this sort of error, it will be given to you.
This time we’ll use H1: p = 0.8 instead of H1: p < 0.8. We can only 
calculate the probability of getting a Type II error if we have a 
single specific value for the alternate hypothesis.
This gives you the probability of rejecting 
the null hypothesis that 90% of people are 
cured when it’s true.
calculating type i and type ii errors
To look up probabilities using the 
alternate hypothesis probability 
distribution, we need an exact 
value for p.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    559
using hypothesis tests
These values are inside 
the critical region.
Z ~ N(0, 1)
We need to find the range of values
Now that the alternate hypothesis H1 gives a specific value for p, we can move 
on to the next step. We need to find the values of X that lie outside the critical 
region of the hypothesis test.
We saw back on page 548 that the critical region for the test is given by Z 
< -1.64—in other words, P(Z < -1.64) = 0.05. This means that values that fall 
outside the critical region are given by Z ≥ -1.64.
Values here are outside 
the critical region.
If we de-standardize this, we get
X - 90  ≥ -1.64
    3
 X - 90 ≥ -1.64 x 3
        X ≥ -4.92 + 90
        X ≥ 85.08
In other words, we would have accepted the null hypothesis if 85.08 people 
or more had been cured by SnoreCull.
The final thing we need to do is work out P(X ≥ 85.08), assuming that H1 
is true. That way, we’ll be able to work out the probability of accepting the 
null hypothesis when actually H1 is true instead. As we’re using the normal 
distribution to approximate X, we need to use a probability distribution  
X ~ N(np, npq), where n = 100 and p = 0.8. This gives us
X ~ N(80, 16)
This means that if we can calculate P(X ≥ 85.08) where X ~ N(80, 16), we’ll 
have found the probability of getting a Type II error.
We calculate this in the same way we calculate other normal distribution 
probabilities, by finding the standard score and then looking up the value in 
standard normal probability tables.
-1.64
Download at WoweBook.Com

560    Chapter 13
This is the usual way of calculating the 
standard score; just subtract the expectation, 
and divide by the standard deviation.
P(Type II error) = 0.102
Q: Why is it so much harder to find P(Type II error) than 
P(Type I error)?
A: It’s because of the way they’re defined. A Type I error is what 
you get when you wrongly reject the null hypothesis. The probability 
of getting this sort of error is the same as α, the significance level of 
the test. 
 
A Type II error is the error you get when you accept the null 
hypothesis when actually the alternate hypothesis is true. To find the 
probability of getting this sort of error, you need to start by finding 
the range of values in your sample that would mean you accept the 
null hypothesis. Once you’ve found these values, you then have to 
calculate the probability of getting them assuming that H1 is true.
Q: Do I need to use the normal distribution every time I want 
to find the probability of getting a Type II error?
A: The probability distribution you use all depends on your test 
statistic. In this case, our test statistic followed a normal distribution, 
so that’s the distribution we used to find P(Type II error). If our test 
statistic had followed, say, a Poisson distribution, we would have 
used a Poisson distribution instead.
This gives you the probability of accepting 
the null hypothesis that 90% of people are 
cured when actually 80% of people are.
more on type ii errors
Find P(Type II error)
We can find the probability of getting a Type II error by calculating  
P(X ≥ 85.08) where X ~ N(80, 16). Let’s start off by finding the standard 
score of 85.08. 
	
	
z = 85.08 - 80
	
	
          16
	
	
   = 5.08
	
	
         4
	
	
   = 1.27
 
This means that in order to find P(X ≥ 85.08), we need to use standard 
probability tables to find P(Z  1.27).
 
	
	
P(Z  1.27) = 1 - P(Z < 1.27)
	
	
	
     = 1 - 0.8980
	
	
	
     = 0.102
 
In other words,
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    561
using hypothesis tests
Introducing power
So far we’ve looked at the probability of getting different types of error in 
our hypothesis test. One thing that we haven’t looked at is power.
The power of a hypothesis test is the probability that we will reject H0 
when H0 is false. In other words, it’s the probability that we will make the 
correct decision to reject H0.
That sounds complicated. I 
hope it’s not as difficult to 
find as P(Type II error).
Once you’ve found P(Type II error), calculating the 
power of a hypothesis test is easy.
Rejecting H0 when H0 is false is actually the opposite of making a Type II 
error. This means that 
Power = 1 - β
where β is the probability of making a Type II error.
So what’s the power of SnoreCull?
We’ve found the probability of getting a Type II error is 0.102. This 
means that we can find the power of the SnoreCull hypothesis test by 
calculating
 
	
	
Power = 1 - P(Type II error)
	
	
           = 1 - 0.102
	
	
           = 0.898 
 
In other words, the power of the SnoreCull hypothesis test is 0.898. This 
means that the probability that we will make the correct decision to reject 
the null hypothesis is 0.898.
Download at WoweBook.Com

562    Chapter 13
The doctor’s happy
In this chapter, you’ve run through two hypothesis tests, and 
you’ve proved that there’s sufficient evidence to reject the claims 
made by the drug company. You’ve been able to show that based 
on the doctor’s sample, there’s sufficient evidence that SnoreCull 
doesn’t cure 90% of snorers, as the drug company claims.
I thought that the claims sounded too 
good to be true, and you’ve proved that 
there are strong statistical grounds 
for showing I’m right. I’ll sleep quieter 
at night knowing that.
But it doesn’t stop there
Keep reading, and we’ll show you what 
other sorts of hypothesis tests you can use. 
We’ll see you over at Fat Dan’s Casino...
SnoreCull
SnoreCull
48 Tablets
snorecull is a fraud!
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    563
using hypothesis tests
The drug company and their cough syrup manufacturer are having a dispute. The factory says 
that the amount of syrup that gets poured into their bottles follows a distribution  
X ~ N(355, 25), where X is the amount of syrup in the bottle measured in mL. The drug company 
conducted tests on a large sample and found that the mean amount of syrup in 100 bottles 
is 356.5 mL. Test the hypothesis that the factory mean is correct at a 1% level of significance 
against the alternative that the mean amount of syrup in a bottle is greater than 355 mL.
We’re going to guide you through this exercise in two parts. Here are the first three steps.
Step 1: Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test. What’s the null hypothesis? What’s the alternate 
hypothesis?
Step 2: Choose your test statistic. 
Step 3: Determine the critical region for your decision. Does the critical region lie in the lower or upper tail of the 
distribution? What’s the significance level? What’s the critical value?
Hint: Your hypothesis concerns the mean, 
so what’s the distribution of X? How 
do you standardize this?
(part 1)
Download at WoweBook.Com

X ~ N(μ, σ2/n), so this means that under the null hypothesis, X ~ N(355, 25/100) or X ~ N(355, 0.25).
If we standardize this, we get
Z = X - 355
        0.25
   = X - 355
         0.5
Step 1: Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test. What’s the null hypothesis? What’s the alternate 
hypothesis?
We want to test whether the mean amount of syrup in the bottles is 355 mL like the factory says. This 
gives us
	
H0: μ = 355
	
H1: μ > 355
Step 2: Choose your test statistic.
Step 3: Determine the critical region for your decision. Does the critical region lie in the lower or upper tail of the 
distribution? What’s the significance level? What’s the critical value?
The alternate hypothesis is μ > 355, which means the critical region lies in the upper tail. We want to test 
at the 1% significance level, so the critical region is defined by P(Z > c) = 0.01. Using probability tables, 
this gives us c = 2.32. In other words, the critical region is given by Z > 2.32.
The drug company and their cough syrup manufacturer are having a dispute. The factory says 
that the amount of syrup that gets poured into their bottles follows a distribution  
X ~ N(355, 25), where X is the amount of syrup in the bottle measured in mL. The drug company 
conducted tests on a large sample and found that the mean amount of syrup in 100 bottles 
is 356.5 mL. Test the hypothesis that the factory mean is correct at a 1% level of significance 
against the alternative that the mean amount of syrup in a bottle is greater than 355 mL.
We’re going to guide you through this exercise in two parts. Here are the first three steps.
(part 1)
564    Chapter 13
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    565
using hypothesis tests
This exercise continues where the last left off. Here are the final three steps of the hypothesis 
test. What do you conclude?
Step 4: Find the p-value of the test statistic. Use the distribution Z = (X - 355)/0.5, the mean amount of syrup in 
the sample, and remember that this time you’re seeing if your test statistic lies in the upper tail of the distribution, as 
this is where the critical region is.
Step 5: See whether the sample result is within the critical region. Remember that you’re testing at the 1% 
significance level.
Step 6: Make your decision. Is there enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis at the 1% level of significance?
(part 2)
Download at WoweBook.Com

566    Chapter 13
This exercise follows on from the last. Here are the final three steps of the hypothesis test. What 
do you conclude?
Step 4: Find the p-value of the test statistic. Use the distribution Z = (X - 355)/0.5, the mean amount of syrup in the 
sample, and remember that this time you’re seeing if your test statistic lies in the upper tail of the distribution as this 
is where the critical region is.
Z = (X - 355)/0.5
    = (356.5 - 355)/0.5
    = 1.5/0.5
    = 3
The p-value for this is given by P(Z > 3), as the critical region is in the upper tail. Looking this up in 
probability tables gives us
p-value = 0.0013
Step 5: See whether the sample result is within the critical region. Remember that you’re testing at the 1% 
significance level.
The p-value 0.0013 is less than 0.01, the significance level, so that means that the sample result is within 
the critical region
Step 6: Make your decision. Is there enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis at the 1% level of significance?
As the sample result lies in the critical region, there’s sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis. We 
can accept the alternate hypothesis that μ > 355 ml.
A Type I error is when you reject the null hypothesis when it’s actually 
correct. The probability of getting a Type I error is α, the significance level of 
the test.
A Type II error is when you accept the null hypothesis when it’s wrong. The 
probability of getting a Type II error is represented by β. 
To find β, your alternate hypothesis must have a specific value. You then 
find the range of values outside the critical region of your test, and then find 
the probability of getting this range of values under H1.



exercise solution
(part 2)
Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    567
the χ2 distribution
14
There’s Something 
Going On...
Sometimes things don’t turn out quite the way you expect. 
When you model a situation using a particular probability distribution, you have a 
good idea of how things are likely to turn out long-term. But what happens if there are 
differences between what you expect and what you get? How can you tell whether 
your discrepancies come down to normal fluctuations, or whether they’re a sign of 
an underlying problem with your probability model instead? In this chapter, we’ll 
show you how you can use the χ2 distribution to analyze your results and sniff out 
suspicious results. 
I thought his success 
with girls would follow a 
binomial distribution with 
p = 0.8. I was so wrong...
Download at WoweBook.Com

568    Chapter 14
Fat Dan’s is used to making a tidy profit from its 
casino-goers, but this week there’s a problem. The slot 
machines keep hitting the jackpot, the roulette wheel 
keeps landing on 12, the dice are loaded, and too many 
people are winning off one of the blackjack tables.
The casino can’t support the loss for much longer, and 
Fat Dan suspects foul play. He needs your help to get 
to the bottom of what’s going on.
There may be trouble ahead at Fat Dan’s Casino
could fat dan’s casino be rigged?
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    569
the χ2 distribution
Let’s start with the slot machines
As you’ve seen before, Fat Dan’s Casino has a full row of bright, shiny slot 
machines, just waiting to be played. The trouble is that people keep on playing 
them—and winning.
Here’s the expected probability distribution for one of the slot machines, where X 
represents the net gain from each game played:
The casino has collected statistics showing the number of times people get each 
outcome. Here are the frequencies for the observed net gains per game:
We need to compare the actual frequency of each value of x with 
what you’d expect the frequency to be based on the probability 
distribution. Fill in the table below. What do you notice?
x
-2
23
48
73
98
P(X = x)
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
x
-2
23
48
73
98
Frequency
965
10
9
9
7
x
Observed frequency
Expected frequency
-2
965
977
23
10
48
9
73
9
98
7
The observed frequency 
is what we actually get.
Hint: The total observed frequency is 
1000, as this is what you get if you 
add all the observed frequencies. Use 
the probability distribution to work 
out what you’d expect the frequencies 
to be.
It’s $2 per game, so if 
you don’t win anything, 
you lose your $2.
If you hit the jackpot, 
your net gain is $98.
The frequency shows 
you how many games had 
which net gain.
Download at WoweBook.Com

570    Chapter 14
We need to compare the actual frequency of each value of x with 
what you’d expect the frequency to be based on the probability 
distribution. Fill in the table below. What do you notice?
Looking at the data, it looks 
like there might be something 
going on with the slot machine 
payouts. But how can we be 
certain? It’s unlikely, but this 
could happen by pure chance.
x
Observed frequency
Expected frequency
-2
965
977
23
10
8
48
9
8
73
9
6
98
7
1
We need some way of deciding whether these results 
show the slot machines have been rigged.
What we need is some sort of hypothesis test that we can use to test the 
differences between the observed and expected frequencies. That way, we’ll 
have some way of deciding whether the slot machines have been tampered 
with to make sure they keep paying out lots of money.
The question is, what sort of distribution can we use for this hypothesis test?
There’s a difference between the number of people you’d expect to win the jackpot, based 
on the probability distribution, and the number of people actually winning it. What we don’t 
know is how significant these differences are.
We found the expected frequencies 
by multiplying the probability of 
each outcome by 1000, the total 
frequency.
sharpen your pencil solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    571
the χ2 distribution
The χ2 test assesses difference
There’s a new sort of probability distribution that does exactly what we want; 
it’s called the χ2 distribution. χ is pronounced “kye”, and it’s the uppercase 
Greek letter chi. It uses a test statistic to look at the difference between what 
we expect to get and what we actually get, and then returns the probability of 
getting observed frequencies as extreme.
Let’s start with the test statistic. To find the test statistic, first make a table 
featuring the observed and expected frequencies for your problem. When 
you’ve done that, use your observed and expected frequencies to compute the 
following statistic, where O stands for the observed frequency, and E for the 
expected frequency:
Use the table of observed and expected frequencies you just 
worked out on the previous page for Fat Dan’s slot machines to 
compute the test statistic. What result do you get?
What do you think a low value tells you? What about a high value?
In other words, for each probability in the probability distribution, you take 
the difference between the frequency you expect and the frequency you 
actually get. You square the result, divide by the expected frequency, and 
then add all of these results up together.
So what’s the test statistic for the slot machine problem?
O refers to the observed frequency, while 
E refers to the expected frequency.
Σ 
(O - E)2
          E
Χ2 = 
Download at WoweBook.Com

572    Chapter 14
So at what point does Χ2 become so large that it’s significant? We need to 
figure out when we can fairly certain that something’s going on with the slot 
machines that’s beyond what could reasonably happen by chance.
To find this out, we need to look at the χ2 distribution.
Use the table of observed and expected frequencies you just 
worked out on the previous page for Fat Dan’s slot machines to 
compute the test statistic. What result do you get?
What do you think a low value tells you? What about a high value?
So what does the test statistic represent?
The test statistic Χ2 gives a way of measuring the difference between the 
frequencies we observe and the frequencies we expect. The smaller the value 
of Χ2, the smaller the difference overall between the observed and expected 
frequencies.
You divide by E, the expected frequency, as this makes the result proportional 
to the expected frequency.
The smaller the differences between O 
and E, the smaller X2 is.
Dividing by E makes the difference 
proportional to the expected frequency.
X2 = (965 - 977)2/977 + (10 - 8)2/8 + (9 - 8)2/8 + (9 - 6)2/6 + (7 - 1)2/1
    = (-12)2/977 + 22/8 + 12/8 + 32/6 + 62
    = 144/977 + 4/8 + 1/8 + 9/6 + 36
    = 0.147 + 0.5 + 0.125 + 1.5 + 36
    = 38.272
If the value of X2 is low, then this means there’s a less significant difference between the observed and expected 
frequencies. The higher X2 is, the more significant the differences become.
another sharpen solution
Σ 
(O - E)2
          E
Χ2 = 
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    573
the χ2 distribution
Two main uses of the χ2 distribution
The χ2  probability distribution specializes in detecting when the results you 
get are significantly different from the results you expect. The probability 
distribution does this using the Χ2 test statistic you saw earlier.
The χ2  distribution has two key purposes. 
First of all, it’s used to test goodness of fit. This means that you can use 
it to test how well a given set of data fits a specified distribution. As an 
example, we can use it to test how well the observed frequencies for the slot 
machine winnings fits the distribution we expect.
Another use of the χ2 distribution is to test the independence of two 
variables. It’s a way of checking whether there’s some sort of association.
The χ2 distribution takes one parameter, the Greek letter ν, pronounced 
“new.” Let’s take a look at the effect that ν has on the shape of the 
probability distribution.
A shorthand way of saying that you’re using the test statistic Χ2 with the 
χ2  distribution that has a particular value of ν is 
Χ2 ~ χ2(ν)
X2 follows a χ2 distribution with a given value of ν.
When ν is 1 or 2
When ν has a value of 1 or 2, the shape of the χ2 distribution 
follows a smooth curve, starting off high and getting lower. It’s 
shape is like a reverse J. The probability of getting low values of 
the test statistic Χ2 is much higher than getting high values. In 
other words, observed frequencies are likely to be close to the 
frequency you expect.
When ν is greater than 2
When ν has a value that’s greater than 2, the shape of the χ2 
distribution changes. It starts off low, gets larger, and then 
decreases again as Χ2 increases. The shape is positively skewed, 
but when ν is large, it’s approximately normal.
It’s like an X, but curvier.
The χ2 distribution has this 
sort of shape if ν is 1 or 2.
It has this sort of shape if ν 
is greater than 2. The larger 
ν becomes, the more normal 
the χ2 distribution gets.
χ2
χ2
Download at WoweBook.Com

574    Chapter 14
ν = (number of classes) - (number of restrictions)
ν = 5 – 1
   = 4
ν represents degrees of freedom
You’ve seen how the shape of the χ2 distribution depends on the value of ν, but 
how do we find what ν is?
ν is the number of degrees of freedom. It’s the number of independent 
variables used to calculate the test statistic Χ2, or the number of independent 
pieces of information. Let’s see what this means in practice.
Here’s another look at the table of observed and expected frequencies for the 
slot machines:
The number of degrees of freedom is the number of expected frequencies we 
have to calculate, taking into account any restrictions we have upon us. 
In order to calculate the test statistic Χ2, we had to calculate all of the expected 
frequencies. This meant that we had to calculate five expected frequencies. 
While calculating this, we had one thing we had to bear in mind: the total 
expected frequency and the total observed frequency had to add up to the same 
amount. In other words, we had one restriction on us in our calculations.
So what’s ν?
To calculate ν, we take the number of pieces of information we calculated, and 
subtract the number of restrictions. To figure out the test statistic Χ2, we had to 
calculate five separate pieces of information, with 1 restriction. This means that 
the number of degrees of freedom is given by
In general,
x
Observed frequency
Expected frequency
-2
965
977
23
10
8
48
9
8
73
9
6
98
7
1
Another way of looking at this is that we had to calculate four of the expected 
frequencies using the probability distribution. We could work out the final 
frequency by looking at what the total expected frequency should be.
degrees of freedom
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    575
the χ2 distribution
Tail probability α
ν
.25
.20
.15
.10
.05
.025
.02
.01
.005
.0025
.001
1
1.32
1.64
2.07
2.71
3.84
5.02
5.41
6.63
7.88
9.14
10.83
2
2.77
3.22
3.79
4.61
5.99
7.38
7.82
9.21
10.60
11.98
13.82
3
4.11
4.64
5.32
6.25
7.81
9.35
9.84
11.34
12.84
14.32
16.27
4
5.39
5.99
6.74
7.78
9.49
11.14
11.67
13.28
14.86
16.42
18.47
5
6.63
7.29
8.12
9.24
11.07
12.83
13.39
15.09
16.75
18.39
20.51
6
7.84
8.56
9.45
10.64
12.59
14.45
15.03
16.81
18.55
20.25
22.46
7
9.04
9.80
10.75
12.02
14.07
16.01
16.62
18.48
20.28
22.04
24.32
8
10.22
11.03
12.03
13.36
15.51
17.53
18.17
20.09
21.95
23.77
26.12
9
11.39
12.24
13.29
14.68
16.92
19.02
19.68
21.67
23.59
25.46
27.88
What’s the significance?
So how can we use the χ2 distribution to say how significant the 
discrepancy is between the observed and expected frequencies? As 
with other hypothesis tests, it all depends on the level of significance.
When you conduct a test using the χ2 distribution, you conduct a one-
tailed test using the upper tail of the distribution as your critical region. 
This way, you can specify the likelihood of your results coming from 
the distribution you expect by checking whether the test statistic lies in 
the critical region of the upper tail.
If you conduct a test at significance level α, then you write this as
χ2
α(ν)
The critical region for testing 
at the α significance level lies 
in the upper tail. The higher the 
value of your test statistic, the 
bigger the differences between 
your observed and expected 
frequencies.
χ2
α(ν)
How to use χ2 probability tables
To find the critical value, start off with the degrees of freedom, ν, and 
the significance level, α. Use the first column to look up ν, and the 
top row to look up α. The place where they intersect gives the value x, 
where P(χ2
α(ν) ≥ x) = α. In other words, it gives you the critical value.
As an example, if you wanted to find the critical value for testing at the 
5% level with 8 degrees of freedom, you’d find 8 in the first column, 
0.05 in the top row, and read off a value of 15.51. In other words, if 
our test statistic Χ2 was greater than 15.51, it would be in the critical 
region at the 5% level with 8 degrees of freedom.
Here’s the 
row for  
ν = 8.
Here’s the column for 0.05.
This is where 8 and 0.05 meet.
So how do we find the critical region for the χ2 distribution? We can use  
χ2 probability tables.
Download at WoweBook.Com

576    Chapter 14
Hypothesis testing with χ2
Here are the broad steps that are involved in hypothesis testing with the χ2 
distribution.
Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test, 
and its alternative
Find the expected frequencies and the degrees 
of freedom
Calculate the test statistic Χ2
Determine the critical region for your decision
See whether the test statistic is within the 
critical region
Make your decision
Look familiar? Most of these steps are exactly the same as for other 
hypothesis tests. In other words, it’s exactly the same process as before.
Q: So are χ2 tests really just a special 
kind of hypothesis test?
A: Yes, they are. You go through pretty 
much all the steps you had to go through 
before.
Q: Do I always use the upper tail for 
my test?
A: Yes, if you’re conducting a hypothesis 
test, you always use the upper tail. This is 
because the higher the value of your χ2 test 
statistic, the more your observed frequencies 
differ from the expected frequencies.
Q: I think I’ve heard the term degrees 
of freedom before. Have I?
A: Yes, you have. Remember when we 
looked at how we can use the t-distribution 
to create confidence intervals? Well, the 
t-distribution uses degrees of freedom, too. 
Q: I think I’ve seen degrees of freedom 
referred to as df rather than ν. Is that 
wrong?
A: Not at all. Different text books use 
different conventions, and we’re using ν. 
At the end of the day, they have the same 
meaning.
Q: I want to look for information about 
the χ2 distribution on the Internet. How do 
I find it? Do I need to type in Greek?
A: You should be able to find any 
information you need by searching for the 
term “chi square.” The χ2 distribution is also 
written “chi-squared.”
These steps are 
just like the ones 
we had before
These steps are 
different from the 
ones you saw before
c2 hypothesis testing steps
1
2
6
5
4
3
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    577
the χ2 distribution
It’s your job to see whether there’s sufficient evidence at the 5% level to say that the slot 
machines have been rigged. We’ll guide you through the steps.
1. What’s the null hypothesis you’re going to test? What’s the alternate hypothesis?
2. There are 4 degrees of freedom. What’s the region for the 5% level?
3. What’s the test statistic?
4. Is your test statistic inside or outside the critical region?
5. Will you accept or reject the null hypothesis?
Hint: You calculated this earlier.
Download at WoweBook.Com

578    Chapter 14
It’s your job to see whether there’s sufficient evidence at the 5% level to say that the slot 
machines have been rigged. We’ll guide you through the steps.
1. What’s the null hypothesis you’re going to test? What’s the alternate hypothesis?
2. There are 4 degrees of freedom. What’s the region for the 5% level?
3. What’s the test statistic?
4. Is your test statistic inside or outside the critical region?
5. Will you accept or reject the null hypothesis?
H0: The slot machine winnings per game follow the described probability distribution.
 
H1: The slot machine winnings per game do not follow this probability distribution.
From probability tables, χ2
5%(4) = 9.49. This means that the critical region is where X2 > 9.49.
The test statistic is X2. You found this earlier; its value is 38.272.
The value of X2 is 38.27, and as the critical region is X2 > 9.49, this means that X2 is inside the critical 
region.
The value of X2 is inside the critical region, so this means that we reject the null hypothesis. In other words, 
there is sufficient evidence to reject the hypothesis that the slot machine winnings follow the described 
probability distribution.
x
-2
23
48
73
98
P(X = x)
0.977
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.001
exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    579
the χ2 distribution
Let’s summarize the steps you went through to discover this.
First of all, you took a set of observed frequencies for the slot machine and 
calculated what you expected the frequencies to be, assuming they followed a 
particular probability distribution. You then calculated the degrees of freedom 
and calculated the test statistic Χ2, which gave you an indication of the total 
discrepancy between the observed frequencies and those you expected.
After this, you used the χ2 probability tables to find the critical region of the 
distribution at the 5% level of significance. You checked this against your test 
statistic and found that there was sufficient evidence to say that the slot machine 
has been rigged to pay out more money.
Your test statistic fell in the critical region, 
so you could reject the null hypothesis
This sort of hypothesis test is called a goodness of fit test. It tests whether 
observed frequencies actually fit in with an assumed probability distribution. 
You use this sort of test whenever you have a set of values that should fit a 
distribution, and you want to test whether the data actually does.
You’ve solved the slot machine mystery
Thanks to your careful use of the χ2 probability distribution, you’ve found out 
that there’s sufficient evidence that the slot machine isn’t following the probability 
distribution that the casino expects it to. Fat Dan is very grateful to you, as this 
means you’ve come up with evidence that the slot machine has been rigged in 
some way. He’s shut them down, so he doesn’t lose any more money.
Out of 
Orde
r
χ2
α(ν)
Download at WoweBook.Com

580    Chapter 14
Fat Dan thinks that the dice in the dice games are loaded. Take a look at the following 
observed frequencies for one six-sided die, and test whether there’s enough evidence to 
support the claim that the die isn’t fair at the 1% significance level. We’ll guide you through the 
steps.
Here are the observed frequencies:
x
Observed frequency
Expected frequency
1
107
2
198
3
192
4
125
5
132
6
248
Value
1
2
3
4
5
6
Frequency
107
198
192
125
132
248
Step 1: Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test, and its alternative.
Step 2: Find the expected frequencies and the degrees of freedom.
Start off by completing the expected frequencies for the die. You’ll need to take into account how many times the die is 
thrown in total, and the probability of getting each value. X represents the value of one toss of the die.
Once you’ve found the expected frequencies, what are the number of degrees of freedom?
You find this the same way you 
found the degrees of freedom for 
the slot machines.
long exercise
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    581
the χ2 distribution
Step 3: Determine the critical region for your decision.
You’ll need to use the significance level and number of degrees of freedom
Step 4: Calculate the test statistic Χ2.
You can calculate this using your observed and expected frequencies from step 2.
Step 5: See whether the test statistic is within the critical region.
Step 6: Make your decision.
Download at WoweBook.Com

582    Chapter 14
Fat Dan thinks that the dice in the dice games are loaded. Take a look at the following observed 
frequencies for one six-sided die, and test whether there’s enough evidence to support the claim 
that the die isn’t fair at the 1% significance level. We’ll guide you through the steps.
Here are the observed frequencies:
x
Observed frequency
Expected frequency
1
107
167
2
198
167
3
192
167
4
125
167
5
132
167
6
248
167
Value
1
2
3
4
5
6
Frequency
107
198
192
125
132
248
Step 1: Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test, and its alternative.
To test whether the die is fair, we have to determine whether there’s sufficient evidence that it isn’t.  
This gives you
	
H0: The die is fair, and every value has an equal chance of being thrown. This means the probability of 
	
     getting each value is 1/6.
	
H1: The die isn’t fair.
Step 2: Find the expected frequencies and the degrees of freedom.
Start off by completing the expected frequencies for the die. You’ll need to take into account how many times the die is 
thrown in total, and the probability of getting each value. X represents the value of one toss of the die.
The total expected frequency 
needs to match the total 
observed frequency. If you add 
the observed frequencies together, 
you get 1002.
The probability of getting each 
value is 1/6. This means the 
expected frequency of each value 
is 1002/6 = 167.
Once you’ve found the expected frequencies, what are the number of degrees of freedom?
We had to find 6 expected frequencies, and their total had to equal 1002. In other words, we had to find 6 
pieces of information with 1 restriction. This gives us
	
ν = 6 - 1
	
   = 5
long exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    583
the χ2 distribution
Step 3: Determine the critical region for your decision.
You’ll need to use the significance level and number of degrees of freedom
The critical region is given by X2 > 15.09. As X2 = 88.24, the test statistic is within the critical region.
From probability tables, χ2
1%(5) = 15.09. This means that the critical region is where X2 > 15.09.
Step 4: Calculate the test statistic Χ2.
You can calculate this using your observed and expected frequencies from step 2.
X2 =     (O - E)2
	
    E
    = (107-167)2/167 + (198-167)2/167 + (192-167)2/167 + (125-167)2/167 + (132-167)2/167 + (248-167)2/167
    = (-60)2/167 + (31)2/167 + (25)2/167 + (-42)2/167 + (-35)2/167 + (81)2/167
    = (3600 + 961 + 625 + 1764 + 1225 + 6561)/167
    = 14736/167
    = 88.24
Step 5: See whether the test statistic is within the critical region.
As your test statistic lies within the critical region, this means that there is sufficient evidence at the 1% level 
to reject the null hypothesis. In other words, you accept the alternate hypothesis that the die isn’t fair.
Step 6: Make your decision.
Download at WoweBook.Com

584    Chapter 14
So can you use the χ2 goodness 
of fit test with any underlying 
probability distribution?
The χ2 goodness of fit test works for pretty much any 
probability distribution.
You can use the χ2 distribution to test the goodness of fit of any probability 
distribution, just as long as you have a set of observed frequencies, and you can 
work out what you expect the frequencies to be.
The hardest thing is working out what the degrees of freedom for ν should be. 
Here are the degrees of freedom for some of the most common probability 
distributions you’ll want to use with the χ2 goodness of fit.
Distribution
Condition
ν
Binomial
You know what p is
You don’t know what p is, and 
you have to estimate it from 
the observed frequencies
ν = n - 1
ν = n - 2
Poisson
You know what λ is
You don’t know what λ is, and 
you have to estimate it from 
the observed frequencies
ν = n - 1
ν = n - 2
Normal
You know what μ and σ2 are
You don’t know what μ and σ2 
are, and you have to estimate 
them from the observed 
frequencies
ν = n - 1
ν = n - 3
p is the probability of success, or 
the proportion of successes in the 
population.
λ is the rate of 
occurrences in an 
interval.
n is the 
total number 
of observed 
frequencies.
c2 distribution cheat sheet
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    585
the χ2 distribution
Fat Dan has another problem
So far you’ve investigated whether the slot machines seem to be rigged 
in some way, by using a goodness of fit test to see whether the observed 
frequencies you have correspond to the expected probability distribution. 
Fat Dan has other problems, though, and this time it’s his staff.
Fat Dan thinks he’s losing more money than he should from one of the 
croupiers on the blackjack tables. Can you determine whether there’s 
significant evidence to show whether or not Fat Dan’s right?
Here are the three croupiers who man the tables:
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Win
43
49
22
Draw
8
2
5
Lose
47
44
30
What we need is some way of testing whether the outcome of the game 
is dependent on which croupier is leading the game.
What do you need to know in order to test this hypothesis?
These are the 
outcomes you get for 
each of the games.
These are the observed 
results for each of 
the croupiers.
Download at WoweBook.Com

586    Chapter 14
So far we’ve looked at the χ2 distribution in terms of performing goodness 
of fit tests. This isn’t the only use of the χ2 distribution. The χ2 distribution 
can also be used to perform tests of independence.
A χ2 test for independence is a test to see whether two factors are 
independent, or whether there seems to be some sort of association 
between them. This is just the situation we have with the croupiers. We 
want to test whether the croupier leading a game of blackjack has any 
impact on the outcome. In other words, we assume that the choice of 
croupier is independent of the outcome, unless there’s sufficient evidence 
against it.
You conduct a test for independence in the same way you conduct a 
goodness of fit test. You set up a hypothesis, use the observed and expected 
frequencies to calculate the Χ2 test statistic, and then see if it falls within the 
critical region.
Now hold it right there! I think 
you’re missing something. How can we 
work out the expected frequencies? 
All we have to go on is the observed 
frequencies the actual game outcomes.
We need to know what the expected frequencies are 
in order to calculate the test statistic Χ2. 
This means that we need some way of calculating the expected frequencies 
from the observed frequencies. And it all comes down to probability...
the χ2 distribution can test for independence
testing for independence
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    587
the χ2 distribution
There are a few steps you need to go through to find the expected 
frequencies.
To start off, calculate the total frequencies for the outcomes and the croupiers, 
and also the grand total. You can show the results in a table like this, called a 
contingency table.
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Total
Win
43
49
22
114
Draw
8
2
5
15
Lose
47
44
30
121
Total
98
95
57
250
Now we can use this information to find the expected number of wins for each croupier.
Let’s start by finding the expected frequency for the number of wins with croupier A.
First off, we can use these grand totals to find the probability of getting a particular 
outcome, or a particular croupier. As an example, to find the probability of winning, you 
divide the total number of wins by the grand total:
P(Win) = Total Wins
	
    Grand Total
P(A) =    Total A
	
Grand Total
Now if the croupier and the outcome of the game are independent, as we 
assume they are, this means that you can find the probability of getting 
a win with croupier A by multiplying together these two probabilities. In 
other words:
P(Win and A) = Total Wins   ×     Total A
	
	
   Grand Total     Grand Total
How can we use this to find the expected number of wins for croupier A?
Similarly, you can find the probability of playing against croupier A by 
dividing the total for croupier A by the grand total.
Back in chapter 4, we saw 
that for independent events, 
P(A ∩ B) = P(A) x P(B).
Total for 
croupier A
Total number 
of wins
Grand total
You can find the expected frequencies using probability
Download at WoweBook.Com

588    Chapter 14
Σ 
(O - E)2
          E
Χ2 = 
So what are the frequencies?
So far, we’ve found that the probability of winning with croupier A, and 
we want to use this to find the expected frequency of wins. To do this, all 
we just need to multiply the probability of winning with croupier A by the 
grand total. This gives us
Expected frequency = Row Total × Column Total
	
	
	
	
    Grand Total
Expected frequency = Grand Total  ×   Total Wins  ×     Total A
	
	
	
	
    Grand Total     Grand Total
	
	
    = Total Wins × Total A
	
	
	
Grand Total
In other words, to find the expected frequency of wins with croupier A, 
multiply the total number of wins by the total number of games with 
croupier A, and divide by the grand total.
How do we find the frequencies in general?
You can generalize this so that you have a nice, easy result you can apply 
to every frequency you need to find. To find the expected frequency for a 
particular row and column combination, multiply the total for the row by 
the total for the column, and divide by the grand total.
Once you’ve figured out what all the expected frequencies are, you can use 
this to calculate the test statistic Χ2. It’s the same test statistic as before, so 
you need to calculate
The key is to ensure you include every observed frequency and every 
corresponding expected frequency.
For every observed frequency, subtract 
the expected frequency, square the result, 
and divide by the expected frequency. 
Then add your results together.
finding the frequencies
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    589
the χ2 distribution
Here’s the table showing the observed frequencies for the croupiers. Your task is to figure out all 
the expected frequencies.
Once you’ve found all the expected frequencies, calculate the test statistic Χ2. Use the table below to help you. The 
first column gives all the observed frequencies, the second column is for the corresponding expected frequencies, 
and if you add together all the numbers in the third column, it gives you your test statistic.
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Total
Win
43
49
22
114
Draw
8
2
5
15
Lose
47
44
30
121
Total
98
95
57
250
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Win
(114×98)/250=44.688
Draw
(15×98)/250=5.88
Lose
(121×98)/250=47.432
Observed
Expected
(O - E)2 
    E
43
44.688
(43-44.688)2/44.688 = 2.85/44.688 = 0.064
8
5.88
(8-5.88)2/5.88 = 4.4944/5.88 = 0.764
47
47.432
(47-47.432)2/47.432 = 0.187/47.432 = 0.004
49
2
44
22
5
30
ΣO = 250
ΣE = 
 
These are 
the observed 
frequencies.
Work out 
each of the 
expected 
frequencies 
here.
(Row total x column total)/grand total
A
B
C
Use the values in the first two 
columns to help you calculate this.
Σ 
(O - E)2
          E
= 
Download at WoweBook.Com

590    Chapter 14
Here’s the table showing the observed frequencies for the croupiers. Your task is to figure out all 
the expected frequencies.
Once you’ve found all the expected frequencies, calculate the test statistic Χ2. Use the table below to help you. The 
first column gives all the observed frequencies, the second column is for the corresponding expected frequencies, 
and if you add together all the numbers in the third column, it gives you your test statistic.
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Total
Win
43
49
22
114
Draw
8
2
5
15
Lose
47
44
30
121
Total
98
95
57
250
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Win
(114×98)/250=44.688
(114x95)/250=43.32
(114x57)/250=25.992
Draw
(15×98)/250=5.88
(15x95)/250=5.7
(15x57)/250=3.42
Lose
(121×98)/250=47.432
(121x95)/250=45.98
(121x57)/250=27.588
Observed
Expected
(O - E)2 
    E
43
44.688
(43-44.688)2/44.688 = 2.85/44.688 = 0.064
8
5.88
(8-5.88)2/5.88 = 4.4944/5.88 = 0.764
47
47.432
(47-47.432)2/47.432 = 0.187/47.432 = 0.004
49
43.32
(49-43.32)2/43.32 = 5.68/43.32 = 0.131
2
5.7
(2-5.7)2/5.7 = 13.69/5.7 = 2.402
44
45.98
(44-45.98)2/45.98 = 3.9204/45.98 = 0.085
22
25.992
(22-25.992)2/25.992 = 15.936/25.992 = 0.613
5
3.42
(5-3.42)2/3.42 = 2.4964/3.42 = 0.730
30
27.588
(30-27.588)2/27.588 = 5.817/27.588 = 0.211
ΣO = 250
ΣE = 250
Observed 
frequencies
Expected 
frequencies
This is your test statistic
A
B
C
exercise solution
Σ 
(O - E)2
          E
= 5.004
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    591
the χ2 distribution
We still need to calculate degrees of freedom
Before we can use the χ2 distribution to find the significance of the observed 
frequencies, there’s just one more thing we need to find. We need to find ν, the 
number of degrees of freedom.
You saw earlier that the number of degrees of freedom is the number of pieces 
of independent information we are free to choose, taking into account any 
restrictions. This means that we look at how many expected frequencies we have 
to calculate independently, and subtract the number of restrictions.
First of all, let’s look at the total number of expected frequencies we had to 
calculate. We had to figure out the expected frequencies for the three croupiers 
and the three possible outcomes. This means that we worked out 3 × 3 = 9 
expected frequencies. 
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Win
Draw
Lose
We had to figure out  
3x3 = 9 expected 
frequencies.
Now for each row and for each column, we only actually had to calculate two of 
the expected frequencies. We knew what the total frequency should be, so we could 
choose the third to make sure that the frequencies added up to the right result. In 
other words, we only actually had to calculate 4 of the expected frequencies; the 
other 5 had to fit in with the total frequencies we already knew about.
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Win
Draw
Lose
We only had to calculate these 
expected frequencies - we 
could figure out the others 
using the total frequency of 
each row and column.
Since we had to calculate 4 expected frequencies, this makes the number of 
degrees of freedom. There were 4 pieces of independent information we had 
to calculate; once we’d done that, the rest were known automatically. In other 
words, ν = 4.
Another way of looking at this is that we needed to find 9 values overall, and 
there were 5 values that we didn’t have to calculate independently. Using our 
formula from before, this gives us ν = 9 – 5 = 4.
We could figure 
the last row and 
column out using 
the totals.
Download at WoweBook.Com

592    Chapter 14
Conduct a hypothesis test with a 1% significance level to see whether the outcome of the 
game is independent of the croupier manning the table. Here’s a reminder of the steps, but 
remember you’ve worked out some of these already.
1. Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test, and its alternative.
2. Find the expected frequencies and the degrees of freedom.
3. Determine the critical region for your decision.
4. Calculate the test statistic Χ2.
5. See whether the test statistic is within the critical region.
6. Make your decision.
another long exercise
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    593
the χ2 distribution
We’ve left you lots of space 
for your calculations.
Download at WoweBook.Com

594    Chapter 14
Conduct a hypothesis test with a 1% significance level to see whether the outcome of the 
game is independent of the croupier manning the table. Here’s a reminder of the steps, but 
remember you’ve worked out some of these already.
1. Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test, and its alternative.
2. Find the expected frequencies and the degrees of freedom.
3. Determine the critical region for your decision.
4. Calculate the test statistic Χ2.
5. See whether the test statistic is within the critical region.
6. Make your decision.
Step 1:
We want to test whether the outcome of the game is independent of the croupier manning the table. This 
means we can use:
	
H0: There is no relationship between the outcome of the game and the croupier manning the table.
	
H1: There is a relationship between the outcome of the game and the croupier manning the table
Step 2:
We found the expected frequencies in the exercise back on page 590, and we’ve just seen that the number 
of degrees of freedom is 4. 
Step 3:
From probability tables, χ2
1%(4) = 13.28. This means that the critical region is given by X2 > 13.28.
Step 4:
We also calculated the test statistic X2 using the expected frequencies back on page 590. We found that 
X2 = 5.004.
Step 5:
The critical region is given by X2 > 13.28, so this means that X2 is outside the critical region.
Step 6:
As X2 is outside the critical region, we accept the null hypothesis. There is insufficient evidence that there’s 
a relationship between game outcome and croupier.
and another long exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    595
the χ2 distribution
Take a look at how we calculated the degrees 
of freedom for a 3x3 table. How do you think 
we could generalize this? See if you can work 
this out, then turn the page.
Q: I’m still not sure I understand how 
you found the degrees of freedom for the 
croupiers. Why are there four degrees of 
freedom?
A: We found the degrees of freedom by 
looking at how many expected frequencies 
we had to calculate, and working out how 
many of these we could have calculated by 
just looking at the total observed frequencies 
for each row and column. 
 
There are three croupiers and three 
outcomes. If you use a contingency table to 
calculate these, the row and column totals 
for the expected frequencies must match 
those of the observed frequencies. This 
means that once you’ve calculated the first 2 
expected frequencies for any row or column, 
the final one is determined by the overall 
total. Therefore, you only need to calculate 
2×2 expected frequencies from scratch. This 
gives you your four degrees of freedom.
Q: Are there any other uses of the χ2 
distribution besides testing goodness of 
fit and independence?
A: These are the two main uses of the 
χ2  distribution. The thing to remember is 
that you can use it to test the goodness of 
fit of virtually any probability distribution. As 
an example, you can use it to test whether 
observed frequencies fit a particular binomial 
distribution.
Q: Should I test at any particular 
level?
A: It depends on your situation. Just as 
with other hypothesis tests, the smaller the 
level of significance, the stronger you need 
your evidence to be before you reject your 
null hypothesis. 
 
Testing at the 5% and 1% level of 
significance is common.
I wonder what happens 
if you have a different size 
contingency table? How 
do you find the number of 
degrees of freedom then?
Download at WoweBook.Com

596    Chapter 14
Generalizing the degrees of freedom
So far we’ve looked at the degrees of freedom for a 3×3 contingency table, 
but how do we generalize the result?
Imagine you’re comparing two variables, and you have h rows of one variable 
and k columns of another. You know what the row and column totals should 
be. Now imagine you want to find the number of degrees of freedom.
Column 1
...
Column k-1 Column k
Row 1
...
Row h-1
Row h
For each row, there are k columns. You know what the total of each row 
should be, so you only actually need to calculate the expected frequency of  
(k – 1) of the columns. You automatically know what the kth column is 
because you know the total frequency of the row.
Column 1
...
Column k-1 Column k
Row 1
You need to calculate these.
You can figure 
out column k using 
the row total.
It’s a similar process for the columns. Each column has h rows, and you 
know what the total of each column should be. This means that you have 
to calculate (h – 1) of the rows for each column. You automatically know 
what the value of the hth row is because you know the total frequency of the 
column.
Column 1
Row 1
...
Row h – 1
Row h
You need to calculate 
the frequencies of 
these h-1 rows.
You can figure out row h 
using the column total.
calculating degrees of freedom in general
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    597
the χ2 distribution
Column 1
...
Column k-1 Column k
Row 1
...
Row h-1
Row h
ν = (h - 1) × (k - 1)
And the formula is...
If we put this together, the total number of expected frequencies 
you have to calculate is (k - 1) × (h - 1). In other words, if you have a 
table with dimensions h by k, you can find the degrees of freedom by 
calculating
You have to calculate (h-1) x (k-1) 
expected frequencies, so there are 
(h-1) x (k-1) degrees of freedom.
Fat Dan has hired two more croupiers. What are the degrees of 
freedom now? The outcomes of the game remain the same.
Download at WoweBook.Com

598    Chapter 14
Fat Dan has hired two more croupiers. What are the degrees of 
freedom now? The outcomes of the game remain the same.
As Fat Dan has hired 2 more croupiers, this means that we now have a 3x5 contingency table.
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Croupier D
Croupier E
Win
Draw
Lose
A, B, and C are the original croupiers, 
and Fat Dan has hired two more.
The number of degrees of freedom is given by (h-1) x (k-1), where h is the number of rows, and k is the number 
of columns. This gives us
	
ν = 2 x 4
	
   = 8
The χ2 distribution allows you to conduct goodness 
of fit tests and test independence between 
variables.
It takes a test statistic 
	
Χ2 = Σ
(O - E)2
 
	
	
 
 E 
where O refers to observed frequencies, and E 
refers to expected frequencies.  
 
 


If we’re using test statistic Χ2 with the χ2 
distribution, we write 
 
	
Χ2 ~ χ2
α(ν) 
 
where ν is the number of degrees of freedom, and 
α is the level of significance.
In a goodness of fit test, ν is the number of 
classes minus the number of restrictions.
In a test for independence for two variables, if your 
contingency table has h rows and k columns,  
 
	
ν = (h – 1) × (k – 1)



sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    599
the χ2 distribution
You’ve saved the casino
Thanks to your mastery of the χ2 distribution, you’ve managed to 
unearth which of the casino games look like they’ve been rigged. You 
discerned explainable discrepancies between what you got and what you 
expected, and you also detected suspicious activity at certain levels of 
significance.
Fat Dan is delighted with your efforts. Thanks to you, he knows which of 
his casino games need to be investigated, and the blackjack croupiers get 
to keep their jobs. Next time you’re in town, tell Fat Dan—he’ll supply 
you with extra chips, all on the house.
Well done!
Fat Dan’s promised you 
a bunch of casino chips 
on the house!
Back in
 Busin
ess!
Download at WoweBook.Com

600    Chapter 14
Fat Dan thinks that one or more of his croupiers are somehow influencing the results of the roulette 
wheel. Here’s data showing the observed frequency with which the ball lands in each color pocket 
for each of the croupiers. Conduct a test at the 5% level to see whether pocket color and croupier 
are independent, or whether there is sufficient evidence to show there might be something going on.
Step 1: Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test, and its alternative.
Step 2: Find the expected frequencies and the degrees of freedom. Use the table of expected frequencies below.
Step 3: Determine the critical region for your decision.
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Red
375
367
357
Black
379
336
362
Green
46
37
41
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Total
Red
1099×800/2300=382.3
1099×740/2300=353.6
Black
1077×800/2300=374.6
Green
124×800/2300=43.1
Total
800
Hint: Complete the row and column totals first these are 
the same as for the observed frequencies above.
chapter-ending long exercise
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    601
the χ2 distribution
Step 4: Calculate the test statistic Χ2. Use the table below to help you.
Step 5: See whether the test statistic is within the critical region.
Step 6: Make your decision.
Observed
Expected
(O - E)2 
    E
375
382.3
(375-382.3)2/382.3 = 53.29/382.3 = 0.139
379
374.6
(379-374.6)2/374.6 = 19.36/374.6 = 0.005
46
43.1
(46-43.1)2/43.1 = 8.41/43.1 = 0.195
367
353.6
(367-353.6)2/353.6 = 179.56/353.6 = 0.508
336
37
357
362
41
ΣO = 
ΣE = 
Σ
(O - E)2 =  
         E
A
B
C
Download at WoweBook.Com

602    Chapter 14
Fat Dan thinks that one or more of his croupiers are somehow influencing the results of the roulette 
wheel. Here’s data showing the observed frequency with which the ball lands in each color pocket 
for each of the croupiers. Conduct a test at the 5% level to see whether pocket color and croupier 
are independent, or whether there is sufficient evidence to show there might be something going on.
Step 1: Decide on the hypothesis you’re going to test, and its alternative.
You want to test whether or not pocket color is independent of croupier. This gives
	
H0: Roulette wheel pocket color and croupier are independent.
	
H1: Pocket color and croupier are not independent.
Step 2: Find the expected frequencies and the degrees of freedom. Use the table of expected frequencies below.
There are 3 columns and 3 rows, and we find the number of degrees of freedom by multiplying together (number 
of rows - 1) and (number of columns - 1). This gives us
	
ν = 2x2
	
   = 4
Step 3: Determine the critical region for your decision.
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Red
375
367
357
Black
379
336
362
Green
46
37
41
Croupier A
Croupier B
Croupier C
Total
Red
1099×800/2300=382.3
1099×740/2300=353.6
1099x760/2300=363.1
1099
Black
1077×800/2300=374.6
1077x740/2300=346.5
1077x760/2300=355.9
1077
Green
124×800/2300=43.1
124x740/2300=39.9
124x760/2300=41.0
124
Total
800
740
760
2300
You find the expected frequencies by multiplying each row and column total, and dividing by the grand total.
From probability tables, χ2
5%(4) = 9.49. This means that the critical region is given by X2 > 9.49.
chapter-ending long exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    603
the χ2 distribution
The critical region is given by X2 > 9.48. As X2 = 1.583, the test statistic is outside the critical region.
Step 4: Calculate the test statistic Χ2. Use the table below to help you.
Step 5: See whether the test statistic is within the critical region.
As your test statistic lies outside the critical region, this means that there is insufficient evidence at the 5% 
level to reject the null hypothesis. In other words, you accept the null hypothesis that pocket color and croupier 
are independent.
Step 6: Make your decision.
Observed
Expected
(O - E)2 
    E
375
382.3
(375-382.3)2/382.3 = 53.29/382.3 = 0.139
379
374.6
(379-374.6)2/374.6 = 19.36/374.6 = 0.005
46
43.1
(46-43.1)2/43.1 = 8.41/43.1 = 0.195
367
353.6
(367-353.6)2/353.6 = 179.56/353.6 = 0.508
336
346.5
(336-346.5)2/346.5 = 110.25/346.5 = 0.318
37
39.9
(37-39.9)2/39.9 = 8.41/39.9 = 0.211
357
363.1
(357-363.1)2/363.1 = 37.21/363.1 = 0.102
362
355.9
(362-355.9)2/355.9 = 37.21/355.9 = 0.105
41
41.0
(41-41)2/41 = 0/41 = 0
ΣO = 2300
ΣE = 2300 Σ
(O - E)2 = 1.583 
          E
A
B
C
This means that the test statistic is given by X2 = 1.583.
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is a new chapter    605
correlation and regression
15
What’s My Line?
The more I use this 
sandpaper, the less 
chance there is of him 
noticing my stubble.
Have you ever wondered how two things are connected? 
So far we’ve looked at statistics that tell you about just one variable—like men’s height, 
points scored by basketball players, or how long gumball flavor lasts—but there are other 
statistics that tell you about the connection between variables. Seeing how things are 
connected can give you a lot of information about the real world, information that you can 
use to your advantage. Stay with us while we show you the key to spotting connections: 
correlation and regression. 
Download at WoweBook.Com

606    Chapter 15
Never trust the weather
Concerts are best when they’re in the open air—at least that’s 
what these groovy guys think. They have a thriving business 
organizing open-air concerts, and ticket sales for the summer 
look promising.
Today’s concert looks like it will be one of their best ones ever. 
The band has just started rehearsing, but there’s a cloud on the 
horizon...
Feel that funky 
rhythm, baby.
Sweet! But is that 
a rain cloud I see 
up there?
Before too long the sky’s overcast, temperatures are dipping, and 
it looks like rain. Even worse, ticket sales are hit. The guys are in 
trouble, and they can’t afford for this to happen again. 
What the guys want is to be able to predict what concert attendance 
will be given predicted hours of sunshine. That way, they’ll be able to 
gauge the impact an overcast day is likely to have on attendance. If 
it looks like attendance will fall below 3,500 people, the point where 
ticket sales won’t cover expenses, then they’ll cancel the concert
They need your help.
the sunshine-attendance connection
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    607
correlation and regression
That’s easy. We can find the mean 
and standard deviation and look at the 
distribution. That will tell us everything.
Let’s analyze sunshine and attendance
Here’s sample data showing the predicted hours of sunshine and concert 
attendance for different events. How can we use this to estimate ticket 
sales based on the predicted hours of sunshine for the day?
Most of the time, that’s exactly the sort of thing we’d 
need to do to predict likely outcomes.
The problem this time is, what would we find the mean and standard 
deviation of? Would we use the concert attendance as the basis for our 
calculations, or would we use the hours of sunshine? Neither one of them 
gives us all the information that we need. Instead of considering just one set of 
data, we need to look at both.
So far we’ve looked at independent random variables, but not ones that are 
dependent. We can assume that if the weather is poor, the probability of high 
attendance at an open air concert will be lower than if the weather is sunny. 
But how do we model this connection, and how do we use this to predict 
attendance based on hours of sunshine?
It all comes down to the type of data.
How would you go about modelling the connection 
between sets of data?
Sunshine (hours)
1.9
2.5
3.2
3.8
4.7
5.5
5.9
7.2
Concert attendance (100’s)
22
33
30
42
38
49
42
55
Download at WoweBook.Com

608    Chapter 15
Exploring types of data
Up until now, the sort of data we’ve been dealing with has been univariate.
Univariate data concerns the frequency or probability of a single variable. As an 
example, univariate data could describe the winnings at a casino or the weights of 
brides in Statsville. In each case, just one thing is being described.
What univariate data can’t do is show you connections between sets of data. For 
example, if you had univariate data describing the attendance figures at an open air 
concert, it wouldn’t tell you anything about the predicted hours of sunshine on that 
day. It would just give you figures for concert attendance.
So what if we do need to know what the connection is between variables? While 
univariate data can’t give us this information, there’s another type of data that 
can—bivariate data.
Open Air Concert Attendance
Attendance
Frequency
Univariate data for concert 
attendance tells you nothing 
about the hours of sunshine.
All about bivariate data
Bivariate data gives you the value of two variables for each observation, not 
just one. As an example, it can give you both the predicted hours of sunshine and 
the concert attendance for a single event or observation, like this. 
Sunshine (hours)
1.9
2.5
3.2
3.8
4.7
5.5
5.9
7.2
Concert attendance (100’s)
22
33
30
42
38
49
42
55
Bivariate data gives you the 
value of two variables for each 
observation. 
If one of the variables has been controlled in some way or is used to explain the 
other, it is called the independent or explanatory variable. The other variable 
is called the dependent or response variable. In our example, we want to use 
sunshine to predict attendance, so sunshine is the independent variable, and 
attendance is the dependent.
introducing bivariate data
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    609
correlation and regression
Visualizing bivariate data
Just as with univariate data, you can draw charts for bivariate data to 
help you see patterns. Instead of plotting a value against its frequency or 
probability, you plot one variable on the x-axis and the other variable against 
it on the y-axis. This helps you to visualize the connection between the two 
variables. 
This sort of chart is called a scatter diagram or scatter plot, and 
drawing one of these is a lot like drawing any other sort of chart.
Start off by drawing two axes, one vertical and one horizontal. Use the 
x-axis for one variable and the y-axis for the other. The independent variable 
normally goes along the x-axis, leaving the dependent variable to go on 
the y-axis. Once you’ve drawn your axes, you then take the values for each 
observation and plot them on the scatter plot.
Here’s a scatter plot showing the number of hours of sunshine and concert 
attendance figures for particular events or observations. As the predicted 
number of hours sunshine is the independent variable, we’ve plotted it on 
the x-axis. The concert attendance is the dependent variable, so that’s on the 
y-axis.
x (sunshine)
1.9
2.5
3.2
3.8
4.7
5.5
5.9
7.2
y (attendance)
22
33
30
42
38
49
42
55
Here’s the data.
Can you see how the scatter diagram helps you visualize patterns in the data? 
Can you see how this might help us to define the connection between open air 
concert attendance and predicted number of hours sunshine for the day?
Hours sunshine goes 
on the x-axis, 
attendance on the 
y-axis.
sunshine (hours)
attendance (100’s)
These are all the data points.
Sunshine is on the x-axis.
Attendance is 
on the y-axis.
Concert Attendance and Sunshine
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Download at WoweBook.Com

610    Chapter 15
sunshine (hours)
attendance (100’s)
Concert Attendance and Sunshine
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
We know we haven’t shown you how to analyze bivariate data yet, 
but see how far you get in analyzing the scatter diagram for the 
concert organizers.
What sort of patterns do you see in the chart? How can you relate 
this to the underlying data? What do you expect open air concert 
attendance to be like if it’s sunny? What about if it’s overcast?
sharpen your pencil
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    611
correlation and regression
The Case of the High Sunscreen Sales
An intern at a sunscreen manufacturer has been given the task of 
looking at sunscreen sales in order to see how they can best market 
their particular brand. 
He’s been given a pile of generated scatter diagrams that model 
sunscreen sales against various other factors. He’s been asked to pull 
out ones where there seems to be some relationship between the 
two factors on the diagram, as this will help the sales team.
The first diagram that the intern finds plots sunscreen sales for 
the day against pollen count. He’s surprised to see that when 
there’s a high pollen count, sales of sunscreen are significantly 
higher, and he decides to tell the sales team that they need to think 
about using pollen count in their advertising.
When the sales team hears his suggestion, they look at him blankly. 
What do you think the sales team should do?
Does a high pollen count make people buy sunscreen?
Five Minute 
Mystery
Five Minute 
Mystery
Download at WoweBook.Com

612    Chapter 15
We know we haven’t shown you how to analyze bivariate data yet, 
but see how you get on with analyzing the scatter diagram for 
the concert organizers.
What sort of patterns do you see in the chart? How can you relate 
this to the underlying data? What do you expect open air concert 
attendance to be like if it’s sunny? What about if it’s overcast?
First of all, the chart shows that the data points are clustered around a straight line on the chart, and this 
line slopes upwards. It looks like, if the predicted number of hours of sunshine in a day is relatively low, then the 
concert attendance is low too. If the number of hours sunshine is high, then we can expect concert attendance to 
be high too. This basically means that the sunnier the weather, the more people you can expect to go to the open 
air concert.
One thing that’s important to note is that we can only be confident about saying this within the range of the 
data. We have no data to say what the pattern is like if the number of hours of sunshine is below 2 hours or 
above 7.5 hours. 
Scatter diagrams show you patterns
As you can see, scatter diagrams are useful because they show the 
actual pattern of the data. They enable you to more clearly visualize 
what connection there is between two variables, if indeed there’s any 
connection at all.
The scatter diagram for the concert data shows a distinct pattern—
the data points are clustered along a straight line. We call this a 
correlation.
sharpen solution
sunshine (hours)
attendance (100’s)
Concert Attendance and Sunshine
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    613
correlation and regression
Positive linear correlation
Positive linear correlation is when low values on the x-axis 
correspond to low values on the y-axis, and higher values of 
x correspond to higher values of y. In other words, y tends to 
increase as x increases.
Negative linear correlation
Negative linear correlation is when low values on the x-axis 
correspond to high values on the y-axis, and higher values of 
x correspond to lower values of y. In other words, y tends to 
decrease as x increases.
No correlation
If the values of x and y form a random pattern, then 
we say there’s no correlation.
Scatter diagrams show the correlation between pairs of values.
Correlations are mathematical relationships between variables. You can 
identify correlations on a scatter diagram by the distinct patterns they form. 
The correlation is said to be linear if the scatter diagram shows the points 
lying in an approximately straight line.
Let’s take a look at a few common types of correlation between two variables:
Linear Correlations Up Close
The points plotted for x and y are 
centered around a straight line.
The line points up, as 
it’s positive.
The line points 
down, as it’s 
negative.
This chart shows a 
random pattern, so 
there’s no correlation.
Download at WoweBook.Com

614    Chapter 15
Correlation vs. causation
So if there’s a correlation, 
does that mean one of the 
variables caused the value 
of the other?
A correlation between two variables doesn’t necessarily 
mean that one caused the other or that they’re actually 
related in real life.
A correlation between two variables means that there’s some sort of 
mathematical relationship between the two. This means that when we 
plot the values on a chart, we can see a pattern and make predictions about 
what the missing values might be. What we don’t know is whether there’s an 
actual relationship between the two variables, and we certainly don’t know 
whether one caused the other, or if there’s some other factor at work.
As an example, suppose you gather data and find that over time, the number 
of coffee shops in a particular town increases, while the number of record 
shops decreases. While this may be true, we can’t say that there is a real-life 
relationship between the number of coffee shops and the number of record 
shops. In other words, we can’t say that the increase in coffee shops caused the 
decline in the record shops. What we can say is that as the number of coffee 
shops increases, the number of record shops decreases.
No. coffee shops
No. record shops
Record shops decrease as coffee 
shops increase, but this doesn’t mean 
that the increase in coffee shops has 
caused the decrease in record shops.
difference between correlation and causation
Coffee shops vs. record shops
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    615
correlation and regression
Solved: The Case of the High Sunscreen Sales
Does a high pollen count make people buy sunscreen?
One of the sales team members walks over to the intern.
“Thanks for the idea,” she says, “but we’re not going 
to use it in our advertising. You see, the high pollen 
count doesn’t make people buy more sunscreen.”
The intern looks at her, confused. “But it’s all here on 
this scatter diagram. As pollen count increases, so do 
sunscreen sales.”
“That’s true,” says the salesperson, “but that doesn’t mean that the high 
pollen count has caused the high sales. The days when the pollen count 
is high are generally days when the weather is sunny, so people are going 
outside more. They’re buying more sunscreen because they’re spending 
the day outside.”
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Download at WoweBook.Com

616    Chapter 15
Q: So are we saying that the predicted sunshine causes low 
ticket sales?
A: The bivariate data shows that there is a mathematical 
relationship between the two variables, but we can’t use it to 
demonstrate cause and effect. It’s intuitively possible that more 
people will go to open air concerts when it’s sunny, but we can’t say 
for certain that sunshine causes this. We’d need to do more research, 
as there may be other factors.
Q: Other factors? Like what?
A: One example would be the popularity of the artist performing. If 
a well-known artist is holding a concert, then fans may want to go to 
the concert no matter what the weather. Similarly, an unpopular artist 
is unlikely to have the same dedication from fans.
Q: Do scatter diagrams use populations or samples of data?
A: They can use either. A lot of the time, you’ll actually be using 
samples, but the process of plotting a scatter diagram is the same 
irrespective of whether you have a sample or a population.
Q: If there’s a correlation between two variables, does it have 
to be linear?
A: Correlation measures linear relationships, but not all 
relationships are linear. As an example, a strong relationship 
between two variables could be a distinctive curve, such as y = x2. In 
this chapter, we’re only going to be dealing with linear relationships, 
though.
Far out, dude, I’m liking 
the way the sunshine and 
attendance connect.
no dumb questions
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    617
correlation and regression
But hold on, man! How can we 
predict concert attendance 
based on predicted sunshine? 
If the concert attendance 
drops below 3,500, we’ll have to 
bail out, and that’d be a burn.
We need to predict the concert attendance
So far we’ve looked at what bivariate data is, and how scatter diagrams 
can show whether there’s a mathematical relationship between the two 
variables. What we haven’t looked at yet is how we can use this to make 
predictions.
What we need to do next is see how we can use the data to make 
predictions for concert attendance, based on predicted hours of sunshine.
How do you think we could go about making predictions like this for bivariate 
data?
Download at WoweBook.Com

618    Chapter 15
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
A line of best fit? And 
you just guess what the line is 
based on what looks good to 
you? That’s hardly scientific.
Drawing the line in this way is just a best guess.
The trouble with drawing a line in this way is that it’s an estimate, so 
any predictions you make on the basis of it can be suspect. You have 
no precise way of measuring whether it’s really the best fitting line. It’s 
subjective, and the quality of the line’s fit depends on your judgment.
Predict values with a line of best fit
So far you’ve seen how scatter diagrams can help you see whether there’s a 
correlation between values, by showing you if there’s some sort of pattern. 
But how can you use this to predict concert attendance, based on the 
predicted amount of sunshine? How would you use your existing scatter 
diagram to predict the concert attendance if you know how many hours of 
sunshine are expected for the day?
One way of doing this is to draw a straight line through the points on the 
scatter diagram, making it fit the points as closely as possible. You won’t be 
able to get the straight line to go through every point, but if there’s a linear 
correlation, you should be able to make sure every point is reasonably close 
to the line you draw. Doing this means that you can read off an estimate 
for the concert attendance based on the predicted amount of sunshine.
Here’s your original 
scatter diagram.
Here’s the line. It goes straight 
through the heart of where the 
data points are.
sunshine (hours)
attendance (100’s)
You can use the line to estimate 
concert attendance for a certain 
number of hours predicted sunshine.
The line that best fits the data points is called the line of best fit.
line of best fit
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    619
correlation and regression
sunshine (hours)
attendance (100’s)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
These are all different 
lines for the same data, 
so which do you use?
Your best guess is still a guess
Imagine if you asked three different people to draw what each of them 
think is the line of best fit for the open air concert data. It’s quite likely 
that each person would come up with a slightly different line of best fit, 
like this:
All three lines could conceivably be a line of best fit for the data, but 
what we can’t tell is which one’s really best.
What we really need is some alternative to drawing the line of best 
fit by eye. Instead of guessing what the line should be, it will be more 
reliable if we had a mathematical or statistical way of using the data 
we have available to find the line that fits best.
We need to find the equation of the line
The equation for a straight line takes the form y = a + bx, where 
a is the point where the line crosses the y-axis, and b is the slope 
of the line. This means that we can write the line of best fit in the 
form y = a + bx.
In our case, we’re using x to represent the predicted number of 
hours of sunshine, and y to represent the corresponding open 
air concert figures. If we can use the concert attendance data to 
somehow find the most suitable values of a and b, we’ll have a 
reliable way to find the equation of the line, and a more reliable 
way of predicting concert attendance based on predicted hour of 
sunshine.
x
y
a
b
y = a + bx
y = a + bx is the 
equation of a line, 
where a and b are 
numbers.
Download at WoweBook.Com

620    Chapter 15
We need to minimize the errors
Let’s take a look at what we need from the line of best fit, y = a + bx. 
The best fitting line is the one that most accurately predicts the true values of 
all the points. This means that for each known value of x, we need each of 
the y variables in the data set to be as close as possible to what we’d estimate 
them to be using the line of best fit. In other words, given a certain number 
of hours sunshine, we want our estimates for open air concert attendance to 
be as close as possible to the actual values. 
The line of best fit is the line y = a + bx that minimizes the distances between 
the actual observations of y and what we estimate those values of y to be for 
each corresponding value of x.
Let’s represent each of the y values in our data set using yi, and its 
estimate using the line of best fit as yi. This is the same notation that 
we used for point estimators in previous chapters, as the ^ symbol 
indicates estimates.
We want to minimize the total distance between each actual value of y 
and our estimate of it based on the line of best fit. In other words, we 
need to minimize the total differences between yi and yi. We could try 
doing this by minimizing
Σ(yi - yi)
but the problem with this is that all of the distances will actually cancel 
each other out. We need to take a slightly different approach, and it’s 
one that we’ve seen before.
^
^
^
line of best fit and sum of squared errors
y = a + bx
These are the 
actual values.
These are the values 
we predict based on 
the line of best fit
If we can find the line that minimizes all the 
distances between the observed and expected 
values of y, we’ll have the line of best fit.
x
y
These are the 
actual and 
estimated values 
of y for the 
same value of x.
yi is the actual value.
yi is the value we 
estimate it to be 
from the line.
^
x
y
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    621
correlation and regression
The SSE reminds me of the variance. 
The variance uses squared distances from 
the mean, and the SSE uses squared 
distances from the line.
The variance and SSE are calculated in similar ways.
The SSE isn’t the variance, but it does deal with the distance squared between 
two particular points. It gives the total of the distances squared between the 
actual value of y and what we predict the value of y to be, based on the line 
of best fit.
What we need to do now is use the data to find the values of a and b that 
minimize the SSE, based on the line y = a + bx.
Introducing the sum of squared errors
Can you remember when we first derived the variance? We wanted to look 
at the total distance between sets of values and the mean, but the total 
distances cancelled each other out. To get around this, we added together 
all the distances squared instead to ensure that all values were positive.
We have a similar situation here. Instead of looking at the total distance 
between the actual and expected points, we need to add together the 
distances squared. That way, we make sure that all the values are positive.
The total sum of the distances squared is called the sum of squared 
errors, or SSE. It’s given by:
SSE = Σ(y - y)2
The difference between the real values 
of y, and what we predict from the 
line of best fit
The sum of squared errors
In other words, we take each value of y, subtract the predicted value of y 
from the line of best fit, square it, and then add all the results together.
^
Download at WoweBook.Com

622    Chapter 15
Let’s start with b
The value of b for the line y = a + bx gives us the slope, or steepness, of 
the line. In other words, b is the slope for the line of best fit.
We’re not going to show you the proof for this, but the value of b that 
minimizes the SSE Σ(y - y)2 is given by
b = Σ((x - x)(y - y))
	
   Σ(x - x)2
Find the equation for the line of best fit
We’ve said that we want to minimize the sum of squared errors, Σ(y - y)2, 
where y = a + bx. By doing this, we’ll be able to find optimal values for a 
and b, and that will give us the equation for the line of best fit.
Are you sure? That 
looks complicated. 
The calculation looks tricky at first, but it’s not that 
difficult with practice.
First of all, find x and y, the means of the x and y values for the data that 
you have. Once you’ve done that, calculate (x - x) multiplied by (y - y) for 
every observation in your data set, and add the results together. Finally, 
divide the whole lot by Σ(x - x)2. This last part of the equation is very 
similar to how you calculate the variance of a sample. The only difference 
is that you don’t divide by (n - 1). You can also get software packages that 
work all of this out for you.
Let’s take a look at how you use this in practice.
^
^
Each value of x, minus the mean of the 
x values, multiplied by the corresponding 
value of y, minus the mean of the y values
This bit’s similar to how you find the 
variance of x. For each value of x, 
subtract the mean of the x values and 
square the result.
	
	
     If you need to calculate this in 
an exam, you will almost 
certainly be given the formula.
This means that you won’t have to memorize 
the formula, just know how to use it. 
calculating b for the line of best fit
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    623
correlation and regression
Let’s see if we can use this to find the slope of the line y = a + bx for 
the concert data. First of all, here’s a reminder of the data:
x (sunshine)
1.9
2.5
3.2
3.8
4.7
5.5
5.9
7.2
y (attendance)
22
33
30
42
38
49
42
55
Let’s start by finding the values of x and y, the sample means of the x 
and y values. We calculate these in exactly the same way as before, so
x = (1.9 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 3.8 + 4.7 + 5.5 + 5.9 + 7.2)/8
   = 34.7/8
   = 4.3375
 
y = (22 + 33 + 30 + 42 + 38 + 49 + 42 + 55)/8
   = 311/8
   = 38.875
Now that we’ve found x and y, we can use them to help us find the 
value of b using the formula on the opposite page. 
We use x and y to help us find b
The first part of the formula is Σ(x - x)(y - y). To find this, we take the x 
and y values for each observation, subtract x from the x value, subtract 
y from the y value, and then multiply the two together. Once we’ve 
done this for every observation, we then add the whole lot up together. 
Use the values of x to find x, 
and the values of y to find y.
Σ(x - x)(y - y) = (1.9 - 4.3375)(22 - 38.75) + (2.5 - 4.3375)(33 - 38.75) + (3.2 - 4.3375)(30 - 38.75) +  
	
           (3.8 - 4.3375)(42 - 38.75) + (4.7 - 4.3375)(38 - 38.75) + (5.5 - 4.3375)(49 - 38.75) +  
	
           (5.9 - 4.3375)(42 - 38.75) + (7.2 - 4.3375)(55 - 38.75)
	
       = (-2.4375)(-16.75) + (-1.8375)(-5.875) + (-1.1375)(-8.875) + (-0.5375)(3.125) + (0.3625)(-0.875) + 
	
           (1.1625)(10.125) + (1.5625)(3.125) + (2.8625)(16.125)
	
       = 40.828125 + 10.7953125 + 10.0953125 -1.6796875 -0.3171875 + 11.7703125 + 4.8828125 +  
	
           46.1578125
	
       = 122.53 (to 2 decimal places)
x - x
y - y
(x - x)(y - y)
Add these together for 
every set of values.
Finding the slope for the line of best fit
Download at WoweBook.Com

624    Chapter 15
Σ(x - x)2 = (1.9 - 4.3375)2 + (2.5 - 4.3375)2 + (3.2 - 4.3375)2 + (3.8 - 4.3375)2 + (4.7 - 4.3375)2 + (5.5 - 4.3375)2 +  
	
   (5.9 - 4.3375)2 + (7.2 - 4.3375)2
              = (-2.4375)2 + (-1.8375)2 + (-1.1375)2 + (-0.5375)2 + (0.3625)2 + (1.1625)2 + (1.5625)2 + (2.8625)2
              = 23.02 (to 2 decimal places)
We find the value of b by dividing Σ(x - x)(y - y) by Σ(x - x)2. This gives us
b = 122.53/23.02
    = 5.32
Finding the slope for the line of best fit, part ii
Here’s a reminder of the data for concert attendance and predicted hours of sunshine:
We’re part of the way through calculating the value of b, where y = a + bx. 
We’ve found that x = 4.3375, y = 38.875, and Σ(x - x)(y - y) = 122.53. The 
final thing we have left to find is Σ(x - x)2. Let’s give it a go
x (sunshine)
1.9
2.5
3.2
3.8
4.7
5.5
5.9
7.2
y (attendance)
22
33
30
42
38
49
42
55
We find Σ(x - x)2 using the 
x values. It’s a bit like finding 
the variance of a sample, but 
without dividing by n-1.
In other words, the line of best fit for the data is y = a + 5.32x. But what’s a?
Q: It looks like the formulas you’ve 
given are for samples rather than 
populations. Is that right?
A: That’s right. We’ve used samples 
rather than populations because the data 
we’ve been given is a sample. There’s 
nothing to stop you using a population if you 
have the data, just use μ instead of x. 
 
 
 
 
Q: Is the value of b always positive?
A: No, it isn’t. Whether b is positive 
or negative actually depends on the type 
of linear correlation. For positive linear 
correlation, b is positive. For negative linear 
correlation, b is negative.
Q: I’ve heard of the term gradient. 
What’s that?
A: Gradient is another term for the slope 
of the line, b.
Q: What about if there’s no 
correlation? Can I still work out b?
A: If there’s no correlation, you can still 
technically find a line of best fit, but it won’t 
be an effective model of the data, and you 
won’t be able to make accurate predictions 
using it.
Q: Is there an easy way of calculating 
b?
A: Calculating b is tricky if you have lots 
of observations, but you can get software 
packages to calculate this for you.
b = Σ(x - x)(y - y)
	
Σ(x - x)2
Here’s a reminder 
of the formula.
We’ve found b. This gives the slope 
for the line of best fit.
calculating b for the line of best fit, part deux
(x - x)2
Note, we don’t use y 
or y in this part of 
the equation.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    625
correlation and regression
We’ve found b, but what about a?
So far we’ve found what the optimal value of b is for the line of best fit  
y = a + bx. What we don’t know yet is the value of a. 
I’m sure we’d be able 
to find a if we knew 
one of the points it 
should go through.
The line needs to go through point (x, y).
It’s good for the line of best fit to go through the the point (x, y), the 
means of x and y. We can make sure this happens by substituting x and y 
into the equation for the line y = a + bx. This gives us
y = a + bx
or
a = y - bx
We’ve already found values for x, y, and b. Substituting in these values 
gives us
a = 38.875 – 5.32(4.3375)
   = 38.875 – 23.0755
   = 15.80 (to 2 decimal places)
This means that the line of best fit is given by
y = 15.80 + 5.32x
	
	
     If you’re taking a statistics 
exam, it’s likely you’ll be 
given this formula.
This means that you’re unlikely to have to 
memorize it, you just need to know how 
to use it. 
sunshine (hours)
attendance (100’s)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
x
y
y = 15.80 + 5.32x
x
y
b
Download at WoweBook.Com

626    Chapter 15
Least Squares Regression Up Close
The mathematical method we’ve been using to find the line of best 
fit is called least squares regression.
Least squares regression is a mathematical way of fitting a line 
of best fit to a set of bivariate data. It’s a way of fitting a line y = a + 
bx to a set of values so that the sum of squared errors is minimized—
in other words, so that the distance between the actual values and 
their estimates are minimized. The sum of squared errors is given by
To perform least squares regression on a set of data, you need 
to find the values of a and b that best fit the data points to the 
line y = a + bx and minimizes the SSE. You can do this using:
a = y - bx
and
b = Σ(x - x)(y - y)
	
Σ(x - x)2
Once you’ve found the line of best fit, y = a + bx, you can use it 
to predict the value of y, given a value b. To do this, just substitute 
your x value into the equation y = a + bx.
The line y = a + bx is called the regression line.
	
       When you’re predicting values of y 
for a particular value of x, be wary 
of predicting values that fall outside 
the area you have data points for. 
Linear regression is just an estimate based on the 
information you have, and it shows the relationship 
between the data points you know about. This doesn’t 
mean that it applies well beyond the limits of the data 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
x
y
y = a + bx
SSE = Σ(y - y)2
^
least squares regression in depth
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    627
correlation and regression
We’ve found an equation for the regression line, so now the 
concert organizers have a couple of questions for you.  As a 
reminder, the regression line is given by 
                                          y = 15.80 + 5.32x
 
where x is the predicted hours of sunshine, and y is the concert 
attendance in 100’s.
The predicted amount of sunshine on the day of the next concert is 6 hours. What do you expect concert 
attendance to be?
If concert attendance looks like it’s dropping below 3,500, the concert organizers won’t make a profit and will 
have to cancel the concert. What’s the corresponding number of hours of predicted sunshine?
Download at WoweBook.Com

628    Chapter 15
The predicted amount of sunshine on the day of the next concert is 6 hours. What do you expect concert 
attendance to be?
If concert attendance looks like it’s dropping below 3,500, the concert organizers won’t make a profit and will 
have to cancel the concert. What’s the corresponding number of hours of predicted sunshine?
We’ve found an equation for the regression line, so now the 
concert organizers have a couple of questions for you.  As a 
reminder, the regression line is given by 
                                          y = 15.80 + 5.32x
 
where x is the predicted hours of sunshine, and y is the concert 
attendance in 100’s.
As x is the predicted number of hours of sunshine, this means that x = 6. We need to find the 
corresponding prediction for concert attendance, so this means we need to find y for this value of x.
	
y = 15.80 + 5.32x
	
  = 15.80 + 5.32 x 6
	
  = 15.80 + 31.92
	
  = 47.72
As y is in 100s, this means that the expected concert attendance is 47.72 x 100 = 4772.
This time, we want to find the value of x for a particular value of y.
The concert attendance is 3,500, which means that y = 35. This gives us
	
	
 y = 15.80 + 5.32x
	
	
35 = 15.80 + 5.32x
	
35 - 15.80 = 5.32x
	
        19.2 = 5.32x
	
	
 x = 19.2/5.32
	
	
   = 3.61 (to 2 decimal places)
In other words, we’d predict concert attendance to be below 3,500 if the predicted hours of sunshine is 
below 3.61 hours.
sharpen solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    629
correlation and regression
That’s awesome, dude! But just one 
question. How accurate is this exactly?
Why do you think it’s important to know the strength of the correlation? What 
difference do you think this would make to the concert organizers?
You’ve made the connection
So far you’ve used linear regression to model the connection between 
predicted hours of sunshine and concert attendance. Once you know what 
the predicted amount of sunshine is, you can predict concert attendance 
using y = a + bx.
Being able to predict attendance means you’ll be able to really help the 
concert organizers know what they can expect ticket sales to be, and also 
what sort of profit they can reasonably expect to make from each event.
It’s the line of best fit, but we don’t know how 
accurate it is.
The line y = a + bx is the best line we could have come up with, but 
how accurately does it model the connection between the amount 
of sunshine and the concert attendance? There’s one thing left to 
consider, the strength of correlation of the regression line. 
What would be really useful is if we could come up with some way of 
indicating how far the points are dispersed away from the line, as that 
will give an indication of how accurate we can expect our predictions 
to be based on what we already know.
Let’s look at a few examples.
Download at WoweBook.Com

630    Chapter 15
Accurate linear correlation
For this set of data, the linear correlation is an accurate 
fit of the data. The regression line isn’t 100% perfect, 
but it’s very close. It’s likely that any predictions made 
on the basis of it will be accurate.
Let’s look at some correlations
The line of best fit of a set of data is the best line we can come up with to 
model the mathematical relationship between two variables.
Even though it’s the line that fits the data best, it’s unlikely that the line 
will fit precisely through every single point. Let’s look at some different 
sets of data to see how closely the line fits the data.
Can you see what the problem is?
Both sets of data have a regression line, but the actual fit of the data varies 
quite a lot. For the first set of data, the correlation is very tight, but for the 
second, the points are scattered too widely for the regression line to be 
useful.
Least squares estimates can be used to predict values, which means they 
would be helpful if there was some way of indicating how tightly the data 
points fit the line, and how accurate we can expect any predictions to be 
as a result.
There’s a way of calculating the fit of the line, called the correlation 
coefficient.
No linear correlation
For this set of data, there is no linear correlation. It’s 
possible to calculate a regression line using least squares 
regression, but any predictions made are unlikely to be 
accurate.
Where would we 
draw the line?
types of correlations
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    631
correlation and regression
The correlation coefficient is a number between -1 and 1 that describes the 
scatter of data points away from the line of best fit. It’s a way of gauging how 
well the regression line fits the data. It’s normally represented by the letter r.
If r is -1, the data is a perfect negative linear correlation, with all of the 
data point in a straight line. If r is 1, the data is a perfect positive linear 
correlation. If r is 0, then there is no correlation. 
r=-1
r=0
r=1
Usually r is somewhere between these values, as -1, 0, and 1 
are all extreme.
If r is negative, then there’s a negative linear correlation 
between the two variables. The closer r gets to -1, the stronger 
the correlation, and the closer the points are to the line.
If r is positive, then there’s a positive linear correlation 
between the variables. The closer r gets to 1, the stronger the 
correlation.
In general, as r gets closer to 0, the linear correlation gets 
weaker. This means that the regression line won’t be able to 
predict y values as accurately as when r is close to 1 or -1. The 
pattern might be random, or the relationship between the 
variables might not be linear.
If we can calculate r for the concert data, we’ll have an idea 
of how accurately we can predict concert attendance based 
on the predicted hours of sunshine. So how do we calculate r? 
Turn the page and we’ll show you how.
r
I’m the correlation 
coefficient, r. I 
say how strong the 
correlation is between 
the two variables.
Think of r as standing 
for relationship.
The correlation coefficient measures how well the line fits the data
Download at WoweBook.Com

632    Chapter 15
So how do we calculate the correlation coefficient, r?
We’re not going to show you the proof for this, but the correlation 
coefficient r is given by
where sx is the standard deviation of the x values in the sample, and sy is 
the standard deviation of the y values. 
I get it. We use 
the value of b to 
help us calculate r. 
r = b sx
        sy
We’ve already done most of the hard work.
Since we’ve already calculated b, all we have left to find is sx and sy. What’s 
more, we’re already most of the way towards finding sx.
When we calculated b, we needed to find the value of Σ(x - x)2. If we divide 
this by n - 1, this actually gives us the sample variance of the x values. If we 
then take the square root, we’ll have sx. In other words, 
sx is the standard deviation of the x values in the 
sample. sy is the standard deviation of the y values.
b is the slope of the line 
of best fit that you’ve 
already found.
This is the 
standard deviation 
of the x values in 
the sample, it’s the 
same formula you’ve 
seen before
You calculated this bit 
earlier, so there’s no need 
to calculate it again.
The only remaining piece of the equation we have to find is sy, the standard 
deviation of the y values in the sample. We calculate this in a similar way to 
finding sx.
Let’s try finding what r is for the concert attendance data.
This is the standard deviation of the x values in the 
sample, and you’ve done these sorts of calculations before.
calculating the correlation coefficient
There’s a formula for calculating the correlation coefficient, r
sx =√
Σ(x - x)2
	
    n - 1
sy =√
Σ(y - y)2
	
    n - 1
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    633
correlation and regression
Find r for the concert data
Let’s use the formula to find the value of r for the concert data. First of 
all, here’s a reminder of the data:
x (sunshine)
1.9
2.5
3.2
3.8
4.7
5.5
5.9
7.2
y (attendance)
22
33
30
42
38
49
42
55
To find r, we need to know the values of b, sx, and sy so that we can use 
them in the formula on the opposite page. So far we’ve found that
b = 5.32
but what about sx and sy?
Let’s start with sx. We found earlier that Σ(x - x)2 = 23.02, and we know 
that the sample size is 8. This means that if we divide 23.02 by 7, we’ll 
have the sample variance of x. To find sx, we take the square root.
Σ(y - y)2 = (22 - 38.875)2 + (33 - 38.875)2 +(30 - 38.875)2 +(42 - 38.875)2 + (38 - 38.875)2 +  
	
   (49 - 38.875)2 + (42 - 38.875)2 + (55 - 38.875)2
             = (-16.875)2 + (-5.875)2 + (-8.875)2 + (3.125)2 + (-0.875)2 + (10.125)2 + (3.125)2 + (16.125)2
             = 780.875 (to 2 decimal places)
The only piece of the formula we have left to find is sy. We already know 
that y = 38.875, as we found it earlier on, so this means that
We can now use this to find sy , by dividing by n - 1 and taking the square 
root.
All we need to do now is use b, sx, and sy to find the value of the 
correlation coefficient r.
This is the slope of the line we found earlier.
This is the standard deviation of the x values. It’s a sample, 
so we divide by n - 1.
Finally, we use the y values in the sample 
to find sy, the standard deviation of y.
sx = (23.02/7)
    = 3.28857
    = 1.81 (to 2 decimal places)
sy = (780.875/7)
    = 111.55357
    = 10.56 (to 2 decimal places)
Download at WoweBook.Com

634    Chapter 15
Q: I’ve seen other ways of calculating 
r. Are they wrong?
A: There are several different forms of the 
equation for finding r, but underneath, they’re 
basically the same. We’ve used the simplest 
form of the equation so that it’s easier to 
see what you’ve already calculated through 
finding b.
Q: Are the results accurate with such 
a small sample?
A: A larger sample would definitely be 
better, but we used a small sample just to 
make the calculations easier to follow.
Q: You haven’t proved or derived why 
you calculate the values of b and r in this 
way. Why not?
A: Deriving the formula for b and r is quite 
complex and involved, so we’ve decided not 
to go through this in the book. The key thing 
is that you understand when and how to use 
them.
Q: What’s the expected concert 
attendance if the predicted hours of 
sunshine is 0?
A: We can’t say for certain because this 
is quite a way outside the range of data we 
have. The line of best fit is a pretty good 
estimate for the range of data that we have, 
but we can’t say with any certainty what 
the concert attendance will be like outside 
this range. The data might follow a different 
pattern outside this range, so any estimate 
we gave would be unreliable.
Q: When we were looking at averages, 
we saw that univariate data can have 
outliers. What about bivariate data?
A: Yes, bivariate data can have outliers 
too. Outliers are points that lie a long way 
from your regression line. If you have 
outliers, then this can mean that you have 
anomalies in your data set, or alternatively, 
that your regression line isn’t a good fit of 
the data.
Q: I’ve heard of influential 
observations. What are they?
A: Influential observations are points that 
lie a long way horizontally from the rest of 
the data. Because of this, they have the 
effect of pulling the regression line towards 
them.
Q: So is an influential observation the 
same as an outlier?
A: No. Outliers lie a long way from the 
line. Influential observations lie a long way 
horizontally from the data.
Find r for the concert data, continued
r = bsx/sy
   = 5.32 x 1.81/10.56
   = 0.91 (to 2 decimal places)
As r is very close to 1, this means that there’s strong positive 
correlation between open air concert attendance and hours 
of predicted sunshine. In other words, based on the data that 
we have, we can expect the line of best fit, y = 15.80 + 5.32x, 
to give a reasonably good estimate of the expected concert 
attendance based on the predicted hours of sunshine.
sunshine (hours)
attendance (100’s)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
x
y
r = 0.91
calculating r and no dumb questions
Now that we’ve found that b = 5.32, sx = 1.81, and sy = 10.56, 
we can put them together to find r.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    635
Awesome, dude, you rock! 
Here’s a free ticket for 
our next event.
You’ve saved the day!
The concert organizers are amazed at the work you’ve done with 
their concert data. They now have a way of predicting what 
attendance will be like at their concerts based on the weather 
reports, which means they have a way of maximizing their profits.
Woah dude! This 
regression thang 
is boogalicious!
correlation and regression
Download at WoweBook.Com

636    Chapter 15
The evil Swindler has been collecting data on the effect radiation exposure has on Captain 
Amazing’s super powers. Here is the number of minutes of exposure to radiation, paired with 
the number of tons Captain Amazing is able to lift:
Radiation exposure (minutes)
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
Weight (tons)
14
14
12
10
8
9.5
8
9
6
Your job is to use least squares regression to find the line of best fit, and then find the correlation coefficient to 
describe the strength of the relationship between your line and the data. Sketch the scatter diagram too.
If Swindler exposes Captain Amazing to radiation for 5 minutes, what weight do you expect Captain Amazing to be 
able to lift?
long exercise
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    637
correlation and regression
We’ve left you 
plenty of space for 
your calculations
Download at WoweBook.Com

638    Chapter 15
The evil Swindler has been collecting data on the effect radiation exposure has on Captain 
Amazing’s super powers. Here is the number of minutes of exposure to radiation, paired with 
the number of tons Captain Amazing is able to lift:
Radiation exposure (minutes)
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
Weight (tons)
12
10
8
9.5
8
9
6
Your job is to use least squares regression to find the line of best fit, and then find the correlation coefficient to 
describe the strength of the relationship between your line and the data. Sketch the scatter diagram too.
If Swindler exposes Captain Amazing to radiation for 5 minutes, what weight do you expect Captain Amazing to be 
able to lift?
Let’s use x to represent minutes of radiation exposure and y to represent weight in tons. We need to find the 
regression line y = a + bx, so let’s start by calculating x and y.
	
x = (4 + 4.5 + 5 + 5.5 + 6 + 6.5 + 7)/7
	
  = 38.5/7
	
  = 5.5
	
y = (12 + 10 + 8 + 9.5 + 8 + 9 + 6)/7
	
  = 62.5/7
	
  = 8.9 (to 2 decimal places)
Next, let’s calculate Σ(x - x)(y - y) and Σ(x - x)2, and then b.
	
Σ(x - x)(y - y) = (4-5.5)(12-8.9) + (4.5-5.5)(10-8.9) + (5-5.5)(8-8.9) + (5.5-5.5)(9.5-8.9) +  
	
	
	
  (6-5.5)(8-8.9) + (6.5-5.5)(9-8.9) + (7-5.5)(6-8.9)
	
	
          = (-1.5)(3.1) + (-1)(1.1) + (-0.5)(-0.9) + (0)(0.6) + (0.5)(-0.9) + (1)(0.1) + (1.5)(-2.9)
	
	
          = -4.65 - 1.1 + 0.45 + 0 - 0.45 + 0.1 - 4.35
	
	
          = -10
	
Σ(x - x)2 = (4-5.5)2 + (4.5-5.5)2 + (5-5.5)2 + (5.5-5.5)2 + (6-5.5)2 + (6.5-5.5)2 + (7-5.5)2
	
	
  = (-1.5)2 + (-1)2 + (-0.5)2 + 02 + 0.52 + 12 + 1.52
	
	
  = 2.25 + 1 + 0.25 + 0 + 0.25 + 1 + 2.25
	
	
  = 7
	
b = Σ(x - x)(y - y)
 	
        Σ(x - x)2
	
   = -10/7
	
   = -1.43 (to 2 decimal places)
long exercise solution
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    639
correlation and regression
Now that we've found b, let's use it to find a.
	
a = y - bx
	
  = 8.9 + 1.43 x 5.5
	
  = 8.9 + 7.86
	
  = 16.76
This means that the line of best fit is given by y = 16.76 -1.43x
The correlation coefficient, r, is given by r = bsx/sy where sx and sy are the standard deviations of the x and y 
variables. We’ve found b, so we need to find sx and sy.  
	
sx = Σ(x - x)2
	
        n - 1
	
   =  7/6
	
   = 1.08
	
Σ(y - y)2 = (12-8.9)2 + (10-8.9)2 + (8-8.9)2 + (9.5-8.9)2 + (8-8.9)2 + (9-8.9)2 + (6-8.9)2
	
	
  = 3.12 + 1.12 + (-0.9)2 + 0.62 + (-0.9)2 + 0.12 + (-2.9)2
	
	
  = 9.61 + 1.21 + 0.81 + 0.36 + 0.81 + 0.01 + 8.41
	
	
  = 21.22
	
sy = Σ(y - y)2
	
        n - 1
	
   =  21.77/6
	
   = 1.90
Putting this together gives us
	
r = bsx/sy 
	
  = -1.43 x 1.08/1.9
	
  = -0.81 (to 2 decimal places)
If x = 5, then we find y by calculating
	
y = 16.76 - 1.43x
	
  = 16.76 - 1.43 x 5
	
  = 9.61	
In other words, after 5 minutes of exposure to radiation, we'd expect Captain Amazing to be able lift 9.61 tons.
Radiation exposure (minutes)
Weight (tons)
y = 16.76 - 1.43x 
r = -0.81
x
y
10
8
6
4
2
0
5
10
15
20
Download at WoweBook.Com

640    Chapter 15
Univariate data deals with just one 
variable. Bivariate data deals with two 
variables.
A scatter diagram shows you patterns in 
bivariate data.
Correlations are mathematical 
relationships between variables. It does 
not mean that one variable causes the 
other. A linear correlation is one that 
follows a straight line.
Positive linear correlation is when low 
x values correspond to low y values, 
and high x values correspond to high 
y values. Negative linear correlation is 
when low x values correspond to high 
y values, and high x values correspond 
to low y values. If the values of x and y 
form a random pattern, then there’s no 
correlation.
The line that best fits the data points is 
called the line of best fit. 
Linear regression is a mathematical way 
of finding the line of best fit, y = a + bx.






The sum of squared errors, or SSE, is 
given by Σ(y - y)2.
The slope of the line y = a + bx is  
 
	
       b = Σ(x - x)(y - y) 
	
                 Σ(x - x)2 
The value of a is given by 
 
	
            a = y - bx 
The correlation coefficient, r, is a number 
between -1 and 1 that describes the 
scatter of data away from the line of 
best fit. If r = -1, there is perfect negative 
linear correlation. If r = 1, there is perfect 
positive linear correlation. If r = 0, there 
is no correlation. You find r by calculating 
 
	
	
r = b sx 
	
	
       sy




^
bullet points
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    641
correlation and regression
Leaving town...
It’s been great having you here in Statsville!
We’re sad to see you leave,  but there’s nothing like taking what you’ve learned 
and putting it to use. There are still a few more gems for you in the back of the book, 
some handy probability tables, and an index to read though, and then it’s time to take all 
these new ideas and put them into practice. We’re dying to hear how things go, so drop 
us a line at the Head First Labs web site, www.headfirstlabs.com, and let us know how 
Statistics is paying off for YOU!
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is an appendix    643
appendix i: leftovers
The Top Ten Things 
(we didn’t cover)
Even after all that, there’s still a bit more.
 There are just a few more things we think you need to know. We wouldn’t feel right about 
ignoring them, even though they only need a brief mention, and we really wanted to 
give you a book you’d be able to lift without extensive training at the local gym. So before 
you put the book down, take a read through these tidbits.
Even after all that, there’s still a bit more.
 There are just a few more things we think you need to know. We wouldn’t feel right about 
ignoring them, even though they only need a brief mention, and we really wanted to 
give you a book you’d be able to lift without extensive training at the local gym. So before 
you put the book down, take a read through these tidbits.
Oh my, look at 
what’s left...
Download at WoweBook.Com

644    Appendix i
dotplots and stemplots
#1. Other ways of presenting data
We showed you a number of charts in the first chapter, but here are a 
couple more that might come in useful.
If your data’s quantitive, dotplots 
show you the shape of your data.
Stemplots
A stemplot is used for quantitive data, usually when your data set is fairly 
small. Stemplots show each exact value in your data set in such a way that 
you can easily see the shape of your data. Here’s an example:
Each value is shown as a dot. You 
stack them in a column above the 
value on the horizontal axis.
The entries on the left are called stems, and the entries on the right are 
called leaves. In this stemplot, the stem shows tens, and the leaves show 
units. To find each value in the raw data, you take each leaf and add it to its 
stem. As an example, take the line
	
	
	
10 | 6 7
This represents two numbers, 16 and 17. You get 16 by adding the leaf 6 to 
its stem 10. Similarly, you get value 17 by adding the leaf 7 to the stem 10.
There’s usually a key to help you interpret the stemplot correctly. In this case, 
the key is 10 | 6 = 16.
Dotplots
A dotplot shows your data on a chart by representing each value as a dot. 
You put each dot in a stacked column above the corresponding value on 
the horizontal axis like this:
0
1
2
3
4
5
No. games bought per month
16  17  22  23  23  24  25  26  26  27  28  
29  29  30  31  31  32  32  33  34  34  35  
36  37  37  38  39  40  41  42  42  43  43  
44  45  45  49  50  50  50  51  55  58  60 
60    0
50    0 0 0 1 5 8
40    0 1 2 2 3 3 4 5 5 9
30    0 1 1 2 2 3 4 4 5 6 7 7 8 9
20    2 3 3 4 5 6 6 7 8 9 9 
10    6 7
Key: 10 | 6 = 16
Here’s your raw data.
Here’s a stemplot 
based on the data.
A stemplot has a shape that is similar to a 
histogram’s, but flipped onto its side.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    645
leftovers
#2. Distribution anatomy
There are two rules that tell you where most of your data values lie in a 
probability distribution.
Chebychev’s rule isn’t as precise as the empirical rule, as it only gives you the 
minimum percentages, but it still gives you a rough idea of where values fall in the 
probability distribution. The advantage of Chebyshev’s rule is that it applies to any 
distribution, while the empirical rule just applies to the normal distribution.
The empirical rule for normal distributions
The empirical rule applies to any set of data that follows a normal 
distribution. It states that almost all of the values lie within three standard 
deviations of the mean. In particular, 
Chebyshev’s rule for any distribution
A similar rule applies to any set of data called Chebyshev’s rule, or 
Chebyshev’s inequality. It states that for any distribution
Just knowing the number of standard deviations from the mean can 
give you a rough idea about the probability.
At least 75% of your values lie within 2 standard deviations of the mean.
At least 89% of your values lie within 3 standard deviations of the mean.
At least 94% of your values lie within 4 standard deviations of the mean.
About 68% of your values lie within 1 
standard deviation of the mean.
About 95% of your values lie within 2 
standard deviations of the mean.
About 99.7% of your values lie within 3 
standard deviations of the mean.
μ
σ
2σ
3σ
-σ
-2σ
-3σ
68%
99.7%
95%
The empirical rule tells you what percentage 
of your values you can expect to lie in 
which area of a normal distribution.
Download at WoweBook.Com

646    Appendix i
#3. Experiments
Experiments are used to test cause and effect relationships between variables. As an 
example, an experiment could test the effect of different doses of SnoreCull on snorers.
In an experiment, indpendent variables or factors are manipulated so that we can 
see the effect on dependent variables. As an example, we might want to examine the 
effect that different doses of SnoreCull have on the number of hours spent snoring in a 
night. The doses of SnoreCull would be the independent variable, and the number of 
hours spent snoring would be the dependent variable.
The subjects that you use for your experiment are called experimental units—in this 
case, snorers.
So what makes for a good experiment?
There are three basic principles you need to bear in mind when you design an 
experiment: controls, randomization, and replication. Just as with sampling, a 
key aim is to minimize bias.
You need to control the effects of external influences or natural variability.
When you conduct an experiment, you need to minimize effects that are not part of the 
experiment. To do this, the first thing is to have a control group, a neutral group that receives 
no treatments, or only neutral treatments. You can assess the effectiveness of the treatment by 
comparing the results of your treated groups with the results of your control group.
A placebo is a neutral treatment, one that has no effect on the dependent variable. Sometimes 
the subjects of your experiment can respond differently to having a neutral treatment as opposed 
to having no treatment at all, so giving a placebo to a group is a way of controlling this effect. If 
the group taking a placebo doesn’t know that it’s a placebo, then this is called blinding, and it’s 
called double blinding if even those administering the treatments don’t know.
You need to assign subjects to treatments at random.
You’ll see more about this on the next page.
You need to replicate treatments.
Each treatment should be given to many subjects. You need to use many snorers per treatment to 
gauge the effects, not just one snorer.
Another factor to be aware of is confounding. Confounding occurs when the 
controls in an experiment don’t eliminate other possible causes for the effect on the 
dependent variable. As an example, imagine if you gave doses to SnoreCull to men, 
but placebos to women. If you compared the results of the two groups, you wouldn’t 
be able to tell whether the effect on the men was because of the drug, or because one 
gender naturally snores more than another.
conducting experiments
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    647
leftovers
Designing your experiment
We said earlier that you need to randomly assign subjects to experiments. But what’s 
the best way of doing this?
Completely randomized design
One option is to use a completely randomized design. For 
this, you literally assign treatments to subjects at random. If 
we were to conduct an experiment testing the effect of doses 
of SnoreCull on snorers, we would randomly assign snorers to 
particular treatment groups. As an example, we could give half 
of the snorers a placebo and the other half a single dose of 
SnoreCull.
Completely randomized design is similar to simple random 
sampling. Instead of choosing a sample at random, you assign 
treatments at random.
Randomized block design
Another option is to use randomized block design. For 
this, you divide the subjects into similar groups, or blocks. 
As an example, you could split the snorers into males and 
females. Within each block, you assign treatments at random, 
so for each gender, you could give half the snorers a dose of 
SnoreCull and give the other half a placebo. The aim of this 
is to minimize confounding, as it reduces the effect of gender.
Randomized block design is similar to stratified random 
sampling. Instead of splitting your population into strata, you 
split your subjects into blocks.
Matched pairs design
Matched pairs design is a special case of randomized 
block design. You can use it when there are only two 
treatment conditions and subjects can be grouped into like 
pairs. As an example, the SnoreCull experiment could have 
two treatment conditions, to give a placebo or to give a 
single dose, and snorers could be grouped into similar pairs 
according to gender and age. You then give one of each 
pair a placebo, and the other a dose of SnoreCull. If one 
pair consisted of two men aged 30, for instance, you would 
give one of the men a placebo and the other man a dose of 
SnoreCull.
Placebo
SnoreCull
500
500
If there were 1,000 subjects, we 
could give half a placebo and the 
other half a dose of SnoreCull
Placebo
SnoreCull
Male
250
250
Female
250
250
If there were 500 men and 500 
women, we could give half of each 
gender a placebo and the other 
half a dose of SnoreCull
Placebo
SnoreCull
Male 30
1
1
Male 30
1
1
Female 30
1
1
Female 30
1
1
...
...
...
You could also form matched pairs using 
gender and age to negate confounding due to 
these variables.
Download at WoweBook.Com

648    Appendix i
In Chapter 15 you saw how a least squares regression line takes the 
form y = a + bx, where
 
	
	
	
b = Σ(x - x)(y - y)
	
	
	
           Σ(x - x)2 
There’s another form of writing this that a lot of people find easier to 
remember, and that’s to rewrite it in terms of variances. If we use the 
notation
then you can rewrite the formula for the slope of a line as
You can do something similar with the correlation coefficient. Instead of writing
 
	
	
	
	
	
r = b sx
	
	
	
	
	
        sy
 
you can write the equation for the correlation coefficient as
sxy is called the covariance. Just as the variance of x describes how the x values 
vary, and the variance of y describes how the y values vary, the covariance of x 
and y is a measure of how x and y vary together.
sx
2 = Σ(x - x)2	 	
sy
2 = Σ(y - y)2	 	
sxy = Σ(x - x)(y - y)
           n - 1	
	
           n - 1	
	
	
       n - 1
b = sxy
      sx
2
r =  sxy
     sxsy
This is the formula for 
the slope of the line.
This is the formula 
for the correlation 
coefficient.
This is the same 
calculation written in a 
different way.
x
y
a
b
y = a + bx
#4. Least square regression alternate notation
Sample variance 
of the x values
Sample variance 
of the y values
other formulas for least square regression
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    649
leftovers
#5. The coefficient of determination
The coefficient of determination is given by r2 or R2. It’s the percentage 
of variation in the y variable that’s explainable by the x variable. As an 
example, you can use it to say what percentage of the variation in open-air 
concert attendance is explainable by the number of hours of predicted 
sunshine.
If r2 = 0, then this means that you can’t predict the y value from the x value. 
If r2 = 1, then you can predict the y value from the x value without any errors. 
Usually r2 is between these two extremes. The closer the value of r2 is to 1, 
the more predictable the value of y is from x, and the closer to r2 it is, the less 
predictable the value of y is.
Calculating r2
There are two ways of calculating r2. The first way is to just square the 
correlation coefficient r.
Another way of calculating it is to add together the squared distances of the 
y values to their estimates, and then divide by the result of adding together 
squared distances of the y values to y.
r2 = ( 
sxy )
2
               sxsy 
r2 = Σ(y - y)2
       Σ(y - y)2
^
This gives you the same value as 
above; it’s just a different way of 
calculating it..
This is just the correlation 
coefficient squared.
sunshine (hours)
attendance (100’s)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
x
y
r2 tells you what percentage of the 
variation in concert attendance is 
explainable by the number of hours 
predicted sunshine.
Download at WoweBook.Com

650    Appendix i
non-linear relationships of two variables
#6. Non-linear relationships
If two variables are related, their relationship isn’t necessarily linear. Here are 
some examples of scatter plots where there’s a clear mathematical relationship 
between x and y, but it’s non-linear:
Linear regression assumes that the relationship between two variables can be 
described by a straight line, so performing least squares regression on raw data 
like this won’t give you a good estimate for the equation of the line.
There is a way around this, however. You can sometimes transform x and y in 
such a way that the transformation is close to being linear. You can then perform 
linear regression on the transformation to find the values of a and b. The big trick 
is to try and transform your non-linear equation of the line so that it takes the 
form 
	
	
	
y' = a + bx' 
where y' and x' are functions of x.
As an example, you might find that your line of best fit takes the form 
	
	
	
y = 1/(a + bx) 
This can be rewritten as 
	
	
	
1/y = a + bx 
so that y' = 1/y. In other words, you can perform least squares regression using 
the line y' = a + bx, where y' = 1/y. Once you’ve transformed your y values, you 
can use least squares regression to find the values of a and b, then substitute these 
back into your original equation.
y
x
y
y
x
x
It’s now in the form yı = a + bx, 
so we can use linear regression.
If your line of 
best fit isn’t 
linear, you 
can sometimes 
transform it to 
a linear form.
This is just a quick overview, 
so you know what’s possible.
These all show definite 
patterns, but they’re 
not straight lines, so 
they’re not linear.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    651
leftovers
#7. The confidence interval for the slope of a regression line
You’ve seen how you can find confidence intervals for μ and σ2. Well, 
you can also find one for the slope of the regression line y = a + bx.
The confidence interval for b takes the form
 
	
	
	
	
	
b ± (margin of error)
 
But what’s the margin of error?
The margin of error for b
The margin of error is given by
 
	
	
	
 
where ν = n – 2, and n is the number of observations in your sample. To 
find the value of t(ν), use t-distribution probability tables to look up ν 
and your confidence level.
The standard deviation of the sampling distribution of b is given by
To calculate this, add together the differences squared between 
each actual y observation and what you estimate it to be from the 
regression line. Then divide by n – 2, and take the square root. 
Once you’ve done this, divide the whole lot by the square root of 
the total differences squared between each x observation and x.
This gives us a confidence interval of
	
	
     If you’re taking 
a statistics 
exam where you 
have to use sb, 
the formula will 
be given to you.
This means that you don’t have to 
memorize it; you just need to know how 
to apply it.
Knowing the standard deviation of b has other uses too. As an 
example, you can also use it in hypothesis tests to test whether the 
slope of a regression line takes a particular value.
^
(b - t(ν) sb, b + t(ν) sb)	
	
ν = n - 2
^
^
margin of error = t(ν) x (standard deviation of b)
This is the 
standard deviation 
of the sampling 
distribution of b
You use the t-distribution with 
n - 2 degrees of freedom.
sb =   
Σ(y - y)2
	
       n - 2
         √Σ(x - x)2 
^
Download at WoweBook.Com

652    Appendix i
#8. Sampling distributions - the difference between two means
Sometimes it’s useful to know what the sampling distribution is like for the 
difference between the means of two normally distributed populations. You may 
want to use this to construct a confidence interval or conduct a hypothesis test. As 
an example, you may want to conduct a hypothesis test based on the means of two 
normally distributed populations being equal.
If X ~ N(μx, σx
2) and Y ~ N(μy, σy
2) where X and Y are independent, then the 
expectation and variance of the distribution X – Y are given by
E(X – Y) = μx – μy
Var(X – Y) = σx
2 + σy
2
	
             nx     ny
If the population variances σx
2 and σy
2 are known, then X – Y is distributed 
normally. In other words
X – Y ~ N(μx – μy, σx
2 + σy
2)
	
	
              nx     ny
You can use this to find a confidence interval for X – Y. Confidence intervals take 
the form (statistic) ± (margin of error), so in this case, the confidence interval is 
given by
The value of c depends on the level of confidence you need for your confidence 
interval:
Level of confidence
Value of c
90%
1.64
95%
1.96
99%
2.58
If σx
2 and σy
2 are unknown, then you will need to approximate them with sx
2 and 
sy
2. If the samples sizes are large, then you can still use the normal distribution. If 
the sample sizes are small, then you will need to use the t-distribution instead.
This is because E(X - Y) = E(X) - E(Y)
Similarly, Var(X - Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y)
This is your confidence 
interval for X - Y.
Your level of 
confidence gives you 
your value of c
other types of sampling distributions
x – y ± c√Var(X – Y)
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    653
leftovers
#9. Sampling distributions - the difference between two proportions
There’s also a sampling distribution for the difference between the proportions 
of two binomial populations. You can use this to construct a confidence interval 
or conduct a hypothesis test. As an example, you may want to conduct a 
hypothesis test based on the proportions of two populations being equal.
If X ~ B(nx, px) and Y ~ B(ny, py) where X and Y are independent, then the 
expectation and variance of the distribution Px - Py are given by
E(Px – Py) = px – py
Var(Px – Py) = pxqx  + pyqy
	
                nx        ny
If np and nq are both greater than 5 for each population, then Px – Py can be 
approximated with a normal distribution. In other words
Px – Py ~ N(px – py, pxqx + pyqy)
	
	
                 nx        ny
You can use this to find a confidence interval for Px – Py. Confidence intervals 
take the form (statistic) ± (margin of error), so in this case the confidence 
interval is given by
The value of c depends on the level of confidence you need for your confidence 
interval. They’re the same values of c as on the opposite page.
	
	
     If you’re taking a statistics exam where you 
have to use the sampling distribution 
between two means or two proportions, the 
variance of the sampling distribution will be 
given to you.
This means that you don’t have to memorize them; you just 
need to know how to apply them.
As before, E(Px - Py) = E(Px) - E(Py)
Var(Px - Py) = Var(Px) + Var(Py)
This is your confidence 
interval for Px - Py   
px – py ± c√Var(Px – Py)
Download at WoweBook.Com

654    Appendix i
#10. E(X) and Var(X) for continuous probability distributions
When we found the expectation and variance of discrete probability 
distributions, we used the equations 
	
	
	
	
E(X) = ΣxP(X = x)
	
	
	
	
Var(X) = Σx2P(X = x) – E2(X)
 
When your probability distribution is continuous, you find the expectation and 
variance using area.
As an example, suppose you have a continuous probability distribution where the 
probability density function is given by
 
	
	
	
f(x) = 0.05	
0  x  20
Finding E(X)
To find the expectation, we’d need to find the area under the curve xf(x) for the 
range of the probability distribution. Here we need to find the area under the 
line 0.05x where x is between 0 and 20
x
f(x)
0
20
0.05
x
xf(x)
0
20
1
The area here gives us E(X).
This is a sketch of f(x), the 
probability density function.
expectation and variance for continuous probability distributions
Multiply x by the 
original function to 
get xf(x).
This is called a uniform 
distribution, as f(x) is a 
constant value.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    655
leftovers
In general, you can find the expectation and variance of a continuous 
random variable using
E(X) = ∫xf(x)dx
over the entire range of x.
Finding Var(X)
To find the variance, you need to find the area under the curve x2f(x) and 
subtract E2(X). In other words, we need to find the area under the curve 
0.05x2 between 0 and 20 and subtract the square of E(X).
Var(X) = ∫x2f(x)dx – E2(X)
x
x2f(x)
0
20
20
To find Var(X), we find the area 
here and then subtract E2(X).
Finding the expectation and variance 
of a continuous random variable often 
involves using calculus.
	
	
     You don’t often 
need to find the 
expectation and 
variance of a 
continuous 
random variable.
A lot of the time you’ll be working with 
distributions like the normal, and in this, 
case the expectation and variance are 
given to you.
[Note from Marketing: Can we put in 
a plug for Head First Calculus—coming 
soon]
Uniform Distribution
If X follows a uniform distribution then
f(x) = 1/(b - a) where a < x < b
E(X) = (a + b)/2
Var(X) = (b - a)2/12
Vital Statistics
Vital Statistics
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is an appendix    657
appendix ii: statistics tables
Looking Things Up
Where would you be without your trusty probability tables?
 Understanding your probability distributions isn’t quite enough. For some of them, you 
need to be able to look up your probabilities in standard probability tables. In this 
appendix, you’ll find tables for the normal, t, and Χ2 distributions, so you can look up 
probabilities to your heart’s content. 
Where would you be without your trusty probability tables?
 Understanding your probability distributions isn’t quite enough. For some of them, you 
need to be able to look up your probabilities in standard probability tables. In this 
appendix, you’ll find tables for the normal, t, and Χ2 distributions, so you can look up 
probabilities to your heart’s content. 
Now I know where 
Ted gets it all from.
Download at WoweBook.Com

658    Appendix ii
normal probabilities table
z
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
–3.4
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0002
–3.3
.0005
.0005
.0005
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0003
–3.2
.0007
.0007
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0005
.0005
.0005
–3.1
.0010
.0009
.0009
.0009
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0007
.0007
–3.0
.0013
.0013
.0013
.0012
.0012
.0011
.0011
.0011
.0010
.0010
–2.9
.0019
.0018
.0018
.0017
.0016
.0016
.0015
.0015
.0014
.0014
–2.8
.0026
.0025
.0024
.0023
.0023
.0022
.0021
.0021
.0020
.0019
–2.7
.0035
.0034
.0033
.0032
.0031
.0030
.0029
.0028
.0027
.0026
–2.6
.0047
.0045
.0044
.0043
.0041
.0040
.0039
.0038
.0037
.0036
–2.5
.0062
.0060
.0059
.0057
.0055
.0054
.0052
.0051
.0049
.0048
–2.4
.0082
.0080
.0078
.0075
.0073
.0071
.0069
.0068
.0066
.0064
–2.3
.0107
.0104
.0102
.0099
.0096
.0094
.0091
.0089
.0087
.0084
–2.2
.0139
.0136
.0132
.0129
.0125
.0122
.0119
.0116
.0113
.0110
–2.1
.0179
.0174
.0170
.0166
.0162
.0158
.0154
.0150
.0146
.0143
–2.0
.0228
.0222
.0217
.0212
.0207
.0202
.0197
.0192
.0188
.0183
–1.9
.0287
.0281
.0274
.0268
.0262
.0256
.0250
.0244
.0239
.0233
–1.8
.0359
.0351
.0344
.0336
.0329
.0322
.0314
.0307
.0301
.0294
–1.7
.0446
.0436
.0427
.0418
.0409
.0401
.0392
.0384
.0375
.0367
–1.6
.0548
.0537
.0526
.0516
.0505
.0495
.0485
.0475
.0465
.0455
–1.5
.0668
.0655
.0643
.0630
.0618
.0606
.0594
.0582
.0571
.0559
–1.4
.0808
.0793
.0778
.0764
.0749
.0735
.0721
.0708
.0694
.0681
–1.3
.0968
.0951
.0934
.0918
.0901
.0885
.0869
.0853
.0838
.0823
–1.2
.1151
.1131
.1112
.1093
.1075
.1056
.1038
.1020
.1003
.0985
–1.1
.1357
.1335
.1314
.1292
.1271
.1251
.1230
.1210
.1190
.1170
–1.0
.1587
.1562
.1539
.1515
.1492
.1469
.1446
.1423
.1401
.1379
–0.9
.1841
.1814
.1788
.1762
.1736
.1711
.1685
.1660
.1635
.1611
–0.8
.2119
.2090
.2061
.2033
.2005
.1977
.1949
.1922
.1894
.1867
–0.7
.2420
.2389
.2358
.2327
.2296
.2266
.2236
.2206
.2177
.2148
–0.6
.2743
.2709
.2676
.2643
.2611
.2578
.2546
.2514
.2483
.2451
–0.5
.3085
.3050
.3015
.2981
.2946
.2912
.2877
.2843
.2810
.2776
–0.4
.3446
.3409
.3372
.3336
.3300
.3264
.3228
.3192
.3156
.3121
–0.3
.3821
.3783
.3745
.3707
.3669
.3632
.3594
.3557
.3520
.3483
–0.2
.4207
.4168
.4129
.4090
.4052
.4013
.3974
.3936
.3897
.3859
–0.1
.4602
.4562
.4522
.4483
.4443
.4404
.4364
.4325
.4286
.4247
–0.0
.5000
.4960
.4920
.4880
.4840
.4801
.4761
.4721
.4681
.4641
#1. Standard normal probabilities
Look up the value of z using the 
first column and first row...
z
P(Z < z)
This table gives you the probability of finding P(Z < z) 
where Z ~ N(0, 1). To find the P(Z < z), look up your value 
of z to 2 decimal places, then read off the probability.
...then read off the 
probability from the table.
These are the probabilities 
for P(Z < z) where z is 
negative.
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    659
statistics tables
z
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
0.0
.5000
.5040
.5080
.5120
.5160
.5199
.5239
.5279
.5319
.5359
0.1
.5398
.5438
.5478
.5517
.5557
.5596
.5636
.5675
.5714
.5753
0.2
.5793
.5832
.5871
.5910
.5948
.5987
.6026
.6064
.6103
.6141
0.3
.6179
.6217
.6255
.6293
.6331
.6368
.6406
.6443
.6480
.6517
0.4
.6554
.6591
.6628
.6664
.6700
.6736
.6772
.6808
.6844
.6879
0.5
.6915
.6950
.6985
.7019
.7054
.7088
.7123
.7157
.7190
.7224
0.6
.7257
.7291
.7324
.7357
.7389
.7422
.7454
.7486
.7517
.7549
0.7
.7580
.7611
.7642
.7673
.7704
.7734
.7764
.7794
.7823
.7852
0.8
.7881
.7910
.7939
.7967
.7995
.8023
.8051
.8078
.8106
.8133
0.9
.8159
.8186
.8212
.8238
.8264
.8289
.8315
.8340
.8365
.8389
1.0
.8413
.8438
.8461
.8485
.8508
.8531
.8554
.8577
.8599
.8621
1.1
.8643
.8665
.8686
.8708
.8729
.8749
.8770
.8790
.8810
.8830
1.2
.8849
.8869
.8888
.8907
.8925
.8944
.8962
.8980
.8997
.9015
1.3
.9032
.9049
.9066
.9082
.9099
.9115
.9131
.9147
.9162
.9177
1.4
.9192
.9207
.9222
.9236
.9251
.9265
.9279
.9292
.9306
.9319
1.5
.9332
.9345
.9357
.9370
.9382
.9394
.9406
.9418
.9429
.9441
1.6
.9452
.9463
.9474
.9484
.9495
.9505
.9515
.9525
.9535
.9545
1.7
.9554
.9564
.9573
.9582
.9591
.9599
.9608
.9616
.9625
.9633
1.8
.9641
.9649
.9656
.9664
.9671
.9678
.9686
.9693
.9699
.9706
1.9
.9713
.9719
.9726
.9732
.9738
.9744
.9750
.9756
.9761
.9767
2.0
.9772
.9778
.9783
.9788
.9793
.9798
.9803
.9808
.9812
.9817
2.1
.9821
.9826
.9830
.9834
.9838
.9842
.9846
.9850
.9854
.9857
2.2
.9861
.9864
.9868
.9871
.9875
.9878
.9881
.9884
.9887
.9890
2.3
.9893
.9896
.9898
.9901
.9904
.9906
.9909
.9911
.9913
.9916
2.4
.9918
.9920
.9922
.9925
.9927
.9929
.9931
.9932
.9934
.9936
2.5
.9938
.9940
.9941
.9943
.9945
.9946
.9948
.9949
.9951
.9952
2.6
.9953
.9955
.9956
.9957
.9959
.9960
.9961
.9962
.9963
.9964
2.7
.9965
.9966
.9967
.9968
.9969
.9970
.9971
.9972
.9973
.9974
2.8
.9974
.9975
.9976
.9977
.9977
.9978
.9979
.9979
.9980
.9981
2.9
.9981
.9982
.9982
.9983
.9984
.9984
.9985
.9985
.9986
.9986
3.0
.9987
.9987
.9987
.9988
.9988
.9989
.9989
.9989
.9990
.9990
3.1
.9990
.9991
.9991
.9991
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9993
.9993
3.2
.9993
.9993
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9995
.9995
.9995
3.3
.9995
.9995
.9995
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9997
3.4
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9998
z
P(Z < z)
#1. Standard normal probabilities (cont.)
These are the probabilities 
for P(Z < z) where z is 
positive.
Download at WoweBook.Com

660    Appendix ii
t
t-distribution table
#2. t-distribution critical values
Tail probability p
ν
.25
.20
.15
.10
.05
.025
.02
.01
.005
.0025
.001
.0005
1
1.000
1.376
1.963
3.078
6.314
12.71
15.89
31.82
63.66
127.3
318.3
636.6
2
.816
1.061
1.386
1.886
2.920
4.303
4.849
6.965
9.925
14.09
22.33
31.60
3
.765
.978
1.250
1.638
2.353
3.182
3.482
4.541
5.841
7.453
10.21
12.92
4
.741
.941
1.190
1.533
2.132
2.776
2.999
3.747
4.604
5.598
7.173
8.610
5
.727
.920
1.156
1.476
2.015
2.571
2.757
3.365
4.032
4.773
5.893
6.869
6
.718
.906
1.134
1.440
1.943
2.447
2.612
3.143
3.707
4.317
5.208
5.959
7
.711
.896
1.119
1.415
1.895
2.365
2.517
2.998
3.499
4.029
4.785
5.408
8
.706
.889
1.108
1.397
1.860
2.306
2.449
2.896
3.355
3.833
4.501
5.041
9
.703
.883
1.100
1.383
1.833
2.262
2.398
2.821
3.250
3.690
4.297
4.781
10
.700
.879
1.093
1.372
1.812
2.228
2.359
2.764
3.169
3.581
4.144
4.587
11
.697
.876
1.088
1.363
1.796
2.201
2.328
2.718
3.106
3.497
4.025
4.437
12
.695
.873
1.083
1.356
1.782
2.179
2.303
2.681
3.055
3.428
3.930
4.318
13
.694
.870
1.079
1.350
1.771
2.160
2.282
2.650
3.012
3.372
3.852
4.221
14
.692
.868
1.076
1.345
1.761
2.145
2.264
2.624
2.977
3.326
3.787
4.140
15
.691
.866
1.074
1.341
1.753
2.131
2.249
2.602
2.947
3.286
3.733
4.073
16
.690
.865
1.071
1.337
1.746
2.120
2.235
2.583
2.921
3.252
3.686
4.015
17
.689
.863
1.069
1.333
1.740
2.110
2.224
2.567
2.898
3.222
3.646
3.965
18
.688
.862
1.067
1.330
1.734
2.101
2.214
2.552
2.878
3.197
3.611
3.922
19
.688
.861
1.066
1.328
1.729
2.093
2.205
2.539
2.861
3.174
3.579
3.883
20
.687
.860
1.064
1.325
1.725
2.086
2.197
2.528
2.845
3.153
3.552
3.850
21
.686
.859
1.063
1.323
1.721
2.080
2.189
2.518
2.831
3.135
3.527
3.819
22
.686
.858
1.061
1.321
1.717
2.074
2.183
2.508
2.819
3.119
3.505
3.792
23
.685
.858
1.060
1.319
1.714
2.069
2.177
2.500
2.807
3.104
3.485
3.768
24
.685
.857
1.059
1.318
1.711
2.064
2.172
2.492
2.797
3.091
3.467
3.745
25
.684
.856
1.058
1.316
1.708
2.060
2.167
2.485
2.787
3.078
3.450
3.725
26
.684
.856
1.058
1.315
1.706
2.056
2.162
2.479
2.779
3.067
3.435
3.707
27
.684
.855
1.057
1.314
1.703
2.052
2.158
2.473
2.771
3.057
3.421
3.690
28
.683
.855
1.056
1.313
1.701
2.048
2.154
2.467
2.763
3.047
3.408
3.674
29
.683
.854
1.055
1.311
1.699
2.045
2.150
2.462
2.756
3.038
3.396
3.659
30
.683
.854
1.055
1.310
1.697
2.042
2.147
2.457
2.750
3.030
3.385
3.646
40
.681
.851
1.050
1.303
1.684
2.021
2.123
2.423
2.704
2.971
3.307
3.551
50
.679
.849
1.047
1.299
1.676
2.009
2.109
2.403
2.678
2.937
3.261
3.496
60
.679
.848
1.045
1.296
1.671
2.000
2.099
2.390
2.660
2.915
3.232
3.460
80
.678
.846
1.043
1.292
1.664
1.990
2.088
2.374
2.639
2.887
3.195
3.416
100
.677
.845
1.042
1.290
1.660
1.984
2.081
2.364
2.626
2.871
3.174
3.390
1000
.675
.842
1.037
1.282
1.646
1.962
2.056
2.330
2.581
2.813
3.098
3.300
∞
.674
.841
1.036
1.282
1.645
1.960
2.054
2.326
2.576
2.807
3.091
3.291
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
95%
96%
98%
99%
99.5%
99.8%
99.9%
Confidence level C
This table gives you the values of t where P(T > t) = p. T follows a t-distribution 
with ν degrees of freedom. Look up the values of ν and p and look up t.
...look up p in the first row...
...then read off the value 
of t from the table.
Look up ν in the first column...
P(T > t)
t
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    661
statistics tables
#3. X
2 critical values
Tail probability α
ν
.25
.20
.15
.10
.05
.025
.02
.01
.005
.0025
.001
1
1.32
1.64
2.07
2.71
3.84
5.02
5.41
6.63
7.88
9.14
10.83
2
2.77
3.22
3.79
4.61
5.99
7.38
7.82
9.21
10.60
11.98
13.82
3
4.11
4.64
5.32
6.25
7.81
9.35
9.84
11.34
12.84
14.32
16.27
4
5.39
5.99
6.74
7.78
9.49
11.14
11.67
13.28
14.86
16.42
18.47
5
6.63
7.29
8.12
9.24
11.07
12.83
13.39
15.09
16.75
18.39
20.51
6
7.84
8.56
9.45
10.64
12.59
14.45
15.03
16.81
18.55
20.25
22.46
7
9.04
9.80
10.75
12.02
14.07
16.01
16.62
18.48
20.28
22.04
24.32
8
10.22
11.03
12.03
13.36
15.51
17.53
18.17
20.09
21.95
23.77
26.12
9
11.39
12.24
13.29
14.68
16.92
19.02
19.68
21.67
23.59
25.46
27.88
10
12.55
13.44
14.53
15.99
18.31
20.48
21.16
23.21
25.19
27.11
29.59
11
13.70
14.63
15.77
17.28
19.68
21.92
22.62
24.72
26.76
28.73
31.26
12
14.85
15.81
16.99
18.55
21.03
23.34
24.05
26.22
28.30
30.32
32.91
13
15.98
16.98
18.20
19.81
22.36
24.74
25.47
27.69
29.82
31.88
34.53
14
17.12
18.15
19.41
21.06
23.68
26.12
26.87
29.14
31.32
33.43
36.12
15
18.25
19.31
20.60
22.31
25.00
27.49
28.26
30.58
32.80
34.95
37.70
16
19.37
20.47
21.79
23.54
26.30
28.85
29.63
32.00
34.27
36.46
39.25
17
20.49
21.61
22.98
24.77
27.59
30.19
31.00
33.41
35.72
37.95
40.79
18
21.60
22.76
24.16
25.99
28.87
31.53
32.35
34.81
37.16
39.42
42.31
19
22.72
23.90
25.33
27.20
30.14
32.85
33.69
36.19
38.58
40.88
43.82
20
23.83
25.04
26.50
28.41
31.41
34.17
35.02
37.57
40.00
42.34
45.31
21
24.93
26.17
27.66
29.62
32.67
35.48
36.34
38.93
41.40
43.78
46.80
22
26.04
27.30
28.82
30.81
33.92
36.78
37.66
40.29
42.80
45.20
48.27
23
27.14
28.43
29.98
32.01
35.17
38.08
38.97
41.64
44.18
46.62
49.73
24
28.24
29.55
31.13
33.20
36.42
39.36
40.27
42.98
45.56
48.03
51.18
25
29.34
30.68
32.28
34.38
37.65
40.65
41.57
44.31
46.93
49.44
52.62
26
30.43
31.79
33.43
35.56
38.89
41.92
42.86
45.64
48.29
50.83
54.05
27
31.53
32.91
34.57
36.74
40.11
43.19
44.14
46.96
49.64
52.22
55.48
28
32.62
34.03
35.71
37.92
41.34
44.46
45.42
48.28
50.99
53.59
56.89
29
33.71
35.14
36.85
39.09
42.56
45.72
46.69
49.59
52.34
54.97
58.30
30
34.80
36.25
37.99
40.26
43.77
46.98
47.96
50.89
53.67
56.33
59.70
40
45.62
47.27
49.24
51.81
55.76
59.34
60.44
63.69
66.77
69.70
73.40
50
56.33
58.16
60.35
63.17
67.50
71.42
72.61
76.15
79.49
82.66
86.66
60
66.98
68.97
71.34
74.40
79.08
83.30
84.58
88.38
91.95
95.34
99.61
80
88.13
90.41
93.11
96.58
101.9
106.6
108.1
112.3
116.3
120.1
124.8
100
109.1
111.7
114.7
118.5
124.3
129.6
131.1
135.8
140.2
144.3
149.4
x
α
This table gives you the value of x where P(X ≥ x) = α. X 
has a χ2 distribution with ν degrees of freedom. Look up 
the values of ν and α, and read off x.
Look up the value of ν in the 
first column...
...look up the value of α in 
the first row...
...then read off 
the value of x 
from the table.
Download at WoweBook.Com

Download at WoweBook.Com

this is the index    663
Index
Symbols
| symbol (see conditional probabilities)
 intersection
finding  159
P(A  B) versus P(A | B)  165
P(Black  Even)  167
P(Even)  167
1/p, expectation  281
when large  407
when small  407
 distribution (see Poisson distribution)
μ (mu)  50, 445
confidence intervals  498
ν (nu)  573
degrees of freedom  574
 (sigma)  49
mean  49
 (sigma)  107
χ2 (chi square)  576
χ2 (chi square) distribution  567–604
cheat sheet  584
contingency table  587
defined  572
degrees of freedom  574, 576, 595
calculating  591
generalizing  596–597
expected frequencies  587–588
goodness of fit  573, 579, 584
independence  573, 586
main uses  573
significance  575
ν (nu)  573
χ2 (chi square) hypothesis testing steps  576
χ2 (chi square) probability tables  575
χ2 (chi square) test  571
x  (x bar)  445–447, 472–476
distribution of  476–486
A
accurate linear correlation  630
alternate hypothesis  529–530, 543
average  46–82
mean (see mean)
median (see median)
mode (see mode)
types of  71
average distance  105
interquartile range  105
B
bar charts  10–20, 23
frequency scales  13
percentage scales  12
scales  23
segmented bar chart  14
split-category bar chart  14
Bayes’ Theorem  173, 178–179
bias  423–426, 434, 438
in sampling  424–426, 438
sources  425
bimodal  73
binomial distribution  289, 324, 384, 392–393, 544
approximating  389, 398, 407
approximating with normal distribution  386
approximating with Poisson distribution  316–317
central limit theorem  482
Download at WoweBook.Com

664    Index
the index
binomial distribution (continued)
discrete  395
expectation and variance  298, 301
finding mean and variance  389
guide  302
versus normal distribution  393, 395
Binomial Distribution Up Close  297
binomial probabilities  384
bivariate data  608, 616, 640
visualizing  609
blinding  646
box and whisker diagrams  100–102
box plot  100
Bullet Points
bias  438
binomial distribution  324
bivariate data  640
box and whisker diagram  102
cluster sampling  438
continuity correction  396
continuous data  337
continuous probability distributions  337
correlation coefficient  640
critical region  539
cumulative frequency  42
discrete data  337
expectation and variance of X  485
expectation of random variable X  224
expectations  220, 233
frequency density  30
geometric distribution  324
histograms  30
hypothesis tests  539
Type I error  566
Type II error  566
independent observations  378
independent observations of X  233
independent random variables  233
interpercentile range  102
interquartile range  97
kth percentile  102
linear regression  640
linear transforms  220, 224, 233
line of best fit  640
negative linear correlation  640
normal distribution  359
approximating  396
normal probabilities  359
one-tailed tests  539
p-value  539
percentiles  102
point estimator  447
Poisson distribution  324, 412
population  438
positive linear correlation  640
probability distributions  220, 224
quartiles  97
range  97
sample  438
sampling distribution of means  485
sampling distribution of proportions  466
scatter diagrams  640
significance level  539
simple random sampling  438
standard deviation  122, 220
  224
standard error of proportion  466
standard error of the mean  485
standard scores  122
stratified sampling  438
sum of squared errors  640
systematic sampling  438
test statistic  539
two-tailed tests  539
univariate data  640
upper and lower bounds  97
variance of random variable X  224
variances  122, 220, 233
z-scores  122
χ2 distribution  598
goodness of fit test  598
test for independence  598
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    665
the index
C
categorical data  18, 73
mean  62
median  62
categories versus numbers  18–23
causation versus correlation  614
census  418
central limit theorem  481–482, 485
binomial distribution  482
Poisson distribution  482
central tendency  45–82
charts and graphs  4
bar charts  10–20, 23
bar chart scales  23
choosing right one  39–40
comparing  6
cumulative frequency  35, 42
failure  9
frequency  8–9, 23
frequency scales  13
histograms (see histograms)
horizontal bar charts  11, 23
line charts  41, 42
multiple sets of data  14, 23
numerical data  23
percentage sales  12
pie charts  8–9, 9, 23
proportions  9
scales  12
segmented bar chart  14
software  6
split-category bar chart  14
vertical bar charts  10–11, 23
Chebyshev’s inequality  645
chi square (χ2)  576
chi square (χ2) distribution  567–604
cheat sheet  584
contingency table  587
defined  572
degrees of freedom  574, 576, 595
calculating  591
generalizing  596–597
expected frequencies  587–588
goodness of fit  573, 579, 584
independence  573, 586
main uses  573
significance  575
ν (nu)  573
chi square (χ2) hypothesis testing steps  576
chi square (χ2) probability tables  575
chi square (χ2) test  571
clustered sampling  434
cluster sampling  433–434, 436, 438
coefficient of determination  649
combinations (see permutations and combinations)
combined weight
continuous  365
distributed  367
distributed normally  365
complementary event  136
completely randomized design (experiments)  647
conditional probabilities  157–160
Bayes’ Theorem  173
P(A  B) versus P(A | B)  165
P(Black | Even)  170
probability tree  158–161
confidence intervals  487–520, 539
cheat sheet  504
confidence level changes  518
four steps for finding  491–502
Step 1: Choose your population statistic  492, 508
Step 2: Find its sampling distribution  492, 509
Step 3: Decide on the level of confidence  494, 512
Step 4: Find the confidence limits  496–501, 513
introducing  490
point estimators  493
selecting appropriate confidence level  495
size of sample changes  518
Download at WoweBook.Com

666    Index
the index
confidence intervals (continued)
slope of regression line  651
summary  503
t-distributions  509–515
probability tables  513
shortcuts  515
small sample  510
standard score  511
versus confidence level  507
confidence level versus confidence interval  507
confidence limits  496, 502, 513
confounding  646
contingency table  587
continuity correction  395–398, 412
Continuity Corrections Up Close  397
continuous data  327, 337, 365
frequency  328
probability distribution  329–333
range of values  333
versus discrete data  366
continuous probabilities  333
continuous probability distributions  337
E(X) and Var(X)  654–655
continuous random variables  331
continuous scale versus discrete probability
distribution  395
control group  646
controls  646
correlation and regression  605–642
accurate linear correlation  630
bivariate data  608, 616, 640
visualizing  609
correlation coefficient  630–634, 640
correlation versus causation  614
dependent variable  608
explanatory variable  608
independent variable  608
least squares regression  626
linear regression  626, 640
line of best fit  618, 624, 640
finding equation  622
finding slope  623–624
sum of squared errors  620–621
negative linear correlation  613, 631, 640
no correlation  613, 631
no linear correlation  630
outliers  634
perfect negative linear correlation  631
perfect positive linear correlation  631
positive linear correlation  613, 631, 640
regression line  626
response variable  608
scatter diagrams  609, 612, 616, 618, 640
scatter plots  609
sum of squared errors  640
univariate data  608, 640
correlation coefficient  631–634, 640
formula  632
least square regression  648
critical region  531–534, 539, 548
Critical Regions Up Close  534
critical value  532
cumulative frequency  34–38, 42
graph  35
D
data
categorical and numerical data  18
categorical data  18
grouped  19
multiple sets of data  14
numerical data  18
qualitative data  18
deciles  98
degrees of freedom  574, 576, 595
calculating  591
generalizing  596–597
number of 510
dependent events  181, 189–190
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    667
the index
dependent variables (experiments)  608, 646
discrete data  329, 337, 370
versus continuous data  326–327, 366
discrete probability distributions  197–240
expectation  204–208
linear transforms  233
expectations  219
independent observations  224, 225–226
linear relationship between E(X) and E(Y)  217–218
linear transforms  219, 225–226
expectation and variance  233
linear transforms versus playing multiple games  221
observation  222–224
observation shortcuts  223
Pool Puzzle  215–216
random variables
adding  230
independent  233
subtracting  231
shortcut or formula  236
variance  205–208, 219
linear transforms  233
versus continuous scale  395
discrete random variables  202
distribution
anatomy  645
mean  56
of X + Y  370
dotplots  644
double blinding  646
drawing lots  431, 434
E
E(X) and Var(X) for continuous probability distributions  
654–655
empirical rule for normal distribution  645
estimating populations and samples  441–486
central limit theorem  481–482, 485
binomial distribution  482
Poisson distribution  482
distribution of Ps  464–466
expectation of Ps  462
formulas  451
point estimators  443–447, 452
for population variance  457
sampling distributions  485
population mean  443, 446
population parameters  444
population proportion  454–457
population variance  448–450
probabilities for a sample  459
proportions, sampling distribution of  460
sample mean  445, 446
sample variance  449, 452
sampling distribution  466
continuity correction  469
of proportions  460
sampling distribution of means  471–479
distribution of x  480
expectation for X  474–475
variance of X  476
standard error  485
of mean  479
of proportion  466
variance of Ps  463
x bar  445
μ  445
events  132
complementary  136
dependent  181
exclusive  147–154
versus exhaustive  150
independent  182–184
versus dependent  189–190
intersecting  147–154
mutually exclusive  147, 150
exclusive events  147–154, 150
exhaustive  149
exhaustive events  150
expectations  204–208, 219, 220, 367
1/p  281
binomial distribution  298
Download at WoweBook.Com

668    Index
the index
expectations (continued)
geometric distribution  280–281
independent observations  378
linear transforms  233
Poisson distribution  308
two games  222–224
experimental units  646
experiments  646
designing  647
explanatory variable  608
F
factorials  246, 248
Fireside Chats, Dependent and Independent discuss their 
differences  186–187
Five Minute Mystery
Case of the Broken Cookies  315
Solved  318
Case of the High Sunscreen Sales  611
Solved  615
Case of the Lost Coffee Sales  421
Solved  429
Case of the Missing Parameters  357
Solved  358
Case of the Moving Expectation  211
Solved  220
The Case of the Ambiguous Average  51
Solved  81
The Case of the Two Classes  185
Solved  188
formulas for arrangements  248
frequencies  8, 23, 67–68, 73
comparing  14
continuous data  328
cumulative frequency  34–38, 42
highest frequency group of values  52
histograms  24–30
percentages with no frequencies  12
frequency density  27–32, 68
Frequency Density Up Close  29
frequency scales  13
G
Gaussian distribution  352
geometric distribution  277–287, 297, 301, 324
guide  284
inequalities  279
pattern of expectations  280–281
variance  281–284
Geometric Distribution Up Close  278
goodness of fit  573
test  579
graphs (see charts and graphs)
grouped data  19
H
height probabilities  338–341
histograms  19–28
frequency  24–30, 25
intervals  20
making  20
making area proportional to frequency  26–28
mean  56
unequal intervals  24–30
when not to use  33
horizontal bar charts  11, 23
horse racing  243–246
hypothesis tests  521–566
alternate hypothesis  529–530, 543
critical region  531–534, 539, 548
critical value  532
null hypothesis  528, 543
one-tailed tests  534, 539
p-value  539
power of a hypothesis test  561
process  526–539
overview  527
Step 1: Decide on the hypothesis  528–529, 543
Step 2: Choose the test statistic  531, 544
Step 3: Determine the critical region  532, 548
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    669
the index
Step 4: Find the p-value  535–536
Step 5: Is the sample result in the critical region?  
537
Step 6: Make your decision  537
significance level  533, 538, 539
statistically significant  551
test statistic  531, 539, 544, 547
two-tailed tests  534, 539
Type I error  555–560, 566
Type II error  555–560, 566
I
incorrect sampling unit  425
independence  573
independent events  182–183, 189–190
versus mutually exclusive  183
independent observations  224–226, 377, 472
expectation  378
of X  233
variance  378
versus linear transforms  376–378
independent random variables  230–233, 368
indpendent variables  608, 646
information
versus data  5
visualizing (see visualizing information)
interpercentile range  98, 102
interquartile range  92–93, 97
average distance  105
versus the median  97
intersecting events  147–154
intersection  149–154
K
kth percentile  99, 102
L
Law of Total Probability  172, 178
least squares regression  626, 648
Least Squares Regression Up Close  626
leaves  644
left-skewed data  62, 64
letters, using to represent numbers  48–49
linear correlations  613, 630–631
Linear Correlations Up Close  613
linear regression  626, 640, 650
linear relationship between E(X) and E(Y)  217–218
linear transforms  219, 220, 224–226
distribution  376
expectation and variance  233
versus independent observations  376–378
versus playing multiple games  221
line charts  41, 42
Line Charts Up Close  41
line of best fit  618, 622, 640
finding equation  622
finding slope  623–624
minimizing errors  620–621
non-linear  650
sum of squared errors  620–621
lower bounds  86, 97
basketball scores  88
lower quartile  92
finding  94
M
matched pairs design (experiments)  647
mean  47–60
basketball scores  88
binomial distribution  389
calculating  50
calculating when to use  78
Download at WoweBook.Com

670    Index
the index
mean (continued)
categorical data  62
distributions  56
frequencies  52
frequency density  68
histograms  56
of two middle numbers  61
outliers  57–59
positive and negative distances  105
problems with  65–72
skewed data  62, 64
standard deviations from  121
using letters to represent numbers  48–49
versus median  62
X + Y  368
μ (mu)  50
 (sigma)  49
measuring probability  132
median  61–70
calculating when to use  78
categorical data  62
frequency density  68
in three steps  62
middle quartile  92
problems with  65–72
skewed data  64
versus mean  62
versus the interquartile range  97
middle quartile  92
modal class  73
mode  73–80
calculating when to use  78
categorical data  73
three steps for finding  74
mu (see μ (mu))
multiple sets of data  14, 23
mutually exclusive events  147, 150
N
n!  248
negative linear correlation  613, 631, 640
no correlation  613, 631
No Dumb Questions
adding probabilities  143
alternate hypothesis  530
approximating binomial distribution  398
arranging objects in circle  248
average distance
interquartile range  105
Bayes’ Theorem  179
bias  426, 434
binomial distribution  301, 412
bivariate data  616
box and whisker diagram  101
breaking data into more than four pieces  97
central limit theorem  485
charts  5
clustered sampling  434
confidence intervals  491, 518, 539
confidence interval versus confidence level  507
continuity corrections  398, 412
continuous data  370
continuous distributions  352
correlation coefficient  634
cumulative frequency  36
degrees of freedom  576, 595
discrete data  370
discrete random variable  203
distribution of X + Y  370
drawing lots  434
E(X1 + X2) and E(2X)  224
expectation  208, 219
factorials  248
frequency density  30
Gaussian distribution  352
geometric distribution  277, 284, 301
histograms  23, 30
how data is spread out  97
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    671
the index
hypothesis tests  530, 552
independent events  184
independent observations  378
independent versus mutually exclusive  184
information versus data  5
interquartile range  97
limit on intersecting events  154
linear transforms  219, 378
line charts  42
line of best fit  624
mean or median with categorical data  62
mean with skewed data  62
median  352
versus mean  62
versus the interquartile range  97
n!  248
normal distribution
accuracy of  398
approximating binomial or Poisson distribution  
412
normal probability tables  352
null hypothesis  530
outliers  634
P(Black | Even)  179
permutations and combinations  263
arranging by type  257
point estimators  446, 452
and sampling distributions  485
Poisson distributions  311, 314, 412
approximating binomial distribution  317, 398
population mean  446
positive and negative distances  105
probabilities written as fractions, decimals, or         
percentages  139
probability  139
best method  143
probability density function  334
probability distributions  203
letters p and q  284
quiz show  290
probability for standardized range  347
probability of range  352
probability tables  352, 370
probability trees  165, 179
proportion versus probability  456
questionnaires  426
random variables  233
right- and left-skewed data  62
roulette wheel  184
sample mean  446
sample variance  452
sampling bias  434
sampling distribution  466
sampling frame  426
scatter diagrams  616
set theory  139
shortcuts  370
significance level  539
significance tests  552
slot machines  208
standard deviation  113, 122, 208
standard error  485
of proportion  466
standard scores  122, 347, 352
outliers  122
statistical sampling
bias  426
clustered sampling  434
drawing lots  434
increasing sample size  434
simple random sampling  434
stratified sampling  434
stratified sampling  434
systematic sampling  434
t-distributions  518
target population  426
Type I error  560
Type II error  560
variance  122, 208
variance equations  113
variances  219
Venn diagrams  139, 165, 184
χ2 (chi square) distribution  595
χ2 (chi square) tests  576
no linear correlation  630
non-linear relationships  650
Download at WoweBook.Com

672    Index
the index
normal approximation  394
normal distribution  325–360, 361–414
accuracy of  398
approximating continuity correction  396
approximating binomial distribution  386
approximating binomial or Poisson distribution  412
approximating binomial probabilities  397
binomial distribution  384, 389, 392–393
approximating  398, 407
continuous  395
continuous data  337, 365
continuous distributions  352
continuous probability distributions  337
defined  339–340
discrete data  337
discrete data versus continuous data  326–327
empirical rule  645
finding ≤ probabilities  397
finding ≥ probabilities  397
finding between probabilities  397
frequency and continuous data  328
Gaussian distribution  352
height probabilities  338–341
in place of binomial distribution  389
median  352
normal probability tables  352
Poisson distribution  386, 406
Pool Puzzle  399–400
probability = area  331
probability density function  330–337, 337
probability for standardized range  347
probability of range  352
probability tables  349–352
standard score  345–347, 352
table  411
transforming  345
versus binomial distribution  393, 395
versus t-distributions  515
Normal Distribution Exposed  404
normal probabilities  359
calculating  341–352
determining distribution  343
standardizing normal variables  344
tables  349–352, 352, 658–659
nu (see ν (nu))  
null hypothesis  528, 530, 543
numbers, using letters to represent  48–49
numerical data  18, 23
O
observations  222–224
independent  224
shortcuts  223
one-tailed tests  534, 539
outliers  57–59, 89–91, 93, 634
interquartile range  93
standard scores  122
P
p-value  535–536, 539
percentage sales  12
percentages with no frequencies  12
percentiles  98–99, 102
kth percentile  99, 102
perfect negative linear correlation  631
perfect positive linear correlation  631
permutations and combinations  241–268
arrangements  246
arranging by type  252–257
arranging duplicates  254
arranging objects in circle  247–248
combinations  260–263, 293
examining combinations  260–263
examining permutations  258–259
factorial  246
formulas for arrangements  248
permutations versus combinations  261
three-horse race  243–246
pie charts  8–9, 9, 23
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    673
the index
placebo  646
point estimators  443–447, 452, 493, 519
and sampling distributions  485
for population variance  457
problem with  489
Poisson distribution  306–319, 324, 386, 406, 407, 412
approximating binomial distribution  398
approximating the binomial distribution  316–317
central limit theorem  482
expectation and variance  308
guide  319
when  is large  407
when  is small  407
X + Y  312–313
Poisson Distribution Up Close  307
Poisson variables, combining  313
Pool Puzzle  
binomial distribution  299–300
confidence intervals  499–500
continuity correction  399–400
discrete probability distributions  215–216
population  418, 438
chart  419
mean  446
proportion  454–455, 457
variance  448–450
versus samples  418
(see also estimating populations and samples)
positive and negative distances  105
positive linear correlation  613, 631, 640
possibility space  135
precision, problem with  489
probability  127–196
= area  331
adding  142, 143
Bayes’ Theorem  173, 178
best method  143
conditional  157–160
probability tree  158–161
events (see events)
for a sample  459
how probability relates to roulette  132
intersection  149–154, 153
Law of Total Probability  172, 178
measuring  132
of getting a black or even  145–146
proportion  455
range of values  329
union  149–154, 153
Venn diagram  136, 154
written as fractions, decimals, or percentages  139
probability density  334
function  330–337
never equaling 0  341
probability distributions  220, 224, 363
4X  376
binomial (see binomial distribution)
continuous data  329–333
geometric (see geometric distribution)
large number of possibilities  273, 277
letters p and q  284
new price and payouts  212–214
normal (see normal distribution)
of X + Y  372
patterns  274–277
Poisson (see Poisson distribution)
random variable X  210
standard deviation  207
Probability Distributions Up Close  202
probability tables  349–352, 352, 370, 513, 657–661
standard normal probabilities  658–659
t-distribution critical values  660
χ2 (chi square) critical values  661
Probability Tables Up Close  351
probability trees  158–161, 165, 180
hints  161
proportions  9
probability  455
sampling distribution of  460
distribution of Ps  464–466
expectation of Ps  462
variance of Ps  463
standard error of  463
Download at WoweBook.Com

674    Index
the index
Q
qualitative data  18
quartiles  92
interquartile range  92–93
lower  92, 94
middle  92
upper  92, 94
questionnaires, bias  426
R
randomization  646
randomized block design (experiments)  647
random number generators  431
random variables  202
adding  230
continuous  331
independent  233
subtracting  231
range  86–103, 97, 329, 333
basketball scores  88
calculating  86
lower bound  86
outliers  89–91
problems with  90
quartiles  92
upper bound  86
regression (see correlation and regression)
replication  646
response variable  608
right-skewed data  62, 64
roulette  129–196
black and even pockets  156
board  129–130
how probability relates to  132
independent events  184
measuring probability  132
P(Black | Even)  167–171
P(Even)  169
possibility space  135
probabilities  135
probability of ball landing on 7  133–134
sample space  135
S
samples  418, 438
biased  424–426
designing  422–423
mean  445, 446
space  135
survey  418, 438
unbiased  424–426
unreliability  420
variance  449, 452
(see also estimating populations and samples)
sampling (see statistical sampling)
sampling distribution  466
difference between two means  652
difference between two proportions  653
sampling distribution of means  471–479
distribution of x  480
variance of X  476
sampling distribution of proportion  460
distribution of Ps  464–466
expectation of Ps  462
variance of Ps  463
Sampling Distribution of Proportions Up Close  469
Sampling Distribution of the Means Up Close  479
sampling frame  423–428, 438
bias  425
sampling units  422, 428
bias  425
sampling without replacement  430
sampling with replacement  430
scales  12
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    675
the index
scatter diagrams  609, 612, 616, 618, 640
line of best fit  618
finding equation  622
finding slope  623–624
sum of squared errors  620–621
scatter plots (see scatter diagrams)
segmented bar chart  14
set theory  139
shortcuts  370
sigma ( )  49
sigma ( )  107
significance level  533, 538, 539
significance tests  552
simple random sampling  430–431, 434, 436, 438
drawing lots  431
random number generators  431
skewed data  58–59, 64
mean  62
Skewed Data Up Close  59
skewed to the left  59
skewed to the right  58–59
slope of regression line
confidence intervals  651
slot machines  198
discrete random variables  202
low versus high variance  208
probability distributions  201
variance  207
split-category bar chart  14
standard deviation  107–110, 113–117, 207, 220
from the mean  121
variance equations  113
 (sigma)  107, 224
Standard Deviation Exposed  108
standard error  485
of mean  479
of proportion  463, 466
standardizing normal variables  344
standard normal probabilities  658–659
standard scores  118–122, 345–347, 352
calculating  119
interpreting  120
Standard Scores Up Close  121
statistical sampling  415–440
bias in sampling  423–426, 434, 438
sources  425
choosing samples  430
cluster sampling  433, 433–434, 436, 438
defined  418
designing samples  422
drawing lots  431, 434
how it works  419
incorrect sampling unit  425
increasing sample size  434
population  418, 438
population chart  419
populations versus samples  418
random number generators  431
representative sample  420
samples  438
unreliability  420
sample survey  418, 438
sampling bias  434
sampling chart  419
sampling frame  423–428, 438
sampling units  422, 428
sampling without replacement  430
sampling with replacement  430
simple random sampling  430–438
choosing  431
strata  432
stratified sampling  432, 434, 436, 438
systematic sampling  433–434, 438
target population  422, 428, 438
unreliability  420
statistics
defined  2
why learn  3
Download at WoweBook.Com

676    Index
the index
statistics tables  657–661
standard normal probabilities  658–659
t-distribution critical values  660
χ2 (chi square) critical values  661
stemplots  644
stems  644
strata  432
stratified sampling  432–438
stratified sampling  436
summation symbol ( )  49
sum of squared errors  640
symmetric data  59
systematic sampling  433–434, 438
T
t-distributions  509–515
probability tables  513
shortcuts  515
small sample  510
standard score  511
table  660
versus normal distributions  515
target population  422, 426, 428, 438
test statistic  531, 539, 544, 547
three-horse race  243–246
two-tailed tests  534, 539
Type I error  555–560, 566
Type II error  555–560, 566
U
unbiased sample  424–425
uniform distribution  655
union  149–154
univariate data  608, 640
upper bounds  86, 97
basketball scores  88
upper quartile  92
finding  94
V
variability  104–124
average distance  105
positive and negative distances  105
variance (see variance)
variables  368
probabilities involving the difference between two  369
variance  106–113, 122, 205–208, 219, 220, 367
binomial distribution  298, 389
calculating  111–113
quicker way  113
geometric distribution  281–284
independent observations  378
linear transforms  233
of X  476
Poisson distribution  308
slot machines  207
standard deviation  107–110
 (sigma)  107
two games  222–224
X + Y  368
Variance Up Close  450
Venn diagrams  136, 139, 154, 165
conditional probability  157
independent events  184
vertical bar charts  10–11, 23
visualizing information  1–44, 19–28
categorical and numerical data  18–23
cumulative frequency  34–38
histograms  19–28
statistics  2
(see also charts and graphs)
Download at WoweBook.Com

you are here 4    677
the index
Vital Statistics
A or B  153
approximating binomial distribution  389
approximating Poisson distribution  407
arranging by type  254
Bayes’ Theorem  178
combinations  263
conditions  165
cumulative frequency  34
event  132
formulas for arrangements  248
frequency  8
independence  184
independent observations  224
interquartile range  93
Law of Total Probability  178
linear transforms  220
mean  54
mode  76
outlier  58
percentile  99
permutations  263
probability  143
quartiles  92
range  86
significance level  533
skewed data  58
standard score  346
uniform distribution  655
variance  106, 113
W
Watch it!
criteria of np > 10 and nq > 10  389
cumulative frequencies  35
exclusive versus exhaustive  150
how large n needs to be  465
independent random variables  230–232
independent versus mutually exclusive  183
linear regression  626
percentages with no frequencies  12
quartiles  92
samples equation  451
subtracting random variables  231
X1 + X2 and 2X  223
Who Wants To Win A Swivel Chair  289, 381–386
expectation and variance  304
generalizing probability for three questions  293
generalizing the probability  296
probability of getting exactly three questions right  304
probability of getting exactly two questions right  304
probability of getting no questions right  304
probability of getting two or three questions right  304
should you play or walk away  291
width of data  88
X
X + Y Distribution Up Close  368
X - Y Distribution Up Close  369
Z
z-scores  118–122
calculating  119
interpreting  120
Download at WoweBook.Com

