

Advance Praise for Head First Physics
“If you want to learn some physics, but you think it’s too difficult, buy this book! It will probably help, 
and if it doesn’t, you can always use it as a doorstop or hamster bedding or something. I wish I had a 
copy of this book when I was teaching physics.”
— John Allister, physics teacher
“Head First Physics has achieved the impossible - a serious textbook that makes physics fun. Students all 
over will be thinking like a physicist!”
— Georgia Gale Grant, freelance science writer, communicator and broadcaster
“Great graphics, clear explanations and some crazy real world problems to solve! This text is full of 
strategies and tips to attack problems. It encourages a team approach that’s so essential in today’s work 
world.”
— Diane Jaquith, high school physics, chemistry and physical science teacher
“This is an outstandingly good teacher masquerading as a physics book! You never feel phased if you 
don’t quite understand something the first time because you know it will be explained again in a different 
way and then repeated and reinforced. ”
— Marion Lang, teacher
“This book takes you by the hand and guides you through the world of physics.”
— Catriona Lang, teacher
“Head First Physics really rocks - I never thought it was possible to enjoy learning physics so much! This 
book is about understanding and not about rote learning, so you can get to grips with the physics and 
remember it much better as a result.”
— Alice Pitt-Pitts

Praise for other Head First academic titles
“Head First Statistics is by far the most entertaining, attention-catching study guide on the market.  By 
presenting the material in an engaging manner, it provides students with a comfortable way to learn an 
otherwise cumbersome subject.  The explanation of the topics is presented in a manner comprehensible 
to students of all levels.”
— Ariana Anderson, Teaching Fellow/PhD candidate in Statistics, UCLA
“Head First is an intuitive way to understand statistics using simple, real-life examples that make learning 
fun and natural.”
— Michael Prerau, computational neuroscientist and statistics instructor, 
Boston University
“Thought Head First was just for computer nerds? Try the brain-friendly way with statistics and you’ll 
change your mind. It really works.”
— Andy Parker
“This book is a great way for students to learn statistics—it is entertaining, comprehensive, and easy to 
understand. A perfect solution!”
— Danielle Levitt
“Down with dull statistics books! Even my cat liked this one.”
— Cary Collett

Praise for the Head First Approach
“There are books you buy, books you keep, books you keep on your desk, and thanks to O’Reilly and the 
Head First crew, there is the ultimate category, Head First books. They’re the ones that are dog-eared, 
mangled, and carried everywhere. Head First SQL is at the top of my stack. Heck, even the PDF I have 
for review is tattered and torn.”
— Bill Sawyer, ATG Curriculum Manager, Oracle
“Elegant design is at the core of every chapter here, each concept conveyed with equal doses of 
pragmatism and wit.”
— Ken Goldstein, Executive Vice President, Disney Online
“I feel like a thousand pounds of books have just been lifted off of my head.”
—Ward Cunningham, inventor of the Wiki and founder of the Hillside Group
“This book’s admirable clarity, humor and substantial doses of clever make it the sort of book that helps 
even non-programmers think well about problem-solving.”
— Cory Doctorow, co-editor of Boing Boing  
Author, Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom 
and Someone Comes to Town, Someone Leaves Town
“It’s fast, irreverent, fun, and engaging. Be careful—you might actually learn something!”
—Ken Arnold, former Senior Engineer at Sun Microsystems 
Co-author (with James Gosling, creator of Java), The Java Programming 
Language
“I received the book yesterday and started to read it...and I couldn’t stop. This is definitely très ‘cool.’ It is 
fun, but they cover a lot of ground and they are right to the point. I’m really impressed.”
— Erich Gamma, IBM Distinguished Engineer, and co-author of Design 
Patterns
“One of the funniest and smartest books on software design I’ve ever read.”
— Aaron LaBerge, VP Technology, ESPN.com
“I ♥ Head First HTML with CSS & XHTML—it teaches you everything you need to learn in a ‘fun 
coated’ format.”
— Sally Applin, UI Designer and Artist

Other related books from O’Reilly
Statistics HacksTM
Statistics in a Nutshell
Mind HacksTM
Mind Performance HacksTM
Your Brain: The Missing Manual
Other books in O’Reilly’s Head First series
Head First JavaTM
Head First Object-Oriented Analysis and Design (OOA&D)
Head First HTML with CSS and XHTML
Head First Design Patterns
Head First Servlets and JSP
Head First EJB
Head First PMP
Head First SQL
Head First Software Development
Head First JavaScript
Head First Ajax
Head First Statistics
Head First PHP & MySQL (2008)
Head First Algebra (2008)
Head First Rails (2008)
Head First Web Design (2008)

Beijing  •  Cambridge  •  Köln  •  Sebastopol  •  Taipei  •  Tokyo
Heather Lang, Ph.D.
Head First Physics
A learner’s companion to 
mechanics and practical physics
Wouldn’t it be dreamy if 
there was a physics book that 
was more fun than going to the 
dentist, and more revealing than 
an IRS form? It’s probably just a 
fantasy...

Head First Physics
by Heather Lang, Ph.D.
Copyright © 2009 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly Media books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions are 
also available for most titles (safari.oreilly.com). For more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales 
department: (800) 998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Series Creators:	
	
Kathy Sierra, Bert Bates
Series Editor:	
	
Brett D. McLaughlin
Design Editor:	
	
Louise Barr
Cover Designers:	
	
Louise Barr, Steve Fehler
Production Editor:	 	
Brittany Smith
Indexer:	
	
	
Julie Hawks
	
	
Printing History:
September 2008:  First Edition.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. The Head First series designations, 
Head First Physics, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as 
trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of a trademark 
claim, the designations have been printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and the authors assume no 
responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.
No pizza delivery guys were harmed in the making of this book. 
ISBN: 978-0-596-10237-1	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
[M]	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

This book is dedicated to... anyone who made me laugh while writing it!

viii
the author
Author of Head First Physics
Heather studied physics in Manchester, 
gaining a first class honours degree. She likes 
explaining how stuff works and persuading 
people to send her chocolate in the post. Her 
first foray into science communication was via 
the BaBar Particle Physics Teaching Package. 
She followed this up with a Ph.D. in the grey 
area between physics and biochemistry, but 
got fed up of sharing a fridge with petri dishes 
and moved on from the lab into education and 
Head First Physics.
When not explaining how stuff works, Heather 
likes to play extreme sports such as chess and 
cricket, play with sliders on a sound desk, or 
play the fool while running school chess clubs 
(in the name of teaching of course).
Heather Lang

table of contents
ix
Table of Contents (Summary)
Table of Contents (the real thing)
Your brain on Physics.   Here you are trying to learn something, while 
here your brain is doing you a favor by making sure the learning doesn’t stick.  Your 
brain’s thinking, “Better leave room for more important things, like which wild 
animals to avoid and whether naked snowboarding is a bad idea.” So how do you 
trick your brain into thinking that your life depends on knowing physics? 
Intro
Who is this book for?	
xxxiv
We know what you’re thinking	
xxxv
Metacognition	
xxxvii
Bend your brain into submission	
xxxix
Read me	
xl
The technical review team	
xlii
Acknowledgments	
xliii
 	
Intro	
xxxiii
1	
Think Like a Physicist: In the beginning ...	
1
2	
Making It All Mean Something: Units and Measurements	
17
3	
Scientific Notation, Area, and Volume: All Numbers Great and Small	
55
4	
Equations and Graphs: Learning the Lingo	
95
5	
Dealing with Directions: Vectors	
149
	
Experiments	
193
6	
Displacement, Velocity, and Acceleration: What’s Going On?	
203
7	
Equations of Motion (Part 1): Playing with Equations	
237
8	
Equations of Motion (Part 2): Up, Up, and... Back Down	
283
9	
Triangles, Trig and Trajectories: Going Two-Dimensional	
335
10	
Momentum Conservation: What Newton Did	
391
11	
Weight and The Normal Force: Forces for Courses	
437
12	
Using Forces, Momentum, Friction and Impulse: Getting On With It	
471
13	
Torque and Work: Getting a Lift	
515
14	
Energy Conservation: Making Your Life Easier	
559
15	
Tension, Pulleys and Problem Solving: Changing Direction	
603
16	
Circular Motion (Part 1) From α to ω	
631
17	
Circular Motion (Part 2): Staying on Track	
663
18	
Gravitation and Orbits: Getting Away From It All	
715
19	
Oscillations (Part 1): Round and Round	
761
20	
Oscillations (Part 2): Springs ‘n’ Swings	
797
21	
Think Like a Physicist: It’s the Final Chapter	
839
i	
Appendix i: Top Six Things We Didn’t Cover	
863
ii	
Appendix ii: Equation Table	
873

table of contents

Physics is the world around you	
2
You can get a feel for what’s happening by being a part of it	
4
Use your intuition to look for ‘special points’	
6
The center of the earth is a special point	
8
Ask yourself “What am I ALREADY doing as  
I reach the special point?”	
9
Where you’re at - and what happens next?	
11
Now put it all together	
13
In the beginning ...
think like a physicist
1
Physics is about the world around you  and how everything 
in it works. As you go about your daily life, you’re doing physics all the time! 
But the thought of actually learning physics may sometimes feel like falling 
into a bottomless pit with no escape! Don’t worry... this chapter introduces how 
to think like a physicist. You’ll learn to step into problems and to use your 
intuition to spot patterns and ‘special points’ that make things much easier. 
By being part of the problem, you’re one step closer to getting to the solution...

table of contents
xi
2
It’s the best music player ever, and you’re part of the team!	
18
So you get on with measuring the myPod case	
19
When the myPod case comes back from the factory, it’s way too big	
20
There aren’t any UNITS on the blueprint	
22
You’ll use SI units in this book (and in your class)	
25
You use conversion factors to change units	
29
You can write a conversion factor as a fraction	
30
Now you can use the conversion factor to update the blueprint	
33
What to do with numbers that have waaaay too many  
digits to be usable	
36
How many digits of your measurements look significant?	
37
Generally, you should round your answers to three significant digits	
39
You ALREADY intuitively rounded your original  
myPod measurements!	
42
Any measurement you make has an error (or uncertainty)  
associated with it	
43
The error on your original measurements  
should propagate through to your converted blueprint	
44
STOP!! Before you hit send, do your answers SUCK?!	
47
When you write down a measurement,  
you need the right number of significant digits	
51
Hero or Zero?	
52
Units and measurements
making it all MEAN something
How long is a piece of string? Physics is based on making 
measurements that tell you about size. In this chapter, you’ll learn how to use 
units and rounding to avoid making mistakes - and also why errors are OK. 
By the time you’re through, you’ll know when something is significant and 
have an opinion on whether size really is everything.

table of contents
xii
3
A messy college dorm room	
56
So how long before things go really bad?	
57
Power notation helps you multiply by  
the same number over and over	
61
Your calculator displays big numbers using scientific notation	
63
Scientific notation uses powers of 10 to write down long numbers	
64
Scientific notation helps you with small numbers as well	
68
You’ll often need to work with area or volume	
72
Look up facts in a book (or table of information)	
73
Prefixes help with numbers outside your comfort zone	
74
Scientific notation helps you to do calculations with  
large and small numbers	
76
The guys have it all worked out	
81
200,000,000 meters cubed bugs after only 16 hours is  
totally the wrong size of answer!	
83
Be careful converting units of area or volume	
84
So the bugs won’t take over ... unless the guys sleep in!	
86
The “Converting units of area or volume” Question	
87
All numbers great and small
scientific notation, area, and volume
The B
ump
er
 
B
o
ok
 o
f 
Bu
g
s
In the real world, you have to deal with all kinds of numbers, 
not just the ones that are easier to work with. In this chapter, you’ll 
be taking control of unwieldy numbers using scientific notation and discovering why 
rounding a large number doesn’t mean having to write a zillion zeros at the end. You’ll 
also use your new superpowers to deal with units of area and volume - which is where 
scientific notation will save you lots of grief (and time) in the future!

table of contents
xiii
4
You need to work out how to give the customer their delivery time	
97
If you write the delivery time as an equation,  
you can see what’s going on	
98
Use variables to keep your equation general	
99
You need to work out Alex’s cycling time	
101
When you design an experiment, think about what might go wrong!	 105
Conduct an experiment to find out Alex’s speed	
108
Write down your results... in a table	
109
Use the table of distances and times to work out Alex’s speed	
111
Random errors mean that results will be spread out	
113
A graph is the best way of taking an average of ALL your results	
114
Use a graph to show Alex’s time for ANY distance	
117
The line on the graph is your best estimate for  
how long Alex takes to cycle ANY distance	
118
You can see Alex’s speed from the steepness  
of the distance-time graph	
120
Alex’s speed is the slope of the distance-time graph	
122
Now work out Alex’s average speed from your graph	
123
You need an equation for Alex’s time to give to the web guys	
125
Rearrange the equation to say " time = something"	
126
Use your equation to work out the time it takes  
Alex to reach each house	
129
So just convert the units, and you’re all set...right?	
131
Include the cooking time in your equation	
133
A graph lets you see the difference the stop lights made	
137
The stop lights change Alex’s average speed	
139
The “Did you do what they asked you” Question	
146
Learning the lingo
equations and graphs
Communication is vital. You’re already off to a good start 
in your journey to truly think like a physicist, but now you need to 
communicate your thoughts. In this chapter, you’re going to take your 
first steps in two universal languages - graphs and equations - pictures 
you can use to speak a thousand words about experiments you do and 
the physics concepts you’re learning. Seeing is believing.

table of contents
xiv
5
Vectors
dealing with directions
The treasure hunt	
150
Displacement is different from distance	
155
Distance is a scalar; displacement is a vector	
157
You can represent vectors using arrows	
157
You can add vectors in any order	
162
The “Wheat from the chaff ” Question	
166
Angles measure rotations	
168
If you can’t deal with something big, break it down  
into smaller parts	
170
Velocity is the ‘vector version’ of speed	
174
Write units using shorthand	
175
You need to allow for the stream’s velocity too!	
176
If you can find the stream’s velocity, you can figure  
out the velocity for the boat	
177
It takes the boat time to accelerate from a standing start	
180
How do you deal with acceleration?	
181
Vector, Angle, Velocity, Acceleration = WINNER!!!	
187
 I’m ready - what’s first?
Time, speed, and distance are all well and good, but you really 
need DIRECTION too if you want to get on in life. 
You now have multiple physics superpowers: You’ve mastered graphs and equations, and 
you can estimate how big your answer will be. But size isn’t everything. In this chapter, 
you’ll be learning about vectors, which give direction to your answers and help you to 
find easier shortcuts through complicated-looking problems.

table of contents
xv
6
Just another day in the desert ...	
204
How can you use what you know?	
207
The cage accelerates as it falls	
210
‘Vectorize’ your equation	
211
You want an instantaneous velocity, not an average velocity	
213
You already know how to calculate the slope of a straight line...	
218
A point on a curved line has the same slope as its tangent	
218
The slope of something’s velocity-time graph  
lets you work out its acceleration	
226
Work out the units of acceleration	
227
Success! You worked out the velocity after 2.0 s -  
and the cage won’t break!	
231
Now onto solve for the displacement!	
234
What’s going on?
Displacement, Velocity, and Acceleration
It’s hard to keep track of more than one thing at a time.    
When something falls, its displacement, velocity, and acceleration are all important at the 
same time. So how can you pay attention to all three without missing anything? In this 
chapter, you’ll increase your experiment, graph, and slope superpowers in preparation for 
bringing everything together with an equation or two.

table of contents
xvi
7
How high should the crane be?	
238
Graphs and equations both represent the real world	
240
You’re interested in the start and end points	
241
You have an equation for the velocity - 
but what about the displacement?	
244
See the average velocity on your velocity-time graph	
249
Test your equations by imagining them with different numbers	
251
Calculate the cage’s displacement!	
253
You know how high the crane should be!	
254
But now the Dingo needs something more general	
255
A substitution will help	
256
Get rid of the variables you don’t want by making substitutions	
259
Continue making substitutions ...	
261
You derived a useful equation for the cage’s displacement!	
264
Check your equation using Units	
265
Check your equation by trying out some extreme values	
268
Your equation checks out!	
273
So the Dingo drops the cage ...	
274
The “Substitution” Question	
275
The “Units” or “Dimensional analysis” Question	
276
Playing With Equations
Equations of motion (part 1)
It’s time to take things to another level. 
So far, you’ve done experiments, drawn graphs of their results, and worked out equations 
from them. But there’s only so far you can go since sometimes your graph isn’t a straight 
line. In this chapter, you’ll expand your math skills by making substitutions to work out 
a key equation of motion for a curved displacement-time graph of a falling object. And 
you’ll also learn that checking your GUT reaction to an answer can be a good thing.

table of contents
xvii
8
Now ACME has an amazing new cage launcher	
284
The acceleration due to gravity is constant	
286
Velocity and acceleration are in opposite directions,  
so they have opposite signs	
288
You can use one graph to work out the shapes of the others	
293
Is a graph of your equation the same shape  
as the graph you sketched?	
298
Fortunately, ACME has a rocket-powered hovercraft!	
305
You can work out a new equation by making a substitution for t	
308
Multiply out the parentheses in your equation	
311
You have two sets of parentheses multiplied together	
312
You need to simplify your equation by grouping the terms	
315
You can use your new equation to work out the stopping distance	
317
There are THREE key equations you can use  
when there’s constant acceleration	
318
You need to work out the launch velocity that gets  
the Dingo out of the Grand Canyon!	
321
You need to find another way of doing this problem	
326
The start of a beautiful friendship	
330
The “Sketch a graph” or “Match a graph” Question	
331
The “Symmetry” and “Special points” Questions	
332
Up, up, and... back down
equations of motion (part 2)
 - Launches a standard 
ACME cage straight up 
in the air.
 - Variable launch speeds.
 
 - Waterproof
 - Payment plans and 
financing available
ACME  Cage Launcher
1
2
 - Top speed 43 m/s.
 - Accelerates or brakes 
at 2.5 m/s2.
 - Financing Available.
ACME  Rocket-powered 
Hovercraft
What goes up must come down. You already know how to 
deal with things that are falling down, which is great. But what about the 
other half of the bargain - when something’s launched up into the air? In this 
chapter, you’ll add a third key equation of motion to your armory which will 
enable you to deal with (just about) anything! You’ll also learn how looking 
for a little symmetry can turn impossible tasks into manageable ones.

table of contents
xviii
9
Camelot - we have a problem!	
336
How wide should you make the moat?	
339
Looks like a triangle, yeah?	
340
A scale drawing can solve problems	
342
Pythagoras’ Theorem lets you figure out the sides quickly	
343
Sketch + shape + equation = Problem solved!	
345
Camelot ... we have ANOTHER problem!	
348
Relate your angle to an angle inside the triangle	
351
Classify similar triangles by the ratios of their side lengths	
354
Sine, cosine and tangent connect the sides and  
angles of a right-angled triangle	
355
How to remember which ratio is which?	
357
Sine Exposed	
358
Calculators have sin(θ), cos(θ) and tan(θ) tables built in	
360
Uh oh. Gravity...	
367
The cannonball’s velocity and acceleration  
vectors point in different directions	
369
Gravity accelerates everything downwards at 9.8 m/s2	
370
The horizontal component of the velocity can’t change  
once you’ve let go	
371
The horizontal component of a projectile’s velocity is constant	
372
The same method solves both problems	
375
The “Projectile” Question	
376
The “Missing steps” Question	
387
Going two-dimensional
triangles, trig and trajectories
Ladder
Wall
End of ladder 
is nowhere near 
top of wall.
Bottom of 
ladder is at 
edge of moat.
Moat filled 
with water.
15.0 m
15.0 m
15.0 m
So you can deal with one dimension. But what about real life? 
Real things don’t just go up or down - they go sideways too! But never fear - you’re 
about to gain a whole new bunch of trigonometry superpowers that’ll see you spotting 
right‑angled triangles wherever you go and using them to reduce complicated-looking 
problems into simpler ones that you can already do.

table of contents
xix
10
The pirates be havin’ a spot o’ bother with a ghost ship ...	
392
What does the maximum range depend on?	
395
Firing at 45° maximizes your range	
396
You can’t do everything that’s theoretically possible -  
you need to be practical too	
397
Sieges-R-Us has a new stone cannonball,  
which they claim will increase the range!	
400
Massive things are more difficult to start and stop	
402
Newton’s First Law 	
403
Mass matters	
404
A stone cannonball has a smaller mass -  
so it has a larger velocity. But how much larger?	
407
Here’s your lab equipment	
410
How are force, mass and velocity related?	
411
Vary only one thing at a time in your experiment	
414
Mass × velocity - momentum - is conserved	
418
A greater force acting over the same amount of time  
gives a greater change in momentum	
420
Write momentum conservation as an equation	
421
Momentum conservation and Newton’s Third Law are equivalent	
422
You’ve calculated the stone cannonball’s velocity,  
but you want the new range!	
429
Use proportion to work out the new range	
430
The “Proportion” Question (often multiple choice)	
434
What Newton Did
momentum conservation
No one likes to be a pushover. So far, you’ve learned to deal with objects that 
are already moving. But what makes them go in the first place? You know that something 
will move if you push it - but how will it move? In this chapter, you’ll overcome inertia as 
you get acquainted with some of Newton’s Laws. You’ll also learn about momentum, 
why it’s conserved, and how you can use it to solve problems.

table of contents
xx
11
WeightBotchers are at it again!	
438
Is it really possible to lose weight instantly?!	
439
Scales work by compressing or stretching a spring	
440
Mass is a measurement of “stuff ”	
442
Weight is a force	
442
The relationship between force and mass involves momentum	
444
If the object’s mass is constant, Fnet = ma	
446
The scales measure the support force	
449
Now you can debunk the machine!	
451
The machine reduces the support force	
452
Force pairs help you check your work	
454
You debunked WeightBotchers!	
456
A surface can only exert a force perpendicular (or normal) to it	
458
When you slide downhill, there’s zero perpendicular acceleration	
461
Use parallel and perpendicular force components to deal with a slope	463
The “Free body diagram” Question	
466
The “Thing on a slope” Question	
467
Forces for courses
weight and the normal force
Lose weight 
INSTANTLY!! 
(for only $499)
Before
After!
Sometimes you have to make a statement forcefully. 
 In this chapter, you’ll work out Newton’s 2nd Law from what you already know about 
momentum conservation to wind up with the key equation, Fnet = ma. Once you 
combine this with spotting Newton’s 3rd Law force pairs, and drawing free body 
diagrams, you’ll be able to deal with (just about) anything. You’ll also learn about why 
mass and weight aren’t the same thing, and get used to using the normal force to 
support your arguments.

table of contents
xxi
12
It’s ... SimFootball!	
472
Momentum is conserved in a collision	
476
But the collision might be at an angle	
477
A triangle with no right angles is awkward	
479
Use component vectors to create some right-angled triangles	
480
The programmer includes 2D momentum conservation ...	
483
In real life, the force of friction is present	
484
Friction depends on the types of surfaces that are interacting	
488
Be careful when you calculate the normal force	
489
You’re ready to use friction in the game!	
491
Including friction stops the players from sliding forever!	
492
The sliding players are fine - but the tire drag is causing problems	
493
Using components for the tire drag works!	
497
Friction Exposed	
498
The “Friction” Question	
499
How does kicking a football work?	
500
F t is called impulse	
502
The game’s great - but there’s just been a spec change!	
506
For added realism, sometimes the players should slip	
509
You can change only direction horizontally on a  
flat surface because of friction	
510
The game is brilliant, and going to X-Force rocks!	
511
Newton’s Laws give you awesome powers	
512
Getting on with it
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
It’s no good memorizing lots of theory if you can’t apply it.   
You already know about equations of motion, component vectors, momentum 
conservation, free body diagrams and Newton’s Laws. In this chapter, you’ll learn 
how to fit all of these things together and apply them to solve a much wider range 
of physics problems. Often, you’ll spot when a problem is like something you’ve 
seen before. You’ll also add more realism by learning to deal with friction - and will 
see why it’s sometimes appropriate to act on impulse.

table of contents
xxii
13
Half the kingdom to anyone who can lift the sword in the stone ...	
516
Can physics help you to lift a heavy object?	
517
Use a lever to turn a small force into a larger force	
519
Do an experiment to determine where to position the fulcrum	
521
Zero net torque causes the lever to balance	
525
Use torque to lift the sword and the stone!	
530
The “Two equations, two unknowns” Question	
533
So you lift the sword and stone with the lever ...  
but they don’t go high enough!	
535
You can’t get something for nothing	
537
When you move an object against a force, you’re doing work	
538
The work you need to do a job = force × displacement	
538
Which method involves the least amount of work?	
539
Work has units of Joules	
541
Energy is the capacity that something has to do work	
542
Lifting stones is like transferring energy from one store to another	
542
Energy conservation helps you to solve problems  
with differences in height	
545
Will energy conservation save the day?	
547
You need to do work against friction as well as against gravity	
549
Doing work against friction increases internal energy	
551
Heating increases internal energy	
552
It’s impossible to be 100% efficient	
553
Getting a lift
torque and work
You can use your physics knowledge to do superhuman feats. 
In this chapter, you’ll learn how to harness torque to perform amazing displays of strength, 
by using a lever to exert a much larger force than you could on your own. However, you 
can’t get something for nothing - energy is always conserved and the amount of work 
you do to give something gravitational potential energy by lifting it doesn’t change.

table of contents
xxiii
14
The ultimate bobsled experience	
560
Forces and component vectors solve the first part... 
but the second part doesn’t have a uniform slope	
563
A moving object has kinetic energy	
565
The kinetic energy is related to the velocity	
567
Calculate the velocity using energy conservation  
and the change in height	
569
You’ve used energy conservation to solve the second part	
571
In the third part, you have to apply a force to stop a moving object	
571
Putting on the brake does work on the track	
573
Doing work against friction increases the internal energy	
574
Energy conservation helps you to do  
complicated problems in a simpler way	
579
There’s a practical difference between  
momentum and kinetic energy	
581
The “Show that” Question	
584
The “Energy transfer” Question	
585
Momentum conservation will solve an inelastic collision problem	
587
You need a second equation for an elastic collision	
587
Energy conservation gives you the second equation that you need!	
589
Factoring involves putting in parentheses	
591
You can deal with elastic collisions now	
592
In an elastic collision, the relative velocity reverses	
593
There’s a gravity-defying trick shot to sort out ...	
594
The initial collision is inelastic - so mechanical energy isn’t conserved	 596
Use momentum conservation for the inelastic part	
597
The “Ballistic pendulum” Question	
599
Making your life easier
energy conservation
Why do things the hard way when there’s an easier way? 
So far, you’ve been solving problems using equations of motion, forces and component 
vectors. And that’s great - except that it sometimes takes a while to crunch through the 
math. In this chapter, you’ll learn to spot where you can use energy conservation as a 
shortcut that lets you solve complicated-looking problems with relative ease.

table of contents
xxiv
15
It’s a bird... it’s plane...no, it’s a guy on a skateboard?!	
604
Always look for something familiar	
605
Michael and the stack accelerate at the same rate	
608
Use tension to tackle the problem	
611
Look at the big picture as well as the parts	
617
But the day before the competition ...	
619
Using energy conservation is simpler than using forces	
621
There goes that skateboard...	
626
Changing direction
tension, pulleys and problem solving
The center of 
the target is 
15.0 m from the 
foot of the pier.
Skateboard is pulled along 
the pier by the rope.
When the skateboard reaches 
the end of the pier, Michael 
continues with velocity v.
v
The mass has just 
hit the surface 
of the water.
11.0 m
15.0 m
With the correct initial 
velocity at the end of 
the pier, Michael will 
follow this trajectory 
and hit the bullseye.
The competition takes 
place when the tide is 
in and the sea is 110. m 
below the top of the pier.
Here’s what SHOULD happen...
Sometimes you need to deal with the tension in a situation 
So far, you’ve been using forces, free body diagrams and energy conservation 
to solve problems. In this chapter you’ll take that further as you deal with ropes, 
pulleys, and yes, tension. Along the way, you’ll also practise looking for familiar 
signposts to help navigate your way through complicated situations.

table of contents
xxv
16
Limber up for the Kentucky Hamster Derby	
632
You can revolutionize the hamsters’ training	
633
Thinking through different approaches helps	
635
A circle’s radius and circumference are linked by π	
637
Convert from linear distance to revolutions	
639
Convert the linear speeds into Hertz	
641
So you set up the machine ... but the wheel turns too slowly!	
643
Try some numbers to work out how things relate to each other	
645
The units on the motor are radians per second	
646
Convert frequency to angular frequency	
651
The hamster trainer is complete!	
652
You can increase the (linear) speed by increasing the wheel’s radius	
657
The “Angular quantities” Question	
660
From α to ω
circular motion (part 1)
Hey kiddo, this Kentucky Hamster 
Derby is big business, and we gotta get 
the training schedule absolutely spot on!
Billionaire 
hamster owner
Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number 
of revolutions
Motor setting 
(       )
15.0
3.0
10.0
4.0
2.0
5.5
0
5 10 15 20 25
You say you want a revolution?  In this chapter, you’ll learn 
how to deal with circular motion with a crash course in circle anatomy, 
including what the radius and circumference have to do with pies (or 
should that be πs). After dealing with frequency and period, you’ll need 
to switch from the linear to the angular. But once you’ve learned to use  
radians to measure angles, you’ll know it’s gonna be alright.

table of contents
xxvi
17
Houston ... we have a problem	
664
When you’re in freefall, objects appear to float beside you	
666
What’s the astronaut missing, compared to when he’s on Earth?	
667
Can you mimic the contact force you feel on Earth?	
669
Accelerating the space station allows you  
to experience a contact force	
671
You can only go in a circle because of a centripetal force	
674
Centripetal force acts towards the center of the circle	
677
The astronaut experiences a contact force when you  
rotate the space station	
678
What affects the size of centripetal force?	
679
Spot the equation for the centripetal acceleration	
681
Give the astronauts a centripetal force	
683
The floor space is the area of a cylinder’s curved surface	
686
Let’s test the space station...	
	
	
	
689
The “Centripetal force” Question	
692
The bobsled needs to turn a corner	
694
Angling the track gives the normal force a horizontal component	
697
When you slide downhill, there’s no perpendicular acceleration	
698
When you turn a corner, there’s no vertical acceleration	
699
How to deal with an object on a slope	
700
The “support force” required for a vertical circle varies	
704
Any force that acts towards the center of the circle  
can provide a centripetal force	
707
The “Banked curve” Question	
711
The “Vertical circle” Question	
712
Staying on track
circular motion (part 2)
The astronauts are tired 
of floating. They want 
gravity... in space!
Ever feel like someone’s gone off at a tangent? That’s exactly what 
happens when you try to move an object along a circular path when there’s not enough 
centripetal force to enable this to happen. In this chapter, you’ll learn exactly what 
centripetal force is and how it can keep you on track. Along the way, you’ll even solve 
some pretty serious problems with a certain Head First space station. So what are you 
waiting for? Turn the page, and let’s get started.

table of contents
xxvii
18
Party planners, a big event, and lots of cheese	
716
What length should the cocktail sticks be?	
717
The cheese globe is a sphere	
719
The surface area of the sphere is the same as  
the surface area of the cheese	
720
Let there be cheese...	
723
The party’s on!	
725
To infinity - and beyond!	
726
Earth’s gravitational force on you becomes weaker  
as you go further away	
729
Gravitation is an inverse square law	
735
Now you can calculate the force on the spaceship  
at any distance from the Earth	
741
The potential energy is the area under the force-displacement graph	 743
If U = 0 at infinity, the equation works for any star or planet	
745
Potential Energy Exposed	
746
Use energy conservation to calculate the astronaut’s escape velocity	
747
We need to keep up with our astronaut	
751
The centripetal force is provided by gravity	
754
With the comms satellites in place, it’s Pluto (and beyond)	
757
The “gravitational force = centripetal force” Question	
758
Getting away from it all
gravitation and orbits
So far, you’ve been up close and personal with gravity - but what 
happens to the attraction as your feet leave the ground? In this chapter, you’ll learn that 
gravitation is an inverse square law, and harness the power of gravitational potential 
to take a trip to infinity... and beyond. Closer to home, you’ll learn how to deal with 
orbits - and learn how they can revolutionize your communication skills.

table of contents
xxviii
19
Welcome to the fair!	
762
Reproduce the duck on the display	
763
The screen for the game is TWO-DIMENSIONAL	
769
So we know what the duck does... but where exactly is the duck?	
773
Any time you’re dealing with a component vector,  
try to spot a right-angled triangle	
774
Let’s show Jane the display	
782
The second player sees the x-component of the duck’s displacement	 783
We need a wider definition of cosine, too	
784
sine and cosine are related to each other	
785
Sine Exposed	
787
Let the games begin!	
788
What’s the duck’s velocity from each player’s point of view?	
789
Get the shape of the velocity-time graph from  
the slope of the displacement-time graph	
790
The game is complete!	
794
Round and round
Oscillations (part 1)
Things can look very different when you see them from 
another angle.   So far you’ve been looking at circular motion from above - but what 
does it look like from the side? In this chapter, you’ll tie together your circular motion and 
trigonometry superpowers as you learn extended definitions of sine and cosine. Once 
you’re done, you’ll be able to deal with anything that’s moving around a circle - whichever 
way you look at it.

table of contents
xxix
20
Get rocking, not talking	
798
The plant rocker needs to work for three different masses of plant	
798
A spring will produce regular oscillations	
799
Displacement from equilibrium and  
strength of spring affect the force	
801
A mass on a spring moves like a side-on view of circular motion	
805
A mass on a spring moves with simple harmonic motion	
806
Simple harmonic motion is sinusoidal	
809
Work out constants by comparing a situation-specific  
equation with a standard equation	
810
The “This equation is like that one” Question	
813
Anne forgot to mention something ...	
815
The plants rock - and you rule!	
821
But now the plant rocker’s frequency has changed ...	
822
The frequency of a horizontal spring depends on the mass	
824
Will using a vertical spring make a difference?	
824
A pendulum swings with simple harmonic motion	
830
What does the frequency of a pendulum depend on?	
831
The pendulum design works!	
833
The “Vertical spring” Question	
835
The “How does this depend on that” Question	
836
Springs ‘n’ swings
Oscillations (part 2)
What do you do when something just happens over 
and over?   This chapter is about dealing with oscillations, and helps 
you see the big picture. You’ll put together what you know about graphs, 
equations, forces, energy conservation and periodic motion as you tackle 
springs and pendulums that move with simple harmonic motion to get the 
ultimate “I rule” experience ... without having to repeat yourself too much.

table of contents
xxx
21
You’ve come a long way!	
840
Now you can finish off the globe	
841
The round-trip looks like simple harmonic motion	
842
But what time does the round-trip take?	
843
You can treat the Earth like a sphere and a shell	
845
The net force from the shell is zero	
850
The force is proportional to the displacement, so your trip is SHM	
853
The “Equation you’ve never seen before” Question	
855
You know your average speed - but what’s your top speed?	
857
Circular motion from side-on looks like simple harmonic motion	
858
You can do (just about) anything!	
861
It’s the final chapter
think like a physicist
It’s time to hit the ground running. Throughout this book, you’ve been 
learning to relate physics to everyday life and have absorbed problem solving skills as 
you’ve gone along. In this final chapter, you’ll use your new set of physics tools to dig 
into the problem we started off with - the bottomless pit through the center of the earth. 
The key is the question: “How can I use what I know to work out what I don’t know (yet)?”

table of contents
xxxi
i
#1 Equation of a straight line graph, y = mx + c	
864
#2 Displacement is the area under the velocity-time graph	
866
#3 Torque on a bridge	
868
#4 Power	
870
#5 Lots of practice questions	
870
#6 Exam tips	
871
The Top Six Things (we didn’t cover)
leftovers
ii
Point of Reference
equation table
No book can ever tell you everything about everything.    
We’ve covered a lot of ground, and given you some great thinking skills and physics 
knowledge that will help you in the future, whether you’re taking an exam or are 
just curious about how the world works. We had to make some really tough choices 
about what to include and what to leave out. Here are some topics that we didn’t 
look at as we went along, but are still important and useful.
It’s difficult to remember something when you’ve only 
seen it once.    
Equations are a major way of describing what’s going on in physics. Every time 
you use equations to help solve a problem, you naturally start to become familiar 
with them without the need to spend time doing rote memorization. But 
before you get to that stage, it’s good to have a place you can look up 
the equation you want to use. That’s what this equation table appendix 
is for - it’s a point of reference that you can turn to at any time.
Learn
Practice
Practice
Practice
Practice
Learn
Learn
Learn
Learn
Start
Finish
Better at physics
Trigonometry
Pythagoras
hyp2  = opp2 + adj2
Sine
sin (θ)  = opp
hyp
Cosine
cos (θ)  =
adj
hyp
Tangent
tan (θ)  = opp
adj
hyp
ttt
adj
θ
Mechanics Equations Table	
874


xxxiii
how to use this book
Intro
In this section we answer the burning question: 
“So why DID they put that in a physics book?”
I can’t believe 
they put that in a 
physics book?”

xxxiv    intro
how to use this book
Who is this book for?
Who should probably back away from this book?
If you can answer “yes” to all of these:
Don’t worry if you’re 
missing the calculator - 
they only cost a few dollars.
If you can answer “yes” to any of these:
this book is for you.
this book is not for you.
[Note from marketing: this book is 
for anyone with the cash to buy it.]
Do you have access to a pen and a scientific calculator?
1
Do you want to learn and understand physics by doing, 
rather than by reading, whether you need to pass an 
exam at the end or not?
2
Do you prefer chatting with friends about interesting 
things to dry, dull, academic lectures?
3
Are you someone who’s never studied basic algebra?
(You don’t need to be advanced, but you should be able to 
add, subtract, multiply and divide. We’ll cover everything 
else you need to know about math and physics.)
1
Are you a physics ninja looking for a reference book?
2
Are you afraid to try something different? Would you 
rather have a root canal than mix stripes with plaid? 
Do you believe that a physics book can’t be serious 
if it involves implementing a training schedule for 
thoroughbred hamster racing?
3

you are here 4    xxxv
the intro
“How can this be a serious physics book?”
“What’s with all the graphics?”
“Can I actually learn it this way?”
Your brain craves novelty. It’s always searching, scanning, waiting for something 
unusual. It was built that way, and it helps you stay alive. 
So what does your brain do with all the routine, ordinary, normal things you 
encounter? Everything it can to stop them from interfering with the brain’s 
real job—recording things that matter. It doesn’t bother saving the boring 
things; they never make it past the “this is obviously not important” filter.
How does your brain know what’s important? Suppose you’re out for a 
day hike and a tiger jumps in front of you, what happens inside your head 
and body? 
Neurons fire. Emotions crank up. Chemicals surge. 
And that’s how your brain knows...
This must be important! Don’t forget it!
But imagine you’re at home, or in a library. It’s a safe, warm, tiger‑free zone. 
You’re studying. Getting ready for an exam. Or trying to learn some tough 
technical topic your boss thinks will take a week, ten days at the most.
Just one problem. Your brain’s trying to do you a big favor. It’s trying 
to make sure that this obviously non-important content doesn’t clutter 
up scarce resources. Resources that are better spent storing the really 
big things. Like tigers. Like the danger of fire. Like how you should 
never have posted those photos on your Facebook page.
And there’s no simple way to tell your brain, “Hey brain, thank you 
very much, but no matter how dull this book is, and how little I’m 
registering on the emotional Richter scale right now, I really do want 
you to keep this stuff around.”
We know what you’re thinking
We know what your brain is thinking
Your brain thinks 
THIS is important.
Your brain thinks 
THIS isn’t worth 
saving.
Great. Only 880 
more dull, dry, 
boring pages.

xxxvi    intro
how to use this book
We think of a “Head First” reader as a learner.
Weight
Normal 
force
θ
So what does it take to learn something? First, you have to get it, then make sure 
you don’t forget it.  It’s not about pushing facts into your head. Based on the 
latest research in cognitive science, neurobiology, and educational psychology, 
learning takes a lot more than text on a page. We know what turns your brain on.
Some of the Head First learning principles:
Make it visual. Images are far more memorable than words alone, and 
make learning much more effective (up to 89% improvement in recall and 
transfer studies). It also makes things more understandable.  Put the 
words within or near the graphics they relate to, rather than on 
the bottom or on another page, and learners will be up to twice as likely to 
solve problems related to the content.
Use a conversational and personalized style. In recent studies, 
students performed up to 40% better on post-learning tests if the content spoke directly 
to the reader, using a first-person, conversational style rather than taking a formal 
tone. Tell stories instead of lecturing. Use casual language. Don’t take yourself too 
seriously. Which would you pay more attention to: a stimulating dinner party 
companion, or a lecture?
Get the learner to think more deeply. In other words, unless you 
actively flex your neurons, nothing much happens in your head.  A reader 
has to be motivated, engaged, curious, and inspired to solve problems, draw 
conclusions, and generate new knowledge. And for that, you need challenges, 
exercises, and thought-provoking questions, and activities that involve both sides of 
the brain and multiple senses.
Get—and keep—the reader’s attention. We’ve all had the “I really want to learn this but 
I can’t stay awake past page one” experience. Your brain pays attention to things that are out of the 
ordinary, interesting, strange, eye-catching, unexpected. Learning a new, tough, technical 
topic doesn’t have to be boring. Your brain will learn much more quickly if it’s not.
Touch their emotions. We now know that your ability to remember something 
is largely dependent on its emotional content.  You remember what you care about.  
You remember when you feel something. No, we’re not talking heart‑wrenching 
stories about a boy and his dog. We’re talking emotions like surprise, curiosity, 
fun, “what the...?” , and the feeling of “I Rule!” that comes when you solve 
a puzzle, learn something everybody else thinks is hard, or realize you know 
something that “I’m more technical than thou” Bob from engineering doesn’t.

you are here 4    xxxvii
the intro
Metacognition: thinking about thinking
I wonder how 
I can trick my brain 
into remembering 
this stuff...
If you really want to learn, and you want to learn more quickly and more 
deeply, pay attention to how you pay attention. Think about how you think. 
Learn how you learn.
Most of us did not take courses on metacognition or learning theory when we 
were growing up. We were expected to learn, but rarely taught to learn.
But we assume that if you’re holding this book, you really want to learn how 
to do physics. And you probably don’t want to spend a lot of time. If you want 
to use what you read in this book, you need to remember what you read. And 
for that, you’ve got to understand it. To get the most from this book, or any book 
or learning experience, take responsibility for your brain. Your brain on this 
content. 
The trick is to get your brain to see the new material you’re learning as 
Really Important. Crucial to your well‑being. As important as a tiger. 
Otherwise, you’re in for a constant battle, with your brain doing its best to 
keep the new content from sticking.
So just how DO you get your brain to treat physics 
like it was a hungry tiger?
There’s the slow, tedious way, or the faster, more effective way. The 
slow way is about sheer repetition. You obviously know that you are able to learn 
and remember even the dullest of topics if you keep pounding the same thing into your 
brain. With enough repetition, your brain says, “This doesn’t feel important to him, but he 
keeps looking at the same thing over and over and over, so I suppose it must be.”
The faster way is to do anything that increases brain activity, especially different 
types of brain activity. The things on the previous page are a big part of the solution, 
and they’re all things that have been proven to help your brain work in your favor. For 
example, studies show that putting words within the pictures they describe (as opposed to 
somewhere else in the page, like a caption or in the body text) causes your brain to try to 
makes sense of how the words and picture relate, and this causes more neurons to fire. 
More neurons firing = more chances for your brain to get that this is something worth 
paying attention to, and possibly recording.
A conversational style helps because people tend to pay more attention when they 
perceive that they’re in a conversation, since they’re expected to follow along and hold up 
their end. The amazing thing is, your brain doesn’t necessarily care that the “conversation” 
is between you and a book! On the other hand, if the writing style is formal and dry, your 
brain perceives it the same way you experience being lectured to while sitting in a roomful 
of passive attendees. No need to stay awake.
But pictures and conversational style are just the beginning…

xxxviii    intro
how to use this book
Here’s what WE did:
We used pictures, because your brain is tuned for visuals, not text. As far as your brain’s 
concerned, a picture really is worth a thousand words. And when text and pictures work 
together, we embedded the text in the pictures because your brain works more effectively 
when the text is within the thing the text refers to, as opposed to in a caption or buried in the 
text somewhere.
We used redundancy, saying the same thing in different ways and with different media types, 
and multiple senses, to increase the chance that the content gets coded into more than one area 
of your brain. 
We used concepts and pictures in unexpected ways because your brain is tuned for novelty, 
and we used pictures and ideas with at least some emotional content, because your brain 
is tuned to pay attention to the biochemistry of emotions. That which causes you to feel 
something is more likely to be remembered, even if that feeling is nothing more than a little 
humor, surprise, or interest.
We used a personalized, conversational style, because your brain is tuned to pay more 
attention when it believes you’re in a conversation than if it thinks you’re passively listening 
to a presentation. Your brain does this even when you’re reading.
We included more than 80 activities, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember 
more when you do things than when you read about things. And we made the exercises 
challenging-yet-do-able, because that’s what most people prefer.
We used multiple learning styles, because you might prefer step-by-step procedures, while 
someone else wants to understand the big picture first, and someone else just wants to see 
an example. But regardless of your own learning preference, everyone benefits from seeing the 
same content represented in multiple ways.
We include content for both sides of your brain, because the more of your brain you 
engage, the more likely you are to learn and remember, and the longer you can stay focused. 
Since working one side of the brain often means giving the other side a chance to rest, you 
can be more productive at learning for a longer period of time. 
And we included stories and exercises that present more than one point of view, 
because your brain is tuned to learn more deeply when it’s forced to make evaluations and 
judgments. 
We included challenges, with exercises, and by asking questions that don’t always have 
a straight answer, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember when it has to work at 
something. Think about it—you can’t get your body in shape just by watching people at the 
gym. But we did our best to make sure that when you’re working hard, it’s on the right things. 
That you’re not spending one extra dendrite processing a hard-to-understand example, 
or parsing difficult, jargon-laden, or overly terse text.
We used people. In stories, examples, pictures, etc., because, well, because you’re a person. 
And your brain pays more attention to people than it does to things. 
If the restoring force 
is proportional to the 
displacement, you have 
simple harmonic motion 
(abbreviated to SHM)
SHM looks like circular 
motion from side on, and 
the equations for the 
l
it
d


and th
For a 
amplit
depen
gravit
not on
It’s fin
analy


Kinetic
Potential
Potential
Your 
Physics 
Toolbox

you are here 4    xxxix
the intro
So, we did our part. The rest is up to you. These tips are a 
starting point; listen to your brain and figure out what works 
for you and what doesn’t. Try new things.
Drink water. Lots of it.
Your brain works best in a nice bath of fluid. 
Dehydration (which can happen before you ever 
feel thirsty) decreases cognitive function. 
Make this the last thing you read before 
bed. Or at least the last challenging thing.
Do lots of physics!
The main way to learn how to do physics is by... 
doing physics. And that’s what you’re going to do 
throughout this book. We’re going to give you a 
lot of practice: every chapter has exercises that 
pose problems for you to solve. Don’t just skip over 
them—a lot of the learning happens when you 
solve the exercises. We included a solution to each 
exercise—don’t be afraid to peek at the solution 
if you get stuck! Look at the first couple of lines, then 
turn back and take it from there yourself! But try 
to solve the problem before you look at the solution. 
And definitely make sure you understand the solution 
before you move on to the next part of the book.
Listen to your brain.
Feel something.
Your brain needs to know that this matters. Get 
involved with the stories. Make up your own 
captions for the photos. Groaning over a bad joke 
is still better than feeling nothing at all.
Pay attention to whether your brain is getting 
overloaded. If you find yourself starting to skim 
the surface or forget what you just read, it’s time 
for a break. Once you go past a certain point, you 
won’t learn faster by trying to shove more in, and 
you might even hurt the process.
Talk about it. Out loud.
Speaking activates a different part of the brain. 
If you’re trying to understand something, or 
increase your chance of remembering it later, say 
it out loud. Better still, try to explain it out loud 
to someone else. You’ll learn more quickly, and 
you might uncover ideas you hadn’t known were 
there when you were reading about it.
Part of the learning (especially the transfer to 
long-term memory) happens after you put the 
book down. Your brain needs time on its own, to 
do more processing. If you put in something new 
during that processing time, some of what you 
just learned will be lost. 
Read the “There are No Dumb Questions”
That means all of them. They’re not optional 
sidebars—they’re part of the core content! 
Don’t skip them.
Slow down. The more you understand, 
the less you have to memorize.
Don’t just read. Stop and think. When the 
book asks you a question, don’t just skip to the 
answer. Imagine that someone really is asking 
the question. The more deeply you force your 
brain to think, the better chance you have of 
learning and remembering.
Cut this out and stick it 
on your refrigerator.
Here’s what YOU can do to bend 
your brain into submission
Do the exercises. Write your own notes.
We put them in, but if we did them for you, 
that would be like having someone else do 
your workouts for you. And don’t just look at 
the exercises. Use a pencil. There’s plenty of 
evidence that physical activity while learning 
can increase the learning. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

xl    intro
how to use this book
Read Me
This is a learning experience, not a reference book. We deliberately stripped out everything 
that might get in the way of learning whatever it is we’re working on at that point in the 
book. And the first time through, you need to begin at the beginning, because the book 
makes assumptions about what you’ve already seen and learned.
We begin with experiments, measurements, graphs and equations, 
then move on to forces and energy conservation, and then more 
advanced topics such as gravitation and simple harmonic motion.
It’s important to start with a firm foundation. We start out with the building blocks and 
tools of physics – experiments, measurements, graphs, equations – and most importantly, 
how to approach problems by thinking like a physicist. But this is no dry, theoretical 
introduction. Right from the word go, you’ll be picking up these important skills by solving 
problems yourself. As the book goes on, your brain is freed up to learn new concepts such as 
Newton’s Laws and energy conservation because you’ve already absorbed and practiced 
the fundamentals. By the time you reach the end of the book, you’ll even be sending people 
into space. We teach you what you need to know at the point where it becomes important, 
as that’s when it has the most value. Yes - even the math!
We cover the same general set of topics that are in the 
mechanics sections of the AP Physics B and A Level curriculums
While we focus on the overall learning experience rather than exam preparation, we 
provide good coverage of the mechanics sections of the AP Physics B and A Level 
curriculums, as well as the practical side of experiments and data analysis in physics. This 
means that as you work your way through the topics, you gain a deeper understanding 
that will help you get a good grade in whatever exam you’re taking. You’ll also learn how 
to break down complicated problems into simpler ones that you already know how to do. 
This is a far more effective way of learning physics than rote memorization, as you’ll feel 
confident about tackling any problem even when you haven’t seen one exactly like it before.
We help you out with online resources.
Our readers tell us that sometimes you need a bit of extra help, so we provide online 
resources, right at your fingertips. We give you an online forum where you can go to seek 
help, and other resources too. The starting point is
http://www.headfirstlabs.com/books/hfphy/

you are here 4    xli
the intro
The activities are NOT optional. 
The exercises and activities are not add-ons; they’re part of the core content of the book. 
Some of them are to help with memory, some are for understanding, and some will help 
you apply what you’ve learned. Don’t skip the exercises. The crossword puzzles are 
the only thing you don’t have to do, but they’re good for giving your brain a chance to 
think about the words and terms you’ve been learning in a different context.
The redundancy is intentional and important. 
One distinct difference in a Head First book is that we want you to really get it. And we 
want you to finish the book remembering what you’ve learned. Most reference books 
don’t have retention and recall as a goal, but this book is about learning, so you’ll see some 
of the same concepts come up more than once. 
The Brain Power exercises don’t have answers.
For some of them, there is no right answer, and for others, part of the learning 
experience of the Brain Power activities is for you to decide if and when your answers 
are right. In some of the Brain Power exercises, you will find hints to point you in the 
right direction.

xlii    intro
the review team
Alice Pitt-Pitts
Bill Mietelski
Scott Donaldson
Georgia Gale Grant
Michael Lew
Catriona Lang
John Allister
Diane Jaquith
Marion Lang
The technical review team
John Allister has degrees from both Oxford and 
Cambridge universities, including a Master’s in 
Experimental and Theoretical Physics. He taught physics 
for 5 years and is currently training for ordination in the 
Church of England.
Scott Donaldson is an editor, do-it-yourselfer, and all 
around lover of science and mathematics, with special 
focus on mechanics and biology.
Georgia Gale Grant is a freelance science writer, 
communicator and broadcaster. She read Chemistry 
at Oxford University before an MSc in Science 
Communication at Imperial College London.
Diane Jaquith earned her Master’s degree in Physics at 
Wesleyan University. She taught physics, chemistry, and 
physical science at Durham High School, Durham, CT. 
She later taught chemistry at Notre Dame College and 
Pinkerton Academy in Derry, NH. 
 
 
 
Catriona Lang studied singing at Birmingham 
Conservatoire. She currently earns her living as a  
singing teacher. 
Marion Lang is a Classics graduate from St Andrews 
University who now works as a Nursery Teacher and also 
runs NYCoS Mini Music Makers classes. She is a member 
of Stirling Gaelic Choir. 
Bill Mietelski is a Software Engineer and a huge 
Head First & Kathy Sierra fan. He plans on putting the 
things he learned in Head First Physics to good use while 
improving his golf game.
Michael Lew is an AP* Physics and Computer Science 
teacher at Loyola High School in Los Angeles, CA and 
has been teaching since 1991. In his spare time, he enjoys 
spending time with his wife, Britt, and his three children, 
Mike, Jade, and Dane.
Alice Pitt-Pitts enjoyed being a guinea pig reviewer for 
Head First Physics. She also likes reading, cycling and ice 
cream and now knows that all of these involve energy 
conservation!
*AP is a registered trademark of the College Board
Technical Reviewers:
Philip Kromer  
Janet Painter  
Don Wilke
Not pictured  
(but just as awesome):

you are here 4    xliii
the intro
The editors:
Thanks go to Catherine Nolan and Brett 
McLaughlin, who were editors on this project 
at various points, and coped admirably with the 
US-UK time difference. Thanks also to Mike 
Loukides for starting the whole thing off as far as 
Head First Physics was concerned.
Acknowledgments
Lou Barr
The O’Reilly team:
Thanks go to Lou Barr for turning my “wouldn’t it 
be dreamy if...” thoughts into reality with any artwork 
that’s more complicated than a line drawing. And also 
to Brittany Smith, who pulled off the impossible in 
the final stages of production. Plus Laurie Petrycki, 
Caitrin McCullough, Sanders Kleinfeld, Julie 
Hawks, Karen Shaner and Keith McNamara. 
Catherine Nolan
The distributed.physics project:
Between them, these heros and heroines got through a draft of the entire book in a single day...
Alice Pitt-Pitts, Andrew Lynn, Brian Widdas, Catriona Lang, Emma Simmons, 
Gareth Poulton, Graham Wood, Hazel Rostron-Wood, Jason Williams, John 
Vinall, Marion Lang, Peter Scandrett, Robin Lang, Roger Thetford, Stephen 
Swain, Tim Bannister, Tim Dickinson and Will Burt.
As well as to say: 
“thanks,” this is an 
experiment to test 
the theory that 
everyone mentioned 
in a book will buy 
a copy.
Brett McLaughlin
The reviewers:
Thanks to everyone on the opposite page. In particular, I’d like to 
mention Donald Wilke for his extremely detailed physics-specific 
comments and John Allister for a physics educator point of 
view that spanned the whole book. A lot of improvements post 
tech review were down to the comments of physics guinea-pigs 
Marion Lang, Catriona Lang and Alice Pitt-Pitts, who did 
a sterling job of pointing out where things could be clearer.
Like distributed 
computing, but 
with a physics book.

xliv    intro
safari books online
Safari® Books Online
When you see a Safari® icon on the cover of your favorite 
technology book that means the book is available online 
through the O’Reilly Network Safari Bookshelf.
Safari offers a solution that’s better than e-books. It’s a virtual library that lets you 
easily search thousands of top tech books, cut and paste code samples, download 
chapters, and find quick answers when you need the most accurate, current 
information. Try it for free at http://safari.oreilly.com.

this is a new chapter    
You’re telling me that 
being part of the problem 
is actually a good thing?
think like a physicist
1
In the beginning ...
Physics is about the world around you  and how everything 
in it works. As you go about your daily life, you’re doing physics all the time! 
But the thought of actually learning physics may sometimes feel like falling 
into a bottomless pit with no escape! Don’t worry... this chapter introduces how 
to think like a physicist. You’ll learn to step into problems and to use your 
intuition to spot patterns and ‘special points’ that make things much easier. 
By being part of the problem, you’re one step closer to getting to the solution...

    Chapter 1
Units
Falling
Circumference
Inverse square law
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Inelastic collision
Force
Frequency
Special points
Experiment
Period
Elastic collision
Centripetal force
Weight
Pendulum
Simple Harmonic Motion
Time
Angular frequency
Spring
Energy
Gravitational field
Component
Tension
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Pulley
Radians
Impulse
Elastic potential energy
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Mechanical energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Amplitude
Angular velocity
Volume
Velocity
Power
Friction
Radius
Freefall
Kinetic energy
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Internal energy
Area
Mass
I don’t 
get it!
Physics is the world around you
Physics is about the world around you and how stuff in the world actually 
works. How do you aim a cannon with no direct line of sight? How can 
a satellite orbit the earth without falling back down? Will you win a prize 
shooting ducks at the fairground? Will the Dingo catch the Emu...
All of this should be really interesting... except that opening a normal physics 
textbook can make you feel rather like you’ve just fallen into a bottomless pit....
welcome to the world of physics
Open a normal physics textbook... 
...and fall right on in!
(not a word that 
can be used for 
Head First Physics!)
But there’s hope, because...

you are here 4    
think like a physicist
You already know more 
than you think you do!
I sure hope so 
- feeling like I’m 
stuck really stinks!
Honest!
This book is all about learning to think like a physicist.
You can get a feel for what’s going on by being a part of it.
Imagine you’re part of a physics problem. 
What would you feel?
You don’t pass physics by memorizing things. 
You pass physics by learning how to think about it.
You can use your life experience to spot what things are like.
Where have you seen or experienced something like this before?
You can use your intuition to spot special points.
Places where important or interesting things happen.

    Chapter 1
You can get a feel for what’s happening by being a part of it
BE part of it
Your job is to imagine you just stepped 
out over a bottomless pit. What would 
you feel if you were part of the scenario? 
Which direction are you moving 
in? Are you speeding up or 
slowing down?
 WHY are you feeling that?
The best way to get started with any kind of physics is to imagine 
that you’re there, in the middle of it. Maybe you’re a block, or a 
car, or a racing driver. Then ask yourself, “What would I feel?”
Which direction am I moving in?
Am I speeding up or slowing down?
Is there anything pushing or pulling me?
	
(and so on...)
Be a part of it!
Go to the start of 
the problem then 
BE a part of it!
Ask yourself, “What would I FEEL if I was part of the scenario?”
So - could you ever escape from the bottomless pit?
Suppose you really are falling into a bottomless pit that runs from 
one side of the world to the other. What do you think would happen 
(assuming that the earth isn’t hot and molten inside)?
Not sure where to start? That’s okay ... break it down and go right 
back to the beginning. Be a part of the problem! Ask yourself, 
“What would I feel just after I step into the tunnel?”
You’ve just 
stepped over 
the edge.
DIRECTION:
SPEED:
WHY:
can you feel it?

you are here 4    5
think like a physicist
Q: But all I’ve done is write down what I already 
knew and what was really obvious! I haven’t worked 
out what happens inside the earth at all!
A: Physics is about being able to put yourself into a 
problem and asking “What would I feel?” When you’re 
doing this, you need to start at the start - with what’s 
initially going on.
Q: Why? It hasn’t helped me get a final answer!
A: Starting off a question with ‘obvious’ things gives 
your brain time to calm down and settle. It’s the first step 
towards solving a more complicated problem. Once you’ve 
made a start, you can build on it by using your intuition 
and experience to spot ‘special points’ (where important 
or interesting things happen) and similarities to problems 
you’ve seen before.
Q: What if I start out OK then get stuck or make a 
mistake? Surely I’ve completely failed if I don’t get the 
right answer at the end?
A: Usually people grading exams are more interested 
in whether you understand the physics, even though the 
math part is important too. So, if you’re able to start off 
in the right direction and show that you understand the 
important physics principles, you’ll get credit for it even if 
you get stuck or make a mistake later on. 
Q: But I still have no idea what happens next here!
A: You’ve already realized that gravity is important. 
And that you’ll fall faster as you fall into the tunnel. That’s 
a great start for you to build on.
BE part of it - Solution
Your job is to imagine you just stepped 
out over a bottomless pit. What would 
you feel if you were part of the scenario? 
Which direction are you moving 
in? Are you speeding up or 
slowing down?
 WHY are you feeling that?
I fall down, into the tunnel.
DIRECTION:
SPEED:
WHY:
I get faster as I fall.
Gravity attracts me into the earth.
Normally the solutions aren’t 
visible when you’re working on 
the problem... but we’re just 
getting started.
	
	
     Don’t worry if you wrote down 
something a bit different.
This is what we wrote. Your answers should be 
similar, but maybe not identical.

    Chapter 1
You’ve just started off the bottomless pit problem by being a part 
of it. You started at the start, imagined you’d just stepped over the 
edge, and asked yourself “What would I feel?” And you know that 
you’ll fall into the tunnel, getting faster as you go.
But what happens next?
The edge of the tunnel is a special 
point. Can you spot any other 
special points in this problem?
Use your intuition to look for ‘special points’
You fall into the 
tunnel, getting faster 
and faster as you go.
In physics, the 
‘special points’ where 
things happen are 
usually at the EDGES 
and in the CENTER.
isn’t that special
The key is to use your intuition to look for ‘special points’ 
– places where important or interesting things happen.
For example, the edge of a cliff is a special point because 
that’s where you change from being supported by the ground 
to being unsupported. And the center of a seesaw is a 
‘special point’ because it’s the only place on the seesaw that 
one person can stand without either side going up or down.
Spotting special points then asking “What would I feel if I was 
there?” helps you to understand what’s going on. 
You already did that for one special point - at the edge of the tunnel. 
Now it’s time to look out for more special points in this problem, so 
you can think about what’s going on there.
Once you know what’s happening at each special point you can play 
connect the dots and work out what’s happening in between too.
The EDGE is the 
special point that makes 
the difference between 
being supported and 
unsupported.
The CENTER is the special 
point that makes the 
difference between being 
balanced and unbalanced.
You’ve already worked 
out what happens at one 
special point - the EDGE 
of the tunnel.

you are here 4    
think like a physicist
Once you’ve found 
a special point, ask 
yourself: 
“What would I FEEL 
there?” and “What is 
being there LIKE?”
Jill: I have a hunch that the center of the earth must be important 
- it just looks like it must be! 
Frank: Yeah. Even though we’re assuming the center of the earth 
isn’t hot (because we’re dealing with an Earth which has lots of 
physics words written on it), the center still looks really important!
Jill: But what’s gonna happen there?
Frank: I’m not sure. I guess that either you stop, or you keep on 
falling. But that’s not narrowing it down all that much!
Jill: Maybe we can use what we already figured out? Didn’t 
we say that when you’re at the surface and step over the edge of the 
tunnel, you fall down into the tunnel because of gravity?
Frank: Yeah, that’s right. I guess that the earth attracts you because 
it’s so big. Gravity is the stuff the earth’s made of and the stuff 
you’re made of attracting each other, right?
Jill: And when you’re at the surface - at the edge of the tunnel - the 
whole of the earth is under you. So gravity attracts you downwards.
Frank: Yeah, that makes sense. So what’s going on in the center? 
The whole Earth isn’t under you any more - it’s kinda all around 
you. There’s the same amount of Earth around you in all directions!
Jill: Then you must get pulled in all directions at once. Ouch! 
Sounds like you’d get torn apart or something!
Frank: Hmm. The Earth’s gravity isn’t strong enough to pull my 
atoms apart when I’m standing on the surface. I have a feeling it’ll 
be more like standing in the exact center of a seesaw. 
Jill: You mean, kinda like a balance point? I guess if you were 
at either end of the seesaw - or at either end of the tunnel - you’d 
move. But if you’re in the center of the seesaw - or the center of the 
earth, you’re balanced.
Frank: Yeah. With the seesaw, it’s like you have one foot ‘pulling’ 
you an equal amount each way, so you stay balanced. And in the 
center of the earth, you have half the earth on one side and half the 
earth on the other side. That’s balanced too.
Jill: So you must stop when you reach the center of the earth if you 
balance there. We solved the problem - you never get out!
Frank: Hmm... but didn’t we say before that you’re already 
moving very fast by the time you reach the center?
What’s it 
SIMILAR to?
So we just worked out that you fall into the 
tunnel from one special point - the edge. And now 
we’re supposed to look for other special points.

    Chapter 1
At the center, 
you’re equally 
attracted in 
all directions 
- so all the 
gravitational 
attractions 
balance out.
The center of the earth is a special point
As Frank and Jill have worked out, the center of the earth is a special 
point where important or interesting things might happen. Maybe 
your eye was drawn to the center because of the symmetry, as 
there’s the same amount of Earth around you in all directions.
So - be a part of it! Imagine yourself at the center of the earth. What 
would I feel there? What is being there like?
journey to the center of the earth
At the first special 
point—the edge of the 
tunnel—you’re pulled 
downwards into the tunnel 
by gravity. This is because 
of the attraction between 
the “stuff ” the earth’s made 
of and the “stuff ” you’re 
made of.
(Stuff isn’t a particularly 
technical term - we’re 
basically using it to mean all 
of your atoms.)
You’re attracted 
downwards.
The white arrows show you 
the direction that gravity 
is attracting you in.
At the second special 
point, in the center of the 
earth, all of your atoms are 
pulled equally in all directions. 
You aren’t attracted in any 
direction more strongly that 
you are in any other direction.
Being attracted in all directions 
at once may not sound like fun 
- but you’re made of stronger 
stuff. The Earth’s gravity isn’t 
strong enough to pull your 
atoms apart. This means that 
all of the attractions balance 
each other out.
There’s lots of 
‘stuff’ under you.
You’re equally 
attracted in all 
directions.
This time, there’s 
‘stuff’ all around you.

you are here 4    
think like a physicist
But Frank and Jill nearly made a big mistake when they were 
thinking about out what it would feel like in the center of the 
earth. At first, they thought that if all the gravitational attractions 
balance out, then you’ll be stationary in the center of the earth, 
like you are when you balance yourself on the center of a seesaw.
But is that really true? You’re already going very fast when 
you reach the center of the earth. You’ve fallen a very long way 
to get there, moving faster and faster all the time. If all the 
attractions balance out, what is there to slow you down?
What is it like to be already going fast when there’s nothing 
pulling or pushing you?
 
Your job is to imagine that you’re going 
very fast. Maybe you’re a car or a speed 
skater. What it is LIKE to be going very 
fast when nothing can pull or push 
you, and you can’t pull or push 
on anything either? That means 
no brakes and no grabbing on to 
something to slow down. Does this give 
you any clues about what it will be LIKE 
at the center of the earth when all the 
attractions balance out?
BE part of it
Ask yourself “What am I ALREADY 
doing as I reach the special point?”
When you put yourself in a 
problem, try to imagine what you’re 
ALREADY doing when you reach 
the special point before going on to 
think about what happens next.
You’re ALREADY 
going fast when you 
reach the center.
You’re pulled equally 
in all directions.
You’re pulled 
downwards.
You get faster 
as you fall.
The black arrows 
show your SPEED.

10    Chapter 1
 
Your job is to imagine that you’re going 
very fast. Maybe you’re a car or a speed 
skater. What it is LIKE to be going very 
fast when nothing can pull or push 
you, and you can’t pull or push 
on anything either? That means 
no brakes and no grabbing on to 
something to slow down. Does this give 
you any clues about what it will be LIKE 
at the center of the earth when all the 
attractions balance out?
BE part of it - Solution
In physics, you sometimes make approximations or assumptions to turn 
a complex problem into a simpler version.
Understanding the simpler version helps you with the complex version.
If I can’t brake or grab onto anything, 
then I can’t slow down. I’ll just keep on 
going really fast. 
I think the same thing will happen in 
the center of the earth. None of the 
directions of attraction will “win”, and I’ll 
just keep on going at the same speed.
That’s right - we’ve made some assumptions 
to turn the problem into a simpler version
We already made an assumption back on page  that 
(for this problem) the earth is solid and isn’t hot in the middle, 
as getting fried isn’t helpful.
And quite right - we’re also assuming that air resistance doesn’t 
slow you down and that the pit goes between the North and 
South poles, so you don’t hit the sides as the earth turns.
In physics, the way of solving a complex problem is often to 
make approximations or assumptions to turn it into a simpler 
problem. That’s OK, as you can ask yourself later on what the 
difference would be if you hadn’t made the assumption. But 
only once you’ve got to come to grips with the simpler version.
Sometimes, including 
all the hard stuff 
right from the start 
makes the problem 
impossible to solve.
You might have said 
that it was LIKE 
something else. That’s 
OK. The main thing 
is that you keep on 
going at the SAME 
SPEED if there’s 
nothing pushing or 
pulling on you.
Isn’t this all a bit ridiculous? You wouldn’t go at 
the same speed-you’d slow down from air resistance 
or bumping into the sides of the tunnel...or something 
like that... especially as the earth turns!
be the solution

you are here 4    11
think like a physicist
Where you’re at - and what happens next?
What do you think happens after you pass through the center 
of the earth? Do you continue at the same speed? Do you start 
falling faster? Do you slow down? How far do you think you 
keep falling? Or do you think something else happens?
Draw a picture then write down any ideas you have.
You’ve learned to step into the problem, so you can be a part 
of it and ask “What would I feel” and “What’s it like.” 
This is a good way to start off and helps you see what the 
important things in the problem are. Here, you realized that 
gravity is important, and that you fall towards the center of the 
earth, getting faster and faster as you go.
You’ve also used your intuition to spot ‘special points.’ You’ve 
spotted that the center of the earth is a place where the 
gravitational attraction between the stuff you’re made of and the 
stuff the earth’s made of is the same in all directions.
And you worked out that this means you just keep on going at 
the same speed you were already going at as you pass through 
the center because there’s nothing to slow you down! So you’re 
going quickly, but you aren’t getting faster and faster anymore.
Hint: Think about where the majority 
of the earth’s “stuff” is when you’re 
at various points in the tunnel.
Write things on your 
sketch to help explain!
You continue at 
the same speed.
You’re pulled 
downwards.
You get faster 
as you fall.
You’re pulled equally 
in all directions.
“Stuff” is 
all or mostly 
below you.
“Stuff” is all 
around you.
But now you’re through the center, what happens 
next? What would you feel? What’s it like? You 
already know that gravity is important and that its 
influence depends on where you and the earth are 
compared to each other. So - what happens next?

12    Chapter 1
Q: I thought that gravity always 
speeds you up when you fall. Now 
you’re saying it can slow you down?
A: Things are always attracted towards 
each other by gravity. Whether you’re 
already moving away from the earth 
or moving towards it, you’ll always be 
attracted towards the center of the earth.
Q: But that doesn’t say anything 
about speeding up or slowing down!
A: You need to think about the speed 
and direction you’re already traveling in. 
If you throw a ball up, it’s moving away 
from the center of the earth, and it gets 
slower. When it comes back down again, 
it’s moving towards the center of the earth, 
and it gets faster.
I think that after passing through the center there starts to be 
more Earth above you than there is below you. 
This acts a bit like brakes - you’re moving away from the center 
but gravity’s attracting you back in. The further from the center 
you are, the more Earth’s above you, so the more you slow down. 
I think you’ll be moving slower and slower until you reach the other 
side of the tunnel.
Center of the earth.
Slowing down.
Slowing down 
even more.
This is an EXTREME, 
another ‘special point!’
What do you think happens after you pass through the center of the 
earth? Do you continue at the same speed? Do you start falling faster? Do 
you slow down? How far do you think you keep falling? Or do you think 
something else happens?
Draw a picture then write down any ideas you have.
It looks like you’re always 
attracted towards the center, right?
You’re always attracted towards 
the center unless you’re already 
in the center.
Right. When you’re on the surface at the 
start, there’s a lot more Earth under you 
than there is on top of you, and you’re 
attracted towards the center. This makes you 
speed up.
When you’re in the center, the attractions all 
cancel each other out, and you keep going at 
the same speed.
As you move through the center towards 
the other side, there’s more and more Earth 
above you than there is below you. So you 
start being attracted back towards the center, 
which slows you down.
a land down under
More ‘stuff’ above 
you than below you.
You should never be 
afraid to ask questions!

you are here 4    13
think like a physicist
Could you ever get back home again - back to where you started before you fell in??
The pictures show what you’ve worked out for three special points so far. Use them to explain 
whether you think you’ll ever be able to make it back home again.
Now put it all together
Back on page , you wondered if you could ever escape 
from the bottomless pit. Being able to step out at the other 
side of the earth doesn’t really count as escaping, as you’d 
be a very long way from where you started!
So - are you going to be able to get back home again, 
or are you doomed to hang out at the other end of the 
bottomless pit forever?
So - could you ever escape from the bottomless pit
What if the bottomless pit on page 4 was real? Would you 
fall out the other end? Or get stuck? Or what?
That’s a pretty hard thing to work out, so let’s break it down 
and go right back to the start. Be ... yourself. What do you 
feel just after you step into the pit?
1
2
3
Home!
Hint: Turn the book upside-down. 
What’s it LIKE?

14    Chapter 1
1
2
3
Home!
Not only can you escape, 
you end up on top of the world!
(As long as you remember 
to step off here!)
Could you ever get back home again - back to where you started before you fell in??
The pictures show what you’ve worked out for three special points so far. Use them to explain 
whether you think you’ll ever be able to make it back home again.
Going from North to South
Going back again, from South to North
there... and back again
If you’re at the other end of the tunnel, you can just step back in again and do the entire journey 
in the opposite direction! It’s all exactly the same as your original trip through the earth - speed up, 
through center, slow down, emerge - except you’re going back the way you came.
Though do be careful - if you 
forget to step off the Earth 
Express at the other end, you’ll 
fall back into the tunnel again 
and keep on falling to and fro 
through it!

you are here 4    15
think like a physicist
Special points
Be part of it
This book isn’t about 
physics. It’s about learning 
to think like a physicist.
You can get a feel for what’s going on by being a part of it.
Imagine you’re part of a physics problem. 
What would you feel?
You can use your life experience to spot what things are like.
Where have you seen or experienced something like this before?
You can use your intuition to spot special points.
Places where important or interesting things happen.

16    Chapter 1
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 1 under your belt, 
and you’ve added some problem-solving 
concepts to your toolbox.
Be Part of It
Putting yourself in the heart of 
the problem often gives you clues 
about what might be happening.
You can draw on your experience 
because physics is all about how 
the world works, and you’ve got 
plenty of experience there. Imagine 
yourself in the scenario and ask 
“What would I feel?”
Special Points
Special points are extremes, places 
where important or interesting 
things happen.
If you work out what’s going on at 
“special points,” you can go on to 
“connect-the-dots” and work out 
what’s going on in between as well.
CHAPTER 1
physics toolbox
What’s it LIKE?
You can get a long way with physics 
problems by asking yourself what the 
situation is LIKE.
It may look very different on the 
surface - but if you can spot an 
analogy or pattern and can connect 
the situation to something you already 
know how to deal with, you’re sorted.
Be visual!
Engage the whole of your brain by 
“thinking aloud” in pictures as well 
as in words. Drawing the scenario 
and then annotating it with 
what you know is one of the most 
powerful tools in your toolbox.
You already know more 
than you think you do
Above all else, don’t panic or worry 
about physics. You already know 
more than you think you do from 
your real life experience. And by the 
end of this book you’ll know - and 
understand - a whole lot more.

this is a new chapter    17
I wonder how far I 
am from the door...
making it all MEAN something
2
Units and measurements
How long is a piece of string? Physics is based on making 
measurements that tell you about size. In this chapter, you’ll learn how to use 
units and rounding to avoid making mistakes - and also why errors are OK. 
By the time you’re through, you’ll know when something is significant and 
have an opinion on whether size really is everything.
Is that 10 meters? 
Or 20 minutes?

18    Chapter 2
It’s the best music player ever, and you’re part of the team!
Just send us the 
case plans, and we’ll 
send you a prototype 
ASAP!
The factory
Introducing the myPod - a revolution in portable music players!
Your design team has just finished the final case prototype. Now 
you need to draw up the blueprints to be sent to the factory that’s 
manufacturing the cases.
MEMO
From: myPod Case Design Team
We’ve just sent over the latest, and hopefully 
final, model myPod case design.
Could you draw up the plans and send 
them to factory where the cases are being 
manufactured? And send us back the myPod 
model when you’re done.
You will, of course, receive one of the limited 
edition numbered myPods for your troubles if 
you manage to turn this around quickly!
myPod rocks

you are here 4    19
making it all mean something
So you get on with measuring the myPod case
The quicker the factory gets the plans, the better. 
Here’s the myPod case with various lengths marked out that you’ll need to 
measure. Cut out the ruler (or just use your own that looks similar to ours) 
and write in the lengths. (The myPod design team already started writing 
them on for you.)
100
1
3
5
31

20    Chapter 2
Here’s the myPod case with various lengths marked out that you’ll need to 
measure. Cut out the ruler (or just use your own that looks similar to ours) 
and write in the lengths. (The myPod design team already started writing 
them on for you.)
100
1
3
5
8
38
10
42
60
31
8
When the myPod case comes back from the factory...
After a lightning-quick turnaround, the myPod case comes back from 
the factory. But there’s a problem.
Uhh ... it was 
supposed to fit 
in my pocket.
size matters

you are here 4    21
making it all mean something
Something’s obviously gone very wrong. But what?!
Have another look at your blueprint, and see if it 
could be interpreted differently.
Not our fault. 
We followed the 
blueprints EXACTLY!
... it’s waaay too big!
The myPod case is huge. Massive. Rocket-sized, not pocket-sized.
But when you give the factory a call, they say they followed your 
instructions exactly.

22    Chapter 2
100
1
3
5
8
60
38
42
10
31
8
Your ruler’s marked off 
in mm - but there’s no 
note of this anywhere 
on the blueprint.
The design team set 
up the mistake by not 
including units on the 
measurements they’d 
already made.
The numbers on 
the blueprint 
don’t have UNITS.
There aren’t any UNITS on the blueprint
A number without any units is meaningless.
The ruler you used is marked off in millimeters (mm)- but there 
aren’t any notes on the blueprint that say this. The factory is used 
to working in inches and assumed it was a giant promotional item. 
Inches are around 25 times bigger than millimeters, so the myPod 
has come back MUCH bigger than expected!
In physics, it’s really important to say what the units 
are any time you write down a number. 
Units give numbers meaning, so 
you know whether the number 
represents millimeters or inches, 
or something else entirely.
This measurement 
was supposed to 
mean 100 mm 
but ended up as 
100 inches-taller 
than a person!
units are useful

you are here 4    23
making it all mean something
Length
Time
Mass
Units Magnets
Throughout the book, you’ll be attaching lots of different units to 
numbers to give them meaning. Your job is to match the units with 
the kind of quantity they measure. You might not have heard of all of 
these, but give it a shot.
feet
milligrams
tonnes
yards
millimeters
milliseconds
grams
years
kilometers
inches
minutes
meters
hours
seconds
kilograms
days
Use these spaces to draw the 
magnets in the right columns.

24    Chapter 2
milliseconds
years
minutes
hours
seconds
days
feet
yards
millimeters
kilometers
inches
meters
Units Magnets Solution
Check your work; were you able to match these up correctly?
Plus you can always look up 
unfamiliar units.
milligrams
tonnes
grams
kilograms
Length
Time
Mass
unit magnets solution
	
	
     Don’t worry if you’re not familiar 
with all of these units just quite yet.
You won’t have to work with all of these unfamiliar 
units throughout the book! Instead, you’ll be sticking 
with the system used worldwide, which is what the 
next couple of pages are all about!

you are here 4    25
making it all mean something
You’ll use SI units in this book (and in your class)
The system of units used in physics worldwide is called SI (short for Système Internationale). 
They’re much easier to use since they go up in multiples of 1000 for each ‘step.’
If you’re working with lengths, instead of having to do calculations using 12 inches in a 
foot, 3 feet in a yard, and 1760 yards in a mile, you have 1000 millimeters in a meter, 1000 
meters in a kilometer, and so on and so forth.
And with masses, instead of having to remember that there are 16 ounces in a pound 
and 2000 pounds in a ton, you have 1000 milligrams in a gram, 1000 grams in a kilogram 
(about the equivalent of three cans of soda), and so on. The only SI unit which doesn’t 
follow this convention is time.
Multiplying and dividing by 1000 is more straightforward mental arithmetic, so calculations 
involving SI units are quicker and easier than calculations with other unit systems. If you’re 
converting meters to kilometers, you divide by 1000 (easier), but going from yards to miles 
involves dividing by 1760 (not straightforward, and definitely not mental arithmetic!).
SI units go up in multiples of 1000, 
which makes the math a whole lot easier!
Working with lengths 
is much easier in SI.
And working with 
masses is easier too.
But time is so widely agreed 
on; it’d be silly to reinvent it!
AP Physics B 
or UK A Level
meter
millimeter
kilometer
× 1000
× 1000
inch
yard
mile
foot
× 12
× 3
× 1760
The multipliers are different at 
each stage with non-SI units.
It’s harder to 
do the non-SI 
multiplications 
and divisions.
It’s easy to multiply 
and divide by 10’s using 
mental arithmetic.

26    Chapter 2
If you use SI units, people all over the world will 
understand your measurements.
Q: Run it past me again - why am I 
being forced to use SI units when I’m 
more used to yards and miles? I really 
have no idea how much a kilogram is!
A: SI units have been used throughout 
the world as the basic standard in physics 
since 1960. SI units are an agreed worldwide 
standard and make sure that everyone is 
using the same words and definitions when 
they make measurements.
Q: But I don’t see why I can’t just use 
the units I’m more familiar with. Surely 
I’m less likely to make mistakes in 
calculations if I use units I’m used to?
A: SI units actually make calculations 
easier. Instead of having to use all sorts 
of weird ratios to move between units (like 
inches, feet, yards, miles), you’ll use tens. 
So even if they’re less familiar at first, they’ll 
be quicker and easier in the long run.
Q: But I’m not at all familiar with SI 
units at the moment. What kinds of units 
am I going to come across?
A: It’s funny you should ask ...
The SI unit of time is the second.
To work with time units, you’ll just use common sense. There are 
60 seconds in a minute, 60 minutes in an hour, 24 hours in a day, 
and 365 days in a year.
 Here are the SI units you’ll use the most
The SI unit of length is the meter.
Other related units are the millimeter (1000th of a meter), 
centimeter (100th of a meter), and kilometer (1000 meters).
Length
Time
The SI unit of mass is the kilogram.
Other related units are the gram (1000th of a kilogram) and the 
milligram (1000th of a gram).
Mass
ask away

you are here 4    27
making it all mean something
Hey, you gotta help me out - I 
want this job to build the cases. 
Could you change the millimeters 
into inches on the plan?
How would you convert the 
measurements you’ve already made 
into inches without remeasuring?
Q: It’s a real pain to have to write 
out ‘millimeters’ or whatever every 
time. At least the units I’m used to have 
abbreviations - like lb for pounds.
A: SI units have abbreviations too! 
Generally, you just use the first letter of the 
unit - m for meters, s for seconds, and so on.
Q: OK, but what about things that 
start with the same letter - meters and 
minutes, for example?
A: The main SI unit takes precedence. 
The main unit for length is the meter, so it 
gets abbreviated to ‘m’. The main SI unit for 
time is the second - the minute is defined 
as 60 seconds, so it isn’t as important and 
usually gets abbreviated as ‘min’. 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: OK, so what about kilometers and 
kilograms. They start with the same 
FOUR letters!
A: The ‘kilo’ is a prefix that goes in front 
of the unit. A kilogram is 1000 times more 
than a gram; a kilometer is 1000 times 
further than a meter. The abbreviation 
includes the prefix as well, so kilograms are 
‘kg’ and kilometers are ‘km’.
  
It’s easier when 
everyone uses  
SI units. 
       
 
  
Q: So “kilo” means 1000, right? But 
what does ‘milli’ mean, then? It sure 
meant 1000 when the millennium came 
around, but a millimeter and kilometer are 
different things, right?!
A: Great observation! Kilo is Greek for 
1000, and milli is Latin for 1000. In the SI 
system, ‘kilo’ in front of a unit means it’s 
1000 times as big - so a kilogram is 1000 
grams. And ‘milli’ in front of a unit means 
it’s 1000 times smaller - so a millimeter is 
1/1000th of a meter. 
Q: I was kind of wondering something. 
The meter is the main SI unit, and it 
doesn’t have a prefix before the unit. So 
why is the kilogram the main SI unit and 
not the gram? That’s plain weird!
A: Most everyday physics things like cars, 
people, and such have masses that are a 
nice manageable number of kilograms, but 
thousands, or even millions, of grams. It 
was a convention that everyone ended up 
using from 1960 onwards. It’s easier when 
everyone does the same thing!

28    Chapter 2
Joe: Yeah. I guess we can remeasure the myPod using a ruler marked off 
in inches and make a new blueprint.
Frank: That sounds like an awful lot of work. It took ages to measure 
all the lengths in the first place, and I can’t face having to do it all over 
again with inches instead of mm.
Joe:  Do we definitely have to remeasure though? Can we do something 
with the measurements we already made instead?
Jim: It would be nice if they wanted the blueprint in centimeters instead. 
Then we’d just have to multiply each measurement by 0.1 to convert it 
from mm to cm.
Frank: How does that work?
Jim: We already know that there are 10 mm in 1 cm, which means that 
1 mm = 0.1 cm. For every mm, you have 0.1 cm. So if you multiply the 
number of mm by 0.1, you get the number of cm.
Frank: You mean if the measurement is 23 mm, you multiply the 
number of mm in the measurement by the number of cm that’s 
equivalent to 1 mm. So 23 × 0.1 = 2.3 cm. But what about the 
blueprint? That needs to be in inches, not cm, right?
Joe: What if we find out how may inches 1 mm is? Can’t we do 
exactly the same thing we just did going from mm to cm?
Jim: Hmm ... Yes, I think we could.
Frank: So we’d multiply the length in mm by the number of inches 
that’s equivalent to 1 mm. It’s the same thing that we did to convert 
a measurement from mm to cm, but it’s more useful, as it’s what we’re 
actually supposed to be doing!
Joe: So we can just use a calculator to do the new plans without 
remeasuring. That rocks!
Jim: Let’s get to it!
If you know how 
many inches 1 mm is, 
you can CONVERT 
your measurements 
from mm to inches.
So we need to redo the 
blueprint using inches 
instead of mm.
converting units 

you are here 4    29
making it all mean something
You use conversion factors to change units
At the moment you have a myPod blueprint measured in 
millimeters that you want to convert to inches. Although the 
numbers you’ve written down on the blueprint will change, 
converting the units of a measurement doesn’t change its size. 
The myPod still fits comfortably in your pocket whether its size is 
described using millimeters or inches!
A meaningful measurement consists of both a number and its 
units. A conversion factor is the number you need to multiply 
your measurement by to convert it from one set of units to 
another. For example, if you want to convert measurements from 
mm to cm, you multiply by 0.1, as 1 mm = 0.1 cm.
Most physics books have a table you can use to look up less 
obvious conversion factors (for example, to convert non-SI units 
to SI units). Google Calculator can also do the same job. If 
you don’t have access to a computer, we’ve also included some 
conversion factors in Appendix B.
Time to work out a conversion factor to change the 
myPod blueprint from mm to inches! 
Type 1 mm in inches into Google (or look it up in a book).
Write how many inches 1 mm is here:
Make sure you don’t put “quotes” 
around this, or Google will look 
for web pages containing that 
phrase instead of looking up the 
conversion factor.
If you’re at home or in class, 
the quickest way of looking 
up a conversion factor is to 
use Google! You can type 
things like 1 mm in inches or 
1 kilogram in pounds into the 
search box, and it automatically 
runs Google Calculator for you 
and gives you an answer!
“Just Google it”
Remember to give your answer 
MEANING and CONTEXT 
by mentioning its UNITS.
Type what you want to 
know into the search box 
on the Google homepage, 
www.google.com.

30    Chapter 2
If you multiply a measurement by a conversion factor, 
you don’t change its size, but DO change its UNITS.
You can write a conversion factor as a fraction
Now that you know that 1 millimeter is the same as 0.0393700787 inches, 
you need to do some math to convert the other myPod measurements to 
inches.
The key is writing your conversion factor as a fraction so that the top and 
bottom of the fraction are both the same size:
1 millimeter
 0.0393700787 inches
These two lengths 
are equivalent.
This fraction = 1, as 
the top and bottom 
are both the same size.
You can then multiply your measurement by the conversion factor fraction. 
Since the top and bottom of the fraction are the same size (or length), 
multiplying by the fraction is the same as multiplying by 1, and the size of 
your measurement doesn’t change.
But multiplying by the conversion factor will change the units of your 
measurement, which is what you want to do!
1 millimeter is the same as 0.0393700787 inches.
This is how you should answer exam 
questions- give UNITS and a CONTEXT so 
that your answer has MEANING.
Never ever 
give just a number... 
Time to work out a conversion factor to change the 
myPod blueprint from mm to inches!
Type 1 mm in inches into Google (or look it up in a book).
Write how many inches 1 mm is here:
or this happens!
sharpen solution

you are here 4    31
making it all mean something
I guess the conversion factor fraction could be written 
either way- with the inches on the top or the millimeters 
on the top. So I need to think about which way to write it.
Q: I don’t get the “conversion 
factor is equal to 1” thing. How can 
that be when there are different 
numbers on the top and bottom?
A: There aren’t just different 
numbers on the top and bottom of the 
fraction - there are also different units. 
 
The top and bottom of the fraction are 
exactly the same size, so the fraction 
equals 1. The numbers are different 
because they’re expressed in different 
units.
Q: And being able to write the 
fraction in two different ways isn’t 
a problem because I can work out 
which one to use from the units?
A: Yes. You want the old units to 
divide out so that you’re just left with 
the new units. Set up your fraction in a 
way that ensures this will happen. 
 
Or you can think, “Do I expect the 
answer to be bigger or smaller than 
the number I started with?” That works 
too.
Q: So far, we’ve wanted to go 
from millimeters to inches. But if 
I wanted to go FROM inches TO 
millimeters, would I just turn the 
fraction the other way up? 
A: Absolutely! Though always do an 
error-check just in case. Ask yourself 
if the units are going to divide out, and 
check that the answer’s around the 
size you expected.
With fractions, you can divide out units 
like you’d divide out numbers.
You can write the conversion factor fraction either way up:
1 millimeter
 0.0393700787 inches
1 millimeter
 0.0393700787 inches
=
= 1
To work out the width of the player (60 mm) in inches, 
we want to end up with units in inches at the end, 
so use the conversion factor fraction that makes the 
millimeters divide out.
1 millimeter
 0.0393700787 inches
60 millimeters in inches           =
×
60 millimeters
= 2.362204722 inches
The only units 
you’re left with are 
inches - which is 
what you want.
Think about the SIZE 
of your answer. You’re 
expecting a number less 
than 60, so this looks OK.
You have millimeters on the top and 
millimeters on the bottom, so they divide out.
The top and 
bottom are 
both the 
same size.

32    Chapter 2
Hey ... isn’t it kinda obvious that if 
1 mm = 0.393700787 inches, then 
60 mm will be 60 times bigger? So 
why can’t I just multiply by 60? Why 
all the extra fuss of laying it out with 
fractions and units and stuff?
Units help you keep track 
of trickier problems.
Here you’re only converting one set of units. 
But sooner than you think, you’ll be asked 
to work out how many seconds are in a year, 
which will involve you converting to minutes, 
then hours, then days, and finally years - a 
calculation that uses five different units in total!
So it’s best to practice simpler problems using 
the same techniques you’d have to use for 
more difficult problems. It’s like practicing 
individual tennis shots over and over to perfect 
your technique. Then when you face a difficult 
opponent, the shot is totally second nature, and 
your brain is free to think about the match 
situation.
There’s also the fact that examiners will 
reward you for showing your work, even 
if you get the final answer wrong! In your exam, 
you get rewarded for demonstrating that you 
understand the physics - and that means 
you must show the examiners how you worked 
out your answer.
So...I guess you can 
help us out with converting 
the plan to inches now?
units are useful

you are here 4    33
making it all mean something
Now you can use the conversion factor to update the blueprint
OK, so you used Google Calculator to find out that 1 mm = 0.0393700787 inches.
Now it’s time to modify the blueprint so that it uses inches instead of millimeters, and the 
factory can cope with it.
Here’s the blueprint with some of the millimeter lengths marked. 
Convert them to inches and earn that limited edition player! Remember 
to show your work (there’s space down the right for that).
Remember to 
write the UNITS 
on the blueprint!
There’s some space over 
here for your work.
42 mm
60 mm
1 mm
100 mm
38 mm

34    Chapter 2
= 1.4960629906”
38 mm in inches
0.0393700787”
1 mm
x
= 38 mm
Make sure you lay 
out your work, so it’s 
obvious which bit of the 
problem you’re doing.
Here’s the blueprint with some of the millimeter lengths marked. 
Convert them to inches and earn that limited edition player! Remember to 
show your work (there’s space down the right for that).
3.93700787”
0.0393700787”
1.4960629906”
1.6535433054”
2.362204722”
42 mm
60 mm
1 mm
100 mm
38 mm
42 mm in inches
0.0393700787”
1 mm
= 42 mm x
= 1.6535433054”
100 mm in inches
0.0393700787”
1 mm
= 100 mm x
= 3.93700787”
60 mm in inches
0.0393700787”
1 mm
= 60 mm x
= 2.362204722”
1 mm in inches - already know 
that 1 mm = 0.0393700787”
Double underline your 
final answer, so it’s 
obvious where it is.
If you need to change units during a problem, 
look up a conversion factor to help, and 
show your work when you do it!
sharpen solution

you are here 4    35
making it all mean something
You just converted the units 
for the entire blueprint!
After converting all measurements from mm to inches 
and checking that the units are written at the end 
of every number, you send the blueprints off to the 
factory and dream of your limited edition myPod ...
What kind of ruler are you using 
anyway? There’s no way we can measure 
a length like 2.362204722 inches!
But there’s STILL a problem ...
A couple of hours after mailing the blueprints, you get 
a call from the factory. They’re saying that they can’t 
follow the instructions on the blueprint, as they’re 
not capable of manufacturing the myPod case to the 
nearest 0.0000000001 inch!
It’s important to make sure you include 
the units EVERY time you write down 
a number as a final answer.
What could have caused this new problem? 
And how can you fix it?

36    Chapter 2
What to do with numbers that have 
waaaay too many digits to be usable
Right now your problem is that the numbers on the blueprint have too many 
digits. The blueprint says that the myPod is 2.362204722 inches wide, which 
implies that you measured it to the nearest 0.000000001 inch. But unless you 
have a ruler that can measure individual atoms, you didn’t!
You have to decide how many of the digits in your answers are significant. 
A number’s most significant digit is the one that tells you the most about how 
big the number is - usually the first non-zero digit. The next-most 
significant digit is the next one along, and so on.
Don’t worry if you’ve heard 
this called ‘significant figures’ 
in the past. Significant digits 
and significant figures are two 
different names for exactly 
the same thing.
Thousandths
Hundredths
.
Ten-thousandths
Units
Tenths
Decimal 
point
There are 10,000 of these really tiny squares 
in 1 big square. Compared to the size of the big 
square, the really tiny squares aren’t significant.
The most significant digit is 
the one that tells you the most 
about the SIZE of the number. 
The most significant digit in 
this number is the units digit.
The most significant digit is the one that tells you 
the most about the SIZE of the number. 
So the first non-zero digit is the most significant.
Together, these blocks represent 
the number 1.1111 (i.e., 1 unit, 1 
tenth, 1 hundredth, 1 thousandth, 
and 1 ten-thousandth).
You get 10 tenths 
in 1 unit.
You get 10 
hundredths 
in 1 tenth.
You get 10 
thousandths in 
1 hundredth.
You get 10 
ten-thousandths 
in 1 thousandth.
If your number is 0.0022, 
then it’s the thousandths digit 
that’s the most significant.
the number of digits is significant

you are here 4    37
making it all mean something
How many digits of your measurements look significant?
Since the numbers on your blueprint have too many digits, it makes sense to round 
them to get rid of some of the less significant digits. For instance, if you round 
2.362204722 inches to one significant digit, it’s 2 inches (since it’s closer to 2 than it is to 
3); to two significant digits it would be 2.4 inches (since it’s closer to 2.4 than it is to 2.3).
But how many significant digits should you round your measurements to?
Don’t worry too much 
about this - you’ll be 
looking at rounding numbers 
on the next couple of pages.
Thousandths
Hundredths
Ten-thousandths
Units
Tenths
Use the grid to draw squares and columns that represent 
2.362204722 inches (your measurement of the myPod’s width) in 
the same way as on the opposite page. Beside it, write the digit 
that each group of squares or columns represents. (There may not 
be space to draw things for all of the digits in your number.)
How many digits of your measurement do you think look 
significant, or how many digits make an appreciable difference to 
the size of the number? Write your answer in the space below.
We’ve already put in one units square for you. 
You’ll need to pile on another to represent 
the 2 units in your measurement. 
You can stack the tenths 
columns next to each other.
.
Decimal point

38    Chapter 2
The first THREE digits of a number are the most significant. 
The other digits don’t contribute much to the SIZE of the number.
.
2
3
.
6
2 2
Thousandths
Hundredths
Ten-thousandths
Units
Tenths
Use the grid to draw squares and columns that represent 
2.362204722 inches (your measurement of the myPod’s width) in 
the same way as on the opposite page. Beside it, write the digit 
that each group of squares or columns represents. (There may not 
be space to draw things for all of the digits in your number.)
How many digits of your measurement do you think look 
significant, or how many digits make an appreciable difference to 
the size of the number? Write your answer in the space below.
Only the first three digits really contribute towards the size 
of the answer. The thousandths and ten-thousandths don’t 
really. So I think I should round to 3 significant digits.
These digits might as well 
not be there, as they 
don’t really contribute to 
the SIZE of the answer.
These digits all contribute 
SIGNIFICANTLY to the 
SIZE of the answer.
sharpen solution

you are here 4    39
making it all mean something
Generally, you should round your 
answers to three significant digits
Unless you have extra information you can use to help, you 
should round your final answers for any calculation to 
three significant digits. The other digits in the number 
don’t really contribute towards the size of the number.
You need to follow certain rules 
when you’re rounding answers
sd stands for 
“significant 
digits.”
If the digit to the right of your 
last significant digit is 4 or less, 
round down.
If the digit to the right of your 
last significant digit is 6 or 
more, round up.
If the digit to the right of your last 
significant digit is a 5 and there are 
other digits after it, round up.
If the digit to the right of your last 
significant digit is 5 and there 
aren’t any more digits, round up or 
down to the nearest even number.
5 is the ‘cut-off’ digit 
for rounding up or down.
If extra 
digits push 
you over the 
cut-off point, 
then round up.
When you’re rounding a number, look at the 
digit to the right of the final significant digit 
that you want to round to. If this digit is 4 or 
less, then round down. If it’s 6 or more, then 
round up.
So you would round down the width of the 
myPod, 2.3622... inches, to 2.36 inches, as 
it’s closer to 2.36 than it is to 2.37. But you’d 
round up a measurement of 4.5874... inches 
to 4.59 inches, as it’s closer to 4.59 than it is to 
4.58.
If the digit to the right of your final significant 
digit is a 5, then look to see if there’s another 
digit after the 5. If there is, round up. If there 
isn’t, round upor down to the nearest even 
digit. So 2.365 would round down to 2.36, and 
2.375 would round up to 2.38.
Once you’ve rounded your answer, always say 
how many significant digits you’ve rounded to, 
for example, by writing 2.36 (3 sd).
When you’re rounding 
a number, the digit to 
the right of your final 
significant digit tells 
you what to do.

40    Chapter 2
I’m used to rounding things to a certain 
number of decimal places. Why bother with significant 
digits? Why not just say “round the measurements to two 
decimal places”? Wouldn’t that be just the same?
Significant digits and decimal places aren’t the same
They may both be ways of describing how many digits to include in a 
number, but they’re not the same as each other.
When you represent the number 2.3622... using squares and columns, 
you can see that the first three digits contribute far more to the size of 
the answer than the rest. So you round it to three significant digits, 2.36 
(3 sd), which also happens to be the same as rounding it to 2 decimal 
places ... this time.
However, if the number had been 236.22, you could have drawn it out 
in just the same way. And again, the first three digits are by far the most 
significant, so you’d round it to 236 (3 sd) just like last time. But this time, 
you’re rounding the number to 0 decimal places.
As it’s always the first three digits of an answer that are the most 
important regardless of how big the number is, it’s best to think about 
significant digits rather than decimal places when you’re doing physics.
3
6
2 2
.
2
Hundreds
Tens
Units
Tenths
Hundredths
3
6
2 2
.
2
Thousandths
Ten-thousandths
Units
Hundredths
Tenths
The first three digits of 
ANY number are the most 
significant (however big or 
small the number itself is).
The first three digits of a 
number might be anywhere- 
before, including, or after the 
decimal point. So it’s better 
to think in significant digits 
rather than decimal places.
the difference between digits and decimal places

you are here 4    41
making it all mean something
You’ve already come a long way towards earning that free limited edition myPod! 
First, you measured the myPod case with your ruler and produced a blueprint so 
that the factory could produce the cases.
After a blip where the case came back 25 times too big (because there weren’t any 
units on the blueprint, the factory assumed it was a giant promotional item), you 
came storming back and learned that with conversion factors, you can change 
the mm to inches without remeasuring the myPod.
Then, the factory pointed out that the converted measurements had too many 
digits in them - don’t believe everything your calculator tells you! But you 
realized that some digits are more significant than others, as they tell you the 
most about the size of the number. And you learned that, in general, you should 
round calculations to three significant digits. So ... are you set to go?
I guess that rounding answers to three significant digits is the 
general rule in physics. But what if I know more about how a specific 
measurement was made. Does that affect what I should do?
Is it OK to round the myPod blueprint to three 
significant digits?
Generally, you should round your 
answers to three significant digits
Unless you have extra information you can use to help, you 
should round your final answers for any calculation to 
three significant digits. The other digits in the number 
don’t really contribute towards the size of the number.
How might the way the original measurement was 
made affect the number of significant digits you 
round your converted answer to?

42    Chapter 2
When you were measuring the myPod to draw your original plan, you 
probably found that some of the dimensions weren’t a whole number of 
millimeters long. The thing you were measuring didn’t exactly line up 
with one of the scale divisions on your ruler.
When this happened, you may have intuitively rounded it to the nearest 
mm. If a measurement is between 6.5 and 7 mm, you’d round up to 
7 mm. And if it’s between 7 and 7.5 mm, you’d round down to 7 mm.
You ALREADY intuitively rounded your 
original myPod measurements!
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
One scale 
division is 1 mm.
mm
A measurement between 
6.5 mm and 7 mm gets 
rounded up to 7 mm.
A measurement between 
7 mm and 7.5 mm gets 
rounded down to 7 mm.
A measurement 
between 7.5 mm 
and 8 mm gets 
rounded up to 
8 mm.
You’re only allowed 
to report back 
measurements that 
are a WHOLE number 
of scale divisions.
You should always round your measurement to the 
nearest scale division on your measuring apparatus.
We’ve enlarged this image so 
you can see what’s going on 
more clearly.
rounding numbers roundup

you are here 4    43
making it all mean something
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
mm
The ERROR BARS 
show the possible 
extent of the 
measurement, i.e., 
0.5 mm either way.
Any measurement you make has an 
error (or uncertainty) associated with it
A measurement quoted as “7 mm” 
will actually lie somewhere in the 
range from 6.5 mm to 7.5 mm. 
This is written as 7 mm ±0.5 mm.
Any time you make a measurement, you intuitively round it to the 
nearest scale division on your measuring apparatus. But this means that 
a measurement you make with your ruler and write down as “7 mm” 
could actually range from just over 6.5 mm to just under 7.5 mm.
If you make a measurement, it’s important that you (and any others 
using it) know how much uncertainty or error is associated with it. 
Was the 7 mm length measured using a ruler with a scale division of 
1 mm, or with a micrometer with a scale division of 0.001 mm?
If you make a drawing of the thing you’re measuring, you can show the  
range that the measurement may lie in using error bars, which mark 
the range’s extremes.
If you write down your measurement, you can show the margin of error 
using numbers. The 7 mm measurement made using the ruler might be 
up to 0.5 mm larger (and rounded down to 7 mm) or 0.5 mm smaller 
(and rounded up to 7 mm). You write this as 7.0 mm ± 0.5 mm.
Because you round your measurements to the nearest scale division, the 
associated error is always ± half a scale division.
Q: If my measurement has an error, 
does that mean I did something wrong?
A: No! In this context, “error” is another 
word for “uncertainty” - the range that your 
measurement might fall into.
Q: I can eliminate the error on a 
measurement completely if I have a good 
enough measuring device, right?
A: Not really. You can reduce it, like 
by using a micrometer where the error is 
±0.0005 mm instead of a ruler where it’s 
±0.5 mm. But no surface is ever perfectly 
smooth at the atomic level, so you’d never 
be able to completely eliminate uncertainty.
Q: So is trying to reduce errors 
associated with measurements a good 
thing, or is that just being a perfectionist?
A: The smaller the error on your 
measurements, the more certain you can be 
of your results.
Q: OK. But a couple of pages ago, we 
decided we should round calculations to 
3 significant digits. But now we’re making 
measurements like 7.0 mm ± 0.5 mm. 
Neither the measurement nor the error 
have three significant digits!
A: That (general) rule was for 
calculations, not for raw measurements.
Q: But if we know how the 
measurements were originally made, 
surely that affects how I round the 
converted values on the blueprint?
A: Yes. Rounding to three significant 
digits is a general rule when you don’t know 
how the measurements you used in your 
calculation were made. But when you have 
more information about the error, you can 
propagate that through the unit conversion.
Q: That kinda makes sense, but how 
do I actually DO it?
A: It’s funny you should ask - that’s what 
we’re just getting on to now.
You say this as 
“plus or minus.”

44    Chapter 2
You already used your ruler to round the myPod measurements to the nearest mm. 
This gives you the error associated with each measurement.
To work out the equivalent to rounding like this using inches, you need to convert 
your error from mm to inches. Then you can write your final answers in inches, 
along with their errors in inches, so the factory knows how well they have to 
measure. 
The error on your original measurements should 
propagate through to your converted blueprint
It’s conventional to round converted 
errors to ONE significant digit, then 
round converted measurements to the 
last digit affected by the error.
Round converted errors to ONE significant digit.
Once you’ve converted your error, it’s conventional to round it to 
one significant digit. Then you round the measurement to the last 
digit affected by the error (which is the same as saying “round to the 
same number of decimal places as the error”).
So if a converted error becomes ± 0.061842375 inches, you’d round 
it to one significant digit: ± 0.06 inches (1 sd). So a measurement of 
27 mm, which converts to 1.0106299213 inches, would be rounded 
to 1.01 inches ± 0.06 inches since the hundredths digit of the 
answer is the last to be affected by the error.
The SIZE of the thing you’re 
measuring doesn’t change 
when you convert its units.
The SIZE 
of the error 
doesn’t 
change 
either when 
you convert 
its units.
But the problem is that the converted 
measurements have too many digits. If I convert 
the error from mm to inches, I’m just shifting the 
problem over - now my converted errors have too many 
digits! How’s anyone supposed to know how much 
of the converted error is significant?!
This is just an 
example - it’s not 
what your myPod 
error converts to!
rounding errors

you are here 4    45
making it all mean something
Right! Time to attack the blueprint again!
Use the page opposite to work out how many significant digits to quote the 
measurements to. Write your rounded answers in the boxes! Remember, you 
originally measured the myPod to the nearest mm, and Google Calculator told 
you that 1 mm = 0.0393700787 inches.
Remember to state the error on your measurements.
3.93700787”
0.0393700787”
1.4960629906”
1.6535433054”
2.362204722”
There’s some space down here 
for you to work out the 
error on your measurements. 
Make sure you explain the 
stages you’re going through.
=
Now that you know how to convert measurements and how many 
significant digits to include, it’s time to attack the blueprint again!

46    Chapter 2
Use the page opposite to work out how many significant digits to quote the 
measurements to. Write your rounded answers in the boxes! Remember, you 
originally measured the myPod to the nearest mm, and Google Calculator told 
you that 1 mm = 0.0393700787 inches.
Remember to state the error on your measurements.
3.94”± 0.02” 
0.04”± 0.02” 
1.50”± 0.02” 
1.65”± 0.02” 
2.36”± 0.02” 
= 0.5 mm
There’s some space down here 
for you to work out the 
error on your measurements. 
Make sure you explain the 
stages you’re going through.
Scale division on original ruler is 1 mm, 
so error on measurement is ± 0.5 mm.
Convert error: 0.5 mm in inches
x
1 mm
0.0393700787”
= 0.01968503935”
Round error to 1 sd:
Error = ± 0.02” (1 sd)
So quote myPod measurements to 
the same number of decimal places. 
(In this case, 2 decimal places.)
Hey ... are you ready to email 
those blueprints over yet? I’m 
kinda starting to worry that we 
might not fix this in time ...
Did you 
remember 
the UNITS??
sharpen solution

you are here 4    47
making it all mean something
STOP!! Before you hit send, do your answers SUCK?!
v
Fill in the sections to see if your myPod blueprint SUCKs!
S
U
C
K
What’s happened so far has probably convinced you that it’s a good idea to check 
over your answers before you turn them in. So - does your answer SUCK?
S is for Size– How big/small are you expecting the answer to be?
U is for Units– Does the answer have units, and are they what was asked for?
C is for Calculations– Check them over and look out for silly mistakes!
K is for ‘K’ontext– Go back to the big picture - what are you trying to do, 
and is it the same as what you actually did to get your 
answer?
SIZE– Are the answers the size you’re expecting?
‘‘K’ONTEXT– What are you trying to do, and is it the same as what you actually did?
CALCULATIONS– Did you do the math right?
UNITS– Do they have units, and are they what you were asked for?
This is so you don’t lose points in 
exams for doing ‘silly things’ that 
you could have avoided.
Always check  
your answers 
before moving on.

48    Chapter 2
S
U
C
K
SIZE– Are the answers the size you’re expecting?
Well, inches are bigger than millimeters, so the inches measurements will be smaller 
numbers than the millimeter measurements. They seem about right for a music player.
‘‘K’ONTEXT– What are you trying to do, and is it the same as what you actually did?
I want to convert measurements from mm to inches using the correct number of 
significant digits (based on the error associated with the original measurements).
CALCULATIONS– Did you do the math right?
I think so. The conversion factor is the right way up (so the units divide out) and 
the sizes already checked out OK.
UNITS– Do they have units, and are they what you were asked for?
The factory need inches, and I converted the lengths to inches. I also used the right 
number of significant digits.
Fill in the sections to see if your answer SUCKs.
This is an EXTREMELY 
useful way of checking if 
your answer is plausible.
ALWAYS ask yourself: 
“Does my answer SUCK?” 
before you move on 
to something else
sucky solution

you are here 4    49
making it all mean something
You nailed it!
The blueprints are right at last, and the factory is 
happy! Before you know it, you’re relaxing by the 
pool with your limited edition myPod.
But what about the giant myPod case 
the mailman delivered? It was used for 
an even more limited edition supergiant 
version that sold for thousands of dollars 
in an online auction, with massive 
publicity.
Wicked!

50    Chapter 2
Not so fast! I think I’ve spotted something. I put 1.5” for the height of the 
screen instead of 1.50”. The 0 doesn’t add any information to the measurement, 
and there’s no point in wasting ink, right? So why’s it in the blueprint?
1.50” ± 0.02”
1.6
The zero gives you extra information.
The number of significant digits you include in an 
answer implies the size of the error. The final digit 
you include is the one that is uncertain.
Here, your error is ± 0.02 inches - the length 
could be up to two hundredths of an inch 
either way. Writing down the measurement as 
1.50 inches correctly implies that the hundredths 
digit is uncertain. But writing down 1.5 inches 
implies that the tenths digit is uncertain, as it’s the 
last digit in the answer. 
Answers should 
have the same 
number of 
significant digits 
that you were 
provided with in 
the question.
What do we do if we don’t know 
anything about the errors of the 
measurement we are using in a 
calculation?
If you don’t know what the errors are, use 
the same number of significant digits in 
the problem.
The first three digits of a number are the ones that are 
significant enough to be worth keeping when you round an 
answer. This means that most of the numbers you are given 
to work with are usually rounded to three significant digits.
So when you come up with an answer, you should also 
round it to three significant digits to preserve what was 
originally done to the number before you were given it.
is that your final answer?

you are here 4    51
making it all mean something
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
inches
1.00
1.10
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.50
1.60
inches
Q: In some physics books, 
there are tables of constants 
with lots of significant digits, 
like the speed of light = 
29979245.8 meters per second. 
That implies an error of 
± 0.05 meters per second. Am I 
really supposed to write down 
NINE significant digits when 
the error propagates through 
to my answer?
A: When you’re asked to work 
with numbers like that, don’t 
round anything until you reach 
the end of your calculation. It’s 
normal then to round your final 
answer to three significant digits.
Q: I’m a bit confused about 
zeros now. At first I thought 
they were just placeholders, 
but now you’re saying they’re 
sometimes significant. The 
zeros in the number 0.005 
aren’t significant, right? So 
how can I tell whether a zero is 
significant or not?
A: We’re just going to 
interview a zero to get it all 
straightened out ...
When you write down a measurement, you 
need the right number of significant digits
If you write down a measurement of 1.5 inches, you’re implying that it was 
measured to the nearest 0.1 inch (at best), i.e., the error is ± 0.05 inches.
If you write down a measurement of 1.50 inches, you’re implying that it was 
measured to the nearest 0.01 inch (at best), i.e., the error is ± 0.005 inches.
So if you write down 1.5 inches when you should have written down 
1.50 inches, you’re implying that the measurement is TEN times worse 
than it actually is. 
Error is 
± 0.05 inches.
Error is 
± 0.005 inches.
Reading is 1.5 inches.
Reading is 1.50 inches.
If you leave out a zero that would be affected by 
the error, you’re implying that your measurement 
is TEN times worse than it actually is!
We’ve enlarged this image, 
so you can see what’s 
going on more clearly.

52    Chapter 2
Head First: Now, onto today’s special guest - a very 
well known figure. As one of the papers asked recently 
- hero or a lot of fuss about nothing? So, Zero, what’s 
your take on this debate about your importance?
Zero: Well, the short answer to your question is that 
my significance kinda depends on where I am in a 
situation.
Head First: How do you mean? Surely you’ll be 
equally significant - or might that be insignificant 
- to anyone doing math all around the world? What’s 
location gotta do with it?
Zero: I don’t mean where in the world you find me. I 
mean where in the number you find me!
Head First: So, you reckon your significance depends 
on where in a number you are. But surely zero is zero, 
whether it’s zero units, zero tenths, or so forth?
Zero: Well, yes, that’s why I was originally invented - so 
you wouldn’t lose your place in a number.
Head First: So you’re just a placeholder, right?
Zero: Oh no, not at all! Sometimes I’m a placeholder, 
but sometimes I’m really significant!
Head First: You’re gonna have to help me here ...
Zero: Well, I’m a placeholder if I’m at the left of a 
decimal point in a number that’s less than 1. Like in 
0.00123, the zeros at the start of the number are just 
padding so that the rest of the digits fall into the right 
place.
Head First: And when aren’t you just padding?
Zero: If I’m not at the start of the number, then I’m 
significant. Especially if I’m part of a measurement.
Head First: Why are measurements special?
Zero: Measurements are quoted to the same number 
of significant digits as your measuring device. So if your 
ruler’s in mm and you measure something 5 mm long, 
then you write 5 mm ...
Head First: ... but there’s no zero there ...
Zero: ... and if your ruler was marked off in tenths of 
a mm, you’d write 5.0 mm.
Headfirst: But why write the extra zero at the end 
when it’s just the same thing? It’s still 5 mm long!
Zero: Because you’ve measured it to a tenth of a 
millimeter this time. So you need to have a figure in 
there to say how many tenths there are. The number of 
tenths is highly significant!
Head First: But there weren’t any tenths! So 5 mm 
and 5.0 mm are just the same number, aren’t they?
Zero: But they don’t have the same meaning. 
Measurements have meaning! If it has a decimal 
point, then the last figure of the measurement tells you 
about the size of the error. So the last figure is always 
significant - even if it’s a zero!
Head First: And if there’s no decimal point, say in a 
number like 1000?!
Zero: Then it’s ambiguous - you don’t know exactly 
where it was rounded. Was the 1000 originally 501 
rounded to the nearest thousand (1 sd), or 1000.1 
rounded to the nearest unit (4 sd)? That’s why you 
should always mention the number of sd when you 
make a measurement or give an answer.
Head First: Well, thank you, Zero, for coming in 
today and explaining what you do.
Measurements have MEANING!
Zeros are significant when 
they show you the error 
on a measurement.
Zeros Exposed
This week’s interview:
Hero or Zero?
interview with a zero

you are here 4    53
making it all mean something
Units
Special points
Be part of it
Does it SUCK?
Starting to fill up 
the world of physics with 
things to solve problems.
Units
Reference standards for measurements. For example, 
meters for distance and seconds for time.
Does it 
SUCK?
Check the Size, Units, Calculations, and Kontext of your 
answers to see if they make sense.

54    Chapter 2
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 2 under your belt, 
and you’ve added some terminology and 
answer-checking skills to your tool box.
CHAPTER 2
Units
A number needs to have units for it to 
mean something.
You’re only allowed to add things 
together if they have the same units.
Does it SUCK?
Memory aid to see if your answer makes sense.
Size - How big did you expect your answer to be?
Units - Does your answer have the correct units?
Calculations - Did you do the math right?
‘K’ontext - What are you trying to do - and is 
that what you actually did?
Errors
Any measurement you make has an error 
associated with it that reflects the 
uncertainly in the measurement.
Don’t worry - they’re not called errors 
because you did something wrong!
Significant digits
Any time your calculator gives you an 
answer, you’ll need to round it.
Round your answer to the same number 
of significant digits as the least precise 
number you were given to work with.
(Usually this will be 3 significant digits.)
Converting units
To convert an answer from one unit to another 
you need to multiply it by a conversion factor.
This is a fraction where the top and bottom 
are both equal sizes - but are expressed in 
different units.
Arrange things so that the units you don’t 
want divide out when you multiply your answer 
by the conversion factor.
Also, think about whether you expect the 
number part of your converted answer to be 
bigger or smaller than what you currently have.
physics toolbox

this is a new chapter    55
scientific notation, area, and volume
3
All numbers great and small
Wait....how big? How 
much? How many zeros? For 
pete’s sake...get to the point!  
In the real world, you have to deal with all kinds of numbers, 
not just the ones that are easier to work with. In this chapter, you’ll 
be taking control of unwieldy numbers using scientific notation and discovering why 
rounding a large number doesn’t mean having to write a zillion zeros at the end. You’ll 
also use your new superpowers to deal with units of area and volume - which is where 
scientific notation will save you lots of grief (and time) in the future!

56    Chapter 3
A messy college dorm room
Well, actually a particularly filthy college dorm room - Matt and Kyle 
probably wouldn’t know one end of a vacuum cleaner from the other, 
and the idea of cleaning has never entered their heads.
But the Dorm Inspector has had enough...
Head First U Department of Dorm Inspection
Your dorm room is becoming hazardous to your health, 
and this state of affairs must be dealt with. We’ve 
detected a single specimen of a bug that doubles 
itself every twenty minutes.
If the bugs grow to occupy more than 6 × 10-5 m3 they’ll 
take over your room, and you will need to find a new 
place to live while we fumigate your living area.
Sincerely,
Dorm Inspection Team
disgusting dormitory

you are here 4    57
scientific notation
Every 20 minutes, the bugs will divide in two. So the 
total number of bugs will double every 20 minutes.
How many do you think there will be by tomorrow 
(12 hours later) - and how might you work that out?
Do we have to clean up 
tonight, or can we just 
wait until tomorrow?
Yeah, how serious can 
these little bugs be? 
Head First U Department of Dorm Inspection
Your dorm room is becoming hazardous to your health, 
and this state of affairs must be dealt with. We’ve 
detected a single specimen of a bug that doubles 
in number every twenty minutes.
If the bugs grow to occupy more than 6 × 10—5 m3, they’ll 
take over your room, and you will need to find a new 
place to live while we fumigate your living area.
Sincerely,
Dorm Inspection Team
So how long before things go really bad?

58    Chapter 3
Kyle: Whether they can or not, just the thought of it makes me 
queasy. Maybe we oughta just straighten this place up now.
Matt: I’m sooooooo tired. Can’t we wait until tomorrow?
Kyle: But that might be too late!
Matt: We can work it out, right? The bug doubles every 20 minutes, 
and it’s 10 pm now. If we get up at 10 am, we’ve given the bug 12 
hours to keep on doubling. Surely there can’t be that many by then?
Kyle: OK, let me sketch this out...
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kyle: ... hmmm, I’m not sure - my drawing’s getting messy!
Matt: Yeah, the drawing will take forever. There’s gotta be a math 
way to figure out how many bugs there’ll be after 12 hours.
Kyle: Yeah, OK.
Matt: Hmmm. I can’t think of an equation for “the bugs double 
every 20 minutes,” but we could just make a table to keep track of 
things and keep on doubling until 12 hours are up. Then we’ll know 
how many bugs there’ll be by the morning.
Kyle: I think that’ll work, but there’s still that funny phrase in the 
note, “If the bugs grow to occupy more than 6 × 10—5 m3.” I don’t 
know what that is, but it sure ain’t a number of bugs.
Matt: Why don’t we worry about that later, once we know how 
many bugs there’ll be...
... after 20 minutes, there’ll be two of them ...
... 40 minutes = 4 bugs ...
... 1 hour = 8 bugs - not that many and 
we only need to give it 12 hours ...
... 1 hour 20 minutes = 16 bugs ...
... 1 hour 40 minutes =  ...
... if we start off with one bug ...
how many?
Is it true? Can these bugs 
really get us evicted?

you are here 4    59
scientific notation
Matt and Kyle have drawn up the table below and started 
doubling the bugs. Your job is to finish off the table to see how 
many bugs there’ll be after 12 hours.
Number of 
doublings
Elapsed 
time
Number of 
bugs
You start off with 1 bug. 
After 20 minutes, it’s doubled 
once, and there are 2 bugs.
This is as 
far as they 
got with 
their sketch.
There are a lot of doublings in 12 hours, so 
we’ve given you space to continue the table.
Number of 
doublings
Elapsed 
time
Number of 
bugs
1
20 min
2
2
40 min
4
3
1 h
8
4
1 h 20 min
16
5
1 h 40 min

60    Chapter 3
Matt and Kyle have drawn up the table below and started 
doubling the bugs. Your job is to finish off the table, to see how 
many bugs there’ll be after 12 hours.
Number of 
doublings
Elapsed 
time
Number of 
bugs
19
6 h 20 min
524288
20
6 h 40 min
1048576
21
7 h
2097152
22
7 h 20 min
4194304
23
7 h 40 min
8388608
24
8 h
16777216
25
8 h 20 min
33554432
26
8 h 40 min
67108864
27
9 h
134217728
28
9 h 20 min
268435456
29
9 h 40 min
536870912
30
10 h
1073741824
31
10 h 20 min
2147483648
32
10 h 40 min
4294967296
33
11 h
8589934592
34
11 h 20 min
17179869184
35
11 h 40 min
34359738368
36
12 h
68719476736
You start off with 1 bug. 
After 20 minutes, it’s doubled 
once, and there are 2 bugs.
This is as 
far as they 
got with 
their sketch.
There are a lot of doublings in 12 hours, so 
we’ve given you space to continue the table.
Number of 
doublings
Elapsed 
time
Number of 
bugs
1
20 min
2
2
40 min
4
3
1 h
8
4
1 h 20 min
16
5
1 h 40 min
32
6
2 h
64
7
2 h 20 min
128
8
2 h 40 min
256
9
3 h
512
10
3 h 20 min
1024
11
3 h 40 min
2048
12
4 h
4096
13
4 h 20 min
8192
14
4 h 40 min
16384
15
5 h
32768
16
5 h 20 min
65536
17
5 h 40 min
131072
18
6 h
262144
This is taking, like, forever. Isn’t 
there a button on my calculator I can 
use instead of doing all that doubling?
sharpen solution

you are here 4    61
scientific notation
This whole term is 
the same as 
2 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 2
How many times you’re 
multiplying by it. This 
is called the INDEX.
Number that 
you’re multiplying 
by lots of times.
Power notation helps you multiply 
by the same number over and over
(a) The number of bugs 
doubles every 20 minutes. 
How many times do you 
need to multiply by 2 to get 
the total number of bugs 
after 12 hours?
(b) How many bugs will 
there be after 12 hours?
If you want to multiply by the same number several times 
over, you can write it down using power notation. This 
means that 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 becomes 25, as there are five 
instances of 2. When you say 25 out loud, you say “two to the 
power of five” or sometimes just “two to the five.” The five 
part is called the index.
Your calculator’s power button gives you superpowers
Power 
notation makes 
multiplying 
by the same 
number over 
and over 
less prone to 
mistakes.  
You can use the power button on your calculator to multiply 
by the same number lots of times without having to type it all 
out. Usually, you type in the number you want to multiply by, 
then press the power button, then type the number of times you 
want to multiply by it.
Watch out though - different calculators have different things 
written on the power button! Make sure you know what yours 
looks like and how it works before you try to use it!
If your calculator doesn’t have a power button, then you’ll need 
to get a scientific calculator. It’ll help you out in the long run 
as you move onto solving more sophisticated and complicated 
physics problems.
Index
Number that 
you’re multiplying 
by lots of times.
There’s space here to 
explain what you’re doing.

62    Chapter 3
What’s that great big 
’E’ doing in the middle 
of my answer?!
Huh?! This doesn’t 
make sense at all!
It’s important to understand the 
answers your calculator gives you.
Write what 
YOUR calculator 
said in here.
(a) The number of bugs 
doubles every 20 minutes. 
How many times do you 
need to multiply by 2 to get 
the total number of bugs 
after 12 hours?
(b) How many bugs will 
there be after 12 hours?
Take time to jot down 
what you’re doing and 
why. It helps you to 
stay on track..
Don’t just copy 
answers down 
and move on.
sharpen solution
(b) Number of bugs after 12 h =  
number at the start x 36 groups of 2. 
 
Number  =  1 x 236  = 
(a) There are 3 lots of 20 minutes 
in an hour. In 12 hours there are 3 x 
12 = 36 periods of 20 minutes, so 
they double 36 times.

you are here 4    63
scientific notation
The first calculator’s given an answer 
of 6.871947674 × 1010. It’s given you 
10 significant digits, and the number is 
the same as writing 6.871947674 × 10 
× 10 × 10 × 10 × 10 × 10 × 10 × 10 × 
10 × 10, which is 68719476740.
The second calculator has displayed 
6.871947E10, which is 68719470000- 
it’s rounded the answer to seven 
significant digit and used an E to 
indicate the second part of the number 
because of the limits of its display.
But there were already 8 bugs after an hour.  8 is more than 
6.87, so how can the answer to 236 possibly be that small?!
Your calculator displays big numbers  
using scientific notation
Sometimes, an answer has too many digits to fit on your 
calculator’s screen. When that happens, your calculator displays 
it using scientific notation. Scientific notation is an efficient 
and shorter way of writing very long numbers.
The value of 236 has 11 digits in it, but a calculator doesn’t have 
enough space to display all of the digits. So instead, they’ve 
rounded the answer to the number of significant digits that 
they can fit on the screen.
The first part of the number on the screen is for  the part that 
starts 6.87...
In math, scientific notation is 
often called standard form. 
Don’t worry, they’re the same thing.
The second part of the number tells you 
the size of the first part.
Numbers written in scientific notation have two parts.
The first part is a number with one significant 
digit before the decimal point and the rest of the 
number after the decimal point.
The second part tells you the number of 10’s you 
have to multiply the first part by to make your 
answer the correct size.
Answers written 
in scientific notation 
have two parts.
This part tells 
you how many 10’s 
to multiply the 
first part by.

64    Chapter 3
Scientific notation uses powers of 10 
to write down long numbers
You calculator’s given you the answer 236 = 6.871947674 × 1010. You know 
that to get this into the form you’re used to, you need to multiply the first part 
of the number by ten groups of 10.
Each time you multiply by 10, the number’s digits shift along one place to 
the left so that each digit is worth 10 times more than it was before.
But it’s quite hard for you to draw that, so practically speaking, you can get 
to the same place by hopping the decimal point the correct number of 
times to the right. Then the number becomes 68719476740.
So you don’t have to 
write them out the long 
way if they have 28 
digits or something!
You can work out 
where the number’s 
digits should lie 
by ‘hopping’ the 
decimal point.
6.871947674    ×  1010
1
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
Each time you multiply by 10, the decimal point hops along one place to make the number bigger.
You need to put a placeholding 
zero in here for this hop.
This bit tells you how 
many 10’s to hop along by.
68719476740
Decimal point 
is now here.
You should round your answers to 
three significant digits, like 
you did in Chapter 2.
But numbers like that are really 
annoying to round. There are so many zeros to 
write in at the end; I always lose count. Does it work 
out as 6870000000 or 68700000000?!
the science behind scientific notation

you are here 4    65
scientific notation
68719476740
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
6.871947674   ×  1010
To convert a normally-
written number into 
scientific notation, count 
how many hops until only 
one digit is left in front 
of the decimal point, and 
multiply the number by 
that many 10’s.
Does writing our answers with scientific 
notation really help us keep track of the digits?
Scientific notation helps you round your answers.
If you have to round a long number to 3 significant digits (sd) as a 
final answer, then the start is OK, but putting in the right number 
of zeros is a real pain.
It’s a lot easier in scientific notation, as the tens are spelled out at 
the end of the number. This lets you rewrite 6.871947674 x 1010  as 
6.87 x 1010 without hopping the decimal point along.
6.87  ×  1010 (3 sd)
Scientific notation helps you to round your answers 
to 3 significant digits without making mistakes.
3 significant digits
The less significant digits 
- round to get rid of them.
You don’t need placeholding 
zeros after a decimal point.
Strictly speaking, it’s 
the digits that move, 
not the decimal 
point, but that’s 
much harder for you 
to draw!
Or however many sd is 
appropriate for your answer.
You can just start here, as this is 
the answer your calculator gave you.

66    Chapter 3
Q: I thought what you’re calling 
‘scientific notation’ is actually called 
‘standard form.’ What gives?
A: They’re both the same thing. 
Scientists use the term ‘scientific notation’ 
and mathematicians ‘standard form.’
Q: Why should I bother with scientific 
notation when I’m really careful about 
how I type numbers into my calculator?
A: Your calculator screen might not be 
big enough to display an answer that’s 
either really big or really small. So you 
need to understand scientific notation, or it 
won’t make sense.
Q: But I have a super duper flashy 
calculator that’ll display lots and lots 
of digits on its humongous screen. So 
if I’m careful, why would I ever need 
scientific notation?
A: You could be given a number in 
scientific notation to work with - in an exam 
question or when you look something up to 
find out how big it is.
Q: How big are we talking about?
A: Well, the earth’s mass is 
5.97 × 1024 kilograms. That’s a very big 
number with a lot of zeros at the end if you 
write it out longhand.
Q: OK, I can see why I might not be 
happy handling over 20 zeros at the 
end. But why would I ever want to write 
an answer I’ve worked out myself in 
scientific notation?
A: If you’re rounding your answer 
to 3 significant digits (like you’ll do in 
your exam), then it’s much easier to use 
scientific notation than it is to scrawl a 
whole lot of zeros across your page. 
 
You can just take the number your 
calculator gives you, for example, 
6.871947674 × 1010, and write 6.87 × 1010 
without having to do anything else to it? 
 
 
 
 
Q: So are you saying that scientific 
notation isn’t just there because my 
calculator’s screen isn’t big enough - it 
helps me as well?
A: Yep, scientific notation helps you to 
write and round very long numbers in a 
much shorter form. So it’s not just about 
calculators - it’s about making your life 
easier.
Q: So which came first - small 
calculator screens or scientific notation.
A: Scientific notation came first by 
several hundred years!
Q: I have one more question. Are 
numbers in scientific notation always 
written with one digit in front of the 
decimal point? Couldn’t you equally 
write 6.87 x 1010 as 687 x 108?
A: Conventionally, they’re written with 
one digit in front of the decimal point. Your 
brain will soon get used to estimating the 
size of the number from the tens part, so 
sticking to the convention is best.
Scientific notation helps you to 
handle very long numbers that 
would otherwise have many digits, 
even when you’ve round them.
ask... you know you want to

you are here 4    67
scientific notation
than 6 × 10-5 m
need to find
li i g area
So the weird number in the 
eviction notice is in scientific 
notation. But it’s 6 x 10—5. How 
do you multiply by a negative 
number of tens???
This sure looks like 
scientific notation, but 
what does it mean?

68    Chapter 3
The number in the Dorm Inspection note is 6 × 10—5. It’s scientific notation 
alright - but there’s a negative power of 10. This is the conventional way of 
showing you that you should divide by the 10’s instead of multiplying.
Every time you divide by 10, the number’s digits shift along one place to the 
right, so each digit is worth 10 times less than it was before.
It’s difficult for you to draw that, but practically speaking, you can get to the 
same place if you hop the decimal point the correct number of times to the 
left. So 6 × 10—5 works out as 0.00006.
Scientific notation helps you with small numbers as well
The key thing with scientific notation is to rewrite 
the number with ONE digit before the decimal point, 
then multiply or divide by the correct number of 10’s.
1
2
3
4
5
6 × 10-5
0.00006
6
Another way of showing this 
is as a fraction, by writing       .
This makes it more obvious that 
you’re dividing by all the 10’s, as 
they appear on the bottom of a 
fraction.
105
6
105
This bit tells you how 
many 10’s to hop along by.
Each time you divide by 10, the decimal point 
hops along one place to make the number smaller.
10 x 10 x 10 x 10 x 10 
6 × 10—5 and       both mean:
105 
6
6
Decimal point 
is now here.
You need to put in placeholding 
zeros for these hops.
The minus sign 
means that you 
divide by the 10’s.
If the 10’s are on the 
bottom of the fraction, 
you’re obviously dividing by 
them, so you don’t need to 
put in the minus sign.
You need a 
placeholding 
zero before the 
decimal point.
You’re dividing 
by 10 five times.
negative notation

you are here 4    69
scientific notation
In this exercise, spot the pattern behind the convention of using a negative index    
(6 × 10—5) to represent dividing by a series of 10’s.
Original number
In scientific notation
Number of 10’s 
you’re multiplying 
or dividing by.
          10000
104
4 (multiplying)
            1000
              100
                10
                  1
                  0.1
                  0.01
10—2
2 (dividing)
                  0.001
                  0.0001
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
This is a 
negative index, 
like in the Dorm 
Inspector’s note.
Write down any patterns you spot.
Is there anything in your table that looks a bit unusual?
But that’s dumb. Why write 10—5 when you can 
use a fraction that makes it obvious what’s going 
on? And why use a minus sign anyway?
The minus sign is part of a pattern
The convention of using a minus (or negative) sign in the index 
to say you’re dividing by that number of 10’s comes from a 
pattern that you’re about to discover for yourself...
Divide by 10.

70    Chapter 3
In this exercise, you’re going to spot patterns that’ll help you write very small 
numbers in scientific notation even more efficiently than we’ve done over there.
Original number
In scientific notation
Number of 10’s 
you’re multiplying 
or dividing by.
          10000
104
4 (multiplying)
            1000
103
3 (multiplying)
              100
102
2 (multiplying)
                10
101
1 (multiplying)
                  1
100
0
                  0.1
10—1
1 (dividing)
                  0.01
10—2
2 (dividing)
                  0.001
10—3
3 (dividing)
                  0.0001
10—4
4 (dividing)
UNUSUAL: Any 
number to the 
power of 0 is 
1. This is a math 
convention, but 
the table should 
help you see why 
it’s sensible.
The PATTERN is that every time 
you divide by 10 to make the number 
smaller, the index of the scientific 
notation version decreases by 1.
Right. And it helps you estimate 
the size of the number too.
If the number in scientific notation is 
greater than 1, then it’ll be multiplied by 
10’s, and if it’s less than 1, it’ll be divided 
by 10’s.
So you can instantly see whether a number 
is larger or smaller than 1 by looking at the 
sign of the index. And you can see how 
large or small it is by looking at the size of 
the index, that is, the number of 10’s that are 
doing the multiplying or dividing.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
Divide by 10.
You can estimate the 
size of a number 
written in scientific 
notation by looking 
at the sign and size 
of the index.
exercise solution
So 10-4 is a more 
compact way of
writing       , right?
104
1

you are here 4    71
scientific notation
Kyle: But 6 × 10—5 what?? It can’t be 6 × 10—5 bugs - the index is 
negative so that’s much less than the 1 bug we started with!
Matt: There’s that funny m3 thing after the number though. It kinda 
looks like it might be meters - but what’s the little 3 for? Typo for MP3?
Kyle: I don’t see where music comes into it. Hey, maybe that’s scientific 
notation as well. Could m3 be meters × meters × meters?
Matt: But when would you ever want to multiply units together?
Kyle: Hmm, good point. But the meters × meters × meters thing 
reminds me of doing stuff with length × width × height years ago. 
That’s three lengths multiplied by each other.
Matt: And that would make a volume! Cubic meters! 
Kyle: Like how area’s measured in square meters? m2?
Matt: Yeah. So the note’s saying that if the bugs grow to occupy more 
than that volume, we wind up in trouble. But how do we find out the 
volume that all the bugs take up? We know how many of them there 
are after 12 hours, but that doesn’t say how big they are all together.
Kyle: I wonder if there’s 
anywhere we can look up the 
volume of one bug? Then we can 
multiply that by the number of 
bugs to get the total volume.
Matt: Sweet!
You can write units 
in scientific notation, 
e.g. area (m2) 
or volume (m3).
 Square meters
Cubic meters
n 6 × 10-5 m3 t
ed to find a n
living area.
m3 is  m x m x m 
i.e., length x width x height, so 
represents a VOLUME.
So now we know that the number 
in the note is written in scientific 
notation. 6 × 10 - 5 is the same as 
0.00006. That’s a relief.

72    Chapter 3
1
2 
Area is the amount of space something 
occupies in two dimensions. In SI 
units, it’s measured in m2 (if you say it 
out loud, this is “meters squared” or 
“square meters”).
Area is two-
dimensional.
1
2
3
Volume is the amount of space 
something occupies in three 
dimensions. In SI units, it’s measured 
in m3 (if you say it out loud, this is 
“meters cubed” or “cubic meters”).
Volume is three-
dimensional.
You’ll often need to work with area or volume
I always thought you use acres for 
area and gallons or liters for volume. Why 
should I use m2 and m3 instead?
Area and volume units based on length 
help you visualize how big things are.
There are lots of other units that people can use 
for areas and volumes. But in your physics course, it 
makes the most sense to use units based on length.
For a start, this makes it easier to visualize how big 
an area or volume is. If you can imagine a meter, then 
you can also imagine a square meter or cubic meter. 
And if you know a football field is approximately 
90 m long and 50 m wide, then you have a good idea 
of what 90 × 50 = 4500 m2 looks like!
Also, in physics you’ll sometimes need to work out the 
area or volume of something when you know how 
long it is in different directions. It’s far easier to use 
volume units based on the lengths you already know 
than it is to introduce even more conversion factors.
The guys have decided that if they can find out the volume of one bug, 
they can multiply that by the total number of bugs to get the total volume.
volume in three dimensions

you are here 4    73
scientific notation
The B
ump
er
 
B
o
ok
 o
f 
Bu
g
s
You’ll have a table of information in 
your exam. There’s one a bit like it 
in Appendix B, but it’s best for you 
to go to the AP Central website to 
download and practice with the one 
you’ll actually have, so it’s familiar. 
Look up facts in a book (or table of information)
If you’re taking a test, you’re not completely on your own. In both the 
multiple choice and the free response sections of the AP Physics B exam, 
you’ll get a table of information.
The stuff in the table is there to prevent you from having to memorize 
lots of values (like the mass of an electron) that are vital for certain parts 
of a question, but don’t help you understand the physics.
The table of information doesn’t have anything in it about bugs, but 
Matt and Kyle find something that does. The Big Book of Bugs says 
that the particular strain of bug the Inspector found in their room is 
about 1 μm long by 1 μm wide by 1 μm high.
The only problem is, what on earth is a μm?
Tables of information and references 
leave your brain free to understand 
physics instead of memorizing lots of 
values that you can easily look up.
The B
ump
er
 
B
o
ok
 o
f 
Bu
g
s
The book’s great. 
But, um, what’s a μm? Is 
the ‘μ’ with the little 
tail on it a typo?

74    Chapter 3
Prefixes help with numbers 
outside your comfort zone
Q: So why bother with scientific 
notation at all when you can just 
incorporate all the 10’s into the prefix, 
and say μm instead of 1 × 10—6 m?
A: There are equations you’ll come 
across later on that only work when you’re 
measuring distance in meters, mass in 
kilograms, and so on. So you end up 
converting everything into meters (usually 
using scientific notation) anyway. 
 
Scientific notation also makes calculations 
easier - as you’ll see in a moment ...
Q: So why bother with μm and all 
those prefixes then?
A: Mainly ease of use. In everyday life, 
it’s far easier to talk about “1 millimeter” 
or “10 kilometers” than it is to talk about 
“1 × 10—3 meters” or “1 × 104 meters.”
Q: But why is that easier?
A: People usually have a better feel for 
numbers that are similar to the numbers 
of objects they can count.
Q: So that’s why you get things 
like ‘nanotechnology’ - it’s easier to 
talk about numbers that are close to 
everyday counting numbers than it is 
to say ‘thousand-millionth technology’!
A: Yes. When speaking out loud, a 
physicist will prefer to say that something 
is 100 nm long rather than 0.0000001 m 
or 1 × 10—7 m. Once you get used to how 
big a nanometer is, your brain is happy to 
use it as a starting point.
Back in Chapter 2, you learned that you can put 
prefixes in front of units to show how big or 
small the units are. A kilometer is 1000 meters 
(103 meters), a millimeter is 0.001 of a meter 
(10—3 meters), and so forth.
There are several other SI unit prefixes. The μ 
prefix in the bug book is the Greek letter ‘mu,’ 
and is short for ‘micro.’ One μm is one millionth 
of a meter (10—6 meters).
That’s not exactly the size of number you’re used 
to working with from day to day! Your brain 
is happier with numbers closer to 1, so it feels 
better to say that the bug is 1 μm long instead of 
0.000001 m long (or 10—6 m long).
You usually get a new prefix when something 
becomes 1000 times bigger, at 103, 106, 109, etc. 
The exception is ‘centi,’ which means 10—2 and is 
commonly used in the context of centimeters.
These are the SI prefixes you’ll come across 
most often. (There are more of them, but 
there’s no point in knowing what they all 
are if you’ll never use them).
Power of 10
SI Prefix
Symbol
1012
tera
T
109
giga
G
106
mega
M
103
kilo
k
10—2
centi
c
10—3
milli
m
10—6
micro
μ
10—9
nano
n
10—12
pico
p
You usually get a new prefix every 103.
number prefixes make things clearer
The little 
tail is very 
important, 
as this is μ, 
not u.

you are here 4    75
scientific notation
Kyle: Yeah, a millionth of a meter. That sure is tiny - I can’t even 
picture it in my head!
Matt: So if one bug is so small, maybe we can get away with cleaning 
even later! There’s a game on tomorrow  -  If we figure out how many 
bugs there will be after 16 hours, we could maybe catch that before 
cleaning.
Kyle: 16 hours is 16 × 3 = 48 groups of 20 minutes, so they double 
in number 48 times. My calculator says that 248 = 2.81 × 1014 (to 3 
significant digits). So there’d be 2.81 × 1014 bugs.
Matt: And after 12 hours, there were 6.87 × 1010 bugs. So what we 
really want to do is work out what volume these bugs take up and 
compare it with the volume in the Dorm Inspector’s note.
Kyle: That’s pretty simple. One bug = 1 μm3, right? So 6.87 × 1010 
bugs is 6.87 × 1010 μm3, and 2.81 × 1014 bugs is 2.81 × 1014 μm3.
Matt: Uhhh, not so fast. The volume in the note is measured in m3, 
not μm3. So we have to convert the units of our answers to m3 to be 
able to compare them.
Kyle: Ah, good point. It looks like we’re 
gonna have to do some calculations 
using numbers in scientific notation, 
keeping in mind that 1 m is the same as 
1 × 106 μm.  I’ve no idea how to do that.
Matt: Me neither.
How might scientific notation 
help you to multiply a very 
large number and a very small 
number together?
n 6 × 10-5 m3 t
ed to find a n
Number of bugs × volume of 1 bug must 
be less than the volume mentioned in 
the Dorm Inspector’s note.
So it’s not an 
‘um,’ it’s a μm. 
A micrometer.

76    Chapter 3
I guess we should keep the numbers in scientific 
notation to make the calculation easier - right?
Scientific notation helps you to do 
calculations with large and small numbers
Writing down numbers in scientific notation really helps you do 
calculations that involve big numbers, small numbers, or both.
Suppose someone asks you to work out the mass of all the atoms in 
a balloon. They tell you that there are 6 × 1022 atoms in the balloon, 
and each atom has a mass of 6.65 × 10—27 kg.
If you don’t use scientific notation, you end up with a horrendous 
bout of calculator-bashing:
The mass of all the atoms is the number of atoms times the mass of one atom : 
Mass of all atoms =  60000000000000000000000 × 0.00000000000000000000000000665 kg
Powers of 10 make calculations easier.
If you’re multiplying together two numbers written in 
power notation, you can add the indices.
Here you’re multiplying by five lots of 
10, and then multiplying by another 
three lots of 10. So you’re multiplying 
by eight lots of 10 in total, or 108.
Here you’re multiplying by five lots of 
10, and dividing by three lots of 10. 
This is the same as multiplying by two 
lots of 10 in total, or 102.
105 × 103 = 108
105 × 10-3 = 102
105
= 102
103
105
= 108
10-3
Add the indices: 5 + 3 = 8
Add the indices: 5 + (-3) = 2
5 + (-3) is the 
same as 5 - 3.
is the same as 10-3.
1031
is the same as 103
10—3
1
If there’s a division sign in your calculation, 
it’s easiest to rewrite it as a multiplication. 
You can rewrite this as 105 × 103 = 108.
You can rewrite this as 105 × 10—3 = 102.
This is a horrible-
looking calculation!
One helium atom 
has a mass of 
6.65 x 10—27 kg.
There are 6x1022 
helium atoms in 
the balloon.
calculations with scientific notation

you are here 4    77
scientific notation
Pool Puzzle - Powers of 10
Here’s the chance to practice working with 
powers of 10 with some calculations. Your 
job is to take numbers from the pool 
and place them into the boxes in these 
statements. You may not use the same 
number more than once, and you won’t 
need to use all the numbers. 
1023
10—3
10—12
106
1019
103
104
10—4
10—5
100
10—36
10—6
10—16
1018
The vast majority of people have             nose.
104 × 10—16 =
There are             meters in a kilometer.
One divided by a million = 
A millionaire is likely to have at least $             dollars in the bank.
105 × 10—13 × 104 = 
10000 is the same as             .
10—12
10—24=
10—12
1024 =
1014
10—3 × 10—6 × 107 = 
The two biggest numbers in the 
pool are             and             .
0.000001 is the same as             .
1012
             is the same as 1024.
10—24
1
             is the same as 10—24.
1024
1
Rewrite this as a multiplication 
(rather than a division) before 
you work out the answer.

78    Chapter 3
10—12
1024 = 10—36
One divided by a million = 10—6
Here’s the chance to practice working with 
powers of 10 with some calculations. Your 
job is to take numbers from the pool 
and place them into the boxes in these 
statements. You may not use the same 
number more than once, and you won’t 
need to use all the numbers. 
Pool Puzzle - Powers of 10 - SOLUTION
1023
10—3
106
1019
103
104
10—4
10—5
100
10—16
1018
The vast majority of people have             nose.
104 × 10—16 = 10—12
There are             meters in a kilometer.
A millionaire is likely to have at least $             dollars in the bank.
105 × 10—13 × 104 = 
10000 is the same as             .
10—12
10—24=
1014
10—3 × 10—6 × 107 = 
The two biggest numbers in the 
pool are             and             .
0.00001 is the same as
1012
             is the same as 1024.
10—24
1
You didn’t need these numbers.
You multiply together 
powers of 10 by 
adding the indices.
This is the same as 10—12 × 1024.
This is the same as 10—12 × 10—24.
This is the same as 
1014 × 103 × 10—6 × 107.
pool puzzle solutions

you are here 4    79
scientific notation
Spend some time going through the balloon multiplication step by 
step before going back to the bug problem.
But numbers written in scientific 
notation have the bit at the start as 
well as the power of 10 at the end!
Once you can handle powers of 10, you can 
do calculations using scientific notation.
A number written in scientific notation has two parts. The 
first part has one digit before the decimal point, and the 
second part is a power of 10.
If you’re multiplying together two numbers written in 
scientific notation, it’s easiest to deal with the decimal point 
parts and powers of 10 parts separately before putting them 
back together.
So if you’re doing 2 × 103  ×  4  × 102, you can change the 
order of the things you’re multiplying together: 
2 × 4 × 103 × 102  =  8 × 105, which is the correct answer!
There are 6x1022 
helium atoms in 
the balloon.
One helium atom 
has a mass of 
6.65 x 10—27 kg.
Rewrite the 
order of the 
parts in the 
multiplication 
so that the 
powers of 
10 are all 
together.
a. There are 6 × 1022 helium atoms in the balloon. 1 helium atom has a mass of 
6.65 × 10—27 kg. Write down the multiplication you’d do to find the mass of all the 
atoms in the balloon.
c. Multiply together the two ‘decimal point’ parts. Then multiply together the two 
‘powers of 10’ parts. This should give you an answer with one decimal point part and 
one power of 10 part.
d. Rewrite your answer from part c. so that the decimal point part has one digit in 
front of the decimal point. (You’ll need to adjust the power of 10 part.)
b. You are allowed to multiply numbers together in any order. Change the order of 
the things you’re multiplying together so that the powers of 10 are next to each other.

80    Chapter 3
a. There are 6 × 1022 helium atoms in the balloon. 1 helium atom has a mass of 
6.65 × 10—27 kg. Write down the multiplication you’d do to find the mass of all the 
atoms in the balloon.
c. Multiply together the two ‘decimal point’ parts. Then multiply together the two 
‘powers of 10’ parts. This should give you an answer with one decimal point part and 
one power of 10 part.
d. Rewrite your answer from part c. so that the decimal point part has one digit in 
front of the decimal point. (You’ll need to adjust the power of 10 part.)
b. You are allowed to multiply numbers together in any order. Change the order of 
the things you’re multiplying together so that the powers of 10 are next to each other.
Spend some time going through the balloon multiplication step by 
step before going back to the bug problem.
There are 6x1022 
helium atoms in 
the balloon.
One helium atom 
has a mass of 
6.65 x 10—27 kg.
Can you run that last part by me 
again? How do I work out what to do 
with the 10’s part of the answer once I’ve put 
one digit in front of the decimal point?
Your answer needs to stay the same size.
If you wind up with the answer 39.9 × 10—5, you need 
to rewrite it in scientific notation as a number that has a 
part with one digit in front of the decimal point 
and a power of 10 part.
You need to divide the 39.9 part of the number by 10 to 
get 3.99. But the number must remain the same size- so 
you need to multiply the second part by 10.
39.9 × 10—1  ×  10—5 × 101  =  3.99 × 10—4
You need to divide the first 
part by 10 (same as multiplying 
by 10 —1) to get one digit in 
front of the decimal point.
So you need to multiply the 
second part by 10 to keep 
your answer the same size.
exercise solution
Mass of all atoms  =  6 × 1022  ×  6.65 × 10—27 kg
Mass of all atoms  =  6 × 6.65  ×  1022 × 10—27 kg
Mass of all atoms  =  39.9  ×  10—5 kg
Mass of all atoms  =  3.99  ×  10—4 kg

you are here 4    81
scientific notation
If you’re doing a 
calculation with 
numbers written in 
scientific notation, 
you should separate 
out the powers of 10 
to add the indices 
before recombining 
them with the rest of 
the numbers.
The guys have it all worked out
Matt and Kyle have had a go at working out the volume of 
bugs in m3 that there’ll be after 12 and 16 hours. Your job 
is to see if you agree with their calculations, and decide 
whether their final answer SUCKs (Size, Units, Calculations, 
‘K’ontext).
Look at the Size of their answer - if it feels wrong, then look 
to see if there’s a mistake with the Units or Calculations.
Q: My calculator has a button that 
lets me input numbers in scientific 
notation. Why can’t I just use that?
A: Sometimes you don’t get to use 
a calculator, like in the multiple choice 
part of the AP exam! 
 
Plus doing the calculation like this 
helps you to see the size of answer 
you’re expecting, and you’re more likely 
to spot silly mistakes when you ask 
yourself if your answer SUCKs.
Q: But when will I ever see 
numbers like this in my exam?
A: There are lots of very big or very 
small numbers in physics - the size of 
an electron, the mass of the earth, etc.
Well, they hope 
they do...
Matt and Kyle have had a go at working out the volume of the 
bugs using scientific notation. But have they done it correctly?
There are 106 μm in 1 m. 
We’ll use this as the conversion factor for the volume.
After 12 hours:
Volume of bugs = 6.87 x 1010 μm3
                  =  6.87 x 1010 μm3   x
1 m3
106 μm3
                  =  6.87 x 1010 x 10-6 m3
                  =  6.87 x 104 m3
After 16 hours:
Volume of bugs = 2.81 x 1014 μm3
                  =  2.81 x 1014 μm3  x
1 m3
106 μm3
                  =  2.81 x 1014 x 10-6 m3
                  =  2.81 x 108 m3

82    Chapter 3
                  =  6.87 x 1010 x 10-6  m3
Matt and Kyle have had a go at working out the volume of 
bugs in m3 that there’ll be after 12 and 16 hours. Your job 
is to see if you agree with their calculations, and decide 
whether their final answer SUCKs (Size, Units, Calculations, 
‘K’ontext).
Look at the Size of their answer - if it feels wrong, then look 
to see if there’s a mistake with the Units or Calculations.
There are 106 μm in 1 m. 
We’ll use this as the conversion factor for the volume.
After 12 hours:
Volume of bugs = 6.87 x 1010 μm3
                  =  6.87 x 1010  μm3   
1 m3
106 μm3
                  =  6.87 x 104 m3
After 16 hours:
Volume of bugs = 2.81 x 1014 μm3
                  =  2.81 x 1014 μm3   x
1 m3
106 μm3
                  =  2.81 x 1014 x 10-6  m3
                  =  2.81 x 108 m3
This is the problem! There are 106 μm in 1 m, 
but that’s LENGTH, not VOLUME. You can’t 
use it as a conversion factor for volume.
Volume is length x length x length and has units 
of m3, not m. Converting between μm3 and m3 is 
different from converting between μm and m.
These answers are 
totally the wrong SIZE! 
2.81 x 108 m3 is the 
same volume as 2000 
giant football stadiums!
sharpen solution

you are here 4    83
scientific notation
200,000,000 meters cubed bugs after only 
16 hours is totally the wrong size of answer!
The size of Matt and Kyle’s answer is waaay off - if you spotted that, well 
done! It just doesn’t make sense to say that the bugs will occupy a volume 
of two hundred million cubic meters after only 16 hours - especially if 
you can visualize the size of just one cubic meter!
There are 106 μm in a m - that part is correct.
So why has there been such a problem converting 
the units from μm3 to m3?
Can you imagine two hundred 
million cubic meters of bugs? 
Think of an enormous sea of 
bugs....eww.
Their calculation 
is OK, so the mistake 
must’ve been with the 
units and the conversion 
factor they used to move 
from μm3 (the units in 
the bug book) to m3 
(the units in the eviction 
notice).
But they were correct to 
say that there are 106 μm 
in 1 m. So what was their 
mistake with the units?

84    Chapter 3
Area is two-dimensional, i.e., length × width. 
So there are 10 × 10 = 100 mm2 in 1 cm2. 
Or in scientific notation: 101 × 101 = 102 mm2 in 1 cm2.
1 mm
1 cm
There are 10 mm in 1 cm.
1 cm
1 cm
There are 100 mm2 in 1 cm2.
1 mm
1 mm
1 mm2
All these pictures 
are magnified 
from actual size!
Area and 
volume are 
NOT the same 
as length.
Although there are 1 × 106 μm in a m, there aren’t 1 × 106 μm3 in a m3. 
This is difficult to see because the numbers are so big - and it’s what the guys 
missed. They’ve ended up saying that the bugs will occupy a volume of two 
hundred million cubic meters after only 16 hours, which must be nonsense! 
A μm is so small; it’s easier to visualize how this happened using mm and cm 
to measure area and volume.
Be careful converting units of area or volume
Volume is three-dimensional, i.e., length × width × height. 
So there are 10 × 10 × 10 = 1000 mm3 in 1 cm3. 
Or in scientific notation: 101 × 101  × 101 = 103 mm3 in 1 cm3.
Length is one-dimensional. 
There are 10 mm in 1 cm. 
take caution with conversions

you are here 4    85
scientific notation
Any time you convert 
units of area or volume, 
think about how many 
dimensions you’re working 
in before you get going!
The bugs occupy 6.87 × 1010 μm3 after 12 h and 2.81 × 1014 μm3 after 16 h.  How many m3 is that, 
and how does this compare with the 6 × 10—5 m3 mentioned in the note? (There are 106 μm in 1 m.)
1 cm3
1 cm
1 cm
1 cm
There are 1000 mm3 
in 1 cm3.
1 mm3
1 mm
1 mm
1 mm
Volume is three-dimensional.

86    Chapter 3
So the bugs won’t take over 
... unless the guys sleep in!
You just worked out that if the guys 
remember to set their alarms for 12 hours 
from now, the bugs won’t reach the tipping 
point and get the guys evicted.
But if the guys try waiting 16 hours 
to catch the football game, the 
Dorm Inspector will turf them out. 
Unfortunately...
After 12 hours:
The bugs occupy 6.87 × 1010 μm3 after 12 h and 2.81 × 1014 μm3 after 16 h.  How many m3 is that, 
and how does this compare with the 6 × 10—5 m3 mentioned in the note? (There are 106 μm in 1 m.)
There are 106 μm in 1 m. Volume is three-dimensional.
So there are 106 x 106 x 106 = 1018 μm3 in  1 m3.
After 16 hours:
Volume of bugs  =  2.81 x 1014 μm3
                  =  6.87 x 1010 x 10—18 m3
                  =  2.81 x 1014 x 10—18 m3
This is less than 6 x 10—5 m3.
This is more than 6 x 10—5  m3.
                  =  2.81 x 10—4 m3
                  =  6.87 x 10—8 m3
The football highlights program 
is on already?! Looks like we 
better pack our bags.
=  6.87 x 1010 μm3 × 1018 μm3
1 m3
=  2.81 x 1014 μm3 × 1018 μm3
1 m3
106 μm
106 μm106 μm
1 m3
Volume of bugs  =  6.87 x 1010 μm3
sharpen solution

87
4. A treasure chest is 800 mm long, 400 mm 
wide, and 500 mm high.
What is its volume in m3?
How many gold blocks measuring 20 cm 
by 10 cm by 5 cm could fit in the chest? 
(Assume that you’re allowed to melt down 
the gold so that it will fit exactly.)
a.
b.
Question Clinic: The “Converting units of area or volume” Question
In the course of doing another question, you’ll often 
find yourself having to convert units of area or volume. As soon as you 
see areas or volumes mentioned, think of the bugs occupying 2000 football 
stadiums - you don’t want to majorly mess up like that! Keep your cool, and think 
about what area and volume actually are to convert the units.
When you have to convert units of area 
or volume, draw a little sketch to make sure the 
powers of 10 work out OK in your conversion factor. 
1 m2
1000 mm
1000 mm
1 m2	 = 1000 mm x 1000 mm
	
=  103 mm x 103 mm
	
= 106 mm2
These are all LENGTHS, 
and they’re all in mm.
But you’re asked 
for a VOLUME 
in m3, not mm3.
Here’s yet another way 
of measuring length 
(cm) that needs to be 
converted into a volume.
With volume questions, you sometimes have to think of how many blocks you 
could stack in each direction before you reach the side of the container. 
This bit lets you know that you don’t need to allow for that.
It’s probably best to 
work through the 
whole question in m3, 
as this is the unit 
you’re asked to give 
your answers in.
It’s often easiest to 
convert the lengths 
to m first and work 
out the volume in m3. 
(Though you could also 
work out the area in 
cm3 and convert that to 
m3 at the end.)

88    Chapter 3
Tonight’s talk: A normal number and one written in 
scientific notation go head-to-head. Who will be the last one 
standing when the revolution comes.
Normal number:
Well, well, Mr. Obscurity. Lovely to meet you at last! 
 
You hide for decades while I do all the counting, 
shopping, algebra, and so on. Then, suddenly you 
show up and expect to take center stage. It’s just 
plain rude! 
 
 
Yeah? Show me one thing you can do that I can’t! 
 
No way! “50 billion dollars” gives you a much better 
idea of size than these silly little numbers by the ten. 
 
It’s not what people are used to! They’ve been doing 
it my way all their lives, and you’ve totally failed to 
show that your way is better. 
 
Um, let me look up my table of information. That’d 
be 0.00000000000000000000000000167 kilograms.  
 
 
But they can still count up my zeros to get the size. 
Um, OK. I guess you are the master of showing big 
or small numbers. So ... do you plan to take over 
completely?
Scientific notation number: 
Less of that! I know most people go 16+ years 
before they meet me, but I’m well worth the wait! 
 
 
 
You can still do all the stuff you’ve always done 
– I’m not trying to steal your thunder. But the fact is 
that I am naturally better at some things. 
OK,  what about writing out Bill Gates’ fortune 
nicely? 5 × 1010 dollars. 
 
Well, my way is really obviously “5” with ten zeros 
after it – what’s so difficult about that? 
 
 
Well then, Mister “They’re used to me,” how would 
you talk about the mass of a proton? 
 
When have people ever seen silly numbers like that? 
They’re not used to them at all! They’re better off 
writing it my way –  1.67 × 10—27 kilograms.  
Well, yeah, but who’s going to bother with that?  
 
 
 
normal number v. scientific notation

you are here 4    89
scientific notation
Normal number 
 
 
 
 
I told you they like me more! 
 
 
Yeah, right. Every calculator manufacturer has a 
different way to input you, especially your 10 to the 
power of negative thingamajiggers. 
 
 
 
 
Sorry? You can multiply by adding? Sounds a bit 
suspicious to a purist like me. 
 
 
 
 
So you’re saying that the first bit of you is easy to 
deal with (but only because people have practiced 
with me), and the second bit is easy because they’re 
used to adding sums (again, because of me)?
Scientific notation number: 
Not completely. People still prefer doing things your 
way if they can! They’ve even invented a whole 
load of units so they don’t have to go around saying 
“blah times ten to the power of whatever” all the 
time. Like nanometers, kilograms, and such. 
Actually, all I’ve said is that people like numbers they 
feel comfortable with. But when it comes to doing 
calculations with the numbers, that’s when I shine. 
 
 
Ah, but the humans don’t have to do that if they’re 
multiplying or dividing numbers like me. They only 
type the first bit into their calculators, the 1.67 or 
whatever. Then they do the tens part separately, on 
paper (which is just simple adding). 
 
Yes, if you’re multiplying lots of tens parts together, 
all you need to do is add the indices. 102 × 103 = 
105 can be broken down into “102 = 10 × 10” and 
“103 = 10 × 10 × 10.” Together, they make “10 × 10 
× 10 × 10 × 10.” Five lots of 10 is 105. 
 
 
 
I suppose you could put it like that. Maybe we need 
each other more than we realized in the beginning.

90    Chapter 3
The giant who came for breakfast
Once upon a time, long long ago, a refugee from the land of the giants 
came to the king’s palace. He was hungry. Now, when I say hungry, I 
don’t just mean the kind of hunger you feel in between meals. The 
giant was twice as tall as a normal person...and starving.
The king sighed with relief when he realized that the giant wasn’t about 
to gobble him up, but instead was far more interested in a hearty 
meal of sausage, bacon, and eggs.
“But if it’s paltry food you bring, I’ll eat the servants, then the 
king!” he concluded.
The smile froze on the king’s lips, becoming the kind of grimace 
you might muster when face-to-face with a hungry giant who’d just 
threatened to turn you into a tasty snack.
The king gathered his advisers around him to ask them for advice 
(which advisers generally provide).
“Your highness,” they began. “Since the giant is twice a tall as a normal 
person and perfectly in proportion, we should serve him twice as much 
breakfast...maybe with a couple of extra pieces of toast just in case.”
Should the king listen, and agree to feed the giant twice 
as much as a normal person because he’s twice as tall?
Five Minute 
Mystery
Five Minute 
Mystery
five minute mystery

you are here 4    91
scientific notation
Units
Special points
Be part of it
Scientific notation
Volume
Does it SUCK?
Area
I can think 
multi-dimensionally now!
Scientific 
notation
A method of representing long numbers using powers of 10.
Area
Two-dimensional space.
Volume
Three-dimensional space.

92    Chapter 3
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 3 under your belt, 
and you’ve added some terminology and 
answer-checking skills to your toolbox.
CHAPTER 3
physics toolbox
Scientific notation
Scientific notation is a way of 
writing really long numbers using two 
parts multiplied together.
The first part is written as a 
number with one digit in front of 
the decimal point.
The second part is a power of 10.
For example, 5 × 103 = 5000
Power notation
Power notation is a way of showing 
that you’re multiplying or dividing by 
the same number over and over again.
For example, if you have 106, it means 
you’re multiplying by 10 six times over.
And if you’re dividing by the same 
number several times, you can show 
this using a negative index, e.g., 10—7.
Multiplying powers of 
10 by each other
Multiply together different powers 
of 10 by adding the indices.
For example, 105 × 10—2 = 103 
because 5 + (-2) = 3
Dividing powers of 10 
by each other
If you’re dividing by a power of 10, 
it’s easiest to rewrite this as a power 
of 10 you’re multiplying by, then add 
the indices as before.
For example:
105
102 =  105 × 10-2  =  103
Calculations using 
scientific notation
If you have to multiply together 
several numbers written in 
scientific notation, it’s easiest 
to treat the powers of 10 
separately before putting the 
number back together.
Converting units of 
area and volume
Areas are based on lengths - you can 
imagine what a m2 or a m3 looks like 
and see if your answer makes sense.
Start any units conversion of area or 
volume with a sketch to make sure you 
use the correct conversion factor.
This will often involve multiplying or 
dividing powers of 10 by each other.

you are here 4    93
scientific notation
The giant who came for breakfast
Should the king listen, and feed the giant twice as much 
because he’s twice as tall as a normal person?
The king needs to make sure that the giant’s stomach 
ends up full of food, so there’s no room left in there 
for him or his advisors!
If the giant’s twice as tall as a normal man and in 
proportion, then he’s also twice as wide from side to 
side, and twice as deep from front to back.
So the giant’s stomach is twice as high, twice as wide and twice as deep 
as a normal man’s and is 2 × 2 × 2 = 8 times larger -so the king should 
order eight breakfasts for the giant to be on the safe side.
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved


this is a new chapter    95
equations and graphs
4
Learning the lingo
Communication is vital. You’re already off to a good start 
in your journey to truly think like a physicist, but now you need to 
communicate your thoughts. In this chapter, you’re going to take your 
first steps in two universal languages - graphs and equations - pictures 
you can use to speak a thousand words about experiments you do and 
the physics concepts you’re learning. Seeing is believing.
Right hand red, left foot 
blue, left hand green...uh huh... 
Yeah, I guess you had be there to 
see how great a game it was...uh 
huh... yeah...Could you just send 
me the pictures?

96    Chapter 4
So - will my pizza 
arrive in time for 
the start of 24?!
The new version of the Break Neck Pizza 
website is nearly ready to go live ...
Wow, Breakneck 
does delivery times now 
- that’s waaaay cool!
Break Neck Pizza already revolutionized pizza delivery through its patented 
“just in time” cooking process and its large fleet of delivery bicycles. 
But now it’s even better! The award-winning Break Neck website has just 
been upgraded to give each customer a delivery time for their order.
mmmm....pizza

you are here 4    97
equations and graphs
You’ve been called in to figure out what time the website should 
quote each customer. The web programmers are happy to 
implement your solution, and you also have Alex, the top Break 
Neck delivery guy, on hand to help. He knows how long it takes 
him to get to some houses, but you’ll need another way to work 
out the delivery time to new, unknown neighborhoods.
I’ve never been to that side 
of town before...I’ve no idea 
how long it’ll take! 
... but you need to work out how to 
give the customer their delivery time
Alex, Break Neck’s 
top delivery guy.
Write down everything you can think of that might affect the delivery time the website 
should give to a customer.
How fast Alex can cycle

98    Chapter 4
Write down everything you can think of that might affect the delivery time the website 
should give to a customer.
Alex’s cycling speed 
Distance from Break Neck to the customer 
Can all the pizzas be cooked at once? 
Deep pan or Italian base? 
How long it takes the website to process the order 
Whether the customer enters their address correctly
It’s fine if you had some other 
answers - like the amount or 
type of topping - that we 
haven’t jotted down here.
It’s OK to assume that the web guys have 
already dealt with these. You only need 
to think about the physics!
These both have to do with the time it 
takes Alex to reach the house. 
Both of these 
affect the time 
it takes for the 
pizza to cook.
Equations let you 
represent the real 
world symbolically.
If you write the delivery time as an 
equation, you can see what’s going on
The total delivery time is the time Alex spends cycling to the 
customer’s house plus the cooking time for the pizza.
It takes a lot of words to describe this, and it’s difficult to tell what’s 
going on without reading the whole thing. This is why in physics, 
people use equations to describe how the world works.
You can use letters with subscripts as symbols to represent each of 
the times:
	
ttotal for the total delivery time.
	
tcyc for Alex’s cycling time.
	
tcook for the cooking time.
Then you can write down the equation ttotal = tcyc + tcook . This says 
exactly the same thing as “The total delivery time is equal to the time 
Alex spends cycling to the customer’s house plus the cooking time for 
the pizza.” Except the equation lets you see that at a glance.
Use ‘t’ to show that a symbol 
represents a time, and use 
subscripts to indicate which 
time, e.g., tcook.
We’re using italics here to represent 
variables. You don’t have to do this 
when you’re writing them down!
sharpen solution

you are here 4    99
equations and graphs
Q: Why bother with an equation when 
a description will do just as well?
A: Descriptions are good because if you 
can explain something in words, you know 
you’ve got it. But equations are also good 
because they let you be short and sweet 
when you’re explaining things.
Q: But the equations use letters in 
them. Surely that makes things harder 
because you have to explain what each of 
the letters means before anyone else can 
understand what the equation says.
A: That’s true - but once you know what 
the letters represent, they’re much quicker to 
write down and take in than a load of words. 
Q: But why use letters in the equation 
at all? Surely it would be easier to get the 
delivery time if we write numbers in there 
from the start?
A: You’re right, that would work - but only 
for one particular house! You’d need to start 
over again for each new delivery.
Q: Can’t I use different letters to 
represent each thing instead of using t all 
the time?
A: Each of the variables in your equation 
is a time. It’s conventional to use the letter 
t to represent a time, and use subscripts to 
indicate which time that variable represents. 
Q: But why use subscripts rather than 
using two letters next to each other? 
Surely using initials like ‘dt’ for delivery 
time would be clearer?
A: One reason is that in physics and 
math, you indicate that you’re multiplying 
two variables together by writing them next 
to each other. So you write a × b as ab. The 
second is that ‘dt ’ is already reserved for 
something else (which you’ll come across 
later on in the book).
Q: Oh yeah, I kinda remember that 
from math. Why is it useful?!
A: It helps you to see the building blocks 
of your equation more easily. We’re just 
getting to that ...
Use variables to keep your equation general
An equation like ttotal = tcyc + tcook is general because it isn’t tied to any 
particular values for the cycling or cooking times. This means you can use 
the same equation for any order. Any quantity represented by a letter rather 
than a number is called a variable. Here it’s good for ttotal , tcyc , and tcook to 
be variables because their values will vary for each customer.
So you can reuse it 
for ANY customer 
who orders pizza.
ttotal    tcyc    tcook
=     +
The order you add in 
doesn’t matter. You could 
also write ttotal = tcook + tcyc.
Cooking 
time
Cycling time
These are all 
VARIABLES, as 
they’re different 
for each customer.

100    Chapter 4
Equations Up Close
An equation must 
have an equal sign!
=
ttotal
+
tcyc   tcook
=
The two sides are equal.
If it doesn’t, it’s 
not an EQUAtion!
An equation uses symbols to show you that two things are equal to each other.
A TERM is one 
of the building 
blocks that you 
add or subtract.
+
=
ttotal
tcook
tcyc
In an equation, each of the blocks you add together or subtract from each 
other is called a term. A term can be a number, a single variable, or several 
numbers and variables multiplied or divided by each other.
These are terms.
Think about 
equations one 
term at a time
You can break down equations by thinking about them one term at a time. 
If a term is more complicated than a single variable, you need to do all the 
calculations (multiplying, dividing, and so forth) within a term before you add 
it to or subtract it from other terms. So that you can spot terms easily, it’s 
usual to use a shorthand for multiplication, like bz instead of b × z since this 
groups together all the variables in each term.
+
=
x
bz
y
This term is two variables multiplied 
together. If you’re putting numbers into 
your equation, you need to work out bz 
before you add the term to the others.
equations explained

you are here 4    101
equations and graphs
You need to work out Alex’s cycling time
Write down everything you can think of that might
time the website should give to a customer.
How fast Alex can cycle 
Distance from Break Neck to the customer 
Your equation for the delivery time is ttotal = tcyc + tcook. There are 
two terms on the right hand side: tcyc for the cycling time, and tcook 
for the cooking time. You can make the job of working out the total 
time, ttotal , easier for yourself by thinking about tcyc and tcook one at a 
time.
You already made great progress with tcyc (Alex’s cycling time) when 
you intuitively realized that tcyc must depend on the speed at which 
Alex cycles and the distance the customer’s house is from Break 
Neck. But how do the speed and distance affect the cycling time?
What do you expect to happen for extremes, like a short distance or 
a high speed?
Part of your Sharpen 
answer from page 98.
Break Neck 
Pizza HQ
Pizza Delivery Magnets
Your job is to use the magnets to explain how the distance to the house and 
the speed at which Alex cycles affect the time it takes him to get there. There 
are only two words on the magnets, but they all have a place on the pictures.
higher
If the speed is                                        
then tcyc is                                          .
If the speed is                                        
then tcyc is                                          .
If the distance is                                        
then tcyc is                                          .
If the distance is                                        
then tcyc is                                          .
Remember -  tcyc is 
the time it takes 
Alex to cycle there.
lower
lower
lower
lower
higher
higher
higher

102    Chapter 4
Pizza Delivery Magnets Solution
Your job is to use the magnets to explain how the distance to the house and 
the speed at which Alex cycles affect the time it takes him to get there. There 
are only two words on the magnets, but they all have a place on the pictures.
I don’t see the point of doing this when I don’t 
know the values for the distance or speed yet. Our 
customers want actual times, not general trends!
When you start, it helps to be a part of it and 
think about what happens at different extremes.
Before you start trying to work out what’s going on with numbers 
and actual measurements, it’s always a good idea to be a part 
of it. Use your intuition to think about what you expect to 
happen to the cycling time at certain extremes, like a long 
distance or a high speed.
If you already have a good idea about how the distance and 
speed affect the time, you’re more likely to spot any little mistakes 
you make in your math.
Break Neck 
Pizza HQ
If the speed is                                        
then tcyc is                                          .
If the speed is                                        
then tcyc is                                          .
If the distance is                                        
then tcyc is                                          .
Remember - t is 
the time it takes 
Alex to cycle there.
lower
lower
lower
lower
higher
higher
If the distance is                                        
then tcyc is                                          .
higher
higher
magnets solution

you are here 4    103
equations and graphs
It usually helps to BE 
someone (or something), 
so you see what the 
physics looks like from 
inside the problem.
How might it be possible to 
measure Alex’s speed, so 
you can use it to work out 
cycling times for deliveries?
Joe: Well, I guess we could get him to cycle to each potential 
customer’s house in his area, one house at a time, and set up a 
database. So when the customer types in their address, the website 
can look it up in the database and give out a delivery time.
Frank: Think of the overtime that’d cost us! It’d take forever for 
him to do all that. And he wouldn’t even be delivering pizzas; he’d 
just be recording times to the houses of people who might never 
order a pizza...that doesn’t sound like a good idea at all.
Joe: OK. Maybe we could work out an equation for Alex’s cycling 
time. We already know that t depends on his speed and the distance, 
so we’d be angling for something that looks like  “t = something to 
do with speed and distance.”
Frank: Ooh, actually, working out the distance to each house is fine. 
The web guys can already do that with their online mapping gizmo.
Joe: We now need to work out Alex’s speed, so we can try to use it 
in an equation. I know this sounds weird ... but we might try being 
Alex. Putting yourself in someone else’s shoes is supposed to help 
you solve problems.
Frank: Like “Alex pushes the pedals, and the bike goes forward”? 
OK, let’s brainstorm. So say I’m Alex, out delivering pizzas all 
evening. I don’t want to ride too fast, or I’ll get tired.
Joe: But I also don’t want to ride too slow, or I won’t deliver that 
many pizzas and won’t get as many tips.
Frank: But I’m the top delivery guy, so I have the experience to 
start off riding at the best speed and to keep up that speed for the 
whole evening.
Jill: So Alex always rides at the same speed. Hmm, if we can 
work out his speed, could we use that and the distances from the 
mapping gizmo to work out the time it takes him reach a house?
Frank: I think you might be right. But how on earth are we 
supposed to work out what speed Alex rides at? And how do we use 
that to get a delivery time?
OK, so we know that houses that are further 
away will take longer to reach. But how much 
longer? How are we supposed to know the time it’s 
going to take Alex to get to a whole load of houses 
that are different distances away when he hasn’t 
been there before?

104    Chapter 4
Joe: Well, if Alex always rides at the same speed, he should 
always cover the same distance in the same amount of time. 
Frank: Ah ... I think I see what you mean. If Alex always goes at 
the same speed, and we measure his time for 1 km, it’ll always 
take him that amount of time to cycle 1 km. But wouldn’t we 
still need to time him over all possible distances to keep our bases 
covered?
Joe: I don’t think we need to time Alex over lots of distances. If we 
time how long it takes him to cycle 1 km, we know, without having 
to time him again, that it’ll take him twice as long to go 2 km.
Frank: Then, we can take his time for 1 km and say it’ll take him 
half as long to go 0.5 km, and three times as long to go 3 km. I 
get it! So we only need to time him once to get his time for any 
distance.
Jill: I’m not so sure about only timing him once. A lot hangs on this- 
if we get the delivery times wrong, the customers get free pizza, and 
that’s very expensive. Why don’t we time him more than once over 
1 km and take an average of all his times in case there’s a bit of 
fluctuation between one run and the next?
Joe: A bit of uncertainty, you mean? That makes sense. And why 
don’t we cover our bases by timing Alex over a variety of distances 
to make sure he does always ride at the same speed?
Jill: Sounds good to me.
Frank: Aren’t we giving ourselves a harder calculation to do at the 
end though? If we just time Alex once over 1 km, it’s easy to scale 
the time for a different distance - 2 km takes twice as long, 0.5 km 
takes half as long, and so forth. If we time him more than once over 
a variety of distances, how can we work them out?
Jill: If we work out Alex’s speed in meters per second, we can use 
that to work out the time. So suppose he goes at 10 m/s; he’d cover 
100 m in 10 s, 1 km in 100 s, and so on. We can estimate his time for 
any distance if it follows the same pattern.
Frank: OK, I think you’ve managed to convince me - especially 
since the town is relatively flat, so there aren’t any hills to mess 
things up. Let’s go design an experiment!
When you do 
an experiment, 
you should 
make multiple 
measurements so 
you get the best 
average possible.
deriving a time from speed and distance
I still don’t see how working 
out a speed will help us when 
we want time.

you are here 4    105
equations and graphs
I’m still not convinced about needing to 
make more than one measurement. Why 
would taking an average help me?
Making multiple measurements gives you an 
idea of how widely your results are spread out.
At the moment, you’re assuming that Alex always rides at the same 
speed. But what if he doesn’t, or if his speed varies between trips 
or at different distances?
If you only time Alex once, you have no idea how consistent his 
speed is. If you time him more than once, and his results have a 
wide spread, then you’ll probably need to think again. But if his 
times are all similar to each other and close to the margin of error 
of your stopwatch, then you’re good to go with their average.
The margin of error for 
a measuring device is 
± half a scale division.
When you design an experiment, think about what might go wrong!
Making more than one measurement is just one way of improving your experiment. 
Everything in your experiment - Alex, the road, your tape measure, and your stopwatch 
- could cause you problems! If you don’t think about the worst that could happen before you 
start, you could end up with useless results and no chance to repeat the experiment.
Item involved in 
experiment
Potential source(s) of error
How to deal with this
Alex and his bike
Alex’s speed is inconsistent. 
Time him more than once over a distance, 
and take an average.
The road
Tape measure
Stopwatch
The watch doesn’t start at the right time. 
 
Would you really 
ask Alex to do 
it all again?
Think about what might go wrong with all the things in your 
experiment - and how you would make sure the worst didn’t happen.
There might be more than one thing that could go wrong with each item.
Design 
experiment

106    Chapter 4
Item involved in 
experiment
Potential source(s) of error
How to deal with this
Alex and his bike
Alex’s speed is inconsistent.
 
Alex gets tired as he cycles longer.
Time him more than once over a distance 
and take an average. 
Time him over both long and short distances.
The road
The road might not be flat. Alex would be 
slower uphill and faster downhill.
Make sure you do the experiment on a flat 
piece of road.
Tape measure
The tape measure might have stretched with 
use and not be accurate.
Test it against something you know is OK 
before you use it.
Stopwatch
The watch doesn’t start at the right time.
 
The watch doesn’t stop at the right time.
Make sure you and Alex agree on a timing 
protocol before you start.
Think about what might go wrong with all the things in your 
experiment - and how you would make sure the worst didn’t happen.
Don’t worry if you said some other 
things, or if you didn’t come up with 
every single one of these possibilities.
Design 
experiment
There are two different types of errors- 
random and systematic.
You already realized that if Alex’s speed isn’t 100% 
consistent, his times will be spread around. This is similar 
to the range that a measurement may fall into due to your 
measuring device having scale divisions (like your myPod 
measurements). If Alex’s times aren’t too different for 
each ride, you can reduce the random error by making 
several measurements and taking an average.
Some sources of error are built into the system. If you 
time Alex going downhill, he will be faster than he would 
around the town, which is mostly flat. If the tape measure 
has stretched, the actual distance will be shorter than 
you think it is. Errors like these are called systematic 
errors, and they bias the results in one particular 
direction. Taking averages doesn’t help reduce bias, as all 
the results will be higher (or lower) in the direction of the 
bias. You need to spot them in advance and plan ahead 
to minimize them.
Random errors 
involve SPREAD. 
Minimize them 
by AVERAGING.
Systematic errors 
involve BIAS.
Minimize them by 
PLANNING ahead.
Most of the sources of error in the table would bias the 
results in one particular direction. I’m not sure I can sort that out by 
making lots of measurements and taking averages.
sharpen solution

you are here 4    107
equations and graphs
You’re designing an experiment to help Break Neck Pizza with their website, on a spare 
napkin (as all good physicists do), but unfortunately, some of the words have succumbed 
to pizza grease.
Fill in the blanks using the words at the bottom of the box.
You might not use all of 
the words, and you may 
use some more than once!
Experiment to help Break Neck Pizza find out 
the time it takes Alex to cycle any distance
Although I really want a delivery time, I think the best 
way to do this is to work out Alex’s speed - he says he 
cycles at a constant speed all evening.
I’m going to measure out several distances with a tape 
measure, making sure the ground is flat and that the 
tape measure isn’t warped to reduce systematic errors.
I’m going to repeat each measurement three times and 
take an average to try to cut down on random errors.
Then I can extrapolate from the times and distances I 
measured to work out a delivery time for any house, any 
distance away.
Missing words:	speed, three times, extrapolate, direction, systematic, distance, 
once, repeat, average, time, distances, random, flat, times
OK - time to recap where you’re at...
Missing words:
This means use the 
results you already 
have for some values 
to work out what 
the result would be 
for any value.

108    Chapter 4
Conduct an experiment to 
find out Alex’s speed
Here’s what happens:
Experiment to help Break Neck Pizza find out 
the time it takes Alex to cycle any distance.
Although I really want a delivery time, I think the best 
way to do this is to work out Alex’s speed - he says he 
cycles at a constant speed all evening.
I’m going to measure out several distances with a tape 
measure, making sure the ground is flat and that the 
tape measure isn’t warped to reduce systematic errors.
I’m going to repeat each measurement three times and 
take an average to try to cut down on random errors.
Then I can extrapolate from the times and distances I 
measured to work out a delivery time for any house, any 
distance away.
You need to give Break Neck Pizza’s customers a 
delivery time. It’s important not to get this wrong 
since you’ll have to give out free pizza if you do! 
You’ve decided to do an experiment to find out 
Alex’s speed when he’s out delivering pizzas. Then 
you can use that to work out the time it takes him 
to cover any distance.
You’re timing Alex over three different distances, 
three times for each distance. That way you’ll 
be able to spot how consistent Alex’s speed is 
and smooth over random errors. These crop 
up because you can’t recreate exactly the same 
conditions each time, and because your measuring 
devices can’t possibly be accurate to the nearest 
fraction of an atom! You’ve also thought of possible 
sources of systematic error and made sure your 
equipment is up to scratch.
Start
100 m
250 m
500 m
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
A dog ran out in front 
of Alex during the 
second trial over 250 m.
experiments with ease

you are here 4    109
equations and graphs
Write down your results... in a table
As you’re doing your experiment, write your results down in a 
table. This keeps all your related pieces of information next 
to each other, in rows or columns. You’re less likely to make a 
mistake writing down a measurement if you use a table. It’s 
also much easier to see what’s going on and spot patterns in 
your experiment
The headings for your table should go in the top row, with 
the thing you’re changing on the left, and the thing(s) you’re 
measuring to the right. You should put the units of each 
column in the headings.
Tables help you keep your 
results ordered and make it 
easier for you to spot patterns.
Fill in the table using the results shown on the opposite page. 
You’ll need to add some extra information to the table headers as well.
Distance Alex cycles
(      )
Time 1
(   s   )
Time 2
(     )
Time 3
(     )
Average time
(      )
500
120
Put your headings 
in the top row.
Put units in the 
headings so that 
the table just has 
numbers in it.
Put the thing you’re 
varying in the left hand 
column, in order of size.
Anything you’re measuring should 
go in columns to the right.
If you’re averaging your 
measurements, this should 
be to the right of the 
measurements themselves.
Your values go 
in these rows.
Transfer your 
experimental results 
into the table.
As you make 
measurements for your 
experiment, write them 
down in a TABLE.

110    Chapter 4
Distance Alex cycles
(  m  )
Time 1
(   s   )
Time 2
(  s  )
Time 3
(  s  )
Average time
(  s  )
100
23
24
24
23.7 (3 sd)
250
58
80
59
65.7 (3 sd)
500
120
121
119
120 (3 sd)
Fill in the table using the results shown on the opposite page. 
You’ll need to add some extra information to the table headers as well.
Remember 
to say what 
UNITS 
you’re using.
If you don’t include the off 
measurement, then the average 
time for 250 m becomes 
58.5 s.
58.5
You’ll usually lose points 
every time you don’t 
mention units. That 
adds up pretty quickly!
If a measurement doesn’t fit, think about WHY 
it doesn’t before deciding what to do with it.
Look out for measurements that don’t fit.
One of the reasons for timing Alex more then once over each 
distance was to assess the spread (or scatter) of his results. 
If he can’t ride at a consistent speed, you’ll have to think 
again about your whole approach.
In this experiment, all of the times for each distance are close 
together, with a spread similar to your stopwatch’s margin 
of error. However, there’s one time that’s way off. The 80 s 
measurement for Alex going 250 m sticks out, and you need 
to think about why. Is it because Alex isn’t very consistent - or 
did something go wrong just that one time?
If the measurements are spread out because Alex is 
inconsistent, you should probably make more and more 
measurements at each distance, so you can get a better idea 
of the spread and take a better average.
If there’s a good reason for the outlying data (which there is 
here because a dog ran out in front of him), then it’s OK to 
discard the measurement since it’s not representative.
But if you don’t 
have a good reason to 
discard it, then it’s 
gotta stay in there!
Thinking about 
where your 
outliers may 
have come from 
will help you to 
improve your 
experimental 
setup and 
reduce errors.
Is it fair to include the 
80 seconds in this average, 
considering a dog got in his way 
and slowed him down?
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
sharpen solution

you are here 4    111
equations and graphs
Now that you have a table of distances and times, you can work out Alex’s 
speed. Speed is measured in miles per hour, kilometers per hour, or meters per 
second. “Per” means “divided by,” so whatever the units, the dimensions of 
speed are distance divided by time. And the speed itself is the change in 
the distance Alex has gone since he started divided by the change in the time  
that’s gone by since he started.
Using the equation above, work out Alex’s speed for each 
of the distances in the table.
Use the table of distances and times to 
work out Alex’s speed
You can work 
out the equation 
for speed using 
its UNITS - 
“miles per hour,” 
“kilometers per 
hour,” and so on. 
Speed is distance 
divided by time.
Distance Alex cycles
(  m  )
Average time  
(  s  )
Average speed 
(meters per second)
100
23.7
250
58.5
500
120.0
There’s space down here for your WORK 
(doing the speed calculations and converting the units).
You already knew this equation 
because you already knew the units!
Strictly speaking, this reasoning 
only works for simple equations. But 
here you intuitively know it’s right.
Once you’ve worked out Alex’s speed, you can give the customer a delivery 
time for any distance.
speed = (change in) distance
(change in) time
kilometers
hour
per
Don’t worry too much 
about the ‘change in’ bit 
for now. You’ll see why it’s 
really important later on 
in the chapter.

112    Chapter 4
Distance Alex cycles
(  m  )
Average time  
(  s  )
Average speed 
(meters per second)
100
23.7
4.22 (3 sd)
250
58.5
4.27 (3 sd)
500
120.0
4.17 (3 sd)
Using the equation, work out Alex’s speed 
for each of the distances in the table:
How can there 
be a different answer 
every time for the 
average speed? There must 
have been something wrong 
with the experiment!
It’s OK - there will be some spread in your 
experimental results due to random errors.
For a start, the error on each of your measurements is 
± half a scale division. Then there are random fluctuations 
in things you don’t have control over - tiny changes in wind 
speed, the exact state of Alex’s tires, tiny changes in the 
surface of the road, and so on.
When you measure the same thing more than once, you 
shouldn’t expect exactly the same answer each time.
3 sd means “3 significant digits.”
For the 100 m distance:
speed  =
time
distance
=
 23.7 s
100 m
=  4.22 meters per second
speed  =
time
distance
=
 58.5 s
250 m
=  4.27 meters per second
For the 250 m distance:
speed  =
time
distance
= 120.0 s
500 m
=  4.17 meters per second
For the 500 m distance:
Remember to 
EXPLAIN what 
you’re doing.
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
speed = (change in) distance
(change in) time
sharpen solution

you are here 4    113
equations and graphs
Q: So I can reduce random 
errors by choosing a more 
accurate measuring device?
A: You mean a more precise 
measuring device. Smaller scale 
divisions mean a smaller spread 
and lead to greater precision. A 
more accurate device would be 
one that reads true values.
Q: So could I get perfect 
precision as long as I use a 
fine enough scale division?
A: Not quite. At very small 
scale divisions, you get random 
fluctuations (errors), e.g., the 
distance read by a micrometer 
is affected by surface 
imperfections, and the reading 
on a balance by tiny air currents.
Q: OK, but the spread in 
Alex’s speeds isn’t because of 
things like that, is it?
A: It’s impossible to set up 
your experiment with exactly 
the same initial conditions, right 
down to the position of every 
atom, each time. Your results 
will always have some kind of 
spread whatever you do.
Q: That’s annoying. I 
worked out an average speed 
over three distances, and it 
came out different each time. 
How do I decide what the best 
average is?
A: You really need a better 
way of taking averages. We’re 
just getting on to that now ...
Random errors mean that results will be spread out
Accurate
Precise
Random errors mean that your experimental results will be spread around an 
average. If they’re not spread out very much, your results are said to be precise.
However, if you have an underlying systematic error that’s biasing your results in 
one particular direction (like if the stopwatch is consistently started at the wrong time), 
then you won’t be able to work out an accurate value by taking an average.
Reducing random errors 
improves your precision.
Reducing systematic errors 
improves your accuracy.
You really want 
your results to be 
both PRECISE 
and ACCURATE.
If you take the average of 
INACCURATE results, your 
answer is way off because 
of systematic bias.
A larger SPREAD 
means that your 
results are less 
PRECISE.
It’s possible for 
results to be 
PRECISE without 
being ACCURATE.
It’s possible 
for results to 
be ACCURATE 
without being 
PRECISE.

114    Chapter 4
A graph is the best way of taking an average of ALL your results
So far you’ve been taking the average of one set of results at a time - but the 
average times (and, therefore, average speeds) for each distance are slightly different. 
You can kind of think of this as a ‘one-dimensional’ average.
Distance
Time
Each set of x’s 
represents times 
for one distance.
Time
The line that goes as 
close as possible to ALL 
the x’s  represents the 
average of ALL the 
measurements.
Each set of x’s 
represents times 
for one distance.
This also has the advantage of giving you a way of reading off the time it should 
take to cover any distance.
As is often the case in physics, a picture speaks a thousand words!
The line also lets you 
read off a predicted 
time for ANY distance!
Doubling 
the distance 
doubles the 
time.
Doubling the distance doubles the time.
0
Each vertical line represents 
the average of three times.
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
The best way to work out the average speed across all of your results is to draw a graph. Since 
you’re expecting the time to double every time you double the distance, triple every time you 
triple the distance, and so on, your measurements will lie along a straight line. You can kind 
of think of this as taking a ‘two-dimensional’ average, as you’re using two axes for your plot 
and are able to include measurements made for different distances on the same graph.
graph it up
The average of each set of three 
points winds up in roughly the same 
place. It’s not exactly in the same 
place, as you’re taking ALL of the 
other points into account.

you are here 4    115
equations and graphs
A Graph Up Close
You’ve probably drawn graphs before, so here’s a quick refresher.
The most important thing is to make it clear what your graph is representing! That means 
you need a title, labels for each of your axes, and units along each axis.
Plot your points by putting the center of an ‘x’ exactly where your measurement is.
If you’re expecting each thing you’ve plotted to double when you double the other thing, 
draw the best straight line you can through all the points on your graph. This takes 
the best average possible of all your data and allows you to read off extra values by 
interpolating (for values that lie between your measurements) or extrapolating (for 
points that lie beyond the range of your measurements).
This graph isn’t of the experiment you did with Alex - that’s your job on the next page! It’s 
another graph where the doubling thing happens - the cost vs. volume of pizza sauce!
Cost of 
sauce 
($)
Volume of sauce 
(cm3)
400
800
1200
1600
0
5
4
3
2
1
0
Graph of cost vs. volume 
for pizza sauce
800 cm3 
costs $2.
INTERPOLATE to work out 
the cost of an in-between 
amount of sauce, e.g., 750 cm3.
EXTRAPOLATE by 
extending the line to 
work out the cost of 
a larger amount of 
sauce, e.g., 2000 cm3.
Remember to include UNITS!
Give your graph a meaningful TITLE.
Mention the thing 
on your vertical 
axis first.
400 cm3 
costs $1.
If doubling one quantity 
doubles the other, draw a 
straight line through the 
points you already know.
1200 cm3 
costs $3.
Then mention 
the thing on your 
horizontal axis.
Remember to say WHAT 
your graph is about!
Label each 
axis of 
the graph.
You know 
the line goes 
through this 
point, as no 
sauce costs $0.
Put a scale 
along each axis.
cm3 are cubic 
centimeters.

116    Chapter 4
We were kinda expecting Alex’s average 
speed to be the same for each distance. But 
it wasn’t - we got a different answer each time. How’s 
drawing a graph supposed to help??
Fitting a line to a graph is like 
taking an ‘informed average.’
If you’re plotting how something changes with time, 
then time always goes along the horizontal axis.
Look at the extremes of your data - the largest and 
smallest numbers. Choose a scale that allows you to 
use most of the paper.
Remember to mention your units on the axes!
Plot points using a small x (not a dot), so you can still 
see the points after you have joined them up.




Join the points freehand with a smooth line unless 
you know that a straight line is more appropriate (e.g., 
if someone went at a steady speed).
Drawing a straight line through your points is like 
taking an average, except in a better, more visual way 
than you did before in your table.
Give your graph a meaningful title that makes its 
context clear.



 Graph-drawing Tips
Use these tips to help 
you with this exercise.
Plotting your measurements on a graph 
helps you take a better average than before.
The first time around, you took a separate average of Alex’s 
times for each distance. But you got a different answer for 
each distance - not a great result.
By doing multiple measurements over more than one distance 
in the first place, you increase the precision of your result 
by reducing random errors. But if you don’t somehow 
combine all these results together to get one answer, you’re 
not answering the question completely.
If you plot the points on a graph and draw the best-fitting 
straight line you can, then you’re using all of them to take an 
average - a much better way of doing things.
And because it’s visual, you’ll be able to see if any of your 
points are outliers.
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
me (s)
Average speed 
(meters per second)
7
4.22 (3 sd)
5
4.27 (3 sd)
0
4.17 (3 sd)
refining your results

you are here 4    117
equations and graphs
Use a graph to show Alex’s time for ANY distance
Alex is good at sticking to the same speed. This means that if you double the distance, then 
the time he takes to cover the new distance will double accordingly.
In other words, the distance and time points should lie along a straight line when you 
plot them on a graph (give or take experimental error). And once you’ve plotted a graph, 
you can read off Alex’s time for any distance.
Time
Distance traveled
(seconds)
(meters)
100
200
500
400
300
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
100
110
90
120
a) Plot the measurements from the table as points on the graph 
(you can skip the outliers).
b) Then draw a best fit straight line through the points so that 
you can read off the time it’ll take Alex to travel any distance.
c) How long do you think it’ll take Alex to travel 400 m?
Distance Alex 
cycles ( m )
Time 1 
( s )
Time 2 
( s )
Time 3 
( s )
100
23
24
24
250
58
80
59
500
120
121
119
Just like the 
cost and amount 
of sauce did
d) And how would you work out his time for a house 1040 m away?
Always put 
time along the 
horizontal axis.
Give your graph 
a meaningful 
TITLE, so you 
know what it’s of.

118    Chapter 4
Step this way!
The line on the graph is your best estimate for 
how long Alex takes to cycle ANY distance
Now that you’ve drawn a graph, you can use it to read off ANY distance Alex may 
have to travel by extending the straight line you drew, and estimating the pattern or 
extrapolating from that.
So for example, if a house is 1040 m away (much further than any of the distances 
we got Alex to bike in the experiment), you can extend the graph and straight line to 
find out that it would take him 250 seconds to get there. The graph works!
There’s only one problem - how to get the graph “into” the Break Neck website, so it 
can give the time to the customer.
Time
Distance traveled
(seconds)
(meters)
100
200
500
400
300
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
100
110
90
120
c) You can INTERPOLATE 
between your data points to work 
out that it takes Alex around 96 
seconds to cover 400 m.
This is a best-fit 
straight line through 
the data points from 
your table.
d) Want to know how long 
it takes Alex to get to a 
house 1040 m away?
If Alex always goes at 
the same speed, you’d 
expect the points to 
lie along a straight line.
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
sharpen solution
Don’t worry if the line 
doesn’t go through all of 
the points exactly - just 
try to put it close to as 
many points as possible.
This is the ‘outlying’ 
point from when the dog 
ran in front of him.
You can also include this point, as Alex 
has traveled 0 meters when he starts.

you are here 4    119
equations and graphs
Plot of distance vs. time for Alex cycling
Did you remember 
to give your graph 
a meaningful title?
You may need to count 
along a few more boxes 
than you originally 
wrote out a scale for.
Then go down from there, and 
read the value off the time axis.
Q: Remind me again why we 
did the graph rather than just 
doing one measurement?
A: To try to reduce the errors. 
Making many measurements is less 
error-prone than just making one.
Q: So why not just measure 
Alex multiple times over one 
distance? Why use several 
different distances?
A: For a couple of reasons. First 
of all, you need to make sure that 
he’s not going to go at different 
speeds for different distances (even 
though you asked him to try and 
ride at the same speed each time). 
 
Secondly, timing him over several 
distances has enabled you to draw 
a graph.
Q: So why not be like a 
spreadsheet program and join 
the points properly? Why draw a 
line that doesn’t even go through 
some of the points?
A: Doing a best-fit straight line 
effectively takes an average of your 
measurements. If Alex goes at the 
same speed the whole way, you’d 
expect the points to all lie along 
a straight line. Errors mean that 
they don’t. You’re trying to ‘find’ the 
line that the errors have obscured. 
A graph allows you to see where 
outlying points are. You can then 
make them count less by not going 
so near them with your line.
I guess that if 
another delivery guy 
rides at a different speed, 
his distance-time graph 
would look different?
You can EXTRAPOLATE 
by extending the line as far 
as you like, and reading off 
times for other distances.
Go across until you hit 
the line on the graph that 
represents Alex’s speed.

120    Chapter 4
You can see Alex’s speed from the 
steepness of the distance-time graph
The distance-time graph not only lets you read off values, 
but it also lets you see how fast something’s going at a 
glance.
The faster someone is, the greater the distance they go 
in a set time. When you plot their distance-time graph, 
you’ll see its slope (or gradient) is steeper compared to 
someone who’s slower. The higher the speed, the steeper 
the slope of the distance-time graph.
So if Alex raced against the delivery personnel from some 
of Break Neck’s rivals (all going at their steady delivery 
speed), you’d be able to pick the winner in advance from 
the slope of their distance-time graphs.
In physics, the 
steepness of a graph 
is called its SLOPE.
If you SEE it, 
you get it!
Distance 
(m)
Time 
(seconds)
Graphs of distance vs. time for 
different delivery personnel
A steeper line shows 
that someone’s covered 
more distance in the 
same time, so they must 
have a higher speed.
The faster something’s going, the steeper 
the slope of its distance-time graph.
Faster
Faster
Faster
The exercise bike is completely 
STATIONARY, so the slope 
of its distance-time graph is 
completely FLAT.
Steeper line = higher slope
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
The slope can also be called the 
gradient - they’re the same thing.
see the slope?

you are here 4    121
equations and graphs
So you can only compare 
the slopes of graphs if 
they’re all drawn on the 
same set of axes?
You can only compare the slopes of 
graphs by eye if they have the same scale.
All the graphs on the opposite page have the same scale. 
This means that you can just see who’s going the fastest, 
as their graph has the steepest slope.
But if you have one graph where 1 cm on paper = 200 m 
in real life and another where 1 cm = 10 m, then a line 
representing the same thing will look very different.
However, a delivery person will still cover the same 
distance in the same time no matter which scale you use 
for their graph. So the distance on their graph will still 
change by the same number of meters in the same time. 
Whatever scale it’s drawn at, the numbers don’t change, 
and you can calculate a value for the slope.
When you calculate the slope of a graph, you get 
an equation which shows you how the two things 
you plotted on the graph relate to each other.
This means doing things 
with numbers (so that 
the website can give the 
customer a delivery time).
To be quantitative, you have to calculate 
the slope of your graph using numbers.
If you calculate the slope of your distance-time graph, 
it’ll give you an equation which will show you how the 
distance and time relate to each other. And as Alex’s 
speed is (change in) distance divided by (change in) time, 
you’ll be able to work that out. This is what you really 
want for the Break Neck Pizza website!
This is being qualitative, like 
saying “this one’s faster” 
or “this one’s slower” but 
without mentioning any 
numbers.
Will calculating a value for the slope help us 
work out Alex’s speed? We can’t really expect 
the customer to read delivery times off a graph!
Which means to do 
things with numbers so 
that the website can 
give the customer a 
delivery time

122    Chapter 4
Alex’s speed is the slope of the distance-time graph
To calculate the slope of a straight line graph, pick two 
points on it, and work out the change in the vertical 
direction divided by the change in the horizontal 
direction. The steeper the graph, the larger the slope.
On your graph, the vertical axis is distance, and the 
horizontal axis is time. So the slope of your graph is 
change in distance divided by change in time 
- exactly the same as your equation for Alex’s speed.
To save time, you can use shorthand ‘ ’ which means 
“change in.” So “change in distance” is  distance.
You need to choose two points on your line to calculate 
its slope.
Try to find points where your line crosses the gridlines 
on the graph paper so that the numbers you use are 
whole numbers of gridline divisions.
Choose two points that are far apart from each other 
- this makes your calculation more accurate.
The slope is the change in the vertical direction 
(between your two points) divided by the change in the 
horizontal direction (between your two points).




Remember to write down the equation for the slope 
before putting the numbers in.
Always subtract the coordinates of the left-most point 
from the coordinates of the right-most point.
When you’ve calculated the slope, look back at the 
graph to see if your answer SUCKs. A slope of 2 
would mean that the graph goes up 2 for every 1 you 
go across. Does your graph look the same as your 
numerical answer?
Remember to include units in your answer.




 Slope-calculating tips
Use these tips to help you work out the 
slope of Alex’s distance-time graph.
Now you have a table of dista
Speed is measured in miles per hour. Or kilometers per hour. Or meters per 
second. “Per” means “divided by”, so whatever the units, the dimensions of 
speed are distance divided by time. And the speed itself is the change in 
the distance Alex has gone since he started, divided by the change in the time  
that’s gone by since he started.
You already knew this equation, 
because you already knew the units!
Once you’ve worked out Alex’s speed, you can give the customer a delivery 
ti
for any distance
speed = (change in) distance
(change in) time
kilometers
hour
per
Distance 
(m)
Time 
(seconds)
Graph of distance vs. time
 time
 distance
 time
 distance
=
Speed
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
Calculate 
slope
 horizontal direction
 vertical direction
Slope =
Distance 
(m)
Time 
(seconds)
Graph of distance vs. time
 horizontal 
direction
 vertical 
direction
1. Choose 
   two points.
2. Work out 
 vertical 
direction and 
 horizontal 
direction.
slope matters

you are here 4    123
equations and graphs
Now work out Alex’s average speed from your graph
a. Choose two points on the line, and calculate the slope of the distance-time graph. 
Use the tips on the opposite page to help you.
b. What do you notice about the units of your answer?
Time
Distance traveled
(seconds)
(meters)
100
200
500
400
300
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
100
110
90
120
Plot of distance vs. time for Alex cycling
.
This may just have something 
       to do with Alex’s speed ...

124    Chapter 4
Point 1 is  ( 12 s , 50 m ),	Point 2 is ( 96 s , 400 m )
=
The units of the slope (meters per second) are the same as the 
units for speed - distance divided by time.
This makes sense, as the equation for slope of the graph is the 
same as working out the distance covered per amount of time. 
The slope of the distance-time graph is the speed!
Slope is
 distance
 time
 vertical
 horizontal
=
400 m - 50 m
96 s - 12 s
350 m
84 s
4.17 meters per second (3 sd)
(Putting numbers in)
=
=
=
Don’t worry if you 
picked different 
points or got a slightly 
different answer.
This is the same 
as your equation 
for speed!
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
Calculate 
slope
The slope of the 
distance-time 
graph is the speed.
a.
b.
sharpen solution
a. Choose two points on the line, and calculate the slope of the distance-time graph.
b. What do you notice about the units of your answer?
Time
Distance traveled
(seconds)
(meters)
100
200
500
400
300
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
100
110
90
120
Plot of distance vs. time for Alex cycling
Point 2
Point 1

you are here 4    125
equations and graphs
Q: Way back on page 112, I worked out Alex’s speed for 
each of the measurements we made, and it always worked 
out somewhere close to 4.17 meters per second (the answer 
I just got from the graph). So what’s the point of doing a 
graph when it just gives me close to the same answer again?
A: The main reason is that by plotting the points and drawing 
a best-fit straight line, you take a better and more informed 
average of your experimental results than you’d be able to 
otherwise. The speed you got from doing the graph is more 
accurate than what you’d get from a single measurement. 
 
A graph helps you see what’s going on. If you see it, you get it.
Q: I got a slightly different answer from you. Is that OK?
A: You probably drew a slightly different ‘best-fit’ line through 
your points. That’s fine.
Q: But there must be an actual best-fit line?
A: Yes, if you use special statistical software to draw the line, 
you always get the same answer. But you don’t have that on 
hand during an exam!
Q: OK. But what about Alex’s speed and the slope of the 
graph? How can you say they’re the same thing?
A: Alex’s average speed is ∆ distance divided by ∆ time - e.g., 
meters per second. The slope of any graph is ∆ vertical direction 
divided by ∆ horizontal direction. 
 
So if you draw a graph of Alex’s distances and times with 
distance on the vertical axis and time on the horizontal axis, then 
its slope is the same as Alex’s average speed.
You need an equation for Alex’s time to give to the web guys
You’ve used the results of your experiment to draw a distance-time graph and 
calculate its slope, which is the same as Alex’s speed. That’s fantastic!
But the web guys need to be able to use Alex’s speed and the distance to a house 
to work out the time it takes Alex to get there. And they’re asking you for an 
equation that they can plug the distance and speed into to get the time.
You already have an equation that involves speed, distance, and time, which you 
worked out from the units of speed:
speed =
 distance
 time
meters
second
per
This gives you the average speed at which something travels between two points. 
But the equation says “speed = ” on the left hand side, allowing you to work out a 
speed if you know a distance and a time. What the web guys want is an equation 
that says “  time = ” on the left hand side, so they can work out a time from the 
map distance and Alex’s speed.
How are you going to get an equation that the web guys can use?

126    Chapter 4
Rearrange the equation to say " time = something"
If you have an equation where the thing you want isn’t on the left hand side all by itself, 
you’ll have to rearrange the equation so that it is.
The top thing to remember when rearranging equations is that you must do the same thing 
to each term on both sides of the equation or else the two sides won’t be equal (or balance) 
anymore. The huge advantage of this is that you don’t have to remember lots and lots of 
equations, as you can rearrange the ones you know to figure out what you need.
You can rearrange your equation to say  “  time = something” like this:
When you rearrange 
an equation, always 
make sure you do the 
same thing to each side 
so that the equation 
remains BALANCED
For time, speed, and 
distance, you only need 
ONE equation, which you 
ALREADY know (from 
the units of speed).
speed
=
 distance
 time
At the moment you’re dividing by  time. You want an equation that says 
“  time = something.” So multiply both sides by  time to get it off the bottom.
 time x speed
=
 distance
You now have  time where you want it, but at the moment it’s being 
multiplied by speed. So divide both sides by speed to sort that out.
 time
=
 distance
speed
An equation that says ”  time = something” that you can use for the 
Break Neck website. Sorted!
 is short for 
‘change in.’ It’s 
a Greek letter 
called ‘delta’.
If you’re adding or subtracting, 
that’s a whole new term that 
you need to add/subtract from 
each side.
If you’re multiplying or 
dividing, you need to do 
the same thing to each 
TERM on both sides.
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
Calculate 
slope
Rearrange 
equation
1
2
3
rearrangin’ an equation

you are here 4    127
equations and graphs
Woah, woah, woah! 
Slowmo replay required!
speed
=
 distance
 time
 time
=
 distance
speed
∆ time x speed
=
∆ distance
Multiply 
both sides 
by  time.
 time  ×  speed
=
 distance  ×   time
 time
 time  ×  speed
=
 distance  ×   time
 time
 time x speed
speed
=
 distance
speed
 time x speed
speed
=
 distance
speed
At the moment you’re dividing by  time. You want an equation that says 
“  time = something.” So multiply both sides by  time to get it off the bottom.
These  times 
divide out.
Divide 
both sides 
by speed.
These speeds 
divide out.
An equation that says “  time = something” that you can use for the 
Break Neck website. 
1
2
3
When you 
rearrange an 
equation, show 
your work ... 
You now have  time where you want it, but at the moment it’s being multiplied 
by speed. So divide both sides by speed to sort that out.

128    Chapter 4
But this is physics, right, not math. I’m 
not too hot on all that equation rearranging 
stuff. Can’t I just learn three equations - one for 
time, one for speed, and one for distance - so I don’t 
need to bother with the rearranging?
Math is the main tool you use to communicate 
ideas and make predictions in physics.
A large part of physics is understanding the physical 
principles behind things. And to an extent you’re right - you can 
do reasonably well in high school physics by understanding some 
principles and rote-learning a few equations.
But when you step up a level to AP Physics, there are far too 
many potentially useful equations and relationships for you to 
be able to memorize them all, never mind every single way they 
can be rearranged. And you need to be able to use the principles 
to make concrete predictions - for example, the time it’ll take 
Alex to cycle a particular distance. And that has to involve math.
This chapter is all about learning to use graphs and equations, 
two universal languages of physics. Like any language, math 
can be difficult to get used to at first. But with practice, you’ll get 
used to communicating the physics principles with it. More than 
that - as you move on, the math enables you to understand and 
visualize difficult physical principles and concepts.
At AP level, being able to rearrange equations yourself is a must, 
so stick at it. The rewards are massive, as you’ll only need to 
learn relatively few fundamental equations, which you can then 
rearrange to get any other equation you might need. Thinking 
like a physicist isn’t about rote memorization. So hang in there 
- it will get easier!
Or the UK equivalent - A level
In physics, math is a vital tool for making 
predictions and communicating principles.
That’s a promise!
math matters to physics

you are here 4    129
equations and graphs
Use your equation to work out the time it 
takes Alex to reach each house
You now have an equation that lets you predict how long it takes Alex to 
get to each of Break Neck’s potential customers!
First, you designed and carried out an experiment. After looking at the 
results to see how spread out they were, you plotted the results on a graph, 
drew a best-fit straight line, and calculated the slope of the line to find 
Alex’s speed in terms of the change in distance and change in time. Phew!
Use Alex’s speed (4.17 meters per second) and the equation you 
worked out to give these Break Neck customers a delivery time.
Customer’s address
Distance 
(m)
Calculation
Time
(s)
57 Mt. Pleasant Street
1000
710 Ashbury
3500
29 Acacia Road
5100
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
Calculate 
slope
Rearrange 
equation
Use 
equation
 time =
 distance
speed
So now you can do a test run with some random addresses 
to catch any potential problems before the site goes live.
And you’ve just rearranged the speed equation so that 
you can put in a speed and distance to calculate the time it 
takes Alex to travel that distance at that speed:
A ‘test run’ is an 
important part 
of seeing if your 
answer’s correct.
This involves 
putting in some 
numbers to see 
if what comes 
out is sensible.

130    Chapter 4
Customer’s address
Distance 
(m)
Calculation
Time
(s)
57 Mt. Pleasant Street
1000
240 (3 sd)
710 Ashbury
3500
840 (3 sd)
29 Acacia Road
5100
1220 
(3 sd)
So you do a test run with the website ...
... but there’s a problem. The programmers set the website up to display 
delivery times in units of minutes. Your calculation used seconds, but 
the units weren’t converted before being displayed.
Doing the question right, but giving 
the wrong UNITS in your answer is 
a common, but avoidable, error.
Use Alex’s speed (4.17 meters per second) and the equation you 
worked out to give these Break Neck customers a delivery time.
 time
 distance
speed
=
4.17
1000
=
 time
 distance
speed
=
3500
4.17
=
 time
 distance
speed
=
5100
4.17
=
4 HOURS for a delivery?! No way! 
I’m much faster than that.
240
sharpen solution

you are here 4    131
equations and graphs
So just convert the units, and you’re all set...right?
Not so fast! Any time you think you’re ready to roll with an 
important website (or even an answer on your exam), take 
a look from 20,000 feet away and ask yourself: Does this 
SUCK?
Change the units for this customer’s delivery time to minutes, then step back to see if it SUCKs.
S
U
C
K
Customer’s address
Time 
(s)
Calculation
Time 
(minutes)
57 Mt. Pleasant Street
240
You’re never finished until 
you’ve asked: “Does it SUCK?”
SIZE - Are the answers the size you’re expecting?
‘‘K’ONTEXT - What are you trying to do, and is it the same as what you actually did?
CALCULATIONS - Did you do the math right?
UNITS - Do they have units, and are they what you were asked for?
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
Calculate 
slope
Rearrange 
equation
Use 
equation
CHECK 
EQUATION!

132    Chapter 4
Change the units for this customer’s delivery time to minutes, then step back to see if it SUCKs.
S
U
C
K
Customer’s address
Time 
(s)
Calculation
Time 
(minutes)
57 Mt. Pleasant Street
240
4
SIZE - Are the answers the size you’re expecting?
‘‘K’ONTEXT - What are you trying to do, and is it the same as what you actually did?
CALCULATIONS - Did you do the math right?
UNITS - Do they have units, and are they what you were asked for?
Well, 4 minutes is plausible for pizza delivery in a way that 240 minutes isn’t!
Apart from using the wrong units originally, and forgetting the cooking time, 
I think the rest is OK.
They asked for minutes, and they’ve got minutes. (Well, they do now!)
Doing part of the problem right, then writing the 
‘interim’ answer to that part as your final answer by 
mistake is another common (and very avoidable) error!
240 s
240 s
1 min
60 s
=
x
conversion 
factor
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
Calculate 
slope
Rearrange 
equation
Use 
equation
CHECK 
EQUATION!
sharpen solution
The first equation I wrote down was ttot = tcyc +  tcook, where tcyc was the cycling 
time, and tcook the cooking time. OH NO, I FORGOT ABOUT THE COOKING TIME!!

you are here 4    133
equations and graphs
 time
 distance
speed
=
4.17 meters 
per second
From the 
online maps
ttotal    tcyc    tcook
=     +
An Italian pizza takes 10 
minutes to cook, and a deep pan 
pizza takes 13 minutes. I can cook 
them all at the same time.
Include the cooking time in your 
equation
The original equation included both a delivery time and 
a cooking time. You did a fantastic job of working out the 
hard part - the delivery time - but forgot to add on the 
cooking time at the end.
Work out the cooking time and total delivery time for each of the orders.
Customer’s 
address
Distance 
( m )
Order
Road time
( s )
Road time 
( min )
Cooking 
time 
( min )
Delivery 
time 
( min )
57 Mt. 
Pleasant 
Street
1000
1 Italian
240
4
710 Ashbury
3503
2 deep pan
840
29 Acacia 
Road
5100
1 Italian 
1 deep pan
1220
This is the total 
delivery time the 
website should give 
the customer.
Work out the cooking time 
from what the chef tells you.
Cycling time
Cooking time
Total delivery time
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
Calculate 
slope
Rearrange 
equation
Use 
equation
CHECK 
EQUATION!
Use 
equation

134    Chapter 4
Work out the cooking time and total delivery time for each of the orders.
Customer’s 
address
Distance 
( m )
Order
Road time
( s )
Road time 
( min )
Cooking 
time 
( min )
Delivery 
time 
( min )
57 Mt. 
Pleasant St.
1000
1 Italian
240
4
10
14
710 Ashbury
3500
2 deep pan
840
14
13
27
29 Acacia 
Road
5100
1 Italian 
1 deep pan
1220
20 m 20 s
13
33 m 20 s
This answer works out at 20.3333333... minutes. The fraction at the end is a third of a minute, 
which is 20 seconds (not 33 seconds). Don’t forget that there are 60 seconds in a minute (and 
not 100), so you need to convert the fraction of a minute into seconds at the end.
The Break Neck website goes live, 
and the customers love it!
You’ve done it! Break Neck have a shiny new website 
thanks to your experiment, graph, equation, and 
units conversion. Every time a customer makes an 
order, they’re given a delivery time that they can plan 
their evening around.
The customers are delighted, and word’s starting to 
get around. Alex is pleased too. He’s getting more tips 
and has nearly saved up enough for the new myPod 
he has his eye on.
This new website is way 
cool. I can plan my evenings 
knowing exactly when my 
order’s gonna arrive.
Design 
experiment
Carry out 
experiment
Look at 
results
Plot results 
on graph
Calculate 
slope
Rearrange 
equation
Use 
equation
CHECK 
EQUATION!
Use 
equation
another solution

you are here 4    135
equations and graphs
Hint: BE ... Alex. 
What might have changed? There’s 
some space under here to jot down 
some ideas before you ask Alex.
A few weeks later, you hear from Break Neck again
Most of the pizzas are still arriving on time ... but some of the 
pizzas are late, and the customers are starting to get impatient 
with Break Neck. The worst thing that could happen would 
be customers switching to one of Break Neck’s competitors 
because of a bug in the website.
So Break Neck has asked you to come back on a new contract 
to see if you can work out what the problem is.
LATE!
Break Neck used to be great, 
but tonight my pizza was late, 
and I missed the end of my favorite 
show when I was answering the door. 
If they don’t improve, I’ll have to find 
a new pizza place... 
But why are only some pizzas now arriving 
late when the rest are still arriving on time?
On time.
On time.

136    Chapter 4
Stop light 300 m 
into route.
Stop light 800 m 
into route.
I got stuck at a couple 
of new stop lights. All the 
ones in this town hold you for two 
minutes. I went at my normal 
speed the rest of the time.
Alex is stuck 
for 2 minutes 
at each light.
Think about what 
this will look like 
on the graph.
alex’s adventure

you are here 4    137
equations and graphs
The line already on the graph represents what we expected Alex to do - travel at a constant 
speed without stopping, so he reaches the house in four minutes.
Draw Alex’s actual journey (which he describes over there on page 136) on the graph to show 
and compare the difference that the stop lights made.
A graph lets you see the difference the stop lights made
If you can see the difference the stop lights made to Alex’s 
journey, you’re more likely to be able to work out what to do about it.
Plot of distance vs. time for Alex’s late delivery
Distance traveled
(meters)
Time
(minutes)
100
200
500
400
300
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
9
600
700
1000
900
800

138    Chapter 4
Plot of distance vs time for Alex’s late delivery
Distance traveled
(meters)
Time
(minutes)
100
200
500
400
300
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
9
600
700
1000
900
800
The line already on the graph represents what we expected Alex to do - travel at a constant 
speed without stopping, so he reaches the house in four minutes.
Draw Alex’s actual journey (which he describes over there on page 136) on the graph to show 
and compare the difference that the stop lights made.
Plot of distance vs. time for Alex’s late delivery
If he stops for 2 
minutes, then his 
distance doesn’t change 
for that amount of time.
When he’s not stopped, 
the SLOPES of the 
two distance-time 
graphs are EXACTLY 
THE SAME, as Alex 
always goes at the same 
speed when he’s cycling.
It’s easy to tell when something’s sitting still, as the 
slope of its distance-time graph is zero (or a flat line).
If he’s stopped, then 
his speed is zero, and 
the slope of the 
distance-time graph is 
also zero.
sharpen solution

you are here 4    139
equations and graphs
Distance traveled
(meters)
100
200
500
400
300
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
600
700
1000
900
800
Time
(minutes)
Plot of distance vs. time for 
Alex’s late delivery
The stop lights change Alex’s average speed
The average speed for a trip is the constant speed at which you could have traveled 
to cover the same total distance in the same total time. So Alex’s average speed is the 
slope of a line between his start and end points on his distance-time graph since the 
slope of a distance-time graph is the speed.
a. Draw a line on the graph to represent Alex’s average speed.
b. Calculate Alex’s average speed for the delivery in meters per second  
    (show your work down the side).
c. Does Alex ever actually travel at his average speed?
Space for part b work.
Space for part c answer.

140    Chapter 4
a. Draw a line on the graph to represent Alex’s average speed.
b. Calculate Alex’s average speed for the delivery in meters per second  
    (show your work down the side).
c. Does Alex ever actually travel at his average speed?
With an AVERAGE speed, it’s 
the changes in total distance and 
total time that are important.
Distance traveled
(meters)
100
200
500
400
300
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
600
700
1000
900
800
Time
(minutes)
Plot of distance vs. time for 
Alex’s late delivery
Space for part b work.
Space for part c answer.
He never travels at the average 
speed for any significant length 
of time (though he must briefly 
go at it as he speeds up/slows 
down for each light).
Point 2
Point 1
Choose point 1 to be the start 
of the run, and point 2 the end.
i.e., ( 0 min ,  0 m )  
( 8  min , 1000 m )
speed
 distance
 time
=
1000 m
8 min
=
=  125 meters per min
But was asked for speed in 
meters per second:
meters
min
125       
meters
min
125       
1 min
60 s
=
x
=  2.08 meters per second (3 sd)
sharpen solution

you are here 4    141
equations and graphs
Add on two minutes per stop light  
to give the customer a maximum delivery time ...
So you - and Alex - have reached the end of the road. You realized 
that the stop lights slow him down. But you were able to get the 
online map to consider the number of stop lights on his route when 
giving the customer a maximum delivery time.
If the lights are red, that’s OK because you planned for that to 
happen. If the lights are green, and Alex isn’t slowed down, then 
the pizza arrives early, and the customer is still happy.
... the customers are extremely happy ...
Fantastic pizza, 
and on time too!
Trying to do something 
with the average speed 
will be too difficult at 
this stage; this is simpler. 
In physics, simpler is 
usually clearer - and, 
therefore, better!
The 14 minutes you calculated 
before plus up to 2 minutes 
for each of the 2 stop lights.
... and you’re invited to the Pizza Party

142    Chapter 4
So this chapter’s confirmed 
what I knew already. Physics is all about 
memorizing equations, then hoping you 
remember them  when you need to.
If you understand physics, you 
don’t have to memorize equations!
Physics isn’t about learning equations. Physics is 
fundamentally about the world around you.
When you’re trying to work stuff out with physics, 
it usually involves making measurements, then 
drawing graphs and/or writing down equations 
that show you how varying one thing (like the 
distance to a house) changes something else (like 
the delivery time for a pizza).
Yes, there’ll be some equations that you’ll have to 
learn to get by - but only a few. Most of the ones 
in this book are equations that you can work out 
from the general physics principles you’re 
learning. Remember - put yourself into the heart 
of the problem, then use what you already know! 
Use your intuition and graphs to see whether you 
expect something to get bigger or smaller when 
you change another thing.
Think like 
a physicist!
In physics, memorizing is the 
opposite of understanding!
If you see it, you get it!
understanding is better

you are here 4    143
equations and graphs
You already knew the two equations 
you’ve used in this chapter!
The first equation you used was:
But that was something you already knew! Every 
time you say something has a speed of “70 miles per hour,” 
you’re quoting units that you can use to write down that 
equation straight out of your head!
speed =
 distance
 time
I guess there are a few equations that are kind of 
common sense, so you don’t need to memorize them 
if you just think about where they come from?
Then you can 
rearrange it to 
get what you want.
The second equation you used was:
But you already knew that one too! Steep hills have 
big slopes. So you can use your intuition to work out 
that  vertical must be on the top of the fraction so that 
you get a big value for a big slope.
slope =
 vertical direction
 horizontal direction
meters
second
per
 horizontal 
direction
 vertical 
direction
 vertical 
direction
 horizontal 
direction
Big slope:  vertical 
direction is bigger than 
 horizontal direction
Small slope:  vertical 
direction is smaller than 
 horizontal direction.
A steep hill 
has a big slope.

144    Chapter 4
Tonight’s talk: Graph and Equation debate who’s best at 
getting the point across.
Graph
You’ve heard it said - “A picture speaks 1000 words,” 
and “If you see it, you get it.” Which kinda makes 
me wonder - what on earth are you doing here in 
my chapter, Equation?
 
 
 
Obviously one that got past the editor! I mean, in a 
chapter that’s mostly about visualizing things, what 
role do you have to play?
 
 
 
But with me, you can see how two things relate to 
each other-how one thing responds when the other 
thing changes.
 
 
 
 
Huh? Variables, which you have to look up before 
you make any sense whatsoever! All those symbols 
and letters, whereas I’m easily accessible from the 
start!
 
 
 
 
 
Equation
 
 
 
Well, that’s a nice way to draw me into the 
conversation considering the chapter title actually 
names me first - “equations and graphs,” it says 
there.
 
 
 
I’m just a different way of visualizing things. With 
me, it’s easy to see, at a glance, when two things are 
equal to each other - you can’t do that.
 
 
 
But I can do that too. All you need to do is think 
what’ll happen to the stuff on the other side of the 
equation when you change the value of one of the 
variables.
 
 
 
 
I disagree- you only make sense once someone’s 
gotten used to working with graphs! Anything 
strange can become familiar if you use it a lot. 
Once you’re used to my kind of shorthand, you’ll 
be able to use it to convey a lot of information in a 
very small space and short amount of time.
graph v. equation

you are here 4    145
equations and graphs
Graph
And random letters are easy to get used to, are they?
 
 
 
But can you do slopes?! Can you display 
experimental results? Do people plant little kisses on 
you, like this     ? In short, are you loved?
 
 
Uhhhhh - how do you mean?
 
 
 
I think not! I have a slope, and you have ... well, you 
have nothing of great interest.
 
 
 
 
No, it’s not! The slope is  vertical direction divided 
by  horizontal direction, and there’s no division 
sign in your equation!
 
 
Well, I guess you might just be a teeny bit more 
versatile. But I’m still the best for visualizing things!
Equation
They’re not random, actually. Physicists always 
choose the same letter to mean the same one thing 
in equations. So once you’ve learned the lingo, it’s 
not as hard as you make it out to be.
 
 
Has it ever occurred to you that a graph and an 
equation are just different ways of saying these 
same things?
Take that distance-time graph from earlier on in the 
chapter. It’s the same as the equation 
∆distance = speed × time except drawn out. (But 
it’s not as long-winded!)
 
Oh, but this equation tells you all about the slope of 
the graph. You have to work out your slope using an 
equation in the first place, don’t you? And if you’ve 
plotted a distance-time graph, then it’s the same 
equation as I already said.
 
 
Ah, but equations can be rearranged to give you 
anything you want (as long as it was in or related to 
the equation in the first place).
 
I’m not denying that - just pointing out that I’m not 
entirely useless, you know!

146
2. A runner jogs one kilometer to a 400 m track, 
where he starts doing laps. For the first half hour, 
he passes the finish line every 90 seconds. After 
this, he does four more laps in 75 seconds each.
How far does he run in the first 30 minutes of 
his training session?
If he started his training session at 1:00 pm, 
what time does he finish at?
If he takes the bus home, how far has he run 
in total that day?
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Did you do what they asked you” Question
Some questions will give you one unit (like minutes) - but 
ask for your answer in another unit (like seconds). And some questions have 
some harder intermediate steps before a more simple step to give the final 
answer. Always check that you’ve done what they asked you! Otherwise you’ll 
lose credit for ‘little’ mistakes on  questions that you mostly did right!
The first type of “Did you do what 
they asked you?” question is there to make sure 
you think about the physics (and units) involved rather 
than just plugging numbers into a formula. The other 
type makes sure you read the whole question and can 
follow things through to the very end.
By the time you’ve done 
the whole question, have you 
forgotten about the 1 km he 
jogged to get to the track in 
the first place?
This question contains 
two different units 
of distance.
It also contains two 
different units of time.
And here’s yet 
another unit 
of time!
And another 
way of writing 
down a time!
This distance is written 
in words rather than 
figures, which makes it 
more difficult to spot!
One more unit of time 
to finish off with!

you are here 4    147
equations and graphs
Units
Graph
Special points
Time
Be part of it
Equation
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Volume
Slope
Does it SUCK?
Area
Graphs and 
equations help me 
see what’s going on.
Speed
How fast something’s going - the rate of change of distance 
with time.
Distance
A length; the number of meters (or miles, or so forth) you 
cover when you take a particular route between two points.
Time
How long something takes; how many seconds (or minutes, and 
so on) that elapse between two moments you’re interested in.
Graph
A visual representation of how two variables depend on 
each other.
Equation
A mathematical representation of how variables depend 
on each other.
Slope
The steepness of a graph; the change in the vertical 
direction divided by the change in the horizontal direction.

148    Chapter 4
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 4 under your belt, 
and you’ve added some terminology and 
answer-checking skills to your toolbox.
CHAPTER 4
Do an experiment
An experiment enables you to find 
out how two variables depend on 
each other - like distance and 
time in this chapter.
Think about errors
Think about sources of experimental 
error at the design stage.
Reduce systematic errors by 
planning ahead.
Reduce random errors by making 
multiple measurements and 
averaging (either mathematically or 
by drawing a graph).
Draw a graph
A graph visually shows you how two 
variables relate to each other.
You’ll usually want to know how 
something varies as time goes on.
ALWAYS put time on the 
horizontal axis of your graph.
The slope of a graph
You can use the equation
to compare the two variables you’ve 
plotted on your graph to each other.
slope  =
 vertical direction
 horizontal direction
Work out an equation
An equation shows you how variables 
relate to each other mathematically.
Use the same letter for the same ‘type’ 
of thing, e.g., ‘t’ for a time.
Use subscripts to represent different 
things of the same ‘type’, like you did 
with tcook, ttotal, and tcyc.
Rearrange your equation
If the equation you come up with doesn’t have the 
variable you want to work out on its own on the left 
hand side, you have to rearrange your equation.
Make sure you always do the same thing to both sides 
at each stage so that your equation stays balanced.
It’s safer to show more work than it is to show no 
work at all.
Rates and slopes
When you’ve plotted time along the 
horizontal axis, the slope of the 
graph gives you the rate at which 
the variable on the vertical axis 
changes with time.
So the slope of a distance - time 
graph gives you the speed, as speed is 
rate of change of distance with time.
physics toolbox

this is a new chapter    149
dealing with directions
5
Vectors
Time, speed, and distance are all well and good, but you really 
need DIRECTION too if you want to get on in life. 
You now have multiple physics superpowers: You’ve mastered graphs and equations, and 
you can estimate how big your answer will be. But size isn’t everything. In this chapter, 
you’ll be learning about vectors, which give direction to your answers and help you to 
find easier shortcuts through complicated-looking problems.
Time, speed, and distance are all well and good, but you really 
need DIRECTION too if you want to get on in life. 
You now have multiple physics superpowers: You’ve mastered graphs and equations, and 
you can estimate how big your answer will be. But size isn’t everything. In this chapter, 
you’ll be learning about vectors, which give direction to your answers and help you to 
find easier shortcuts through complicated-looking problems.
Gee, was he always 
so romantic?
I was furious when we wound up 
in Luxembourg after I’d already pointed 
him in the right direction. But of course, he 
knew best. “We’re only 100 miles from Paris, dear.” 
Well, yes - but the way he went, we spent the first 
day of our honeymoon stuck in the car. 
In Luxembourg!

150    Chapter 5 
Ye olde treasure mappe
The treasure hunt
It’s treasure time. You and your teammate, 
Annie, are part of a scavenger hunt. To be 
the first team to reach the prize at the end of 
the game, you have to follow four clues. 
Here’s the first clue ...
This’ll help you 
with direction.
This’ll help you 
with distance.
Ye olde 
oake tree.
Clue 1
Backwards and forwards, 
forwards and back 
Is immediate action your 
plan of attack? 
First ponder - then go - for 
soon you will spot 
That the target may seem 
far away ... but it’s not. Go: 
1) 60 meters North 
2) 150 meters South 
3) 120 meters North 
4) 60 meters South 
5) 20 meters South 
6) 40 meters North 
The start of your journey is 
right by the tree, 
and continues whenceforth 
you unearth the next key.
0 m
400 m
300 m
200 m
100 m
500 m
Scale:
who doesn’t like treasure?

you are here 4    151
vectors
Stream
Progresse:
Clue 1
Clue 2
Clue 3
Clue 4
 I’m ready - what’s first?
What do you think is the best 
way to guide Annie to the next 
clue as quickly as possible?
Annie

152    Chapter 5 
Clue 1
Backwards and forwards, 
forwards and back 
Is immediate action your 
plan of attack? 
First ponder - then go - for 
soon you will spot 
That the target may seem 
far away ... but it’s not. Go: 
1) 60 meters North 
2) 150 meters South 
3) 120 meters North 
4) 60 meters South 
5) 20 meters South 
6) 40 meters North 
The start of your journey is 
right by the tree, 
and continues whenceforth 
you unearth the next key.
Joe: I say we just tell Annie to get going and follow the 
directions as quickly as possible!
Mary: Hang on, the clue says to “first ponder - then go.”
Joe: Hmmm?
Mary: I mean, we should think first rather than rushing into it. 
The directions do seem to be a bit...uh... repetitive. It’s silly to do 
the same thing over and over again if we don’t have to.
Joe: Oh yeah, I see what you mean. The first instruction sends 
us off to the North - and then the next one makes us retrace our 
steps back to the South again!
Mary: All of the directions in the clue are either North or 
South. So we’re just running up and down the same line until 
we get to the end of the directions.
Joe: So following the instructions exactly isn’t the quickest way 
after all.
Mary: What if we try to imagine the directions first - that’ll be 
quicker than doing all that running backwards and forwards. So 
that’s 60 m North, then 150 m South, then ... 
Joe: Isn’t it better to sketch them out? It’ll be much easier to see 
what’s going on than trying to hold onto all these directions in 
our heads.
Mary: I guess so - let’s get to work!
Sketching things out 
on paper leaves room 
in your brain to think 
about physics.
ALWAYS start 
with a sketch!
clue conversation

you are here 4    153
vectors
Your team already started a sketch of the instructions in clue 1, but they haven’t managed to finish it off yet.
That’s your job.
They’ve decided to represent each leg of the instructions using an arrow so that 1 cm represents 20 m. 
They’ve also decided to spread the arrows out a bit, so they aren’t all drawn on top of each other.
60 m
150 m
1st 
leg
2nd 
leg
3rd 
leg
4th 
leg
5th 
leg
6th 
leg
Start here.
1st leg 
is 60 m 
North
2nd leg 
is 150 m 
South
Separate the arrows, 
so you don’t get 
confused by drawing 
them all on top of 
each other.
1 cm = 20 m

154    Chapter 5 
Your team already started a sketch of the instructions in clue 1, but they haven’t managed to finish it off yet.
That’s your job.
They’ve decided to represent each leg of the instructions using an arrow so that 1 cm represents 20 m. 
They’ve also decided to spread the arrows out a bit, so they aren’t all drawn on top of each other.
60 m
150 m
1st 
leg
2nd 
leg
3rd 
leg
4th 
leg
5th 
leg
6th 
leg
Start here.
1st leg 
is 60 m 
North
2nd leg 
is 150 m 
South
Separate the 
arrows, so you don’t 
get confused by 
drawing them all on 
top of each other.
1 cm = 20 m
120 m
60 m
20 m
40 m
Annie would end 
up really close to 
where she started!
sharpen solution

you are here 4    155
vectors
Displacement is different from distance
a. Work out the distance Annie would travel if she followed 
the instructions in the clue exactly.
You’ve just worked out that Annie will end up very close to the tree if she follows 
the directions in the clue line by line. This illustrates the difference between 
distance and displacement.
Distance is the actual total distance traveled. If you walk 70 m North, then 30 m 
South, you travel a total distance of 100 m.
But displacement is the change in position between two points regardless of 
the route you take to get there. If you walk 70 m North, then 30 m South, you 
wind up 40 m North of where you started. So your displacement is 40 m North.
b. Work out Annie’s displacement - the size and direction of 
the change in position between her start and finish points.
This is just a number 
with units - a size with 
no indication of direction.
This has both a size 
and a direction.
Clue 1
Backwards and forwards, 
forwards and back 
Is immediate action your 
plan of attack? 
First ponder - then go - for 
soon you will spot 
That the target may seem 
far away ... but it’s not. Go: 
1) 60 meters North 
2) 150 meters South 
3) 120 meters North 
4) 60 meters South 
5) 20 meters South 
6) 40 meters North 
The start of your journey is 
right by the tree, 
and continues whenceforth 
you unearth the next key.

156    Chapter 5 
Clue 1
Backwards and forwards, 
forwards and back 
Is immediate action your 
plan of attack? 
First ponder - then go - for 
soon you will spot 
That the target may seem 
far away ... but it’s not. Go: 
1) 60 meters North 
2) 150 meters South 
3) 120 meters North 
4) 60 meters South 
5) 20 meters South 
6) 40 meters North 
The start of your journey is 
right by the tree, 
and continues whenceforth 
you unearth the next key.
a. Work out the distance Annie would travel if she followed 
the instructions in the clue exactly.
b. Work out Annie’s displacement - the size and direction of 
the change in position between her start and finish points.
Distance	 =	 60 + 150 + 120 + 60 + 20 + 40
	
=	 450 m
She’d travel 450 m if she followed the instructions in 
the clue exactly.
Each of the instructions in the 
clue is a displacement - with a 
SIZE and a DIRECTION.
Q: So Annie ends up 10 m South of 
where she started! Isn’t the clue a lot of 
fuss about nothing?!
A: The point of the clue is thinking before 
you act. If you set out instantly to try and 
save time, you actually end up running much 
further.
Q: We’ve done a lot with units in 
the past. Are the units of distance and 
displacement the same?
A: Distance and displacement are both 
measured in meters (or other units of length).
Q: How can distance and 
displacement be different things when 
they both have the same units?
A: Displacement has a direction attached 
to it - distance doesn’t.
Q: Doesn’t a direction have units too?
A: No. North, South, left, right, horizontal, 
vertical ... etc. None of them have units.
Q: OK, I think I’m getting it now. 
Distance and displacement are different 
because distance is just a size - but with 
displacement there’s also a direction.
A: That’s right ... and we’re just getting to 
that now.
The picture with the arrows on it shows that she ends up 
10 m South of where she started.
Displacement has a size 
and a direction.
Distance has a size.
sharpen solution

you are here 4    157
vectors
Distance is an example of a scalar 
quantity in physics. Scalars only have a 
size, like 10 meters.
Displacement is an example of a 
vector quantity in physics.
Vectors have a size and a direction, for 
instance 10 meters South.
The instructions in the clue are all 
vectors, as they have a size and a 
direction. The route you take to get to 
the next clue isn’t important - all you’re 
really interested in is the change in 
position between the start and end points.
Distance is a scalar; 
displacement is a vector
Scalars only 
have a SIZE. 
One hundred bucks!
One hundred bucks, 
going from your 
wallet to my wallet!
Vectors have a SIZE 
and a DIRECTION. 
120 m
60 m
20 m
40 m
150 m
60 m
You can represent vectors using arrows
You can represent a vector quantity using an arrow, 
where the length of the arrow is proportional to the 
vector’s size, and the arrow points in the vector’s direction. 
You already did this when you were solving the clue.
You also intuitively added the vectors correctly, lining them 
up “nose-to-tail” by putting the tail of the next vector by 
the nose of the previous one.
If the vectors all lie along a straight line (like the ones 
here) it can be confusing just to draw them all on top of 
each other. It’s easy to lose track of where you are. So 
sometimes it’s appropriate to line them up next to each 
other (like you already did) with the understanding that 
they’re actually all on top of each other.
You can add vector arrows by 
lining them up “nose-to-tail.”
Drawing the 
vector arrows 
on top of 
each other is 
confusing ...
... so 
spread 
them out 
a bit.
Length of 
arrow is 
proportional to 
size of vector.
Arrow points 
in direction 
of vector.
Line up vector 
arrows “nose-to-
tail” to add them.
Direction
Only a size, 
no direction.
Start
Finish
Start
Finish

158    Chapter 5 
So when we add the 
vectors up nose-to-tail, 
does it matter which 
order we do it in?
Nope. The only thing that matters 
is adding vectors “nose-to-tail.”
When you’re adding vectors together, you 
should always line them up “nose to tail.” This 
is what’s important - it doesn’t matter which 
order you add the vectors in.
Practically speaking, it might be easier to add 
together all the Norths first, then all the Souths, 
since the overall displacement is still the same.
Adding the 
vectors in 
ANY ORDER 
will result 
in the same 
overall 
displacement.
120 m
150 m
Overall 
displacement.
Each of the 
instructions in the 
clue is a vector.
120 m
60 m
20 m
40 m
150 m
60 m
Start
Finish
 10 m         
60 m
40 m
60 m
20 m
Finish
Start
You get the same 
overall displacement 
whatever order you 
add the vectors in.
Adding all the 
Norths, then 
all the Souths.
Adding the vectors in 
the order they were 
given in the clue.
add ‘em up

you are here 4    159
vectors
Why take all that time to 
draw the vector arrows? If 
I’m adding them, can’t I do 
it faster using math?!
You can add vectors quickly using math.
If you go 60 m North, and then 60 m South, your 
displacement is zero since you’re back where you started.
North and South are opposite directions - so you can use 
opposite signs to represent them mathematically. Suppose 
you decide that traveling North is positive, and traveling 
South is negative. So 60 m North, then 60 m South is a 
displacement of 60 - 60 = 0 m (or 60 + -60 = 0).
When you were working out the displacement, you might 
already have intuitively done something like this (by making 
North the positive direction), like 60 - 150 + 120 - 60 - 20 
+ 40 = -10 m, which is the same as 10 m South of where 
you started. Or you may have added together all the Norths, 
then all the Souths, like the vector diagram on the other 
page.
Q: If vectors add “nose-to-tail,” then 
how do scalars add?
A: The same way they always have - you 
just add the numbers together.
Q: Are there any other vector 
quantities apart from displacement?
A: Yes - we’ll meet some others soon ...
Q: Don’t you need to define a starting 
point before you add your vectors?
A: Yes, that’s right. Sometimes there’ll 
be an obvious starting point - like a tree! 
Sometimes you’ll need to define one. For 
example, if you’re describing heights, it’s 
conventional to make 0 m equal to sea level 
and measure everything else in reference 
to that.
Q: How do you decide which way is 
positive and which way is negative?
A: It’s up to you - as long as you choose a 
direction and stick with it, the math will work 
out the same. If you make North positive 
and your answer is -10 m, it means 10 m 
South. And if you make South positive and 
get the answer 10 m, that means 10 m South 
as well. You just need to remember how to 
interpret the sign of your answer at the end.
You can use opposite signs 
to mean opposite directions.
This ONLY works if you have 
two opposite directions, like 
North-South, up-down,  
left-right, and so forth.

160    Chapter 5 
But there’s a problem ...
All that lies to 
the East is a swamp. 
I can’t possibly go 
that way.
You found the next clue...
Clue 2
And now you’ve unearthed your  
next set of directions  
Watch the impediment in the 
next section 
Do not be swamped by the 
hurdle you see 
You just need to get from point A 
to point B 
Go 700 m East then 1100 m North 
To find the next clue in the 
obstacle course.
Ye olde treasure mappe
Annie’s here now, 
after going 10 m 
South for the 
first clue.
0 m
400 m
300 m
200 m
100 m
500 m
Scale:
clue number two

you are here 4    161
vectors
a. Draw the instructions from the clue on 
the map using vector arrows.
b. “Do not be swamped” is an important part 
of the clue. Write down your ideas about 
how you might achieve this.
Stream
Progresse:
Clue 1
Clue 2
Clue 3
Clue 4

162    Chapter 5 
500m
Going East then North is impossible because 
of the swamp. But you can get to exactly 
the same place by going 1100 m North, 
then 700 m East. - you can follow the 
instructions either way around.
700 m East
1100 m 
North
a. Draw the instructions from the clue on 
the map using vector arrows.
b. “Do not be swamped” is an important part 
of the clue. Write down your ideas about 
how you might achieve this.
700 m East
1100 m 
North
Adding the vector 
arrows in the order 
they’re given in the clue 
goes through the swamp.
Adding 
the vector 
arrows in 
this order 
doesn’t go 
through the 
swamp.
You can add vectors 
in any order
Even when vectors aren’t pointing 
along the same line, you can still 
add them together by lining them 
up “nose-to-tail.”
Whichever order you add them in, 
you always end up with the same 
difference in position between the 
start and finish points.
So you can send Annie 1100 m 
North first, then 700 m East. 
This way, she’ll find the next clue 
without getting swamped.
sharpen solution

you are here 4    163
vectors
Scalars have size. Distance is 
an example of a scalar.
Vectors have both size and 
direction. Displacement is an 
example of a vector.
You can represent vectors 
using arrows.
The length of a vector arrow 
is equal to the size of the 
distance.
The direction of a vector 
arrow is equal to direction of 
movement.
You add vectors by lining them 
up “nose-to-tail” and following 
the arrows from start to finish.
If your vectors all lie along a 
straight line, you can add them 
quickly using math by defining 
one direction as positive and 
the other direction as negative.
If your vectors point in different 
directions, you can still add 
them by lining them up nose-to-
tail, and following the arrows.
You can add vectors in any 
order regardless of which 
direction they point in.









Q: So you’re saying that even 
if I have hundreds of vectors, it 
doesn’t matter what order I add 
them in?
A:Exactly! As long as you line 
the vectors up “nose-to-tail,” you’ll 
always end up with the same 
resultant vector at the end.
Q: Wait, what’s a resultant 
vector?!
A: It’s just another way of saying 
“answer vector.” A resultant vector is 
what you get when you add together 
other vectors.
Q: So if I add together vectors, 
do I always get a resultant vector 
as my answer?
A: Yes. If you’re adding vectors, 
your answer must also be a vector.
Q: Can a vector equal zero? Is 
that still a vector?
A: Yep, in the context of vector 
addition, you get a special vector 
called the “zero vector.” 
 
 
Q:  It’s OK to use a different 
sign for two directions when 
they’re total opposites, like North 
and South, isn’t it? But what about 
when they’re not opposites - like 
North and East in this clue. How 
do I add the vectors using math 
then?
A: Great question - and something 
you’ll learn all about in chapter 9.
When you add 
vectors together,  
your answer can 
be called the 
resultant vector.

164    Chapter 5 
Stream
Ye olde treasure mappe
Progresse:
Clue 1
Clue 2
Clue 3
Clue 4
700 m East
1100 m 
North
Annie goes this way 
- no problem!
There’s a boat 
on the shore of 
the lake!
0 m
400 m
300 m
200 m
100 m
500 m
Scale:
But instructions 
become destruction 
for this guy!
onto clue three

you are here 4    165
vectors
Well done - you’ve found the third clue!
And along with the third clue at the 
shore of the lake is a motor boat. 
There’s a problem though - the clue 
has a lot of numbers and technical 
jargon in it.
To pick your way through it, first, 
work out what you’re supposed to 
do. Once that’s clear, think about 
how you might do it.
First what, then how.
Think - first what, then how.
Underline the parts of the clue that give you the “what,” 
then use your own words to write down what you’re 
supposed to do - and also how you might do it.
Clue 3
Now that you’re traveling on 
the high seas, set your course 
to the bearing 330 degrees. 
Start from East, and turn 
counter-clock. Then 4 x 100 m, 
and there ye can dock. 
Ye’r treasure lies 20 leagues 
down - don’t be late, speed 
on to clue 4 - and some 
pieces of 8.

166
 Clue 3
Now that you’re traveling on the high seas. Set 
your course to the bearing 330 degrees. Start 
from East, and turn counter-clock. Then 4 x 
100 m, and there ye can dock. Ye’r treasure 
lies 20 leagues down - don’t be late, Speed on 
to clue 4 - and some pieces of 8.
Question Clinic: The “Wheat from the chaff” Question
Sometimes a question will have a lot of unfamiliar words or 
jargon in it. Don’t panic! Often a complicated-looking build-up leads into a 
straightforward question to test your ability to sort out the stuff that actually 
matters. The question may give you more information than you need to actually solve 
the problem, so don’t worry if you don’t use everything you’re given.
First what - then how! Start off by 
looking at the end of the question to see what you’re 
actually being asked. Sometimes extra numbers or 
information are included in a simple factual question to 
test your understanding of the physics.
Here are some numbers that 
you don’t actually need to use 
to get your answer.
Parts of the question contain 
irrelevant information and unfamiliar 
words. Don’t let that stress you out 
or make you think you can’t do it.
Here’s some 
relevant 
information!
As long as you can sort 
out the wheat from 
the chaff - or the 
important information 
from the irrelevant 
padding - you’ll be fine.
Sometimes there’ll be 
a line break in the 
middle of something 
relevant. Don’t let 
that put you off!
Look out for 
direction as 
well as size.

167
WHAT -	 4 x 100 m is 400 m 
	
A bearing of 330 degrees sounds like an angle. 
	
Measure it counter-clockwise from the East. 
HOW -	 Protractor measures 330° counter-clockwise 
	
from the East, and a ruler plus the 
	
scale on the map measures the 400 m.
Think - first what, then how.
Underline the parts of the clue that give you the “what,” 
then use your own words to write down what you’re 
supposed to do - and also how you might do it.
First WHAT - then HOW!
Don’t worry if you’ve 
forgotten a lot about angles. 
We’ll spend a while going over 
them on the next few pages.
Look out for questions 
on ‘hard topics’ (like particle 
physics) that you don’t think you 
know much about. Often they’re 
just questions about simpler stuff 
disguised to make them look 
‘difficult.’ You may already know how 
to do them, so don’t get psyched 
out at the start.
Clue 3
Now that you’re traveling on 
the high seas, set your course 
to the bearing 330 degrees. 
Start from East, and turn 
counter-clock. Then 4 x 100 m, 
and there ye can dock. 
Ye’r treasure lies 20 leagues 
down - don’t be late, speed 
on to clue 4 - and some 
pieces of 8.

168    Chapter 5 
Angles measure rotations
Angles measure rotations, how far you have to rotate 
a line so that it lies on top of another line.
You’ve probably already come across a common way 
of measuring angles - in degrees (symbol: °).  
You measure angles with a protractor. It’s marked 
off in degrees, so you can line it up and read off the 
size of the angle just like you would with a ruler.
90°	 = a right angle
180°	 = halfway around
360°	= a full revolution
This is 90° - a right 
angle, like a corner 
of a rectangle.
Half-way 
around is 
180°.
Going full circle 
is 360°.
Imagine rotating this line 
around the point where 
they meet, so it lies on top 
of the other one.
Mark the angle 
with an arc.
In physics and math, 
you usually measure 
angles counter-
clockwise from the 
right.
Use a protractor 
to measure angles.
90° is the only 
one we really need to 
remember  -  just add lots 
of 90° ’s together to get the 
other angles.
An angle that comes up a lot in physics is the 
right‑angle, which is 90°. It’s a quarter of a 
revolution, and it’s the angle you find in the corners 
of a rectangle. So you see right-angles everywhere 
you go - between the ground and anything standing 
on it (chair, table, building, and so forth).
Half a revolution is 180°, and it’s called a straight 
angle. So anything that does a U-turn to go in the 
opposite direction has rotated 180°. It looks like a 
straight line.
There are 360° in a complete revolution - if you 
go all the way around, so the line ends up back on 
top of itself, that’s an angle of 360°.
practical protractor information

you are here 4    169
vectors
Q: Why 360° in a full rotation? That seems a bit 
random. I mean - why not a nicer number like 100° or 
1000°? Doesn’t that fit in better with SI units?
A: The rotation originated from ancient civilizations 
thousands of years ago. But the most practical reason is 
that 360 divides exactly by a lot of useful numbers.
Q: But that works just as well if there are 100 
degrees in a circle. Half a rotation would be 50, and a 
quarter would be 25 ...
A: Yes, we were just getting to that. With 360° in 
a rotation, a third of a rotation is 120°, and a sixth is 
60°. Now, try doing that with 100 degrees in a circle- 
33.33333333... degrees in a third of a rotation, anyone?
Q: Can you get angles bigger than 360° if 
something keeps on going round and round? Or does 
the angle ‘reset’ itself  to 0° when you get back to 
where you started?
A: It depends on what you’re trying to do - sometimes 
talking about the total rotation is useful; other times 
‘resetting’ the angle when you get back to the start is 
useful.
Q: Is an angle a scalar or a vector?
A: Good question! It can be either, depending on 
whether you’re talking about the total rotation (scalar) or 
the rotation distance between the start and finish points.
Q:Vectors are represented by straight arrows, 
where the length is proportional to the size. But 
how do you use a straight vector arrow to give the 
direction of an angle that’s kinda curved?!
A: Yes - you can’t directly represent an angle using 
a vector arrow. It’s a valid question, but you don’t have 
to worry about it for the moment, as we’ll get on to 
representing angular quantities with vector arrows in 
chapter 12.
Now you can get on with clue 3!
You’ve worked out that you need to start off facing East, and 
rotate counter-clockwise through an angle of 330°. Once 
you’ve done that, you’ll travel 400 m in the direction you’re 
now facing to reach clue 4.
400 m on a bearing of 330 counter-clockwise from East is 
a displacement, not a distance, as it has both a size (400 m) 
and a direction (330° counter-clockwise from the East). 
You can use an angle 
to indicate direction.
Uh... how can I 
measure an angle of 330° 
when my protractor only 
goes up to 180°?
A standard protractor can 
measure angles up to 180°.
How can you measure an angle 
of 330° when your protractor only 
goes up to 180°?

170    Chapter 5 
If you’re measuring something with your ruler, and it’s 
too long, you can start off by measuring along as far as 
you can. Then, you can make a mark, move the ruler 
along, and measure the next part. And so on.
The underlying principle is one that’s essential for physics 
- especially when it gets more complicated! If something’s 
too big for you to deal with it all at once, break it down 
into smaller parts that you can deal with.
There are two ways you can do this with a standard 180° 
protractor - do whatever you’re most comfortable with:
If you can’t deal with something big, 
break it down into smaller parts
Thing you want 
to measure
Use your 
ruler once ...
... make a mark ... ... then use your 
ruler again.
Longer than 
your ruler
You can 
measure an 
angle bigger 
than 180° by 
using your 
protractor 
twice.
You can also say, “330° is only 30° 
short of being a full 360° circle.” So  
turning 330° counterclockwise is the 
same as turning 30° clockwise.
You can use your protractor 
once to measure how far 
around you have to go in 
the opposite direction.
360° - 30° = 330°
You can measure your angle 
the other way around
180°
150°
You can use your protractor 
twice to break down the angle
You can do exactly the same as you would 
with a ruler, and use your protractor twice. It 
goes up to 180°, so measure that far first.
To work out how much further to go, you 
can say 330° - 180° = 150°, then measure 
around another 150° from where you 
stopped.
work your angle

you are here 4    171
vectors
Sharpen your protractor, follow the instructions in the clue, 
and draw Annie’s route on the lake.
protractor
Scale: 2 cm = 100 m
0 m
400 m
300 m
200 m
100 m
Start
Stream
Clue 3
Now that you’re traveling on 
the high seas, set your course 
to the bearing 330 degrees. 
Start from East, and turn 
counter-clock. Then 4 x 100 m, 
and there ye can dock. 
Ye’r treasure lies 20 leagues 
down - don’t be late, speed 
on to clue 4 - and some 
pieces of 8.

172    Chapter 5 
Stream
Progresse:
Clue 1
Clue 2
Clue 3
Clue 4
330°
400 m
0 m
400 m
300 m
200 m
100 m
500 m
Scale:
sharpen solution
v
protractor
Ye olde treasure mappe

you are here 4    173
vectors
Clue 4
The treasure is near, I hope 
you feel beckoned. 
With velocity 1. 5 m/s 
So head to the North for the 
time of one minute. 
Arrive in the right place and 
you’ll surely win it. 
But don’t you forget, you 
already know - that 
sometimes you cannot just 
go with the flow...
Hmmm......
velocity is a new term...
is it okay to guess what 
it means?
You move onto the fourth clue...
You can work out what things 
are from their context.
Sometimes an unfamiliar word comes 
up. Whether it’s completely new to you or 
something you saw once before then forgot 
about, the important thing is not to panic.
Often you’ll be able to work out what it 
means from the context. What is the rest 
of the sentence or paragraph about? Are 
there any units mentioned? What is the 
rest of the question about? What are they 
asking you to do?
You got the angle right because Annie’s found a sign 
sticking out of the water with the fourth clue on it!
See if you can work out what a velocity might be from the context.
If you already know what a velocity is, then write down how someone 
who doesn’t could work it out from the context.
A word you’ve 
not seen yet 
in this book

174    Chapter 5 
Velocity has UNITS of m/s, which looks like meters divided by seconds. 
That’s the same units as speed. 
There’s also a DIRECTION mentioned-North. 
I think that velocity might be a vector version of speed, with both a 
size and a direction.
See if you can work out what a velocity might be from the context.
If you already know what a velocity is, then write down how someone 
who doesn’t could work it out from the context!
Just like displacement is the 
vector version of distance.
Velocity is the ‘vector version’ of speed
Velocity is measured in meters per second - which is exactly the 
same units as speed. Velocity is the ‘vector version’ of speed - it has a 
direction as well as a size.
Speed is a scalar - “I’m traveling at 1.5 m/s.”
Velocity is a vector - “I’m traveling North at 1.5 m/s.”
So the clue is asking you to go North at 1.5 m/s for a minute.
Size
Direction
Same units
Speed is rate of change of distance.
Velocity is rate of change of displacement.
Scalar
Scalar
Vector
Vector
Clue 4
The treasure is near, I hope 
you feel beckoned. 
With velocity 1. 5 m/s 
So head to the North for the 
time of one minute. 
Arrive in the right place and 
you’ll surely win it. 
But don’t you forget, you 
already know - that 
sometimes you cannot just 
go with the flow...
sharpen solution

you are here 4    175
vectors
I went downstream for a 
minute like you said - but 
there’s no treasure here!
Write units using shorthand
You’ve spotted that the units of velocity are written as m/s 
in the clue. This is a more concise way of writing meters per 
second. The ‘/’ means ‘per’ or ‘divided by.’
Meters per second is the same as meters divided by seconds. 
So when you use the standard letters to abbreviate the units, 
you get m/s.
‘per’ means 
‘divided by’
Use standard 
abbreviations.
meters
seconds
m
s
meters per second
Units written 
out in words
What do you think’s gone wrong?
So, on to clue 4 ...
Now that you know that velocity is the vector 
version of speed, you tell Annie to point the boat 
North, set the controls  to 1.5 m/s, and travel for 
a minute before dropping the anchor.
But when she arrives, there’s no treasure.
m/s
Use a / instead 
of a horizontal 
line to save space.
You may also have seen 
this represented as ms—1 
rather than m/s, as this 
is what some courses do.

176    Chapter 5 
You need to allow for the stream’s velocity too!
Going North from the Clue 4 sign involves 
going downstream, towards the sea. If Annie 
didn’t start the motor, the boat would move 
North with the same velocity as the stream.
Stream velocity
Boat drifting 
with the stream
Boat 
velocity
Velocity seen from bank greater 
than boat speedo reading.
But Annie did start the motor - and 
the boat moved North with a reading 
of 1.5 m/s on its speedometer. But 
the speedometer tells you how fast the 
boat’s going relative to the water. This 
means that Annie went faster than the 
clue said she should, at 1.5 m/s plus the 
velocity of the stream.
Stream 
velocity
Add vectors 
nose-to-tail.
Boat 
velocity
Velocity seen 
from bank is 
less than boat 
speedo reading.
Stream velocity
If Annie had been going South, 
upstream, the boat and stream 
velocity vectors would point in 
different directions. So the overall 
velocity of the boat as seen from 
the bank would be less than the 
reading on its speedometer.
If the upstream current 
was really, really 
fast, the boat would 
go backwards even 
if the reading on its 
speedometer said it 
was going forwards!
Velocity seen from 
bank is negative (in 
opposite direction 
from boat velocity).
Boat 
velocity
Stream 
velocity
Boat velocity
Velocity of 
water in 
lake = 0
Clue 3 took place entirely on a still 
lake. So when the boat was set to go 
at a certain velocity relative to the 
water, that was the velocity it went at.
more than one velocity matters

you are here 4    177
vectors
If you can find the stream’s velocity, you can 
figure out the velocity for the boat
The boat needs to go North with an overall velocity of 1.5 m/s for a minute.
a. If the leaves Annie throws into the stream travel 10 m North in 20 s, 
what’s the velocity of the stream?
b. What speed should Annie set on the boat’s speedometer to solve the 
clue and find the treasure? (You may find it helpful to use vector arrows 
to visualize this.)
Hey, I could drop these 
leaves in the stream 
and see how far they go in 
a certain time?
It’s possible to add velocity vectors by lining them up nose-to-
tail in the same way you added up the displacement vectors 
earlier on.
You know that the overall velocity of the boat needs to 
be 1.5 m/s to the North. And Annie works out a way of 
measuring the velocity of the stream by dropping leaves in it.
Now, you only need to do the calculation, send Annie on her 
way, and the treasure is yours ...
Clue 4
The treasure is near, I hope 
you feel beckoned 
With velocity 1. 5 m/s 
So head to the North for the 
time of one minute. 
Arrive in the right place and 
you’ll surely win it. 
But don’t you forget, you 
already know - that 
sometimes you cannot just 
go with the flow...

178    Chapter 5 
Q: So basically a vector is something  
I can draw as an arrow, right?
A: Yes - the length of the arrow 
represents the size, and the direction of the 
arrow represents the direction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: I was fine with displacement, where 
the length of the arrow represents an 
ACTUAL length. But I’m kinda finding it 
hard to visualize a velocity.
A: Something’s overall velocity vector 
points in the direction that it’s currently 
moving in. If it’s going fast, you draw a long 
arrow, and if it’s going slow, a shorter arrow. 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: Right - so something going fast 
to the North would have a long arrow 
pointing North, and something moving 
slowly to the East would have a short 
arrow pointing East.
A: Exactly.
The boat needs to go North with an overall velocity of 1.5 m/s for a minute.
a. If the leaves Annie throws into the stream travel 10 m North in 20 s, what’s the velocity of the stream?
b. What speed should Annie set on the boat’s speedometer to solve the clue and find the treasure? (You 
may find it helpful to use vector arrows to visualize this.)
a. Leaves travel 10 m North in 20 s.
Velocity
Change in displacement
Change in time
=
10 m
20 s
=
=  0.5 m/s North
b. Annie wants to go North at 1.5 m/s.
    Stream will ‘provide’ 0.5 m/s of this velocity.
    So the boat should go North at 1.0 = m/s (relative 
    to the stream).
If you’re asked for a vector 
quantity, remember to give a 
DIRECTION as well as a size.
Displacement = 10 m North
t = 20 s
Want overall 
velocity 
of 1.5 m/s 
North
Stream velocity 
0.5 m/s North
Required boat velocity 
(relative to stream)
A sketch makes 
everything 
clearer!
The overall velocity 
vector points in the 
direction the thing’s 
currently moving in.
sharpen solution

you are here 4    179
vectors
Annie did exactly what you asked her to, but 
it hasn’t worked out again. Any ideas why?
Are we ever 
gonna find it?!
Q: How do you mean? Surely the boat can only have 
one velocity?
A: The boat’s speedometer tells you how fast it’s going 
relative to the water. But if the water is also moving, then the 
boat’s velocity vector, as seen from the bank of the stream, 
will be different. It points in the direction that the boat is 
currently moving in. The velocity of the boat as seen from 
the bank is equal to the boat’s velocity relative to the water 
plus the water’s velocity.
Q: But that doesn’t make sense.
A: You know the moving walkway at the airport that helps 
you travel long distances more quickly? What happens if you 
turn around and start walking in the opposite direction of the 
walkway’s motion? You start moving backwards relative to 
the rest of the building, but you’re actually moving forwards 
relative to the walkway. The walkway moves you backwards 
more quickly than you’re walking forwards. 
 
It’s the same with the boat and the stream.
If the upstream current 
was really, really 
fast, the boat would 
go backwards even 
if the reading on its 
odometer said it was 
going forwards!
Overall velocity is 
negative (i.e., in 
opposite direction 
from boat velocity).
Boat 
velocity
Stream 
velocity
So Annie goes North at 
1.0 m/s for 1 minute ...
... but doesn’t find any treasure 
this time either.
Here’s what would happen 
if the upstream current 
was really fast.
A speedometer gives the velocity RELATIVE to the water. 
But you’re interested in the velocity RELATIVE to the bank
I get that - but I’m still not sure about what happens when the boat’s 
trying to fight against a really fast current. How can the boat go backwards 
when its speedometer says it’s going forwards.

180    Chapter 5 
It takes the boat time to accelerate from a standing start
Although Annie pointed the boat North and set the controls for 1.5 m/s, the boat takes time to 
get up to that speed from standing still. It takes time to accelerate from 0 m/s to 1.5 m/s.
Annie started timing the boat before it had accelerated up to 1.5 m/s. So it didn’t go at 1.5 m/s 
for the whole minute - and didn’t go as far as it should have.
The boat spent part of the minute accelerating from 0 m/s to 1.5 m/s ...
... and the rest of the minute traveling at 1.5 m/s.
If it had spent the WHOLE MINUTE traveling at 1.5 m/s, it would’ve gone even further.
Here the boat’s 
anchored, and its 
velocity is 0 m/s.
Here it’s going 
at 1.5 m/s.
The boat ACCELERATES 
between these two points.
Draw the velocity 
vector as an arrow.
The boat’s velocity is constant 
between these two points.
The boat STARTS with 
a velocity of 1.5 m/s.
But the treasure 
will be here instead.
Where the boat ended up 
with the standing start
Velocity = 0 m/s 
here, so velocity 
vector is just a dot.
It’s OK if you didn’t 
think of the boat 
accelerating - this one 
was pretty tricky!
ladies & gentlemen...start your engines

you are here 4    181
vectors
How do you deal with acceleration?
Draw the directions of the velocity vector and acceleration vector for each of these things, 
showing what they’ll look like at the very moment when the acceleration that’s described 
starts to happen.
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity - if 
something is accelerating, it means that its velocity is changing. 
Acceleration is a vector with a size and a direction.
If the boat is going forwards, and you open up the throttle, it 
accelerates in the same direction you’re already going in. Its 
acceleration vector points forwards.
If a boat’s going forwards, and you drop the anchor, it 
decelerates. You can think of this as acceleration in the opposite 
direction from the one it’s already traveling in, so its acceleration 
vector points backwards.
The boat is traveling forwards, 
and you open up the throttle.
The boat is drifting backwards, 
and you open up the throttle.
The boat is going forwards, and 
you drop the anchor.
The boat is going backwards, 
and you drop the anchor.
The duck is going from right to 
left, and it just hit the edge.
The duck is going forwards and is 
pushed by a current coming from 
the right.
Your right, as you 
look straight at 
the duck, that is.
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity.
Velocity
Acceleration
We gave the 
acceleration 
vector a second 
arrowhead, so 
you can tell 
the difference 
between it 
and velocity or 
displacement 
vectors.
Acceleration
Acceleration
Acceleration
Open up the 
throttle a 
little bit.
Open up the 
throttle a lot.
Drop the 
anchor.

182    Chapter 5 
Q: Isn’t it confusing to 
represent the displacement, 
velocity, and acceleration all 
with arrows? 
A: It’s only confusing if you 
don’t label your sketches with 
what’s going on.
Q: How can the anchor 
make the boat accelerate 
when it slows it down?
A: The anchor changes the 
velocity of the boat. Acceleration 
is rate of change of velocity. So 
even slowing down is still an 
acceleration.
Q: But wouldn’t that be a 
DEceleration then?!
A: The ‘de’ means the 
acceleration and velocity are in 
opposite directions. So when 
you do math, the acceleration 
and velocity vectors will have 
opposite signs.
Q: Ah math, lovely. 
Shouldn’t I know the units of 
acceleration to do that?
A: Acceleration is the rate of 
change of velocity. You’ll work 
out the units in chapter 6; right 
now, we’re just dealing with the 
concept. 
Draw the directions of the velocity vector and acceleration vector for each of these things, showing what 
they’ll look like at the very moment when the acceleration that’s described starts to happen.
The boat is drifting backwards, 
and you open up the throttle.
The boat is going forwards, and 
you drop the anchor.
The boat is going backwards, 
and you drop the anchor.
The duck is going from right to 
left, and it has just hit the edge.
The duck is going forwards and is 
pushed by a current coming from 
the right.
Velocity vector 
is gray.
Acceleration vector is black 
with two arrowheads.
The engine always 
accelerates the boat 
forwards regardless 
of what the boat’s 
currently doing.
The anchor 
always opposes 
what the boat’s 
currently doing.
The anchor makes 
the boat decelerate 
- i.e., accelerate 
in the opposite 
direction from its 
current velocity.
The edge does 
the same job as 
the anchor.
Although the duck keeps 
on going forwards as well 
as sideways, the CHANGE 
in its velocity is in the 
direction of the push.
Velocity
Acceleration
Velocity
Acceleration
Velocity
Acceleration
Velocity
Acceleration
Velocity
Acceleration
The boat it traveling forwards, 
and you open up the throttle.
Velocity
Acceleration
exercise solution

you are here 4    183
vectors
Can you think of how to make sure Annie ends up where the treasure is?
Draw / write / explain / calculate in the space below.
So it’s back to the boat ...
You told Annie to start at the Clue 4 sign, set the controls for 
1.0 m/s, and go North for a minute. But because the boat 
took time to accelerate from a standing start, it didn’t go the 
whole way at 1.0 m/s, and Annie ended up in the wrong 
place.
Now that you know that the boat’s acceleration could be a 
problem, how are you going to guide Annie to the treasure?
We’re not telling you which of these  
you’ll have to do - that’s up to you! 
The main thing is to explain your 
idea as clearly as possible.
Are you sure 
we’ll find it this 
time?
Clue 4
The treasure is near, I hope 
you feel beckoned 
With velocity 1. 5 m/s 
So head to the North for the 
time of one minute. 
Arrive in the right place and 
you’ll surely win it. 
But don’t you forget, you 
already know - that 
sometimes you cannot just 
go with the flow...

184    Chapter 5 
v
Can you think of how to make sure Annie ends up where the treasure is?
Draw / write / explain / calculate in the space below.
We’re not telling you which of these  
you’ll have to do - that’s up to you! 
The main thing is to explain your 
idea as clearly as possible.
You can do this by working out the DISPLACEMENT.
The boat needs to travel at 1.5 m/s for 60 s to reach the treasure.
In 1 s, the boat travels 1.5 m.
So in 60 s, the boat travels 1.5 x 60 = 90 m
So tell Annie to go 90 m North of the clue 4 sign.
The principle for velocity 
and displacement is 
exactly the same as for 
speed and distance.
If you forget a formula, you’ll often 
be able to work it out using common 
sense, like this. So don’t panic!
You can also do this with a ‘rolling start.’
If the boat’s ALREADY going at the correct velocity when it 
passes the clue 4 sign, then going for a minute, as per the clue, 
will work out fine.
Velocity = 0 m/s
Boat has 
reached 1.5 m/s 
before the sign.
00:00
01:00
Start timer 
as boat 
passes sign.
Treasure is 
where boat is 
after 1 minute.
sharpen solution
There are TWO 
ways you could have 
done this problem.

you are here 4    185
vectors
So no matter which 
way we work things out, 
the answer comes out 
the same, right??
That’s right - there may be more than 
one way of doing something.
Sometimes there’s more than one approach to a 
problem, and each approach will lead you to the 
same answer.
This is the case for mathematical problems where 
there are multiple equations you can use to solve 
them, or there may be a shortcut you can take 
that’ll save you time.
This is especially true of the problems that ask 
you to design an experiment and allow you to use 
a lot of equipment to do it. There will usually be 
several different set-ups that’ll work, and it’s up to 
you to design, draw, and describe what you want 
to do.
Like you just 
did here!
Problem Solving 101: 
Understand WHAT’s 
going on, then work 
out HOW to do it. 

186    Chapter 5 
Stream
Ye olde treasure mappe
Progresse:
Clue 1
Clue 2
Clue 3
Clue 4
90 m
0 m
400 m
300 m
200 m
100 m
500 m
Scale:
found it!

you are here 4    187
vectors
Vector, Angle, Velocity, Acceleration = WINNER!!!
Clue 1
Direction is important.
Displacement is the ‘vector version’ of 
distance. It has both a size and a direction.
You can represent opposite directions using 
vector arrows or math signs.
Clue 2
You can add vectors that don’t lie 
along a straight line by drawing 
them out and adding ‘nose-to-tail.’
It doesn’t matter which order you 
add vectors in as long as you line 
them up ‘nose-to-tail.’
Clue 3
In physics, you measure 
angles counter-clockwise 
from the horizontal.
Clue 4
Velocity is the ‘vector version’ of speed. 
It has both a size and a direction.
You can add velocity vectors by lining 
them up ‘nose-to-tail.’
Be careful about what a velocity 
is relative to; for example, a boat’s 
velocity could be relative to the stream 
or the bank.

188    Chapter 5 
Vectors (or displacement) are sometimes 
more useful than scalars (or distance).
Sometimes it’s appropriate to use scalars, and sometimes 
it’s appropriate to use vectors.
For example, if you want to know how much gas you’ll use 
for a round trip, knowing that the vector displacement is 
zero doesn’t help - it’s the distance you’re interested in.
But if you want to know the shortest route between two 
points, then vectors are the best.
There are also other things that you haven’t met properly 
yet -  scalar quantities that don’t have a vector equivalent 
and vector quantities that don’t have a scalar equivalent. 
But no worries, you’ll get to some of them in later chapters.
Sometimes it’s appropriate to use vectors. 
Sometimes it’s appropriate to use scalars.
It’s up to you to 
decide which is best 
for any situation.
How come we used speed and distance before for 
Alex the pizza guy, and now we’re using velocity and 
displacement? Why didn’t we just use velocity and 
displacement from the start instead of having to 
learn two ways of doing this?
vectors versus scalars

you are here 4    189
vectors
Here’s a map of one of Alex’s pizza deliveries from the pizza shop to a customer’s house.
a. Draw his route to show his overall distance, and draw a vector arrow to show his overall displacement.
b. Draw vector arrows to represent his velocity at each of the X’s on the road.
c. Explain why it was more appropriate to use distance and speed to deal with Alex rather than 
displacement and velocity.

190    Chapter 5 
Here’s a map of one of Alex’s pizza deliveries from chapter 3.
a. Draw his route to show his overall distance, and draw a vector arrow to show his overall displacement.
b. Draw vector arrows to represent his velocity at each of the X’s on the road.
c. Explain why it was more appropriate to use distance and speed to deal with Alex rather than 
displacement and velocity.
You only use distance and speed if direction isn’t important.
Alex can’t go directly through buildings or duckponds works - but the displacement vector does. 
So it would be silly to talk about displacement instead of distance. 
And he always covers the distance at the same speed even though the direction of his velocity 
changes. So there’s no point in talking about velocity either.
Overall displacement
Overall distance
sharpen solution

you are here 4    191
vectors
Units
Graph
Time
Equation
Scientific notation
Distance
Slope
Does it SUCK?
Area
Now I can deal 
with direction.
Vector
A quantity with both a size and a direction.
Scalar
A quantity that just has a size.
Acceleration
The rate of change of velocity.
Displacement
The “vector version” of distance. 
The change in position between two points.
Velocity
The “vector version” of speed. 
The rate of change of displacement.
Scalar
Acceleration
Velocity
Special points
Displacement
Volume
Be part of it
Speed
Vector

192    Chapter 5 
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 5 under your belt and 
added some terminology and math skills 
to your toolbox.
CHAPTER 5
First what, then how
Before you start to work on a 
problem, work out what it is you’re 
supposed to be doing.
Go through the question and 
underline the important parts.
Only think about how you’ll do the 
problem once you’ve worked out 
what they’re looking for.
Start with a sketch
Start every physics problem with 
a sketch. No, really - start every 
physics problem with a sketch!
A sketch gathers everything you 
know into one place in a visual 
way, so your brain is free to think 
about physics.
Math with vectors
Add vector arrows by lining them up 
“nose-to-tail.”
OR
If your vectors all lie along the same 
line, define one direction as positive 
and the other as negative.
Add the sizes of the vectors, making 
sure you get the signs correct.
Is direction important?
Ask yourself, “Is direction important?”
Then you’ll know whether to use scalars 
(like distance and speed) or vectors 
(like displacement and velocity).
Measuring angles
In physics, you measure angles 
counter-clockwise from the 
horizontal.
You can measure angles greater 
than 180° with your protractor 
either by thinking of how much 
greater than 180° the angle is, or 
how much less than 360° it is.
Direction of velocity 
and acceleration vectors
An object’s velocity vector points in the 
direction it’s currently moving in.
An object’s acceleration vector points in 
the direction the velocity is currently 
changing in. If the velocity is being 
changed by a push, the acceleration 
vector points in the direction of the push.
physics toolbox

    193
You have a steel ball-bearing, a tape measure, a timer, and an electromagnet that you can rig to switch off 
when the timer starts. Your challenge is to design an experiment which will enable you to draw a graph of 
displacement vs. time for a falling object.
a. List any additional equipment you would like to use.
An electromagnet is a magnet 
that can be switched on and 
off using electricity.
b. Draw and label a diagram of your experimental design.
c. Briefly describe how you would carry out your experiment. You should mention what measurements 
you will make, and how you will use them to draw graphs that will show you a value for the displacement 
at any time.
Try it
Don’t be afraid to try this! The next few 
pages will take you through it ... but you 
already know more than you think you do!
You’re right. Experiments are 
valuable tools for observation.
The next few pages will show you an experimental 
design set-up…but put yourself in the problem, 
and try it on your own first. Don’t worry, you 
already know more than you think you do.
Hey ... I thought physics was supposed 
to be about labs! Like, when do we actually 
start doing experiments and stuff...

194
6. You have a steel ball-bearing, a tape measure, a timer 
and an electromagnet that you can rig to switch off when 
the timer starts. Your challenge is to design an experiment 
which will enable you to draw a graph of displacement vs. 
time for a falling object.
List any additional equipment you would like to use.
Draw and label a diagram of your experimental design.
Briefly describe how you would carry out your 
experiment. You should mention what measurements 
you will make, and how you will use them to draw a 
graph that shows you a value for the displacement at 
any time.
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Design an experiment” Question
Physics is based on experimental results, so 
it’s important to be able to design an experiment yourself. 
There are often several good ways to do this. Some problems 
will give you a list of equipment, but you may not need to use it 
all, depending on what you decide to do.
When you see a “design an experiment” question, 
make sure you underline everything you’re supposed to do 
to separate out the wheat from the chaff and clarify 
the task in hand.
These types of questions always give you a list of 
available equipment, and may say that additional items 
are available if you can think of any you’d like to use.
These types of questions also contain buzzwords 
that tell you exactly what you’re supposed to do. 
So be careful - if it says ‘draw’ and you don’t, 
you’ll automatically lose points!
The AP Physics B 
free response paper 
ALWAYS includes at 
least one question that 
asks you to design or 
analyze an experiment.
If you’re plotting 
any graph involving 
time, then time 
should be on the 
horizontal axis.

195
Look out for buzzwords in the 
question that tell you exactly what 
you’re supposed to do!
Description that says what you have to do
A number with units. The reason you’re doing your 
experiment - you can work it out from your results.
Words that say how you set up your experiment.
Annotation with arrow describing part of a drawing.
Make a picture of how the equipment you’re using 
works together.
Make a plot of one set of measurements against 
another set of measurements.
Words that say what you do with the equipment 
you’ve set up.
A number, with units, that you read from a scale or a 
meter in the course of your experiment.
Match each term to its description, which says what 
you have to do when you answer the question.
Term
design
describe how you 
would carry out ...
draw a graph
label
measurement
a value for ...
draw a diagram

196
Description that says what you have to do
A number, with units. The reason you’re doing your 
experiment - you can work it out from your results.
Words that say how you set up your experiment.
Annotation with arrow describing part of a drawing.
Make a picture of how the equipment you’re using 
works together.
Make a plot of one set of measurements against 
another set of measurements.
Words that say what you do with the equipment 
you’ve set up.
A number, with units, that you read from a scale or a 
meter in the course of your experiment.
Match each term with its description, which says 
what you have to do when you answer the question.
Buzzword
design
describe how you 
would carry out ...
draw a graph
label
measurement
a value for ...
draw a diagram
6. You have a steel ball-bearing, a tape measure, a timer, 
and an electromagnet that you can rig to switch off when 
the timer starts. Your challenge is to design an experiment 
which will enable you to draw a graph of displacement vs. 
time for a falling object.
First up, you’ll find 
it helpful to jot down 
what you can measure or do 
with the equipment you have 
available, and write down any 
relationships between them. Also 
write down what you’re being 
asked to do!

197
If you have a list of equipment, ask yourself: “What can I DO 
with this stuff?” and “How can these items work together?”
Here are all the pieces of equipment mentioned in the question. Your job is to write down what quantity 
you can measure with it, and what you can do with it in the experimental setup.
You should also write down what it is you’re being asked to find by doing your experiment, plus any 
relationships between the units of what you can measure and what you’re being asked to work out.
Piece of equipment
What can you measure / do with it?
Steel ball-bearing
Tape measure
Timer
Electromagnet
What I’m supposed to do:
Relationships between what the items in the 
table can measure and what I’m being asked 
to work out:
Any other equipment you’ll need to be able to 
do the experiment:

198
Something to hold the electromagnet. And a 
way to stop the timer when the ball lands.
I can measure displacement (m) with the tape 
measure and time (s) with the timer.
Look at the UNITS of what you can measure and what you’re 
being asked to work out. How do they relate to each other?
Draw a graph of displacement vs. time.
Here are all the pieces of equipment mentioned in the question. Your job is to write down what quantity 
you can measure with it, and what you can do with it in the experimental setup.
You should also write down what it is you’re being asked to find by doing your experiment, plus  any 
relationships between the units of what you can measure and what you’re being asked to work out.
Piece of equipment
What can you measure / do with it?
Steel ball-bearing
  I can drop it so that it falls downwards.
Tape measure
  I can measure the height that the ball-bearing falls from.
Timer
  I can time how long the ball-bearing takes to fall.
Electromagnet
  It can hold the ball-bearing then drop it when it switches off. 
  The timer starts when the magnet switches off.
What I’m supposed to do
Relationships between what the items in the 
table can measure and what I’m being asked 
to work out:
Any other equipment you’ll need to be able to 
do the experiment:
You wouldn’t draw out a table like 
this in an exam - just annotate the 
equipment list you’re given!

199
This particular question asks if you’d like to use 
any other equipment. So do the ‘ideal world’ test - in an ideal 
world, what would you need to measure the values as accurately as 
possible? Then, you actually need to design the experiment in 
your head before you can describe, draw, or label it!
You need extra equipment to stop the 
timer and to hold the electromagnet
You can measure displacement and time using the 
tape measure and timer. And the question says that 
the electromagnet can be rigged up to release the 
ball-bearing when the timer starts.
All you need then is to stop the timer when the ball 
lands - which will need an extra piece of equipment, 
for instance a switch plate rigged up to stop the 
timer when the ball lands on it.
Is the experimental setup you now have in mind similar to what you drew at the start, or is it different?
If it’s different, draw and label a diagram of your new experimental setup, and explain how you’ll use it to 
make measurements and draw a graph that shows you a value for the displacement at any time.
You might not have any changes, and if you don’t...that’s okay too...

200
Is the experimental setup you now have in mind similar to what you drew at the start, or is it different?
If it’s different, draw and label a diagram of your new experimental setup, and explain how you’ll use it to 
make measurements and draw a graph that shows you a value for the displacement at any time.
You might not have any changes, and if you don’t...that’s okay too...
Use the clamp stand and the tape measure to set 
the height of the ball-bearing. Time how long it 
takes to fall from that height using the timer, 
electromagnet and switch plate. Use a range of 
heights, from the smallest the timer can measure 
to the height of the ceiling, and several heights 
in between as well. And time each height two or 
three times to reduce random errors.
Then, plot a graph with the time along the 
horizontal axis and the distance up the vertical 
axis. Draw a smooth line through the data points. 
The graph lets you read off the time it’ll take 
for the ball-bearing to fall any distance.
Ball-bearing
Electromagnet
Timer
Switch plate
Clamp stand
Distance from 
bottom of 
ball-bearing 
to top of 
switch plate 
(tape measure)
You have a steel ball-bearing, a tape measure, a timer, and an electromagnet that 
you can rig to switch off when the timer starts. Your challenge is to design an 
experiment which will enable you to draw a graph of displacement vs. time for a 
falling object.
a. List any additional equipment you would like to use.
b. Draw and label a diagram of your experimental design.
c. Briefly describe how you would carry out your experiment. You should mention 
what measurements you will make, and how you will use them to draw graphs 
that will show you a value for the displacement at any time.
Make sure you 
include labels so 
it’s clear what 
everything is.
Don’t spend too much 
time making your 
diagram look pretty.
On your graphs, time should always 
be along the horizontal axis.
Try it

201
The AP Physics B free response paper 
ALWAYS has a ‘design an experiment’ 
question in it.
You will be given a list of equipment. 
There’s often more than one way of 
designing an experiment that will work, so 
don’t feel that you need to use it all.
You can also choose extra equipment if you 
have a good reason for using it.
Read the question carefully, and underline 
what it asks you to do.
If the question asks you to design, 
describe, draw, label or explain, that’s 
what you get points for!
You may find it useful to jot down what 
you can measure or do with each piece 
of equipment to get your creative juices 
flowing.
Remember to explain clearly what you’ll do 
in your experiment - how you’ll use your 
equipment, and what you’ll plot on a graph.
If you’re plotting a graph, time always goes 
along the horizontal axis.








Can’t you, like, do a summary 
of that or something?!
Remember to 
explain clearly 
what you’ll do in 
your experiment!


this is a new chapter    203
Handed off to the running back ... 
he just covered about 5 meters in a second 
on a 30° diagonal from the line of scrimmage 
... now he’s changed direction - look at that 
acceleration ...  an overall gain of 1 meter so 
far, and he’s still going ...
Displacement, Velocity, and Acceleration
6
What’s going on?
It’s hard to keep track of more than one thing at a time.    
When something falls, its displacement, velocity, and acceleration are all important at 
the same time. So how can you pay attention to all three without missing anything? In this 
chapter, you’ll increase your experiment, graph, and slope superpowers in preparation 
for bringing everything together with an equation or two.
It’s hard to keep track of more than one thing at a time.    
When something falls, its displacement, velocity, and acceleration are all important at 
the same time. So how can you pay attention to all three without missing anything? In this 
chapter, you’ll increase your experiment, graph, and slope superpowers in preparation 
for bringing everything together with an equation or two.
Hey ... can’t we 
just show it on the 
chalkboard during 
the replay?!

204    Chapter 6
Just another day in the desert ...
The Emu runs at 54 
kilometers per hour.
The cage will fall 
on the target.
The Dingo pushes the 
cage off the platform 
as soon as the Emu 
rounds the corner.
The target is 30 m 
from the corner.
The Dingo needs to 
know how high the 
platform should be, 
and whether the 
cage can cope with 
falling that far.
what’s going on here?
The Dingo wants the Emu to 
stay still for long enough to 
deliver an invitation to his 
birthday party.

you are here 4    205
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
Hmmm, falling cage landing exactly on running                 , tricky! The 
Emu’s                  is on the computer  up there -                 - and we 
set up the crane and target                  past the corner. The 
                   falls at the same time as the                  rounds 
the corner. If we work out the                 the cage falls in the                  
it takes the Emu to run                  ,we can set the crane to that 
                  and take home a fat                  . Be careful - the 
                  is only guaranteed if it hits the ground at less than 25 m/s.
To: Dingo    Re: Cage
Crane Company Magnets
The crane company gets to work on the problem. But we accidentally dropped their memo 
and some of the words fell off. Your job is to put them back in the right places. You might 
use some magnets more than once, and some not at all.
Also, underline the most important parts in the memo to separate the important stuff 
from the fluff - the wheat from the chaff.
... and another Dingo-Emu moment!
Every year it’s the same. The Dingo wants to invite the Emu to his birthday 
party - but the daft bird won’t stop running for long enough for him to 
deliver the invitation. So this year, the Dingo’s decided that extending a 
paw of friendship needs drastic measures. He’s hired a crane, and wants to 
push a cage off the platform the moment the Emu rounds the bend. But is 
this practical? What height does the platform need to be, and will 
the cage be able to handle hitting the ground at a high speed?
So the Dingo calls the crane company’s customer service department to ask 
some questions ...
Emu - Runningus fasticus
54 kilometers per hour
commission
height
cage
time
speed
Emu
54 km/h
54 m/s
velocity
30 km
distance
30 m

206    Chapter 6
54 m/s
velocity
30 km
These didn’t get used 
because the units are wrong.
The Emu’s speed, rather than 
his velocity, is important , as 
the road is curved.
Crane Company Magnets - Solution
The crane company gets to work on the problem. But we accidentally dropped their memo 
and some of the words fell off. Your job is to put them back in the right places. You might 
use some magnets more than once, and some not at all.
Also, underline the most important parts in the memo to separate the important stuff 
from the fluff - the wheat from the chaff.
Hmmm, falling cage landing exactly on running                 , tricky! The 
Emu’s                  is on the computer  up there -                 - and we 
set up the crane and target                  past the corner. The 
                   falls at the same time as the                  rounds 
the corner. If we work out the                 the cage falls in the                  
it takes the Emu to run                  ,we can set the crane to that 
                  and take home a fat                  . Be careful - the 
                  is only guaranteed if it hits the ground at less than 25 m/s.
To: Dingo    Re: Cage
commission
distance
height
30 m
cage
time
speed
Emu
54 km/h
Emu
30 m
cage
Which of these would 
you try to work out first?
magnets solution
What height should the crane be?
Will the cage be going faster than 
25  m/s when it hits the ground?
      NOTES
What time does the cage fall for?

you are here 4    207
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
How can you use what you know?
First things first. Work out the time it takes the Emu to cover 30 m from the 
corner to the target at a speed of 54 km/h.
The Dingo drops the cage as soon as the Emu rounds 
the corner. Then, the cage falling and the Emu 
running both take the same time to reach the target.
The time that the Emu takes to arrive depends on 
the speed he runs at and the distance he covers 
from the corner to the target. As the Emu always 
runs with a constant speed, you already know an 
equation you can use to do this.
Once you know the time it takes the Emu to arrive, 
you’ll have to figure out how far the cage falls 
during that time. This will give the Dingo the height 
that he needs to set the platform at.
However, if the cage travels faster than 25 m/s in 
the time it takes for the Emu to reach the target, this 
plan won’t work because the cage will hit the ground 
and be destroyed upon impact. 
Hint: You’ll need 
to convert units.
The Emu takes  
time to get 
from the corner 
to the target.
The cage takes 
time to get from 
the platform to 
the target.
These times are equal.
You haven’t dealt with falling 
things yet - but don’t worry, 
that’s what this chapter’s about!

208    Chapter 6
Work out the time it takes the Emu to cover 30 m from the corner to the target 
at a speed of 54 km/h.
Convert units: km/h to m/s
1000 m
54 km/h in m/s
60 mins
1 hour
60 s
1 km
km
hours
1 min
x
x
=  15 m/s
=  54
x
Work out the time it takes:
After stringing together 
conversion factors, you’re left 
with meters on the top and 
seconds on the bottom - m/s.
speed
 distance
 time
=
Equation comes from the units 
of speed. Meters per second is 
a distance divided by a time.
The Emu takes 2.0 seconds to 
reach the target - so the cage 
needs to take 2.0 seconds to 
reach the target as well.
You know that 
the Emu takes 
2.0 s to arrive 
at the target.
So the cage needs to take 
2.0 s to fall from the crane.
00:02.00
00:02.00
The problem gave numbers 
with 2 significant digits 
to work with, so your 
answer should have 2 sd.
If you don’t feel 
so confident about 
stringing them together, 
you can do the units 
conversion one step at a 
time. That’s fine too.
 time
 distance
speed
15 m/s
30 m
=
= 2.0 seconds (2 sd)
Rearrange 
equation to get 
 time = ...
=
speed  time   =    distance
This symbol 
means ‘implies 
that’. You 
can use it 
going from 
one line to 
the next as 
you rearrange 
an equation.
What height should the crane be?
Will the cage be going faster than 
25 m/s when it hits the ground?
       NOTES
What time does the cage fall for?
The cage falls for 2.0 s.
sharpen solution

you are here 4    209
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
So I have the time figured out, but uh ... I still don’t know 
how high the crane should be, or how fast the cage is going 
when it hits the ground. Isn’t that the point?
Don’t worry - you’ve already made progress.
When you started out, you knew a couple of facts about the 
Emu’s speed and the distance he covers - but nothing at all 
about the cage or the crane platform.
Now we need to figure out how fast the cage is going when 
it hits the ground after 2.0 s and  the distance it falls in that 
time.
BE the cage
Your job is to imagine that you’re the cage. 
What do you feel at each of the points 
in the picture? Which direction are you 
moving in? Are you speeding up 
or slowing down? Why are you 
moving like this?
Point 1 - Just 
been pushed off 
the platform
Point 4 - Just 
about to land 
(but hasn’t hit 
the ground yet)
Point 2
Point 3
Don’t be afraid 
to start out doing 
a question, even 
if you’re not quite 
sure what direction 
it’s going to take.
At Point 1:  
 
At Point 2:  
 
At Point 3:  
 
At Point 4:  
 
Why: 

210    Chapter 6
BE the cage - SOLUTION
Your job is to imagine that you’re the cage. 
What do you feel at each of the points 
in the picture? Which direction are you 
moving in? Are you speeding up 
or slowing down? Why are you 
moving like this??
Point 1 - Just 
been pushed off 
the platform
Point 4 - Just 
about to land 
(but hasn’t hit 
the ground yet)
Point 2
Point 3
In this problem, we gave you headings to use, 
but it’s always a good idea to make it clear 
which part of the problem you’re answering 
at each stage!
You know that 
something is 
accelerating if 
its velocity is 
changing.
The cage accelerates as it falls
You’ve spotted that the cage accelerates as it falls. 
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity. You 
can tell that the cage is accelerating because its velocity 
is continually changing. It starts off with zero velocity, 
then gets faster and faster until it hits the ground.
With that in mind, it’s on to working out the cage’s 
velocity after 2.0 seconds and its displacement in 
that time so that the Dingo knows whether the idea’s a 
starter - and if so, how high to make the platform.
We’re going to talk about 
the cage’s displacement 
and velocity, as the 
DIRECTION is starting 
to become important 
- the cage isn’t being 
launched up into the air, 
just dropped!
be the solution
At Point 1: A ‘special point’, as I’m suddenly going 
from standing still to starting to move downwards. 
At Point 2: Falling down faster than I was at 
point 1. 
At Point 3: Falling down even faster than I was at 
point 2.. 
At Point 4: This is the fastest I’ll be going before 
I hit the ground (I’ll be here after 2.0 seconds if 
the height is right). 
Why: Gravity’s accelerating me downwards.

you are here 4    211
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
You’ve already used the equation 
speed  =
 distance
 time
 to work out that it takes 
the Emu 2.0 seconds to reach the target.
The ‘vector version’ of this equation is
 velocity  =
displacement
 time
, or v =
x
t.
It’s fundamentally the same, except that it 
involves velocity and displacement instead of 
speed and distance.
Hey ... what’s with this talk of 
displacement and velocity? I was quite 
happy with distance and speed.
Displacement and velocity will be 
more useful to you in the long term.
As the cage is always falling in the same 
direction - straight down - you could use either 
distance and speed or displacement and velocity 
to describe its motion.
But soon you’re going to be dealing with 
situations where direction is crucially important, 
and you must use vectors. As you practice using 
displacement, velocity, and acceleration for the 
cage, you’ll soon get comfortable with them, 
which will stand you in good stead in the future.
 means 
‘change in’
‘ Vectorize’ your equation
v =
x
t
velocity
change in 
displacement
change in time
Displacement is the ‘vector version’ of 
distance and is represented by the letter x in 
equations (or the letter s in some courses).
Velocity is rate of change of displacement 
- the ‘vector version’ of speed. It is 
represented by the letter v in equations.
Acceleration is rate of change of velocity, 
represented by a, and doesn’t have a scalar 
equivalent. If an object’s velocity is changing, 
you need to know which direction the 
velocity is changing in for the statement to 
have meaning. Otherwise, you don’t know if 
the object’s speeding up, slowing down, or 
changing direction - which are all ways that 
an object’s velocity can change.
Displacement, Velocity, 
and Acceleration Up Close
We’re using bold letters, like x and v, to represent 
vectors and italic letters, like t, to represent scalars.

212    Chapter 6
Jim: We also need to work out what its velocity will be when it hits 
the ground. If that’s more than 25 m/s, then the cage will shatter.
Joe: Why don’t we work out the velocity first? That way, if it turns 
out that the cage is going too fast after it’s been falling for  
2.0 seconds, we won’t have to bother working out the displacement 
as well. 
Frank: Sounds good. I’m all for spotting shortcuts!
Jim: Well, we’ve done something similar before with that cyclist 
who rode everywhere at the same speed. Can’t we use the equation 
v  =
x
t  to work out the cage’s velocity
Frank: Yeah, let’s just use that equation! We want to know the 
velocity, and that equation says “v =” on the left hand side. v for 
velocity. It’s perfect!
Joe: Um, I’m not so sure. The cage doesn’t have the same velocity 
all the time - it accelerates as it falls.
Jim: But we can still use that equation, right? If we work out the 
displacement, we can divide it by the time to get the velocity.
Joe: I don’t think so. If the cage always had the same velocity, then, 
fair enough, that would work. But the cage’s velocity is always 
changing because it’s accelerating - it isn’t constant. We want to 
know what its velocity is at the very end, as it hits the ground.
Frank: Oh ... and when it hits the ground, it’s only been traveling at 
that velocity for a split second.
Jim: Yeah, as it gets closer to the ground its velocity increases, so 
it covers more and more meters per second. If we divided the total 
displacement by the total time, we’d get the cage’s average velocity.
Joe: But we need to know what the velocity is the instant it hits the 
ground. An average velocity’s no good to us.
Frank: I guess we need to do something different ...
NEVER blindly stick 
numbers into an 
equation. Always ask 
yourself “What does 
this equation MEAN?”
If you calculate the cage’s velocity first, you 
won’t have to bother calculating its displacement 
if it turns out that the cage will break.
What height should the crane be?
Will the cage be going faster than 
25 m/s when it hits the ground?
    NOTES
What time does the cage fall for?
The cage falls for 2.0 s.
DO THIS NEXT!!
(Come back to this if necessary.)
displacement or velocity first?
So we need to work out the displacement of the 
cage after 2.0 seconds. That doesn’t sound too bad.

you are here 4    213
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
The equation v  =
x
t  works fine if you have 
something traveling at a constant velocity. But 
the cage gets faster and faster as it falls - and you 
want to know what its velocity is the instant it 
hits the ground.
The best you can do with the equation is to work 
out the cage’s average velocity, which is the 
constant velocity it would need to travel with 
to cover that displacement in that time. But since 
the cage isn’t traveling with a constant velocity, 
this value won’t help you out.
You’ve previously used the equation v  =
x
t  to work out the 
average velocity of a cyclist who was slowed down by stop lights, 
and it gave you the slope of a straight line between the start and 
end points of his displacement-time graph. Using the slope of 
his displacement-time graph at that point, you were also able to 
work out his instantaneous velocity at any point.
How might you try to work out a value 
for the instantaneous velocity of the 
cage just before it hits the ground.
You want an instantaneous velocity, 
not an average velocity
Displacement
(meters)
100
200
500
400
300
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
600
700
1000
900
800
Time
(minutes)
Plot of displacement vs time 
for Alex’s late delivery
vavg =
x
t
x
t
As it falls, the 
cage’s velocity 
increases.
The acceleration is the 
rate at which the velocity 
of the cage changes.
As its velocity increases, the 
cage’s displacement is greater 
in the same amount of time.
This vector represents the velocity of the 
cage just before it hits the ground. The 
length of the vector represents the size 
of the velocity. Don’t be put off by it 
appearing to go ‘into’ the target.
This is the 
graph for 
the cyclist in 
chapter 4.
Strictly speaking, you used distance and 
speed rather than displacement and 
velocity, but the principle is the same.
v
v
v
∆x
∆x
∆x

214    Chapter 6
So could we draw a displacement-time graph 
for a falling thing, and calculate its slope at t = 2.0 s to get 
its instantaneous velocity? Will that part still work?
... but didn’t we already 
design an experiment 
like this?
ar to what you drew at the start - or is it different?
If it’s different, draw and label a diagram of your new experimental setup - and explain how you’ll use it 
to make measurements and draw a graph that shows you a value for the displacement at any time.
If it’s the same as what you already did, you can skip this Sharpen. :-)
Use the clamp stand and the tape measure to set 
the height of the ball-bearing. Time how long it 
takes to fall from that height using the timer, 
electromagnet and switch plate. Use a range of 
heights, from the smallest the timer can measure 
to the height of the ceiling, and several heights 
in between as well. And time each height two or 
three times to reduce random errors.
The plot a graph with the time along the 
horizontal axis and the distance up the vertical 
axis. Draw a smooth line through the data points. 
The graph lets you read off the time it’ll take 
for the ball-bearing to fall any distance.
Ball-bearing
Electromagnet
Timer
Switch plate
Clamp stand
Distance from 
bottom of 
ball-bearing 
to top of 
switch plate 
(tape measure)
Make sure you 
include labels so 
it’s clear what 
everything is.
Don’t spend too much 
time making your 
diagram look pretty.
On your graphs, time should always 
be along the horizontal axis.
Understanding 
the physics helps 
you to work out 
how to solve a 
problem even if 
you can’t directly  
use an equation 
you already know.
You may be able to use the same method 
even if you can’t use the same equation.
As the cage doesn’t fall with a constant velocity, the best you 
can do with the equation v  =
x
t  is work out its average 
velocity - which isn’t what you want. You can’t reuse this 
equation to work out the cage’s instantaneous velocity 
because the context is different.
But you can use the same method even if you can’t 
directly reuse the same equation. If you draw a 
displacement-time graph for a falling thing and are 
able to calculate its slope at t = 2.0 s, this will give you 
the instantaneous velocity of the cage. As long as you 
understand the physics, you can work out how to do a 
problem even if you can’t directly use an equation you 
already know.
Though you still need to design the experiment...
methods sometimes work when an equation won’t

you are here 4    215
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
Time
(seconds)
(meters)
0.50
1.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
0
0
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
1.00
0.90
Plot of
Displacement
3.00
When you carry out the experiment with the 
falling ball-bearing, electromagnet, and timer 
that you designed earlier, you get the results 
shown in the table.
Use these measurements to draw a displacement- 
time graph for the falling ball-bearing.
(Don’t worry about calculating the slope of your 
graph for now - you’ll do that next.)
Displacement 
of ball ( m )
Time 1
( s )
Time 2 
( s )
0.10
0.142
0.150
0.25
0.228
0.224
0.50
0.316
0.319
0.75
0.387
0.390
1.00
0.456
0.451
1.50
0.552
0.556
2.00
0.639
0.637
2.50
0.712
0.712
3.00
0.779
0.782

216    Chapter 6
When you carry out the experiment with the 
falling ball-bearing, electromagnet, and timer 
that you designed earlier, you get the results 
shown in the table.
Use these measurements to draw a displacement- 
time graph for the falling ball-bearing.
(Don’t worry about calculating the slope of your 
graph for now - you’ll do that next.)
Time
(seconds)
(meters)
0.50
1.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
0
0
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
1.00
0.90
Plot of displacement vs. time for falling ball-bearing
Displacement
3.00
If your points don’t 
lie along a straight 
line, draw a smooth 
curved line instead.
Displacement 
of ball ( m )
Time 1
( s )
Time 2 
( s )
0.10
0.142
0.150
0.25
0.228
0.224
0.50
0.316
0.319
0.75
0.387
0.390
1.00
0.456
0.451
1.50
0.552
0.556
2.00
0.639
0.637
2.50
0.712
0.712
3.00
0.779
0.782
Remember to include the point 
(0, 0) - the ball-bearing has 
zero displacement at t = 0.
It’s important to mention 
that this object is falling.
sharpen solution

you are here 4    217
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
So if our points obviously don’t lie along a straight 
line, we shouldn’t try to force them onto one?
Look at where the points are to 
work out what type of line to draw
If your points look like they ought to lie along 
a straight line, then draw a straight line that 
passes as close to as many points as possible.
If your points look like they ought to lie along a 
curve, then draw a smooth curve that passes as 
close to as many points as possible.
But never play ‘connect the dots’!
Q: So ... why am I drawing a 
displacement-time graph when I want to 
know the cage’s velocity after 2.0 s?
A: You can use the displacement-time 
graph to get the cage’s velocity after 2.0 s.
Q: But what does velocity have to do 
with displacement?
A: Velocity is rate of change of 
displacement. That means that the slope at 
a point on a displacement-time graph is the 
same as the velocity at that point.
Q: Velocity and displacement are 
vectors, right? Do I have to write them in 
bold letters like in the book?
A: Not if you’re just handwriting them. 
We’ve made the vectors bold so you get 
used to thinking of them the right way, but 
you don’t have to do that in your solutions.
Q: Why does the slope of a graph 
matter? How does it help me?
A: The slope of a graph is the change 
in the vertical direction divided by the 
change in the horizontal direction. On a 
displacement-time graph, displacement 
is on the vertical axis, and time is on the 
horizontal axis. 
 
So the equation for the slope gives you 
change in displacement divided by change 
in time - which is the same as the equation 
for velocity.
Q: OK, so I see why the displacement-
time graph is important. But why haven’t I 
drawn a straight line on it this time?
A: Last time, the points on your graph 
lay along a straight line. But this time it’s 
obvious that they don’t. 
 
Q: So should I mimic a spreadsheet 
program, using my ruler to draw straight 
lines from point to point?
A: No, not in physics. The cage doesn’t 
move jerkily from point to point - it moves 
smoothly. So you should draw a smooth line 
that goes as close to as many of the points 
as possible.
Q: OK, so the displacement-time 
graph is curved. I can work out the slope 
of a straight line graph, it’s 
x
t . 
 
But how can I work out the slope of the 
curved graph  when it won’t “sit still” for 
long enough for me to work out 
x
t  for 
a straight portion?
A:Funny you should ask ...
Never play 
‘connect the 
dots’ with your 
points. Always 
use a smooth 
line (whether 
it’s straight or 
curved).

218    Chapter 6
A tangent to the 
curve touches it at 
only one point.
 horizontal 
direction
 vertical 
direction
Choose two points 
to calculate the 
gradient of the 
straight line.
You already know how to calculate 
the slope of a straight line...
In Chapter 4, you calculated the slope of a 
straight line graph by picking two points on 
it, and calculating 
 vertical direction
 horizontal direction .
If the graph is plotted with displacement, x , 
on the vertical axis and time, t , on the 
horizontal axis, this expression for the slope 
becomes x
t , which is the velocity.
A tangent is a line that 
touches a curve at one point 
without crossing it.
Velocity 
is rate of 
change of 
displacement 
with time.
You can calculate the slope at a point on a 
curved graph by drawing a tangent. This is a 
straight line that touches a curve at only that 
point without crossing the curve.
This means that the tangent has the same 
slope as the curve at that point - so calculating 
the slope of the tangent tells you the slope of 
the curve at that point.
Slope   =
 horizontal direction
 vertical direction
t
x
Slope   =   Velocity
Slope   =
A point on a curved line has 
the same slope as its tangent
 horizontal direction =  t
 vertical direction =  x
Work out the slope of the 
tangent the same way you 
worked out the slope of a 
straight line graph.
We haven’t put units on the axes 
because the graph would still be the 
same SHAPE whatever the units 
may be.
x
 horizontal 
direction
 vertical 
direction
t
x
t
Graph of displacement vs time
Graph of displacement vs. time
a straight line can have a slope

you are here 4    219
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
We’ve marked the highest values 
you’ve obtained so far on the axes.
You need to extrapolate 
the graph as far as you can 
- at least up to t = 2.0 s.
Q: Isn’t a tangent something to do with circles?
A: In this context, a tangent is a straight line that touches a curve 
at one point but doesn’t intersect it. The tangent has the same slope 
as the curve at that point. You can also talk about a tangent to a 
circle - a straight line that touches it at one point.
Q: Aren’t there tangents in trigonometry as well?
A: ‘Tangent’ means something different in the context of 
trigonometry. The definition there is related to this one. You’ll learn 
more about the other meaning in chapter 9.
Q: So here, I can draw a tangent that touches my curve at a 
point and use it to work out the velocity at that point?
A: Yes - the slope of a displacement-time graph gives you the rate 
of change of distance with time, which is the same as the velocity.
Q: But the graph I’ve drawn only goes up to 0.78 s, and I 
want to know the velocity after 2.0 s. Do I have to extrapolate my 
graph out to 2.0 s or something?
A: Let’s try it ...
When you drew the displacement-time 
graph for the cyclist, you were able 
to extrapolate it further than the 
measurements you’d originally made.
Now you can extrapolate your graph 
for the ball bearing experiment. Your 
set of measurements goes up to 0.78 s, 
but you’re interested in what’s going 
on after it’s been falling for 2.0 s. We’ve 
redrawn it to give you more space. 
0.78
3.00
t (s)
x (m)
Graph of displacement vs. time

220    Chapter 6
0.78
3.00
t (s)
x (m)
Graph of displacement vs. time
It’s nearly impossible to 
extrapolate a curve accurately.
It turns out that this method isn’t so hot after 
all. Drawing the displacement-time graph was 
fine, but this time, instead of being a straight 
line, it’s a curve.
With a straight line displacement-time graph, 
its easy to use a ruler to continue the straight 
line as far as you need to.
But you can’t extrapolate from a curved graph 
in the same way, as it’s almost impossible to 
tell exactly how the curve will continue.
It’s only 
meaningful to 
extrapolate a 
graph if its 
points lie along 
a straight line. 
This TOTALLY stinks!! 
Extrapolating from a straight 
line is fine, but how am I supposed 
to deal with curves when there are 
so many options?!
Maybe the 
graph does 
this...
...or this...
...or this...
...or this...
... or maybe 
even this...
... or maybe it doesn’t 
do any of these 
things at all, but does 
something else instead!
When you drew the displacement-time 
graph for the cyclist, you were able 
to extrapolate it further than the 
measurements you’d originally made.
Now you can extrapolate your graph for 
the ball bearing experiment. Your current 
set of measurements goes up to 0.78 s 
but you’re interested in what’s going 
on after it’s been falling for 2.0 s. We’ve 
redrawn it to give you more space. 
sorta solution

you are here 4    221
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
Joe: But our curved graph looks very plausible. If the ball-bearing’s 
getting faster as it falls, then its displacement in the same amount of 
time will keep on getting larger. Look: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Frank: OK, so maybe it’s not a total disaster. But we still need to work 
out the cage’s velocity after two seconds. I don’t see how we can do 
that - without dropping the actual cage from a distance high enough to 
make it fall for 2.0 s. That sounds tough. Even in a room with a 3 meter 
ceiling, we didn’t get the ball-bearing to fall for more than 0.78 seconds.
Joe: We can’t keep on dropping the cage - we might break it, which is 
what we’re trying to avoid! Plus there’d be the repair bill for the road.
Jim: Hmmm. When we were drawing a displacement-time graph for a 
cyclist, we didn’t ever need him to ride long distances, just short ones.
Frank: That’s because we were able to extrapolate his displacement-
time graph. But we already said we can’t do that here!
Jim: The last time we drew a displacement versus time graph, we 
calculated its slope to work out the pizza guy’s velocity. And then we 
used that in an equation to work out his time for any distance.
Frank: But here the velocity’s changing - it doesn’t have one single 
value. We already said we can’t use the equation we worked out then.
Joe: But what if we use the slope of our displacement-time graph at 
various points to plot a velocity-time graph? If it’s a nice shape, we 
might be able to extrapolate it and use it to get the velocity after 2.0 s 
Jim: Yeah, if we draw some tangents on our displacement - time 
graph, we could do that. It might just work ...
Usually when you 
do an experiment, 
you’ll use the 
results to draw a 
graph - then use 
the graph to work 
out an EQUATION.
Time
Displacement
Same amount of time.
Displacement in 
same amount of 
time is larger 
when it’s been 
falling for longer.
So that was a dismal failure. We drew a 
displacement-time graph just like we did 
before, but it’s ended up curved, and we can’t 
extrapolate. Physics stinks.

222    Chapter 6
You want to plot the velocity-time graph for the ball-bearing. You can get values for its velocity at various 
points in time from the slope of your displacement-time graph at each point in time. As this is a curved 
graph, we’ve already selected some regularly-spaced points on it and sketched in their tangents for you.
a.  Fill in the table by choosing two points on each tangent and working out its slope - and, therefore, the 
velocity of the ball-bearing at each point.
b. Use the velocities you’ve calculated to plot the velocity-time graph for the ball-bearing. You’ll need to 
write in all the labels yourself and choose your own scale for the vertical axis.
You can work out something’s velocity 
at any point in time from the slope of 
its displacement-time graph.
0.50
1.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
0
0
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
1.00
0.90
3.00
Plot of displacement vs. time for falling ball-bearing
Time
(seconds)
(meters)
Displacement
You might like to go over 
the tangents with your 
ruler and different-
colored pens so you can 
tell them apart!
We already 
selected two 
points on this 
tangent and 
calculated 
the slope at 
t = 0.20 s.
sharpen that pencil

you are here 4    223
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
0
0
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
1.00
0.90
Time at point 
(s)
x  (m)
t  (s)
 Velocity  =          (m/s)
0.00
0.20
1.65 - 0.00  =  1.65
0.95 - 0.10  =  0.85
                =  1.94 (3 sd)
0.40
0.60
0.76
x
t
1.65
0.85
a.
  Plot of
b.
This is  x 
between two 
points you pick 
on the tangent.
This is  t 
between two 
points you pick 
on the tangent.
You’ll need to 
pick a suitable 
scale for your 
vertical axis.

224    Chapter 6
v
1.0
2.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
  Plot of velocity vs. time for falling ball-bearing
6.0
Velocity 
(m/s)
Time 
(s)
7.0
Time at point 
(s)
x  (m)
t  (s)
 Velocity  =          (m/s)
0.00
0
1
                =     0
0.20
1.65 - 0.00  =  1.65
0.95 - 0.10  =  0.85
                =  1.94 (3 sd)
0.40
2.65 - 0.20 = 2.45
0.88 - 0.25 = 0.63
          = 3.89 (3 sd)
0.60
3.25 - 0.25 = 3.00
0.85 - 0.34 = 0.51
          = 5.88 (3 sd)
0.76
3.15 - 0.45 = 2.70
0.80 - 0.44 = 0.36           = 7.50 (3 sd)
∆x
∆t
1.65
0.85
0.63
2.45
0.36
2.70
0.51
3.00
0
1
Time
Displacement
(seconds)
(meters)
0.50
1.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
0
0
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
1.00
0.90
Plot of displacement vs time for falling ball-bearing
3.00
These are the points 
we chose to use. If you 
chose slightly different 
points or got slightly 
different values for 
the velocities, then 
don’t worry as long as 
you were close!
Axes need to have 
labels and units!
Here we used 
a scale that 
spreads things 
out nicely.
Finally, a 
straight 
line ... !
Only give as many 
significant figures 
on your scale as 
you are able to 
plot on your graph.
0
0
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
1.00
0.90
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
sharpen solution
a.
b.

you are here 4    225
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
Jim: That looks, hmmm, nice. I’m starting to find straight lines strangely 
comforting, like they’re somehow meant to be. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Frank: But what now? We still need to work out what the velocity will 
be after 2.0 s. Our graph only goes up to 0.78 s.
Jim: We can always extrapolate the graph out to 2.0 s and read off 
the velocity. It’s OK to extrapolate straight line graphs!
Joe: Yeah ... but it would be kinda nice to come up with an equation if 
we can, so we can quickly work out the velocity at any time. Like, what if 
the Dingo wants to put the crane somewhere else?
Frank: With the cyclist, we used the slope of his displacement-time 
graph to work out the equation v  =
x
t .
Jim: The cyclist’s displacement-time graph was a lovely straight line, like 
this one. Except this is a velocity-time graph. I wonder if we can use it to 
work out an equation in a similar way.
Joe: Well, the slope of the velocity-time graph will be v
t  because 
velocity is on the vertical axis this time. So the slope would be the rate of 
change of velocity ...
Frank: Hey! Didn’t we say before that the acceleration is the rate of 
change of velocity? So we can use the slope to get the equation a  =
v
t .
Jim: Ooh - because it’s a lovely straight line graph, the slope is constant. 
So the acceleration must be constant. Which means we can use the 
graph to calculate the acceleration - then use the acceleration to work 
out the velocity after any time!
The velocity 
increases at a 
steady rate as 
time passes.
Time
Velocity
Velocity-time graph 
for something falling
A lovely 
straight line!
The slope of a 
‘something’-time graph 
tells you the rate at 
which the ‘something’  
changes with time.
v =
x
t
a =
v
t
Velocity 
is rate of 
change of 
displacement.
Acceleration 
is rate of 
change of 
velocity.
We did it! We managed to plot a 
velocity-time graph for the ball-
bearing, and it’s a straight line

226    Chapter 6
The slope of something’s velocity-time graph 
lets you work out its acceleration
Acceleration is rate of change of velocity with time. So the slope of a velocity-time 
graph is the acceleration.
The pizza guy goes at a constant velocity, so his displacement-time graph has a 
constant slope. His velocity-time graph is a flat line, as his velocity is constant at all 
times. The slope of his velocity-time graph is zero, so his acceleration is zero.
The falling thing’s velocity-time graph is a straight line with a constant slope. 
As acceleration is rate of change of velocity, this means that it has a constant 
acceleration, equal to the slope of the velocity-time graph  a  =
v
t .
The slope of a 
velocity-time graph 
is the acceleration.
a =
v
t
Acceleration
Slope of velocity-
time graph
a
t
v
t
Constant 
value
Increasing 
value
Increasing 
gradient
Constant 
gradient
x
t
Graphs for a falling object 
(constant acceleration)
a
t
v
t
x
t
Constant 
gradient
Zero 
gradient
Zero 
value
Constant 
value
Velocity is constant 
at all times, so always 
has the same value. 
So the velocity-time 
graph is a flat line.
Velocity is constant, 
so acceleration is zero.
Graphs for Alex the cyclist 
(constant velocity)
Displacement-time
Displacement-time
Velocity-time
Velocity-time
Acceleration-time
Acceleration-time
getting acceleration from a slope

you are here 4    227
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
Q: Why do the graphs over there on 
the opposite page not have any numbers 
or units on them?
A: Because these are ‘sketch graphs’ 
where the shape is the most important thing.  
The x-t, v-t and a-t graphs for something 
with  a constant velocity will always have the 
same shape, no matter what that constant 
velocity is. Same goes for anything with 
constant acceleration.  
 
You’ll sometimes see graphs like this on an 
exam - these allow you to show that you 
understand physics principles by choosing, 
drawing, or explaining the shape of a graph.
Q: I don’t get why Alex’s acceleration- 
time graph is a flat line.
A:Alex cycles with a constant velocity. So 
at each point in time, his velocity is always 
the same. So the graph doesn’t go up or 
down - the value stays the same.
Q: And how do you get from that to 
‘zero value’ for the acceleration?
A: Acceleration is rate of change of 
velocity. The velocity-time graph shows 
that his velocity isn’t changing. So his 
acceleration must be zero.
Q: OK, I think I get Alex’s graphs now. 
But I’m still puzzled about how the falling 
thing’s displacement-time graph turned 
into a straight line velocity-time graph.
A: Velocity is the rate of change of 
displacement. As the curve gets steeper, 
its slope gets larger. So you know that the 
velocity increases as time goes on, and the 
velocity-time graph you just drew showed 
that the increases form a straight line.
Q: So, what are the units of 
acceleration, anyway? Surely I need to 
know that to be able to do calculations?
A: Funny you should ask ...
Work out the units of acceleration
Velocity is rate of change of displacement, in other words how something’s 
displacement varies with time. You already worked out that its units are meters per 
second (m/s).
Acceleration is rate of change of velocity, or how something’s velocity varies with 
time. Although you’ve met acceleration as a concept before, you now need to deal 
with acceleration in calculations. Which means that you need to know about its units.
Fill in the blanks in the table to work out the units of acceleration.
Quantity
is rate of 
change of
Units of the 
changing thing
Units of time
Units of 
quantity
Velocity
Displacement
m
s
         =  m/s
Acceleration
m
s
Hint: It’s easiest to write 
the units as fractions to 
work them out before 
changing them to the ‘inline’ 
style of m/s at the very end.

228    Chapter 6
Fill in the blanks in the table to work out the units of acceleration.
Quantity
is rate of 
change of
Units of the 
changing thing
Units of time
Units of 
quantity
Velocity
Displacement
m
s
         =  m/s
Acceleration
Velocity
m/s
s
   =     = m/s2
m
s
Think of m/s2 as (meters per second) per second
Velocity is the rate of change of displacement, so its units are 
meters per second, or m/s.
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity, so its units are 
[velocity] per second, or meters per second per second, or m/s2.
This might seem weird at first, as m2 is a visible area in ‘square 
meters,’ but there’s no such thing as a ‘square second’! But if you 
instead think of the units as (meters per second) per second, it 
makes a lot more sense.
s2 is a weird unit. I guess I 
should think of them as something 
other than ‘square seconds,’ right?
The units of acceleration are m/s2, 
or (meters per second) per second.
Square brackets around something is 
shorthand for ‘units of’. So [velocity] 
means ‘units of velocity’.
You’re dividing by seconds 
twice, so it works out as m/s2.
m
s2
mss
‘per’ means ‘divided by’
sharpen solution

you are here 4    229
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
a. Use your velocity-time graph to get a value for the acceleration of a falling object.
b. Use that to work out the cage’s velocity when it’s been falling for 2.0 s. Is this less than 25 m/s?
0
0
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
1.00
0.90
  Plot of velocity vs. time for falling ball-bearing
Velocity 
(m/s)
Time (s)
There’s space down here 
for you to show your work.
1.0
2.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
6.0
7.0
You already 
titled and 
labeled the 
graph, chose a 
vertical scale 
and plotted 
the points.

230    Chapter 6
0
0
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
1.00
0.90
  Plot of velocity vs. time for falling ball-bearing
Velocity 
(m/s)
Time (s)
a. Use your velocity-time graph to get a value for the acceleration of a falling object.
b. Use that to work out the cage’s velocity when it’s been falling for 2.0 s. Is this less than 25 m/s?
Try to choose points 
that lie EXACTLY 
on an intersection 
between two gridlines.
t
v
a  =
Acceleration   =
Rate of change of velocity
a  =
0.50 - 0.00
4.9 - 0.0
a  =
9.8 m/s2 (2 sd)
You can only quote the answer to 2 sd as the 
velocities are only plotted on the graph to 2 sd.
These were the points we chose - if you 
chose slightly different points and got a 
slightly different answer, that’s OK.
Remember to write 
down what it is 
you’re actually doing!
a.
b.
Velocity after 2.0 s:
t
v
a  =
This is less than 25 m/s, so the cage won’t break, and the plan is a go.
Your final answer should have 
2 sd, as the numbers you were 
working with only have 2 sd.
∆v  =  a t  =  9.8 × 2.0  =  19.6  =  20 m/s (2 sd)
The cage starts off with zero velocity. 
So a 20 m/s change in velocity means 
it ends up going at 20 m/s.
What height should the crane be?
Will the cage be going faster than 
25 m/s when it hits the ground?
     Notes
What time does the cage fall for?
The cage falls for 2.0 s.
DO THIS NEXT!!
(Come back to this if necessary.)
No, it’s only going at 20 m/s, 
so the cage won’t break.
sharpen solution
1.0
2.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
6.0
7.0

you are here 4    231
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
Success! You worked out the velocity 
after 2.0 s - and the cage won’t break!
You’ve just worked out that the cage will be going at 20 m/s after 
2.0 s, so the cage won’t break. - and the Dingo will be able to 
stop the Emu for long enough to deliver his party invitation! You 
got here by designing an experiment, which let you draw the 
displacement-time graph for a falling object.
Then, you used the slope of the 
velocity-time graph to calculate a value 
for the acceleration due to gravity, 
9.8 m/s2. 
Finally you used that value in the equation 
a  =
v
t  , which you rearranged to 
calculate the cage’s velocity.
The velocity is less than 25 m/s, so the cage 
won’t break.
Then, you used the slope at various points 
of the displacement-time graph to draw a 
velocity-time graph.
Ball-bearing
Electromagnet
Timer
Switch plate
Clamp stand
Displacement 
of ball-
bearing.
Will the cage 
be going so fast 
after 2.0 s 
that it breaks? 
What is its 
VELOCITY?
The Earth’s gravity 
accelerates falling objects at 
a constant rate of 9.8 m/s2.
Increasing slope 
means that velocity 
is increasing.
Constant slope means 
that acceleration is 
constant.
x
t
Graph of displacement vs. time 
for a falling object
v
t
Graph of velocity vs. time for a 
falling object
v = ?

232    Chapter 6
Q: I’ve seen values of 10 m/s2 or  
9.81 m/s2 for acceleration due to gravity 
used in other books. These values are 
both close to 9.8 m/s2 but...
A: The AP Physics B table of information 
gives the value of acceleration due to gravity 
as 9.8 m/s2. That’s what we’re going to use 
in this book.
Q: But surely I should practice with 
the value I’ll use in my exam?
A: Yes, that’ll be fine. Your answers 
won’t work out too different from ours, and 
the exact value you’re supposed to use will 
become second nature to you.
Q: I’m worried about the AP B multiple 
choice exam though. Doing calculations 
involving 9.8 without a calculator is a bit 
time-consuming, to say the least!
A: That’s right - in the AP B multiple 
choice exam, you need to do mental 
arithmetic because you’re not allowed to use 
a calculator. But at the start of the multiple 
choice exam, it says ‘Note: To simplify 
calculations, you may use g = 10 m/s2 in all 
problems.’ 
 
Multiplying and dividing by 10 is much, much 
easier than dealing with 9.8 s, so there’s no 
need to worry about that. 
 
 
Q: Hmmm. Why do you use ‘/s2’ to 
indicate dividing by s2 with units, but 
use 10—2 to indicate dividing by 102 in 
scientific notation?
A: These are the conventions that the 
AP physics course, table of information, and 
exam all use. It’s also possible to write m/s2 
as ms—2 - using the same convention as you 
do for scientific notation. If this is what you’re 
more used to, then do feel free to write your 
units like this instead.
Q: OK, so I got the value for the 
cage’s acceleration - but what about its 
displacement after 2.0 seconds?!
A: You’ll work that out in chapter 7 ...
Not so fast! All through this, we’ve been assuming that the ball-bearing 
and cage will both accelerate at the same rate. But don’t big things fall 
faster - so they must accelerate more than small things when you drop them!?
Gravity accelerates everything at the same 
rate (if air resistance is minimal)
Although everyday experience might lead you to think otherwise, 
the earth’s gravity accelerates everything at the same rate of 
9.8 m/s2  if you ignore the effect of air resistance.
The reason ‘light’ things like feathers fall more slowly than 
‘heavy’ things like ball-bearings or cages is because they’re falling 
through the air. The feather has a large surface area compared 
to its weight, so it’s held up more by the air. If the air wasn’t 
there, the feather and ball-bearing would land at the same time.
Most of the time in physics, you’ll be dealing with things 
like cages and ball-bearings, which have small surface areas 
compared to their weight. Unless a question states otherwise, 
you can safely ignore air resistance.
Sometimes it’s 
useful to make 
an assumption 
that simplifies a 
problem so you 
can solve the 
easier version.
gravity works

you are here 4    233
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
x
t
x
t
While we’re here, I’ve been wondering how it’s possible 
to calculate an ‘instantaneous’ velocity at a single point on a 
displacement-time graph. Surely you need to use two points, so you can 
work out the change that happens between them?!
You do need two points - but they 
can be really really close together
The first time you calculated a velocity from 
a displacement-time graph, it was for a cyclist 
who traveled with a constant velocity. So the 
graph had a constant slope, and it didn’t matter 
which two points you chose to use to calculate 
x and t since the value of the slope (and, 
therefore, the velocity) was always the same.
Now, you’ve had to deal with a falling thing for 
which the velocity is continually increasing. This 
produced a curved displacement-time graph where 
the slope was never the same from one moment to 
the next.
You can think of calculating the slope at a single 
point on this graph as calculating x and t 
over a very, very small interval, using two points 
infinitesimally close to the point you’re interested in.
If you’re talking about an instantaneous velocity at 
a single point like this, a more ‘correct’ way of writing 
your equation is to use a small letter ‘d’ to mean 
‘change in’ instead of a capital ‘ ’. This means that the 
change is infinitesimally small.
So you’d write the equation for instantaneous velocity 
as v  = dx
dt  to make it clear that you mean an 
instantaneous velocity measured over a tiny, tiny change 
in x and t rather than the larger change that using x 
and t would imply.
Practically speaking, there are two ways of calculating 
dx
dt : drawing a tangent (as you’ve already done) and 
using calculus (which isn’t part of this book).
Whichever two points you 
choose, 
x
t  will be the same, 
as the velocity is constant.
If you do this, it’s more correct 
to write dx
dt  instead of 
x
t
to show that the changes are 
infinitesimally small.
If you want to calculate 
the instantaneous velocity 
at a point, you need to 
choose two points that are 
really, really, really close 
together - practically on 
top of each other!
This means 
“smaller than any 
possible measure”.
A capital  implies 
that you mean a 
reasonable-sized 
change in a quantity.

234    Chapter 6
Bring on 
chapter 7!
Now onto solve for the displacement!
You know that the cage won’t be going fast enough to break when 
it hits the ground 2.0 s after being dropped, so it’s OK to go ahead 
with the plan. The notebook summarizes everything you’ve learned 
in this chapter about falling objects.
The Dingo’s plan to stop the Emu and invite him 
to the birthday party is taking shape!
So it’s on to chapter 7 - where you’ll calculate 
the cage’s displacement after 2.0 s. so that the 
Dingo knows how high to set the crane platform ...
What height should the crane be?
Will the cage be going faster than 
25 m/s when it hits the ground?
      Notes
What time does the cage fall for?
The cage falls for 2.0 s.
DO THIS FIRST!
(Come back to this if necessary.)
No, it’s only going at 20 m/s, 
so the cage won’t break.
Graphs
Equations
Don’t worry if the page 
looks incomplete - you’ll 
be adding more to your 
notebook in chapter 7.
Time
Displacement
Time
Acceleration
Time
Velocity
This is the value you’ve worked 
out for acceleration due to 
gravity - it’s constant.
These are the graphs 
you’ve worked out.
As the acceleration is constant, 
the acceleration-time graph is 
a flat line at a = 9.8 m/s2.
v  = dx
dt
a  = v
t
a = 9.8 m/s2
Velocity-time graph 
is a straight line, so 
acceleration is constant 
for any two points on it.
Displacement-time graph 
isn’t a straight line, 
so slope is continually 
changing. Therefore, you 
can only cite this equation 
for infinitesimally small 
changes in x and t.
Cage idea - 
things I worked out
You worked out the time and 
the velocity - now you just need 
to calculate the displacement.
almost done

you are here 4    235
displacement, velocity, and acceleration
Falling
Something falling close to the Earth is accelerated 
by gravity at a constant rate of 9.8 m/s2.
Constant 
acceleration
Something with constant acceleration has a straight line 
velocity-time graph described by the equation a  =
v
t
Scalar
Acceleration
Velocity
Graph
Special points
Time
Volume
Slope
Does it SUCK?
Area
Getting comfortable 
handling displacement, 
velocity and acceleration.
Falling
Equation
Constant acceleration
Scientific notation
Displacement
Be part of it
Vector
Speed
Distance
Units

236    Chapter 6
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 6 under your belt, 
and you’ve added some terminology and 
problem-solving skills to your toolbox.
CHAPTER 6
Experiment -> graph -> equation
When you do an experiment, you’ll usually use the results to 
draw a graph, then use the slope of the graph to work out 
an equation.
Falling object
A falling object is accelerated 
by gravity - so has a constant 
acceleration of 9.8 m/s2 downwards 
close to the the Earth’s surface..
Constant velocity
If something has constant velocity, its 
displacement increases at a steady rate.
This means that its displacement-time 
graph has a constant slope equal to its 
velocity.
Something with a constant velocity has 
an acceleration of zero, as its velocity 
isn’t changing.
Slope of a graph
The slope of a displacement-time graph 
is equal to the velocity.
The slope of a velocity-time graph is 
equal to the acceleration.
Constant acceleration
If something has constant velocity, its 
displacement increases more and more 
each second as time goes on.
Its velocity-time graph has a constant 
slope equal to its acceleration.
Acceleration due to gravity
Acceleration due to gravity has a value of 9.8 m/s2 
downwards when you’re close to the Earth’s surface.
physics toolbox

this is a new chapter    237
When you said “take things 
to another level”, I didn’t 
realize you meant literally ... !
Equations of motion (part 1)
7
Playing With Equations
It’s time to take things to another level. 
So far, you’ve done experiments, drawn graphs of their results and worked out equations 
from them. But there’s only so far you can go, since sometimes your graph isn’t a straight 
line. In this chapter, you’ll expand your math skills by making substitutions to work out 
a key equation of motion for a curved displacement - time graph of a falling object. And 
you’ll also learn that checking your GUT reaction to an answer can be a good thing.
It’s time to take things to another level. 
So far, you’ve done experiments, drawn graphs of their results and worked out equations 
from them. But there’s only so far you can go, since sometimes your graph isn’t a straight 
line. In this chapter, you’ll expand your math skills by making substitutions to work out 
a key equation of motion for a curved displacement - time graph of a falling object. And 
you’ll also learn that checking your GUT reaction to an answer can be a good thing.

238    Chapter 7
How high should the crane be?
The Dingo wants to invite the Emu to his birthday party - but 
the only way he’ll get him to stay still for long enough is by 
catching him in a cage! 
In chapter 6, you figured out that it takes the Emu 2.0 s to get 
from the corner to the target on the road while running at his 
constant speed.
You also figured out that the cage’s velocity after 2.0 s won’t 
lead to it shattering on impact, by drawing its velocity - 
time graph and working out the equation  a  =
v
t .
But the Dingo wants to know how high to set the crane. 
Which means that you now need to work out the cage’s 
displacement after it’s been falling for 2.0 s.
You already drew a displacement - time 
graph for a falling object, but you can’t 
extrapolate it to read off the displacement 
after 2.0 s because the graph is curved.
0.78
3.00
t (s)
x (m)
Graph of displacement vs. time
It’s nearly impossible to 
extrapolate a curve accurately
It turns out that this method isn’t so hot after 
all. Drawing the displacement - time graph 
was fine, but this time, instead of being a 
straight line it’s a curve
It’s only 
meaningful to 
extrapolat
This TOTALLY stinks!! 
Extrapolating from a straight 
line is fine, but how am I supposed 
to deal with curves when there are 
so many options?!
Maybe the 
graph does 
this ...
... or this ...
... or this ...
... or this ...
... or maybe 
even this ...
... or maybe it doesn’t 
do any of these 
things at all and does 
something else instead!
When you drew the displacement 
- time graph for the cyclist, you were 
able to extrapolate it further than the 
measurements you’d originally made.
Now you can extrapolate your graph for 
the ball bearing experiment. Your current 
set of measurements goes up to 0.78 s 
but you’re interested in what’s going 
on after it’s been falling for 2.0 s. We’ve 
redrawn it to give you more space. 
If you can’t read the value for the 
displacement after 2.0 s off your 
graph, what can you do?
What is the 
displacement of 
the cage after it’s 
fallen for 2.0 s?
The Emu takes 
2.0 s to arrive 
at the target.
00:02.00
The falling cage’s displacement 
- time graph is curved, so you 
can’t extrapolate...
what’s the displacement?

you are here 4    239
equations of motion (part 1)
Jim: It’s a curve, so we don’t really know what it’s going to do next. If 
the last point we’d plotted was close to 2.0 s we could probably make an 
educated guess, but not when we’re so far away.
Frank: But 0.78 s is only a little bit less than 2.0 s. We’d only need to 
continue the graph for another 1.22 s - that’s hardly any time at all!
Jim: It’s a lot of time compared to what we already have. We’ve plotted 
less than half the graph between t = 0.0 s and t = 2.0 s.
Joe: Maybe we could try working out an equation, like we did before 
to get a value of the cage’s velocity from its velocity - time graph?
Do you think it’s possible for a 
curved graph to be represented 
by an equation?
Frank: But the velocity - time graph is a straight line. 
Our displacement - time graph is a curved line!
Jim: Yeah, I dunno if it’s possible for a curved graph 
to be represented by an equation.
Joe:: I’m sure it must be possible, if graphs and 
equations are both ways of representing reality ...
Time (s)
Displacement (m)
0.78
3.00
The limit of your 
experiment in chapter 6 
was dropping something 
from 3.00 m, which 
took 0.78 s.
t
v
a  =
Time
Velocity
v
t
∆v  =  a t
=  9.8 × 2.0
=  20 m/s (2 sd)
Acceleration is 
rate of change of 
velocity with time.
Rearrange 
equation to say 
v =  something
You did this 
in chapter 6.
Graphs and 
equations are 
both ways of 
representing 
reality.
OK, so we have to figure out the cage’s 
displacement after it’s been falling for 2.0 s. 
Are we absolutely sure we can’t just extrapolate 
the displacement-time graph we drew before?

240    Chapter 7
Graphs and equations both represent the real world
Graphs are a way of representing the real world visually. 
Equations are a way of representing the real world 
symbolically. They both allow you to predict what will 
happen to a quantity when other things that affect it 
change as well.
For example, a  =
v
t  is the equation for the cage’s 
velocity-time graph. The equation and the graph both 
represent the same physical reality. The equation shows 
you symbolically how the velocity, acceleration and time 
interrelate when the acceleration is constant. If you know 
values for two of the quantities in the equation, you can 
use the equation to calculate the third by rearranging 
the equation.
v
t
Velocity - time
a =
v
t
The graph and the 
equation both represent 
the same physical reality.
So, if you can work out the equation that 
represents your displacement - time 
graph, you’ll be able to use it to solve the 
problem of how high the cage needs to be.
x
t
Displacement - time
?????
You can’t extrapolate this 
graph, as it’s curved.
But if you can work 
out an equation 
that represents the 
same thing, you can 
solve the problem.
Use a different 
variable to represent 
each of the values 
at the points you’re 
interested in.
But I thought we said earlier that 
we can’t form an equation using ∆x and ∆t 
because our graph isn’t a straight line?
That’s right - we’re not going to use 
x and t this time.
Originally, x and t helped with the concept of 
finding the slope of a graph using the change 
in x and t between two points. But as the slope 
of this graph is continually changing, you’d have 
to put the two points so close together it’d be 
impossible to measure the changes!
Instead, you’ll use a different variable to 
represent the displacement and time at each 
point you’re interested in.
graphs and equations

you are here 4    241
equations of motion (part 1)
We’re only really interested in two points in the cage’s motion - the start 
(when it’s on the platform) and the end (when it hits the ground) - as we 
want to calculate the cage’s displacement between these points.
In the equation you work out for your curved displacement - time 
graph we’re going to use variables to represent every value we might be 
interested in at these start and end points: 
	
x0 is the displacement at the start (when t = 0). 
	
v0 is the velocity at the start (when t = 0). 
	
x is the displacement at the end. 
	
v is the velocity at the end. 
	
a is the acceleration (which you already know is constant).
You’re interested in the start and end points
You can tell that v and v0 are 
both displacements because they 
use the letter v. But that they’re 
different quantities because they 
have different subscripts.
Use the same letter to 
represent the same type 
of thing, and subscripts 
to say which is which.
velocity
time
Graph of velocity vs time for a 
falling object
v
v0
t
0
a. Write down an equation you already know that 
involves a, v and t.
c. Rearrange your equation so that it says 
“v = something”.
We’ve drawn in the interesting start and end points 
on your velocity - time graph.
b. Use the values on the graph to rewrite this 
equation as an equation involving a, v0, v and t.
You might 
find it 
helpful to 
draw or 
write on 
the graph.
You call this “v nought” if 
you’re speaking out loud.
End point.
Start 
point.
The little ‘0’ is part of the variable 
name, and is called a subscript.
There’s no point in having a0 and a, 
as the value for the acceleration is 
always the same.
This is how the 
velocity of the 
cage would 
continue to change 
if it hadn’t just 
hit the ground!

242    Chapter 7
Are we putting in letters, like ‘t’ for time, instead 
of values, like 2.0 seconds, to make it more general?
You want your equation to be as general 
as possible so you can use it elsewhere.
At the moment, you’re dealing with a falling cage. You 
could stick in the numbers you already know (t = 2.0 s, 
a = 9.8 m/s2) but then you’d end up with an equation 
that you can only use once.
If you leave everything as letters for now and only 
put the numbers in at the end, you’ll end up with a 
general equation you can use to deal with falling 
things, jet skis, racing cars ... anything that has a period 
of constant acceleration.
velocity
time
Graph of velocity vs time for a 
falling object
v
v0
t
0
a. Write down an equation you already know that 
involves a, v and t.
t
v
a  =
Acceleration  = Rate of change of velocity
c. Rearrange your equation so that it says 
“v = something”.
a  =
t
v - v0
at  =
t
v - v0 × t
v0 + at  =  v - v0 + v0
v  =  v0 + at
We’ve drawn in the start and end points we’re 
interested in on your velocity - time graph.
b. Use the values on the graph to rewrite this as 
an equation involving a, v0, v and t.
a  =
t
v - v0
∆t
∆v
a  =
 =
t - 0
v - v0
If your 
equation is 
general, you 
can reuse 
it in other 
problems .
v = v - v0
t = t - 0
Multiply both 
sides by t.
Add v0 to 
both sides.
Now you have 
v on its own.
Swap the 
sides over.
general equations

you are here 4    243
equations of motion (part 1)
Q: Why did you choose particular variable names, like v (with 
no subscripts) for the final velocity and v0 for the initial velocity?
A: It’s a common convention to use x0 and v0 for the initial values 
of displacement and velocity and x and v for the final values. It’s 
what’s used in lots of textbooks, as well as the AP Physics B exam.
Q: But the convention isn’t consistent! The initial velocity 
is called v0, but the initial time doesn’t even have a symbol - we 
just put in its value of 0.
A: The convention assumes that everything you’re interested in 
starts at t=0. The ‘0’ subscript in v0 stands for ‘at t=0’’, so you can 
read v0 as “the velocity at t=0”. Similarly, t0 would stand for “the time 
at t=0”. So there’s no need to bother with a t0 symbol, as you already 
know that t=0 when t=0!
Q: Do I have to use these letters? Before, I’ve used s instead 
of x for displacement, and u instead of v0 for initial velocity. I’m 
finding this confusing!
A: The main thing is that you understand the physics concepts 
that lie behind the equations. It doesn’t matter which set of letters you 
use for that. It’s fine to show your work using the letters you’re more 
familiar with that already make sense for you!
Q: So what physics concepts are the most important here?
A: A graph and an equation can represent the same thing in real 
life. In this problem, they both describe what happens to the velocity 
of the falling cage as time passes.
Q: OK. But why have I used letters in the equation when I 
already worked out all the values of the things in the equation?! 
I know what v, v0, a and t are for the falling cage!
A: One reason is that you can reuse a general equation again and 
again. If the crane is a different distance away from the corner, the 
cage would fall for a different time. Your general equation, v = v0 + at, 
will give you the value of v for any time. All you need to do is put in 
the new numbers.
Q: And the other reason for not putting in the values yet?
A: If you keep the equation general, you’ll be able to use it for 
anything with constant acceleration, even if it isn’t 9.8 m/s2. All you 
need to do is to put in the new numbers for your new problem.
Hey! We’re supposed to be figuring out 
an equation for displacement, x. But the 
equation we just worked out doesn’t have an x 
in it, so how’s it gonna help?!?!
The equation shows how different variables 
depend on one another. You can use it as a 
stepping stone to get what you really want.
Your equation  v = v0 + at  shows you how the variables v, v0, 
a and t depend on each other. But it doesn’t have an x in it, so 
you can’t use it to directly calculate a value for the displacement, 
However, as displacement is rate of change of velocity, the 
displacement and the velocity must depend on each other. So 
although you can’t use this equation directly, you’ll be able to 
use it as a stepping stone towards calculating the displacement 
of the cage after 2.0 s.

Velocity 
        (m/s)
Time 
(s)
Graph of velocity vs time 
for something with 
constant acceleration
v
v0
v = v - v0
t = t - 0
t
0
v  =  v0 + at
Equation for the velocity
Used the slope of the velocity - time 
graph to work out the acceleration, 
then rearranged the equation.
You have an equation for the velocity - 
but what about the displacement?
You’ve worked out the equation v = v0 + at , which 
comes from the slope of your velocity - time graph. It 
gives you an object’s velocity, v, after a certain amount 
of time (if you know its initial velocity, v0, and its 
acceleration, a).
How might you get an 
equation that involves 
the displacement?
The notebook keeps 
track of where 
you’re at so far.
This equation 
gives you the 
velocity after a 
certain amount 
of time.
For a falling thing, v0 = 0 m/s 
downwards if you drop it from 
a standing start
But the equation doesn’t 
have x in it, which is what 
you’re interested in!
For a falling thing, a = 9.8 m/s2 
at all times.
But what we’re really interested in is the 
displacement, x, after a certain amount of 
time. If you have an equation for that, you 
can say how far the cage will fall in 2.0 s.
The velocity equation might be useful later on, 
as velocity and displacement must be related 
somehow. But right now, you really need an 
equation with an x in it to move forward ...
244    Chapter 7
velocity and displacement are related

you are here 4    245
equations of motion (part 1)
What about the average velocity? 
Doesn’t that have something to do 
with displacement and time?
Get the average velocity from the 
total displacement and total time.
The average velocity of the cage between its 
start and end points is given by the change 
in its displacement divided by the change in 
time, vavg =
x
t
vavg is the average velocity - the same as the 
constant velocity that an object would need 
to travel with to cover that displacement in 
that time.
As ∆x is the change in the displacement 
between the start and end points, the 
equation for the average velocity will have an 
x in it - which is what you want to calculate!
The average velocity 
is the same as the 
constant velocity 
you could have 
gone at to cover 
the displacement 
between your start 
and end points in 
the same time
x is the displacement 
at the end point.
a. Draw a line on your displacement - time 
graph to represent the cage’s average velocity 
between times 0 and t.
b. Use the graph to come up with an equation 
for the average velocity, vavg , in terms of x0, x 
and t.
Displacement
Time
Graph of displacement vs time 
for a falling object
x
x0
t
0
You’re working out the 
average velocity between 
your start and end points.

Velocity 
        (m/s)
Time 
(s)
Graph of velocity vs time 
for something with 
constant acceleration
v
v0
v = v - v0
t = t - 0
t
0
v  =  v0 + at
Equation for the velocity
Used the slope of the velocity - time 
graph to work out the acceleration, 
then rearranged the equation.
a. Draw a line on your displacement - time 
graph to represent the cage’s average velocity 
between times 0 and t.
b. Use the graph to come up with an equation 
for the average velocity, vavg , in terms of x0, x 
and t.
Displacement
Time
Graph of displacement vs time 
for a falling object
x
x0
t
0
You’re working out the 
average velocity between 
your start and end points.
Average velocity   =
Total displacement
Total time
vavg  =
t
x - x0
t
x
vavg  =
t - 0
x - x0
=
a. Average velocity is 
the slope of this line.
Graph of displacement vs time 
for something with 
constant acceleration
Displacement 
        (m)
Time 
(s)
x
x0
t
0
Equation for the average velocity
Used the displacement - time graph to 
work out the average velocity.
vavg  = x - x0
t
An equation with x in it, 
which is what I want!
246    Chapter 7
sharpen solution

you are here 4    247
equations of motion (part 1)
This stinks! Now we’ve got an equation with an x in it, 
but it’s got the cage’s average velocity in it as well - and 
we don’t know what that is!! So we can’t work out the value of 
the displacement. How’s that supposed to help?!
Wouldn't it be dreamy 
if we could calculate the 
value of the average velocity 
a different way. But I know it’s 
just a fantasy ...
You know x0.
You know t.
You want to 
know x.
But you don’t 
know vavg, so you 
can’t figure out x.
00:02.00
That’s right - we don’t know the 
value of the average velocity.
You’ve come a long way, and have two 
equations from the graphs you drew: 
v = v0 + at and vavg = x - x0
t
.
The second of these equations has an x in it, 
which is what you want - but it also has vavg, 
the average velocity, in it.
Since you don’t know what the average 
velocity is, you can’t use this equation to 
calculate x and tell the Dingo how high to 
put the crane platform right now. But you’re 
definitely making progress ...
x0 = 0 m
x = ?
t = 2.0 s
vavg  =
x - x0
t

If you don’t 
know the value 
for a variable 
in your equation, 
try to find 
another equation 
which includes 
that variable.
∆t = t - 0
v  =  v0 + at
Time 
(s)
x0
t
0
vavg  = x - x0
t
An equation with x in it,
Jim: Let’s just see how they help us. I’m gonna put a question mark by 
the x, because we want to work that out. Then I’ll tick what we already 
know values for, and cross the variables we don’t know ...
Jim: ... hmmm, neither equation helps us. The one on the left is for the 
velocity, v, which we’re not interested in. The one on the right has the 
displacement, x, in it, which is what we want to work out ... but it also 
has the average velocity, vavg, in it. And we don’t know what vavg is.
Joe: Is there another equation we can use?
Frank: What do you mean?
Joe: Our problem is vavg, right? We can’t just rearrange the equation 
to say “x = something” and put in the values for the other variables 
because we don’t have a value for vavg. But what if there was another 
equation we could use to calculate the value of vavg?
Frank: I like your thinking. But we already worked out vavg the only way 
we know how - from the slope of our displacement - time graph.
Jim: Hang on! What about our velocity - time graph? Maybe if we 
look at that, we can eyeball a second equation for vavg.
Joe: You might be on to something there ... let’s try it!
∆t = t - 0
v  =  v0 + at
Time 
(s)
x0
t
0
vavg  = x - x0
t
An equation with x in it,
So we’ve got two equations - that’s 
gotta be a good start.
248    Chapter 7
substitute for unknown variables

vavg  =
x - x0
t
See the average velocity on 
your velocity-time graph
You’ve already worked out one equation for 
the falling cage’s average velocity, vavg, from its 
displacement - time graph.
Now you can use your intuition to spot vavg on the 
cage’s velocity - time graph , which will lead you 
to a second equation for the cage’s average velocity.
(And once you know the cage’s average velocity, you 
can use that to get its displacement, which is what 
you really want to know!)
x = ?
00:02.00
You want 
to know x
But you don’t 
know vavg
If you work out 
another equation 
for vavg, you can 
make a substitution 
to “get rid of it”.
a. On your graph, draw in where you think the cage’s average velocity is between times 0 and t.
It’ll be somewhere 
between v0 and v.
velocity
time
Graph of velocity vs time for a 
falling object
v
v0
t
0
b. Explain how you worked that out visually.
c. Circle the equation from the choices on the right that 
matches most closely with your ideas.
vavg =
v - v0
2
vavg = v + v0
t
vavg =
v - v0
t
vavg = v + v0
2
x0 = 0 m
t = 2.0 s
you are here 4    249
equations of motion (part 1)

I didn’t do that. I tried putting in v0 = 0 and t = 2 
into the equations, since those are the values for Dingo’s 
cage problem. But all the equations gave me the same answer!
The right equation will work for ALL values of v0 and t.
If you tried putting in the Dingo’s values for v0 and t into the equations, 
then well done. You’re definitely thinking along the right lines.
If you’re still not sure which equation is correct, the next thing to do is to 
try some different numbers for v0 and t and see what happens.
Even if you think you already know which equation is right, it’s always a 
good idea to double-check it with some numbers.
vavg
I think that vavg will be halfway between v0 and v.
In fact it’ll be the average of v0 and v!
The equation I’ve picked adds together v0 and v then divides 
by 2, which is how you take an average of 2 numbers.
a. On your graph, draw in where you think the cage’s average velocity is between times 0 and t.
It’ll be somewhere 
between v0 and v.
velocity
time
Graph of velocity vs time for a 
falling object
v
v0
t
0
b. Explain how you worked that out visually.
c. Circle the equation from the choices on the right that 
matches most closely with your idea.
vavg =
v - v0
2
vavg = v + v0
t
vavg =
v - v0
t
vavg = v + v0
2
250    Chapter 7
sharpen solution

Fill in the table to show the value for vavg given by each of 
these equations for various values of v0, v and t.
Possible 
equation for 
vavg
v0 = 0 m/s
v  = 10 m/s
t  = 5 s
v0 = 0 m/s
v  = 10 m/s
t  = 100 s
v0 = 9 m/s
v  = 10 m/s
t  = 5 s
Does this 
equation SUCK?
v - v0
2
v + v0
2
v + v0
t
v - v0
t
 10 - 0 m/s
2
=  5 m/s
Test your equations by imagining 
them with different numbers
If you’re not sure whether an equation’s right and want 
to test it, you can try some numbers in it to see if the 
answers you get are plausible.
You have four different equations for vavg to choose from. 
They can’t all be right! So it’s time to try some different 
values for v, v0 and t in each equation to see which gives 
you consistently sensible answers that are the right size.
velocity
time
Graph of velocity vs time for 
something with constant acceleration
v
v0
t
0
v0 may not be 0 m/s. if 
the thing is already falling 
when you start the timer.
t could be anything 
at all, not just 2.0 s.
Is the average velocity the 
size you’d expect it to be?
Does the equation 
have the right units?
you are here 4    251
equations of motion (part 1)

That’s right - the average velocity will be 
different if the acceleration isn’t constant.
This equation only works because your velocity - time 
graph is a straight line (your object, the cage, has 
constant acceleration).
If you didn’t know what happened in between the initial 
and final velocities v0 and v, you couldn’t work out the 
average velocity. If someone goes at 1 m/s for most of 
the time then at 5 m/s right at the end, they won’t have 
an average velocity of 3 m/s as they spent most of their 
time travelling slowly.
Fill in the table to show the value for vavg given by each equation 
for various values of v0, v and t.
Possible 
equation for 
vavg
v0 = 0 m/s
v  = 10 m/s
t  = 5 s
v0 = 0 m/s
v  = 10 m/s
t  = 100 s
v0 = 9 m/s
v  = 10 m/s
t  = 5 s
Is this equation 
plausible?
No. In the 3rd 
answer the average 
must be between 9 
and 10. It isn’t!
No. The units are 
wrong and the 2nd 
and 3rd answers 
are way too low.
No. The units are 
wrong and the 2nd 
and 3rd answers 
are way too low.
Yes. All of the 
answers for vavg are 
between v0 and v, 
which is sensible.
v - v0
2
v + v0
2
v + v0
t
v - v0
t
 10 - 0 m/s
2
=  5 m/s
5 s
10 + 0 m/s= 2 m/s2
5 s
10 - 0 m/s= 2 m/s2
2
10 + 0 m/s= 5 m/s
100 s
10 + 0 m/s= 0.1 m/s2
100 s
10 - 0 m/s= 0.1 m/s2
2
10 + 0 m/s= 5 m/s
2
10 + 0 m/s= 5 m/s
5 s
10 + 9 m/s= 3.8 m/s2
5 s
10 - 9 m/s= 3.8 m/s2
2
10 + 9 m/s= 9.5 m/s
2
10 - 9 m/s= 0.5 m/s
The right 
equation 
for vavg
The equation only works when the 
acceleration’s constant, right?
Time
Velocity
If you spend more 
TIME going slowly, 
vavg will be slow.
vavg
Time
Velocity
vavg is in the middle 
when the acceleration 
is constant.
vavg
252    Chapter 7
is acceleration constant?

Velocity 
        (m/s)
Time 
(s)
Graph of velocity vs time 
for something with 
constant acceleration
v
v0
v = v - v0
t = t - 0
t
0
v  =  v0 + at
Equation for the velocity
Used the slope of the velocity - time 
graph to work out the acceleration, 
then rearranged the equation.
Graph of displacement vs time 
for something with 
constant acceleration
Displacement 
        (m)
Time 
(s)
x
x0
t
0
Equation for the average velocity
Used the displacement - time graph to 
work out the average velocity.
vavg  = x - x0
t
An equation with x in it, 
which is what I want!
Velocity 
        (ms-1)
Time 
(s)
Graph of velocity vs time 
for something with 
constant acceleration
v
v0
t
0
vavg
Another average velocity equation
Used the velocity - time graph 
to work out the average velocity.
vavg  = v + v0
2
Calculate the cage’s displacement!
You’ve used your displacement - time and velocity - time 
graphs to work out some equations that describe what 
the cage is doing as it falls towards the ground.
Now, you can use them to calculate a value for the cage’s 
displacement after 2.0 s!
a. Draw a sketch of the cage and platform, with 
values and/or vector arrows representing what you 
already know about x, x0, v0, v, a and t.
The cage has to fall 
for 2.0 seconds, and 
acceleration due to 
gravity is 9.8 m/s2.
This collates 
together all the 
information you 
already know in 
a visual format.
b. Use what you already know to calculate v.
c. Use your answer from part b. to calculate vavg.
d. Use your answer from part c. to calculate x.
you are here 4    253
equations of motion (part 1)

a. Draw a sketch of the cage and platform, with 
values and/or vector arrows representing what you 
already know about x, x0, v0, v, a and t.
The cage has to fall for 2.0 
seconds, and acceleration due 
to gravity is 9.8 m/s2.
This collates 
together all the 
information you 
already know in 
a visual format.
b. Use what you already know to calculate v.
c. Use your answer from part b. to calculate vavg.
d. Use your answer from part c. to calculate x.
x0 = 0 m
a = 9.8 m/s2
t = 0 s
t = 2.0 s
v0 = 0 m/s
v = ? m/s
x = ? m
v  =  v0 + at
v  =  0 + 9.8 × 2.0
v  =  19.6 m/s  =  20 m/s (2 sd)
vavg  =
2
v + v0
2
20 + 0
=
vavg  =  10 m/s (2 sd)
vavg  =
t
x - x0
x  =  vavgt + x0
x  =  10 × 2.0 + 0
x  =  20 m (2 sd)
x - x0  =  vavgt
You know how high 
the crane should be!
You’ve calculated the cage’s 
displacement after 2.0 s, so you 
know how high the crane should 
be - an awesome result!
At last, the Dingo will be able 
to make the Emu pause for 
long enough to invite him to his 
birthday party ...
Each part of this problem 
involves using a different 
equation that you originally 
worked out from your graphs.
It’s also OK 
to write in 
the value you 
calculated in 
chapter 6.
Start every problem 
with a sketch to bring 
together everything you 
know in a visual way.
Then use what you 
already know to work 
out what you don’t know.
254    Chapter 7
sharpen your pencil

We can already do this, yeah?! You use the 
time and acceleration to calculate the velocity, 
and then you use the velocity to calculate the 
average velocity, and then you use the average 
velocity to calculate the displacement!
But now the Dingo needs something more general
But the Dingo’s soon back, with the sad news that his crane won’t 
go high enough! What’s more, he’s not sure where he’s going to find 
another spot for the crane, so has to stay flexible.
The Dingo really needs to be able to work out the cage’s displacement 
for any time that the Emu might take to get to the target.
Can you help me work 
out the displacement 
for any time?
You don’t want to do all of that every time 
when you just want the displacement!
You’re right - you can do this by calculating intermediate 
values for v and vavg every time you want to know a new 
value for x. But to go through all of that every time you 
want to calculate a displacement isn’t very efficient, and 
will take a long time.
What you really want is an equation that says 
“x = something” where the right hand side only contains 
variables that you already know values for (x0, a and 
t). Somehow, we need to “get rid” of the intermediate 
variables v and vavg from your equations to come up with 
a general equation for the displacement that you’ll be able 
to use again and again.
The time you spend getting 
your equations into this 
form will be made up by 
the time you save by using 
the new equation!
Can you think of any way of using the equations 
you already have to “get rid of” v and vavg, the 
variables you don’t know - and don’t want?
This is exactly 
what you did on 
the opposite page.
you are here 4    255
equations of motion (part 1)

A substitution will help
Suppose you have two equations, that say “e = 2b” 
and “e = c + d” respectively. By definition, the two 
sides of an equation are equal. 
Substitution can be useful if e is a quantity that’s difficult to 
measure, but you’re interested in the other variables in the 
equations. Instead of having two equations which both have 
an e in them, you can combine them to completely get rid of 
the e by doing a substitution.
Both equations say “e =” on one side. So 2b is 
equal to e and c + d is also equal to e.
Therefore, we can write down the new 
equation: 2b = c + d. This works because if 2b 
and c + d are both equal to e, they must also 
be equal to each other.
This is called making a substitution 
because the equation you’re left with doesn’t 
have any mention of e in it. It’s like the e has 
been substituted and gone off the playing 
field, like substitutes do in sports.
e
=
c + d
e
=
2b
2b
=
c + d
=
c + d
e
2b
Both of these 
equations say 
“e = something”
You can substitute in the 
“2b” from the first equation 
any time you see an “e” in 
the second equation.
Once you’ve substituted 
for “e”, you’re left with 
an equation that doesn’t 
have “e” in it at all.
You can get rid of 
a variable that isn’t 
helpful to you by 
making a substitution.
Don’t worry if you’re not sure how a 
substitution will help you with the crane 
problem yet. We’re almost there...
256    Chapter 7
substitute in your equations

Q:Can I do substitutions with any 
equations I like?
A: Only with equations where there’s 
some form of overlap between the 
variables. In the same way that some 
dominos don’t match, some equations 
don’t have any variables in common. 
 
So if your equations are a = b and 
c = d, you can’t make any substitutions 
because there’s no common ground.
Q: What if I have two equations, 
but the letters mean different things. 
Like in one equation “a” means 
acceleration but in another “a” 
means altitude?
A: Then you can’t make a 
substitution. The letters need to 
represent the same thing each time for 
it to be meaningful.
Q:If I’m given some equations 
to use in a test, how am I supposed 
to know what the letters in them 
represent?
A: Many exam boards provide an 
equation sheet. For example, the AP 
Equation Table gives you a list of what 
the letters stand for in the equations 
for each section of the syllabus. You’re 
doing Newtonian Mechanics at the 
moment, so should look in that section 
to find out what the symbols mean.
Q: But I don’t really want to 
look backwards and forwards to an 
equation table all the time to look up 
what the letters mean.
A: That’s why we’ve mentioned 
what each symbol means as we’ve 
introduced it, and keep on slipping 
in hand-written reminders when they 
come up again. You’ll pick a lot up as 
you go along, which is great if you’re 
doing the AP course as you don’t get 
an equation table at all in the multiple 
choice part!
Q: So if I get used to the 
equations by USING them, I won’t 
really need the table at all and can 
go a lot faster?
A: You got it! It can be nice to have 
the equation table to double-check 
what you think you can remember, to 
check units or simply for inspiration 
if you’re not sure where to go with a 
problem. 
 
But learning the equations through 
understanding and using them is the 
most successful route.
Q: But the equations on the 
scales over there aren’t physics 
equations!
A: OK, so it’s time to get back to the 
Dingo’s crane where your substitution 
skills are about to come in handy ...
You can only substitute 
one equation into 
another if they have 
at least one variable in 
common between them.
If you’re working 
with more than one 
equation, make sure 
that the same letter 
represents the same 
thing in all of them!
you are here 4    257
equations of motion (part 1)

You can make 
substitutions 
using any 
equation as long 
as you’re able 
to rearrange it.
But what if I want to get rid of a 
variable that isn’t sitting on its own on one side of an 
equation. How do I do a substitution then?
You can rearrange one equation so the 
thing you want to get rid of is on its own
If the equations you’re dealing with don’t have vavg on 
its own, you’ll have to rearrange at least one of them 
before you can make a substitution.
But once you’ve rearranged one of your equations to say 
“vavg = something”, you can insert the “something” into 
your second equation every time you see vavg mentioned.
Q:Why is it useful for me to make a 
substitution?
A: Sometimes the equation you want to use has 
a variable in it that you don’t have a value for. If you 
do a substitution to get rid of that variable, you’ll be 
able to use the new equation to get what you want.
Q: How do I get rid of a variable by making a 
substitution?
A: You also need a second equation that contains 
that variable. If you rearrange that equation so that 
the variable you want to get rid of is on its own on 
the left, you can then substitute in everything on the 
right hand side every time you see that variable in 
your original equation.
Q: What’s wrong with just calculating a value 
for the variable and putting that in the original 
equation instead?
A: There’s nothing inherently wrong with that 
- but it’s a process you’ll have to repeat again and 
again in the future if you want to do the same 
calculation using different numbers. You also might 
run into problems with rounding your intermediate 
values, or making a calculator typing mistake.
Q: So is making a substitution kind-of the 
same as calculating an intermediate value, 
except with letters not numbers?
A: Great spot! Instead of substituting in a value 
for the variable, you’ll be substituting in some other 
variables that it’s equal to.
Making a 
substitution 
instead of 
calculating 
intermediate 
values saves 
you time in 
the long run.
258    Chapter 7
rearrange equations

Get rid of the variables you don’t 
want by making substitutions
The equations you’ve worked out so far (with the variables you knew 
values for at the start checked off) are in the notebook above.
Decide which of vavg and v is the easiest to get rid of first by making a 
substitution. Then go ahead and do the substitution!
You’ve managed to work out three different 
equations from your graphs.
But there are a couple of variables, v and 
vavg, which you didn’t know at the start, and it 
would be good to get rid of them by making 
substitutions so that you don’t have to spend 
time calculating them.
If you can do that, you’ll be left with a general 
equation that gives you the displacement after 
any time, but doesn’t include vavg or v. You’ll be 
able to use this equation to work out how far the 
cage falls in any time - and also for any problem 
where an object has constant acceleration.
So, it’s time to get on with making some 
substitutions to get rid of the variables you don’t 
want, v and vavg.
v   = v0 + at
Equations for the falling cage
vavg  = v + v0
2
vavg  = x - x0
t
you are here 4    259
equations of motion (part 1)

The equations you’ve worked out so far (with the variables you knew 
values for at the start checked off) are in the notebook above.
Decide which of vavg and v is the easiest to get rid of first by making a 
substitution. Then go ahead and do the substitution!
Hmmm ... I decided to 
get rid of v first instead. 
Are you saying that’s wrong?
Try to spot which part of the 
math will be the easiest to do.
You already have two equations that 
both say “vavg = something” so doing 
a substitution with them is the most 
straightforward thing to do.
Doing the easier substitution first means 
that you’re less likely to make a careless 
slip. If you start with the more difficult 
substitution, you’re could mess up and 
get stuck when you don’t have to. 
If you can 
choose which 
order to do the 
math in, always 
try to spot the 
easier part and 
do it first.
vavg  = v + v0
2
vavg  = x - x0
t
I already have two equations that say “vavg = something”, so make the 
substitution to get rid of vavg first.
vavg  =
2
v + v0
vavg  =
t
x - x0
and also
=
t
x - x0
2
v + v0
v   = v0 + at
260    Chapter 7
do the easy parts first

My equations after 
I’ve substituted for vavg
v + v0
2
 = x - x0
t
v   = v0 + at
Continue making substitutions ...
Now that you’ve made one substitution, your 
equation with x and t in it doesn’t have vavg in 
it anymore But in addition to v0 and t (which 
you’ve known values for from the start) the 
equation contains the variable v.
Since we’re deriving a general equation for x 
that doesn’t require you to know a value for 
v, you can use the other equation to make a 
substitution that ‘gets rid’ of the v as well.
a. Using your two equations, make a substitution to ‘get rid’ of the variable v.
b. Then rearrange your new equation into the form “x = something”.
you are here 4    261
equations of motion (part 1)

Remember to 
explain what you’re 
doing and why.
v
avg
v + v0
2
 = x - x0
t
v   = v0 + at
a. Using your two equations, 
make a substitution to ‘get 
rid’ of the variable v.
Your final answer 
should be in the 
simplest form possible.
Make a substitution:
v  = v0 + at
=
t
x - x0
2
v + v0
=
t
2(x - x0)
v + v0
=
=
t
2(x - x0)
v
-  v0
=
Equation (1) already says “v = something”.
Rearrange equation (2) to say “v = something”.
=
t
2(x - x0)
2v0 + at
=
2(x - x0)
2v0t + at2
=
t
2(x - x0) -  v0
v0 + at
=
t
2(x - x0) -  v0
v0 + at
(1)
(2)
=
x - x0
v0t +   at2
2
1
Add v0 to both sides so that there’s only the 
term that contains x on the left hand side.
Multiply both sides by t 
so that the x -x0 bit 
isn’t divided by anything.
Divide both sides by 2 so that 
the x - x0 is left on its own.
Add x0 to both sides so 
that you have x on its own.
If the x starts off on 
the left, it’s easier to 
rearrange the equation 
to say “x = something”.
x0 +
2
1
x   =
v0t +   at2
b. Then rearrange your new equation into the form “x = something”.
It’s a good idea 
to number your 
equations (1) and (2) 
so you can refer to 
them later on.
Multiply both 
sides by 2.
Subtract 
v0 from 
both sides.
262    Chapter 7
simple solutions

Can we save time by making 
substitutions without rearranging both 
equations to say “v = something”?
v  = v0 + at
(1)
Substitute  v0 + at  for v in equation (2):
=
t
x - x0
2
v + v0
(2)
=
t
x - x0
2
v0 + at + v0
Then you’d go on to rearrange the equation to say 
x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 as you did before.
Doing the math this way is fine. The main thing is that you 
always understand what you’re doing and why.
It’s OK to do substitution in a different way 
as long as you understand what’s going on.
If you want to rearrange just one of your equations to say 
“v = something” then substitute the “something” in every 
time you see v in your other equation, then that’s fine.
Doing it this way would look like this:
You’ve made a lot of substitutions, and 
come up with a nice-looking equation 
for x that only involves variables you 
already knew the values for at the start.
But does your equation SUCK?
Use the space on the right to jot down 
as many different ways you can think of 
to check over your equation, which is 
supposed to work OK for any values of 
the variables in it.
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
This is the equation 
you’ve worked out. 
But is it right?
Don’t worry if you’re not sure how to do a particular 
check yet. Just say what you’d like to do if possible.
you are here 4    263
equations of motion (part 1)

The equation you’ve worked out for the displacement after a 
certain amount of time is x = x0 + v0t + ½at2. With not a v or 
vavg to be seen anywhere!
But is your equation correct? You don’t want the Dingo’s 
birthday plans to go wrong because of a calculation error.
When you work out 
an equation, you 
should check it over 
before you use it.
You did it - you derived a useful  
equation for the cage’s displacement!
Is the equation definitely right? I 
really want to invite the Emu to my birthday 
party - and this might be my only chance
You’ve made a lot of substitutions, and 
come up with a nice-looking equation 
for x that only involves variables you 
already knew the values for at the start.
But does your equation SUCK?
Use the space on the right to jot down 
as many different ways you can think of 
to check over your equation, which is 
supposed to work OK for any values of 
the variables in it.
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
This is the equation 
you’ve worked out. 
But is it right?
S - Size. I guess I could try the value t = 2.0 s in the 
equation to see if it gives the same answer as it did 
before. And maybe try some other values as well.
U - Units. I’d like to check the units, but I’m not sure how 
to do that.
C - Calculations. I think I did the substitutions OK.
K - ‘K’ontext. The equation says that x depends on v0, a 
and t, which it probably should!
When you’re checking over a numerical answer, 
asking yourself if it SUCKs is a good tool. But 
not all of the parts of SUCK are applicable to an 
equation.
So instead, we’re going to think GUT.
G - Graph. Does your equation describe the graph?
U - Units. Does each term have the same units?
T - Try out extreme values (or values you already 
know the answer for) in your equation.
We’re going to do the units part first, as it’s the 
quickest check you can do once you’ve got used to 
how it works.
264    Chapter 7
always check your work

A quick way of checking your equation is to think about the units of 
each of its terms (a term is one of the chunks in your equation that 
you add or subtract).
Check your equation using Units
Does your equation 
make sense - do all 
of its terms have the 
same units? Fill in the 
table to find out.
Every term in your equation must have the 
same units, so you can add or subtract them.
+
=
Each of the blocks represents a 
term in the equation - a chunk 
that you add or subtract.
Term
x
x0
v0t
½at2
Units of 
variable
[x]
[x0]
[v0]
[t]
[½]
[a]
[t]
m/s
s
Units of 
term
[x]
[x0]
[v0t]   =   m/s × s 
    [½at2]    =
Square brackets 
means ‘units of’. 
So [x] = meters.
Some answers are already 
filled in for you.
A term may be a load of numbers and variables 
multiplied or divided by each other.
A term may be 
just a single variable.
+
+
x0
  at2
v0t
x
=
2
1
A term can be anything from a single variable to a 
group of variables and numbers multiplied together.
A term can be anything 
from a single variable 
to a group of variables 
and numbers multiplied 
together. You need to 
keep track of the units 
of each variable to 
make sure that each 
term has the same units.
You’re only allowed to add or subtract 
things that have the same units, as 
something like “2 seconds + 3 meters” 
is meaningless. So every term in 
your equation must have the 
same units.
m
s × s  =  m
As these variables are 
multiplied together, 
you can work out the 
units of the term by 
multiplying the units of 
each variable together.
Graphs  Units  Try values
you are here 4    265
equations of motion (part 1)

+
+
x0
  at2
v0t
x
=
2
1
All of the terms in your equation have the same 
units (meters) so your equation makes sense.
If a term in your equation has different units, then you know there 
MUST be something weird going on, as the equation doesn’t make sense.
Each TERM in the equation
Anything you add or subtract must have the same UNITS.
+
=
-
All of the terms in your equation have the same units.
Does your equation 
make sense - do all 
of its terms have the 
same units? Fill in the 
table to find out.
Does your equation 
make sense - do all 
of its terms have the 
same units? Fill in the 
table to find out.
Term
x
x0
v0t
½at2
Units of 
variable
[x]
[x0]
[v0]
[t]
[½]
[a]
[t]
m
m
m/s
s
No units.
m/s2
s2
Units of 
term
[x]
[x0]
[v0t]   =   m/s × s
    [½at2]    =    m/s2 ×  s2
m
m
Square brackets 
means ‘units of’. 
So [x] = meters.
Numbers are 
dimensionless and 
don’t have units.
All of the terms have units of m, 
so the equation’s units check out OK.
m
s × s  =  m
× s2  =  m
m
s2
Graphs  Units  Try values
266    Chapter 7
check your units

Q: Why is it important for all the terms in an 
equation to have the same units?
A: You can’t add things together which have different 
units. The question “What is 2.0 seconds + 3 meters?” is 
meaningless, because you can’t add meters to seconds.
Q: But you can multiply and divide things that 
have different units, right?
A: Yes - for example, when you divide a displacement 
by a time to work out something’s velocity in meters per 
second.
Q: What would I do if it turned out that one of the 
terms in my equation had different units from the 
rest?
A: If one of the terms has different units from the 
others, you probably made a little slip with the math when 
you were rearranging an equation.
Q: What kinds of mathematical slips should I be 
on the lookout for?
A: If one of the terms sticks out when you compare the 
units, look back and see if you made a slip with that term 
when you were rearranging your equation. 
 
For example, maybe you meant to multiply everything by 
t when you were rearranging your equation, but missed 
doing that to one of the terms.
Q: Does checking the units like this guarantee 
100% that my equation’s right?
A: No, not totally. Thinking about the units of each 
term of your equation will help to catch any mistakes that 
altered the units.
Q: What kinds of mistakes don’t alter the units?
A: Perhaps you meant to multiply everything by 2 
when you were rearranging your equation. Since 2 is 
just a number, it doesn’t have any units, so this method 
wouldn’t pick up on that. 
 
The other thing that sometimes happens is missing off 
a subscript, like writing x instead of x0. As x and x0 both 
have the same units, this wouldn’t get picked up.
Q: How would I find a mistake if it doesn’t involve 
units?
A: You can compare your equation with your graph 
and try out some extreme values in it to see if it really 
does describe reality ...
If all of the terms 
in your equation that 
need to be added to or 
subtracted from each 
other have the same 
units, you’re doing great!
Graphs  Units  Try values
you are here 4    267
equations of motion (part 1)

Check your equation by trying 
out some extreme values
You’ve worked out an equation that describes the displacement - time 
graph for a falling object: x = x0 + v0t + ½at2. And you’ve just confirmed 
that each term in the equation has the same units.
But that doesn’t totally guarantee that the equation is right.
If a variable is 
zero, then any 
term where it’s 
multiplying must 
also be zero.
It’s also a good idea to check your equation by trying out some extreme 
numbers in it, and comparing what your equation says to what would 
happen in real life. So ask yourself things like “what would happen if the time 
was zero?” or “what would happen if the initial velocity was very large?”
In real life, if the time was zero, then you wouldn’t have time to go anywhere. 
Your displacement would be the same as x0, your initial displacement.
Your equation says x = x0 + v0t + ½at2. But if t = 0, then the term v0t is 0 
because anything multiplied by zero is zero. Similarly, the term ½at2 is zero. 
So your equation becomes  x = x0 + 0 + 0, or just  x = x0. Which is what you 
already worked out would happen in real life!
+
+
x0
v0t
x
=
  at2
2
1
x0
x
=
t = 0
Similarly, if a variable is very large, then any term where it’s 
multiplying will also become very large and dominate the 
equation. And any term where the variable is dividing will 
become very small and will hardly affect the equation at all. 
This is because dividing by a very large number gives you a 
very small answer.
In real life, if the initial velocity was very large, you’d expect 
the displacement to be very large as well.
Your equation says x = x0 + v0t + ½at2. If v0 is very large, 
then the v0t term will also be very large and will dominate the 
equation. So your equation would become  “x = something 
very large”, which is what you know will happen in real life.
If a variable is very large, 
then any term where it’s 
multiplying must also be very 
large. And any term where it’s 
dividing must be very small.
If t = 0, then these two 
terms also = 0 and disappear 
from your equation.
If t = 0 then x = x0. Which is 
what you’d expect, as there’s no 
time to go anywhere!
Graphs  Units  Try values
268    Chapter 7
test your equation with extreme values

 
Your job is to imagine you’re the equation. What’s going to happen to you at various 
EXTREMES? When the acceleration is zero? When the acceleration is very large? 
When the time is zero? When the time is very large? How does v0 affect you? 
And most importantly - do you describe reality?!
Extreme
What happens in real life?
What happens to 
your equation?
Does your equation describe 
what happens in real life?
t = 0
You’ve had no time to move, so 
you won’t have gone anywhere.
t is large
x  is large because 
the v0t and the ½at2 
terms dominate.
a = 0
a is large
v0 is zero
The equation 
becomes
x = x0 + ½at2
v0 is large
Your displacement is large, as 
you’re going really fast right 
from the start.
BE the equation
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
Graphs  Units  Try values
you are here 4    269
equations of motion (part 1)

Your job is to imagine you’re the equation. What’s going to happen to you at various 
EXTREMES? When the acceleration is zero? When the acceleration is very large? 
When the time is zero? When the time is very large? How does v0 affect you? 
And most importantly - do you describe reality?!
 
Extreme
What happens in real life?
What happens to 
your equation?
Does your equation describe 
what happens in real life?
t = 0
You’ve had no time to move, so 
you won’t have gone anywhere.
x = x0
Yes - it says that you stay 
where you started and don’t go 
anywhere.
t is large
Your displacement is large because 
you travel for a long time.
x  is large because 
the v0t and the ½at2 
terms dominate.
Yes - it predicts that your 
displacement is large.
a = 0
The velocity is constant.
The equation becomes 
x = x0 + v0t
Yes. This is similar to the 
equation distance = speed × time 
except with vectors and the 
initial displacement, x0, in there.
a is large
The velocity will get faster and 
faster more quickly.
The ½at2 term 
dominates more and 
more as t2 increases.
Yes - it says that you get faster 
more quickly.
v0 is zero
x will depend only on the 
acceleration and x0 as you have no 
velocity at the start.
The equation 
becomes
x = x0 + ½at2
Yes - displacement only depends 
on acceleration and x0, and not 
on v0.
v0 is large
Your displacement is large, as 
you’re going really fast right 
from the start.
x is large because the 
v0t term dominates.
Yes - it predicts that you go a 
long way.
BE the equation - SOLUTION
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
Graphs  Units  Try values
270    Chapter 7
be the equation solution

Graph and equation story magnets
As graphs and equations both represent reality, a third (and final) 
way you can check your equation is to see if it tells the same 
story as your graph.
Your job is to match up each graph and an equation with a story. 
Each magnet will be used exactly once.
All of the equations are based on the equation you worked out, 
x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 but with some of the variable equal to zero (like 
you’ve just been thinking about) which leads to some of the terms 
being missing.
A couple of the story magnets have been left blank so that you 
can make up your own stories to describe the graphs! Think about 
using phrases like “constant velocity”, “zero velocity”, “constant 
acceleration” or “zero acceleration” in your stories.
x
t
x
t
A person in an office 
sits in the same position 
for a long time.
x  =  v0t
x  =  x0
x  =  ½at2
x  =  x0 + ½at2
x
t
x0
x
t
x0
A car sitting at traffic 
lights at displacement x0 
from home pulls away with 
constant acceleration.
x
t
x0
A cage is dropped from 
a crane from initial 
displacement x0 = 0.
x  =  x0 + v0t
Write your own 
stories on the 
blank magnets.
Graphs  Units  Try values
you are here 4    271
equations of motion (part 1)

x
t
A person walks from home (where 
x = 0) to work at a constant 
velocity (with zero acceleration).
x  =  v0t
x
t
x0
A car joins a long straight freeway 
at position x = x0, and hits cruise 
control to travel at a constant 
velocity (zero acceleration)..
x  =  x0 + v0t
x
t
x0
x  =  x0 + ½at2
A car sitting at traffic 
lights at displacement x0 
from home pulls away with 
constant acceleration.
x
t
x0
x  =  x0
A person in an office 
sits in the same position 
for a long time.
x
t
x  =  ½at2
A cage is dropped from 
a crane from initial 
displacement x0 = 0.
It doesn’t matter what story you made up, 
as long as you realized that a constant slope 
on the x-t graph means a constant velocity.
These graphs are curved 
because of the t2 part 
of the equation. 12 = 1, 
22 = 4, 32 = 9, and so 
on. As t increases, the 
t2 term dominates and 
makes the graph get 
steeper and steeper.
The equation doesn’t have the variable 
t in it. If x doesn’t depend on t, then 
x must be constant.
Graph and equation story magnets - SOLUTION
As graphs and equations both represent reality, a third (and final) way you can check your 
equation is to see if it tells the same story as your graph.
Your job is to match up each graph and an equation with a story. Each magnet will be used 
exactly once.
All of the equations are based on the equation you worked out, x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 but with 
some of the variable equal to zero (like you’ve just been thinking about) which leads to some 
of the terms being missing.
A couple of the story magnets have been left blank so that you can make up your own stories 
to describe the graphs! Think about using phrases like “constant velocity”, “zero velocity”, 
“constant acceleration” or “zero acceleration” in your stories.
Think of 
graphs and 
equations 
“telling stories” 
about what 
happens.
Graphs  Units  Try values
272    Chapter 7
story magnets solution

Your equation checks out!
Your equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 passes all 
of the tests you’ve done on it.
U
All of the terms in the equation have the same 
units (meters).
Does your equation 
make sense - do all 
of its terms have the 
same units? Fill in the 
table to find out.
Does your equation 
make sense - do all 
of its terms have the 
same units? Fill in the 
table to find out.
Term
x
x0
v0t
½at2
Units of 
variable
[x]
[x0]
[v0]
[t]
[½]
[a]
[t]
m
m
m/s
s
No units.
m/s2
s2
Units of 
term
[x]
[x0]
[v0t]   =   m/s × s
    [½at2]    =    m/s2 ×  s2
m
m
Square brackets 
means ‘units of’. 
So [x] = meters.
Numbers are 
dimensionless and 
don’t have units.
All of the terms have units of m, 
so the equation’s units check out OK.
m
s × s  =  m
× s2  =  m
m
s2
T
Your job is to imagine you’re the equation. What’s going to happen to you at various 
EXTREMES? When the acceleration is zero? When the acceleration is very large? 
When the time is zero? When the time is very large? How does v0 affect you? 
And most importantly - do you describe reality?!
 
Extreme
What happens in real life?
What happens to 
your equation?
Does your equation describe 
what happens in real life?
t = 0
You’ve had no time to move, so 
you won’t have gone anywhere.
x = x0
Yes - it says that you stay 
where you started and don’t go 
anywhere.
t is large
Your displacement is large because 
you travel for a long time.
x  is large because 
the v0t and the ½at2 
terms dominate.
Yes - it predicts that your 
displacement is large.
a = 0
The velocity is constant.
The equation becomes 
x = x0 + v0t
Yes. This is similar to the 
equation distance = speed × time 
except with vectors and the 
initial displacement, x0, in there.
a is large
The velocity will get faster and 
faster more quickly.
The ½at2 term 
dominates more and 
more as t2 increases.
Yes - it says that you get faster 
more quickly.
v0 is zero
x will depend only on the 
acceleration and x0 as you have no 
velocity at the start.
The equation 
becomes
x = x0 + ½at2
Yes - displacement only depends 
on acceleration and x0, and not 
on v0.
v0 is large
Your displacement is large, as 
you’re going really fast right 
from the start.
x is large because the 
v0t term dominates.
Yes - it predicts that you go a 
long way.
BE the equation - SOLUTION
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
When you try out extreme values, the 
equation corresponds to reality.
G
The graph and the equation 
both tell the same story.
x
t
A cage is dropped from 
a crane from initial 
displacement x0 = 0.
x  =  x0 + v0t ½at2
On this occasion, x0 = 0 (so 
the graph starts at x = 0) 
and v0 = 0 (as you’re dropping 
it from a standing start).
The t2 part 
means that 
the x-t graph 
is curved.
To check your 
equation over, 
check your GUT.
The Dingo now wants the cage to fall for 1.5 s. 
How high should he set the platform of the crane?
Graphs  Units  Try values
you are here 4    273
equations of motion (part 1)

The Dingo now wants the cage to fall for 1.50 s. 
How high should he set the platform of the crane?
x  =  x0 + v0t + ½at2
x  =  0 + 0 + 0.5 × 9.8 × 1.502
x  =  11.0 m (3 sd)
x0 = 0 m
a = 9.8 m/s2
t = 0 s
t = 1.50 s
v0 = 0 m/s
v = ? m/s
x = ? m
So the Dingo drops the cage ...
... but as the 
dust clears ...
To be continued ...
Dear Dingo,
You didn’t think I’d 
see the crane?!
Sincerely not yours,
Emu.
Dear Dingo,
You didn’t think I’d see the 
crane?!
Sincerely not yours,
Emu.
WHOOSH!
Clunk
274    Chapter 7
dingo drops...

275
Question Clinic: The “Substitution” Question
A question that asks you to find an “equation”, “expression” 
or “formula” for something often involves manipulating equations you 
already know or are given in the question. The main thing is not to panic, 
especially if you’re given equations you’ve not seen before, and to identify the 
variables that need to be eliminated from the final equation.
These questions are mostly algebra and 
involve substitution to get rid of the variables you 
don’t want in the final equation. Don’t forget to check 
your equation, using GUT - Graphs, Units and Trying 
some extreme numbers - to make sure your equation 
represents reality!
7. Given the equations: 
 
 
 
Write down what each of these symbols conventionally 
means / represents in physics, and give their units. 
Find an expression for x  in terms of x0, v0, a and t.
a.
b.
vavg  =
x - x0
t
vavg  =
v + v0
2
v = v0 + at
This indicates that you probably don’t 
have to work out any extra equations 
apart from the ones they give you.
This means that they want an equation 
that says “x = something”, i.e. the 
x is on its own on the left hand side.
This means that they want  
the right-hand side to only 
have x0, v0, a and t in it, and 
NO other variables.
Always remember that 
physics equations MEAN 
something and aren’t 
just meaningless letters 
to do algebra with.
Watch for the variables that you 
DON’T want in the final equation, 
and try to work out how to make 
substitutions that get rid of them.
If you’re aware of the units of your 
variables, you can test your final answer by 
making sure each term in your equation has 
the same units (see page 266).
Try to get a FEEL for 
what your equation is 
saying at the extremes 
of variables. Does it 
represent reality?

276
Question Clinic: The “Units” or “Dimensional analysis” Question
Sometimes you’ll be asked to show that an equation 
makes sense by using “dimensional analysis” or by 
“considering the units”. You do this by figuring out the units of each term in the 
equation. All terms must have the same units, as you’re not allowed to add or 
subtract terms that have different units. The main thing you need to be able to 
do is to handle units written in scientific notation. This is basically the same as being 
able to handle numbers written in scientific notation - go back to 
Chapter 3 if you feel you need a review.
Some questions may ask you about 
DIMENSIONS (length, time) instead of units 
(meters, seconds). The easiest thing to do is to do 
all your work with units (which you’ve practiced with 
more), then give your final answer in dimensions, 
for example if your answer has units of m/s2, its 
dimensions are length/time2.
8. In the equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at 2, the units of t are 
seconds and the units of x are meters. What are the 
units of a?
9. In the equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at 2, t has dimensions 
of time and x has dimensions of length. What are the 
dimensions of a?
Look carefully to 
see whether the 
question asks you to 
give your answer in 
terms of UNITS or 
DIMENSIONS.
Each TERM in the equation 
must have the same units.
You’re only given the units of t and 
x, not v0 or x0 or a. But you only 
need the units of one of the terms, 
and as x is a term you’re fine.
A question that asks you about dimensions is exactly the same as one 
that asks you about units, except that you need to give a final answer of 
“length” instead of “meters”, or “time” instead of “seconds” etc.

you are here 4    277
equations of motion (part 1)
Honest Harry has a problem
At Honest Harry’s Autos, they’re always thinking of new ways to make 
their second-hand cars stand out from the competition. Detailed specs 
on their website, a one year guarantee, and fluffy dice all help them to 
stay ahead of the rest.
But Harry’s latest idea has got him into trouble.
“Most dealers have the car’s acceleration from 0-60 miles per hour 
in their specs,” he explains. “But you can go at 80 mph on the 
freeway. So I decided to come up with specs for acceleration 
between 60-80 mph myself. No one else has that!”
But his figures got Harry into hot water when scores of 
angry motorists returned their cars threatening to sue him for 
misinformation, as the car’s performance from 60-80 mph was far 
poorer than he’d claimed.
“I dunno what went wrong,” Harry says mournfully. “I set things up 
to plot the speedometer reading on a graph as I accelerated from 60 
to 80 mph. Then I drew a best fit straight line through my data points, 
making sure it went through the origin, and used the slope of that to 
work out the acceleration that went on the spec sheet.”
Why did Harry calculate the wrong acceleration?
Five Minute 
Mystery
Five Minute 
Mystery

The origin of Harry’s problem ... is the origin!
Why did Harry calculate the wrong acceleration?
Harry drew his straight line through the origin of his graph (where the 
velocity is 0 mph and the time is 0 s). But the car’s speed 
at t = 0 was actually 60 mph, so the line he drew 
should have crossed the vertical axis at 60 mph, not 
at the origin. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This meant that the slope of his line was much steeper than it should 
have been - so his values for the acceleration of each car were far too 
high. No wonder Harry’s customers came back to complain!
The equation for the graph is v = v0 + at. where v0 is the velocity at t = 0. 
Harry’s right that he can work out the car’s acceleration from the slope 
of a best fit straight line - but only if the line he draws passes through v0!
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Velocity 
(mph)
Time 
(seconds)
Graph of velocity versus time 
for accelerating car
This is the line that 
Harry drew, through the 
origin then through the 
points the best he could.
This is the 
actual best fit 
straight line!
A best fit straight line doesn’t 
need to go through the origin.
60
80
278    Chapter 7
best fit lines

Do I really need to memorize all of this 
chapter for my exam? Dude, that was tough!
You only need to memorize a couple of 
this chapter’s equations for your exam
The two important equations from this chapter are 
v = v0 + at and x = x0 + v0t + ½at2. These are the 
two things you need to memorize for your exam 
- so that you can solve all kinds of problems 
similar to this one!
And don’t worry - you’ll pick the equations up soon 
enough by using them to do problems. As long as 
you practice, there’ll be no need for you to do any 
rote memorization.
If you practice your tennis forehand, you can 
guarantee that your tennis results will improve 
even though you’ll never play two identical 
forehands because each game situation is unique.
In a similar way to your forehand. you can also 
develop your equation-handling skills to enable 
you to solve all kinds of problems that are like 
this one, even if they’re not exactly the same.
Now you can solve 
all kinds of problems 
that are like this one.
Throughout your physics career (and definitely 
in your exam) you’ll be interpreting graphs and 
working out equations from them. If you want 
to understand what’s going on and do well in 
physics, you need to be able to rearrange 
equations, make substitutions and check 
your answers. Which is what you’ve been 
practicing in this chapter.
Think like a physicist!
Grooving your 
physics skills 
means that you 
can solve all kinds 
of problems, not 
just ones you’ve 
memorized.
you are here 4    279
equations of motion (part 1)

Units
Falling
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Special points
Experiment
Time
Substitution
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Speed
Distance
Volume
Velocity
Slope
Does it SUCK?
Area
Algebra 
isn’t too bad 
after all.
Substitution
Making a substitution is ‘getting rid’ of a variable 
from an equation by replacing it with an expression 
it’s equal to (usually from a second equation).
280    Chapter 7
the world of physics
Scientific notation
Displacement

Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 7 under your belt and 
added some problem-solving and answer-
checking skills to your toolbox.
Substitution
Making a substitution is replacing 
a variable in an equation with an 
expression that‘s equal to it.
This can be useful if you have a 
variable in your equation that you 
don’t know a value for.
Equation of a graph
The equation of a graph has the form:
vertical = something to do with horizontal
GUT check
Graph - Do your equation and 
graph tell the same story?
Units - Do all the terms in your 
equation have the same units?
Try extreme values - Does your 
equation mirror reality when you 
make the variables zero or very 
large one at a time?
A fundamental 
equation of motion
v   = v0 + at
v
t
Velocity - time
Another fundamental 
equation of motion
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
x
t
Displacement - time
you are here 4    281
equations of motion (part 1)
CHAPTER 7


this is a new chapter    283
equations of motion (part 2)
8
Up, up, and... back down
What goes up must come down. You already know how to 
deal with things that are falling down, which is great. But what about the 
other half of the bargain - when something’s launched up into the air? In this 
chapter, you’ll add a third key equation of motion to your armory which will 
enable you to deal with (just about) anything! You’ll also learn how looking 
for a little symmetry can turn impossible tasks into manageable ones.
Nothing like a little Starbuzz in 
the morning to get me up. Still, no 
matter how hard I try, I always end 
up crashing a bit later in the day...

I gotta have that cage 
launcher! And I’m going 
back to my old spot, where 
the Emu takes 2.0 s to arrive.
But you can’t keep the Dingo down for long - especially when ACME has an 
amazing new cage launcher! Once installed, it’ll propel a standard ACME 
cage straight up in the air at a speed of your choice.
It’s ideal for a more subtle approach - you can launch the cage from ground 
level, instead of having a big crane that the Emu will spot.
You just need to work out what velocity to launch it at so that it lands back on 
the target when the Emu arrives, exactly 2.0 s after you launched it.
Now ACME has an amazing new cage launcher
Previously ...
Dear Dingo,
Really? You didn’t think 
I’d see the crane?!
Sincerely not yours,
Emu.
Dear Dingo,
You didn’t think I’d see 
the crane?!
Sincerely not yours,
Emu.
 - Launches a standard 
ACME cage straight up 
in the air.
 - Variable launch speeds.
 
 - Waterproof
 - Payment plans and 
financing available
ACME  Cage Launcher
1
2
284    Chapter 8
back to dingo

Always start 
with a sketch!
Joe: Hmm, could we try using the equation we worked out in 
chapter 7? Y’know, x = x0 + v0t + ½at2.
Frank: But that was for a falling thing. This time, the cage is 
going up. It’s not the same thing.
Joe: But once the cage gets to its maximum height, it falls back down 
again. So it’s kinda the same. Or, well, at least the falling down part 
of it is!
Frank: But what about the first half, when the cage is going up?
Jim: Actually, the equation might work OK then too. It’s supposed 
to work in any situation where the acceleration’s constant, right? 
And I think that the acceleration due to gravity is constant, whatever 
direction you’re moving in.
Frank: But how can the cage be accelerating downwards, when it’s 
moving upwards?
Joe: Acceleration is rate of change of velocity, right? And the 
cage gets slower as it goes up. So the acceleration vector must be 
pointing downwards, or else it wouldn’t get slower.
Frank: I think I’d find it easier to visualize with a sketch ...
Draw a sketch of the cage just after it’s been 
launched straight up in the air. Mark on the initial 
velocity vector v0 , the acceleration vector a, and any 
other information you know about the problem.
Do you think it’s going to be OK to reuse the 
equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 in this new scenario? 
Why / why not?
So we have to launch the cage 
up in the air so that it lands 
2.0 s later. That sounds a lot 
harder than just dropping it.
you are here 4    285
equations of motion (part 2)

Draw a sketch of the cage just after it’s been 
launched straight up in the air. Mark on the initial 
velocity vector v0,  the acceleration vector a, and any 
other information you know about the problem.
Do you think it’s going to be OK to reuse the 
equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 in this new scenario? 
Why / why not?
The acceleration vector points down regardless 
of the direction of the cage’s velocity.
The acceleration will be constant at 9.8 m/s2 
downwards. The equation’s supposed to be used 
for constant acceleration, so it’ll probably work.
a = 9.8 m/s2
Cage takes t = 2.0 s 
to go up then down.
v0 = ?
The acceleration due to gravity is constant
The equation of motion you worked out last time, 
x = x0 + v0t + ½at2, is supposed to be OK in any 
situation where the acceleration is constant.
If you can reuse this equation, it’ll be much much 
faster than going through the rigmarole of trying to 
design and carry out an experiment where you shoot 
things straight up into the air.
If an object is 
acted on ONLY BY 
GRAVITY, it has 
an acceleration 
of 9.8 m/s2 
downwards, 
whatever its 
velocity is.
x0 = 0 m
x = 0 m
The cage starts 
and ends at the 
same point, so x0 
and x are both 0 m.
a = 9.8 m/s2
v
Although you originally 
worked out this equation 
from a graph you plotted by 
dropping things down from 
a height, any object that’s 
accelerated only by gravity has 
a constant acceleration of 
9.8 m/s2 downwards. It 
doesn’t matter whether its 
velocity vector points up, down, 
sideways, or at an angle.
a = 9.8 m/s2
v
a = 9.8 m/s2
v = 0 m/s
When the cage is going up, it 
gets slower. This is because it’s 
being accelerated downwards 
at a rate of 9.8 m/s2
When the cage is going 
down, it gets faster. 
This is because it’s being 
accelerated downwards 
at a rate of 9.8 m/s2
When the cage’s 
velocity is zero, its 
acceleration due to 
gravity is still 9.8 m/s2.
Give your hand-drawn acceleration vectors double-
arrowheads to distinguish them from velocity vectors.
286    Chapter 8
is acceleration constant?

 
BE the equation
Your job is to imagine you’re the equation. Here, both x and x0 are 0 because the 
cage starts and finishes in the same place. This means that the left hand side of 
the equation = 0, and on the right hand side, there are two non-zero terms 
ADDED together. Is there any way this is possible, or will we need to 
work out a different equation for the cage?
I’m not convinced! If the cage starts 
and finishes in the same place, then x 
and x0 are both zero. So how does the rest of 
the equation work? How can two terms added 
together be zero?!
Good thinking - try to imagine your 
equation with some numbers in it.
The cage starts and finishes at ground level. 
This means that both x and x0 are zero, and 
your equation becomes 0  = 0 + v0t + ½at2 
when you put these values in.
So for the equation to be true, the two terms on 
the right hand side, v0t and ½at2, must add up 
to zero. But how can two terms added together 
be zero? It’s time to ...
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
a = 9.8 m/s2
v0 = ?
x0 = 0 m
x = 0 m
t = 2.0 s
If your equation represents 
reality, it should work with 
these numbers in it.
you are here 4    287
equations of motion (part 2)

When x and x0 are both zero, your equation becomes 
0 = 0 + v0t + ½at2. So the terms on the right hand side 
of your equation, v0t and ½at2, must add up to zero. 
You’re interested in what’s happening at t = 2.0 s, so both 
t and t2 are positive. Therefore, the signs of the terms 
v0t and ½at2 are determined by the signs of v0 and a.
You’re working with vectors! So as well as having a 
size, v0 and a have a direction. The acceleration due 
to gravity, a, always acts downwards. But the initial 
velocity, v0, is upwards. So v0 and a have opposite 
signs. One is positive and the other is negative.
As v0 and a have opposite signs, it’s perfectly reasonable 
to say that there’s a certain value for v0 where 
v0t + ½at2 = 0. And that’s the value you want to work 
out, as it’s the launch velocity for the cage!
 
Your job is to imagine you’re the equation. Here, both x and x0 are 0 because the 
cage starts and finishes in the same place. This means that the left hand side of 
the equation = 0, and on the right hand side, there are two non-zero terms 
ADDED together? Is there any way this is possible, or will we need to 
work out a different equation for the cage?
Vectors have 
DIRECTION!
Velocity and acceleration are in opposite 
directions, so they have opposite signs
You use positive 
and negative 
signs to show 
the direction. 
Velocity and acceleration are vectors.
v0 is upwards, and a is downwards - as they point in opposite 
directions, they’ll have opposite signs.
It IS possible for a positive number and a negative number to equal 
zero when you add them together. So the equation could be OK.
v0 is UPWARDS.
a is DOWNWARDS.
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
a = 9.8 m/s2
v0 = ?
a
v0
As v0 and a point in 
opposite directions, they 
will have opposite signs.
BE the equation - SOLUTION
288    Chapter 8
vectors have direction

Do we get to decide which direction is 
positive and which is negative? So this is just 
another way to use vectors?
But when we were dropping the cage, we said 
that down was positive. Why suddenly change 
now to make up positive - it’s confusing!
Choose the direction that makes 
the math easier.
It’s easy to ‘lose’ or forget about minus signs 
when you’re doing calculations and end up with 
the wrong answer. When you dropped the cage, 
its displacement, velocity and acceleration all 
pointed in the same direction - downwards. 
So by making down the positive direction, you 
didn’t have to deal with minus signs.
But now that the cage is going up then down, 
with v0 and a pointing in opposite directions, 
you’ve nothing to gain by making down positive. 
You’re better off sticking with the convention 
of making up positive so that when you draw a 
displacement-time graph, up on the graph is the 
same direction as up in the real world.
You’re less prone 
to making mistakes 
when doing math 
with only positive 
numbers than you 
are when there 
are negative 
numbers around.
Yes. With vectors that point in opposite 
directions, you get to decide which 
way is positive and which is negative.
Vectors are vectors, so as long as you are consistent 
and dealing with opposites, you get to choose 
whether to make up or down the positive direction.
When something’s moving through the air, it’s usually 
easiest to make up the positive direction and 
down the negative direction. 
-
+
It’s conventional to make up 
the positive direction and 
down the negative direction.
you are here 4    289
equations of motion (part 2)

Q:I still don’t get how you can add two numbers together 
and get zero as your answer.
A: Numbers can be negative as well as positive. If one of the 
numbers is negative, it can work out like that. For example, if 
v0t = -2 and ½at2 = 2, then you have -2 + 2 = 0. 
Q: Sorry ... I still don’t quite see how two numbers added 
together can be zero?
A: Suppose you spend $10 entering a competition, then win a 
$10 prize in it. You’ve earned (-10) + 10 = 0 dollars. The sum of 
the (negative) entry fee and the (positive) prize win comes out to 
a zero balance.
Q: Why would I want to add a negative number to a 
positive number when I can just do a subtraction?
A: Because when you have an equation like x = x0 + v0t + ½at2, 
you don’t know in advance which variables are positive and which 
are negative. But when you put the numbers in, it’ll work out as 
long as you get the minus signs right.
Q: So the variables x0, x, v0, v and a could all be negative 
because they’re vectors?
A: Yes, vectors have both a size and a direction. When all of 
your vectors lie along one line (like in this case, they’re either 
pointing up or down) then you can choose to make one direction 
positive and the other direction negative.
Q: And I get to choose whatever direction I want to be 
positive? Either up or down?
A: Yes, as long as you’re consistent throughout. But it’s usual 
to make up the positive direction so that when you plot a graph, 
up on the graph corresponds to up in real life.
Q: What would happen if I made down the positive 
direction instead?
A: The math would all still work out, as long as you make sure 
you’re consistent. You just have to be careful to do the right thing 
when you’re adding or subtracting a negative number.
Q: How would I figure out if I’d made a mistake with the 
minus signs?
A: You can see if your answer SUCKs. If a minus sign has 
gone astray, then the answer may end up a very different size 
from what you’d expect. So make sure you have a rough idea of 
what size your answer’s going to be at the back of your mind, then 
compare it with the result of your calculation.
Q: OK, so I think I have the negative numbers, vectors and 
directions all figured out. Is there anything else I should do?
A: As you’ve never used this equation before to deal with 
something going up then down, it wouldn’t hurt to sketch some 
graphs to confirm that it’s going to be OK ...
I only get one shot at this. 
Are you sure this equation’s 
gonna work? Can you draw me a 
graph or something?
Vectors in opposite directions 
have opposite signs.
290    Chapter 8
opposite directions opposite signs

Frank: I guess we need to do some graphs that show it’s OK to 
use the equation to deal with the cage going straight up in the air 
and back down again.
Jim: But that’s gonna be difficult. We usually draw graphs of 
experimental results, but I don’t think we can do that this time. 
We only get one shot at launching the cage, and if we miniaturize 
the experiment, we can’t really measure the launch speed. 
Joe: Hmmm. Maybe we could sketch graphs of what we know 
happens to something that goes up and down. Then put some 
numbers into the equation and plot it to see if it comes out the same 
shape - like doing that GUT check thing - comparing the equation 
with the graph by trying out some values.
Frank: But how do we sketch a displacement-time graph for 
something that goes up then down? Is it curved? Is it straight? Does 
the shape depend on whether it’s going up or down? I don’t think 
we can do that straight off.
Joe: We could start off with the acceleration-time graph. We 
know that has a constant value of 9.8 m/s2.
Jim: You mean -9.8 m/s2 ... up is positive, so down is negative!
Joe: Yeah, well, acceleration is rate of change of velocity. So the 
value of the acceleration is the slope of the velocity-time graph. 
The value of the acceleration is constant: -9.8 m/s2, so the slope of 
the velocity-time graph must also be constant at -9.8 m/s2.
Frank: Err, a negative slope?! What would that look like?!
Jim: I guess it would go the other way, down from left to right 
instead of up?! Like going downhill instead of uphill?
Joe: That sounds about right. Then when we have the velocity-
time graph, we can use the fact that velocity is rate of change 
of displacement. So the value of the velocity is the slope of the 
displacement-time graph.
Frank: Which lets us draw a displacement-time graph as well.
Jim: Great!
What might the velocity-time and 
displacement-time graphs look like?
Equations represent reality. 
If you sketch a graph 
of what happens in real 
life, it should be the same 
shape as the graph for 
your equation.
Don’t worry about numbers 
here - the important thing 
is the SHAPES of the graphs.
OK, so we’ve got an equation. 
But does it look right?!
you are here 4    291
equations of motion (part 2)

v
t
Graph of velocity vs. time
∆t
∆v
v
t
Graph of velocity vs. time
∆t
∆v
Slope Up Close
∆t is positive.
∆v is negative.
∆v
∆t is negative.
Acceleration.
Sloping 
DOWN
Sloping 
UP
Slope of velocity-time 
graph is positive, so value 
of acceleration is positive, 
i.e., it’s accelerating in this 
direction.
∆v is positive.
∆t is positive.
∆v
∆t is positive.
Acceleration.
Since velocity is a vector, it can be either positive or negative. The slope of a 
velocity-time graph shows you the value of the acceleration.
If the change in velocity is positive, then the graph slopes up, and the 
acceleration is positive. If the change in velocity is negative, then the graph 
slopes down, and the acceleration is negative.
If a graph goes up, its slope is positive.
If a graph goes down, its slope is negative.
The same principle applies to the 
slope of a displacement-time graph 
and the value of the velocity.
a  = ∆t
∆v
a  = ∆t
∆v
Slope of velocity-time 
graph is negative, so value 
of acceleration is negative, 
i.e., it’s accelerating in this 
direction.
292    Chapter 8
negative and positive slope

Use the value of your acceleration-time graph to sketch the shape of the velocity-time 
graph. Try to imagine the velocity of the cage as it goes up then back down again. The 
first dotted line is the top of its flight, and the second one is when it lands again.
We’ve put v0 
on to help 
you out.
v0
Velocity  (m/s)
Time (s)
Graph of velocity vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
Acceleration (a) is 
constantly -9.8 m/s2.
Acceleration 
(m/s2)
Time (s)
Graph of acceleration vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
-9.8
Top of 
flight
Landing
You can use one graph to work out 
the shapes of the others
You already sketched graphs by 
thinking about values and slopes. What 
you’re doing here isn’t too different.
Acceleration, velocity, and displacement are all related to each 
other. If you have the graph of one of them and some initial 
values for the others, you can use these to sketch the shapes of 
the other graphs.
You know that the launched cage has a constant acceleration 
of -9.8 m/s2. Since the value of the acceleration is constant 
and negative, the slope of the velocity-time graph must be 
constant and negative too.
The slope of 
the velocity-time 
graph gives the value 
of the acceleration.
Don’t worry about 
the displacement-time 
graph for the moment 
- you’ll do that next.
The value of the 
acceleration gives 
the slope of the 
velocity‑time graph.
a
t
v
t
Constant 
value.
Increasing 
value. 
Increasing 
gradient.
Constant 
gradient.
x
t
Graphs for a falling object 
(constant acceleration)
a
t
v
t
x
t
Constant 
gradient.
Zero 
gradient.
Zero 
value.
Constant 
value.
Velocity is constant 
at all times, so always 
has the same value. 
So the velocity-time 
graph is a flat line.
Velocity is constant, 
so acceleration is zero.
Graphs for Alex the cyclist 
(constant velocity)
Displacement-time
Displacement-time
Velocity-time
Velocity-time
Acceleration-time
Acceleration-time
This is the 
velocity vector 
at t=0.
This graph shows that the 
acceleration is constant, with this 
size and this direction at all times.
a
Don’t worry 
about what 
happens after 
it lands.
These two statements are the same 
thing said different ways around.
you are here 4    293
equations of motion (part 2)

The velocity-time graph has a constant slope of 
-9.8 m/s2 because the acceleration-time graph 
has a constant value of -9.8 m/s2.
The slope is negative, so 
the graph slopes down.
Acceleration (a) is 
constantly -9.8 m/s2.
Acceleration 
(m/s2)
Time (s)
Graph of acceleration vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
-9.8
v0
Velocity  (m/s)
Time (s)
Graph of velocity vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
The value of the velocity 
is zero when the cage is at 
the top of its flight path.
Use the value of your acceleration-time graph to sketch the shape of the velocity-time 
graph. Try to imagine the velocity of the cage as it goes up then back down again. The 
first dotted line is the top of its flight, and the second one is when it lands again.
We’ve put v0 
on to help 
you out.
The graphs show the size and 
direction of a vector at any time
The line on a graph shows the size and 
direction of the quantity you’re plotting 
at any time. If you imagine the tail of the 
arrow on the horizontal axis, the head will be 
just touching the line.
Vectors are arrows, right? 
So what have the lines on the 
graphs got to do with vectors?
Tails of vectors 
are at v = 0.
Graph shows you where 
heads of vectors are.
When x is positive, 
vector arrows point up.
When x is negative, 
vector arrows point down.
v
t
Velocity-time graph
When the cage is falling down, 
its velocity is negative, as 
down is the negative direction.
When the cage comes back 
down again, it gets faster 
and faster - but in the 
downwards DIRECTION.
294    Chapter 8
vectors have size and direction

Graph of displacement vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
Time (s)
Displacement   
(m)
v0
Velocity  (m/s)
Time (s)
Graph of velocity vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
Acceleration 
(m/s2)
Time (s)
Graph of acceleration vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
-9.8
Now it’s time for you to sketch the displacement-time graph for the cage, then 
annotate it to explain what you’ve done. The first dotted line is the top of its 
flight, and the second one is when it lands again.
The slope of the 
displacement-time 
graph gives the 
value of the velocity.
The value of the velocity 
gives the slope of the 
displacement-time graph.
These two statements are the same 
thing, said different ways around.
If this value is 
high, then the 
slope of the 
displacement-
time graph will 
be steep.
Another way to do this (or 
to check over your answer) is 
to “be the cage” and think 
about what’s going on as you 
go up then down again.
you are here 4    295
equations of motion (part 2)

Graph of displacement vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
Time (s)
Displacement   
(m)
Initial and final displacements are both at x = 0.
Slope decreases as value 
of velocity decreases.
Slope = 0 when velocity = 0
Now it’s time for you to sketch the displacement-time graph for the cage, then 
annotate it to explain what you’ve done. The first dotted line is the top of its 
flight, and the second one is when it lands again.
The velocity-time graph has a 
constant slope of -9.8 m/s2 because 
the acceleration-time graph has a 
constant value of -9.8 m/s2.
The slope is negative, so 
the graph slopes down.
v0
Velocity  (m/s)
Time (s)
Graph of velocity vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
Acceleration (a) is 
constantly -9.8 m/s2
Acceleration 
(m/s2)
Time (s)
Graph of acceleration vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
-9.8
The value of the velocity is 
zero when the slope of the 
displacement-time graph is zero.
As the cage falls, it gets 
faster and faster in a 
downwards direction. The 
value of the cage’s velocity 
gets larger. The sign of 
the velocity is negative, 
as the cage is falling 
downwards. The slope of 
the displacement-time 
graph is negative because 
the velocity is negative. The 
slope gets steeper because 
the size of the velocity 
gets larger.
You might be used to 
using the word ‘gradient’ 
to indicate the steepness 
of a graph. In this book, 
we’re using the word 
‘slope’ to indicate the 
steepness of a graph.
296    Chapter 8
sharpen solution

you are here 4    297
equations of motion (part 2)
The second half of each graph 
looks quite like when we dropped 
the cage from the crane.
Q: I can’t quite believe that the 
velocity-time graph is just a diagonal line 
like that. It seems too perfect.
A: The acceleration is constant and 
negative. So the slope of the velocity-time 
graph also has to be constant and negative. 
This is another way of saying that the 
velocity-time graph is a straight line graph 
that slopes downwards.
Q: How do you know where to start 
drawing the diagonal line? You could put 
it anywhere on the velocity-time graph!
A: Good point! If you didn’t know that 
the initial velocity was v0, then you wouldn’t 
know where to start drawing the graph. 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: How do you know what angle to 
slope the velocity-time graph at? 
A: This is just a sketch graph, with no 
scales on the axes, so the angle doesn’t 
matter much here. Just make sure the line 
goes through v= 0 when the object is at the 
top of its flight. 
 
If you were plotting a velocity-time graph 
with values on your axes, then you’d make 
its slope the same as the value of the 
acceleration-time graph.
Q: You said that the line should go 
through v = 0 when the object is at the 
top of its flight. How can something’s 
velocity be zero when it’s up in the air?
A: There’s a split second when the 
object reaches its maximum height. There, 
the object’s just stopped going up and is 
just about to come down. At that point, the 
velocity is zero.
Q:So when the velocity of a launched 
object is zero, does that mean the 
displacement’s zero as well?
A: No ... it means that the slope of the 
displacement-time graph is zero.
Q: So you’re saying that we can work 
backwards from the acceleration-time 
graph to draw the other graphs?
A: Close but not quite - the cage started 
with velocity v0 and at x0 = 0.  If you hadn’t 
known these initial values, you wouldn’t have 
known where to start sketching the graphs.
Q: But I knew some start values, so 
the sketches are OK. Can I get on with 
plotting the equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 to 
see if it’s the same shape as the sketch?
A: Well, alright then ...
Yes. The second half is like dropping 
something from a stationary start.
What goes up must come down! At its highest point, 
the cage isn’t going up any more and hasn’t quite 
started coming down yet. The top of its flight is a 
‘special point’ where its velocity is zero.
So for the second part of its motion, when it’s 
coming back down, the cage behaves exactly as if 
it’s been dropped from its maximum height.
If you launch 
an object 
straight up, 
the object’s 
velocity = 0 
at the top of 
its flight.
The graph is the same shape as last 
time, though it’s the other way up 
because this time up is positive.

Graph of displacement vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
Time (s)
Displacement   
(m)
Is a graph of your equation the same 
shape as the graph you sketched?
You want to plot a graph of your equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 to see if it’s the same shape as the 
displacement an object has when it goes up then down in real life.
If the equation is correct, then it should produce the same shape of graph whatever value of v0 you 
choose. We’re going to get you to plot the graph of the equation using v0 = 15 m/s.
a. Fill in the table of values.
b. Plot the graph. Is it the same shape as your sketch graph?
This is the sketch graph 
you already did a couple 
of pages ago.
You can work out whether it’s OK to use the equation 
x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 by plotting it on a graph. If the shape is 
the same as the shape of the graph you already sketched, then 
you’re good to go!
You’re already reasonably 
sure that it’s OK to use the 
equation, as it’s supposed to 
work when the acceleration is 
constant. But you want to make 
ABSOLUTELY sure!
Back in chapter 7, we tried out 
extreme values for the ‘T’ of GUT 
to make sure that the equation we 
worked out there wasn’t completely 
ridiculous. Here, we’re trying some 
reasonable values to draw a graph. 
The principle is the same.
As you’re just doing a GUT check by drawing a 
graph and trying some values to see the shape of the 
graph, it’s OK to just choose a value for v0. After all, 
you’re expecting the cage to go up and eventually 
come back down again whatever v0 is (as long as it’s 
positive!), so if the equation gives you that shape, it’ll 
be fine to use it to give the Dingo an answer.
298    Chapter 8
GUT check

Horizontal axis
Vertical axis
time (s)
v0t
½at2
x = x0 + v0t + ½at2
0.0
15 × 0 = 0
0.5 × (-9.8) × 02 = 0
0 + 0 = 0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Remember 
a = -9.8 m/s2
We’re trying 
v0 = 15 m/s
It’s up to 
you to choose 
a scale for 
both axes of 
your graph.
0
0
  Plot of
you are here 4    299
equations of motion (part 2)

If the equation is correct, then 
it should produce the same 
shape of graph whatever value 
of v0 you choose. We’re going to 
get you to plot the graph of the 
equation using v0 = 15 m/s.
a. Fill in the table of values.
b. Plot the graph. Is it the same 
shape as your sketch graph?
  Plot of the equation  x - x0 = v0t + ½at2  , with v0=15 m/s
x - x0 
(m)
t (s)
2.0
4.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
12.0
0
0
2.0
2.5
3.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
You want to plot a graph of your equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 to see if it’s the same 
shape as the displacement an object has when it goes up then down in real life.
time (s)
v0t
½at2
x = x0 + v0t + ½at2
0.0
15 × 0 = 0
0.5 × (-9.8) × 02 = 0
0 + 0 = 0
0.5
15 × 0.5 = 7.5
0.5 × (-9.8) × 0.52 = -1.23
7.5 + (-1.23) = 6.3 (1 dp)
1.0
15 × 1.0 = 15.0
0.5 × (-9.8) × 1.02 = -4.90
15.0 + (-4.90) = 10.1 (1 dp)
1.5
15 × 1.5 = 22.5
0.5 × (-9.8) × 1.52 = -11.0
22.5 + (-11.0) = 11.5 (1 dp)
2.0
15 × 2.0 = 30.0
0.5 × (-9.8) × 2.02 = -19.6
30.0 + (-19.6) = 10.4 (1 dp)
2.5
15 × 2.5 = 37.5
0.5 × (-9.8) × 2.52 = -30.6
37.5 + (-30.6) = 6.9 (1 dp)
3.0
15 × 3.0 = 45.0
0.5 × (-9.8) × 3.02 = -44.1
45.0 + (-44.1) = 0.9 (1 dp)
You can check equations by picking values and plotting a graph.
It’s the same shape as the sketch 
graph, so it’s OK to use the equation!
If you’re adding or 
subtracting, quote 
your answers to the 
same number of 
decimal places as the 
least precise number.
300    Chapter 8
graph your equations

Ready to launch the cage!
The Dingo wants to catch the Emu by launching a cage straight up in the air as the Emu 
rounds a bend. The cage needs to land 2.0 s later, when the Emu reaches the launch site.
What should the initial launch velocity be?
The cage is ready for lift-off! You’ve sketched 
graphs and tried numbers to confirm that the 
equation of motion x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 works in 
any situation where the acceleration is constant 
- whether the cage starts off falling or going up.
So you’re ready to rock and roll and work 
out a launch velocity for the Dingo!
This is a typical question. 
We’ve included the sketch 
you drew before so that you 
don’t have to do that again.
a = -9.8 m/s2
t = 0 s at start and 
t = 2.0 s at end.
Up is positive direction.
v0 = ?
x0 = 0 m
x = 0 m
Once the launch velocity’s 
input, all he needs to do is 
sit and wait for the Emu ...
?? m/s
you are here 4    301
equations of motion (part 2)

Always start with a sketch. Draw in all the 
sizes and directions of the things you already 
know plus the ones you want to find out.
If your equations involve vectors, make sure 
you decide which direction is positive and 
stick to it!
Be very careful when you’re dealing with 
negative numbers!!
If you already have any one of the displacement-
time, velocity-time or acceleration-time graphs, 
you can work out the other two (though 
sometimes you may need initial values to know 
where to start drawing the other graphs).




Before you ‘reuse’ an equation, think about the 
context you’re trying to reuse it in. For instance, 
does it only work when the velocity is constant, 
and is the velocity constant in your situation?
You can use your key equations v = v0 + at and 
x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 in any situation where there’s 
constant acceleration.


The Dingo wants to catch the Emu by launching a cage straight up in the air as the Emu 
rounds a bend. The cage needs to land 2.0 s later, when the Emu reaches the launch site.
What should the initial launch velocity be?
v0   =
0 - 0 - 0.5 × (-9.8) × 22
2
x   =
x0 + v0t + ½at2
Need to know what v0 is for x to be 0 after 2.0 seconds.
Rearrange equation to say “v0 = something.”
v0t   =
x - x0 - ½at2
v0   =
x - x0 - ½at2
t
Put in numbers.
v0   = 9.8 m/s (2 sd)
Two negative numbers multiplied 
together is a positive number.
The initial launch velocity should be 9.8 m/s (2 sd).
a = -9.8 m/s2
t = 0 s at start and 
t = 2.0 s at end.
Up is positive direction.
v0 = ?
x0 = 0 m
x = 0 m
302    Chapter 8
bullet points

Q: I did exactly the same as you did 
when I rearranged the equation to say 
“v0 = something” but got a different 
answer when I put the numbers in. Why 
was that?
A: You might need to spend a bit more 
time practicing with your calculator.
Q: It doesn’t seem fair that I do all that 
work then get marked wrong because I 
typed something in wrong.
A: Understanding the physics is the most 
important thing - you won’t get marked 
wrong for the whole problem. In many mark 
schemes, including AP Physics B, you get 
most of your points for setting up the answer 
using the fact that you understand the 
physics.
Q: Is that why everyone’s always 
going on about how I should show my 
work and not just write down an equation 
or an answer?
A: Partly. If you show your work, it’s 
easier for you to spot any little slip you might 
have made on the way through that caused 
your answer to turn out wrong.
Q: But people who are good at doing 
physics and math don’t make little slips 
like losing minus signs or typing in the 
numbers wrong ... do they?
A: You’d be surprised! That’s why we’ve 
been practising checking over your answers 
a lot, using things like SUCK and GUT. If 
you get into thinking in this way, it’s like 
having a second line of defense against little 
mathematical slips.
Q: So you’re saying that people 
who’ve more experience of physics than 
me make this kind of mistake as well? 
That’s a relief!
A: Oh yes!
Q: So the main thing is that if I show 
my work, then I can go back and try to fix 
it if I spot something’s not quite right with 
my final answer?
A: Exactly! It might be something as 
simple as inserting a minus sign and 
retyping the numbers into your calculator.
Q: Can we go see how the Dingo’s 
getting on with the launcher?
A: Oh yes ...
If you show 
your work, 
it’s easier to 
spot - and 
fix - little 
mathematical 
slips.
Your launch velocity of 5.0 m/s is definitely right!
So the Dingo puts his 
paw on the button, 
and waits ...
9.8 m/s
you are here 4    303
equations of motion (part 2)

... and waits ...
9.8 m/s
9.8 m/s
Suddenly, Emu runs past—from 
the other direction
9.8 m/s
Wouldn’t it be dreamy if I could 
travel as fast as the Emu. But I 
know it’s just a fantasy ...
304    Chapter 8
a faster dingo

You need to figure out the stopping distance of the hovercraft. So start off by 
drawing a sketch of the hovercraft. Do one sketch showing the moment that 
it puts on the brakes while traveling at 15 m/s. Do another sketch showing the 
moment that the hovercraft comes to a halt (before you release the brakes). Put 
on all the values you already know, plus the ones you want to find out.
Fortunately, ACME has a rocket-powered hovercraft!
The Dingo goes back to ACME and discovers a rocket-powered 
hovercraft, which is tailor-made for his needs! Usually, he can’t 
run as fast as the Emu can, but now he can set the hovercraft to 
any speed he likes and use it to catch up with the Emu. More 
importantly, he can exactly match his speed with the Emu by setting 
the controls to 15 m/s. Perfect for passing on a party invitation!.
However, the Dingo’s a bit nervous, as he’s tried 
this kind of thing before and it didn’t go well. 
Before he goes anywhere near the hovercraft, 
he wants to know its stopping distance (the 
distance that it travels between applying the 
brake and the hovercraft actually stopping).
You’re only 
going to do 
the sketch now.
You’ll do the 
calculation later.
Hint: Draw two separate hovercraft drawings - 
one with all the values at the start next to it and 
the other with all the values at the end next to it.
There are various 
values on the 
website above.
 - Top speed 43 m/s.
 - Accelerates or brakes 
at 2.5 m/s2.
 - Financing Available.
ACME  Rocket-powered 
Hovercraft
The hovercraft’s 
ideal - but I’m 
not going on it 
until I know its 
stopping distance!
you are here 4    305
equations of motion (part 2)

You need to figure out the stopping distance of the hovercraft. So start off by 
drawing a sketch of the hovercraft. Do one sketch showing the moment that 
it puts on the brakes while traveling at 15 m/s. Do another sketch showing the 
moment that the hovercraft comes to a halt (before you release the brakes). 
Put on all the values you already know, plus the ones you want to find out.
v0 = 15 m/s
Make forwards the positive direction.
v = 0 m/s
t = 0 s
x0 = 0 m
t = ?
x = ?
a = -2.5 m/s2
Start
Finish
a = -2.5 m/s2
You don’t know the time it takes to stop!
The equation you used before, x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 , 
has several variables in it: x, x0, v0, t, and a. You’re 
trying to work out the stopping distance, x, and you 
already know v0 and a. So far, so good.
But you don’t know t! If you have one equation 
with two unknowns, you can’t use it (on its own) to 
work out either of the things you don’t know.
So we just plug these values into the 
same equation we used before, and that 
gives us the stopping distance, right?
Before you try to 
use an equation, 
make sure that 
the value you want 
to find out is the 
ONLY variable you 
don’t already know.
The acceleration is 
backwards because putting 
on the brakes makes the 
hovercraft’s velocity 
change in the opposite 
direction from the 
direction the hovercraft 
is currently traveling in.
The acceleration 
is negative, and 
the velocity is 
positive. This 
shows you that 
the hovercraft 
is decelerating.
You didn’t use all of the values 
on the hovercraft website - for 
example, the hovercraft’s top speed. 
That’s OK - sometimes you won’t 
need to use all the values you’re given.
It’s nearly always best to 
define x0 = 0 as your 
starting point.
306    Chapter 8
one unknown

So we need to get the 
stopping distance, x, for 
the Dingo’s hovercraft.
Jim: The equation we used last time is x = x0 + v0t + ½at2, but we 
can’t use that equation here because we don’t know what t is.
Frank: Yeah, if there are two values you don’t know and only one 
equation, then you can’t work out what either value is.
Joe: The hovercraft’s acceleration’s constant at 2.5 m/s2, isn’t it?
Jim: MINUS 2.5 m/s2 ! We made forwards the positive direction.
Joe: OK, the acceleration’s -2.5 m/s2 then, but it’s still constant, right? 
So there’s a second key equation of motion we can use, v = v0 + at
Frank: I don’t see how it helps - that equation doesn’t have an x in it, 
which is what we want to work out!
Joe: But it does have t in it. We know v0, we know v, and we know a - 
the only other variables in the equation. So we could use this equation 
to work out a value for t to use in the other equation.
Jim: That sounds good, but I don’t want to have to work out an 
intermediate value for t every time I want to do something like 
this. Is there any way we could make a substitution to get a more 
general equation that we could use to work out something’s 
displacement when we don’t know the time interval? That would be 
really useful!
Joe: OK, I think you’re right about trying to be general. It’s more 
efficient, and we can use our new equation again and again to solve 
similar problems. But how are we going to wind up with an 
equation for x that doesn’t involve t ?
How might you use your two equations, 
v = v0 + at and x = x0 + v0t + ½at2, to 
come up with a general equation that 
lets you work out x when you don’t 
know what t, the time interval is?
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
Equations of motion
v  = v0 + at
This problem
v0 = 15 m/s
v = 0 m/s
t = 0 s x0 = 0 m
t = ?
x = ?
a = 2.5 m/s2
Start
Finish
a = 2.5 m/s2
Make forwards the positive direction.
Working out a general 
equation is better than 
scribbling down a whole lot 
of intermediate values.
you are here 4    307
equations of motion (part 2)

=
x0 + v0t + ½at2
x
=
(
)
t
=
x0 + v0(
) + ½a(
)2
x
=
v0 + at
v
These are the two 
equations you know 
at the moment.
Rearrange this equation 
to say “t = something.”
Every time you see ‘t’ 
in this equation, you can 
substitute in the thing 
that’s equal to t.
You can work out a new equation 
by making a substitution for t
So far, you know two key equations of motion:
v = v0 + at and x = x0 + v0t + ½at2
You want to work out x, the stopping distance for the Dingo’s 
hovercraft. The hovercraft is traveling with a particular 
velocity and braking with a particular acceleration. 
However, you don’t know the time the hovercraft takes to 
stop, so you can’t use x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 directly.
If you need 
to get rid of 
a variable, 
then make a 
substitution 
for it.
However, you can form a 
new equation that doesn’t 
involve t  by rearranging 
your other equation to say 
“t = something” then making 
a substitution. Then you 
can plug the values in to get 
the stopping distance.
As you haven’t 
rearranged the 
equation yet, we’ve 
used this symbol 
as a placeholder.
308    Chapter 8
substitute for the unknown

Rearrange the equation v = v0 + at so that you can substitute for t in the equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 and 
end up with an equation for x in terms of v0, v, and a.
You may find it helpful if you use parentheses (also called brackets) when you make the substitution, to 
keep everything that’s equal to t together.
We’re only asking you to make 
the substitution at the moment. 
You don’t need to simplify the 
equation once you’ve substituted 
for t - we’ll do that next.
you are here 4    309
equations of motion (part 2)

Rearrange the equation v = v0 + at so that you can substitute for t in the equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 and 
end up with an equation for x in terms of v0, v, and a.
You may find it helpful if you use parentheses (also called brackets) when you make the substitution, to 
keep everything that’s equal to t together.
x   =
x0 + v0t  +  ½at2
I have two equations to rearrange, then substitute to get rid of t :
v   =
v0  +  at
(1)
(2)
Rearrange (2) to say “t = something” then substitute it into (1).
at   =
v  -  v0
t   =
a
v - v0
(2’)
Substitute (2’) into (1).
That’s a very complicated-looking 
equation. Can we try to simplify it a bit 
by multiplying out the parentheses?
If you’re asked to work out an equation, 
always give it in its most simple form.
Often when you do a substitution, you’re left 
with a complicated-looking equation with some 
parentheses in it. You can make life a lot easier 
for yourself by multiplying out the parentheses and 
seeing if some of the terms in the equation cancel by 
dividing out or adding to zero.
You’re going to spend the next few pages making this 
ugly equation more clear and simple so that you’re less 
likely to make mistakes when you use it in the future.
Put this in parentheses to make it 
clear that EVERYTHING in the 
parentheses is to be multiplied by 
the other part of the term.
Remember to include 
the 2 part, as the t you 
replaced was squared.
Remember to EXPLAIN what 
you’re doing at each stage.
If you number your equations, it 
makes it easier for you to refer to 
them in your explanations.
Number this equation 2’ to show it’s a rearranged 
version of 2, not an entirely new equation.
x   =
v0
+   ½a
a
v - v0
a
v - v0
2
x0  +
Clear, simple 
equations 
are nicer to 
work with 
than ugly, 
complicated 
equations.
310    Chapter 8
clear and simple equations

x   =
v0
+   ½a
a
v - v0
a
v - v0
2
x0  +
Multiply out the parentheses in your equation
You need to know how to deal with an equation where you have 
stuff inside parentheses that you need to multiply by something 
that’s outside the parentheses.
For example, a(b + c) = ab + ac
a
ab
+
c
b
=
a
ab
ac
+
+
c
b
=
Everything inside the parentheses needs to be multiplied by 
v0, which is outside the parentheses. 
v0
v - v0
a
When you write two things next to each other 
like this, there’s an implied × sign in between.
The first term on the right hand side of your equation is:
You can sort out one of the terms on the right hand side like this
Doing this in steps makes it easier. 
First of all, multiply what’s outside by 
the first thing in the parentheses.
Then multiply what’s outside by the second thing 
in the parentheses (and so on if you have more 
than two things in there).
Remember - when you write two things next to 
each other, there’s an implied × sign in between.
Remember - ac means a × c.
Multiply out the parentheses for this term on the right hand side of your equation.
You can leave the terms 
we’ve greyed out as they 
are for the moment.
you are here 4    311
equations of motion (part 2)

x   =
v0
+   ½a
a
v - v0
a
v - v0
2
x0  +
+
b
a
+
b
a
a2
=
+
b
a
+
b
a
a2
ab
+
=
+
b
a
+
b
a
a2
ab
ab
+
+
=
+
b
a
+
b
a
a2
ab
ab
b2
+
+
+
=
a2
2ab
b2
+
+
=
+
b
a
+
b
a
Multiply out the parentheses for the first term on the right hand side of your equation.
+   ½a
a
v - v0
x   =
x0  +
a
v0v - v0
2
You have two sets of parentheses multiplied together
The other nasty-looking term on the right hand side of your equation involves something 
inside parentheses squared. If you square something, it means you multiply it by itself.
For example, if you have (a + b)2, it’s the same as (a + b)(a + b). You need to multiply 
everything in the first set of parentheses by everything in the second set of parentheses. 
This gives you a2 + ab + ab + b2, which simplifies to a2 + 2ab + b2 when you add the two 
lots of ab together.
Multiply every term 
in the second set of 
parentheses by every 
term in the first set 
of parentheses, one 
term at a time.
Doing this in steps makes it easier. 
First of all, multiply the first thing in the first 
bracket by the first thing in the second bracket.
Then multiply the first thing in the first bracket 
by the second thing in the second bracket
Then do the same with the second 
thing in the first bracket.
You can simplify your answer a bit by 
adding the two lots of ab together.
2
When you multiply a fraction by a number that’s not a 
fraction, you only multiply the bit on the top of the fraction. 
So the bit on the bottom stays as ‘a,’ and doesn’t become ‘v0a.’
312    Chapter 8
squared terms

x   =
x0  +
a
v0v - v0
2
v - v0
½a
a
2
Multiply out the parentheses for the second term on the right hand side of your equation.
It’s probably easiest to do the squared part inside the parentheses first (similar to the example on the 
opposite page), then multiply everything through by ½a, which is outside the parentheses.
Because the stuff in the parentheses is squared, this is the same as writing
The second term on the right hand side of your equation is:
Then you can figure out your second term on the right hand side
½a v - v0
a
v - v0
a
Everything in the second set of parentheses needs to be multiplied by everything 
in the first set of parentheses, like in the example on the opposite page.
+   ½a
a
v - v0
2
It’s easiest to write out the thing in the 
parentheses × itself first, so you can 
multiply out the parentheses more easily.
You can leave 
the terms we’ve 
greyed out as 
they are for 
the moment.
Do the top of the fractions first. Multiply everything on the top 
by everything on the top. Then do the bottom of the fractions. 
Multiply everything on the bottom by everything on the bottom.
you are here 4    313
equations of motion (part 2)

x   =
x0  +
a
v0v - v0
2
x   =
x0  +
a
v0v - v0
2
x   =
x0  +
a
v0v - v0
2
a
v - v0
+   ½a
x   =
x0  +
a
v0v - v0
2
I’m finding this difficult. Does that 
mean I’m not going to pass physics?
You can still pass physics, but algebra is 
important too. 
In your exam you get points for understanding 
physics concepts - but you also get points for being 
able to explain physics using graphs and equations.
For much of your course, you won’t need to do that much 
algebra. But if you need to rearrange equations and 
make substitutions to get a solution, you won’t get 
full credit if your algebra is a bit hazy - though you can 
probably score enough points to pass if you can explain 
how you would do the question.
Your priority is definitely understanding the physics. 
There aren’t that many patches of nasty algebra in the 
rest of this book, so hang in there!
Multiply out the parentheses for the second term on the right hand side of your equation.
It’s probably easiest to do the squared part inside the parentheses first (similar to the example on the 
opposite page), then multiply everything through by ½a, which is outside the parentheses.
2
+   ½a
a
v - v0
a
v - v0
+   ½a
a2
v2 - 2vv0 + v0
2
+  
a
½v2 - vv0 + ½v0
2
 negative × negative  = positive
so (-v0) × (-v0) = v0
2
On the bottom of the 
fraction, a × a = a2
It’s easiest to write out the 
thing in the parentheses × itself 
like this, so you can multiply out 
the parentheses more easily.
Now you have to multiply everything 
inside the brackets by ½a ...
... but the a on the top and 
the a2 on the bottom cancel to 
leave everything divided by a.
314    Chapter 8
algebra matters

=
x0 + v0t + ½at2
x
=
(
)
t
Where you’re at with your new equation
You’re working out an equation that’ll give you the stopping distance 
for the Dingo’s new rocket-powered sled given v0, its initial velocity. 
However, the only equation you had for x, the displacement, included t, 
the time it would take to stop. But you don’t know what t is.
You’re already most of the way through working out a new equation for 
x that doesn’t involve t by rearranging some equations you already 
knew and substituting in for the variable t to get rid of it.
You want the equation to be as clear and simple as possible so that 
you’re less likely to make mistakes when you use it. You just multiplied 
out the parentheses to try to simplify the equation. But it doesn’t look 
particularly simple at the moment!
You need to simplify your equation 
by grouping the terms
a
ab
+
c
b
=
a
ab
ac
+
+
c
b
=
v0 = 15 m/s
Make forwards the positive direction.
v = 0 m/s
t = 0 s
x0 = 0 m
t = ?
x = ?
a = 2.5 m/s2
Start
Finish
a = 2.5 m/s2
Now that you’ve multiplied out the 
parentheses, your equation has a lot of 
terms in it! If you group together all the 
terms that are the same letter (or letters 
multiplied together), you’ll be able to 
simplify your equation.
For example, if you have the equation   
a = b + c - b - 2c, you have b and -b on the 
right hand side. When you group them 
together, they become b - b = 0. You also 
have c and -2c. When you group them 
together, they become  c - 2c = -c
Written out, the work looks like:
	
a = b + c - b - 2c
	
a = b - b + c - 2c
	
a = -c
If you do something similar with the 
equation for the hovercraft’s stopping 
distance, it’ll be a lot clearer to work with 
and less prone to error. We don’t want the 
Dingo to get hurt when he only wants to 
invite the Emu to his birthday party.
Group together the similar terms on the right 
hand side of your equation, and simplify it down.
(We’ve already started by joining together the 
terms that were all being divided by a).
v0v - v0
2 + ½v2 - vv0 + ½v0
2
a
x   =
x0  +
you are here 4    315
equations of motion (part 2)

x   =
x0  +
v0v - v0
2 + ½v2 - vv0 + ½v0
2
a
Group together the similar terms on the right 
hand side of your equation, and simplify it down.
(We’ve already started by joining together the 
terms that were all being divided by a).
v0v - vv0 + ½v2 - v0
2 + ½v0
2 
a
½v2- ½v0
2  
a
This equation is usually rearranged on 
equation tables to say:
v2 = v0
2 + 2a(x - x0)
Did you spot that vv0 and v0v 
are just the same thing written 
in a different order?
We’ve spaced the lines of 
the answer out so that the 
annotations can fit!
On this line, the 
similar terms are 
grouped together.
This is just a neater 
way of writing the 
same thing that you 
have in the line above.
This is what happens 
when you group together 
the v0
2 terms.
These two terms 
add up to zero 
and cancel each 
other out.
	
	
     You won’t need to do all that again!
We’ve been working out this key equation 
as an opportunity to practice the kind of math 
you’ll come across while you’re doing some parts of 
physics. Now that you know the equation, you can 
use it time and time again - either from memory (in 
your multiple choice paper) or by looking it up on your equation 
table (in the free response section).
x   =
x0  +
v2- v0
2  
2a
x   =
x0  +
x   =
x0  +
It’s nicer to write 
½v2 - ½v0
2 than it is 
to write - ½v0
2 + ½v2.
316    Chapter 8
sharpen solution

v2- v0
2  
2a
x   =
x0  +
If I won’t need to do all that again, why have I 
been doing it now? I checked - other physics textbooks just 
give you that equation and let you get on with using it!
You’ve been learning some important 
algebra as you go along.
Although we said that you don’t need lots of algebra  
to pass physics, we’d rather you understand as 
much as possible. If you manage to get your head 
around this, you’re setting yourself up to do really 
well if you take an exam.
It’s important to be able to do things like multiplying 
out parentheses now so that you won’t feel lost or 
confused later on. It also means that you won’t have 
to completely skip parts of exam questions where 
you understand the physics perfectly because they 
involve algebra at a similar level to this.
You can use your new equation to 
work out the stopping distance
You’ve worked out an equation you can use to calculate the 
stopping distance of the hovercraft for the Dingo.
A rocket-powered hovercraft is traveling at 15 m/s. When the 
brakes are applied, it decelerates at a rate of 2.5 m/s2. What is 
its stopping distance?
v0 = 15 m/s
Make forwards the positive direction.
v = 0 m/s
t = 0 s
x0 = 0 m
t = ?
x = ?
a = 2.5 m/s2
Start
Finish
a = 2.5 m/s2
This is the sketch of 
the problem that you 
drew before.
you are here 4    317
equations of motion (part 2)

v2- v0
2  
2a
x   =
x0  +
There are THREE key equations you can 
use when there’s constant acceleration
As well as a stopping distance to pass onto the Dingo, 
you now know the three key equations that will 
enable you to deal with any problem where the 
acceleration is constant.
Falling things, launched things, rocket hovercrafts, 
cars, boats - you name it.
Now that’s a real superpower!
This is exactly the same 
equation, but rearranged 
so that there are no 
fractions in it. We’ve 
mentioned it here 
because it’s the version 
of the equation you’ll 
find on equation sheets.
v0 = 15 m/s
Make forwards the positive direction.
v = 0 m/s
t = 0 s
x0 = 0 m
t = ?
x = ?
a = 2.5 m/s2
Start
Finish
a = 2.5 m/s2
A rocket-powered hovercraft is traveling at 15 m/s. When the 
brakes are applied, it decelerates at a rate of 2.5 m/s2. What is 
its stopping distance?
02- 152  
x  =  0  + 2 × (-2.5)
x   =
45 m (2 sd)
The stopping distance is 45 meters (2 sd).
v2- v0
2  
2a
x   =
x0  +
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
Equations of motion
v  = v0 + at
v2 = v0
2 + 2a(x-x0)
The three key equations for something 
with constant acceleration.
v2- v0
2  
2a
x   =
x0  +
This is the equation you 
just worked out. it’s 
sometimes called the “no 
time” equation because 
the variable ‘t’ doesn’t 
appear in the equation.
318    Chapter 8
three key equations

So the bottom line with the math stuff is 
that if I can use these equations, I’ll do OK. But if I 
can rearrange, substitute, multiply out parentheses, 
and simplify equations, I can do even better?
Q: So am I supposed to memorize all 
of these equations? That’s an awful lot! 
I thought this was supposed to be about 
understanding, not memorization!
A: The first equation, v = v0 + at, says 
that your new velocity is the same as 
your old velocity, plus the effect of your 
acceleration. You don’t care about x0 or x. 
 
The second equation, x = x0 + v0t + ½at2, 
says that your new displacement depends 
on your old displacement, your initial velocity 
and your acceleration, as well as the length 
of time you’ve been going for. You don’t care 
about v. 
 
The third equation, v2 = v0
2 + 2a(x-x0), is the 
one you just worked out. It gives you your 
final velocity when you don’t know t, the time 
you’re traveling for. 
Q: So if the best way to learn 
equations is to do lots and lots of 
problems, how come Head First Physics 
doesn’t have hundreds of examples at 
the end of each chapter, like most other 
physics books do?
A: One reason is that you’re learning and 
doing problems throughout each chapter.  
 
This book is about trying things out while 
you’re learning. You use the concepts as you 
go along so that you really understand the 
physics, rather than the ‘read along and nod’ 
method that most textbooks use. There are 
plenty of resources with practice questions 
out there - do spend time working through 
lots of problems to reinforce what you’re 
learning here. 
 
Q: So if I keep a lookout on the Head 
First website, will there be something up 
there to help me practice?
A: Yes, we’ll be producing some online 
resources to go with the book.
That’s right - math is just another tool 
to help you get better at physics.
Most physics books assume you can already do 
algebra to use the equations they give to you ready-
baked. This book is different. You’ve gradually been 
introduced to a lot of algebra in the context of 
physics so that you can use it as a tool to help you 
understand physics the best you can.
If you’re not so sure of some of the math, you can 
still do OK, but it’s up to you to practice anything 
you initially find difficult until you get better at it.
Or don’t care about t!
OK, here we go ...
you are here 4    319
equations of motion (part 2)

The rocket-powered hovercraft is a great success...
Stopping distances aren’t much good if you don’t 
look where you’re going.
C
a
g
e
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D
i
n
g
o
Top of 
cliff 7 m
320    Chapter 8
dingo versus emu

The Dingo is stuck at the bottom of the cliff with a launcher. If the cliff is 7.00 m high at this point, 
what launch speed will mean that the top of his flight is at the top of the cliff?
b. Write down your three key equations for doing 
these kinds of problems. Next to each variable in 
each equation, put a ? if you want to find it out, a 
tick if you know it, and a cross if you don’t know it.
a. Start with a sketch! Draw everything 
you already know about.
c. Do  you think you can do this problem straight off, or do you need some extra information?
You need to work out the launch velocity that 
gets the Dingo out of the Grand Canyon!
The Dingo’s fallen over a cliff, but he had a soft splash landing. 
Fortunately, he still has his ACME launcher. And a new idea! If he 
launches himself into the air so that the top of his flight is exactly level 
with the top of the cliff, he should be able to pass the Emu the party 
invitation - but in a situation where the Emu doesn’t feel scared.
The thing is that the Dingo doesn’t know what what his launch 
velocity should be. If he sets the launch velocity too low, he won’t 
make it up to the edge. If he sets the launch velocity too high, he’ll still 
be going up when he reaches the edge and might not have time to pass 
on the invitation.
What should the Dingo set as the launch velocity this time?
Do as much of this as you 
can from memory, then 
turn back to page 314 to 
copy them down.
This is an important 
problem-solving skill.
?? m/s
you are here 4    321
equations of motion (part 2)

The Dingo is stuck at the bottom of the cliff with a launcher. If the cliff is 7.00 m high at this point, 
what launch speed will mean that the top of his flight is at the top of the cliff?
Do as much of this as 
you can from memory, 
then turn back to page 
314 to copy them down.
a = -9.8 m/s2
t = 0 s
v0 = ? m/s
Up is positive
x0 = 0 m
x = 7.00 m
x   =   x0 + v0t  +  ½at2
v   =
v0  +  at
v2   =
v0
2  +  2a(x-x0)
All of the equations have something else in them that I don’t know (either v or t, or both!), as 
well as v0 (which is what I want to find out). So I need some extra information to do the problem.
b. Write down your three key equations for doing 
these kinds of problems. Next to each variable in 
each equation, put a ? if you want to find it out, a 
tick if you know it, and a cross if you don’t know it.
a. Start with a sketch! Draw everything 
you already know about.
c. Do  you think you can do this problem straight off, or do you need some extra information?
Wouldn’t it be dreamy if I 
could work out v or t somehow, so 
I could use the equations to get v0. 
But I know it’s just a fantasy ...
This is an important 
problem-solving skill.
If you don’t know 
which equation to use, 
you should always have 
a go at doing this.
322    Chapter 8
solutions

Graph of displacement vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
Time (s)
Displacement   
(m)
Now that you’ve spotted the special point, use your extra information that v = 0 at the 
top of the Dingo’s flight together with what you did on the opposite page to calculate 
what his launch velocity should be.
Hey ... didn’t we say 
that velocity = 0 
at the very top of 
something’s flight?
Sometimes you’ll need to spot a ‘special point.’
Don’t settle just for the information you’re given in a problem. 
Start with a sketch. Be the Dingo. Spot the ‘special point’!
You’ve just realized that the top of something’s flight is a special 
point where it’s stopped going up but hasn’t quite started going 
down again. So the velocity is zero there.
This is a value you can use in your equations to help you work 
out other things.
Slope of displacement-
time graph is zero, so 
velocity MUST be zero.
You should add v = 0 
to your sketch, and 
tick ‘v’ every time you 
see it in an equation.
you are here 4    323
equations of motion (part 2)

Now that you’ve spotted the special point, use your extra information 
that v = 0 at the top of the Dingo’s flight together with what you did on 
the opposite page to launch him out of the Grand Canyon.
Rearrange to say “v0 = something”
v2   =
v0
2   =
v0   =
v2 - 2a(x-x0)
   =
137.2
v0   =
=
02   - 2 × (-9.8) × (7.00 - 0)
11.7 m/s (3 sd)
v2 - 2a(x-x0)
v0
2  +  2a(x-x0)
The Dingo needs to be launched at 11.7 m/s (3 sd).
This works out as 
negative × negative × positive = positive
I wanna know the time it takes 
for me to go up then back down to 
the bottom of the cliff. Is it long enough 
for my safety thingy to inflate?
a = -9.8 m/s2
t = 0 s
v0 = ? m/s
Up is positive
x0 = 0 m
x = 7.00 m
Extra information: 
v = 0 m/s at the top.
The launch velocity’s right!
You just used the fact that v = 0 m/s at the top 
of the cliff to work out that the Dingo’s launch 
velocity should be 11.7 m/s.
But the Dingo doesn’t like getting 
wet, and wants a better plan for 
landing than splashing into the river 
again. He has an ACME inflatable 
landing area and wants to press its 
inflate button at the same time as 
launching himself up in the air.
The landing area takes 1.00 s to 
inflate. How long will the Dingo be 
in the air for? Will the landing area 
have enough time to inflate before 
he comes back down?
While he’s 
in the air, a 
safe landing 
area inflates.
x   =   x0 + v0t  +  ½at2
v   =
v0  +  at
v2   =
v0
2  +  2a(x-x0)
Extra information: 
you know what v is.
v0 is now the only unknown 
in this equation.
v = 0 m/s
324    Chapter 8
what goes up...

Write down your 
equations, and tick or 
cross the variables you 
know or don’t know.
Jim: Yeah, we already know a lot of values! x0 and x will 
both be zero (as he’s starting and finishing at the bottom of 
the canyon). And v0 = 11.7 m/s.
Joe: Not forgetting a = -9.8 m/s2. I think we know more 
values right now than we’ve done for any other problem!
Frank: So which equation can we use? We don’t know what 
v is, so we can’t use either of the equations with v in them.
Jim: Well, that leaves x = x0 + v0t + ½at2, which should be 
cool. We know x, x0, v0, and a ... that leaves only t, which is 
what we want to calculate!
Joe: One equation, one unknown - sounds ideal!
Frank: So I guess we rearrange the equation so that it says 
“t = something.”
Jim: Yeah, let’s get on with it!
a. Try rearranging the equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 to say “t = something,” so you can 
use it to work out the time it takes the Dingo to go up and back down again.
b. Write down your thoughts about whether this idea will work or not.
So we need to work out the 
time the Dingo will be in the air 
for. That shouldn’t be too bad.
Important 
problem‑solving skill!
you are here 4    325
equations of motion (part 2)

You need to find another way 
of doing this problem
Your equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 contains two 
terms with t in them, v0t and ½at2. Because 
one of the terms has t in it, and the other has t2 in it, 
there’s no easy way to rearrange your equation to say 
“t = something” because the t and t2 won’t cancel by 
adding to zero.
However, if either v0 = 0 or a = 0, then one of these 
terms would disappear. This means you’d be able 
to rearrange the equation to say “t = something” and 
use it to calculate the value of t.
a. Try rearranging the equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 to say “t = something,” so you can 
use it to work out the time it takes the Dingo to go up and back down again.
b. Write down your thoughts about whether this is a good idea or not.
x   =
x0  +  v0t  +  ½at2
Try to get this t on its own 
to say“t = something”
v0t   =
x - x0 -  ½at2
t   =
x - x0 -  ½at2
v0
But now there’s a t2 over here, 
so that doesn’t work.
This isn’t going to work. If you try to rearrange to say “t = something,” 
there’s a t2 on the other side. And if you get the t2 on its own to take a 
square root, there’ll still be the t on the other side. You can’t simplify the 
equation enough to say “t = something.”
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
If a = 0, then the equation becomes x = x0 + v0t, which 
is the equation you worked out before for something that 
moves with a constant velocity without accelerating. But 
the acceleration isn’t zero in this scenario.
But if v0 = 0, then the equation would simplify 
to  x = x0 + ½at2, which you can rearrange to say 
“t = something.” That’s incredibly useful!
If only there was a way of reframing the problem so that 
v0 = 0, then all of this would be possible ...
What would happen to 
your equation if different 
variables were zero? 
Would this make the 
equation easier to solve?
If v0 = 0, the equation 
becomes x = x0 + ½at2
If a = 0, the equation 
becomes x = x0 + v0t
If any variable that’s multiplying 
a term is zero, then the whole 
term is zero and disappears.
Strictly speaking, this is 
possible if you use something 
called the quadratic formula. 
If you already know how to 
do this, then feel free to use 
this method. But if you’ve 
never heard of the quadratic 
formula before, don’t worry. 
You’re about to learn a much 
less complicated way ...
326    Chapter 8
zero values

A dingo is launched with an initial velocity of 11.7 m/s upwards. The top 
of his flight path is 7.00 m from the level he started at.
a. Use symmetry to make a new problem where v0  =  0. This will enable 
you to rearrange the equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 to say “t = something.” 
Use this equation to calculate the time it takes for the Dingo to return to 
the bottom of the cliff.
The displacement-time graph’s 
symmetrical. Symmetry’s 
helped us before. I wonder if 
symmetry will help us again?
Look out for 
symmetry that 
might make a 
hard problem 
easier ...
Graph of displacement vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
Time (s)
Displacement   
(m)
The ‘up’ half and the ‘down’ half 
take the same amount of time
b. The Dingo’s safety device takes 1.00 s to inflate. Will the safety 
device have inflated before the Dingo lands?
You’re 
creating a 
new problem, 
so start with 
a new sketch.
you are here 4    327
equations of motion (part 2)

x  =  x0 + v0t  +  ½at2
Work out the time it takes him to fall 7.00 m, then 
double it to get the time it takes him to go up then down.
a = 9.8 m/s2
t = 0 s
v0 = 0 m/s
Down is positive
x = 7.00 m
x0 = 0 m
t = ? s
at2   =
2(x - x0)
a
2(x - x0)
t   =
9.8
2(7.00 - 0)
=
= 1.20 s (3 sd)
Yes, the safety device inflates before the Dingo lands. Result!
Rearrange this to say “t = something”
v0 = 0 so this term is zero.
Now there’s only 
t2 and no t, so 
this is an equation 
you can solve.
The time it takes to go up and down is 
DOUBLE the time it takes to fall from 
the top of the flight path.
The top of 
the flight 
path is 
exactly 
HALFWAY 
through the 
flight.
Now that you’re ONLY 
dealing with vectors pointing 
downwards, you can make 
down the positive direction 
so that the math is easier.
A dingo is launched with an initial velocity of 
11.7 m/s upwards. The top of his flight path is 
7.00 m from the level he started at.
a. Use symmetry to make a new problem where 
v0  =  0. This will enable you to rearrange the 
equation x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 to say “t = something.” 
Use this equation to calculate the time it takes for 
the Dingo to return to the bottom of the cliff.
b. The Dingo’s safety device takes 1.00 s to inflate. Will the safety 
device have inflated before the Dingo lands?
You get the same answer if 
you make “up” the positive 
direction, but there’s more 
risk of making a mistake 
with minus signs.
½at2   =
x - x0
328    Chapter 8
solutions
Graph of displacement vs. time for the cage 
which goes up then down again
Time (s)
Displacement   
(m)
You spend half the 
time going up ...
... and the other 
half going down.
So the TOTAL time it 
takes to go up and down 
is double the time it 
takes to fall from the 
same height.

Q: So why was I trying to find a 
special point where v0 = 0? I wasn’t quite 
sure about that bit.
A: You want to use the equation 
x = x0 + v0t + ½at2 to calculate t. But 
because it has both t and t2 in it, you can’t 
easily rearrange it to say “t = something.” 
 
But the term with the t in it is actually v0t. 
So if you can reframe the problem into one 
where v0 is zero, you lose that term entirely 
and can solve the equation to find t. 
 
Q: But couldn’t I just use the quadratic 
formula to solve for t without having to 
do all of that symmetry stuff?
A: If you already know how to solve 
quadratic equations like this one, that’s fine. 
Feel free to use any method you understand. 
 
But spotting the symmetry and working out 
how long it takes to fall, then doubling it is 
actually easier mathematically and a very 
useful shortcut to know about. Symmetry 
makes hard problems easier. 
 
 
Q: But what if I’m in a situation where 
I can’t make v0 = 0? How do I solve that 
kind of equation then?
A: In that case, it’s usually most 
straightforward to work out a value for v, so 
you can use the simpler equation v = v0 + at. 
You’d do this using the other one of the three 
key equations, v2 = v0
2 + 2a(x - x0).
Q: Ack. I have trouble remembering 
these equations.
A: Don’t worry - it’s on your equation 
table. And you’ll naturally memorize it as you 
practice using it.
Symmetry makes hard problems easier.
If it’s symmetrical, does that mean that 
you have the same speed when you hit the 
bottom as you did when you were launched, 
but in the opposite direction?
At a single height, a launched object has the 
same speed whether it’s going up or down.
The Dingo left the ground with a speed of 11.7 m/s and a 
velocity of 11.7 m/s upwards. Since going up then down again 
is symmetrical, his speed at the bottom will also be 11.7 m/s, 
and his velocity will be 11.7 m/s downwards.
Also, at any displacement in his flight, his speed will be the 
same whether he’s going up or down. This is another special 
symmetry thing that you can sometimes use to solve 
problems. If you start and end at the same height, then v = -v0.
Don’t worry about what this is if you don’t 
already know. You won’t need to use it if 
you can spot symmetry in problems!
You’ll also learn another approach to doing 
a problem like this in chapter 14, which you 
can use instead if you want to.
you are here 4    329
equations of motion (part 2)

The start of a beautiful friendship
Thanks to you, the Dingo has managed to deliver 
his party invitation. And the party marks the start of 
a beautiful friendship.
TAG! You’re it!

331
2. A cage is propelled straight up from ground level by 
a launcher with initial velocity v0. Sketch graphs of:
The displacement
The velocity
The acceleration
of the cage with respect to time, from the moment 
it’s launched until it hits the ground again. State any 
assumptions you make.
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Sketch a graph” or “Match a graph”  Question
Sometimes you’ll be asked to sketch a graph or match a 
sketched graph with an equation or story. The point is to show that you 
understand what’s going on. Sketching a graph will usually be part of a free 
response question, and choosing graphs that match stories or scenarios is a 
standard style of multiple choice question.
If you’re asked to sketch more than one 
graph (like displacement, velocity, and acceleration), 
it’s usually best to work out which graph is easiest to draw, 
and start with that one. You can then work out what the 
others look like by thinking about values and slopes.
ALWAYS START WITH A SKETCH!! Even if 
you’re asked for a graph, sketch the situation 
to get your whole brain zoned in on the job.
Make a note of any initial 
VALUES, as you should 
include them on your graph.
Make a note of initial 
DIRECTIONS, and decide which 
direction to make positive.
This means get the 
SHAPE right. Don’t plot 
only put on values you 
know/have been given.
You don’t have to actually draw 
the graphs in this order. The 
easiest one is the acceleration, 
as it’s a constant -9.8 m/s2. 
So start with that and work 
backwards. 
This tells you what to put 
on the horizontal axis.
Don’t forget to do this 
bit, or you’ll lose points!
This tells you where 
your sketch should end.

332
3. A cage is propelled straight up from ground level by 
a launcher with initial velocity v0 = 10 m/s. If it goes up 
then comes back down again to ground level,
What is the value of its velocity just before it hits 
the ground
How long does it remain in the air for?
What is the maximum height it reaches?
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Symmetry” and “Special points” Questions
Some of the questions you’ll be asked about moving 
things will have one simple step. But in many, you’ll have to 
spot symmetry to take a shortcut - or to make the problem solvable at all.  You 
may also need to spot ‘special points’ that give you extra information because 
of symmetry - like v = 0 at the top of something’s flight, or the fact that 
something’s speed will be identical at the same height whether it’s going up or 
coming down (though the direction of the velocity is different).
The secret is to keep calm and start with 
a sketch. Write down the three key equations, add in 
‘special points’ to your sketch, then play with the terms and the 
variables in your equations until you know which of them to 
use to get the answer you want.
It starts and finishes at the same 
HEIGHT, so it will have the same SPEED 
both times, just in opposite directions.
This is asking for a time. 
If you already know the 
height, you could work out 
how long it takes to fall 
that far and double it.
ALWAYS START WITH A SKETCH!!
But here you know v and 
v0 already (as v0 = -v), so 
you can use v = v0 + at.
You know that the maximum height is 
a ‘special point’ where the velocity is 
zero and that it gets there in half 
the time it takes to go up and down..
DO ANOTHER SKETCH!! As this part 
of the problem has a DIFFERENT END 
POINT (the top of the flight path 
instead of ground level), some of your 
variables will have different values.

you are here 4    333
equations of motion (part 2)
Units
Falling
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Special points
Experiment
Time
Substitution
Equations of motion
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Displacement
Volume
Velocity
Symmetry
Slope
Does it SUCK?
Area
Equations 
of motion
Three equations that you can use to calculate the motion 
of an object that is moving with constant acceleration.
Symmetry
In physics, the second half of something’s motion 
sometimes mirrors the first. For example, going up 
into the air then back down again is symmetrical.
Symmetry makes 
life easier.

Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 8 under your belt 
and added some equations, math 
techniques and problem-solving skills to 
your tool box.
CHAPTER 8
Vectors: positive direction
When you’re dealing with vectors that all 
lie along one line, you have to decide which 
direction is positive.
Usually, you’d make up positive so that your 
graphs come out the same way round as 
real life.
If all your vectors point down (e.g., if an 
object is falling), then making down positive 
helps to reduce errors with minus signs.
x  = x0 + v0t +   at2
2
1
Equations of motion
v  = v0 + at
v2 = v0
2 + 2a(x-x0)
The three key equations for something 
with constant acceleration.
Special points
Special points help you to simplify 
and solve problems.
Vertical velocity = 0 at the top 
of an object’s flight.
Parentheses
When you’re multiplying out parentheses, 
you multiply every term inside by every 
term outside:
    a(b + c)  =  ab + ac
    (a + b)(a + b) = a2 + 2ab + b2
Symmetry
When an object goes up then 
down, the up part and the 
down part of its motion 
both take the same TIME.
When something goes up 
then down, its VELOCITY 
has the same size at any 
one height regardless of 
whether the direction of 
the velocity is up or down.
The object may also be moving horizontally. 
We’ll talk about this in chapter 9 ...
Which equation of 
motion should I use?
If you don’t know which equation 
of motion to use, write down all 
three of them. Tick the variable 
you know values for, cross the 
variables you don’t know, and put 
a ? by the variable you want to 
find out. For example:
x   =   x0 + v0t  +  ½at2
v   =
v0  +  at
v2   =
v0
2  +  2a(x-x0)
334    Chapter 8
physics toolbox

triangles, trig and trajectories
9
Going two-dimensional
So you can deal with one dimension. But what about real life? 
Real things don’t just go up or down - they go sideways too! But never fear - you’re 
about to gain a whole new bunch of trigonometry superpowers that’ll see you spotting 
right‑angled triangles wherever you go and using them to reduce complicated-looking 
problems into simpler ones that you can already do.
So I was, like, “When’s 
this physics book ever gonna 
get onto the REAL stuff.” 
And then it hit me right 
between the eyes ...
this is a new chapter    335

Camelot - we have a problem!
The Head First castle is in imminent danger! Back when it was 
built, the longest ladder available from Sieges-R-Us was 15.0 m 
long. So the castle was designed with a moat 15.0 m wide and 
a wall 15.0 m high, making it impossible for anyone to put a 
ladder from the edge of the moat to the top of the wall.
If you don’t act quickly, someone will turn up 
with the new ladder, and you’ll be toast. It’s time 
to design a new castle defense system!
336    Chapter 9
Ladder
Wall
End of ladder 
is nowhere near 
top of wall.
Bottom of 
ladder is at 
edge of moat.
Moat filled 
with water
15.0 m
15.0 m
New ladder will 
comfortably reach 
top of wall!
Wall
Moat
15.0 m
15.0 m
25.0 m
Ladder
The new ladder
15.0 m
But the Sieges-R-Us website has just been 
updated with a new top of the range 25.0 m 
ladder. It’s only a matter of time before someone 
comes to attack your castle armed with the new 
ladder, and your current defense system just isn’t 
big enough...
castle defense needed

Coat the top of the wall with something slippery.
Advantage(s)	
Disadvantage(s)
Make the moat wider.
Advantage(s)	
Disadvantage(s)
Run away! Run away!
Advantage(s)	
Disadvantage(s)
Make the wall higher.
Advantage(s)	
Disadvantage(s)
 
Put a health and safety rep on the top of the wall to recite the 
working height directive repeatedly to anyone who gets higher 
than 2 m. Also to ask when their ladders were last inspected 
and if they have been trained in the proper use of ladders.  
And insist that they all wear safety harnesses, hard hats, ear 
defenders, goggles, gloves and toe protectors.
Advantage(s)	
Disadvantage(s)
Here are some ideas for a new castle defense system. 
Unfortunately, you don’t have many spare stones lying around, only 
some shovels and food.
Write down at least one advantage and disadvantage of each idea, 
and check the box next to the idea you think is the best.
Check the box 
next to the idea 
you think is best.
you are here 4    337
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Coat the top of the wall with something slippery.
Advantage(s)	
Disadvantage(s)
Make the moat wider.
Advantage(s)	
Disadvantage(s)
Run away! Run away!
Advantage(s)	
Disadvantage(s)
Make the wall higher.
Advantage(s)	
Disadvantage(s)
 
Put a health and safety rep on the top of the wall to recite the 
working height directive repeatedly to anyone who gets higher 
than 2 m. Also to ask when their ladders were last inspected 
and if they have been trained in the proper use of ladders.  And 
to Insist that they all wear safety harnesses, hard hats, ear 
defenders, goggles, gloves and toe protectors.
Advantage(s)	
Disadvantage(s)
Here are some ideas for a new castle defense system. 
Unfortunately, you don’t have many spare stones lying around, only 
shovels and food.
Write down at least one advantage and disadvantage of each idea, 
and check the box next to the idea you think is the best.
By wearing ear defenders, they 
can ignore him and continue 
attacking the castle anyway.
I’m not sure how wide to make 
the moat.
The attackers might get bored 
and attack a different castle.
... but there’s no stone available 
to build a higher wall.
This would definitely keep 
them out of the castle ...
They’ll get into the castle.
I won’t be there when they 
get into the castle.
I have a shovel to dig a 
wider moat.
Washes off in the rain, attracts 
cats, not a long-term solution.
Ladders will slip, it might 
delay them a bit.
It’s a lot easier to 
dig a wider moat 
than it is to build 
a higher wall.
338    Chapter 9
we need a wider moat

How wide should you make the moat?
The best way of defending the castle against the 
25.0 m ladder is to make the moat wider. The 
moat is already 15.0 m wide—so how much 
wider do you need to make it?
You could try making the moat the same size as 
the ladder —25.0 m— so that the distance from 
the edge of the moat to the bottom of the wall is 
the same length as the ladder. That would make 
sure that attackers couldn’t simultaneously put 
one end of the ladder at the edge of the moat 
and the other end on the top of the wall.
a. Draw a sketch of the 15.0 m castle 
wall, 25.0 m ladder, and extended 
moat, where the ladder is only just 
too short to reach the top of the 
wall from the side of the moat.
(This sketch is just a quick drawing 
to get the visual parts of your brain 
working—the lengths on it don’t 
have to be accurate as long as 
everything’s labelled correctly.)
b. What shape does your sketch resemble? 
But time is of the essence, and you don’t want to start out 
digging a 25.0 m moat if a narrower moat will do the same 
job. The important thing is the distance from the edge 
of the moat to the top of the wall. If that’s more than 
25.0 m, there won’t be anything to lean the ladder on. And 
you might be able to achieve that with a narrower moat... a 
sketch should help.
? m
15.0 m
You want the distance from 
the edge of the moat to 
the top of the wall to be 
more than 25.0 m.
Widening the 
moat moves the 
bottom of the 
ladder further 
away from the 
top of the wall.
Old moat width
you are here 4    339
triangles, trig, and trajectories

a. Draw a sketch of the 15.0 m castle 
wall, 25.0 m ladder, and extended 
moat, where the ladder is only just 
too short to reach the top of the wall 
from the side of the moat.
(This sketch is just a quick drawing 
to get the visual parts of your brain 
working—the lengths on it don’t have 
to be accurate as long as everything’s 
labelled correctly.)
b. What shape does your sketch resemble? 
Looks like a triangle, yeah?
You can turn your complicated-looking castle, ladder, 
and moat sketch into a more simple picture of a 
right‑angled triangle, with a 90° angle (a right 
angle) between the wall and the moat. You already 
know the lengths of two of the triangle’s sides and 
want to find out how long the third side is.
You could figure this out by ordering a 25.0 m 
ladder, putting one end at the top of the wall, and 
seeing where the ladder touches the ground. But the 
attackers might arrive with their new ladder first!
If you don’t want to wait, you can measure 25.0 m 
of rope, tie one end to the top of the wall, and see 
where it touches the ground when you pull it tight. 
But that still involves a lot of steps and equipment.
Top of ladder doesn’t 
quite reach top of wall.
Bottom of ladder is 
right at edge of moat.
This distance is less than 
25.0 m. So this way is quicker 
and more efficient than 
making the moat 25.0 m wide.
15.0 m
25.0 m
Ladder
Wall
Minimum width of moat = ? m
Moat
It looks like a triangle.
Moat
Dawr a little square in 
the corner to show that 
this is a RIGHT ANGLE.
Simplified version 
of our sketch
Ladder
Wall
15.0 m
25.0 m
? m
You need to 
work out how 
long this side is.
340    Chapter 9
remember triangles?

Wouldn't it be dreamy if you 
could just work out the smallest moat 
width from the triangle drawing, without having 
to climb the wall and make a lot of measurements? 
But I know it's just a fantasy… 
you are here 4    341
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Sweep compasses 
around until you cross 
the horizontal line.
15 cm
25 cm
? cm
Measure this side and 
scale it up to get the 
best moat width.
At the moment, your drawing is only a sketch—the 
triangle’s side lengths aren’t to scale (though the 
lengths you’ve written beside them are correct). 
A scale drawing is one where you say something like 
“1 cm on the drawing = 1 m in real life.” You can then 
do the same as you would with the 15.0 m castle wall 
and 25.0 m ladder, except with 15 cm and 25 cm!
A scale drawing takes 
time, and I’m sure someone 
must have solved a problem 
like this before. Is there an 
equation that’ll help?
You can solve some problems 
with scale drawings, but it 
takes time and effort.
... and swing down from the top of the wall to meet the ground 
line. Now you can measure the most economical moat width.
That’s a lot of effort just to work out a simple length though ...
Make a right-angle here.
Measure up 
15 cm for 
the wall.
Set a pair of compasses to 25 cm 
(same as swinging the ladder down).
A scale drawing can solve problems
This is one way of getting 
the best moat width from 
a triangle drawing. But it’s 
not the best way.
Accurate scale version 
of your triangle.
Start off by making a right-angle to represent where the wall 
meets the moat. Then measure up 15 cm to represent the wall. 
Now, you want to swing the ladder down and see where it hits 
the ground. So set a pair of compasses to 25 cm... 
342    Chapter 9
scale drawings

Pythagoras’ Theorem lets you figure out the sides quickly
If you already 
know two sides of 
the right‑angled 
triangle, Pythagoras 
gets you the third.
Pythagoras’ theorem is an equation for solving this 
kind of problem without waving ladders around or 
making a super-accurate drawing. You only need to 
know the lengths of two sides, and the equation will tell 
you the third.
The longest side of the triangle is opposite the biggest 
angle (the right angle). This side has a special name and 
gets called the hypotenuse.
The square of the hypotenuse
	
is equal to the sum
of the other two sides squared:
	
c2 = a2 + b2
If the triangle is right‑angled:
Longest side 
is called the 
hypotenuse.
The hypotenuse is 
opposite the right angle 
- the largest angle.
If you square the length of the hypotenuse, the answer is 
equal to the answer you get if you square the length of the 
other two sides individually, then add the squares together.
That’s very wordy. So here’s the equation - if you label the 
sides of your triangle a, b and c (where c is the hypotenuse) 
then Pythagoras’ Theorem says:
	
c2 = a2 + b2
c
b
a
c2 = a2 + b2 
The hypotenuse is on one side of 
the equation, the rest are on the 
other side of the equation.
Pythagoras only works for 
right‑angled triangles.
It doesn’t really matter which 
letters you use for the sides. 
We’ve chosen the same letters as 
the AP physics equation table.
Pythagoras’ Theorem only works for right‑angled 
triangles. You can’t use it if your triangle doesn’t have a 
right angle.
you are here 4    343
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Q: You’ve called Pythagoras a theorem and an equation 
so far. And I’ve seen things like that called a formula too. So 
which is it?
A: Equation, formula, and theorem mean the same thing really. 
They all describe relationships where you write down “something = 
another thing.” 
Q: How do I try to remember Pythagoras? I mean, how do 
I remember which sides are a, b and c, then what order to put 
them in the equation?
A: If you can remember the form of the equation, you don’t 
need to remember the letters. The hypotenuse is the longest side, 
whatever letter you use to name it. So hypotenuse goes on the left 
of the equation. 
 
And on the right of the equation, you square each of the other sides, 
then add them together. You can think about the S in SUCK - size 
matters. So it’s the square of the longest side that goes on its own.
Q: What if I know the hypotenuse and want to calculate the 
length of one of the other sides?
A: You can rearrange the equation so that the side you don’t 
know is on its own on the left.
Q: So where does Pythagoras’ Theorem come from? Aren’t 
we going to go through proving it?
A: It’s only really worth going into understanding where an 
equation comes from if the understanding you gain helps you see 
how the world works, so you can solve physics problems (and other 
problems) better. 
 
Being able to prove Pythagoras’ Theorem doesn’t help with this, so 
we’ve not gone into that here.
We’ll probably see a lot of 
right‑angled triangles in physics 
because the ground’s horizontal and 
gravity acts vertically?
You’ll spot many right angles between the 
horizontal and vertical
Right‑angled triangles are going to be one of your most 
important physics tools. There are lots of right angles in 
physics, often between the horizontal ground and vertical 
walls or vertical acceleration vectors that exist as a result 
of gravity.
Keep your eyes open for them as this chapter progresses ...
344    Chapter 9
look for right angles

Sketch + shape + equation = Problem solved!
Back to the castle and the new Sieges-R-Us ladder!
You started with a sketch and spotted a right‑angled triangle shape in it. After toying 
with the idea of a scale drawing, Pythagoras popped up with an equation!
So now you can work out the best moat width—and save the castle!
A castle is built on flat ground with 15.00 m walls. How wide must the moat be to 
ensure that a 25.00 m ladder only just touches the top of the wall? Assume that the 
base of the ladder is placed at the edge of the moat.
Start with a sketch
Look for familiar shapes 
(triangles, rectangles, etc)
Use an equation that tells you 
about this kind of shape
Solve your problem!
15.0 m
25.0 m
Ladder
Wall
Minimum width of moat = ? m
Moat
15.0 m
25.0 m
? m
c
b
a
c2 = a2 + b2
you are here 4    345
triangles, trig, and trajectories

This is what you say 
if you use Pythagoras.
Want to know a, the width of the moat.
So the best moat width is 20.0 m (3 sd).
This is what you say 
if you use Pythagoras.
By Pythagoras,
c2  =  a2 + b2
a2  =  c2 - b2
a2  =  252 - 152
a2  =  400
a  =   400   =  20.0 m
A castle is built on flat ground with 15.00 m walls. How 
wide must the moat be to ensure that a 25.00 m ladder 
only just touches the top of the wall? Assume that the 
base of the ladder is placed at the edge of the moat.
Q: There were square roots in that solution, 
but it’s been a while since I used these, and 
they’re a bit hazy. Remind me how they work 
again?
A: As we saw in chapter 3, the square of a 
number is the number times itself.  
 
	
or 32 = 3×3 = 9. 
 
If you take the square root (√ ) of a number, the 
answer you get is the number you’d have to 
square to get the one you started off with. For 
example, √9 = 3 because 32 = 9.
Q: I noticed that I got nice round numbers – 
15.0, 20.0 and 25.0 – for the side lengths. Does 
that always happen with right‑angled 
triangles?
A: Here, the wall, ladder and moat formed a 
right‑angled triangle which has nice side lengths 
in a 3:4:5 ratio. 32 + 42 = 52, and a 15:20:25 ratio 
is just a 3:4:5 ratio multiplied by 5. 
 
But usually that doesn’t happen - your calculator 
will give you answers that you’ll have to round 
to the same number of significant digits as the 
values you were initially given to work with.
15.0 m
25.0 m
?m
Ladder
Wall
Moat
Start with a sketch:
Rearrange 
equation 
for the side 
you want.
Values in your question 
were given to 3 sd, so 
your answer should 
have 3 sd too.
346    Chapter 9
pythagorean theorem

You kept them out!
The routine 
	
SKETCH 
	
SHAPE 
	
EQUATION 
is an excellent one!
You’ll often see right‑angled 
triangles, as the ground is 
horizontal and walls, gravity and 
such operate vertically.
The hypotenuse is the side 
opposite the right angle.



Pythagoras’ Theorem is an 
equation you can use to get the 
third side of a right‑angled triangle 
if you already know the other two.
Pythagoras’ Theorem only works 
on right‑angled triangles! 
 
 
 
 
 


If you spot a triangle with side 
lengths in a 3:4:5 ratio, then you 
know it must be right-angled 
(because Pythagoras’ Theorem 
only works on right‑angled 
triangles).
If you forget which way around 
Pythagoras is, then think about 
the lengths of the sides and what 
makes sense. Or sketch out a 
3:4:5 triangle and work out what 
Pythagoras must be from that.


But the attackers get smarter!
Under your instructions, the castle workmen start digging 
your 20.0 m wide moat immediately.
A couple of hours after they’ve finished, some attackers 
come along with the new 25.0 m ladder ... and have an 
unexpected bath!
We’ll camp at the edge 
of the moat until you’re 
desperate for food and 
have to surrender!
Phoning for a pizza just isn’t an option. 
How could you try to scare them away 
so you can get more supplies in?
you are here 4    347
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Camelot ... we have ANOTHER problem!
Is it possible to aim the 
cannon at the attackers 
by the moat even though 
you don’t have a direct 
line of sight?
Cannon can 
tilt.
Protractor measures 
aiming angle round 
from the horizontal.
You dealt with the new ladders—and gave the 
attackers an early bath by widening the moat.
But now they’re camped at the edge of the moat, 
waiting for you to run out of food and surrender. It 
would be someone else’s problem ... if you weren’t 
stuck in the castle too!
On the bright side—you have a cannon!
On the not-so-bright side, you need to aim before 
you fire. And you can’t look over the top of the wall 
to aim the cannon, as they’ll probably shoot at you 
before you can aim at them...
Attackers right 
at edge of moat.
You have a 
cannon on top 
of the wall ...
... but it’s not safe to look down 
the cannon’s sight to aim because 
you could get picked off.
Sparkly new 20.0 m moat!
The cannon up close
348    Chapter 9
cannons?

Frank: That’s easy! In a castle, surrounded by an army camped 
at the edge of our moat... until we run out of food and surrender.
Jim: Uhhhh. I kinda meant where we’re at with aiming the 
cannon, when we can’t see to point it at the correct angle.
Joe: Well, we know the distance they are from the cannon - 
25.0 m! We already worked that out when we did the ladder thing.
Frank: Oh yeah ... well looks like it only delayed the inevitable.
Joe: Think positive - we can do this! We know the height of the 
wall and the width of the moat. We worked those out with a 
sketch and Pythagoras’ Theorem.
Jim: Yeah, we know all there is to know about the sides of the 
triangle. But we need an angle to aim the cannon. If only there 
was some kind of ‘Pythagoras for angles’ equation we could use.
Joe: But there is! The angles in a triangle add up to 180°!
Jim: And we already know that the right angle is 90°, so the other 
two angles must add up to 180° - 90° = 90°. That’s progress!
The three angles 
in a triangle add 
up to 180°.
Frank: Not a lot of progress though. The other two angles could 
be 1° and 89°, or 45° and 45°, or 18.2° and 71.8°.
Jim: Oh yeah. You can’t find out two things you don’t know if 
you only have one equation to work with.
Joe: Well, since we only have one equation at the moment, 
maybe we can do an experiment with some different 
right‑angled triangles and see if we can figure something out?
Frank: OK, that kinda thing’s worked for us before ...
c
b
a
The right 
angle is 90°.
As all three angles 
add up to 180°, 
these two angles 
must add up to 90°.
Right, so I guess we’d 
better take stock of 
where we’re at.
you are here 4    349
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Whoa, hang on! 
The angle you want 
isn’t even part of a 
triangle—see?!
Moat
Wall
Triangle
The angle you want might be the SAME 
SIZE as one of the angles in your triangle.
When there are right‑angled triangles around, you’ll often 
find complementary and/or supplementary angles.
Complementary angles add up to 90°, and supplementary 
angles add up to 180°. They’re useful because they help 
you work out the sizes of angles that aren’t in your triangle.
Try to spot 
angles that 
add up to 90° 
or 180° in and 
around your 
right‑angled 
triangles.
Complementary angles 
add up to 90°.
Supplementary angles add up to 180°.
These two angles 
add up to 90°.
These two angles 
add up to 180°.
You don’t need to 
remember which is 
which to be able to 
actually USE them!
Firing 
angle
15.0 m
25.0 m
20.0 m
Right angle
Angles meeting at 
a straight line
350    Chapter 9
complementary and supplementary angles

Hey - didn’t we say before that 
these two angles also add up to 90°?
Relate your angle to an 
angle inside the triangle
We’re going to give the firing angle the symbol 
θ. This is the Greek letter theta and is often 
used in physics to represent an angle that 
you’re interested in.
You want to calculate the firing angle - but 
it isn’t part of your triangle. However, when 
there are right‑angled triangles around, there 
are often angles that add up to 90° or 180° 
that you can use to work out the angle you’re 
interested in. Here, the firing angle and the 
angle at the top of your triangle add up to 90°.
The firing angle is the same 
size as an angle in your triangle.
Now you have two sets of angles that add 
up to 90°. The first set is the firing angle, 
θ, and the angle at the top of the triangle. 
The second set is the angles at the bottom 
and top of the triangle.
This means that θ and the angle at the 
bottom of the triangle must both be the 
same size. So you can label the angle at the 
bottom of the triangle θ as well, and get on 
with trying to work out what size it should 
be to fire the cannonball ...
The three angles in a 
triangle add up to 180°. 
The right angle is already 
90°, so the other two 
angles must add up to 90°.
15.0 m
25.0 m
20.0 m
θ
15.0 m
25.0 m
20.0 m
θ
15.0 m
25.0 m
20.0 m
θ
θ
Label the angle you 
want to find out θ.
There’s a right-angle here, 
so these two angles must 
add up to 90°.
This angle is the same size as the 
firing angle, so you can label it θ.
you are here 4    351
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Frank: Yeah, but what now?! We need to work out an angle - but 
we only know the side lengths of the triangle.
Joe: Well, if there isn’t some kind of Pythagoras for angles, maybe 
we could go back to the idea of doing an accurate scale drawing, 
then measuring the angle with a protractor.
Jim: I guess that might work. The angles always have to add up to 
180° however big the triangle is, so I guess that the angles wouldn’t 
change even if all three sides got scaled up or down as we zoom in 
or out making scale drawings.
Frank: Yeah that’s right. It’s still the same triangle!
Jim: It says here that triangles with equal angles (but different 
side lengths) are called similar triangles.
Joe: So the scale drawing would be of a similar triangle. And the 
angles would be the same as the original, big triangle. Cool!
Frank: But what if the attackers move? We’d have to do another 
scale drawing, and that’s gonna take time.
Jim: We can do that in advance. We can draw all the right‑angled 
triangles that you could ever get and measure their angles.
Joe: Yeah, we can make the information into a table so that you 
can look up the angles of any right‑angled triangle without having 
to measure them. And we could get a computer or a calculator to 
look up the angles when we tell it the sides—that bit would be 
really quick.
Frank: But if we were drawing all possible right‑angled triangles, 
some of them would be really huge, like, miles long!
Jim: Not necessarily. We just worked out that the angles of 
similar triangles are always the same. So if we have a 
triangle in the table with side lengths 3 cm, 4 cm, and 5 cm, we 
don’t also need one with 3 miles, 4 miles, 5 miles or 1500 miles, 
2000 miles, 2500 miles, etc, as they’re all just the same triangle, 
except zoomed in or out a bit.
Joe: Cool! Let’s get cracking!
Triangles with equal 
angles are called 
similar triangles.
These angles 
are equal.
These angles 
are equal.
These angles 
are both 
right angles.
This triangle is 
just the bigger 
one shrunk down.
OK. So we worked out that θ, the firing 
angle, is the same as one of the angles in 
our triangle. So let’s label that θ as well.
352    Chapter 9
similar triangles

Triangle shape
Angle θ (°)
Other 
angle (°)
24.6
65.4
40.6
49.4
18.5
71.5
You can classify triangles by their shape - but 
need a way of looking them up later on.
Using similar triangles in your table is the best bet, so each 
type of triangle only needs to appear in the table once. For 
example, instead of the table including lots of different triangles 
with side lengths in a ratio of 3:4:5, it only needs to include one. 
But the problem now is how to arrange or index the table. How 
are you actually going to find the triangle when you go to look 
it up?
Not so fast! How are you 
going to arrange the table so that you 
can actually find the triangle you’re 
trying to look up?
How might you classify the 
shapes of the triangles in 
your table?
If you look up the shape 
of your triangle, the table 
will give you its angles.
The problem is that the triangle someone wants to look 
up could be any SIZE or zoomed in or out from the 
SHAPE of its entry in the table. So how on earth can 
you ever find the row with the right SHAPE in it?
You need some way to classify 
the SHAPE of a triangle that 
doesn’t involve its angles (which 
are what you want to look up).
The angles in this table have 3 significant 
digits because that’s easier to write 
- but the angles in the completed table 
could have more significant digits.
you are here 4    353
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Classify similar triangles by the ratios of their side lengths
If you take a triangle and magnify or reduce it (zoom in or out), 
you make a similar triangle which has the same angles as the 
triangle you started off with. For example, a scale drawing of a 
bigger triangle is a similar triangle.
Similar triangles don’t have the same side lengths, but they do 
have the same ratios of side lengths. To work those out, you 
have to decide on a way of naming the sides so that everyone 
knows what you’re talking about:
	
The hypotenuse it labelled ‘hypotenuse.’ 
	
The side opposite ‘your’ angle is labelled ‘opposite.’ 
	
And you label the third side ‘adjacent.’
Similar triangles 
have the same 
RATIOS of side 
lengths. Sine, 
cosine, and tangent 
are RATIOS.
Hypotenuse
Adjacent
Opposite
Angle you’re 
interested in
Label the sides the same way every time.
opposite
hypotenuse
=
sin(θ)
adjacent
hypotenuse
=
cos(θ)
opposite
adjacent
=
tan(θ)
Opposite
Hypotenuse
Adjacent
Adjacent
Opposite
Hypotenuse
The RATIO of two side 
lengths is one side length 
divided by another side length.
Don’t worry about 
remembering which name is 
which ratio at the moment.
The ratio of two side lengths is simply 
one side length divided by the 
other side length. There are three 
sides and three ratios, which all have 
names:
	
Sine (pronounced “sign”)
	
Cosine (pronounced co-sign)
	
Tangent
When you’re writing these as part of 
an equation, sine is abbreviated to 
sin, cosine becomes cos and tangent 
becomes tan.
If you were saying 
this out loud, it 
would be “sine theta.”
The angle you are interested 
in goes in brackets after 
the name of the ratio.
Tangent has the same name as the tangent to 
a curve - which can be confusing at first. But 
it’s always abbreviated to ‘tan’ in equations.
354    Chapter 9
ratios and similar triangles

Label the sides of these right‑angled triangles with ‘h’ (hypotenuse), ‘o’ (opposite),  and ‘a’ 
(adjacent), then fill the blanks in the table below. If a side length is missing, then use Pythagoras 
to work it out in the space under the table. The angle θ is the one you’re interested in.
Sine, cosine and tangent connect the sides 
and angles of a right-angled triangle
Space for working out the missing 
side lengths using Pythagoras.
Triangle
sin(θ)
cos(θ)
tan(θ)
 
a
= 0.515
 
b
 
c
 
d
Use the definitions of sine, cosine and tangent 
on the opposite page to fill in these boxes.
40 m
24 m
46.6 m
20 cm
9 cm
56 m
48 m
2.72 cm
2.60 cm
o
h
24
46.6
=
The ratios sine, cosine and tangent are a way of classifying the 
similar triangles in your table. Suppose you have two similar 
triangles, one with side lengths 3 cm, 4 cm and 5 cm, and the 
other with side lengths 15.0 m, 20.0 m and 25.0 m. As they’re 
similar triangles, you know that their angles must be equal.
And although their sides aren’t equal, the ratios of their sides 
are. In the first triangle, the ratio of the two shortest sides is 
tan(θ) = 3
4  = 0.75; in the second triangle,  tan(θ) = 15
20 = 0.75.
25.0 m
15.0 m
20.0 m
3 cm
5 cm
4 cm
The ratios of 
the sides of 
these triangles 
are the same.
At the moment, this table just has ratios in it. 
The final table will have the angle that each 
ratio corresponds to, so you can look up an 
ANGLE if you have a RATIO, and vice-versa.
These are similar 
triangles with 
the same sizes 
of angles.
you are here 4    355
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Triangle
sin(θ)
cos(θ)
tan(θ)
 
a
= 0.515
= 0.858
= 0.600
 
b
= 0.411
= 0.913
= 0.45
 
c
= 0.294
= 0.956
= 0.308
 
d
= 0.857
 = 0.514
= 1.67
Label the sides of these right‑angled triangles with ‘h’ (hypotenuse), ‘o’ (opposite),  and ‘a’ 
(adjacent), then fill the blanks in the table below. If a side length is missing, then use Pythagoras 
to work it out in the space under the table. The angle θ is the one you’re interested in.
The side length ratios - sine, 
cosine and tangent - are always 
the same for similar triangles.
The ratios don’t have units, as           is dimensionless.
length
length
40m
24m
46.6m
20cm
9cm
2.72cm
2.60cm
21.9cm
0.80cm
28.8m
56m
48m
By Pythagoras,
h2  =  o2 + a2
h2  =  202 + 92
 h  =   481  =  21.9 cm (3 sd)
Triangle b:
Triangle c:
o2  =  h2 - a2
o2  =  2.722 - 2.602
 o  =   0.6384  =  0.80 cm (3 sd)
Triangle d:
a2  =  h2 - o2
a2  =  562 - 482
 a  =   832  =  28.8 m (3 sd)
The units are important, 
as some triangles are in 
m and some are in cm.
o
o
o
o
h
h
h
h
a
a
a
a
o
h
24
46.6
=
o
h
9
21.9
=
o
h
0.80
2.72
=
o
h
48
56
=
a
h
2.60
2.72
=
a
h
28.8
56
=
a
h
20
21.9
=
a
h
40
46.6
=
o
a
0.80
2.60
=
o
a
48
28.8
=
o
a
9
20
=
o
a
24
40
=
When you’ve labelled your triangle ‘h’, ‘o’ 
and ‘a’ (hypotenuse, opposite and adjacent) 
it’s fine to use these letters instead of a, 
b and c in Pythagoras’ Theorem.
356    Chapter 9
solutions

How to remember which ratio is which??
The mnemonic ‘SOH CAH TOA’ helps you to 
remember which ratio involves which sides.
SOH - Sine is Opposite divided by Hypotenuse.
CAH - Cosine is Adjacent divided by Hypotenuse.
TOA - Tangent is Opposite divided by Adjacent.
“SOH CAH TOA”
“SOH CAH TOA”
“SOH CAH TOA”
“SOH CAH TOA”
“SOH CAH TOA”
TOA
opposite
adjacent
=
tan(θ)
Like they 
say it in 
Boston.
adjacent
hypotenuse
=
cos(θ)
CAH
opposite
hypotenuse
=
sin(θ)
SOH
Say it a few times before 
you turn the page to help 
you remember.
If you forget which sides 
go with which ratio, write 
down this mnemonic, and 
go on from there.
you are here 4    357
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Interviewer: So, sine, would you say that your bad 
reputation is justified?
sine: Sigh. The problem is that I’m sometimes get called 
‘sin.’ But I’m still pronounced sine - with an ‘e’ - like 
‘pine.’ I’m not bad—I’m a trigonometric function!
Interviewer: Err ... a trigono-what-now?!
sine: Trigonometric - that means I help you with 
triangles. And I’m a function, so you give me a number, 
and I give you a different number back.
Interviewer: Hmmm. No, sorry, you’ve lost me. Why 
would I ever want to swap numbers with you?
sine: Well, the number you give me is an angle, from a 
right‑angled triangle. I give you back the ratio of the side 
opposite the angle divided by the hypotenuse.
Interviewer: Riiiiight. I’m not sure why I’d ever care 
about that, but there you go.
sine: I’m the missing link! I’m what connects what you 
can know about the lengths of a triangle’s sides to 
what you can know about the sizes of its angles.
Interviewer: Hmm. So what?
sine: Right angled triangles and angles are very 
important in physics. In fact, I’m one of the most 
important things in your entire physics toolbox!
Interviewer: So, without you, people wouldn’t be able 
to do most of the stuff in the rest of this book.
sine: Exactly!
Interviewer: You sound extremely important then. Can 
you just run past us again how you work?
sine: You give me an angle–probably one you found in 
a right‑angled triangle. And I give you a number back, 
which is the ratio of the side opposite the angle divided by 
the hypotenuse. Like this: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interviewer: But I don’t really see how that helps.
sine: Well, if you already know the angle and the side 
opposite it, you can rearrange that equation to get the 
hypotenuse. And if you already know the angle and the 
hypotenuse, you can get the opposite side.
Interviewer: But what if I know the length of the 
adjacent side, plus one other side? Should I get Pythagoras 
to work out the missing side before calling on you to help?
sine: Not necessarily—you could call on my close 
relatives cosine or tangent.
Interviewer: And what do they do?
sine: Well, cosine is the ratio of the side adjacent to 
the angle divided by the hypotenuse. And tangent is the 
opposite divided by the adjacent.
Interviewer: Oh, so you guys cover all possible 
combinations of two sides of the triangle between you. So 
if I already know an angle and a side, I can get the length 
of any other side in one step. Cool. But what if I don’t 
know any angles at all? Can I use you to work out the 
angles in a triangle too?
sine: Going the other way - from side lengths to angles?
Interviewer: That’s right - some guys in a castle were 
trying to do that just before we went on air.
sine: You’ll want my inverse to go the other way. He 
looks up the table of angles and ratios in the opposite 
direction. So you give my inverse a ratio, and he gives you 
the angle that the ratio corresponds to.
Interviewer: That sure sounds useful. Thank you, sine, 
you’ve been just swell.
Sine Exposed
This week’s interview:
sine is mighty fine!
Sine Exposed
This week’s interview:
sine is mighty fine!
opposite
hypotenuse
=
sin(θ)
Opposite
Hypotenuse
358    Chapter 9
sine exposed

Q: Why choose to have three different ratios? 
Why not one, or two ... or five or six?
A: Suppose you only know two sides of your 
right‑angled triangle, and want to find out one of the 
angles. If there were only one or two ratios in your 
calculator’s table, you’d often have to work out the third 
side using Pythagoras before you could work out a ratio 
to get the angle. Having three ratios in the table covers 
all the different combinations of two sides. 
Q: And why not five or six? You could have 
hypotenuse divided by adjacent, for example.
A: There are special names for these other ratios, but 
they’re not important right now. You’ll never need to use 
them on your physics course. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: OK. Now, I was wondering something else 
about ‘tan’ - or tangent, to give it its full name. I did 
tangents before, right? But that was something to do 
with working out the gradient of a curve, wasn’t it?
A: Good point. Very good point! A tangent is a straight 
line that only touches a curve at one point - and you did 
use one to work out the slope of a line in chapter 7: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Your formula for tan(θ) is basically a rewrite of the “slope 
of a line” equation, which is where the name ‘tangent’ 
comes from. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: Suppose I work out a ratio (sine, cosine or 
tangent) from two of the sides of my triangle. How 
do I use that to get an angle?
A: You need to calculate the firing angle for the 
cannon using the ratio of two sides of the moat-wall 
triangle. We’re just getting on to that ...
The trigonometric 
functions sine, cosine 
and tangent connect 
what you know 
about the sides of a 
right‑angled triangle 
to what you know 
about its angles.
Slope
=
horizontal
vertical
horizontal
vertical
tan(α)
=
adjacent
opposite
Adjacent
Opposite
Hypotenuse
If you put a value into a function, then 
it gives you a different value back. For 
example, if you give an angle to the sine 
function, it gives you back the ratio of 
the opposite and hypotenuse.
you are here 4    359
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Calculators have sin(θ), cos(θ) and tan(θ) tables built in
Your calculator already contains a table a bit like the one you’ve been 
filling in, where the angles of similar triangles are indexed using the 
ratios sine, cosine and tangent.
To get a ratio when you have an angle, use the sin(θ), cos (θ) and 
tan (θ) functions. They’re usually printed on a calculator button.
To get an angle when you have a ratio, you need to use the 
inverse sine, cosine and tangent functions. They’re usually written 
above the ‘sin’ ‘cos’ and ‘tan’ buttons. You use the inverse functions by 
pressing the ‘shift’ or ‘2nd fn’ button first.
The inverse functions are usually called sin-1, cos-1 and tan-1. This is 
weird, as at first glance the ‘-1’ bit looks like scientific notation. But it’s 
not - it’s just a convention for indicating an inverse function that you’ll 
unfortunately need to get used to.
Sometimes the inverse functions are called arcsine, arccosine and 
arctangent. These are abbreviated to asin, acos and atan on calculators. 
Make sure you know what they’re called on your calculator!
Functions 
written on 
buttons.
Inverse functions 
written above buttons.
What about that ‘deg rad grad’ buttony 
slider thingy. I think that might be important, 
but I don’t really know what it does.
Make sure your calculator’s set to degrees!
If you and your calculator are speaking different languages, 
there’s no way you’re going to get the right answer. There’s 
more than one way of measuring angles. Right now, make 
sure your calculator’s set to work in degrees.
Usually, there’ll be a switch or a button with a ‘deg’ or ° sign 
on it that you can use to sort this out.
It’s also good to spend time playing with your calculator to 
see which order you need to press the buttons in. On some 
calculators, you type the number in, then press the button for 
the function you want. Other, more expensive, calculators let 
you type things in the same order you’d write them.
Play with your calculator, and make sure you know how it 
works before you go on to find the firing angle.
Know how 
your calculator 
works and 
inwhich order 
you should 
press the 
buttons!
Then the calculator will 
do what you want it to.
360    Chapter 9
use your calculator

Triangle
sin(θ)
cos(θ)
tan(θ)
Angle θ (°)
Angle β (°)
 
a
0.515
0.858
0.6
31.0
 
b
0.411
0.913
0.45
 
c
0.294
0.956
0.308
 
d
0.857
0.514
1.67
Here’s the table you already started filling in on pages 351-352. It’s similar to the kind of table in 
your calculator, and it’s time to practice moving smoothly between sides and angles before you 
do the critical mission of calculating the angle back at the castle.
The side lengths you were originally given are written in type. Your job is to skip the Pythagoras 
step and use the appropriate ratio ­— sin(θ), cos (θ) or tan (θ) — to get from the two given sides 
to find the angle θ. Show which ratio you’d use by circling it.
Once you’ve worked out θ, try to spot a quick way of calculating β for each triangle as well.
Triangle a - could use any two of three given sides. 
Use tangent with opp and adj.
tan-1 (0.6)
=
=   31.0° (3 sd)
We’ve used another Greek letter, β 
(beta), to represent the other angle.
40 m
24 m
46.6 m
20 cm
9 cm
56 m
48 m
2.72 cm
2.60 cm
If you’re not sure what to do with your calculator, play 
with the one we’ve already done, and see which buttons 
you need to press to get the same answer.
you are here 4    361
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Triangle
sin(θ)
cos(θ)
tan(θ)
Angle θ (°)
Angle β (°)
 
a
0.515
0.858
0.6
31.0
59.0
 
b
0.411
0.913
0.45
24.2
65.8
 
c
0.294
0.956
0.308
17.1
72.9
 
d
0.857
0.514
1.67
59.0
31.0
Q: I was playing with my 
calculator and typed in sin-1 (random 
number), and it gave me an error 
instead of an angle. Why was that?
A: It’s great that you took the time to play with your calculator. Since the hypotenuse is the 
longest side, the length of any other side divided by the length of the hypotenuse must always 
be less than 1. So if you type in sin-1 of a random number bigger than 1, it’s not in the table, and 
the calculator gives you an error.
Quick way of 
getting β: 
θ + β = 90°
Slow way of getting 
β: find sine, cosine 
or tangent of β.
Triangle a: could use any two of three given sides. 
Use tangent with opp and adj.
tan-1 (0.6)
=
=   31.0° (3 sd)
tan-1 (0.45)
=
=   65.8° (3 sd)
Triangle b:
cos-1 (0.956)
=
=   17.1° (3 sd)
Triangle c:
sin-1 (0.857)
=
=   59.0° (3 sd)
Triangle d:
Here’s the table you already started filling in on pages 351-352.
The side lengths you were originally given are written in type. Your job is to skip the Pythagoras 
step and use the ratio (sin, cos or tan) you can get from the two given sides to find the angle α. 
Show which ratio you’d use by circling it.
Once you’ve worked out θ,try to spot a quick way of getting β for each triangle as well.
40 m
24 m
46.6 m
20 cm
9 cm
56 m
48 m
2.72 cm
2.60 cm
362    Chapter 9
use your ratios

Back at the castle, everyone’s depending on you!
Back at the castle, things are starting to get 
slightly desperate. The supply of food has just 
run out, and morale is low.
We’re running out of time, and we’ll need to 
work out how to aim the cannon and make the 
attackers retreat.
A cannon sits on top of a 15.0 m castle wall. Outside the castle, at the edge of its 20.0 m moat, 
are some attackers. What angle should the cannon make with the horizontal if it is to be pointed 
directly at the attackers?
This is how it might be 
worded in a physics exam.
The trigonometric 
functions sine, cosine and 
tangent let you work out 
angles from side lengths, 
and vice-versa.
Angle between 
horizontal and 
attackers, θ.
θ
Using the protractor, 
you can aim the cannon 
without having to look 
over the top.
you are here 4    363
triangles, trig, and trajectories

tan(θ)
A cannon sits on top of a 15.0 m castle wall. Outside the castle, at the edge of its 20.0 m moat, 
are some attackers. What angle should the cannon make with the horizontal if it is to be pointed 
directly at the attackers?
The cannon points at the attackers if it’s 
aimed at 36.9° below horizontal.
Remember to give some 
MEANING to your answer 
- it’s more than a number.
If you know ONE SIDE, 
plus ONE OTHER FACT (a 
side or an angle), you can 
work out EVERYTHING 
about a right‑angled 
triangle using sine, cosine, 
tangent and Pythagoras.
The firing angle is the same as the 
angle θ in the triangle.
o
a
15.0
20.0
=
=
=   0.75
=   tan-1(0.75)   =   36.9° (3 sd)
Then use tan-1 button to look up 
table in calculator:
You can know everything! *
When you have a right‑angled triangle 
and know the length of one side, plus one 
other fact (either another side length or an 
angle), you now have superpowers that enable 
you to work out all the other sides and angles.
You’re going to see a lot of right‑angled 
triangles through the rest of the book since the 
ground is horizontal and gravity accelerates 
things vertically at right-angles to the ground. 
* Well, everything about a right‑angled 
triangle at least!
This length wasn’t 
given in the 
question, but it’s 
one you worked 
out earlier on.
Moat
20.0 m
15.0 m
25.0 m
Wall
Firing 
angle
36.9°
θ
364    Chapter 9
right-angled triangles

v
Fill in the sections to see if your answer to the cannon question SUCKs. Remember to think 
about the ‘k’ontext of what you’re actually being asked to do!
Does your answer SUCK?
Remember to check your answer once you’ve got it! Does the angle 
feel like it’s the right kind of size? Did you remember the units? 
How about the calculations? And what about the ‘kontext’ - 
stepping back and thinking about the big picture before moving on.
Well done if you already 
did this automatically 
when you worked it out!
S
U
C
K
SIZE
‘‘K’ONTEXT
CALCULATIONS
UNITS
you are here 4    365
triangles, trig, and trajectories

This is an EXTREMELY 
useful way of checking if 
your angle is plausible.
  Before you launch in, think:
 “Am I actually answering the question I was asked?”
It saves time to do this 
BEFORE starting on the math 
rather than afterwards.
Fill in the sections to see if your answer to the cannon question SUCKs. Remember to think 
about the ‘k’ontext of what you’re actually being asked to do!
S
U
C
K
SIZE
‘‘K’ONTEXT
CALCULATIONS
UNITS
I’m expecting an angle less than 45°, as it’s opposite the smallest side of the 
triangle. So 36.9° is very plausible, as the smallest side isn’t that much smaller than 
the other two, and my angle isn’t that much less than 45°.
It’s a cannon firing a cannonball from the top of a wall, so it goes along 
a straight line that’s the hypotenuse of a right‑angled tri ... hang on. 
OH NO - WE FORGOT ABOUT GRAVITY!!
Well, they look OK. I rearranged the equation and used the inverse 
sine button OK (I didn’t press the normal sine one by mistake).
I’ve put them in - it’s an angle, measured in degrees.
366    Chapter 9
does it SUCK?

Huh? Why did we 
spend all that time messing 
about with triangles when it 
was never going to work?!
Uh oh. Gravity...
Everyone forgot about gravity! The calculations 
assumed that the cannonball’s going to follow the same 
straight path as the ladder. So although you got an 
answer which was the correct size with correct units 
and flawless calculations, it wasn’t the answer to the 
problem we have to solve!
Gravity makes objects like baseballs and footballs 
travel along curves as they fly through the air. So the 
cannonball’s going to curve too because gravity will 
accelerate it downwards.
Solving the wrong problem 
is a common mistake.
This happens more often than you’d 
think! Because the triangle thing 
worked for the ladder problem, the 
guys kept plowing ahead, without 
backing up first to make sure what 
they were doing was an appropriate 
way of solving the new problem.
Any time you get asked something 
new, sit back and work out what 
you’re supposed to do before thinking 
about how you’ll do it. First what, 
then how. Then you’ll be fine.
So what affects how much the 
cannonball curves? A baseball and 
a bullet appear to curve by different 
amounts. So maybe the firing angle 
will be OK after all if the cannonball 
doesn’t deviate from its part all that 
much. To work out if the angle’s OK, 
it’s time to be the cannonball!
 
A cannonball isn’t a 
ladder - it won’t 
follow a straight path.
BE the cannonball
Your job is to imagine you’re 
the cannonball. What makes 
you change direction as 
you go through the air.? 
And what affects how 
much you deviate from a 
straight line?
Is there a way of 
following a straight line 
as closely as possible?!
you are here 4    367
triangles, trig, and trajectories

 
A cannonball isn’t a 
ladder - it won’t 
follow a straight path.
BE the cannonball - 
SOLUTION
Your job is to imagine 
you’re the cannonball. 
What makes you change 
direction as you go 
through the air? And 
what affects how much you 
deviate from a straight line?
But is there a way 
of nearly going along 
a straight line?!
I’m being accelerated downwards by gravity.
If I was going slowly, I’d land very close to 
the wall.
If I was going quickly, I’d land further out.
If I was going really quickly, I’d almost go 
along a straight line.
My velocity affects how much I deviate 
from a straight line.
Jim: We might still 
be OK though. I just 
looked up the cannon on 
the Sieges-R-Us website, 
and its muzzle velocity is 
90 m/s! That’s high compared 
with the distance it’s traveling, so 
maybe there won’t be time for it 
to deviate from its original path too 
much.
Joe: We could use our equations of motion... except 
that we don’t know the cannonball’s total displacement! 
We know that the straight line distance from the cannon to 
the enemy is 25.0 m. But how do we get the length of its 
curved path?
Jim: Maybe that doesn’t matter though. Back in the 
desert, we didn’t need to know everything about the cage 
to be able to use equations of motion to work things out.
Joe: So ... what do we know? The cannonball’s 
initial velocity (v0), its initial displacement (x0) and the 
acceleration due to gravity (a).
Frank: Except - how are we going to put the numbers 
into the equations? Before, the acceleration and velocity 
vectors were always along the same straight line, either in 
the same direction or in opposite directions. So we defined 
one direction as positive and the other as negative. But 
with the cannon, the acceleration vector points down, 
and the velocity vector points at an angle. They’re not 
opposites! How do we deal with that?
Joe: Ah ... I see what you mean. And it’s even worse - the 
direction the cannonball’s going in keeps changing. So 
both the size and the direction of the velocity vector are 
changing all the time!
Jim: Mm-hm. How on earth are we gonna deal with that?
Joe: We could always go back to the experiment idea since 
we’re doing something totally new now ...
So we still don’t 
know where to point 
the cannon.
368    Chapter 9
be the cannonball

The cannonball’s velocity and acceleration 
vectors point in different directions
There’s a big difference between the cannonball and an object 
launched vertically. The cannonball’s velocity and acceleration 
vectors point in different directions. Not opposite directions 
- they’re at completely different angles.
This creates a problem with the math. Before, we defined ‘up’ as 
the positive direction, and ‘down’ as the negative direction. This 
was because a launched object’s velocity vector points up, and 
its acceleration vector points down. But the cannonball’s velocity 
doesn’t point up or down—it’s at an angle—so you can’t do that.
Try it!
Try dropping two balls off the edge of a table at the 
same time, one with a little push and one with a big 
push. Keep the pushes horizontal for now so you’re 
not ‘helping’  either of them downwards by pushing 
them towards the ground.
Look out for where they land - and when they land 
- and write down anything you notice.
‘v0’ and ‘a’ don’t lie along 
the same line - they’re 
at different angles. So 
you can’t just say that 
one direction is positive 
and the other is negative.
Cannonball 
launched at 
an angle
a = 9.8 m/s2
v0
And even worse - as the cannonball accelerates, it 
changes direction and curves towards the ground. As 
time goes on, the direction of the velocity vector changes 
to point more and more towards the ground. That sounds 
difficult to deal with.
What IS possible is to try things out. You can see if 
there’s any difference between how gravity acts on an 
object that is dropped versus an object that is already 
moving horizontally (like the cannonball is) before it falls.
a = 9.8 m/s2
v0
Cage launched 
straight up.
‘v0’ and ‘a’ lie along the 
same straight line, in 
opposite directions. So 
you can say up is positive 
and down is negative.
Velocity vector 
at the start.
Velocity vector 
at the end
Flightpath
Both the 
SIZE and 
DIRECTION 
are changing!
v0
v
a = 9.8 m/s2
a = 9.8 m/s2
Little push
BIG PUSH!
Or you could use 
two pens instead - 
the type of object 
doesn’t matter.
you are here 4    369
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Gravity accelerates everything downwards at 9.8 m/s2
Back when you were thinking about the Dingo dropping/launching his cage, you 
worked out that gravity always accelerated the cage vertically at 9.8 m/s2 , 
whether the cage was going up or coming back down again.
This is also the case if an object’s velocity has a horizontal part (or component). 
Gravity accelerates everything downwards at the same rate of 9.8 m/s2..
This ball was hit off 
the table horizontally.
Gravity is accelerating 
the balls down at a 
rate of 9.8 m/s2.
The same amount of 
time passes between 
each picture.
Horizontal component of 
velocity stays the same.
Vertical components 
of both balls’ velocities 
change at the same rate as 
gravity accelerates them.
Horizontal component of 
this ball’s velocity stays 
the same too (zero).
Since v0  = 0 for both 
balls, their vertical 
displacements are 
identical at all times 
and equal to at2.
x  = x0 + v0 t + ½at2
This ball was dropped from the 
edge of the table at the same 
time as the other ball.
Tried it!
You’ve just been pushing two things off a table at the same time, but with different horizontal velocities, and 
seeing which hit the ground first. 
The two balls hit the ground at the 
same time (assuming the ground is flat).
370    Chapter 9
gravity and acceleration

The horizontal component of the velocity 
can’t change once you’ve let go
Get a ball, and throw it straight up in the air 
while standing still.
Now start to walk along a straight line, still 
throwing the ball in the same way you were 
before. Walking forwards gives the ball a 
horizontal velocity component which is the 
same as your walking velocity. Throwing the ball 
upwards gives it a vertical velocity component. 
Write and sketch anything you notice.
Try it!
Gravity accelerates things downwards at a rate of 9.8 m/s2. When something moves 
through the air, gravity is the only thing affecting it (assuming that it doesn’t have an 
engine like an airplane). The cannonball doesn’t have an engine, so gravity changes 
the vertical component of its velocity at a rate of 9.8 m/s2.
Once you’ve launched the cannonball, nothing affects the horizontal component 
of its velocity. It will keep on doing exactly what it was doing.
The technical term for 
‘something moving through the 
air’ is a PROJECTILE.
Strictly speaking, 
there’ll be air 
resistance, but for a 
cannonball, this will 
be tiny, and you can 
ignore it for now.
Gravity only affects 
the vertical component 
of the velocity.
That’s why the two objects you knocked 
off the table hit the ground at the same 
time, even though you gave one object 
a big horizontal push and let the other 
object drop straight down vertically.
The vertical components of both 
objects’ velocities were zero at the start 
- they weren’t falling before they left the 
table. Gravity accelerated both objects 
downwards at the same rate of 9.8 m/s2, 
changing the horizontal components of 
each object’s velocity by the same amount.
The horizontal component of both 
objects’ velocities were unaffected by 
gravity. The dropped object landed 
directly under where it started, but the 
pushed object landed further away.
But the cannonball is launched at an 
angle - so its velocity initially has both 
horizontal and vertical components. 
What happens to something like that? 
Time to try it ...
you are here 4    371
triangles, trig, and trajectories

The horizontal component of a 
projectile’s velocity is constant
A ball you throw straight up comes straight back down into 
your hand for you to catch.
A ball you throw straight up while moving forwards also 
comes back down into your hand. Even though your hand 
stays the same distance away from your body as you throw 
the ball (so you throw it straight up), the ball’s velocity also 
has a horizontal component . This is because you’re 
moving forwards at the time that you throw the ball.
A “horizontal component” 
is sometimes called a 
“horizontal component vector.”
Ball’s 
velocity
Horizontal 
component
Vertical 
component
Your velocity (only 
in the hoizontal 
direction).
The ball has no vertical velocity 
component at the top of its arc.
You and the ball always 
have identical horizontal 
velocity components.
You’re able to catch the 
ball at the end because 
your horizontal motions 
have been identical.
The ball’s velocity 
changes in size and 
direction throughout, 
as gravity affects the 
vertical component.
Your velocity 
remains constant 
throughout.
Throughout the ball’s flight, the horizontal 
component of your velocity and the horizontal 
component of the ball’s velocity are exactly the 
same. The horizontal component of the ball’s 
velocity doesn’t change even though the ball’s 
going up and down.
vball
vball
vball
vball
vball
vyou
vyou
vyou
vyou
vyou
The ball’s horizontal 
velocity component remains 
constant throughout.
372    Chapter 9
constant velocity

REALLY?! I just don’t buy that. 
Gravity must affect every part of the ball’s 
motion. The ball follows a curved path through the 
air! How can you say for sure that the horizontal 
component isn’t affected by gravity?
The horizontal component 
of a projectile’s velocity 
isn’t affected by gravity, so 
is CONSTANT throughout 
the projectile’s flight.
Would you, could you, on a plane?
OK, so imagine yourself on an airplane, 
traveling horizontally through the sky. If you 
throw a ball straight up in the air, it comes 
straight back down again.
Now, imagine that you’re looking at the airplane 
from outside. You see the ball following a curved 
path. Relative to the inside of the plane, the ball 
goes straight up and down. But relative to a 
person outside, the ball moves horizontally with 
the same velocity as the plane.
The horizontal component of the ball’s velocity 
is constant throughout the balls’ motion.
These are just two 
different perspectives 
of the same ball 
being thrown. So the 
horizontal component of 
the balls’ velocity MUST 
be the same as the 
horizontal component of 
the plane’s velocity.
By the time the ball 
lands in your hand, you’ve 
traveled a long distance 
horizontally.
The maximum height of 
the ball above your hand 
is still the same.
you are here 4    373
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Can we use the fact that the horizontal 
velocity component is constant to help 
with the cannonball problem?
The vertical component 
of a projectile’s velocity 
behaves like an object 
launched straight up or 
down at that velocity.
Yes. You can treat the vertical and 
horizontal parts of the problem separately.
Back in chapter 6, you solved an Emu-catching problem 
by treating the problem’s horizontal and vertical parts 
separately. You were able to do this because the cage 
and the Emu are separate objects that are completely 
independent of each other.
You calculated the time it took the cage to fall using the 
cage’s velocity and acceleration - which are both vertical.
Then you calculated the horizontal distance that the 
Emu would cover in that time.
As the horizontal and vertical components of the 
cannonball’s velocity are completely independent, you 
can do the cannonball problem the same way you did 
the Emu problem.
You can calculate the time it takes for the cannonball to 
land by thinking about the vertical component of the 
cannonball’s velocity and the cannonball’s acceleration, 
which is also vertical.
Then you can calculate the horizontal displacement 
that the cannonball has in that time using the horizontal 
component of the cannonballs’ velocity.
v
Vertical 
component 
of velocity
Horizontal component 
of velocity
This changes 
because gravity 
acts vertically.
This stays constant 
because there 
is no horizontal 
acceleration.
v changes because its 
vertical component changes.
374    Chapter 9
horizontal and vertical components

v0v
v0h
xv
xh
v0
v0v
v0h
xv
xh
Step 1: Work out the vertical and 
horizontal components of the 
initial velocity, v0v and v0h.
v0
v0v
v0h
Step 2: Use the vertical velocity 
component and vertical 
displacement to work out the 
time the object is in the air for.
Step 3: Use the horizontal 
velocity component and the 
time to work out the object’s 
horizontal displacement.
v0v
Time, t
v0h
Time, t
xh
xv
We’ve used the subscripts ‘v’ 
and ‘h’ to mean ‘vertical’ and 
‘horizontal,’ so you can keep track 
of which velocity is which.
For the Emu problem, you’re working 
with the cage’s velocity (vertical) and 
the Emu’s velocity (horizontal) rather 
than with components.
The same method solves both problems
You ALREADY KNOW 
how to solve this problem!
The cannonball’s initial 
velocity has vertical and 
horizontal components.
Calculate the time 
it takes to fall using 
vertical components.
Calculate the horizontal 
distance traveled in that time 
using horizontal components.
you are here 4    375
triangles, trig, and trajectories

376
5. You are in a castle where the wall is 15.0 m high. A cannon at 
the top of the wall is aimed directly at an enemy 20.0 m from the 
base of the castle wall. The cannon’s muzzle velocity is 90.0 m/s.
What angle does the cannon make with the ground?
How long does it take for the cannonball to reach the ground?
How far from the attackers does the cannonball land?
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Projectile” Question
Any question that involves an object projected through 
the air usually means you have to turn its velocity into horizontal and vertical 
components. Then you can use your right‑angled triangle superpowers together 
with your equations of motion (from chapters 6, 7, and 8) to get your answers. 
The question presented here is a typical question.
The projectile question almost always 
requires you to work out the time it takes for an 
object to fall (using the vertical velocity component), 
and then the distance it travels horizontally in that 
time (using the horizontal velocity component).
Remember to start with a sketch, and to 
add information to the sketch as you work 
things out, so you have it all in one place.
This is just our 
problem worded 
differently.
When you see the word 
‘angle,’ start trying 
to spot right‑angled 
triangles, and thinking 
about “sin, cos, tan & 
Pythagoras.” Use the 
displacement triangle 
to calculate the angle.
This involves using the 
VERTICAL component of 
the cannonball’s velocity 
to see how long it takes 
to fall vertically.
This involves using the HORIZONTAL 
component of the cannonball’s velocity to see 
how far it travels horizontally in that time.
You’ve already 
done part a 
of the question 
with the 
displacement 
vector triangle.
The word ’angle’ also 
gives you the hint that 
component vectors 
might be important.
You need to work 
out the vertical and 
horizontal velocity 
components first, 
before you do parts 
b and c.

377
You are in a castle where the wall is 15.0 m high. A cannon at the top of the wall is aimed directly 
at an enemy 20.0 m from the base of the castle wall. The cannon’s muzzle velocity is 90.0 m/s.
You’ve already worked out that the cannon makes an angle of 36.9° with the horizontal.
Now it’s time to work out the vertical and horizontal components of the cannonball’s velocity. Use 
subscripts in your symbols, vv for the vertical component and vh for the horizontal component.
Moat
20.0 m
15.0 m
Wall
Firing 
angle
36.9°
Step 1: Work out the vertical and 
horizontal components of the 
initial velocity, v0v and v0h.
v0
v0v
v0h
Step 2: Use the vertical velocity 
component and vertical 
displacement to work out the 
time the object is in the air for.
Step 3: Use the horizontal 
velocity component and the 
time to work out the object’s 
horizontal displacement.
v0v
Time, t
v0h
Time, t
xh
xv
This is a displacement 
vector triangle. You need 
to draw a velocity vector 
triangle and work out the 
lengths of its sides.

378
 
You are in a castle where the wall is 15.0 m high. A cannon at the top of the wall is aimed directly 
at an enemy 20.0 m from the base of the castle wall. The cannon’s muzzle velocity is 90.0 m/s.
You’ve already worked out that the cannon makes an angle of 36.9° with the horizontal.
Now it’s time to work out the vertical and horizontal components of the cannonball’s velocity. Use 
subscripts in your symbols, vv for the vertical component and vh for the horizontal component.
There are TWO different ways of doing this question!
Doing it using sine, cosine and tangent.
This way would be the quickest if you hadn’t already been playing 
with the displacement triangle earlier on.
Start by writing 
out the equation.
Then put the numbers 
in/rearrange it.
Make sure you use headings, 
so you and others know 
what you’re trying to do.
36.9°
vh
vv
v = 90.0 m/s
Vertical component
sin(36.9°)  = opp
hyp = vv90
90 sin(36.9°)  =
vv  =
54.0 m/s (3 sd)
cos(36.9°)  = adj
hyp = vh90
90 cos(36.9°)  =
vh  =
72.0 m/s (3 sd)
Horizontal component
Their angles are 
the same, as 
they both have 
a 90° angle and 
a 36.9° angle.
=
Velocity
Doing it using similar triangles
The position and velocity triangles are SIMILAR TRIANGLES.
As they’re similar triangles, 
the ratios of their side 
lengths are identical.
36.9°
20.0 m
15.0 m
25.0 m
Displacement
vv
15
25
=
90
Vertical component:
15 × 90
25
vv   =
=   54 m/s
vh
20
25
=
90
Horizontal component:
20 × 90
25
vv   =
=   72 m/s
36.9°
vh
vv
v = 90 m/s
It doesn’t matter 
which one you used 
- they both work!

you are here 4    379
triangles, trig, and trajectories
I did it the first way, but I don’t 
see the point of the second way. Why 
bother including it when it’s so complicated, 
and I already did it right?!
Sometimes there’s more than one way 
of doing the same calculation.
There often isn’t one single “right way” to solve a problem 
in physics. As long as you reach the correct destination, it 
doesn’t really matter how you got there, as long as what 
you did makes sense.
Here, the usual way to work out the horizontal and 
vertical components would be to use sine and cosine, along 
with the angle and side you’d been given for the velocity 
triangle. That’s the method given in the first answer.
But because you already knew all three sides of the 
displacement triangle (from doing the ladder thing), it 
was possible to take a shortcut this time. Shortcuts are a 
good idea - they involve doing fewer calculations. Fewer 
calculations mean you type less into your calculator - and 
there’s a smaller chance that you’ll mess up by accidentally 
typing the wrong thing.
This particular shortcut works because the displacement 
and velocity triangles are similar triangles. You already 
know that the ratios of their side lengths will be the same.  
15
25 in the first triangle = 
vv
90 in the second triangle. You 
don’t need to use the angle and sine, cosine or tangent to 
calculate the ratios of the side lengths.
These are similar 
triangles, as they both 
have the same angles.
These triangles are 
exactly the same shape, 
just scaled differently.
The ratios of 
these sides will 
be the same.
25.0 m
15.0 m
20.0 m
36.9°
36.9°
vv
vh
v = 90 m/s

5. You are in a castle where the wall is 15.0 m high. A cannon at 
the top of the wall is aimed directly at an enemy 20.0 m from the 
base of the castle wall. The cannon’s muzzle velocity is 90 m/s.
What angle does the cannon make with the ground?
How long does it take for the cannonball to reach the ground?
How far from the attackers does the cannonball land?
a.
b.
c.
Calculating the horizontal and vertical 
components of the cannonball’s velocity 
wasn’t part of the original question. Is there a way 
of spotting that we need to do that?
Sometimes you have to work out 
the intermediate steps yourself.
Many processes in life involve a series of 
intermediate steps to get from where you 
are to where you want to be. To get into your 
house, first of all you need to find your keys! 
Physics problems can be like this too.
In order to calculate the time it takes for 
the cannonball to fall, you need the vertical 
component of the cannonball’s velocity. And 
to calculate the horizontal displacement, 
you need the horizontal component of the 
cannonball’s velocity.
Spotting these intermediate steps comes with 
experience and practice with a variety of 
physics problems. You’ve been building up the 
ability to spot what you need to do to solve a 
problem as you’ve been learning to think like 
a physicist. But using what you’ve learned in 
this book to do practice problems and exam 
questions from elsewhere is important too.
In the Question Clinics 
throughout the book, we’ve 
taken several typical exam-
style questions and broken 
them down to tell you what 
kinds of clues to look out for.
Now it’s time to get 
on with part b of 
the original problem!
380    Chapter 9
work out the intermediate steps

b. How long does it take for the 
cannonball to reach the ground?
These are the triangles you’ve already drawn. You 
can still refer to them for this part of the question.
20.0 m
15.0 m
72 m/s
54 m/s
90 m/s
36.9°
36.9°
Hint: Treat the cannonball like 
something launched directly 
downwards with the vertical 
component of the cannonball’s 
velocity. Do a sketch that 
only deals with the VERTICAL 
direction and go on from there.
25.0 m
Step 1: Work out the vertical and 
horizontal components of the 
initial velocity, v0v and v0h.
v0
v0v
v0h
Step 2: Use the vertical velocity 
component and vertical 
displacement to work out the 
time the object is in the air for.
Step 3: Use the horizontal 
velocity component and the 
time to work out the object’s 
horizontal displacement.
v0v
Time, t
v0h
Time, t
xh
xv
Hint: You may need to use more 
than one equation of motion to 
solve this problem.
you are here 4    381
triangles, trig, and trajectories

b. How long does it take for the 
cannonball to reach the ground?
20.0 m
15.0 m
72 m/s
54 m/s
90 m/s
These are the triangles you’d already 
have drawn on your page during earlier 
parts of the question.
It takes 0.276 s (3 sd) for the cannonball to reach the ground.
a = 9.8 m/s2
t = 0 s
v0 = 54 m/s
Down is positive, as 
nothing’s pointing up.
x = 15.0 m
x0 = 0 m
x - x0   =
v0t  +  ½at2
v   =
v0  +  at
v2   =
v0
2  +  2a(x-x0)
In the first equation, the only thing I don’t know is t. But there’s both t and t2 in the 
equation, and I can’t rearrange it to say “t = something.”
So use third equation to work out v, then use that value in v = v0 + at to work out t.
t = ?
v2   =
v0
2  +  2a(x-x0)
v   =
542  +  (2 x 9.8 x 15)   =   56.7 m/s (3 sd)
Use this value in v = v0 + at to work out t.
v   =
v0  +  at
at   =
v - v0
t   = v - v0
a
56.7 - 54
9.8
=
=   0.276 s (3 sd)
Write down 
your three key 
equations, and 
make a note of 
what you do and 
don’t know.
25.0 m
36.9°
36.9°
If you’re only dealing with one 
component (in this case the 
vertical component) of the 
displacement, velocity and 
acceleration, you can omit 
the ‘horizontal’ and ‘vertical’ 
subscripts from your variables to 
reduce the clutter in your work.
This is a sketch that only 
deals with the vertical 
direction. It’s much clearer to 
do this than it is to try to 
work with parts of triangles.
382    Chapter 9
solutions

Now for part c (or step 3 in the illustration above). Hang in 
there; you’re nearly done!
c.	 How far from the attackers does the cannonball land? 
	
(The attackers are at the edge of the moat, 20.0 m from 
      the base of the wall.)
72m/s
54m/s
90m/s
You’ll need to use the velocity 
triangle you already worked out 
and the time from part b (it 
takes 0.276 s for the cannonball 
to reach the ground).
36.9°
Step 1: Work out the vertical and 
horizontal components of the 
initial velocity, v0v and v0h.
v0
v0v
v0h
Step 2: Use the vertical velocity 
component and vertical 
displacement to work out the 
time the object is in the air for.
Step 3: Use the horizontal 
velocity component and the 
time to work out the object’s 
horizontal displacement.
v0v
Time, t
v0h
Time, t
xh
xv
Hint: Treat the cannonball like 
something launched horizontally with 
the horizontal component of the 
cannonball’s velocity. Do a sketch that 
only deals with the HORIZONTAL 
direction and go on from there.
you are here 4    383
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Check: “Have I 
actually answered the 
question I was asked?”
c.	 How far from the attackers does the cannonball land? 
	
(The attackers are at the edge of the moat, 20.0 m from the base of the wall.)
Cannonball takes 0.276 s to reach the ground.
Horizontal component of velocity = 72 m/s.
Horizontal distance traveled in this time	
=	 speed  x  time
	
=	 72  x  0.276
	
=	 19.9 m (3 sd) 
So the cannonball lands 20.0 - 19.9 = 0.1 m short of the attackers, 
but probably gets them running scared ...
You worked this 
out in part b.
You worked this out 
in the ‘missing step’ 
between parts a and b.
This is the right method - once you 
know how long it takes to reach 
the ground VERTICALLY, work 
out how far the cannonball travels 
HORIZONTALLY in this time.
Did you answer the question you were 
ACTUALLY ASKED (distance from 
the attackers) or did you leave it as 
19.9 m (distance from the wall)?
Make sure you don’t forget to 
do something simple at the end, 
like convert units or subtract 
one length from another.
v = 72 m/s
t = 0.276 s 
Distance = ?
72 m/s
54 m/s
90 m/s
36.9°
This is the horizontal 
component of the 
cannonball’s velocity.
Attackers are 20.0 m away from the 
foot of the castle wall. This is another 
way of saying that they are 20.0 m 
horizontally from the cannon.
384    Chapter 9
did you answer the question?

With a right‑angled triangle where you know the length 
of one side plus one other fact (a side length or an 
angle), you can work out all the other sides and angles 
using sine, cosine, tangent and Pythagoras.
Similar triangles have the same sizes of angles.
Similar triangles are useful because the ratios of the 
similar sides are the same. This means you can often 
find side lengths without having to work out an angle.
If something’s velocity is in a different direction from its 
acceleration, try breaking the velocity down into vector 
components parallel to and perpendicular to the 
acceleration.




Vectors should always be added nose to tail.
Once your displacement/velocity/acceleration vectors 
are broken down into components at 90° to each other, 
you can treat the two directions independently.
You might want to work out the time it takes something 
to happen from one component, then use that in an 
equation involving the other component.
Add together the component vectors at the end to find 
out what’s happened to the original vector.




And so they ran away ...
The cannonball lands only 10 cm away from the attackers and 
soaks them! They didn’t know you had a cannon up your sleeve 
(as well as your shovels). And and they’re not waiting around to 
see what you do next  - so make a very hasty retreat!
Run away! Run away!
you are here 4    385
triangles, trig, and trajectories

Hey ... I’ve noticed that the AP 
table of information has sine, cosine 
and tangent for ‘common angles.’ What 
makes an angle ‘common’?!
There are some standard triangles 
that you should look out for.
You’ve already met the 3:4:5 triangle in this 
chapter. Its angles (to 2 sd) are 37° and 53°. So 
if you see a question, especially on the multiple 
choice section (where you can’t use a calculator) 
involving these side length ratios or angles, you 
know what kind of triangle it is.
Another standard triangle 
is the 1:1:√2 triangle.. It 
has two sides that are the 
same length, so the two 
angles opposite them are 
the same size - 45°.
The third standard triangle in 
the table is the 1:2:√3 triangle. 
Its angles are 30° and 60°.
1
1
√2
√3
1
2
4
3
5
45°
45°
37°
53°
30°
60°
Note that the smallest side 
is always opposite the smallest 
angle, and the largest side is 
opposite the largest angle.
If you’re doing the AP Physics exam, 
you’re not allowed a calculator in the 
multiple choice section. So they give you 
a table - like the one you worked out 
earlier - of values for sine, cosine and 
tangent for certain ‘common angles.’
386    Chapter 9
standard triangles

387
If you don’t realize 
that this is REALLY 
important, you might 
wrongly try to do 
the question using 
Pythagoras and a 
straight flight path 
along the hypotenuse 
of a right‑angled 
triangle, like we did 
earlier.
5. You are in a castle where the wall is 15.0 m high. A 
cannon at the top of the wall is aimed directly at an enemy 
20.0 m from the base of the castle wall. The cannon’s 
muzzle velocity is 90 m/s.
What angle does the cannon make with the ground? 
 
Work out the horizontal and vertical components of 
the cannonball’s velocity.
How long does it take for the cannonball to reach the 
ground?
How far from the attackers does the cannonball land?
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Missing steps” Question
Often, you’ll get a multi-part question, which doesn’t 
directly ask you to carry out some of the steps you need to get from one 
bit of the question to the next. So there are missing steps that you need to 
figure out yourself. If you’re familiar with the methods that are used in certain 
types of questions, you’ll be fine with this.
This shows you how important it is to 
practice thinking about and doing certain types 
of questions, so that the in-between steps become 
something you’d do naturally, and you don’t get 
stuck or waste time going down the wrong path.
This is the 
missing step and 
the KEY to 
being able to do 
the question.
The way the question is set up at the start, 
it could be a ‘wheat from the chaff’ one 
where these details are irrelevant and just 
in there to distract you.
So you start with a sketch and do 
the first bit with trigonometry (sine, 
cosine and tangent) which may make 
you think Pythagoras will be next.
Parts b and c need you to use 
equations of motion - and 
you MUST carry out the 
missing step to be able to do 
them correctly.

Component
Pythagoras
Trigonometry
Units
Falling
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Special points
Experiment
Time
Substitution
Equations of motion
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Displacement
Volume
Velocity
Symmetry
Slope
Does it SUCK?
Area
Right-angled triangles 
give me superpowers.
Pythagoras
An equation that you can use to find the third side of a 
right‑angled triangle when you already know two sides.
Trigonometry
Using the ratios sine, cosine and tangent to relate 
ratios of side lengths to angles.
Component
‘Part’ of a vector. For example, you can turn a 
vector that’s at an angle into horizontal and 
vertical conponent vectors.
388    Chapter 9
your world

Spot the triangle
Anytime you do a sketch that 
involves two dimensions, look out 
for triangles.
Keep a special look out for 
right‑angled triangles formed 
when there are things going on 
both horizontally and vertically.
Component vectors
If an object is moving at an angle, it can be 
useful to break down its velocity vector into 
horizontal and vertical component vectors.
The horizontal component remains constant.
The vertical component is affected by gravity.
This lets you break down a complicated problem 
into two simpler problems that you already 
know how to do.
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 9 under your belt and 
added some terminology and answer-
checking skills to your tool box.
CHAPTER 9
Pythagoras’ Theorem
If you know the lengths of two sides 
of your right‑angled triangle, you can 
calculate the length of the third side. 
 
 
 
 
 
c2 = b2 + a2
c
b
a
sine, cosine and tangent
sine, cosine and tangent are ratios of the 
sides of a right‑angled triangle.
hyp
opp
ajd
sin( )  = opp
hyp
cos( )  = adj
hyp
tan( )  = opp
ajd
Right‑angled 
triangle facts
If you know one side and one 
other fact (either a side or 
an angle), then you can work 
out EVERYTHING there is 
to know about a right‑angled 
triangle using Pythagoras and 
sine, cosine and tangent.
TOP TIP - Make sure you know how your 
calculator works! Do you have to press the ‘sin,’ 
‘cos’ or ‘tan’ button before or after entering 
the angle? Is your calculator definitely in the 
degree mode of measuring angles? It’s annoying 
to understand the physics only to get the 
problem wrong by making silly mistakes!
you are here 4    389
triangles, trig, and trajectories


this is a new chapter    391
momentum conservation
10
What Newton Did
If the club hits the ball, then 
the ball also hits the club. 
That’s Newton’s 3rd Law.
No one likes to be a pushover. So far, you’ve learned to deal with objects that 
are already moving. But what makes them go in the first place? You know that something 
will move if you push it - but how will it move? In this chapter, you’ll overcome inertia as 
you get acquainted with some of Newton’s Laws. You’ll also learn about momentum, 
why it’s conserved, and how you can use it to solve problems.

The pirates be havin’ a spot o’ bother 
with a ghost ship ...
The pirate captain is being chased across the seas by a ghost ship 
and needs to make sure it keeps its distance.
His ship’s fitted with some Sieges-R-Us battle cannons. The 
captain wants to know the maximum range of his cannons - the 
maximum horizontal distance he can fire a cannonball, and 
you’ve been called in as the expert.
But the supply of cannonballs is limited at sea - so he won’t 
actually be able to fire a cannon until you’ve got it all worked out.
Yaar. I’d sure be appreciatin’ it if 
you could be workin’ out the maximum 
range of our cannons. We don’t want the 
ghost ship gettin’ too close.. 
Cannonball’s range is its horizontal displacement.
Cannonball’s flight path
Pirate ship
Ghost ship
Firing 
angle
Sea.
Range
The muzzle velocity is the velocity with 
which the cannonball leaves the cannon. 
It’s the cannonball’s initial velocity.
392    Chapter 10
what’s the cannon range?

Horizontal displacement
Time
Horizontal acceleration
Time
Time to get the hang of what the cannonball’s doing. Your job is to sketch graphs that show 
how the horizontal and vertical components of the displacement, velocity and acceleration 
change with time. Think about it one component at a time, and do the easier graphs first!
Whiteboard Wipeout - Cannonball
Pirate ship
Ghost ship
Horizontal velocity
Time
Vertical displacement
Time
Vertical acceleration
Time
Vertical velocity
Time
Maximum height
Hint: Start off by 
thinking about what the 
cannonball’s horizontal 
acceleration and vertical 
acceleration are first.
you are here 4    393
momentum conservation

Horizontal displacement
Time
Horizontal acceleration
Time
Time to get the hang of what the cannonball’s doing. Your job is to sketch graphs that show 
how the horizontal and vertical components of the displacement, velocity and acceleration 
change with time. Think about it one component at a time, and do the easier graphs first!
Whiteboard Wipeout - Cannonball SOLUTION
Pirate ship
Ghost ship
Horizontal velocity
Time
Vertical displacement
Time
Vertical acceleration
Time
Vertical velocity
Time
Horizontal velocity 
component is constant.
Cannonball has zero acceleration 
in the horizontal direction.
Constant vertical 
acceleration due to 
gravity = -9.8 m/s2.
Vertical velocity 
component = 0 at top 
of cannonball’s flight.
Cannonball starts and 
finishes at the same height.
Horizontal displacement 
increases at a constant rate.
Maximum height 
halfway through.
Maximum height
Once the cannonball’s been fired, 
there’s nothing pushing it horizontally 
to make it faster or slower.
Up is positive; 
cannonball starts 
off going up.
Down is negative; 
cannonball comes back 
down, getting faster.
Velocity gets 
less and less.
Cannonball always covers the 
same amount of horizontal 
distance per second.
394    Chapter 10
cannonball solution

a. Write down all the things that could possibly affect the range of the cannonball.
What does the maximum range depend on?
Now that you’ve sketched the graphs of its component vectors, you can think 
which variables may affect the maximum range of the cannonball.
For example, you already know from the last chapter that the firing angle 
will make a difference to the range. But what angle will be the best? Can you 
figure it out by thinking about what will happen at the extremes of the 
range of angles you could fire the cannonball at? And is there anything else 
you might need to take into account?
b. Imagine - and draw - what will happen for small firing angles (close to 0° or horizontal) and describe 
this in terms of horizontal and vertical velocity components.
c. Imagine - and draw - what will happen for large firing angles (close to 90° or vertical) and describe 
this in terms of horizontal and vertical velocity components.
Now think about some extreme angles to help you work out what’s important.
d. What do you think the optimal firing angle will be to give the maximum range? (You don’t have to 
be right - just guess and trust your instincts).
How does changing 
the firing angle 
alter the range?
Space 
to draw.
Space to 
write in.
you are here 4    395
momentum conservation

v
a. Write down all the things that could possibly affect the range of the cannonball.
b. Imagine - and draw - what will happen for small firing angles (close to 0° or horizontal) and describe 
this in terms of horizontal and vertical velocity components.
c. Imagine - and draw - what will happen for large firing angles (close to 90° or vertical) and describe 
this in terms of horizontal and vertical velocity components.
Now think about some extreme angles to help you work out what’s important.
d. What do you think the optimal firing angle will be to give the maximum range? (You don’t have to 
be right - just guess and trust your instincts.
If the firing angle is small, then the horizontal component is large, and the 
vertical component is small. Although it’s going fast horizontally, it isn’t 
spending much time in the air because the vertical component is so low.
If the firing angle is large, then the vertical component is large, and the 
horizontal component is small. So the cannonball spends a long time off the 
ground - but doesn’t travel very far horizontally in that time.
The optimal firing angle will be between these two extremes - probably at around 45°.
Velocity 
vector
Velocity 
vector
An angle of 45° gives you the best 
balance between time in the air (vertical 
component of velocity) and distance 
covered horizontally in that time 
(horizontal component of velocity).
So you end up with the maximum range 
possible for that velocity.
Firing angle 
Velocity of cannonball 
Wind speed and direction
Velocity of ship 
A big wave could change the angle / velocity
Larger angle gives 
you more air time but 
a smaller horizontal 
velocity component.
45° gives you the 
maximum range.
Smaller angle gives you a 
larger horizontal velocity 
component, but less air time.
v0
v0v
v0h
Firing at 45° maximizes your range
The flight path is 
always symmetrical.
Initial 
velocity
We’re using the subscripts ‘v’ 
and ‘h’ for the vertical and 
horizontal components.
396    Chapter 10
what’s the best angle?

You can’t do everything that’s theoretically 
possible - you need to be practical too
The pirate captain is delighted at your suggestion of achieving a maximum 
range using a 45° firing angle. Unfortunately, the pirates aren’t able to aim 
properly for angles greater than 10°, so a 45° firing angle isn’t practical. 
Sometimes what would be theoretically possible is restricted by what’s 
physically possible.
But on the bright side, you know that if the pirates fire their cannon at 10°, the 
cannonball will go further than it would for any other possible angle, as 10° is 
the closest to 45° you can practically get. So you can calculate the range ...
Work out the maximum range of the cannon when it’s fired at an 
angle of 10° with an initial velocity of 90.0 m/s. (Assume that the 
cannonball is fired from sea level to sea level.)
Remember to start with a sketch, 
and say which direction is positive. 
You might want to use subscripts to 
represent the vertical and horizontal 
components, like vh and vv.
That’s great - but 
our maximum firing 
angle is 10°. What’ll our 
range be then?
Page 328 in chapter 8 and page 375 in 
chapter 9 should help you if you’re not sure 
how to break this problem down into smaller 
parts.
you are here 4    397
momentum conservation

Spotting that the initial and final vertical 
velocity components are the same size (although 
in opposite directions) is pretty useful, right?
Look out for shortcuts involving symmetry.
Symmetry is often a useful shortcut - especially if the 
overall vertical displacement is zero.
Sometimes you can use the fact that a projectile takes 
equal times to go up and down as a shortcut.
And sometimes you can use the fact that the vertical 
components of v0 and v have the same size 
(but opposite directions) at the same height.
Work out the maximum range of the cannon when it’s fired at an 
angle of 10° with an initial velocity of 90.0 m/s. (Assume that the 
cannonball is fired from sea level to sea level.)
10°
v0h
v0v
v0 = 90.0 m/s
Start off by working out horizontal and vertical velocity components.
sin(10°)  = opp
hyp = v0vv0
v0sin(10°)  =
v0v  =
15.6 m/s (3 sd)
cos(10°)  = adj
hyp = v0hv0
v0cos(10°)  =
v0h  =
88.6 m/s (3 sd)
Get time from vertical velocity component (working ONLY with vertical components):
av = -9.8 m/s2
v0v = 15.6 m/s
Up is positive
xv - x0v = 0 m
t = ?
vv = -15.6 m/s
vv   =
v0v  +  at
at   =
vv  -  v0v
t   = vv  -  v0v
av
= (-15.6) - (15.6)
-9.8
=   3.18 s (3 sd)
Work out horizontal change in position during that time using horizontal velocity component
vh = 88.6 m/s
No acceleration in 
horizontal direction.
t = 3.18 s
xh  = ?
vh  =
xht
xh   =
vht
=   88.6 × 3.18   =   282 m (3 sd)
The range of the cannonball fired at 10° is 282 m (3 sd)
v0
v0v
v0h
Velocity vector 
at the start
x0h  = 0 m
= xh - x0h
t - 0
=
xh
t
Either use subscripts like this, or 
be very very careful when you 
treat the vertical and horizontal 
components separately!
398    Chapter 10
look for symmetry shortcuts

Q: Is it OK if I didn’t spot the 
symmetry but still got most of the 
way through the problem?
A: Yes, it’s absolutely fine. But 
it’s always a good idea to keep on 
the lookout for symmetry, because it 
sometimes lets you solve problems 
more quickly.
Q: Can you still get the right 
answer to a problem like this even if 
you don’t spot the symmetry?
A: Yes - you can use the equation 
v2 = v0
2 + 2(x - x0). Here, x - x0 = 0 
because the cannonball starts and 
finishes at the same height. So the 
equation simplifies to v2 = v0
2.
Q: If I have the equation v2 = v0
2, 
doesn’t that mean that v = v0?
A: Not necessarily. If you multiply 
two negative numbers together, then 
you get a positive number. So the 
solution to the equation v2 = v0
2 could 
either be v = v0 or v = -v0. 
 
 
 
 
Q: If I have an equation with two 
possible solutions, how do I work 
out which solution is correct?
A: Look at the context (or ‘k’ontext). 
Here, the vertical component of the 
cannonballs’ velocity points up at the 
start and down at the end. So they’re 
in opposite directions. Therefore, the 
solution must be the one where the 
vertical velocity components point in 
opposite directions: v = -v0.
Q: I noticed that there were some 
subscripts used in the sharpen 
answer. Should I use subscripts too?
A: Subscripts sometimes help you 
keep track of things - and sometimes 
make things look messy! As long as 
you stay organized and write out what 
you’re doing, you’ll be OK.
Q: What if the ghost ship’s more 
than 282 m away? I guess the pirates 
can’t just get new cannons that have 
a higher muzzle velocity?
A: The pirates have to stick with the 
same cannons. But the website does 
say that the muzzle velocity is for a 
standard iron cannonball ...
Wouldn’t it be dreamy if 
it was possible to increase the range 
even more without having to buy a new 
cannon. But I know it’s just a fantasy ...
If a projectile starts 
and finishes at the 
same height, the vertical 
component of its velocity 
has the same size, but 
the opposite direction, at 
the start and finish.
v
vv
vh
Velocity vector 
at the end.
The horizontal component 
is the same (no horizontal 
acceleration).
The vertical components 
are the same size but 
in opposite directions.
Usually you’d draw 
the velocity vector 
pointing away from 
the cannonball, but 
we’ve put it here to 
make the symmetry 
more obvious.
you are here 4    399
momentum conservation

Sieges-R-Us has a new stone cannonball, 
which they claim will increase the range!
The Sieges-R-Us website has just been updated! As well 
as the standard iron cannonball, they now have a stone 
cannonball. Although both cannonballs are the same 
size, the stone cannonball is only a third of the mass 
of the iron cannonball because they’re made from 
different materials.
An object’s mass is a measure of the amount of stuff 
it’s made from. Both cannonballs are the same size and 
have the same volume (so fit in the same cannon), but 
the iron one has more material in it.
The website claims that the stone cannonball has a 
longer range than the iron one if you fire it out of the 
same cannon. But the stone cannonball is so new that 
there are no tech specs - like the muzzle velocity.
So... does the stone cannonball actually go 
further, or is it all hype?
Even IF the stone cannonball does go 
further then the iron one, it might not be worth 
the money if it only goes a few meters further.
 ‘Does it?’ and ‘How much?’ are both 
questions you may need to answer.
Sometimes you need to answer a qualitative 
question, such as “Does a stone cannonball go 
further than an iron cannonball (which has a larger 
mass) if you shoot them from the same cannon?”
And sometimes you need to answer a quantitative 
question like, “How much further (if at all) does a 
stone cannonball go than an iron cannonball (which 
has a larger mass) if you shoot them both from the 
same cannon?”
Here, it’s likely you’ll need to answer both questions. 
If the stone cannonball does go further, then the 
pirates will want to know how much further, so they 
can keep the ghost ship as far away as possible.
400    Chapter 10
even more problems

BE ... someone pushing something
Your job is to imagine pushing an 
elephant, then pushing a mouse with the 
same strength of push. You might want 
to think about each animal  being 
on a skateboard so that you can 
actually see the effect of pushing 
them. How do their velocities vary?
Jim: Yeah, they don’t even have any tech specs on there about the 
velocity the stone cannonball will travel at - only the fact that it’s a 
third of the mass of the iron cannonball.
Frank: But the two cannonballs must have the same size if they 
both fit in the same cannon - so how can they have different masses? 
Joe: 1 cm3 of iron has a larger mass than 1 cm3 of stone, doesn’t 
it? If you have the same volumes of iron and stone, it takes more 
effort to lift the iron. So if the two cannonballs are the same size, 
then the iron cannonball must have a larger mass. The website’s 
right about that!
Jim: But didn’t we say before that all falling objects accelerate at 
the same rate no matter what their masses are? So there wouldn’t be 
any difference for the stone and iron cannonballs.
Joe: Hmmm. But the cannonballs are coming out of the cannon 
before gravity takes over, aren’t they? There’d be the same explosion 
to push them out of the cannon each time.
Frank: And I guess that’s different from gravity - the explosion 
pushes the cannonball, but gravity doesn’t have to make contact 
with the cannonball to accelerate it.
Jim: Maybe we could be the cannon. We could imagine pushing 
the stone and iron cannonballs to see what we think would happen.
Joe: But to us, both cannonballs are difficult to push. Maybe this 
is a good place to think in extremes - like pushing a large mass 
versus pushing a small mass ... pushing an elephant versus pushing 
a mouse ...
The cannon is different 
from gravity because it 
pushes the cannonball by 
making contact with it.
I’m always very suspicious 
of anything that comes out 
of a marketing department.
you are here 4    401
momentum conservation

Massive things are more difficult to start off
If you stand an elephant and a mouse on a skateboard and give each the same size of 
push to make them move, then the mouse ends up traveling at a higher velocity than the 
elephant. Because the elephant has a larger mass, it’s more difficult to change its velocity.
Objects enjoy continuing at 
their current velocity.
Massive things are more difficult to stop
If the elephant and the mouse are already traveling with the same velocity, the elephant 
is more difficult to stop. This is because its greater mass means it has a greater 
tendency to continue at its current velocity when you give it the same strength of push.
The larger an object’s mass, 
the more difficult it is 
to change its velocity.
Same 
strength 
of push.
Large mass
Small mass
Large change 
in velocity
Small change 
in velocity
Same 
starting 
velocity
Same 
strength 
of push
Difficult to stop!
Easy to stop
BE ... someone pushing something - SOLUTION
Your job is to imagine pushing an 
elephant, then pushing a mouse with the 
same strength of push. You might want 
to think about each animal  being 
on a skateboard so that you can 
actually see the effect of pushing 
them. How do their velocities vary?
If I push the mouse hard, it’ll go really fast. 
It’s harder to get the elephant going because 
it has a larger mass. If I give it the same push 
I give the mouse, it’ll hardly move at all. 
The object with a lower mass has a higher 
velocity for the same push.
velephant
vmouse
velephant
vmouse
velephant
vmouse = 0
This is true if the object’s 
current velocity is zero. It’s also 
true if the object is moving.
The elephant and the 
mouse both start with 
zero velocity. 
This is true if the object’s 
initial velocity is zero. It’s also 
true if the object is moving.
mmouse
melephant
mmouse
melephant
melephant
402    Chapter 10
hard to start...hard to stop

Newton’s First Law 
Objects have inertia, which means that they will keep on 
moving with their current velocity unless you act on them 
with a force (for example, by giving them a push). A stationary 
object remains stationary unless something happens to make it 
move. And a moving object continues to move with its current 
velocity unless something happens to speed it up, slow it down, 
or change its direction of movement.
Another way of putting this is Newton’s First Law, which 
says that an object will continue on with a constant velocity 
unless there’s a net force acting on it.
Q: If this is Newton’s FIRST Law, 
does that mean there are others? 
How many are there?
A: You’ll meet Newton’s three Laws 
of Motion in this chapter and the next.
Q: I’ve heard something about 
Galileo’s Law of Inertia, which 
sounds very similar to Newton’s 
First Law. Do I need to know about 
that as well?
A: Galileo’s Law of Inertia and 
Newton’s First Law both say the same 
thing, there’s no need to worry.
Q: OK, so does it matter what I 
call these laws? Do I have to learn 
their names or is it enough to 
understand the physics concepts?
A:Understanding the concepts 
is the most important thing, but 
in an exam, you may be asked to 
explain what’s happening in terms of 
Newton’s three laws. Then you’d have 
to remember which is which.
Q: If an object continues on with 
“constant velocity,” it could either 
already be moving, or it could be 
completely still and have a velocity 
of zero, right?
A: Yes, that’s correct. Whether 
something’s stationary or moving, you 
need a net force to change its velocity.
Q: If its velocity changes, that 
means it speeds up or slows down, 
right?
A: Velocity is a vector, so as well 
as speeding up or slowing down, a 
change in velocity could be a change 
in direction without a change in speed.
Q: What does ‘net’ force mean? 
A: There might be more than 
one force acting on an object at the 
same time. The ‘net’ force is what 
you get when you add all the forces 
acting on an object together. Just 
like a company’s net profit (or net 
loss) is when you add together all its 
incomings and (negative) outgoings.
Newton’s First Law 
says that an object 
will carry on with 
the same velocity 
unless there’s a net 
force acting on it.
The same SPEED in 
the same DIRECTION
But that’s not right! Everyone 
knows that moving objects 
naturally slow down and stop 
- that’s just common sense!
Friction is a force.
Friction is a force that 
you get when things are in 
contact with one another. 
Newton’s First Law says 
that an object will move at 
a constant velocity unless 
acted on by a net force.
As friction is a force, it is 
able to change the object’s 
velocity, for example by 
slowing it down, which 
is why moving objects 
often appear to slow down 
naturally when you don’t 
interfere with them.
You’ll learn more about 
friction in chapter 12.
‘Net force’ means 
total overall force.
You might have heard the saying “An object 
at rest tends to stay at rest; an object in 
motion tends to stay in motion.” Newton’s 
1st Law takes this further.
We’ll talk 
about this 
more later on.
you are here 4    403
momentum conservation

I’m not all that clear on what 
pushing elephants and mice 
has to do with cannonballs. Why 
are we doing this again?!
Q: Does this mean I have to do math with forces? How do I 
do that?
A: That’s something for later on. Right now, you’re not doing 
calculations with forces, just working out some general physics 
principles involving them. 
 
Q: I’ve heard the word ‘inertia’ used to mean reluctance. Like, 
“I had to overcome a lot of inertia to get out of bed on a cold 
morning.” Is this another meaning for the same word?
A: It’s kind of similar actually. An object’s inertia is its tendency 
to continue at its current velocity. In the example you mention, your 
inertia is your tendency to continue in your current sleeping place. So 
the usage is kind-of similar!
Mass matters
If you push an elephant and a mouse with the same force each time, 
the mouse ends up with a larger velocity than the elephant because 
it has a smaller mass. And if you try to stop an elephant and a 
mouse that are already traveling with the same velocity, you’ll get 
flattened by the elephant if you push it with the same force that you 
need to stop the mouse.
The more massive something is, the greater its inertia, or tendency 
to continue with its current velocity, and the larger the force you 
have to push it with to produce the same change in velocity.
The cannon exerts a force. 
The cannonballs have different masses.
The cannon pushes the cannonballs with the same 
explosion - the same strength of push, the same force. 
The iron and stone cannonballs have different masses, 
but both probably feel quite massive to you. It’s hard to 
imagine what the difference will be.
So to work out what happens, you’ve been thinking about 
extremes - two things that have very different masses 
- so that you can come back to the cannonballs and say, 
“The stone one will have a higher velocity if they’re both 
given the same push.”
But before you go back to the pirate ship, here’s a quick 
exercise.
Get used to 
thinking in 
extremes to 
work out what 
will happen in 
your situation.
Same 
force
Large mass
Small mass
Large change 
in velocity
Small change 
in velocity
velephant
vmouse
F
F
mmouse
melephant
404    Chapter 10
think in extremes

In this exercise, you have three coffee machine cups. One has an iron cannonball 
balanced on top, the next has a less massive stone cannonball on top, and the 
third has an even less massive wood ball balanced on top.
The same brick is dropped directly onto each ball from the same height each time.
Which cup is damaged the least, and why?
Iron 
(largest mass)
Wood 
(smallest mass)
Stone
Brick always 
dropped from 
the same height.
Coffee machine cups 
are all identical.
Relax - we’re looking for a 
prediction, so don’t worry if 
you’re not sure what will happen.
you are here 4    405
momentum conservation

In this exercise, you have three coffee machine cups. One has an iron cannonball 
balanced on top, the next has a less massive stone cannonball on top, and the 
third has an even less massive wood ball balanced on top.
The same brick is dropped directly onto each ball from the same height each time.
Which cup is damaged the least, and why?
Massive things are more difficult to shift.
If an elephant was sliding towards you, which would you 
rather it hit first - a solid wall or a sheet of paper? With this 
setup, the balls are actually protecting the cups from the 
impact of the brick like a wall would protect you from an 
elephant. The cup under the iron ball suffers the least damage 
because the iron ball has the largest mass.
If we dropped the balls themselves directly onto the cups, the 
iron ball would do the most damage since it takes more force 
to bring it to a standstill (the cup can’t exert enough force to 
stop the ball ... but the ground can).
Newton’s first law says that objects continue at the velocity they already 
have unless acted on by a net force. All of the balls have zero velocity. 
The more massive something is, the more force you need to change its 
velocity. So it’s most difficult to get the iron cannonball moving when you 
drop the brick on it, as it has the most mass. By being difficult to shift, 
it kind of protects the cup. 
Therefore, the cup under the iron ball is damaged the least.
But that’s the wrong way around! The iron one 
must do the most damage because it has the largest mass!
The larger an 
object’s mass, the 
more difficult it 
is to change the 
object’s velocity.
Squashed 
the least
Squashed 
the most.
Iron 
(largest 
mass)
Wood 
(smallest 
mass)
Stone
406    Chapter 10
change massive velocity

Iron - 
large mass
If you push 
them with 
the same 
force...
Stone - 
Small mass
Large change 
in velocity
Small change 
in velocity
Is there any way of working out the range 
or velocity for a stone cannonballs fired at 
10° when you can only measure things that 
are actually on the ship?
A stone cannonball has a smaller mass - so it 
has a larger velocity. But how much larger?
As the stone cannonball has a smaller mass than the iron one, it will 
come out of the cannon with a greater velocity.
OK, so the new stone cannonballs 
have arrived. I don’t mind doing a 
test firing - as long as it’s horizontal. To 
stay under the radar - see?
However, the only thing you know about a stone cannonball is 
that it’s a quarter of the mass of an iron cannonball. The pirate 
captain wants to know the range of a stone cannonball fired at 
10°, but will only let you fire a stone cannonball horizontally.
Firing horizontally doesn’t sound like it’ll help, as you can’t 
measure the distance the cannonball goes out to sea, and the 
cannonball’s velocity will be far too high to measure directly.
Same 
force
Large mass
Small mass
Large change 
in velocity
Small change 
in velocity
velephant
vmouse
F
F
F
F
vstone
viron
mmouse
melephant
miron
mstone
You can’t 
measure the 
distance when 
you’re at sea!
If you know the 
velocity, you can 
calculate the range.
you are here 4    407
momentum conservation

Jim: Yeah, if the stone cannonball has a higher velocity, the vertical  
velocity component will be larger, so the cannonball will stay off 
the ground for longer. And the horizontal velocity component will 
also be larger, so the cannonball will go even further in that time.
Joe: So we’ve answered the “Does it?” question - it does go further. 
But now we need to answer the “How much?” question - how 
much further than the iron cannonball will the stone cannonball go?
Frank: But the stupid Sieges-R-Us website still hasn’t been updated 
with proper tech specs. If we knew the muzzle velocity for the 
stone cannonball, it’d be easy. We might be able to do something if 
we knew the actual masses of the cannonballs. But all the website 
says is that the stone one is four times lighter than the iron one.
Joe: Maybe we could do some kind of experiment?
Frank: But the pirates won’t let us fire their cannons at the ghost 
ship - they want the element of surprise...
Joe: I mean, maybe we could miniaturize things to do a small 
experiment then scale it up, like we’ve done before.
Jim: With a toy cannon, perhaps. We could make it fire two 
different objects, one four times the mass of the other.
Frank: I’m not sure how practical it is to calibrate a toy cannon.  
How about we use a spring to push an object horizontally? 
Then we’re only thinking about one dimension - we can always 
extrapolate to two dimensions later on by using component vectors.
Joe: But if we push an object horizontally, they’ll soon grind to a 
halt because of the friction between them and the table. There’s 
relatively little friction when a cannonball goes through the air. It 
wouldn’t be the same.
Jim: Hmm, air. Can we make some kind of hovercraft thingy to 
push with the spring? That floats on a cushion of air.
So the stone cannonball will go further. Since the stone 
cannonball has less mass than the iron cannonball, the stone 
cannonball will come out of the cannon with a higher velocity.
Reduce friction - maybe with 
a hovercraft?! (Though I’ve 
never seen one like that).
Miniaturize experiment 
with mini-cannons?
A spring is a more 
controlled way of 
exerting a force.
408    Chapter 10
reduce friction

When you design an 
experiment, try to make 
it LIKE the situation 
you’re modelling.
Frank: Or, no ... even better - can we use an air hockey table to 
reduce friction? We can push an object horizontally across an air 
hockey table, using a spring to make sure we use the same force 
each time.
Joe: I just thought of something else. Cannons recoil, right?
Jim: What do you mean?!
Joe: When you fire a cannon or a gun, the force of the explosion 
makes it kick back. That’s why the pirates’ cannon has wheels.
Frank: So how about putting the spring between two objects on 
the air hockey table. One has a large mass, like the cannon. The 
other has a smaller mass, like the cannonball. Then we get a recoil 
when we let the spring do its thing?
Joe: That sounds good, but I’ve also been thinking - how do we 
measure velocity? That’s what we actually want to find out for 
the things with different masses - so we can scale it up for the two 
cannonballs and work out the range of the stone cannonball.
Jim: I guess we could mark out a distance we know, and time 
how long it takes for the thing we’re pushing to cover it. We can 
work out a velocity from that.
Joe: But it’s going to be difficult to do that precisely. It’s not like 
we can use a regular stopwatch because the times here are going  
to be very short, maybe less than half a second and difficult to do by 
hand.
Frank: I’ve seen this thing in a physics lab before. It’s a beam of 
light, and when something goes through and breaks the beam, a 
timer starts. Then when the beam’s restored, the timer stops.
Jim: But there’s only one beam, right? So how can we time 
something over a certain distance when the beam’s always in the 
same place?
Frank: If we know the length of the object going through the 
beam, then we know that it’s gone exactly that distance while 
breaking the beam. So we can work out the velocity.
Joe: And we could do that for both the small object (cannonball) 
and large object (cannon) so we get the recoil velocity as well.
Jim: Let’s go see what equipment we’ve got in the lab ...
Something like an air 
hockey table is a good 
way to reduce friction.
The cannon recoils 
- so let’s push apart two 
masses with the spring.
A light gate is an accurate 
way of measuring a speed 
using a distance and a time.
you are here 4    409
momentum conservation

Here’s your lab equipment
Here are the things you need for this experiment:
You need a way of reducing friction. You have an air track, 
which is like an air hockey table because it has small holes in it all 
the way along its length to create a ‘cushion’ of air and reduce 
friction as much as possible.
You need objects to represent the cannon and cannonball. 
The air track has specially-designed vehicles that sit on it.
Actual track is much 
longer than this.
Vehicle
Air pumped out 
through holes.
Floats on a 
cushion of air.
An air track reduces friction, and the vehicles 
represent the cannon and cannonball.
You can add masses to the vehicles 
and push them apart with a spring
You need a way of changing and measuring the vehicles 
masses. The air track vehicles come with a set of masses that 
you can stack on top of them - both these and the vehicle are 
marked with their masses. So one vehicle can represent the 
cannonball and the other one the cannon.
You need something to push the vehicles apart with the 
same force each time. You can use a spring, which you push 
in to the same place every time. Then when you let go of the 
spring, it pushes the vehicles apart.
You need a way of measuring velocity. You can measure 
pieces of card and attach them along the length of each vehicle. 
Then set up a light gate (sometimes called a photogate) for each 
vehicle to pass through. When the card breaks the beam, it 
starts a timer, and when the card has passed all the way through, 
the beam is restored and the timer stops. This gives you the 
time it took for the vehicle to go the same distance as the 
length of the card, which you can use to calculate the velocity.
You can add a piece of card to a vehicle and 
time it with a light gate to work out its velocity.
Think about what you 
NEED to do. Then about 
what equipment you 
HAVE available to do it.
410    Chapter 10
lab equipment

How are force, mass and velocity related?
You now have all the equipment you need to design an 
experiment that will let you work out the effect that a cannonball’s 
mass has on its muzzle velocity. But you need to put the equipment 
together in an experimental setup.
The other important thing at this stage is to work out what 
variables you can change during the course of your experiment. 
These are all the different things that might affect what you are 
measuring (in this case, the velocities of the vehicles).
Any time you design 
an experiment, think 
about what your 
VARIABLES are.
a. Design and draw an experimental setup with the equipment on the opposite page (plus anything else 
you’d like to use) to replicate a scenario where a force pushes apart a cannon and a cannonball, so that 
they both experience a change in velocity. Your aim is to see how the velocity of the cannonball varies 
with its mass (and whether this also affects the recoil velocity of the cannon).
b. Identify the things in your experimental setup that you can vary in order to produce a set of results.  
(At this stage you’re not being asked how you would vary them.)
c. Explain what measurements you would make for one trial of your experiment, and how you would use 
them to fill in a table of masses and velocities.
you are here 4    411
momentum conservation

Light gate 
measures time it 
takes for card to 
pass through.
Piece of card - 
know the length.
Use an air track 
to reduce friction.
Spring pushed in the 
same amount each time
Once the spring has sprung, 
there are no horizontal forces 
acting on the vehicles.
Various 
masses 
added to 
vehicles.
a. Design and draw an experimental setup with the equipment on the opposite page (plus anything else 
you’d like to use) to replicate a scenario where a force pushes apart a cannon and a cannonball, so that 
they both experience a change in velocity. Your aim is to see how the velocity of the cannonball varies 
with its mass (and whether this also affects the recoil velocity of the cannon).
b. Identify the things in your experimental setup that you can vary in order to produce a set of results.  
(At this stage you’re not being asked how you would vary them.)
c. Explain what measurements you would make for one trial of your experiment, and how you would use 
them to fill in a table of masses and velocities.
Q: Why am I using two vehicles again?
A: Cannons recoil. As well as the 
cannonball going forwards, the cannon goes 
backwards. So you’re replicating that.
Q: Why am I measuring the ‘cannon’ 
vehicle’s velocity when I’m only 
interested in the cannonball’s velocity?
A: You never know what might be useful...
Q: But that’s just extra work!
A: The spring pushes both vehicles, so 
knowing both velocities might help you come 
to a better conclusion than only knowing one.
b. I can vary the mass of each vehicle, and the strength of the spring.
c. For one trial, I would put masses on each vehicle. Then I’d use scales to find the mass of the vehicle plus 
the masses. I would use the light gates to measure the time it takes for each vehicle to pass through. Then I 
would use the length of the card and the time to work out each vehicle’s velocity
a.
412    Chapter 10
the power of a spring

Frank: Yeah, but what do we do now?
Jim: I guess we push the vehicles apart, measure some times, 
use them to work out velocities and write them down in a table.
Frank: But we gotta be more organized than that. Like, what 
will we change in between one trial and the next?
Joe: We can change the mass of the “cannon” vehicle and 
the mass of the “cannonball” vehicle.
Jim: So we just change both masses each time. We won’t have to 
do so many trials that way, as we can change two things at once.
Joe: I’m not sure that’s a good idea. Suppose we change both 
masses and get a different result for the velocities. We won’t 
know why we got a different result. Which of the two changes 
was responsible for the difference - or did it come about as a 
result of both changes working together somehow?
Frank: Yeah, that’s a good point. In real life, the cannon’s 
mass doesn’t change. I think we should give one of the vehicles 
a really large mass - like the cannon has compared to the 
cannonball - then vary the mass of the other vehicle each time. 
we do a trial.
Jim: But what if we just happen to choose a mass for our 
‘cannon’ vehicle that produces a special result. I think we need 
to change that mass as well, to make sure anything we work out 
isn’t a special case.
Joe: So why don’t we do one set of trials with a fixed ‘cannon’ 
mass and change the ‘cannonball mass’ each time, then do 
another set with a different fixed ‘cannon’ mass to see if that 
makes a difference?
Frank: And then do another lot with a different spring, to make 
sure that’s not a special case too.
Jim: OK, I see what you mean. Changing only one thing at 
a time must be the best way of doing it. If something different 
happens, you know for sure that the thing you changed is what 
caused the difference.
There are THREE variables 
in your experiment.
You should only change 
one thing at a time in 
your experiment.
We got our experiment 
set up ... phew!
m1
m2
m1
m2
m1
m2
Spring
Spring
Spring
you are here 4    413
momentum conservation

Here are the results of your experiment. We’ve annotated the diagram with all of the relevant details 
like labelling which light gate is which, and the length of the pieces of card (10 cm). Be careful with the 
direction that each velocity is in!
Fill in the missing boxes in the table, and use the space below to write down any patterns you see.
Vary only one thing at a time in your experiment
The point of doing an experiment is to find out what happens to one quantity if you 
vary another quantity. In this experiment, we want to find out what happens to the 
velocities of two objects that are pushed apart by a force when you vary the objects’ 
masses. Then you can extrapolate your results to predict what will happen to the 
velocities of a cannon and cannonball when they’re forced apart by an explosion.
If you vary both masses for each trial of your experiment, it’ll be difficult to spot 
patterns in your results.  You won’t know which change had the most effect on your 
results - or if the changes somehow canceled each other out.
So by varying only one mass at a time then changing the other mass and doing it again 
will make sure that it’ll be OK to extrapolate your findings to any two masses.
An experiment 
shows you what 
happens to one 
quantity when 
you vary another 
quantity.
414    Chapter 10
experiment

Light gate 2
Piece of card 
- length = 10 cm
Spring pushed in the 
same amount each time
This vehicle 
is usually 
more 
massive
Light gate 1
Mass 1 (kg)
Mass 2 (kg)
LG 1 time (s)
 LG 2 time (s)
Velocity 1  =          (m/s)
Velocity 2  =          (m/s)
0.150
0.150
0.19
0.20
                 =   -0.53 (2 sd)
                 =    0.50 (2 sd)
0.150
0.300
0.17
0.35
0.150
0.450
0.16
0.48
0.300
0.150
0.34
0.17
0.300
0.300
0.27
0.26
0.300
0.450
0.25
0.38
0.450
0.150
0.47
0.16
0.450
0.300
0.37
0.25
0.450
0.450
0.34
0.33
x
t
x
t
-0.10
0.19
0.10
0.20
Repeat experiment with masses the other way round in case of 
systematic error/BIAS, e.g. the air track being on a slight slope.
This is the positive direction.
m1
m2
Times measured to 2 sd so you should 
only quote your velocities to 2 sd.
Be careful with the minus 
signs that show the direction 
of each vehicle’s displacement 
and velocity vectors.
you are here 4    415
momentum conservation

Here are the results of your experiment. We’ve annotated the diagram with all of the relevant details like  labelling 
which light gate is which. Note: The pieces of card on the vehicles are 10 cm long.
Fill in the missing boxes in the table, and use the space below to write down any patterns you see.
When the masses are the same, the velocities are roughly the same magnitude.
When the masses are the same but both heavier than another trial, their velocities are smaller.
When the masses are different, the smaller one always has a higher magnitude of velocity.
The size of mass × velocity is the same for both vehicles, whether the masses are the same or not.
Mass 1 (kg)
Mass 2 (kg)
LG 1 time (s)
 LG 2 time (s)
Velocity 1  =          (m/s)
Velocity 2  =          (m/s)
0.150
0.150
0.19
0.20
                 =    -0.53 (2 sd)
                 =    0.50 (2 sd)
0.150
0.300
0.17
0.35
          =  -0.59 (2 sd)
          =  0.29 (2 sd)
0.150
0.450
0.16
0.48
          =  -0.63 (2 sd)
          =  0.21 (2 sd)
0.300
0.150
0.34
0.17
          = -0.29 (2 sd)
          =  0.59 (2 sd)
0.300
0.300
0.27
0.26
          = -0.37 (2 sd)
          =  0.38 (2 sd)
0.300
0.450
0.25
0.38
          = -0.40 (2 sd)
          =  0.26 (2 sd)
0.450
0.150
0.47
0.16
          =  -0.21 (2 sd)
          =  0.63 (2 sd)
0.450
0.300
0.37
0.25
          = -0.27 (2 sd)
          = 0.40 (2 sd)
0.450
0.450
0.34
0.33
          = -0.29 (2 sd)
          =  0.30 (2 sd)
x
t
x
t
-0.10
0.19
0.10
0.20
0.17
-0.10
0.16
-0.10
0.34
-0.10
0.27
-0.10
0.25
-0.10
0.47
-0.10
0.37
-0.10
0.34
-0.10
0.35
0.10
0.48
0.10
0.17
0.10
0.26
0.10
0.38
0.10
0.16
0.10
0.25
0.10
0.33
0.10
i.e. the same size - magnitude 
is another word for size.
mass x velocity is always the same size 
for both vehicles in any one trial.
Don’t worry if you didn’t 
spot this last pattern. It’s 
more difficult to see than 
the others.
416    Chapter 10
solution

Q: I looked really hard for the pattern 
but didn’t spot it. Is that OK?
A: If you spotted that when the mass of 
the  vehicle is smaller its velocity is larger 
(as long as the other vehicle still has the 
same mass) then that’s the main thing. 
Spotting that mass × velocity always has the 
same value was the bonus.
Q: So if I hadn’t kept one vehicle’s 
mass constant, I might not have spotted 
the pattern for the other vehicle so 
clearly?
A: That’s right. Before you started actually 
doing your experiment, you worked out what 
things you are able to vary. Then you made 
sure that you varied only one thing at a time. 
 
Keeping the mass of one of the vehicles 
constant enabled you to see the effect that 
varying the other vehicle’s mass had. You 
were able to spot the pattern because you 
only changed one variable at a time.
Q: So I should turn all but one of the 
variables into constants for each trial 
- each set of measurements - that I make?
A: Precisely - just like you did in this 
experiment. Your first set of trials were 
for one mass of ‘cannon’ vehicle and your 
second set of trials for another. 
 
 
 
Q: And that was so I didn’t 
inadvertently draw conclusions from 
just one set of trials, when the results 
might have looked different for a different 
‘cannon’ vehicle mass?
A: You got it!
Q: Why are we using a ‘cannon’ 
vehicle and measuring its velocity in 
the first place? Why not just push the 
‘cannonball’ vehicle off of a solid wall or 
something?
A: Because of the observation that 
cannons recoil. When the cannonball goes 
forward, the cannon rolls backwards - that’s 
why they have wheels! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: So we’re trying to replicate the 
‘big’ scenario the best we can with our 
experiment?
A: Yeah, that’s the idea.
Q: And now I get to use the results to 
come up with an equation that helps to 
work out the difference between firing the 
iron and stone cannonballs?
A: You got it!
Mass × velocity is the same 
size for both of the vehicles, 
but the two velocity vectors point in 
opposite directions. So we should be 
careful with negative signs, right?
Change only one 
variable at a time 
and keep the others 
constant when you 
do an experiment. 
This helps you reach 
better conclusions.
Any time you’re dealing with 
vectors, think about signs!
When you filled in your table of 
experimental results, you were 
talking about velocity, not speed. So 
each velocity should have a sign 
corresponding to the direction the 
vehicle is going in.
So far we’ve been saying that both 
vehicles have the same size of 
mass × velocity. But you’re right, the 
direction of the vectors is about to 
become really important ...
you are here 4    417
momentum conservation

Q: How can you say momentum is 
conserved? At the start, the vehicles 
don’t have any momentum - they’re 
sitting still. After they’re pushed apart, 
they’re moving, so they both have 
momentum.
A: If you just think about each vehicle 
individually, then you’re right - at the start 
they have no momentum and at the end 
they do. 
 
But when you add up the total momentum 
of all the individual objects involved in the 
experiment, then it’s the same both before 
and after the interaction
Q: But I thought we said before that 
mass × velocity is the same for both 
vehicles once they’re pushed apart. How 
can two things that are the same be zero 
when they’re added together?
A: We said that the size of 
mass × velocity is the same for both vehicles. 
But as they’re traveling away from each 
other in opposite directions, their velocity 
vectors - and momentum vectors - point in 
opposite directions. 
 
 
Q: So when I add together two vectors 
that are the same size but point in 
opposite directions, the answer is zero?
A: Yes, that’s right. Vectors add ‘nose-to 
tail’. When you line up two vectors that 
are the same size and point in opposite 
directions, you end up where you started so 
the answer is zero.
Q:So now I’ve got my head around 
momentum conservation, do I get to play 
with equations to try and solve the stone 
cannonball problem?
A: Absolutely!
Mass x velocity - momentum - is conserved
From your experiment, you’ve worked out that 
when you push two objects apart, they end 
up with the same size of mass × velocity. The 
name given to mass × velocity is momentum. 
Momentum is given the symbol p.
An object’s momentum is a vector that points 
in the same direction as its velocity vector. Your 
experiment has told you that momentum is 
conserved in this interaction when two things 
are pushed apart, as the total momentum is the 
same both before and after.
Mass is measured in kg and velocity in m/s. 
This means that momentum has units of kg.m/s 
The . between ‘kg’ and ‘m’ means ‘multiplied by’ 
The . helps to reduce confusion by keeping the 
‘kg’ and the ‘m’ distinct
At the start of your experiment, the total momentum of 
the system is zero, as nothing’s moving at all. Once the 
vehicles have been pushed apart, the total momentum of 
the system is still zero, as the two equally-sized momentum 
vectors point in opposite directions and cancel when 
you add them ‘nose to tail’.
Momentum is always conserved in any interaction 
between two (or more) objects.
Total momentum = 0 
at the start (nothing 
is moving)
The total momentum is 
conserved in any interaction 
between different objects.
Momentum 
is a vector!
Momentum vectors have same 
size, but in opposite directions.
m1
m2
v1
v2
p1
p2
Total momentum = 0 
at the end (momentum 
vectors add to zero).
m1
m2
Large mass.
Small mass.
Large velocity.
Small velocity.
*BOING*
p1
p2
418    Chapter 10
total momentum is conserved

Hey, not so fast! Weren’t we going to 
try some different springs as well? The 
results might work out differently.
BE the experiment
Your job is to be the experiment you’ve 
just been doing, and imagine what will 
happen if you use an even stronger 
spring to push the two vehicles 
apart. How will the increased 
strength of spring affect mass x 
velocity for the vehicles?
Good point - you need to work out what 
happens when the force is different
When you were designing the experiment, you 
realized that there are three things you can vary - the 
mass of vehicle 1, the mass of vehicle 2 and the 
strength of the spring that pushes them apart.
To make your experiment complete, you’d usually 
have to repeat it with a couple of different springs. 
But this time around, you’re going to use your physics 
intuition to predict what would happen if you used a 
stronger spring ...
Old spring
Stronger spring
m1
m2
m1
m2
you are here 4    419
momentum conservation

m2
v2
p2
m1
v1
p1
m1
m2
v1
v2
p1
p2
*BOING*
Pushing with 
a greater force 
for the same 
amount of 
time, leads to a 
greater change 
in momentum.
BE the experiment - SOLUTION
Your job is to be the experiment you’ve 
just been doing, and imagine what will 
happen if you use an even stronger 
spring to push the two vehicles 
apart. How will the increased 
strength of spring affect mass x 
velocity for the vehicles?
A stronger spring will push the two vehicles apart with a bigger 
force. So it’ll have a bigger effect on the velocity of each 
vehicle. I think that momentum will still be conserved but the 
mass x velocity for each vehicle will be bigger, as they were 
pushed with a bigger force.
A greater force acting over the same amount 
of time gives a greater change in momentum
If you use a stronger spring, 
you increase the force that 
pushes the two vehicles apart. 
If you apply this larger force 
for the same time that you 
were applying the smaller 
force, it leads to a greater 
change of momentum for 
each vehicle. If both vehicles 
are still the same mass, their 
velocities will both be larger 
than before.
Velocities are larger than before.
Each vehicle has a larger change 
in momentum than before, but the 
TOTAL momentum is still zero.
*BOING*
Small force, smaller change in momentum 
(when force is applied for the same time).
Larger force, larger change in momentum 
(when force is applied for the same time).
But because of momentum 
conservation, the total momentum 
is still equal to zero, even though each 
individual vehicle has more momentum 
than it did previously.
420    Chapter 10
greater force = greater change

m1
m2
v2
p1
p2
*BOING*
v1
m2
m1
The total 
momentum is 
the same before 
and after.
Write momentum conservation as an equation
The symbol for momentum is p, so you can write the equation p = mv  
(momentum = mass × velocity).
When you’re dealing with more than one object, you’ll typically see subscripts to 
make it clear which object you’re talking about. So vehicle 1 has mass m1, velocity 
v1, and momentum p1. Vehicle 2 has mass m2, velocity v2, and momentum p2.  
 
The total momentum is always ptotal = p1 + p2 - this is what’s conserved.
The symbol for 
momentum is p.
ptotal= 0, as the momentum 
vectors add to zero when 
you line them up nose to tail.
So you can write down the equation:
You can also write the equation this way, which will be very 
useful for working with masses and velocities:
At the start of your experiment, v1 and v2 are both 0, therefore 
p1 and p2 are both zero so ptotal = 0.
At the start
ptotal = p1 + p2
ptotal = 0
At the end of your experiment, the massive vehicle is moving 
slowly to the left, and the less massive vehicle is moving more 
quickly to the right. ptotal is still 0, as momentum is conserved.
At the end
ptotal = p1 + p2
ptotal = 0
p1 = m1v1
p2 = m2v2
We’ve not  drawn in the 
spring this time, to make 
what’s going on with the 
vehicles a bit clearer.
This is zero because the 
total momentum was 
zero at the start. If 
the total momentum 
had a different value 
at the start, that value 
would be here instead.
v1 = 0
v2 = 0
p1 = 0
p2 = 0
ptotal = p1 + p2 = 0
ptotal = m1v1 + m2v2 = 0
p1
p2
you are here 4    421
momentum conservation

In any interaction 
between two 
objects, they both 
experience the 
same size of force, 
but in opposite 
directions.
Momentum conservation and 
Newton’s Third Law are equivalent
Newton’s Third Law says that if you push something, 
it pushes back at you with an equal size of force in 
the opposite direction.
Imagine that instead of being separate, the spring is attached 
to the left hand vehicle, so the left hand vehicle ‘pushes’ the 
right hand vehicle. Then imagine that the spring is attached to 
the right hand vehicle, so that it ‘pushes’ the left-hand vehicle.
It actually doesn’t make any difference which vehicle is “doing 
the pushing” - they still move apart in the same way. The size 
of each vehicle’s change in momentum is the same, though 
their momentum vectors point in opposite directions. So both 
vehicles must have experienced the same size of force for 
the same amount of time, though in opposite directions. 
This is the case whichever vehicle you think of as “doing the 
pushing”. Both vehicles experience the same size of force, but 
in opposite directions, as a result of their interaction.
If the total momentum is conserved 
in any interaction, does that mean 
that when two things interact, they both 
experience the same size of force?
There is a second 
law too - you’ll 
meet that later.
Both vehicles experience the same SIZE 
of force, but in opposite DIRECTIONS.
m1
m2
v1
v2
p1
p2
*BOING*
F2 on 1
F1 on 2
The same size of force 
applied for the same 
time leads to the same 
change in momentum
Newton’s third law and momentum conservation mean that the 
cannon and cannonball exert the same force on each other 
when the cannon is fired. So the change in the cannonball’s 
momentum is the same size as the change in the cannon’s 
momentum. These changes in momentum happen in opposite 
directions, as the force that the cannon exerts on the 
cannonball is in the opposite direction from the force that the 
cannonball exerts on the cannon.
p1 = m1v1
p2 = m2v2
The same force 
applied for the 
same amount 
of time always 
produces the 
same change in 
momentum.
422    Chapter 10
momentum conservation

Not so fast! What if the cannon was 
attached to the ground? The cannonball would go 
forwards but the cannon wouldn’t go backwards. So 
afterwards, the cannonball would have momentum but the 
cannon wouldn’t, so momentum isn’t conserved!
If the cannon’s attached to the ground, 
you make the EARTH move backwards!
Momentum is always conserved in interactions 
between two or more objects. If the cannon exerts a 
force on the cannonball, then the cannonball exerts an 
equal-sized force on the cannon in the opposite direction.
If the cannon is on wheels, this force makes it recoil 
and roll backwards. But if the cannon is attached to the 
earth, then the whole earth experiences the force from 
the cannonball! Since momentum is conserved, the 
earth must recoil backwards - but because the earth is 
so massive, its recoil velocity is incredibly small. You can 
work out how small it is ...
Use momentum conservation to work out the approximate velocity that the 
earth would ‘recoil’ with if the cannon is firmly attached to it when it is fired.
The cannonball has  a velocity of 90.0 m/s and a mass of around 1 kg.
The earth’s mass is 5.97 × 1024 kg.
Why don’t you notice the earth recoiling like this?
The Sieges-R-Us 
website doesn’t give 
its mass, but it feels 
like it’s around 1 kg.
If you need a refresher 
in scientific notation, 
turn to chapter 3.
Remember to start with a labelled sketch!
This is Newton’s 
Third Law.
you are here 4    423
momentum conservation

Use momentum conservation to work out the approximate velocity that the 
earth would ‘recoil’ with if the cannon is firmly attached to it when it is fired.
The cannonball has  a velocity of 90.0 m/s and a mass of around 1 kg.
The earth’s mass is 5.97 × 1024 kg.
Why don’t you usually notice the earth recoiling like this?
p   =
m1v1  +  m2v2
Total momentum of earth and cannonball at start = 0
=   0
Total momentum of earth and cannonball after firing = 0 
(momentum conservation)
Want to know v1, so rearrange equation.
m1v1  =   -m2v2
v1  =
-m2v2
m1
=
-(1 × 90)
5.97 × 1024
The earth’s recoil velocity is around 1 × 10-23 m/s in the 
opposite direction to the cannonball’s velocity.
m1 = 5.97 × 1024 kg
m2 = 1 kg
v2 = 90 m/s
v1 = ?
Remember to draw a labelled 
sketch, so that it’s easy for you 
(and your examiner) to work out 
what m1, v2 etc are.
You don’t notice this because it would take an incredibly 
long time to travel any noticeable distance at this velocity!
Q: Momentum is always conserved, 
even when it doesn’t look like it is?
A: That’s right - it’s easy to see a cannon 
recoil. But impossible to see the earth recoil! 
Q: When am I allowed to use 
momentum conservation?
A: Any time two (or more) objects interact, 
momentum is conserved, so you can say 
pbefore = pafter. As long as you keep track of 
which mass and velocity is which, you’re fine.
Q: So I guess I can use the same type 
of calculation to work out what happens 
with the stone cannonball?
A: Yes - momentum conservation is the 
vital key to working out what happens there. 
Speaking of which ...
This answer should only 
be quoted to 1 sd as the 
cannonball’s mass is listed 
as ‘around 1 kg,’ so has 1 sd.
v1  =  -1 × 10-23 m/s (1 sd)
The Earth’s velocity is 
negative, as it moves in the 
opposite direction to the 
cannonball.
424    Chapter 10
momentum is conserved

So, does the cannon exert the 
same force on the stone cannonball 
as it exerts on the iron cannonball?
Mass 1 
(kg)
Mass 2 
(kg)
Velocity 1 
(m/s)
 Velocity 2 
(m/s)
Change in momentum 1 
p1 = m1v1 (kg.m/s)
Change in momentum 2 
p1 = m1v1 (kg.m/s)
0.450
0.150
-0.21
0.63
0.450 × -0.21  =  0.094 (2 sd)
0.450
0.300
-0.27
0.40
0.450
0.450
-0.29
0.30
The same size of force applied for the same amount of time always leads to the same change in momentum.
Therefore, if a spring pushing two vehicles apart always exerts the same force on both vehicles for the same 
amount of time, then each individual vehicle will experience the same change in momentum every time you do 
the experiment.
a. The table below is taken from your experiment a few pages ago, where you pushed two vehicles of varying 
masses apart with the same spring. Complete the table to show the change in momentum for each vehicle.
b. Is the change in momentum of a single vehicle always the same in each trial of the experiment?
c. Try to think of reasons to explain the result you described in part b. Does this have implications for the iron and 
stone cannonballs, which are fired separately and have different masses?
Test out any assumptions you have
If the cannon exerts the same force for the same 
amount of time on the stone cannonball as it does on 
the iron cannonball, the change in momentum would 
be the same for both cannonballs.
But right now this is an assumption, as the cannon 
may not always exert the same force for the same 
amount of time.
To investigate this further, you can revisit the 
experiment you did earlier...
Sometimes you can 
do this using an 
experiment (like 
here). Sometimes 
you’ll need to think 
through assumptions 
using words, graphs 
or equations.
you are here 4    425
momentum conservation

Mass 1 
(kg)
Mass 2 
(kg)
Velocity 1 
(m/s)
 Velocity 2 
(m/s)
Change in momentum 1 
p1 = m1v1 (kg.m/s)
Change in momentum 2 
p1 = m1v1 (kg.m/s)
0.450
0.150
-0.21
0.63
0.450 × -0.21  =  0.094 (2 sd)
0.150 × 0.63 = 0.094 (2 sd)
0.450
0.300
-0.27
0.40
0.450 × -0.27 = 0.12 (2 sd) 0.300 × 0.40 = 0.12 (2 sd)
0.450
0.450
-0.29
0.30
0.450 × -0.29 = 0.13 (2 sd) 0.450 × 0.30 = 0.14 (2 sd)
The same size of force applied for the same amount of time always leads to the same change in momentum.
Therefore, if a spring pushing two vehicles apart always exerts the same force on both vehicles for the same 
amount of time, then each individual vehicle will experience the same change in momentum every time you do 
the experiment.
a. The table below is taken from your experiment a few pages ago, where you pushed two vehicles of varying 
masses apart with the same spring. Complete the table to show the change in momentum for each vehicle.
b. Is the change in momentum of a single vehicle always the same in each trial of the experiment?
c. Try to think of reasons to explain the result you described in part b. Does this have implications for the iron 
and stone cannonballs, which are fired separately and have different masses?
No, the change in momentum isn’t the same. It seems to get larger as the masses of the vehicles get larger.
The change in momentum is only the same on different 
occasions if the same force is applied for the same time.
As the masses of the vehicles get larger, the change 
in momentum increases. The larger a vehicle’s mass, the 
more difficult it is to get the vehicle going. 
So maybe the vehicles with larger masses 
spend more time in contact with the 
spring, so the force isn’t applied over the 
same time.
The iron cannonball has a larger 
mass than the stone cannonball. 
This means that it’s more 
difficult to get it going. So it 
may spend a longer time inside 
the cannon, and end up with a 
larger momentum.
If the force is different every 
time, how are we supposed to 
solve the problem?!
You can use momentum conservation
You’re allowed to do horizontal test firings. Although 
we didn’t see any point in this before, as we can’t 
measure the cannonball’s velocity or displacement, 
we can measure things ON the ship.
This means we can measure the cannon’s velocity for 
firing the iron cannonball, and the cannon’s velocity 
for firing the stone cannonball.
Then we can use what we’ve learned about 
momentum conseervation to put the pieces together ...
426    Chapter 10
more solutions

Yaar, we can test-fire the cannon 
- as long as we aim it horizontally and 
away from the ghost ship!
Here are the results of two horizontal test firings, where the cannon’s recoil 
velocity was measured.
Iron cannonball: Cannon velocity = 0.126 m/s, Cannonball velocity = 90.0 m/s
Stone cannonball: Cannon velocity = 0.063 m/s
The only other fact you know is that the mass of the iron cannonball is four 
times the mass of the stone cannonball. If you knew the mass of the cannon 
you’d be fine, but it’s far too heavy to measure using scales. But there’s another 
way to measure the mass of the cannon...
b. Use momentum conservation and your answer from part a. to calculate the velocity of the 
stone cannonball. The stone cannonball’s mass is a quarter of the mass of the iron cannonball.
Don’t worry about 
calculating the range yet 
- you’ll do that next.
a. Use momentum conservation to calculate mc the mass of the cannon, in 
terms of mi the mass of the iron cannonball.
You won’t be able to give your 
answer as just a number. Your 
answer will look something like 
mc = 400mi which would tell you 
that the cannon has 400 times 
the mass of the iron cannonball.
By the way, this isn’t 
the correct answer, it’s 
just an example of what 
an answer would look like!
This is the value given for 
this particular cannon and 
cannonball on the website.
you are here 4    427
momentum conservation

Even though we didn’t know the 
masses of the cannonballs, we could still do 
the question because the masses we didn’t 
know divided out and cancelled.
Try the variables from your sketch 
in equations to see what happens
Often, you won’t know how a problem’s 
going to work out until you start writing down 
equations and playing with them.
So don’t get stressed if you don’t know many 
values at the start. Do your sketch, write down 
everything you know, and  jot down how you’d 
do the problem and which equation(s) you’d use.
Then play with the equations! You’ll often find 
that variables cancel and the equation simplifies 
down to a calculation you’re able to do.
If you don’t know 
values for the 
variables you’re 
working with, 
play with the 
equations. Some 
of the variables 
may divide out 
and cancel.
b. Use momentum conservation and your answer 
from part a. to calculate the velocity of the stone 
cannonball. The stone cannonball’s mass is a 
quarter of the mass of the iron cannonball.
a. Use momentum conservation to calculate mc 
the mass of the cannon, in terms of mi the mass 
of the iron cannonball.
Iron cannonball: Cannon velocity = 0.126 m/s, Cannonball velocity = 90.0 m/s
Stone cannonball: Cannon velocity = 0.063 m/s.
mc = 714mi
ms =
vs = ? m/s
vc = -0.063 m/s
Stone cannonball
=  0
p   =
mcvc + msvs
=  -mcvc
msvs 
vs = -mcvc
ms
mi4
Make substitutions for mc and ms in terms of mi.
=  0.25mi
vs = -714mivc
0.25mi
vs = -714 × (-0.063)
0.25
vs =  180 m/s (2 sd)
Sometimes you’ll 
be asked to do 
a problem where 
your final answer 
isn’t a number. 
That’s OK.
Don’t put units 
on an answer like 
this. The units of 
mc will depend on 
the units that mi 
is measured in.
mc = ?
mi = ?
vi = 90.0 m/s
vc = -0.126 m/s
Iron cannonball
=  0
p   =
mcvc + mivi
=  -mivi
mcvc 
mc = -mivivc
mc = -mi × 90vi
-0.126
mc  =  714mi (3 sd)
You don’t know actual values 
for any of the masses - but 
the terms in the momentum 
conservation equation all 
mention masses.
If you know what 
all the masses are 
relative to each 
other, for example 
in terms of mi,, all 
mention of mass in 
your equation will 
divide out and cancel.
428    Chapter 10
try your variables

You’ve calculated the stone cannonball’s velocity...
Although the cannon doesn’t always exert the same force on 
a cannonball, momentum is always conserved on every 
occasion that the cannon is fired.
You’ve just used momentum conservation twice. The first 
time was for firing the iron cannonball, which allowed you 
to calculate the mass of the cannon. The second time was 
for the stone cannonball, which allowed you to calculate the 
velocity of the stone cannonball: 180 m/s.
That’s great and all, but 
we want to know the range 
of the stone cannonball.
... but you want the new range!
You already know that you can work out the 
cannonballs’ range if you know its velocity - you 
already did that for the iron cannonball.
But that was a long, involved calculation which took  
you quite a while.
Work out the maximum range of the cannon when it’s fired at an 
angle of 10° with a muzzle velocity of 90 ms-1. (You can assume 
that it’s being fired from sea level to sea level.)
10°
vh
vv
v = 90ms-1
Start off by working out horizontal and vertical velocity components.
sin(10°)  = opp
hyp = vvv
v sin(10°)  =
vv  =
15.6 ms-1 (3 sd)
cos(10°)  = adj
hyp = vhv
v cos(10°)  =
vh  =
88.6 ms-1 (3 sd)
Get time from vertical velocity component (working ONLY with vertical components):
a = -9.8 ms-2
v0 = 15.6 ms-1
Up is positive
x - x0 = 0 m
t = ?
v = -15.6 ms-1
v   =
v0  +  at
at   =
v  -  v0
t   =
v  -  v0
a
=
-15.6 - 15.6
-9.8
=   3.18 s (3 sd)
Work out horizontal change in position during that time using horizontal velocity component
v = 88.6 ms-1
No acceleration in 
horizontal direction.
t = 3.18 s
x - x0 = ?
v  =
x
t
x   =
v t
=   88.6 × 3.18   =   282 m (3 sd)
The range of the cannonball fired at 10° is 282 m (3 sd)
This is what you did 
to work out the iron 
cannonball’s range.
Momentum conservation 
allows you to calculate 
masses or velocities that 
you don’t already know.
you are here 4    429
momentum conservation

Wouldn't it be dreamy if you could work 
out the new range without having to redo the 
whole calculation all over again with different 
numbers. But I know it's just a fantasy… 
Use proportion to work 
out the new range
Your earlier calculation to work out the range of 
the iron cannonball had three parts:
Part a: Work out the vertical and horizontal 
components of the initial velocity, v0v and v0h.
Part b: Use the vertical component and the 
equation vv = v0v + avt to work out the time the 
cannonball is in the air for.
Part c: Use the horizontal component 
and the equation xh = v0h t to work out the 
cannonball’s horizontal displacement in that time.
You’ve calculated that the stone cannonball’s 
initial velocity v0 is two times greater than the 
iron cannonballs’ velocity.
So rather than doing the entire calculation 
again with a different value for v0, you can use 
proportion to work out the new range ...
You used 
subscripts to 
keep track 
of which 
component is 
which.
430    Chapter 10
proportion

a. If the initial velocity is 2 times greater than before, how 
many times greater are its horizontal and vertical components?
b. The vertical component of the velocity is used in the 
equation v = v0 + at to work out the time in the air. How many 
times greater is the time in the air with the new cannonball?
c. The horizontal component of the velocity and the time in the 
air are used in the equation xh = vh t  to work out the range. 
How many times greater is the range with the new cannonball?
d. The range of the iron cannonball fired at 10° is 282 m. 
What is the range of the stone cannonball when it’s fired at 10°?
v0
v0v
v0h
v0v
v0h
vv  =   v0v + avt
xh  =   v0h t
Part a.
Part b.
Part c.
The range is the same 
as the horizontal 
component of the 
displacement.
you are here 4    431
momentum conservation

Both vv and v0v are 2 times larger. When you rearrange the 
equation to say “t = something” it becomes t   = vv  -  v0v
av
When you’re adding or subtracting (which you are before you 
divide by av) and the numbers you’re dealing with become two 
times larger, your answer also becomes two times larger.
Both vh and t are 2 times greater then before.
As they’re multiplied together to give xh, this means that  
xh is 4 times greater than before, as  2 × 2 = 4.
The angle is still the same, so 
they’re similar triangles. If 
one side is two times longer, 
the other sides are too. 
 
Both components are 2 times 
greater than before.
Q: What’s the ‘similar triangles’ thing 
again? It rings a bell ...
A: If two triangles have identical angles, 
then the ratios of their sides are equal. You 
used that before to work out sin, cos, and tan. 
 
Here, if you make the velocity two times larger, 
then the whole triangle also becomes two 
times larger - as do the components.
Q:Oh yeah. But what’s this bit about 
adding rather than multiplying vv and v0v?
A: The rearranged equation is t  = 
av
vv - v0v  
 
Since v0v = -vv (they have the same size but 
are in opposite directions), the bit on top of the 
fraction is 2 times greater than it was before. 
And since a is constant, t is also 2 times 
greater than before.
Q: What about part c?
A: That equation is xh = vh t. You’re 
now dealing with the horizontal component 
of the velocity, vh, which is two times greater 
than before. And the time, t, is also two times 
greater than before. So the term v t is four 
times greater, as 2×2 = 4.
a. If the initial velocity is 2 times greater than before, how 
many times greater are its horizontal and vertical components?
b. The vertical component of the velocity is used in the equation 
vv = v0v + avt to work out the time in the air. How many times 
greater is the time in the air with the new cannonball?
c. The horizontal component of the velocity and the time in the 
air are used in the equation xh = vh t  to work out the range. 
How many times greater is the range with the new cannonball?
d. The range of the iron cannonball fired at 10° is 282 m. 
What is the range of the stone cannonball when it’s fired at 10°?
New range is 4 times greater than old range.
New range  =  4 × 282  =  1130 m (3 sd)
v0h
v0v
v0
Iron cannonball
Stone cannonball
v0v
v0
v0h
Using proportion to 
work out the answer 
to a question that’s 
similar to one you 
already did can be a 
good shortcut.
432    Chapter 10
look for similarities

I’m not too sure about the proportion thing. 
Is it OK if I do the calculation with numbers like 
I did for the other cannonball, to check it’s OK?
You solved the pirates’ problem!
The Sieges-R-Us hype is justified! The vertical component of the stone 
cannonball’s velocity is two times greater than for the iron cannonball, so 
the time in the air is two times greater as well. If the horizontal component 
of the velocity was the same for both cannonballs, then the stone cannonball 
would go two times as far (as it’s in the air for two times as long).
But the horizontal component of the stone cannonball’s velocity is also 
two times greater than the horizontal component of the iron cannonballs’ 
velocity. So the stone cannonball’s range is a massive four times further 
than the iron cannonball’s!
So the ghost ship has to stay 4 × 282 m = 1130 m away - where 
it doesn’t cause problems any more. Another job well done!
Iron cannonball 
range = 282 m.
Stone cannonball 
range = 1130 m.
If you can see a way you understand 
that works for you, then go for it!
Although it’s quicker to do this question using 
proportion, if you can see a different (albeit longer) 
way of doing it that you know you definitely 
understand, then go for it!
Some exam-style questions do ask you proportion 
questions like “what would happen to the maximum 
height if the velocity was doubled?”– we’ll look at 
some questions like that in a later chapter.
you are here 4    433
momentum conservation

434
Question Clinic: The “Proportion” Question (often multiple choice)
You will sometimes come across questions, especially in a 
multiple choice exam, which don’t give you numerical values. Instead they 
may say that something is ‘three times the mass’ or has ‘double the momentum’ 
of something else. These are designed to test your understanding of the 
physics, rather than your ability to press buttons on a calculator.
The ‘proportion’ question may look like it’s from 
a ‘weird’ part of physics - for instance a question about an 
atomic nucleus that splits into two parts. The key is to see past the 
story - start with a sketch - what is it like? When you do this, you’ll 
realize that it’s the same as two things being pushed apart and 
you can use momentum conservation to solve the problem.
2. An adult and a child are on an ice rink. The child has 
mass m and the adult has mass 3 m. The child pushes 
the adult, and as a result the adult slides backwards 
with velocity v. What is the size of the child’s velocity?
v
 
3v
 
 
 9v
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
v
2
v
3
Start with a sketch! 
Then you’ll spot 
that this question 
is about momentum 
conservation.
Write what you 
know on your sketch.
This tells you that 
it’s a proportion 
question, so don’t 
worry about not 
knowing any values.
The child has a lower mass, 
so it will go faster than the 
adult when they push with 
the same force. So you can 
already eliminate any answer 
where the child is going 
slower than the adult, or at 
the same speed.
The adult and child experience the same force for the same amount of time 
(Newton’s 3rd Law). So mass × velocity should have the same size for the 
adult and the child. As the child is a third of the mass of the adult, the 
child’s velocity needs to be three times greater than the adult’s velocity.
m
3 m
v
?
This tells you that you can 
ignore the effect of friction.
Velocity is a 
vector, but 
this question 
only wants 
the size, not 
the direction.

you are here 4    435
momentum conservation
Units
Falling
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Force
Special points
Experiment
Time
Component
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Displacement
Trigonometry
Volume
Velocity
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Does it SUCK?
Area
Mass
Starting to learn about 
why things move, as well as 
how they move.
Mass
The amount of ‘stuff’ that something is made from.
Momentum 
conservation
Momentum is mass × velocity. When two (or more) 
objects interact, the total momentum is the same 
both before and after.
Force
Something that causes a change in an object’s 
momentum, for example a push or a pull (though 
there are also other types of forces).
Newton’s 
Laws
Three laws that tell you how objects move in the 
presence (or absence) of forces.

Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 10 under your belt and 
added some problem-solving skills to your 
ever-expanding toolbox.
CHAPTER 10
Vary one thing at a time
If you’re doing an experiment, you should 
only vary one thing at a time.
This means that you can know for certain 
what has caused any change to your results 
that you observe.
Momentum conservation
Momentum is mass × velocity, p = mv
Momentum is a vector that has the same 
direction as an object’s velocity vector.
The same force always causes the same 
change in momentum
If two (or more) objects interact, their 
total momentum is the same both before 
and after the interaction. You can work 
out the total momentum by adding the 
momentum vectors ‘nose-to-tail.’
Newton’s 1st law
An object continues with its 
current velocity unless it’s 
acted on by a force.
In everyday life, things appear 
to slow down as time passes, 
but that’s because of the 
force of friction.
Newton’s 3rd law
When two objects interact, each 
experiences an equal force, but in 
opposite directions.
This is a direct consequence of 
momentum conservation. As the 
same force always causes the 
same change in momentum, and 
momentum is conserved, then the 
two objects must experience equal 
(but opposite) forces so that 
the total momentum is the same 
before and after.
Proportion
If you have an equation, you can 
work out what happens to the answer 
you get if you change one of the 
variables by a certain amount (e.g., 
doubling, tripling or halving it).
If you’ve already used the equation, 
this can be faster than redoing the 
same calculation with different values.
Newton’s 2nd law 
is in chapter 11!
436    Chapter 10
physics toolbox

this is a new chapter    437
weight and the normal force
11
Forces for courses
Sometimes you have to make a statement forcefully. 
 In this chapter, you’ll work out Newton’s 2nd Law from what you already know about 
momentum conservation to wind up with the key equation, Fnet = ma. Once you 
combine this with spotting Newton’s 3rd Law force pairs, and drawing free body 
diagrams, you’ll be able to deal with (just about) anything. You’ll also learn about why 
mass and weight aren’t the same thing, and get used to using the normal force to 
support your arguments.
The normal force really 
helps me get my point 
across. BLAM!

WeightBotchers are at it again!
WeightBotchers claim that their new product guarantees 
instant weight loss. It’s been difficult to miss their brash 
advertisements since the campaign launched last week.
But the TV show FakeBusters doesn’t buy those claims, 
and want you to investigate the details. If you can prove 
that the WeightBotchers machine is a hoax, your work will 
be featured in a special episode in their next series.
Memo
From: FakeBusters
Re: WeightBotchers
We’re planning to include a 10 minute slot 
in our next series looking into the claims 
made by WeightBotchers about their 
latest product.
If you can bust the fake with physics, we’d 
love to have you on our show.
Lose weight 
INSTANTLY!! 
(for only $499)
438    Chapter 11
weightbotchers on fakebusters

How do you think the machine works?
(How do scales actually produce a measurement?)
Is it really possible to lose weight instantly?!
Here’s the deal. The machine has a platform at the top with 
some scales on it. When you stand on the scales, they read 
the same number of kilograms as they usually would in your 
bathroom. No surprises there.
There must be a trick involved 
somewhere... but what is it? The scales 
don’t look fake and read the same 
number of kilograms as usual when 
they’re not on the machine.
So maybe it’s something to do with what 
the machine does and how the scales 
produce a measurement.
But then the platform you’re standing on suddenly moves 
downwards - and the reading on the scales becomes lower. 
Numbers don’t lie - so if the reading’s gone down then you 
must have lost weight. Right?
Just before you reach the bottom of 
the machine, the scales are switched 
off to protect them from the impact 
with the cushioned landing area.
Platform moves 
down when you 
step on it.
Set of 
scales.
Scales switched 
off here.
Spring-cushioned 
landing area.
Reading on scales 
taken here.
You’re lighter here 
than you were before.
Here, the reading on 
the scales is the same 
number of kilograms 
as it would usually be.
Here, the reading on the 
scales is lower than it was 
at the top of the machine!
you are here 4    439
weight and the normal force

Scales work by compressing 
or stretching a spring
Some scales work by compressing a spring. If 
you put pieces of fruit on top that are all more 
or less the same size, the spring will compress 
by the same amount each time you add another 
piece. The change in length of the spring is 
converted into a reading in kilograms.
A marker at the end of 
the spring points to a scale 
showing the current weight.
This end is firmly 
attached to something.
This loop’s attached 
to the end of the 
spring, and can be 
pulled by something.
Spring is in here.
Inner bit with loop is 
separate from outer 
bit with scale on it.
Change in spring 
length makes the 
dial go round and 
point to a number 
of kilograms.
Change in 
spring length.
Original 
spring 
length.
A spring will 
always compress/
stretch by the same 
amount for the 
same load, to give a 
consistent reading.
Another type of scales works by stretching a spring. 
This is exactly the same principle as compressing a 
spring, except that you hang an object from the spring 
rather than putting it on top. Again, a change in length is 
converted into a reading in kilograms.
New spring 
length.
440    Chapter 11
scales and springs

Jim: Yeah, I’m struggling as well. I don’t see how the person’s lost 
weight. It’s not like they were wearing a rucksack full of boulders 
that they suddenly took off, or anything.
Joe: Maybe it’s something to do with how the scales make their 
measurements. Scales don’t measure the number of kilograms 
directly - scales measure the change in length of a spring.
Frank: Hmmm. You mean if I put the 
scales against the wall and pushed them 
with my hand, they’d register a number of 
kilograms. Yeah, I can see that.
Jim: That’s weird. Kilograms are units of mass, right? Mass is 
the amount of ‘stuff’ something’s made from. But if you push the 
scales sideways like that, the reading depends on the force that you 
push with, not on the amount of stuff your hand’s made from.
Joe: I guess that’s because the scales don’t really measure kilograms 
directly - they measure the change in the length of the spring. 
And that must depend on the force that the spring’s pushed with.
Frank: If I’m standing on the scales, I’m kinda pushing down on 
the spring inside them because of gravity. I guess that because of 
gravity, a certain number of kilograms must produce a certain force 
- and a certain change in length of the spring. So the scales always 
assume that you’re standing on them when making a measurement.
Joe: So if you use the scales differently from how the manufacturer 
intended - by pushing them against the wall, or perhaps by making 
them move down like the WeightBotchers machine does - then you 
get a flakey reading.
Frank: That sounds plausible - but personally I’d like to get my 
head around how force (which seems to do with pushing) and mass 
(which is to do with the ‘stuff’ you’re made of) are connected ...
If you know HOW 
your measuring 
devices work, you 
can trouble-shoot 
your experiments 
when unexpected 
things happen.
Hand pushes scales 
with this force.
I’m just trying to get my head around this. 
You stand on the scales - and they read the 
same as they usually would. Then the scales move 
downwards in the machine - and the number of 
kilograms they read goes down too.
you are here 4    441
weight and the normal force

Mass is an indication of how much ‘stuff’ something is 
made from, and is measured in kilograms. Mass is a 
scalar, as ‘stuff’ can’t have a direction - it’s just what’s there.
Even though the scales indicate otherwise, the person on the 
WeightBotchers machine always has the same mass - it’s not 
like they took off a rucksack or had a haircut halfway down 
and lost a whole lot of matter.
WEIGHT is the FORCE you 
experience as a result of being 
in a gravitational field.
MASS is how much 
“stuff” something’s 
made of. It’s a scalar, 
because ‘stuff’ doesn’t 
have a direction.
Mass is a measurement of “stuff”
If you put the scales against the wall, you can exert 
a horizontal force on them by pushing them with 
your hand and compressing the spring.
Force is a vector because it has direction - the 
direction that you’re pushing the spring in.
Weight is a force
Although the scales give a reading in kilograms, they actually make 
measurements based on the change in length of the spring. So if 
you put fruit on the scales and the spring’s length changes, there must 
be a force involved.
The change in length comes about because the spring has to 
counteract the fruit’s weight, which is there because the fruit is in the 
earth’s gravitational field. The fruit’s weight is the force exerted on it 
by the earth’s gravitational pull. You can draw the fruit’s weight as a 
force vector arrow pointing down, towards the center of the earth.
Applying a force in this 
direction compresses 
the spring and makes 
the dial go round.
The force vector 
of the fruit’s 
weight points in 
this direction.
As weight is a force, 
this is a force vector.
On Earth, your weight vector points 
down, towards the center of the earth.
442    Chapter 11
weight is a force

But people say things like “I weigh 60 
kilograms” all the time. How can you say 
that mass and weight are different?
So the scales measure the force it takes 
to compress a spring, then convert the force 
that causes a certain change in spring length into 
kilograms? It sounds like the relationship between mass 
and weight is really important here.
The way that the scales convert a 
force into a reading in kg is crucial.
If you stand on the scales on the moon, the 
scales will read the wrong number of kilograms 
- even though your mass hasn’t changed. This is 
because the scales assume you’re on earth when 
they convert the change in length (as a result of 
an applied force) into a reading in kilograms.
If you can work out the relationship 
between force and mass that the scales use 
to do this conversion, you’ll be able to debunk 
the WeightBotchers machine.
Mass and weight are different!
In everyday speech, people use the words “mass” 
and “weight” like they’re the same thing. But in 
physics we need use these words more carefully.
If you go to the moon, your mass is the same 
number of kilograms as it is on earth, as you’re 
still made from the same amount of ‘stuff’.
But weight is the force you experience as a result 
of being in a gravitational field. And as the 
moon’s gravitational field is smaller than the 
earth’s, your weight is less on the moon than it is 
on Earth even though your mass is still the same.
Have you seen an equation 
that involves both force and 
mass somewhere before?
Your weight is six 
times larger on 
the earth than 
on the moon.
Your mass is the same on 
the earth and the moon.
Earth.
Moon.
Weight. Force. Vector.
Mass. Stuff. Scalar.
Weight 
on Earth
Weight 
on Moon
Force vector 
arrow.
you are here 4    443
weight and the normal force

The relationship between force and mass involves momentum
In chapter 10, you figured out that when you apply the same force 
for the same amount of time to any object, you always give it 
the same change in momentum. As long as there are no other 
forces acting on the object, you can write this as an equation:
	
F t  =  p
Force applied ...
... for a period of time
... gives a change in momentum.
But momentum is mass × velocity. So you can substitute in mv 
every time you see a p and rewrite this equation as:
	
F t  =  (mv)
Large mass
Small mass
v1
v2
F
F
m1
m2
p2  = m2v2
p1  = m1v1
Same change 
in momentum.
Large velocity.
F t  =  (mv)
Same force 
applied for same 
amount of time.
Small velocity.
Momentum, p = mv
Momentum, p = mv
This is Newton’s Second Law. It shows that objects 
with more mass have more inertia, or more resistance to 
changing how they’re currently moving. If you apply the 
same force for the same time to push two different objects, 
the object with the larger mass is more ‘resistant to change’ 
and has a smaller change in velocity at the end.
The equation F t  =  (mv) gives you a relationship 
between force and mass that you can use to work out 
what’s going on with the WeightBotchers machine.
Here, we’ve called the 
elephant object 1, so it has 
mass m1 and velocity v1. Using 
numbers in subscripts is a 
common way of distinguishing 
between objects in physics.
Using numbers in subscripts 
makes equations more general. We 
could still write down the same 
equation, p1 = m1v1 if we swapped 
the elephant for a duck, whereas 
pe = meve would be confusing.
This equation works for ANY object. We 
don’t have a specific object in mind here, 
so there are no subscripts on the ‘m’ or ‘v’.
This equation works 
if F is the only force 
acting on the object.
444    Chapter 11
force and mass

a. After introducing a subscript to make it clear that it is the net force that causes the change in 
momentum, the equation on the opposite page, Fnet t = (mv) can be rearranged to say 
(mv)
t
Fnet  =
Use this equation to work out the units of force.
b. Your equation contains the term (mv)
t
. Do both m and v change with time while a force is applied?
(Assume that the situation is one where an elephant or mouse has been pushed with a net force.)
c. Does your answer to part b give you any ideas about how you might simplify your equation 
(mv)
t
Fnet  =
Hint: What other equations 
do you know where a variable 
changes with time?
But sometimes you push something 
with a force and it stays still. Where’s 
the change in momentum there?
It’s the net force that matters.
Two people pushing the mouse with equal 
forces in opposite directions looks like this:
F
m
F
When you add together these force vectors 
by lining them up ‘nose to tail’, the overall, 
or net force you end up with is zero. And 
the mouse doesn’t go anywhere, so its 
momentum doesn’t change.
But if the left-to-right force became larger, 
it would start to ‘overpower’ the right-to-left 
force, and there’d be a net force to the right. 
So the mouse would start moving to the 
right - its momentum would change in the 
direction of the net force.
Newton’s Second Law:  
If you apply a  force
to any object for a 
period of time, the 
change in the object’s 
momentum always has 
the same value.
NET
Fnet = 0
Fnet t  =  (mv)
This equation works for any number 
of forces acting on the object added 
together to make the net force, Fnet.
you are here 4    445
weight and the normal force

If the object’s mass is constant, Fnet = m a
Newton’s Second Law says that if you apply a net force to an object 
for a period of time, then its momentum changes. So force is the 
rate of change of the momentum of an object:
	
Fnet  =  (mv)
t
Rate of change 
of momentum
The form of Newton’s 
Second Law that 
you’ll use the most is:
Fnet = ma
Net force
Mass
Acceleration
[m] = kg
[v] = m/s
Typically, the mass of an object doesn’t change during the time 
that the force is applied. This means that m is constant and only 
v changes with time. And you already know that v
t  is the rate of 
change of velocity - in other words, the acceleration.
So you can rewrite Newton’s Second Law as:
	
Fnet  =  ma
This shows you that the units of force are kg.m/s2. However, as this 
is a rather unwieldy unit to write out, physicists have come up with a 
new unit, the Newton (N) where 1 N = 1 kg.m/s2.
So if you do a calculation to work out a force where the mass is in 
kg and the acceleration is in m/s2, you’d write your answer as 10 N 
instead of 10 kg.m/s2.
a. After introducing a subscript to make it clear that it is the net force that causes the change in 
momentum, the equation on the opposite page, Fnet t = (mv) can be rearranged to say 
(mv)
t
Fnet  =
Use this equation to work out the units of force.
b. Your equation contains the term (mv)
t
. Do both m and v change with time while a force is applied?
(Assume that the situation is one where an elephant or mouse has been pushed with a net force.)
c. Does your answer to part b. give you any ideas about how you might simplify your equation 
(mv)
t
Fnet  =
And       is the acceleration.   So it could become F = ma.
v
t
The velocity changes but the mass doesn’t change.
v
t
[t] = s
[F] = kg.m/s  =  kg.m/s2
s
Don’t worry if you 
didn’t spot this.
You could turn it into   F =  m       as the mass is constant.
If you say this out loud, it’s: 
“kilogram-meters per second squared”
446    Chapter 11
if mass is constant...

But we’re interested in weight! When I put an 
apple on scales, its velocity doesn’t change and 
it doesn’t accelerate, but it still has a weight!
Q: So why not just say “Fnet = ma” from the start? Why all this 
stuff about momentum first?
A: This book is about understanding physics. Rather than 
nodding and accepting “Fnet = ma” with no reason for it, we went back 
to what you discovered about momentum in chapter 10, when you 
used a force to change the momentum of various objects. You’ve just 
used what you already knew about momentum to work out this form 
of Newton’s Second Law for yourself.
Q: Won’t the mass of an object always be constant? So you 
can always use Fnet = ma?
A: Sometimes, both the mass and velocity of an object can 
change. For example, a rocket going into space carries a large mass 
of fuel, which it continually burns. As time goes on, its velocity gets 
larger, but its mass gets smaller as the fuel gets used up. So both the 
mass and velocity change with time, which means that you’d need to 
treat the (mv) part of the equation Fnet t = (mv) differently. 
 
But you don’t need to worry about this too much, since it’s not the 
part of the physics that we’ll cover in this book.
Q: If an object’s mass stays the same, you can say Fnet = ma. 
But if its mass changes, you have to say Fnet t = (mv)?
A: Yes. The equation Fnet t = (mv) works for any object, whether 
its mass is constant or not.  
 
The equation Fnet = ma only works for an object whose mass is 
constant. 
Q: But how do I know which equation to use?
A: If you’re interested in the object’s velocity or momentum 
rather than its acceleration, Fnet t = (mv) is the most useful form of 
Newton’s Second Law.  
 
 If you’re interested in the object’s acceleration, then Fnet = ma its the 
most useful form of Newton’s Second Law (as long as the mass of 
the object is constant).
Weight is the force that causes an 
object to accelerate when it falls.
If you drop an apple, it accelerates at a rate of 
9.8 m/s2. This is because the earth’s gravitational field 
strength is 9.8 m/s2. You now know that for something 
to accelerate, a net force must act on it.
The only force acting on the falling apple is its weight. 
You can think of this as a gravitational force which 
results from the stuff that the earth’s made of and the 
stuff that the apple’s made of attracting each other.
Even when the apple isn’t falling, it’s still subject to the 
same gravitational force, so it still has the same weight 
- its mass × the gravitational field strength, or mg (we 
use the letter g to represent the gravitational field 
strength).
Weight = mg
On earth, 
g = 9.8 m/s2
g is the 
gravitational 
field strength.
Different physics courses use 
slightly different values for g. 
AP Physics uses 9.8 m/s2
you are here 4    447
weight and the normal force

Jim: Right - and my weight is due to the “stuff ” I’m made of and 
the “stuff ” the earth’s made of attracting each other. So we can 
think of weight as being a gravitational force.
Joe: Yeah, your weight is the reason you accelerate towards 
the ground at 9.8 m/s2 when there’s nothing to support you. And 
Fnet = ma, so if I have a mass of 80.0 kg, my weight must be 
80 × 9.8 = 784 N as that’s the gravitational force on me.
Frank: Yeah, and if you’re not accelerating, that force of your 
weight’s still there, and is still 784 N, as weight = mg. I guess that 
means that if my mass is constant, then the force of my weight is 
constant whatever’s going on - my weight is still mg.
Jim: But the force that the WeightBotchers machine measures goes 
down when the scales move downwards!
Jim: Yeah, that’s a puzzle. The scales can’t be measuring weight 
directly, or else they would always have the same reading. So if the 
scales don’t measure weight, what force do the scales measure?!
Joe: I think the key thing might be that the scales on the 
WeightBotchers machine are accelerating towards the ground when 
the reading changes.
Frank: But why would that change the reading?
Joe: I guess that the scales aren’t supporting you as much as they 
were before they started to move.
Jim: Yeah ... when you stand on the scales, the spring inside the 
scales compresses until it provides enough force to support you - to 
stop you moving down any further. And it’s the compression of the 
spring that the scales measure.
Joe: Yeah, the scales measure the support force!
Frank: So if the scales aren’t totally supporting your weight, the 
reading would be less?
Joe: I think that’s probably right.
If the scales (or 
the earth) didn’t 
provide a support 
force, you’d just 
keep on falling!
So where have we got 
to now? Weight is a 
force, right?
Practical point: Different 
physics courses use slightly 
different values for g. 
AP Physics uses 9.8 m/s2 
- but generally expects you to 
quote answers to 3 significant 
digits even though this value 
for g given in the AP table 
of information only has 2 
significant digits.
448    Chapter 11
support force

The scales measure the support force
Your weight is always mg. If you’re falling, then the force of your 
weight causes you to accelerate. But if you’re stationary, the thing 
you’re standing on must be exerting a support force on you in the 
opposite direction from your weight - otherwise you’d be falling!
When you stand on scales that are sitting on the ground, you compress 
the spring and continue to move down slightly until the spring is 
compressed enough to exert a support force on you that’s equal to your 
weight. Then the net force on you is zero.
a. What is the weight of an 80 kg person?
b. An 80 kg person stands stationary on some scales 
that are sitting on the ground. What support force 
do the scales need to exert on the person to prevent 
them from breaking or falling through the scales?
c. What is the net force on the person?
d. Draw a sketch of the person showing all of the 
forces acting on them. Use labeled vector arrows 
pointing away from the person to represent the forces.
e. Now, imagine that the person on the scales 
grabs onto a couple of rings hanging from 
the ceiling, and pulls down on them with a 
force of 200 N. Draw a sketch showing all the 
forces acting on the person, including both the 
support force provided by the rings, and the 
support force provided by the scales.
f. What reading (in kg) do the scales show when 
the person is partially supported by the rings, as 
described in part e?
If you are stationary, 
the net force acting 
on you must be zero.
ONLY draw the 
person - don’t 
draw the scales 
or the earth or 
anything else.
you are here 4    449
weight and the normal force

a. What is the weight of an 80 kg person?
b. An 80 kg person stands stationary on some scales 
that are sitting on the ground. What support force 
do the scales need to exert on the person to prevent 
them from breaking or falling through the scales?
c. What is the net force on the person?
d. Draw a sketch of the person showing all of the 
forces acting on them. Use labeled vector arrows 
pointing away from the person to represent the forces.
e. Now, imagine that the person on the scales 
grabs onto a couple of rings hanging from 
the ceiling, and pulls down on them with a 
force of 200 N. Draw a sketch showing all the 
forces acting on the person, including both the 
support force provided by the rings, and the 
support force provided by the scales.
f. What reading (in kg) do the scales show when 
the person is partially supported by the rings, as 
described in part e?
weight  =  mass × gravitational field strength
=  80.0 × 9.8
weight  =  784 N
The person’s weight is 784 N. So to stop them 
breaking the scales, the support force needs to 
be 784 N.
The net force is 0 N, as the weight 
acts downwards, the support force 
acts upwards, and the weight and 
support force are equal sizes.
Support force, 784 N
Weight, 784 N
Scales provide a support force of 584 N 
and assume that F = mg
m  = Fg = 584
9.8
m  =  59.6 kg (3 sd)
Scales measure the support force provided by the spring, then 
convert this into kilograms using F = mg to tell you what your mass is.
If, for some reason, the support force isn’t equal to your weight, then 
the scales will still convert the support force into kilograms. However, 
this reading in kilograms will not be equal to your mass, as the support 
force wasn’t the same size as your weight.
Scales measure 
the support force.
Scales support 
force, 584 N
Weight, 784 N
Rings support 
force, 200 N
ONLY draw the 
person - don’t 
draw the scales 
or the earth or 
anything else.
450    Chapter 11
support force

b. Newton’s Second Law, Fnet = ma, says that an object 
accelerates if all of the forces acting on it add up to a 
non-zero net force. The person on the machine accelerates 
downwards at a rate of 2.0 m/s2. Use these facts to derive 
an equation for the support force from the scales.
Now you can debunk the machine!
You’ve worked out that the scales measure the support force 
- and that if the support force is less than your weight, the 
reading on the scales will be less than your mass.
One of the tools you’ve used to do this is a free body 
diagram. This is just another name for a sketch of an 
object showing all of the forces acting on it, and it’s a very 
useful way of analyzing forces.
A free body diagram 
shows an object plus 
all of the forces acting 
on it, and nothing else.
Speaking of analysis, the FakeBusters team think 
they’ve made a breakthrough! They’ve looked 
at the advertisement and worked out that the 
machine is accelerating downwards at a rate of 
2.0 m/s2 while the low reading is being taken.
You can use this fact to demonstrate why the 
WeightBotchers machine gives false readings.
Support 
force from 
scales.
Support 
force from 
rings.
Weight = mg
c. The scales will give a reading in kg. 
What will this reading be?
a. Draw a free body diagram 
for the person, mass m, on the 
WeightBotchers machine, inside the 
box to the right.
(There’s no need to include the values 
of forces you’ve not calculated yet, 
just words to describe what they are.)
d. Explain why the reading on the scales is lower 
than it would be if the scales were stationary.
A free body 
diagram only shows 
one object. So only 
draw the person 
- not the scales or 
the machine.
This is a 
sketch.
This is a free 
body diagram. 
it’s different 
from the 
sketch because 
it only shows 
ONE object.
Your answer 
won’t be a 
pure number. It 
will still have 
m, the mass of 
the person, in 
it. For example 
0.5 m kg 
means that 
the scales will 
give a reading 
that’s half the 
person’s mass.
Be careful not to get the variable used to represent mass and the unit of meters 
mixed up. They are both represented by the letter ‘m’ (but in different contexts).
Hint: The scales assume that 
they are measuring the force mg 
and convert that to kilograms.
you are here 4    451
weight and the normal force

b. Newton’s Second Law, Fnet = ma, says that an object 
accelerates if all of the forces acting on it add up to a 
non-zero net force. The person on the machine accelerates 
downwards at a rate of 2.0 m/s2. Use these facts to derive 
an equation for the support force from the scales.
Support 
force
Weight 
= mg
Make down the positive direction.
Fnet  =  ma
mg - FS  =  2.0 m
FS  =  mg - 2.0 m
c. The scales will give a reading in kg. 
What will this reading be?
Scales assume that measured F= mg, so 
divide support force by g to get mass in kg.
mg - 2.0 m
g
Reading  =
Reading  =   m - 2.0 m
g
Reading  =   0.80 m kg  (2 sd)
=  m - 0.204 m
a. Draw a free body diagram for the 
person, mass m, on the WeightBotchers 
machine, inside the box to the right.
(There’s no need to include the values 
of forces you’ve not calculated yet, just 
words to describe what they are.)
d. Explain why the reading on the scales is lower 
than it would be if the scales were stationary.
As the person is accelerating downwards, there 
must be a net downwards force. This means 
that the support force (what the scales 
measure) is less than the person’s weight.
The machine reduces the support force
The WeightBotchers machine ‘works’ because scales 
measure the support force that the scales exert on 
the person that stands on them. If the support force 
is less than your weight, then the reading on the 
scales is also less then your weight.
The machine accelerates you downwards. This 
means that there must be a net force acting on you 
to produce the acceleration, as Fnet = ma. The only 
force acting downwards on you is your weight, and 
the only force acting upwards is the support force.
So if you’re accelerating downwards, the support 
force must be less than your weight and the scales 
will in turn have a lower reading - that’s how 
WeightBotchers are doing it.
Fs, Support 
force from 
scales.
Add together force 
vectors by lining them 
up ‘nose to tail’ to 
calculate net force.
Support force is 
less than weight.
Weight = mg
The net force is the 
weight and the support 
force added together.
Force is a vector, 
so you need to get 
the signs right.
Start with 
Newton’s 2nd Law, 
then substitute in.
We chose this symbol 
for support force.
This is like 
(1 - 0.204) m
Reading  =   m - 2.0 m
9.8
The scales are only 
partially supporting 
the person.
Fs
Vector arrows show 
the directions of 
the forces.
mg
Fnet = mg - Fs
When you write the 
vectors as part of an 
equation, you need to 
put the signs in to 
indicate the direction.
452    Chapter 11
reduce the support force

Q: So the scales don’t measure my 
mass ... and they don’t even measure my 
weight?!
A: The scales measure the force that the 
spring is exerting on you, which we’ve called 
the support force here. They calculate the 
support force from the change in the length 
of the spring.
Q: So how is it possible for the scales 
to measure a support force that’s less 
than my weight?
A: If the scales are only partially 
supporting you (for example, if you’re 
partially pulling yourself up using rings, or 
you have one foot on the scales and one foot 
on the floor) then they will provide only part 
of the supporting force. 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: So if I’m being supported by more 
than one thing, all of the supporting 
forces will add up to my weight?
A: If you’re not being accelerated then 
yes, the supporting forces will add up to your 
weight because the net force on you is zero.
Q: Why does being accelerated 
change the supporting force?
A: Good question! But don’t think of an 
acceleration ‘causing’ or ‘changing’ a force. 
It’s the other way around - a non-zero net 
force causes an acceleration. 
 
If you’re accelerating, there must be a non-
zero net force on you, because Fnet = ma. If 
you’re accelerating downwards, your weight 
(which points down) must be greater than 
the supporting force (which points up) to 
have a net downwards force that causes 
your acceleration. 
Q: What would happen if the upwards 
force was larger than my weight? Like if I 
sat on a rocket or something?
A: Then there’d be a net force upwards, 
so you would accelerate upwards.
Q: I’ve a question about free body 
diagrams. Why do the force vector arrows 
always point away from the object, even 
when some of them act from underneath 
(like the support force from scales does)?
A: If you’re drawing a free body diagram 
with several different forces on it, this 
convention helps you to see at a glance 
which directions forces are operating in. 
An arrow above the object must be a force 
acting upwards, and so on.
Q: Now I’ve debunked the 
WeightBotchers machine, do I get to go 
on television?
A: Well ...
Hey ... not so fast! I thought we said 
before that forces come in pairs that 
are the same size - that’s Newton’s 3rd 
Law. But the forces on the free body 
diagram aren’t the same size.
The forces in a Newton’s 3rd Law pair 
act on different objects.
A free body diagram has only one object in it, and 
shows only the forces experienced by that object. For 
example, your free body diagram might show your 
weight and a support force.
Newton’s 3rd Law says that forces come in pairs - and 
that each force in a pair acts on different objects. So 
if the earth exerts a gravitational force on you, you 
exert an equal and opposite gravitational force on it. 
And if the scales are exerting a support force on you (by 
virtue of you and the scales being in contact), you’re 
exerting an equal and opposite contact force on them.
The forces in a 
Newton’s 3rd Law pair 
act on different objects.
These forces both act 
on the same object. So 
they’re not a Newton’s 
3rd Law pair.
Support 
force from 
scales.
Weight = mg
you are here 4    453
weight and the normal force

If you draw a free body diagram of a 
person standing on scales, there are two 
forces acting on the person - their weight 
and the support force.
Although these forces are equal in size 
and in opposite directions, they are not a 
Newton’s 3rd Law pair of forces, as both 
forces act on the same object.
This is NOT a 
Newton’s 3rd Law 
pair of forces, as 
both forces act on 
the same object.
Support 
force from 
scales.
Weight = mg
m1
m2
v1
v2
p1
p2
*BOING*
F2 on 1
F1 on 2
Force pairs help you check your work
You need to make sure you worked out the forces involved 
in the WeightBotchers machine correctly before you present 
your findings to FakeBusters. And the best way to do that is 
to make sure that each force you’ve drawn on your free body 
diagram is part of a Newton’s 3rd Law pair of forces.
You originally met Newton’s 3rd Law back in 
chapter 10 when you were dealing with pushing 
two objects apart. In order for momentum 
to be conserved (an experimental result that 
you worked out), each object must experience 
the same size of force but in opposite 
directions when they interact.
If the objects are “1” and “2” the pair of forces is:
The force that object 1 exerts on object 2. 
The force that object 2 exerts on object 1.
This is NOT a free body diagram, as it 
has more than one object in it and doesn’t 
show all of the forces (the weight and 
supporting force are both missing).
To conserve momentum, each vehicle must experience 
the same size of force in opposite directions.
The force that pairs with 
your weight is the gravitational 
force that you exert on the earth - 
as the stuff you’re made from and 
the stuff that the earth’s made 
from mutually attract each other.
This pair of forces will also exist 
at a distance, even if you’re not in 
contact with the earth.
The force that pairs with 
the support force from the 
scales is the contact force 
that you exert on the scales.
Neither the support force 
that the scales exert on you 
nor the contact force that 
you exert on the scales would 
exist if there was no contact.
Support 
force from 
scales.
Contact 
force you 
exert on 
scales.
Weight = m g 
(Gravitational 
force)
Gravitational 
force
This is a Newton’s 3rd Law 
pair of forces, as they act 
on different objects.
This is a Newton’s 3rd 
Law pair of forces.
You can check your work by 
seeing if each of the forces 
you’ve drawn on the free 
body diagram is part of a 
Newton’s 3rd Law pair.
To do this, you need to work 
out what the other object in 
each pair would be:
This is a Newton’s 3rd Law 
pair of forces, as they act 
on different objects.
454    Chapter 11
force pairs

Your weight is a force that acts on you.
Your weight is a force that acts on you. It must act 
on you or else you wouldn’t fall through the air as a 
result of it. It points downwards. If it helps, think of 
it as “gravitational attraction.”
The contact force between you and the scales acts on 
the scales. It also points downwards - but it acts on 
the scales, not on you.
You can only add together forces if they act on the 
same object. As these two downwards forces act on 
different objects, you can’t add them together.
But that doesn’t make sense! There are two arrows 
pointing downwards, your weight and this ‘contact force’, 
so when you add them together, doesn’t that mean you’re pushing 
on the ground with double your weight?!
It’s only 
meaningful to 
add together 
forces that 
act on the 
same object.
There’s a distinction between 
contact forces and non-contact forces
Gravitational forces are non-contact forces, which 
can act at a distance. The earth exerts a gravitational 
force on you  whether you’re in contact with it or not.
Contact forces only exist if there is contact between 
two objects. If you stand on the ground you’re not 
accelerating. The net force on you is zero, so your 
weight and the support force that the ground exerts on 
you must add to zero.
Newton’s 3rd Law says that if the ground is exerting a 
contact force to support you, then you must be exerting 
a contact force on it. This makes sense - you can only 
squash a bug by stepping on it, which involves contact. 
This can’t be done by the force of your weight - as this 
is a force that acts on you, not on the bug. But it can be 
done by the contact force that pairs with the support 
force that the ground exerts on you.
It seems that the support force only exists 
when you’re in contact with the scales?
The forces in a 
Newton’s 3rd 
Law pair must 
both be of the 
same type (for 
example, both 
contact or both 
non-contact).
you are here 4    455
weight and the normal force

Q: Why is it useful to think about 
Newton’s 3rd Law pairs of forces?
A: When you draw a free body diagram, 
you’re drawing only the forces that act on a 
single object. Each of these forces must be 
one of a pair - as when two objects interact, 
each of them experiences an equal-sized 
force in opposite directions.
Q: So when I draw a free body 
diagram, I should think about what the 
other force in the pair is?
A: That’s right - and you should also 
think about which two objects are involved 
in the interaction. This prevents you from 
accidentally drawing two forces on your free 
body diagram that act on different objects.
Q: Where does this idea of a ‘contact 
force’ with the ground come from? I 
thought that the Newton’s 3rd Law  force 
pair was my weight and the support force.
A: Both your weight and the support force 
that the scales exert are forces that act on 
you. They can’t be a Newton’s 3rd Law force 
pair, as they don’t act on different objects.
Q: Is there any other way for me to 
work out what forces might be in a pair?
A: The forces in a Newton’s 3rd Law force 
pair must be of the same type. So either they 
both have to be contact forces, or they both 
have to be non-contact forces.
Q: Why doesn’t the contact force I 
exert on the earth (via the scales, which 
are attached to the earth) lead to the earth 
accelerating? Don’t I exert a net force on 
the earth?
A: As well as the contact force you exert 
on the earth, you also exert an attractive 
gravitational force on it, in the opposite 
direction. So the net force on the earth as 
a result of you being there is zero, and the 
earth doesn’t accelerate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: What if I wasn’t standing on the 
earth? Then the gravitational force that 
the earth experiences as a result of me 
being there must accelerate the earth 
towards me, right?
A: That’s completely spot on, and a great 
observation. When you’re not standing on 
the earth, there’s a gravitational force pair. 
The gravitational force on you (your weight) 
accelerates you towards the earth. And the 
gravitational force on the earth accelerates it 
towards you.
Q: So why don’t I notice the earth 
accelerating towards me?
A: Newton’s 2nd Law says that F = ma. 
Therefore, a = Fm . As the earth has a much 
much larger mass than you, its acceleration 
is very small compared to yours. So it’s not 
something you’d notice. 
Thinking about 
Newton’s 3rd Law 
pairs of forces 
helps you make 
sure your free body 
diagram is correct.
You debunked WeightBotchers!
Your free body diagram of the person on the scales is 
correct. The support force exerted by the scales on the 
person is less than the person’s weight.
This means that the net force on the person is not 
zero. A non-zero net force produces an acceleration: 
Fnet = ma. The net force leads to the person 
accelerating downwards, as observed on the advert.
The scales measure the support force, and convert it 
to a mass by assuming that F = weight = mg. If the 
support force is less than the person’s weight, then the 
scales read a smaller number of kilograms than they 
would if there was no acceleration.
FakeBusters are soon back in touch to congratulate you, 
and arrange for your segment of the show to be filmed.
Busted!
456    Chapter 11
debunk weighbotchers

Lose weight 
INSTANTLY!! 
(for only $499)
Before
After!
But WeightBotchers are back!
We spoke too soon. WeightBotchers are back with a new machine 
- though only the magazine ads for it have appeared so far.
This time, the person on the scales is sliding down a hill. And 
miraculously (or so it seems), the scales read lower than they did 
when the person was standing on flat ground.
FakeBusters wants your help busting the new scam with science 
once again.
It’s clear from the WeightBotchers ad that 
when the person’s going down the slope, the 
scales read less than they did on the flat ground 
at the top of the slope.
So - what’s the trick this time?!
How do you think the new machine works?
Memo
From: FakeBusters
Re: WeightBotchers
Great work busting WeightBotchers...
but they’re back. 
Could you investigate WeightBotchers’ 
latest machine, and work out how it 
produces the results it does? We’ve 
enclosed a copy of their ad. If you can 
bust the fake we’d love to have you 
back on the show.
Here, the reading on the scales is the same 
number of kilograms as it would usually be.
Here, the reading 
on the scales is 
lower than it was 
at the top of 
the machine!
Person is sliding 
down the slope 
on the scales.
Slope is like an air hockey 
table, so there’s practically 
zero friction.
you are here 4    457
weight and the normal force

A surface can only exert a force 
perpendicular (or normal) to it
If you’re standing on a horizontal surface, you don’t accelerate. 
This is because the surface exerts a vertical contact force on you, 
perpendicular to the surface.
Up until now, we’ve been calling a perpendicular contact force exerted 
by a surface a “support force”. But a more accurate name for the 
perpendicular contact force exerted by a surface is the normal force.
This is because whatever angle a surface is at, the surface can only exert 
a contact force perpendicular, or normal, to itself. Depending on the 
situation, the normal force may not be supporting an object’s weight.
Normal 
force
Weight
Horizontal surface.
Vertical 
contact 
force.
If you try to “stand” on a 
vertical surface (like a wall), 
you just fall straight down, as 
the vertical surface can only 
produce a horizontal normal 
force. The vertical surface 
is unable to provide any 
support for your weight.
Weight
A vertical surface can’t 
exert a vertical force.
The wall will only exert 
a horizontal normal 
force on you if you 
exert a horizontal 
contact force on it.
If you throw a ball horizontally 
at a vertical wall, it experiences a 
horizontal normal force from 
the wall that makes it bounce.
The ball also experiences the 
force of its weight, but as the 
ball’s weight is parallel to the 
wall, it doesn’t affect the size of 
the normal force.
Normal 
force
Ball thrown 
horizontally 
at wall.
The ball bounces because 
of the normal force 
exerted on it by the wall.
Weight
The ball’s weight 
is parallel to the 
surface,.
The normal force that a surface exerts on you is the same size 
as the perpendicular force you are exert on it, but in the 
opposite direction. If you are stationary on a horizontal surface, 
the normal force is equal to your weight. If you push a wall 
horizontally with a force of 50 N, the normal force is 50 N.
The normal 
force that a 
surface exerts 
on you is the 
same size as the 
perpendicular 
force that you 
exert on the 
surface, but 
in the opposite 
direction.
458    Chapter 11
the normal force

Jim: Yeah, the spring in the scales that makes the measurement can 
only be compressed perpendicular - or normal - to the slope.
Joe: But how do we calculate the normal force this time? Last 
time we got data from the TV ad, but there’s only a magazine ad 
this time. We need to do this before the deadline for FakeBusters.
Frank: I guess we can measure the angle of the slope...
Jim: How does the angle help us to calculate the normal force?
Joe:  It says here: “the normal force that a surface exerts on you 
is the same size as the perpendicular force that you exert on the 
surface, but in the opposite direction.”
Frank: I think that means we need to think in terms of forces that 
are parallel and perpendicular to the slope.
Jim: Yeah, I’m sure the net force and the equation Fnet = ma will 
come in to it somewhere. Though I’m not really sure where yet...
So I guess the scales in 
the new machine measure 
the normal force.
a. If a car accelerates horizontally, parallel 
to the ground, does its acceleration have a 
component perpendicular to the surface?
b. If a person on a sloped surface  accelerates down 
the slope, parallel to it, does their acceleration have 
a component perpendicular to the surface?
c. If an object has zero acceleration, what can 
you say about the net force acting on it?
d. If one component of an object’s acceleration 
is zero, what can you say about the net force 
acting in the direction of that component?
e. Do your answers to parts a-d give you any ideas about how to deal with the person on the 
WeightBotchers machine accelerating down the slope?
Hint: An object’s acceleration must 
be in the same direction as the net 
force acting on the object, since 
Fnet = ma is a vector equation.
you are here 4    459
weight and the normal force

a. If a car accelerates horizontally, parallel 
to the ground, does its acceleration have a 
perpendicular component?
b. If a person on a sloped surface  accelerates down 
the slope, parallel to it, does their acceleration have 
a component perpendicular to the surface?
c. If an object has zero acceleration, what can 
you say about the net force acting on it?
d. If one component of an object’s acceleration 
is zero, what can you say about the net force 
acting in the direction of that component?
e. Do your answers to parts a-d give you any ideas about how to deal with the person on the 
WeightBotchers machine accelerating down the slope?
No, it only has a parallel (horizontal) component 
as it is accelerating parallel to the surface.
No, they only have a parallel component, as 
they are accelerating parallel to the surface.
F = ma so if the acceleration is zero then 
the net force is zero (even though there 
may be several forces acting on the object).
If the component of the acceleration in that 
direction is zero, then the net force in that 
direction must be zero.
The person is accelerating parallel to the slope but not perpendicular to the slope. If we think 
about acceleration and force components parallel and perpendicular to the slope, it might work 
out well, because the perpendicular components will all be zero.
Q: I just want to get some terminology 
straight. Are the normal force and a 
support force the same thing or not?
A: The normal force is the contact force 
that a surface exerts on you. The normal 
force always acts perpendicular to the 
surface, and depends on the force you are 
exerting perpendicular to the surface 
 
What we were calling the support force 
earlier on was a specific example of a 
normal force. We called it a “support force” 
because it was supporting your weight, 
which acts perpendicular to a horizontal 
surface. “Support force” was a good mental 
image to have when you were getting to 
grips with how scales work.
Q: Why are we now using the term 
‘normal force’ instead of ‘support force’?
A: Now, the surface isn’t horizontal any 
more - it’s at an angle. The normal force 
always acts perpendicular to the surface. 
So the normal force doesn’t point in the 
opposite direction from your weight any 
more - it’s at an angle because the surface 
is at an angle. 
 
You can’t think of the normal force as 
“supporting” your weight in quite the same 
way, as the weight vector and normal force 
vector are not parallel to each other. So 
it’s best to use the term “normal force” 
rather than “support force” to avoid getting 
confused. 
Q: We’ve always talked about 
horizontal and vertical vector 
components in earlier chapters. Why 
are we talking about parallel and 
perpendicular vector components now?
A: When you’re dealing with projectiles, 
the net force that causes the projectile to 
accelerate at 9.8 m/s2 is the gravitational 
force. The net force acts vertically, so the 
projectile accelerates vertically. There’s zero 
net force in the horizontal direction. 
 
When you’re dealing with an object 
accelerating down a slope, the net force acts 
down the slope, so the object accelerates 
down the slope. The net force acts parallel 
to the slope. There’s zero net force in the 
perpendicular direction.
Hint: An object’s acceleration must 
be in the same direction as the net 
force acting on the object, since 
Fnet = ma is a vector equation.
460    Chapter 11
solution

The only two forces with components perpendicular 
to the slope are the weight and the normal force. 
Therefore, the perpendicular component of the 
weight and the normal force must add up to zero, so 
that the net force is parallel to the slope.
When you slide downhill, there’s 
zero perpendicular acceleration
The person on the slope has two forces acting on them: 
their weight and the normal force from the slope.
The NORMAL force, FN, 
is always perpendicular 
to a surface.
The NET force, Fnet, always 
points in the same direction 
as the acceleration it causes.
The person slides down the slope, accelerating 
parallel to the slope. This means that the net force 
must act parallel to the slope, because Fnet = ma.
This means that the components of the forces 
perpendicular to the slope must add up to zero.
No acceleration 
in perpendicular 
direction, so these 
two vectors must 
have equal sizes. 
and add to zero.
Parallel component 
of weight is net 
force that causes 
acceleration
Weight = mg
Normal 
force
θ
θ
Perpendicular 
component
Parallel 
component
Parallel and perpendicular 
force components drawn in
Weight = mg
Normal 
force
θ
Person accelerates 
in this direction, 
parallel to the slope
Acceleration must be caused by net 
force, since Fnet = ma. So net force 
must be parallel to the slope.
There are two forces 
on the person’s free 
body diagram: the 
weight and the 
normal force.
We’ve greyed in 
the slope and 
scales so you can 
see the angle θ.
Free body diagram
you are here 4    461
weight and the normal force

This angle 
and  β add 
up to 90° 
So this angle 
must be θ.
Component is 
perpendicular to 
the slope, so this 
is a right angle.
Weight = mg
Perpendicular 
component
Parallel 
component
θ and β add 
up to 90°.
θ and  add 
up to 90°
The force vector angles are 
related to the angle of your slope.
Your slope is like a right-angled triangle. 
You can label its angles by calling the angle it 
makes with the ground θ and its other angle β. 
You know that the angles in a triangle add up 
to 180°, and as there’s already a right angle in 
there (90°), θ and β must add up to 90°.
I guess we can work out the angles 
of the force vectors from the other 
angles nearby, like we did before?
If a problem 
involves parallel 
components, 
perpendicular 
components and 
angles, look for 
similar triangles.
You did this back in chapter 9, 
with right-angled triangles
Your weight vector components also form 
a right-angled triangle. Because two of the 
sides of the weight vector triangle are parallel 
and perpendicular to the slope, the slope 
triangle and weight vector triangle are similar 
triangles. So the angle θ from your slope will 
also appear in your weight vector component 
triangle.
462    Chapter 11
look for similar triangles

The WeightBotchers ad shows an “instant 5% reduction” when the person goes down the slope. 
You’re going to calculate the angle the slope would need to be to produce this reduction. Then the 
Fakebusters team will compare your theoretical calculation with the angle of the slope in the ad.
The reading on the scales is the normal force, which is the same 
size as the perpendicular component of your weight. This is 
because the normal force always acts perpendicular to a surface, and 
always exerts the same size of force on you as you exert on the surface.
The parallel component of your weight is is the net force that 
leads to you accelerating down the slope.
Time to get on TV ...
Use parallel and perpendicular force 
components to deal with a slope
Parallel component 
provides net force.
Perpendicular 
component is 
same size as 
normal force.
Similar triangles 
mean that these 
angles are the 
same size.
Weight = mg
Normal 
force
θ
θ
Perpendicular 
component
Parallel 
component
a. Draw a big vector triangle showing 
the weight and its  components of the 
weight parallel and perpendicular to 
the slope, so you can write things on it.
b. If the WeightBotchers scales show a 5% reduction in someone’s 
mass, what’s the angle of the slope? (Assume that the person has 
mass m, and that the gravitational field strength is g.)
c. What is the person’s acceleration down the slope?
Hint: a 5% 
reduction 
means that 
the normal 
force is 95% 
of the person’s 
actual weight.
Hint: Calculate the net force 
down the slope, and use Fnet = ma
you are here 4    463
weight and the normal force

Calculate net force then use Fnet = ma to get acceleration
Using triangle to work out net force (which is opp side)
sin(θ)   = o
h
Fnet   = mg sin(18.2) 
Fnet
mg
= 
0.312 mg
Fnet   = 
0.312 mg
ma   = 
0.312 × 9.8  =  3.06 m/s2 (3 sd)
a   = 
The WeightBotchers ad shows an “instant 5% reduction” when the person goes down the slope. 
You’re going to calculate the angle the slope would need to be to produce this reduction. Then the 
Fakebusters team will compare your theoretical calculation with the angle of the slope in the ad.
a. Draw a big vector triangle showing 
the weight and its  components of the 
weight parallel and perpendicular to 
the slope, so you can write things on it.
b. If the WeightBotchers scales show a 5% reduction in someone’s 
mass, what’s the angle of the slope? (Assume that the person has 
mass m, and that the gravitational field strength is g.)
c. What is the person’s acceleration down the slope?
Hint: a 5% 
reduction 
means that 
the normal 
force is 95% 
of the person’s 
actual weight.
Perpendicular 
component is FN = 
reading on scales = 
0.95 mg
Parallel component is Fnet that 
causes acceleration down hill.
Weight = mg
o
h
a
Weight = mg.
5% reduction means that normal force = 0.95 mg
Using triangle:
cos(θ)   = a
h
0.95 mg
mg
=
=   0.95 
θ   = cos-1(0.95)   =   18.2° (3 sd)
 ‘mg’ is on the top and 
bottom of the fraction so 
it divides out and cancels.
The angle doesn’t 
depend on the 
person’s mass.
‘m’ is multiplying both sides 
of the equation, so it 
divides out and cancels.
The acceleration doesn’t 
depend on the person’s mass.
464    Chapter 11
instant reduction?

Another fake busted!
There are two forces acting on you when you stand on the 
second WeightBotchers machine - your weight and the 
normal force from the surface.
Your weight vector points straight down, but the normal 
force points perpendicular to the surface.
You accelerate down the slope, parallel to the surface. This 
means that the net force acting on you must be parallel 
to the surface, because Fnet = ma. And the perpendicular 
components of the forces must add to zero.
When you draw in the parallel and perpendicular 
components of your weight vector, you see that the parallel 
component of your weight provides the parallel net force.
The net perpendicular force on you is zero. Therefore, 
the normal force and the perpendicular component of 
your weight must add to zero. As the scales measure the 
normal force, and the normal force is only a component 
of your weight, the scales don’t register your full weight. 
The reading on the scales is lower than it would be on a 
horizontal surface.
Weight
Normal 
force
θ
1. Start with a free body diagram
θ
2. Work out the direction of the 
net force.
Net force acts 
parallel to slope.
Turn weight 
into component 
vectors.
θ
θ
3. Draw in components parallel 
and perpendicular to the net force.
Normal force 
already perpendicular 
to net force.
θ
θ
4. The components perpendicular 
to the net force must add to zero.
Components 
perpendicular 
to slope add 
to zero.
Net force is 
this component.
Lose weight 
INSTANTLY!! 
(for only $499)
Before
After!
Busted!
you are here 4    465
weight and the normal force

466
5. A hot air balloon, mass 3500 kg, travels horizontally at a 
constant speed of 2.0 m/s.
Draw a free body diagram for the balloon, clearly 
labelling all the forces acting on it.
If sandbags with a mass of 200 kg are dropped from the 
basket, draw the new free body diagram for the balloon.
What is the acceleration of the balloon after the 
sandbags are removed?
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Free body diagram” Question
Any time you have a problem that involves forces, always, 
always, ALWAYS start with a free body diagram! To do this, think of all 
the Newton’s 3rd Law pairs of forces that the object is involved in. Then draw 
in all the forces from the pairs that act ON the object (but not the forces 
that the object exerts on other things).
Remember - if the object is stationary or moving 
with a constant velocity, there’s no net force acting on it - it’s 
not accelerating. So all the forces you draw must add to zero when 
you line them up ‘nose-to-tail’. This will help you not to forget 
forces that you should include on your free body diagram.
This means that there 
is no net force acting 
on the balloon, causing 
it to accelerate.
This should immediately get 
you thinking about horizontal 
and vertical components.
If you know the mass, you might be 
able to use it to work out the net 
force (F = ma) or the momentum 
(p = mv) later on.
This means that 
you should write 
down what your 
force vector 
arrows represent 
next to them.
If there’s no net force, 
then the weight and 
the buoyant force 
must be equal.
This changes 
the weight of 
the balloon.
This will be the same 
as your old one, but 
with the new weight.
There’s now a net force, as the 
buoyant force that holds up the 
balloon is greater than the new 
weight. So you can use Fnet = ma 
to work out the acceleration.
Remember to use the new 
mass without the ballast!

467
5. A person, mass m, stands on scales that accelerate down a 
slope. The slope makes an angle θ with the ground.
Draw a free body diagram for the person, clearly labelling all 
the forces acting on them.
Calculate the normal force in terms of m, θ and g, the 
gravitational field strength.
What mass do the scales say the person is?
If the person accelerates down the slope at 3 m/s2, what is θ?
If there was no slope and the person was just falling, what 
would the reading on the scales be?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Question Clinic: The “Thing on a slope” Question
Sometimes, you’ll be asked a question about an object on a 
slope. You should always start with a sketch - draw the slope, and write on 
all the information you know. If the question is about forces and acceleration, 
then make sure you draw a free body diagram as well. Look carefully to see if 
the wording of the question implies that there’s a net force
This means that 
there is a net force 
acting on the person.
This gives you the 
direction of the 
net force - parallel 
to the slope.
These are the values 
you know at the 
start of the problem.
A simple free body 
diagram shouldn’t 
contain components - 
just the actual forces.
Use F = ma 
and components.
Draw a new free body diagram. 
There’s no normal force, so the 
scales will read zero.
Note when you’re asked for a 
mass rather than a weight.
This means that you’re 
using the variables m, 
θ and g rather than 
numerical values, which 
tests your understanding 
of the physics more.
Work with components 
perpendicular to the slope.
It’s very important to resolve your force vectors into 
components parallel and perpendicular to the slope - especially the 
object’s weight vector. This is because an object moving down a slope 
experiences no net force perpendicular to the slope. So drawing in the 
components of your forces helps you calculate the correct value for the 
normal force, and provides a way of working out the net force as well.

Units
Falling
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Force
Special points
Experiment
Time
Component
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Displacement
Trigonometry
Volume
Velocity
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Does it SUCK?
Area
Mass
Weight
The gravitational force exerted on an object by a much 
larger object, such as the earth. Weight = mg, where m is 
the mass and g is the gravitational field strength.
Free body 
diagram
A diagram showing only one object, and all of the 
forces acting on it.
Normal force
The contact force exerted by a surface on an 
object. This force is always perpendicular (or 
normal) to the surface
468    Chapter 11
the physics world
Weight
Learning to 
deal with weighty 
matters

Newton’s 3rd Law 
pairs of forces
Newton’s 3rd Law pairs of forces exist 
where two objects interact.
Both forces in the pair must be of the 
same type (contact or non-contact).
Each force in the pair must act on a 
different object.
Each force in the pair will have the 
same size, but the forces will be in 
opposite directions.
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 11 under your belt and 
added some problem-solving concepts to 
your toolbox.
CHAPTER 11
Free body diagram
For any problem that involves 
forces, you should always draw 
a free body diagram, giving the 
size and direction of every force 
acting on a single body.
Draw your force vector arrows 
pointing away from the object.
Net force
You can work out the net force 
on an object by adding together 
all the force vectors from its 
free body diagram by lining them 
up “nose to tail.”
If the net force is zero, the 
object isn’t accelerating.
If there is a non-zero net force, 
the object accelerates in the 
direction of the net force.
Newton’s 2nd law
A net force applied for a time always 
leads to the same change in momentum:
 
If the mass of an object is constant, 
this can simplify to:
Fnet t  =
(mv)
Fnet = ma
Object on a slope
If you have an object on a 
slope, the normal force and the 
perpendicular component of the 
weight are equal sizes.
The net force and the parallel 
component of the weight are 
equal sizes.
Choosing component 
directions
If you have a problem where the 
net force is zero in one particular 
direction (e.g. perpendicular to 
a slope) then choose component 
vectors parallel and perpendicular 
to this direction to make your 
calculations easier.
you are here 4    469
weight and the normal force


this is a new chapter    471
I don’t really care if you can 
draw me a free body diagram 
showing the weight and the 
normal force - just get on and 
do some ironing, man!
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
12
Getting on with it
It’s no good memorizing lots of theory if you can’t apply it.   
You already know about equations of motion, component vectors, momentum 
conservation, free body diagrams and Newton’s Laws. In this chapter, you’ll learn 
how to fit all of these things together and apply them to solve a much wider range 
of physics problems. Often, you’ll spot when a problem is like something you’ve 
seen before. You’ll also add more realism by learning to deal with friction - and will 
see why it’s sometimes appropriate to act on impulse.

You can help, right? 
That trip to the X-Force 
Games will be sweet! I 
need a vacation!
It’s ... SimFootball!
You’ve been contacted by the SimFootball team, who 
need your help with some of the physics in their 
video game. If you can help them figure out why the 
characters in the game aren’t behaving like they would 
in real life - you’ll get an all expenses paid trip to the 
X-Force Games.!
Memo
From: SimFootball
Re: Physics in our new game
We saw you on FakeBusters the other night, and 
thought you might like to be a consultant on our 
latest game.
We already have the graphics in place, but need 
advice on the physics engine for many of the 
components of the game - passing, tackling, tire 
drag (in training mode)  and kicking. You will 
work closely with one of our programming team.
If you can help us get this all together in time, 
we’ll send you to the X-Force Games...all 
expenses paid.
472    Chapter 12
simfootball

you are here 4    473
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
The SimFootball programming team have come up with a list of things they need physics advice on for 
their game. Your first job is to outline the physics you think you’ll need to use.
So start with a sketch of each item to reduce it to its ‘bare bones’ and see if it’s like something you 
already know how to do. Label things like velocity, acceleration, force etc where appropriate. And give a 
brief outline of the kind of physics you might use to solve each problem.
a. Passing - Working out the path of a ball that 
has been thrown through the air at a known angle 
with a known initial velocity.
b. Tackling - Players with known masses each 
running with a certain velocity  collide with each 
other and grab on.
c. Tire drag - In training mode, a player with a 
rope around his waist runs, dragging a tire along 
the ground.
d. Kicking - Moving foot kicks stationary ball with 
a force, and is in contact for a known period of 
time.
	
	
     Don’t worry if you don’t know 
much about football.
Each of the game elements are explained in the 
‘Sharpen your pencil’. You’re only going to be 
working with the physics, so it doesn’t matter if 
you don’t know much about the rules.
This is American 
football, not soccer. 
But whatever you 
call it, don’t worry!

If you’re given a story, start with 
a sketch to work out what physics 
the story involves. What’s it LIKE?
a. Passing - Working out the path of a ball that 
has been thrown through the air at a known angle 
with a known initial velocity.
b. Tackling - Players with known masses each 
running with a certain velocity  collide with each 
other and grab on.
c. Tire drag - In training mode, a player with a 
rope around his waist runs, dragging a tire along 
the ground with a constant velocity.
d. Kicking - Moving foot kicks stationary ball with a 
force, and is in contact for a known period of time.
The SimFootball programming team have come up with a list of things they need physics advice on for 
their game. Your first job is to outline the physics you think you’ll need to use.
So start with a sketch of each item to reduce it to its ‘bare bones’ and see if it’s like something you 
already know how to do. Label things like velocity, acceleration, force etc where appropriate. And give a 
brief outline of the kind of physics you might use to solve each problem.
Foot and ball both 
have a mass and a 
velocity, and again 
momentum must be 
conserved.
m2
This looks like a 
projectile fired 
through the air at an 
angle. Use equations 
of motion and treat 
horizontal and vertical 
components separately.
a = -9.8 m/s2
 v0
 v0h
 v0v
m2
m1
Players both have mass 
and velocity, so both 
have momentum before 
collision.
Momentum is conserved 
so it must be the same 
before and after.
v1
v2
m1
Before
After
m1 m2
v = ?
t = contact time
Force of 
foot on ball.
Force of ball 
on foot.
The tire is being 
pulled at an angle, 
so you can maybe 
make a right-
angled triangle 
and use component 
vectors of forces 
to work this out.
You don’t know exactly how to 
do some of these problems yet, 
but don’t worry - you’ve already 
got off to a great start!
If two objects interact, look out 
for being able to use momentum 
conservation or a form of 
Newton’s 2nd Law (either F = ma 
or F∆t = ∆p) as both objects 
experience the same size of force.
474    Chapter 12
start with a sketch

you are here 4    475
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
Two football players hit each other head on. One has a mass of 95.0 kg and is running from left to right at 
8.50 m/s. The other has a mass of 120.0 kg and is running from right to left at 3.80 m/s
If the players lock together in the tackle, what velocity do they move with in the split second after the tackle?
Jim: Yeah, but what about tackling? The players usually hit head 
on and grab on to each other. In the game we know their masses 
and velocities before the tackle. Ow!!! What are you doing?!
Joe: Just being a part of it! Looks like if I’m running faster when I 
tackle you, we move faster afterwards than when I run slowly.
Frank: And if your mass was larger, Jim would have gone flying!
Joe: The total momentum, mass × velocity, will be the same 
before and after - right?
Jim: I’m glad we’re back to math now! Yeah, the game would need 
to move the players with the correct velocity after the tackle. We 
know the mass and velocity of each player before the tackle, so 
using momentum conservation sounds about right.
We can already 
handle passing using 
equations of motion!
Hint: If the 
players lock 
together, they 
move as one 
mass after 
the tackle

Two football players hit each other head on. One has a mass of 95.0 kg and is running from left to right at 
8.50 m/s. The other has a mass of 120.0 kg and is running from right to left at 3.80 m/s
If the players lock together in the tackle, what velocity do they move with in the split second after the tackle?
Before:
After:
v2 = -3.8 m/s
v1 = 8.5 m/s
m2 = 120.0 kg
m1 = 95.0 kg
m3 = 95.0 + 120.0 = 215.0 kg
v3 = ?
Use momentum conservation to work out v3:
m1v1  +  m2v2
=
m3v3
m1v1  +  m2v2
m3
v3
=
= 95.0 × 8.50  -  120.0 × 3.80
215.0
v3
v3
=
1.63 m/s (3 sd)
total momentum before = total momentum after.
It’s safest to 
rearrange your 
equation before you 
put the values in.
Left to right is positive.
They go from left to right at 1.63 m/s (3 sd).
Momentum is conserved in a collision
Momentum is always conserved in an interaction between 
two or more objects. So when the two players collide in the 
tackle, the total momentum must be the same afterwards as it 
was before the collision.
This happens because each player experiences the same size 
of force when they collide, but in opposite directions - a 
Newton’s Third Law pair of forces. The same size of 
force always causes the same change in momentum.
So the first object has its momentum changed in the direction 
of the force acting on it - and the second object has its 
momentum changed in the direction of the force acting on it.
But the forces are equal sizes and in opposite directions. So 
the changes in momentum are equal sizes and in opposite 
directions. This means that the total momentum is the same 
both before and after the collision. The changes in momentum 
make no difference to the total when you add them together.
When two objects collide, 
think about what happens. 
Do they become one object?
Total momentum 
is conserved.
Momentum of 
each player.
Add momentum 
vectors by 
lining them up 
‘nose-to-tail’.
Players form one 
mass after collision.
p1
p2
p1
p2
ptot
ptot
m1
m2
m1+m2
Before
After
Momentum is a VECTOR so you 
need to choose which DIRECTION 
to define as positive.
476    Chapter 12
objects and collision

you are here 4    477
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
What you did is working out 
great ... but the players don’t 
always hit each other head on.
But the collision might be at an angle
The SimFootball team are really happy with what you 
told them about tackling, and write it into the game!
But they soon realize that the problem’s more involved 
than they first thought. The players don’t always collide 
head on - sometimes they hit each other at an angle. 
And they don’t know how to deal with that.
Players sometimes hit 
each other head-on.
But sometimes they run in 
at different angles before 
the tackle happens.
Q: How do you know that the two 
masses that exist before the collision 
have turned into one mass afterwards?
A: You’ll often do problems where two 
masses stick together after colliding. This 
means that they no longer move as two 
separate masses, but as one mass with a 
single velocity. Read the question carefully!
Q: Are there any buzzwords that 
indicate that the objects stick together?
A: Sometimes the term “inelastic” is used 
to indicate a situation where two objects 
collide without bouncing (in an “elastic” way).
Q: Is momentum always conserved? 
Or does that only happen when the 
objects stick together?
A: Momentum is always conserved 
in any interaction between two objects, 
whether they stick together or bounce off 
of each other. This happens because each 
object experiences an equal-sized forces in 
opposite directions as a result of the collision. 
The same size of force always leads to the 
same change in momentum. 
 
So if one object’s momentum changes 
by +10 kg.m/s and the other object’s by 
-10 kg.m/s, the total momentum is still the 
same. The +10 and -10 add to zero when 
you add the “after” momentums together.
Q: So that happens because of a 
Newton’s Third Law pair of forces?
A: Spot on! Newton’s 3rd Law and 
momentum conservation are two sides of the 
same coin.
Q: What if the football player had a 
collision with an advertising billboard 
that stopped him completely? Where’s 
the momentum conservation there?
A: The advertising billboard is attached 
to the Earth, which has a huge mass 
compared to the player. As momentum is 
mass × velocity, the Earth’s huge mass 
means that the change in its velocity is far 
too small for you to notice.
p1
p2
m1
m2
p1
p2
m1
m2

Jim: Well, isn’t momentum still conserved? We can figure out 
the total momentum before the collision just like we did before. 
This’ll be the the same as the size and direction of the players’ total 
momentum after the tackle, when they stick together.
Joe: We can do that in principle ... but in practice it’s going to 
be difficult dealing with the momentum vectors if we add them 
together to work out the total momentum at the start. Look:
Momentum vectors 
for the two players.
Momentum vectors added ‘nose-to-tail’ 
to work out total momentum.
Frank: But what’s the big deal? The vectors make a triangle - and 
we can deal with triangles!
Jim: Correction ... we can deal with right-angled triangles. But 
that triangle sure ain’t right-angled.
Frank: Oh yeah. When the players hit head on, we didn’t need to 
think about angles, because all the action was taking place along a 
straight line that ran from left to right.
Jim: But can’t we just use Pythagoras etc?
Joe: Pythagoras only works for right-angled triangles. And what we 
know about sine, cosine and tangent only works for right-angled 
triangles. I guess we could try to work out something that works for 
other triangles, but that sounds waaay hard.
Frank: Hmmm, a triangle with no right-angles like the one we’re 
stuck with sure is awkward.
Jim: I wonder if we could somehow flip things around so that there 
are some right-angled triangles ..
Total momentum.
p1
p2
p1
p2
ptot
You can’t use 
what you know of 
Pythagoras, sine, 
cosine or tangent 
unless your triangle 
is right-angled.
When you draw 
a sketch, make 
sure you think 
about angles.
How are we gonna to figure out what 
happens if they hit each other at an angle 
instead of head on like before?
478    Chapter 12
think about angles

you are here 4    479
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
A triangle with no right angles is awkward
The main problem with this collision is that the players are running in at 
different angles. You can add together the players’ momentum vectors to 
get the total momentum before the collision by lining them up nose-to-tail, 
like we’ve done here.
Add momentum vectors for 
the players ‘nose-to-tail’.
Total 
momentum
p1
p2
p
How do you work out the size 
and direction of the total 
momentum when the triangle 
isn’t right-angled?
But the triangle formed by the players’ 
momentum vectors isn’t right-angled. This 
makes it difficult for you to calculate the total 
momentum. Pythagoras, sine, cosine and 
tangent only work with a right-angled triangle. 
A triangle with no right angles is awkward!
Wouldn't it be dreamy if we could 
somehow break down that vector triangle 
into right-angled triangles that we can work 
with. But I know it's just a fantasy… 

Use component vectors to create 
some right-angled triangles
You can redraw any vector 
as two component vectors 
at right-angles to each 
other. This is especially 
useful if you have to add 
two vectors together 
that aren’t parallel or 
perpendicular to each other.
Vectors aren’t parallel 
or perpendicular to 
each other.
1. You need to add together vectors at an angle.
p1
p2
New component vectors 
for the total momentum.
p1u/d
p2u/d
pu/d
p1l/r
p2l/r
pl/r
3. Add together each set of components.
p1u/d
p2u/d
p1l/r
p2l/r
pu/d
pl/r
p
p1
p2
4. Add new components for total momentum.
Adding the components 
gets you to the same 
place as adding together 
the two original vectors.
2. Turn each vector into components at right angles.
p1
p2
p1u/d
p2u/d
p1l/r
p2l/r
You can deal with 
right-angled triangles.
Finally, you can make 
a new right-angled 
triangle out of the 
up/down and left/right 
components of the total 
momentum, and use it 
to calculate the total 
momentum (which 
will be the same before 
and after the collision)
Now work with the components! Use 
right-angled triangles to add together the 
up/down and left/right components of 
each momentum vector separately.
This gives you the up/down and 
left/right components of the total 
momentum vector.
If your problem has 
two dimensions, think 
component vectors.
We’ve used the subscript 
‘l/r’ to mean ‘left-right 
component’.
We’ve used the subscript 
‘u/d’ to mean ‘up-down 
component’.
Total up/down 
momentum component
Total left/right 
momentum component
480    Chapter 12
right-angled triangles

you are here 4    481
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
Two players in the “SimFootball” game collide in a tackle and grab on to each other. Their masses and 
velocity vectors are shown here:
b. Draw a sketch to show the left/right and up/down components of each player’s 
momentum, and calculate the sizes of these components.
c. Calculate the size and direction of the total momentum vector using your results from part b.
a. Calculate the size of the momentum 
vector for each player.
d. What velocity do the players move with after the tackle?
v1 = 8.86 m/s
29.2°
22.4°
v2 = 2.92 m/s
m1 = 110 kg
m2 = 125 kg

Left/ right components: 851 - 337 = 514 kg.m/s right
By Pythagoras, p2  =  pl/r
2 + pu/d
2 =  5142 + 6152
p  =   5142 + 6152  =  802 kg.m/s (3 sd)
Two players in the “SimFootball” game collide in a tackle and grab on to each other. Their masses and 
velocity vectors are shown here:
b. Draw a sketch to show the left/right and up/down components of each player’s 
momentum, and calculate the sizes of these components.
c. Calculate the size and direction of the total momentum vector using your results from part b.
a. Calculate the size of the momentum 
vector for each player.
v1 = 8.86 m/s
29.2°
22.4°
v2 = 2.92 m/s
m1 = 110 kg
m2 = 125 kg
d. What velocity do the players move with after the tackle?
Up / down components: 476 + 139 = 615 kg.m/s down
Size:
Direction: Given angles all measured from the horizontal, so do this too.
pl/r = 514 kg.m/s
pu/d = 615 kg.m/s
p
θ
tan(θ)  = o
a
θ  = tan-1 615
514 =  50.1° (3 sd) from the horizontal, left to right.
m = total mass = 110 + 125 = 235 kg
p = mv
v  = p
m = 802
235 = 3.41 m/s (3 sd) at 50.1° (3 sd) from the horizontal, left to right.
p1  =  m1v1  =  110 × 8.86  = 975 kg.m/s (3 sd)
p2  =  m2v2  =  125 × 2.92  = 365 kg.m/s (3 sd)
p1u/d   = 975 sin(29.2) 
sin(29.2)   = o
h
p1u/d
975
= 
476 kg.m/s (3 sd) down
p1u/d   = 
p2u/d   = 365 sin(22.4) 
sin(22.4)   = o
h
p2u/d
365
= 
139 kg.m/s (3 sd) down
p2u/d   = 
cos(29.2)   = a
h
p1l/r
975
= 
p1l/r   = 975 cos(29.2) 
851 kg.m/s (3 sd) right
p1l/r   = 
cos(22.4)   = a
h
p2u/d
365
= 
p2l/r   = 365 cos(22.4) 
337 kg.m/s (3 sd) left
p2l/r   = 
29.2°
975
p1u/d
p1l/r
365
22.4°
p2u/d
p2l/r
482    Chapter 12
what is the momentum?

you are here 4    483
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
10
20
30
40 50 40302010
10
20
30
40 50 40302010
Q: That was a lot of math to go through with all 
the component vectors!!
A: It wasn’t any more difficult than what you’ve done 
previously. It’s just that you had to calculate a number 
of sides and angles! But  as long as you manage to 
organize your work so that you don’t get mixed up, you’re 
fine. Now you can handle component vectors and right-
angled triangles, you have superpowers that let you deal 
with two-dimensional situations.
Q: How often will I need to do a problem involving 
momentum conservation like this one?
A: You may not come across many problems exactly 
like this. But the general skill of being able to turn 
vectors at awkward angles into component vectors so 
you can add them together is one you can use again and 
again with any vectors.
Q: I was just thinking ... what happens if the 
players bounce off each other after the tackle? Then 
I’d have two momentum vectors to deal with after the 
collision!
A: Great spot! You’re right - this would be a more 
difficult problem, and you’ll need to learn about energy 
before you can solve it. You’ll come back to a similar 
scenario in a later chapter, so don’t worry about it for now.
Momentum conservation’s great 
- I just put it into the game. But now 
the players keep on sliding after the tackle. 
Sometimes they even go the whole length of the 
field before they hit something!. Is there 
anything we can do about that?
What needs to be included in 
the game to stop the players 
just sliding on for ever?
The programmer includes 2D 
momentum conservation ...
The SimFootball programmer gets to work, and 
quickly codes up what you’ve learned about 2D 
collisions using momentum conservation. Now 
the players move realistically for the split second 
after the tackle ...
... but the players keep on 
sliding for ever!
To add together two 
vectors at different 
angles, resolve the 
vectors into components 
at right-angles, then 
add together the 
components.

Friction always acts 
to OPPOSE motion. 
If an object is sliding 
along a surface, the 
frictional force on it 
acts PARALLEL to 
the surface.
In real life, the force of friction is present
Newton’s First Law says that an object will continue on at the same 
velocity unless acted on by a net force. At the moment, the SimFootball 
game isn’t finished, and the only way sliding players can be stopped is if 
they crash into the advertising billboards or a goalpost.
So at the moment, the players just continue along at the same velocity 
after the tackle until they hit something.
Frictional force and velocity 
are in opposite directions.
This block represents the 
players sliding along the ground.
If the object is stationary, its velocity is constant (zero) therefore there 
is no net horizontal force. If no other horizontal forces are present, and 
therefore no friction if there are no other horizontal forces.
 If you start to gently push a stationary object, it won’t move, as friction 
always opposes motion. But if you keep on pushing harder, you’ll 
eventually manage to exert a larger force than the frictional force, and 
the object will move.
No-one knows for sure exactly how friction works. It’s definitely a 
contact-dependent force, which you see when you try to slide one 
surface over another. Interactions between the surfaces act to oppose the 
motion until, eventually, the two surfaces end up at rest. But the exact 
nature of these interactions hasn’t yet been pinned down.
In the real world, moving objects slow down and eventually stop because 
of the force of friction (symbol Ffric). Friction only comes about when 
two surfaces are in contact with each other, and the frictional force 
always acts to oppose motion. If an object is sliding along a surface, the 
frictional force always acts parallel to the surface.
v
v
v
With no net force, the players 
continue with their current velocity.
m
m
m
v
v
v
m
m
m
m
Ffric
Ffric
Ffric
Fnet = ma, so frictional force 
causes object to decelerate.
When the object is 
stationary, there is no 
movement to oppose so 
there is no frictional force.
Frictional force is 
parallel to the surface.
484    Chapter 12
friction opposes motion

you are here 4    485
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
Jim: How are we gonna calculate that?! I don’t know where to start.
Joe: How about we think of all the things that might affect the size 
of the frictional force. We can be qualitative even if we don’t 
know how to be quantitative yet.
Frank: Well, there’s the roughness of the surface for a start. I 
think grass and astroturf will produce different results.
Jim: How about the mass of the players.
Joe: Yeah, and the velocity they’re going at when they start to slide. 
Plus some football fields slope a little - that might make a difference.
Frank: I guess we’d better have a go at being a sliding object, to 
see how each of these variables might affect the frictional force.
BE the sliding object
Your job is to be a sliding object. We’ve 
drawn an experiment here that you can 
do yourself - or you can put yourself in 
the place of the sliding object / 
player. Write down the effect you 
think each factor will have on the 
size of the frictional force and give 
reasons for your answers.
Surface.
Can be set 
to any angle
Block sliding along 
the surface.
m
v
Hinge.
θ
So we need to include 
friction in the game so 
that the players don’t 
slide on for ever.
d. Velocity of block.
c. Angle / slope of surface.
b. Mass / weight of block.
a. Materials block and surface are made from.

Q: So the amount of friction depends 
on how rough the surfaces are, right? 
Like, sandpaper on sandpaper creates 
a lot of friction, but there’s less friction 
with smooth surfaces?
A:Not quite. As anyone who’s ever worn 
through their bicycle brakes may have 
spotted, there’s actually more friction with 
two perfectly smooth surfaces (steel on 
steel) than with sandpaper, or rubber brake 
blocks on steel! Friction depends on the type 
of surface, but not necessarily on roughness.
Q: But everyone knows that when you 
oil something (i.e. make its surface more 
smooth) then there’s less friction.
A: Friction occurs when two surfaces are 
in contact with each other. Oiling introduces 
a layer in between the two surfaces, which 
increases the distance between them. 
Oiling doesn’t change the smoothness of the 
surfaces themselves.  
 
 
Q:What about something moving 
through the air? It’s not close to any 
surfaces, but it still slows down.
A: That’s mainly air resistance, which 
isn’t quite the same as friction. The force 
of friction experienced by an object sliding 
across a surface actually doesn’t depend 
on its velocity. But the resistive force 
that something moving through the air 
experiences increases when its velocity 
increases, as the faster it goes, the more 
air molecules it has to ‘push aside’ every 
second to make progress.
BE the sliding object - SOLUTION
Your job is to be a sliding object. We’ve 
drawn an experiment here that you can 
do yourself - or you can put yourself in 
the place of the sliding object / 
player. Write down the effect you 
think each factor will have on the 
size of the frictional force and give 
reasons for your answers.
Surface.
Can be set 
to any angle
Block sliding along 
the surface.
m
v
Hinge.
θ
Friction is a contact-
dependent force.
a. Materials block and surface are made from.
b. Mass / weight of block.
d. Velocity of block.
c. Angle / slope of surface.
Some surfaces will have more friction than 
others. Players slide further on grass than 
on astroturf so frictional force is smaller.
The heavier something is, the harder it is to 
slide, as it’s “pushed into” the surface. So a 
larger mass leads to a larger frictional force.
The larger the angle, the smaller the 
frictional force, because the block isn’t 
“pushed into” the surface so much.
It’s difficult to tell what effect the velocity 
has on the friction without making more 
accurate measurements.
486    Chapter 12
be the sliding object

you are here 4    487
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
It seems harder to start something moving than 
it is to keep it moving. Is that because friction’s 
different when you have a standing start?
Static friction and kinetic friction have 
different values for the same object.
Static friction is the force you need to overcome to 
get an object to start to slide across a surface. 
If you try to push a stationary object along a surface, 
the static friction force opposes what you’re trying 
to do until you push with a greater force than the 
maximum amount of static friction which can exist 
between that surface and that object.
If the parallel 
component of the 
pushing force 
and the kinetic 
friction are equal 
in size, your object 
will move with a 
constant velocity, 
since there is no 
net force.
Static friction is greater than kinetic friction between the 
same two surfaces. So you need a larger force to start 
something moving than you need to keep it moving.
m
m
m
Ffric
Ffric
Fpush
Fpush
If you’re not pushing, 
there’s no attempt at 
motion for a frictional 
force to oppose.
Fweight
Fnormal
Fweight
Fnormal
Fweight
Fnormal
If you push gently, an equal-
sized static friction force 
opposes what you want to do.
If you push harder than the 
maximum possible static friction, 
you can start the object moving.
Kinetic friction is the force you need to overcome to 
keep an object moving. If an object is already moving 
and you push with a force equal to the kinetic friction, 
the object will move with a constant velocity, since 
there is no net force. The amount of friction doesn’t 
depend on the object’s velocity.
m
Ffric
Fpush
Fweight
Fnormal
v
Zero net force 
means constant 
velocity.
There’s now a net 
force to the right.
The net force 
in the first two 
pictures is zero.
Newton’s 1st Law says 
that an object will move 
with a constant velocity 
unless there is a net 
force acting on it.

So there are grass and astro fields in SimFootball. 
We need to be able to calculate the friction for each so 
that the game knows how the players should move.
Friction depends on the types of 
surfaces that are interacting
The frictional force that a moving object (such as two football 
players sliding after a tackle) experiences depends on the nature 
of the two surfaces that are interacting. In physics, this is 
expressed by the coefficient of friction, μ. The greater the 
value of μ, the greater the amount of friction. Values of μ can 
range from around 0.05 for two teflon surfaces to around 1.7 for 
a rubber tire on a road.
For the football pitch surfaces, μ = 0.8 for astro and μ = 0.5 for 
grass. So you can see that the frictional force as the players slide 
along astroturf will be higher than the frictional force from grass.
The larger 
the coefficient 
of friction, ƫ, 
the larger the 
frictional force.
The larger the 
normal force, 
the larger the 
frictional force.
Friction depends on the normal force
The frictional force that a moving object experiences depends on 
how much the object is “pushed into” the surface. This is another 
way of saying that friction depends on the normal force that a 
surface exerts on the object. The greater the normal force, 
the greater the amount of friction.
The equation for the size of the frictional force experienced by an 
object is:
Frictional force
Normal force
Coefficient of friction
Ffric =  μFN
This is just an equation for the size of the frictional force. Ffric 
will always oppose the direction of motion (or attempted motion) 
parallel to the surface. So to get the direction of Ffric, you need to 
look at the velocity of the object (for kinetic friction) or the parallel 
component of a pushing force (for static friction).
When you know the direction of Ffric, you can use Fnet = ma 
to calculate the players’ acceleration. You can then use the 
acceleration in equations of motion to see how the players move.
μ is the Greek letter ‘mu’ 
and is pronounced ‘mew’.
This applies to size. 
The normal force is 
perpendicular and the 
frictional force is parallel.
488    Chapter 12
friction depends on...

you are here 4    489
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
The reading on the scales is the normal force, which is the same 
size as the perpendicular component of your weight. This is 
because the normal force always acts perpendicular to a surface, and 
always exerts the same size of force on you as you exert on the surface.
The parallel component of your weight is is the net force that 
leads to you accelerating down the slope.
Time to get on TV ...
Use parallel and perpendicular force 
components to deal with a slope
Parallel component 
provides net force.
Perpendicular 
component is 
same size as 
normal force.
Similar triangles 
mean that these 
angles are the 
same size.
Weight = mg
Normal 
force
θ
θ
Perpendicular 
component
Parallel 
component
Be careful when you calculate the normal force
The normal force is always perpendicular to a surface. It 
should be the last force you add to a free body diagram, as it is 
the force exerted by the surface on an object so as to make the 
net perpendicular force equal to zero.
If the object is on a slope then you’ll have to 
work out the perpendicular components of 
all the forces acting on the object. Usually, this 
will just involve the object’s weight, but it can 
sometimes involve extra forces if something else is 
pushing or pulling the object.
If there are other forces with perpendicular 
components in addition to the weight, you’ll need 
to calculate the size of the normal force that 
makes the net perpendicular force equal to zero.
If surface is horizontal and there are 
no other forces acting on the object 
then the normal force is exactly the 
same as the object’s weight.
Opposite 
direction 
to velocity
Ffric
Fweight
FN
v
Normal force must 
make perpendicular 
forces = zero.
Frictional force 
is larger than 
before, as normal 
force is larger.
Extra force pushing 
block into surface.
If there are other forces acting on 
the object (for example, a player 
may be pushed into the ground 
by another player), then you need 
to ensure that you draw on the 
normal force so as to make the net 
perpendicular force equal to zero.
Ffric
Fweight
v
Fextra
FN
FN is the same size 
as Fweight + Fextra.
The normal force 
ensures that the net 
force perpendicular 
to the surface is zero.
You already know how to 
calculate the normal force when 
an object is on a slope.
If the net perpendicular force wasn’t zero, the 
object would either crash through the surface, 
burrow into the surface or bounce off the surface.
If the surface is 
at an angle, the 
normal force is 
also at an angle, 
as it is always 
perpendicular.

Uh, are you trying to tell me that friction only 
depends on μ and FN and not on the surface area? 
Sorry, but that’s ridiculous! There must be more 
friction if there’s more contact!
Frictional force doesn’t depend on surface area!
Since friction is a force that depends on contact between two 
surfaces, it seems logical to assume that you will have a greater 
value of friction when the surface area is greater.
But think of it this way instead. If you have a flat-sided brick, 
there are three different ways you can put it on a flat surface. The 
normal force is always the same each time, since the weight of the 
brick doesn’t change. So if you maximize the contact surface area, 
you might think that the quantity of friction will increase.
The frictional force ONLY depends on the 
coefficient of friction and the normal force.
However, if you increase the surface area, you also reduce the 
pressure (force per bit of area) that the brick exerts on the surface. 
So the brick with a large contact surface area won’t ‘dig in’ to the 
surface as much as one on its end - in the same way as flat-soled 
shoes don’t ‘dig in’ to a surface as much as high heels do. 
It turns out that these two effects - increasing the surface area and 
reducing the pressure - exactly cancel each other out when it comes 
to their effect on the frictional force experienced by the brick. The 
frictional force depends only on the coefficient of friction and the 
normal force, i.e. Ffric = μFN
Normal force doesn’t 
depend on how the 
brick is sitting.
Maximum contact 
surface area
Minimum contact 
surface area
Minimum 
pressure
Maximum 
pressure.
FN
FN
FN
490    Chapter 12
frictional force

you are here 4    491
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
You’re ready to use friction in the game!
You should start any problem that involves forces with a free body 
diagram. This is even more important if friction is involved. Remember 
that friction always acts to oppose motion, so you need to think about the 
object’s velocity to get the direction of the frictional force.
Think about which direction the object is accelerating in (if any). 
If it isn’t accelerating perpendicular to the surface, then all of the 
perpendicular force components will cancel each other out so that there 
is no net force in that direction. The value of the normal force will be 
whatever makes the net perpendicular force equal to zero.
After a tackle, two players with a combined mass of 215 kg slide horizontally along the ground with an 
initial velocity of 3.70 m/s.
How long does it take for them to come to a complete stop on a. Astroturf (μ = 0.80) and b. grass (μ = 0.50)?
Hint: Use the normal force to calculate the frictional 
force. Work out the acceleration that the frictional 
force produces using Fnet = ma. Then use the acceleration 
and equations of motion to calculate the stopping time.
If a problem 
involves forces, 
start by 
drawing a free 
body diagram.
Hint: Draw a free body diagram to 
get the forces right. Draw a separate 
sketch to use with equations of motion.
Look at the pictures 
on page 489 if this 
sounds mind-boggling.

Including friction stops the 
players from sliding forever!
You explain to the programmer that 
the players sliding along a surface will 
experience a frictional force that opposes 
their current velocity, with size Ffric = μFN.
When he includes this in the game, the 
players stop sliding endlessly, and come to 
a stop like you’d expect them to in real life. 
Which is great!
This is waaay cool! X-Force 
Games, here we come - we’re 
getting there...
After a tackle, two players with a combined mass of 215 kg slide horizontally along the ground with an 
initial velocity of 3.70 m/s.
How long does it take for them to come to a complete stop on a. Astroturf (μ = 0.80) and b. grass (μ = 0.50)?
m = 215 kg
Weight = mg
FN = mg
Ffric = ?
Direction of 
velocity
Want to work out time. Use Fnet = ma to work out 
acceleration then equations of motion to get t.
Fnet  =  Ffric  =  μFN 
Fnet  = ma
a = μg
v0 = -3.7 m/s
v = 0 m/s
m = 215 kg
Right to left is positive.
v  =  v0 + at
v - v0
t  =
a
v - v0
μg
=
a  = Fnet
m
μFN
m
=
= μmg
m
=  μg
a. For astro: t  = v - v0
μg
= 0 - (-3.70)
0.80 × 9.8 =  0.47 s (2 sd)
b. For grass:
t  = v - v0
μg
= 0 - (-3.70)
0.50 × 9.8 =  0.76 s (2 sd)
Free body diagram
Equations of motion sketch
μFN  = ma
The net force is 
the frictional force.
Velocity helps you 
see direction of 
frictional force.
Choose a positive direction 
and stick with it.
492    Chapter 12
include friction

you are here 4    493
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
We used the tire’s weight to 
calculate the normal force. But the 
game doesn’t produce the same result as 
an experiment we did where we actually got a 
player to drag a tire. You can figure it out 
so we can fix it, right?
Soon, the SimFootball team have another problem that 
involves friction. In training mode, the players can run 
dragging a tire behind them.
What could be behind the game calculating 
too high a value for the friction?
The sliding players are fine - but 
the tire drag is causing problems
Rope is tied 
round the 
player’s waist
Tire is dragged 
along the ground.
The programmer’s tried working out 
the weight of the tire and making the 
normal force the same size as the tire’s 
weight to calculate the friction. But 
the computer-generated players aren’t 
behaving the way the programmer 
expects them to.
The frictional force that the game 
calculates appears to be larger than the 
frictional force actually is is in real life.

If forces act at 
angles, think about 
resolving them 
into components 
that are parallel 
and perpendicular 
to a surface.
Jim: Do we have the right value for μ, the coefficient of friction? 
And is the field totally flat?
Joe: Yeah the game’s using flat astroturf, and the experiment 
involving the real player was done on astroturf too, with no slope.
Frank: I guess we’d better do a sketch - we might have some more 
ideas about what’s going on if we can actually see this.
Jim: Ooh, the rope’s tied to the player’s waist, isn’t it? 
Joe: Yeah, the force that the player exerts on the tire via the rope 
acts at an angle.
Frank: Will that make the normal force different somehow?
Jim: I think so - the player’s kind-of pulling the tire up as well as 
along. Look at the components of the pulling force:
Joe: The rope’s supporting the tire vertically as well as pulling it 
horizontally. The normal force will be smaller than the tire’s weight.
Frank: So how do we work with that?
Jim: Well, the tire’s weight vector points downwards. The vertical 
component of the force from the rope points upwards. And the 
normal force points upwards. The tire isn’t rising or burrowing 
down - there’s no net perpendicular force. So the tire’s weight, the 
vertical force from the rope and the normal force must add to zero.
Joe: And the tire’s moving horizontally with a constant velocity, 
so the frictional force and the horizontal component of the 
force from the rope must add to zero, so that there’s zero net 
horizontal force. Or else the tire would accelerate.
So the frictional force doesn’t come out right 
when you say that the normal force is equal to the 
weight of the tire then use that to calculate the 
size of the friction with Ffric = μFN. Hmmm.
Vertical component.
Horizontal component 
of force exerted on 
tire by player via rope.
Pulling force acts in 
same direction as rope.
494    Chapter 12
parallel and perpendicular components

you are here 4    495
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
A football player has one end of a rope tied around his waist; the other end is attached to a tire. The programmer 
has done a brief experiment involving a real player and tire, and wants to calculate the force that the player 
exerts on the tire via the rope so he can use it in the game.
a. Draw a free body diagram of the tire when it is 
dragged along the ground with a constant velocity. 
Use Fr to represent the force that the player exerts on 
the tire via the rope.
b. Draw a new sketch showing the horizontal and vertical 
components of all the forces acting on the tire.
c. Use the vertical components to work out an 
equation for the normal force, FN.
d. Use the fact that the frictional force, Ffric = μFN to 
arrive at an equation that only involves the components 
of Ffric , the mass of the tire, the coefficient of friction 
and g, the gravitational field strength.
e. The tire has a mass of 10.0 kg, the rope is 2.00 m long and 
the player’s belt is 120 cm above the ground, which is astro 
with μ = 0.80.  Use your equation from part d to work out Fr, 
the force that the player exerts on the tire via the rope.
Don’t put on 
any values yet, 
just draw the 
force vector 
arrows and 
say what they 
represent.

A football player has one end of a rope tied around his waist; the other end is attached to a tire. the programmer 
has done a brief experiment involving a real player and tire, and wants to calculate the force that the player 
exerts on the tire via the rope so he can use it in the game.
a. Draw a free body diagram of the tire when it is 
dragged along the ground with a constant velocity. 
Use Fr to represent the force that the player exerts on 
the tire via the rope.
b. Draw a new sketch showing the horizontal and vertical 
components of all the forces acting on the tire.
c. Use the vertical components to work out an 
equation for the normal force, FN.
d. Use the fact that the frictional force, Ffric = μFN to 
arrive at an equation that only involves the components 
of Ffric , the mass of the tire, the coefficient of friction 
and g, the gravitational field strength.
e. The tire has a mass of 10.0 kg, the rope is 2.0 m long and 
the player’s belt is 120 cm above the ground, which is astro 
with μ = 0.80.  Use your equation from part d to work out Fr, 
the force that the player exerts on the tire via the rope.
496    Chapter 12
the tire problem
No net force so  FN + Frv - mg  =  0
Up is the positive direction.
2.0 m
1.2 m
x
Fr
Fr
Frv
Fr
2.0
1.6
μmg
0.80 × 10 × 9.8
(0.60 × 0.80) + 0.80
0.60μ + 0.80
Rope horizontal 
component, Frh
Weight = mg
Normal 
force FN
Friction 
force Ffric
Rope vertical 
component, Frv
Frh
2.0
1.2
=
Frv = 0.60 Fr
Frh
Frv
FN  =  mg - Frv
Right is the positive direction.
Force from 
rope Fr
Weight = mg
Normal 
force FN
Friction 
force Ff
Rope distance triangle 
and force triangle are 
similar triangles.
By Pythagoras, x2 + 1.22  =  2.02
x = 1.6 m
Similar 
triangles:
=
Frh = 0.80 Fr
μmg  =   Fr(0.60μ + 0.80)
Fr  =
=
Fr  =  61 N (2 sd)
There’s zero net 
horizontal force.
Constant velocity so  Frh + (-Ffric)  =  0
But also Ffric  =  μFN  =  μ(mg - Frv)
Ffric  =  Frh
μ(mg - Frv)  =  Frh
μ(mg - 0.60 Fr)  =  0.80 Fr
μ(mg - Frv)  =  Frh
Equation:
μmg - 0.60 μFr  =  0.80 Fr

you are here 4    497
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
Q: What do I need to know in order to 
calculate the force of friction?
A: The equation for the size of the 
frictional force is Ffric = μFN. So you need 
to know the coefficient of friction for the 
surfaces you have, and the normal force.
Q: How do I find out what the 
coefficient of friction is?
A: You can look it up in a book or on the 
web. And if you’re taking a test, μ will either 
be something you’re given or something 
you’re asked to work out from the values of 
various forces. 
Q: How do you get the normal force?
A: The object isn’t accelerating into the 
surface, so the perpendicular components of 
the forces acting on it must add to zero. The 
normal force will have the value that makes 
this possible
Q: I’ve noticed that an object travelling 
at a constant velocity has come up more 
than once. Is there a reason for that, and 
what’s the best way of dealing with it?
A: There are many situations where you’d 
want something to travel with a constant 
velocity. A constant velocity means that 
there’s no net force on an object (Newton’s 
1st Law) - you’ll be fine if you remember this.
Q: What if there is a frictional force 
acting on an object? How do you get a 
situation where there is no net force?
A: Either by pushing or pulling the object 
with a force equal to the frictional force, or by 
tipping the surface to a greater angle, so that  
the normal force (and therefore the frictional 
force) is smaller, and the component of the 
object’s weight accelerating it down the 
slope is greater.
Q: Does the tire experience the same 
frictional force when it rolls?
A: No. It experiences a relatively small 
amount of rolling friction, due to the part of 
the tire in contact with the surface deforming.
That’s, like, totally awesome! 
We’ve got everything covered 
that might be affected by 
friction now. Sweet!
Using components for the tire drag works!
Now that the programmer knows how to calculate the 
normal force, there’s no stopping him, and the parts of 
the game that are affected by friction are soon in place.
And as well as sliding players and dragging tires, the game 
can even deal with dragging tackles!

HeadFirst: So, friction, you’re a bit of an enigma, 
aren’t you? Like, no-one really knows where you come 
from. What’s your take on that?
Friction: Yeah, it’s true that people don’t really know 
why I’m around. But the important thing is that I’m 
here!
HeadFirst: But you’re a bit of a stick-in-the-mud, 
aren’t you? You always oppose everything!
Friction: It’s true that I always oppose motion, but 
it’s not something you should take personally.
HeadFirst: And you’re a little without direction, 
aren’t you? I mean, you always depend on what 
everyone else is doing!
Friction: OK, well I guess that’s true. Because I’m 
a force that always opposes motion, I don’t actually 
appear until something actually moves, or tries to 
move. But as long as you’re watching closely, that 
shouldn’t be a problem.
HeadFirst: So are you in surfaces all the time, just 
hiding and waiting to come out?
Friction: Not at all. I’m just not there unless 
something’s moving or trying to move.
HeadFirst: You’ve used that phrase “moving or 
trying to move” a couple of times now. What do you 
mean by it?
Friction: Well, I come in a couple of different 
varieties. If you’re already moving, the force that 
opposes this motion is called kinetic friction.
HeadFirst: Why is it called that?
Friction: Kinetic means “moving”!
HeadFirst: And what if an object’s stationary then 
someone comes along and tries to move it?
Friction: Then there’s static friction. I guess the 
two surfaces have longer to interact with each other 
because they’re stationary, and so the frictional force 
you have to overcome is greater.
HeadFirst: But kinetic friction doesn’t depend on 
velocity, right?
Friction: Right. That’s why having a mental picture 
of “bonds forming and breaking” or something like 
that can be misleading
HeadFirst: So what’s this about you and the normal 
force?
Friction: I was wondering when that would come up! 
I can only oppose motion if two surfaces are actually 
touching. And the more they’re “pushed together” the 
larger the frictional force between them. The normal 
force is a measure of how hard the two surfaces are 
being “pushed together.”
HeadFirst: And how might the normal force vary?
Friction: If the surface is at an angle, and there are 
no other forces present, then the normal force will be 
less than the weight of the object.
HeadFirst: Is it only the angle of the surface that 
affects the normal force?
Friction: No - if there are extra forces acting on the 
object as well as its weight and the normal force, then 
the perpendicular components all have to add to zero.
HeadFirst: Why is that?
Friction: If the object isn’t burrowing into or 
bouncing off the surface, there’s no net perpendicular 
force. So the perpendicular components of the forces 
acting on the object have to add to zero. The normal 
force is whatever it needs to be for that to be true.
Friction Exposed
This week’s interview:
Getting to grips with friction.
498    Chapter 12
friction exposed

499
2. A tire attached to a rope is dragged along the ground by a player. 
with a constant velocity. The tire has a mass of 10 kg, the rope is 
2.0 m long and the player’s belt is 120 cm above the ground, which 
is Astroturf with μ = 0.8
Draw a free body diagram for the tire.
Draw in the components parallel and perpendicular to the ground 
for any forces that aren’t entirely parallel or perpendicular.
Use the perpendicular components to work out the normal force 
and hence the frictional force in terms of F, the force the player 
exerts on the tire via the rope.
Use the parallel components to work out a value for F.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Question Clinic: The “Friction”  Question
Sometimes, you will be presented with a problem where 
friction plays a vital role. The main thing in this type of problem is to 
work out the normal force (which you can then multiply by μ to get the frictional 
force) - so always start with a free body diagram. NB: This example question has 
these ‘intermediate steps’ filled in for you; in other questions you may need to carry 
them out unprompted as you home in on your final answer.
An important thing to remember when doing 
problems that involve forces is that ‘constant velocity’ 
is shorthand for ‘no net force’. Usually, this means that the 
frictional force will have the same size as the component 
of the force that’s causing the object to move.
If the overall velocity is constant (or zero), 
this means that there is no net force acting 
on the object.
Friction always opposes motion, so the 
frictional force will be in the opposite 
direction from the velocity.
If the velocity in a particular direction 
is constant (or zero) then there is no 
net force in that direction, i.e. all the 
components must add up to zero.
As the normal force depends on all of the other force 
components perpendicular to the surface (as it needs to 
balance them all so that the net force in the direction 
is zero), it should be the last thing you calculate.
The normal force acts 
perpendicular to the 
surface - so you’ll need 
to turn any vector 
that’s not already 
perpendicular or parallel 
to the surface into 
components.

How does kicking a football work?
So the game’s nearly complete ... but the SimFootball team 
want to make kicking the football as realistic as possible. 
They’ve got their hands on some freeze frame footage - and 
have worked out the ball’s velocity as it heads for goal. But 
they need you to work out the average force of the kick so 
they can program it in
But how are you going to do that when you don’t know the 
ball’s acceleration, can’t use Fnet = ma?
What might you be able to do with the images 
to work out the average force that the ball 
experiences when the player kicks it?
The frames are 2.5 
milliseconds apart.
I took some freeze frames of 
someone kicking a football. I 
hope they’ll help us work out how 
to put it into the game.
First contact is here.
Last contact is here.
500    Chapter 12
kick the football

you are here 4    501
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
Jim: But we don’t know the football’s acceleration - we only 
know the velocity that it takes off with.
Frank: Hmm, good point.
Jim: Can we somehow use the freeze frame footage to work out the 
acceleration?
Joe: I think that’s gonna be difficult. The ball deforms when it’s 
kicked, then expands to its normal shape again. Which part of the 
ball would we use to work out the acceleration, when different parts 
are moving in different ways?!
Frank: But we can use the freeze frames to work out the time 
that the foot’s in contact with the ball for. It looks like it’s around 
10 milliseconds... if we can use the time, it might help us somehow.
Joe: Oh ... hang on! Newton’s second Law isn’t actually Fnet = ma, 
is it? In its purest form, it actually says that when you apply a force 
for a period of time, then it causes a change in momentum.
Jim: So you’re saying that we can use Fnet∆t = ∆p (where p = mv)? 
That’s cool: momentum is mass × velocity, and we know what both 
of these are for the football!.
Frank: And we can get the time of contact from the freeze frame! 
That’s the time that the force acts for, isn’t it? 10 milliseconds?
Jim: Yeah, that sounds good. Though the force doesn’t look like it’ll 
be the same all the time. I’m sure the middle of the kick exerts more 
force than the start or end of it ...
Joe: But we’ve been asked to find the average force. When 
we were finding average speeds it was only the overall change in 
position that counted. So with the football, we can use the overall 
change in momentum to work out the average force.
Frank: So we are using Newton’s Second Law like I suggested all 
along - but just a different form of it.
Jim: Yeah. Come on - let’s do it!
You can rewrite Newton’s Second Law as F = m
Newton’s Second Law says that if you apply a net force to an object for 
a period of time, then its momentum changes. So force is rate of change 
of momentum: 
	
F  =  
Usually the mass of an object doesn’t change during the time that the force 
is applied. This means that m is constant, so you can rewrite the equation 
as:
 
	
F  =  m
∆(mv)
∆t
∆v
∆t
But you already know that         is the rate of change of velocity - i.e. 
acceleration.
So you can rewrite your equation as:
	
F  =  ma
This is the form of Newton’s Second Law you’ll use on your course.
∆v
∆t
Rate of change 
of momentum
m is constant
v changes with time
Earlier on, you rewrote 
Newton’s Second Law, having 
originally worked it out from 
momentum conservation.
Newton’s Second Law 
in its purest form is:
Fnet = ∆p
∆t
Well, that’s easy. We 
just use Newton’s Second Law: Fnet = ma. 
We know there must be a net force on the 
football, because in one frame it’s sitting still 
and in the next it’s moving!

F∆t is called impulse
You can work out the force of the kick using a slightly different 
form of Newton’s Second Law, F∆t = ∆p. The quantity F∆t is 
also called impulse, and the equation says that impulse is equal 
to the change in something’s momentum.
If you have a problem where your first instinct is to use Fnet = ma 
but you don’t know the acceleration, look to see if you know the 
mass and velocity at the start and at the end.
 If you do, you can work out the change in momentum, which is 
equal to the impulse, and then get the force from that.
So, run it past me again - what are the 
differences between acceleration, force, momentum 
and impulse? They all seem kinda similar ...
The total momentum of 
everything taking part in 
an interaction is conserved.
If you apply a force 
for a short time, you 
get a smaller change in 
momentum than if you 
apply it for a long time.
These are related by 
the equation Fnet = ma
The impulse is the actual change 
in an object’s momentum.
The force is the rate of change 
of an object’s momentum.
Momentum = mass x velocity
The acceleration is the rate of 
change of an object’s velocity.
∆p also happens to be 
called impulse. And you 
can write down the 
equation F∆t = ∆p
Foot is in contact 
with ball for time 
∆t during which it 
exerts force F on it.
Symbol: p
Symbol: a
Symbol: F
Some people give impulse the 
symbol J, many others don’t 
bother with a symbol.
502    Chapter 12
impulse

you are here 4    503
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
a. The programmer wants to know the average force of the kick. The football has a mass of 400 grams and 
from the freeze frames, you can tell that the foot and ball are in contact for 10 ms (milliseconds). If the ball 
leaves the boot at an angle of 45° and travels 60 m, work out the force of the kick.
Hint: 45° is when the horizontal and vertical components of the ball’s velocity are equal.
Hint: Use equations of motion to calculate the initial velocity. Look back at pages $$-$$ of chapter 10 if you 
get stuck, as the problem there is very similar. 
Hint: Once you know the initial velocity, you can use F∆t = ∆p. (Remember that p = mv)
b. Experiencing a large net contact force hurts! Explain, using impulse, why football players wear padding.

a. The programmer wants to know the average force of the kick. The football has a mass of 400 grams and 
from the freeze frames, you can tell that the foot and ball are in contact for 10 ms (milliseconds). If the ball 
leaves the boot at an angle of 45° and travels 60 m, work out the force of the kick.
Hint: 45° is when the horizontal and vertical components of the ball’s velocity are equal.
Hint: Use equations of motion to calculate the initial velocity. Look back at pages $$-$$ of chapter 10 if you 
get stuck, as the problem there is very similar. 
Hint: Once you know the initial velocity, you can use F∆t = ∆p. (Remember that p = mv)
 -v0v - v0v
Use F∆t = ∆mv to work out the force. So work out the initial velocity, v0, from 60 m range.
v0
v0h
v0v
45°
45° angle, so  v0h = v0v
v0  =  2 v0v
Get time from vertical component, then distance in that time from horizontal.
Vertically:
vv  =  -v0v   because of symmetry. Use this in equation of motion:
 vv  =  v0v + at
t  =
Symmetry: Replace vv. with 
-v0v in every equation you use
a
=  -2v0v
-9.8
Negative divided by 
negative is positive.
a = -9.81 m/s2
UP is positive 
RIGHT is positive
Horizontally:  v0h =  v0v  =
Use this value for 
t with horizontal 
component of velocity.
=  0.204 v0v
v0h and v0v are the same 
size. A right-angled 
triangle with two equal 45° 
angles has two equal sides.
x - x0
t
60 - 0
0.204 v0v
There’s a v0v on both 
sides, so you can solve 
for v0v, and then for v.
v0v  =
v0v
2  = 294
Multiply both 
sides by v0v
v0v  =  17.1 m/s (3 sd)
From 45° triangle, v0 = 2 v0v
 v0  =  2 × 17.1  =  24.2 m/s (3 sd)
Rearrange F∆t = ∆mv to get F:
F  = ∆mv
∆t
= 0.4 × 24.2
10 × 10-3
This is contact time 
for foot and ball, not 
flight time!
=  968 N
Force is measured 
in Newtons.
   The average force of the kick is 970 N (2 sd).
Pythagoras:  v0
2  =  v0h
2 + v0v
2  
v0
2  =  2v0v
2
x  = 60 m
x0  = 0 m
504    Chapter 12
average force

you are here 4    505
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
Hey ... I think we’re all done! The 
players can, pass, tackle, drag a tire, and 
kick - plus nothing slides on for ever. 
X-Force Games - here we come!
Q: So why does this thing 
have the special name “impulse”? 
Why can’t I just call it “change in 
momentum” like we’ve been doing 
all along?
A: Because “impulse” is what it’s 
called! If you understand how it works 
that’s great - but you need to be able 
to communicate with other people who 
call it impulse.
Q: But if I explain what I mean, 
won’t they get it?
A: If your exam question asks you 
to explain something using impulse 
(like the question about padding did) 
then you need to know what impulse is. 
Q: Yeah, the question about 
padding. Surely padding works 
because it absorbs some of the hit 
so you don’t feel it as much by the 
time it gets to you? What does that 
have to do with impulse?
A: You just said “the time it gets 
to you”. If the interaction takes place 
over a longer time, the average force 
is lower.
Q: What does that have to do 
with it?
A: Big forces hurt! If you were 
wearing a suit of armor instead of 
padding, it wouldn’t deform. The 
collision would take the same time as 
it did before, and it would hurt just as 
much.
If a collision takes 
more time, the 
average force is 
lower - and it 
hurts less!
If you have velocity v and are 
tackled so that your final 
velocity = 0,  your momentum 
has changed from mv to 0. And 
Newton’s Second Law / impulse 
says that F∆t = mv
If you’re not wearing padding, 
then this happens over a short 
time. So F is high and it hurts.
If you’re wearing padding, then 
this happens over a longer period 
of time, as the padding deforms. 
So F is lower than if you 
weren’t wearing any padding at 
all and it hurts less.
b. Experiencing a large net contact 
force hurts! Explain, using impulse, 
why football players wear padding.

The strength of the moon’s gravitational 
field is lower then the Earth’s 
The moon is smaller and less massive than the Earth, so the 
gravitational force it exerts on objects is less, which means its 
gravitational field strength is less. You need to work out how this will 
affect the physics of the game
The players will be in a pressurized dome where there’s plenty of air, 
so you don’t need to worry about anything medical!
How is being on the moon going 
to affect the game (if at all)?
The game’s great - but there’s 
just been a spec change!
You and the SimFootball team have come up with 
a realistic game that’s also fun to play! Big win! But 
before you all collect your VIP  passes, the CEO takes 
a look at the game - and decides he wants to have a 
mode where you can play football on the moon!
Bad news - the boss wants to be 
able to play on the moon! I hope 
we don’t have to change too much - I 
want that trip!!
506    Chapter 12
moonball

you are here 4    507
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
Which aspects of the game will change as a result of being on the moon and which will stay the same? 
The SimFootball programming team have already had a go at guessing what will happen - and you 
need to decide whether each of these statements is correct or not.
If you think a statement and the reasoning is correct, please explain why, using physics.
 If a statement is incorrect, or an incorrect reason is given for a correct statement, then please explain 
why using physics - to debunk the myth! Use relevant equations wherever you can.
a. The ball will go further when passed horizontally because it weighs less so is easier to throw.
b. The ball will go further when passed horizontally because it weighs less  so spends longer in the air.
c. The ball will go further when passed horizontally because the gravitational field strength is less.
d. There will be less friction in the game so the players will slide further.
e. Tackles will involve less force because the players weight less.
f. The optimal angle where punts go furthest won’t be 45° any more because the ball weighs less.
g. The ball will have a higher velocity when it leaves a player’s boot because it weighs less.
h. If a player runs into and collides with a goalpost, it will hurt less because they weigh less.

Which aspects of the game will change as a result of being on the moon and which will stay the same? 
The SimFootball programming team have already had a go at guessing what will happen - and you 
need to decide whether each of these statements is correct or not.
If you think a statement and the reasoning is correct, please explain why, using physics.
 If a statement is incorrect, or an incorrect reason is given for a correct statement, then please explain 
why using physics - to debunk the myth! Use relevant equations wherever you can.
a. The ball will go further when passed horizontally because it weighs less so is easier to throw.
b. The ball will go further when passed horizontally because it weighs less  so spends longer in the air.
c. The ball will go further when passed horizontally because the gravitational field strength is less.
d. There will be less friction in the game so the players will slide further.
e. Tackles will involve less force because the players weight less.
f. The optimal angle where punts go furthest won’t be 45° any more because the ball weighs less.
g. The ball will have a higher velocity when it leaves a player’s boot because it weighs less.
h. If a player runs into and collides with a goalpost, it will hurt less because they weigh less.
No - wrong reason! The ball still has the same mass. Throwing force Fnet = ma so the 
acceleration (and velocity) depend on the ball’s mass, not its weight, if it’s thrown horizontally.
No. Same reason as a, e and g. Any time the change is in the horizontal direction but not 
the vertical direction, the important thing is the mass, not the weight.
Yes. The ball accelerates vertically because of its weight. On the moon, the ball weighs less. 
Therefore it will go further, as it’ll have a longer time to travel horizontally.
Yes. This is just another way of wording the statement in b.
Yes. If the gravitational field strength is less, the players weigh less, and the normal force 
is less. Therefore, there will be less friction in the game and the players will slide further.
No. Newton’s 2nd Law is Fnet = ma. Tackling is horizontal. So their weights have nothing to 
do with it (weight would only have an effect if they were tackling vertically!).
No. The optimal angle is always 45° whatever planet you’re on!
No. F∆t = ∆(mv). Force, time and mass are still the same, so the velocity is still the same.
508    Chapter 12
on the moon?

you are here 4    509
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
For added realism, sometimes the 
players should slip
After successfully adding the ‘moon mode’, the SimFootball 
team have decided that the game needs one more element. At 
the moment, the players are able to make impossibly tight turns 
and change direction more or less instantly. But if they tried 
that in real life, they would slip.
But what makes someone slip? Or rather - what makes 
someone able to change direction in the first place? A change 
of direction means a change in velocity. Newton’s First Law 
says that for a velocity to change, there must be a net force. But 
where does the force that enables a player to change direction 
come from?
The moon mode’s awesome and the 
game’s perfect ... too perfect. We need 
the players to slip when they try to 
change direction too violently...
b. Describe in words how you’d go about working out whether a player will slip when they change 
direction.
a. If a player changes direction, they change velocity, so there must be a net force acting on them in the 
same direction as the change in velocity.
Explain where this force comes from, and why a player might slip in real life.

Work out what the player’s change in momentum is when they change direction.
Work out what the maximum friction force is given the player’s weight, the normal force and 
the surface he’s playing on.
F∆t = ∆p Use what you worked out for F and ∆p to work out how long the player’s foot 
needs to be in contact with the ground to provide this change in momentum.
Estimate whether this is reasonable or not.
The player can change direction because of friction between their foot and the ground.
If the player exerts a force on the ground with their foot, the ground exerts an equally-sized 
force on the player in the opposite direction - a Newton’s Third Law pair of forces.
If the force required for the change in direction is smaller than the force that can be 
provided by friction, then the player will slip.
b. Describe in words how you’d go about working out whether a player will slip when they change 
direction.
a. If a player changes direction, they change velocity, so there must be a net force acting on them in the 
same direction as the change in velocity.
Explain where this force comes from, and why a player might slip in real life.
You can change only direction horizontally 
on a flat surface because of friction
If you’re trying to change direction horizontally on a flat surface, friction 
is the only thing that can provide the force you require to change your 
momentum. Otherwise, you would slip (unless there’s a convenient wall or 
curb you can push against instead).
510    Chapter 12
the effect of friction

you are here 4    511
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
Thanks - there’s no way 
I’d have managed all of 
that on my own!
The game is brilliant, and 
going to X-Force rocks!
SimFootball is a success! Using physics, 
you were able to turn the real game into a 
computer game. Everything acts just like it 
should -  on Earth and on the moon!
If you want to 
change direction 
PARALLEL to a 
surface, friction is 
the only thing that 
can provide the 
force you require.
Force required to 
change direction.
Large velocity.
Force of foot on edge.
Force of edge on foot.
This is a solid 
thing you can push 
against.
Small velocity.
Force of foot 
parallel to ground.
Frictional force of 
ground on foot
Force required to 
change direction.
Large velocity.
Force required to 
change direction.
Force of foot 
parallel to ground.
Frictional force of 
ground on foot
This velocity becomes 
lower, but not enough 
to change direction 
- so you slip.
Change in direction 
takes the same time 
in each picture.

Newton’s Laws give you awesome powers
You can use momentum conservation, Newton’s Laws and free 
body diagrams to work out problems that involve forces.
Always start with a free body diagram 
of all the forces acting on an object.
Mark on all the forces.
Is there a net force?
Work out forces you don’t know.




Use Fnet = ma to determine how the 
object moves.
Remember the impulse form of 
Newton’s Second Law: Fnet∆t = ∆p
Total momentum is conserved!



Constant velocity 
(or zero velocity) 
means no net force.
Newton Three: Push you, push me.
Newton One: Things carry on.
Newton Two: Fnet = ma
This comes from 
momentum conservation.
This comes 
from momentum 
conservation
Draw a FREE 
BODY DIAGRAM 
to work out the 
net force.
Total momentum is conserved.
The fundamental thing 
you can work out from 
experiments.
Forces come in pairs 
that are the same size 
in opposite directions and 
act on different objects.
512    Chapter 12
newton’s laws

you are here 4    513
using forces, momentum, friction and impulse
Units
Falling
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Force
Special points
Experiment
Weight
Time
Component
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Impulse
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Displacement
Trigonometry
Volume
Velocity
Friction
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Does it SUCK?
Area
Mass
I can deal with friction 
now - and it isn’t slowing 
down my progress!
Impulse
Impulse is equal to the change in momentum, 
Fnet∆t. Impulse is sometimes given the symbol J.
Friction
A contact-dependent force that opposes motion.

Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 12 under your belt and 
added some problem-solving concepts to 
your toolbox.
CHAPTER 12
How many objects?
Before you start a problem, think 
about how many objects there are 
interacting in it.
If there is only one object, you can 
probably use equations of motion 
to work out what happens
But if there are two or more 
objects, or if there are forces 
involved, then look to use Newton’s 
Laws, momentum conservation or 
impulse (or a combination of these).
“Constant velocity”
If an object moves with “constant 
velocity”, it means that there is no 
net force on an object
To solve a problem where an object 
moves with constant velocity, you 
should draw a free body diagram 
and start equating forces and/or 
components of forces.
Working with forces and 
equations of motion
A common way of making progress on 
a problem is to use Newton’s 2nd Law 
(usually in the form Fnet = ma, though 
occasionally in the form Fnet∆t = ∆p) 
to calculate the acceleration (or velocity) 
an object experiences.
Then you can use this value in your 
equations of motion to find out how the 
object moves as a result of the force.
Calculating friction
The friction experienced by an 
object on a surface depends on the 
normal force and the coefficient 
of friction, μ, for that object and 
that surface.
Ffric = μFN
The normal force
Be careful when calculating the 
normal force as part of a friction 
problem (or indeed any problem).
The normal force is perpendicular 
to a surface. As long as the object 
in contact with the surface isn’t 
accelerating in the perpendicular 
direction, the normal force has 
the right size to make the net 
perpendicular force equal to zero.
514    Chapter 12
physics toolbox

this is a new chapter    515
torque and work
13
Getting a lift
You can use your physics knowledge to do superhuman feats. 
In this chapter, you’ll learn how to harness torque to perform amazing displays of strength, 
by using a lever to exert a much larger force than you could on your own. However, you 
can’t get something for nothing - energy is always conserved and the amount of work 
you do to give something gravitational potential energy by lifting it doesn’t change.
I love how gaining 
gravitational potential energy 
lets me show off like this.

Half the kingdom to anyone who 
can lift the sword in the stone ...
The sword in the stone has acquired near-legendary status. 
But now, in a shock move, anyone can attempt to lift it.
There are rules of course - but the promise of half the 
kingdom for anyone who succeeds is completely genuine.
Stone.
Sword in the 
stone - rules
Anyone who lifts 
the sword in the 
stone is entitled 
to half the 
kingdom.
The crossguard 
of the sword 
must be raised as 
high as the mark 
on the wall, or 
higher.
Only one person 
at a time is 
allowed to try.
Only two 
attempts per 
person in a 
lifetime.
The entire crossguard 
must pass the upper line.
Crossguard
516    Chapter 13
sword in the stone

you are here 4    517
torque and work
Can physics help you to lift a heavy object?
Think about the physics you’ve learned so far. How 
might you be able to lift the sword and the stone?
The rules say that the crossguard of the sword must go up by at least 
10.0 cm to reach the line. But they don’t say anything about whether 
the sword needs to be detached from the stone at the time!
If you can use physics to lift both 
the sword and the stone 10.0 cm off 
the ground, you’ll win. The only thing 
is the stone is far too heavy for one 
person to lift on their own, and it’s 
not like you can take it to the moon to 
reduce its weight or use something like 
a crane that hasn’t been invented yet...
Sword
Stone
Entire crossguard 
must pass this line.
What they probably 
intended - lift the sword
The loophole - lift the 
sword AND the stone!

Jim: So how are we gonna do it?  How do people use physics to lift 
heavy objects. What’s it like ... ?
Joe: Maybe “how do people lift heavy objects” is the wrong 
question. Lifting involves applying an upwards force at least equal 
to the weight of the thing you’re trying to lift. So maybe we should 
be thinking about how people apply large forces to objects.
Frank: That’s a really good point.
Jim: Um ... how can we say that an equal force will lift it? 
Wouldn’t we need to apply a force greater than the sword and 
stone’s weight to get it to move upwards?
Joe: Once you’ve got the sword and stone going (with a force 
slightly larger than its weight) the most efficient way to lift it is to use 
a force equal to its weight. If there’s no net force, it’ll go up with a 
constant velocity.
Jim: Ah - I forgot about that Newton stuff. So if we can somehow 
apply a force equal to the sword and stone’s weight, we’ll be OK.
Frank: So how do people apply large forces? What circumstances 
might I want to use a large force in? What’s it like?
Frank: Well, I guess that if you want to get through a locked door 
without a key, you could pry it open. You’d use a crowbar for that 
- to apply a large enough force to break either the door or the lock.
Joe: So how does that work?! I guess it has a long handle and a 
short claw ... you use it like a lever. You push down on the long end, 
and the short end does a lot of damage!
Jim: Yeah - far more damage than your pushing force would do if 
you just pushed on the door directly. Somehow, the force that the 
lever exerts on the door is greater than the force you exert on it.
Frank: So maybe we can rig up a lever with a long end and a short 
end to exert a larger force on the sword and stone than we can 
manage directly. I think we’re on to something here ... 
If you’re asking 
“what’s it like?” try 
to generalize. Ask 
“How can I apply a 
large force?” instead 
of “How can I lift a  
heavy thing?”
Crowbar
Thing 
you want 
to apply 
force to.
Push down 
on long end.
Short end does 
the damage.
If we lift the sword and stone, we’ll be 
rich! We just need to figure out how to 
move it when it’s too heavy for one person 
to lift by themselves.
Crowbar rotates 
around fulcrum 
where it touches 
the ground.
518    Chapter 13
what’s it like?

you are here 4    519
torque and work
The stone is granite. We looked it up, and 1.00 cm3 of this granite has a mass of 2.680 grams.
a. The stone is 1.0000 m by 0.8100 m by 0.6900 m. What is the mass of the stone?
b. The sword’s mass is 2.2 kg. What is the minimum force required to lift the sword and stone?
Use a lever to turn a small force 
into a larger force
 It’s just not possible for one person to generate enough force on their own 
to lift the sword and the stone - it weighs too much.
But by using  a lever, you can exert a greater force on the sword and stone 
than you can manage by grabbing and pulling. You can use physics to 
increase the force you can generate.
A lever is a bit like a seesaw - a rigid bar that can rotate about a fulcrum (or 
pivot point). If you push down on one end, the other end goes up.
In physics, the two sides of the lever are called the arms. If the lever arms 
are different lengths, you can use the lever to exert a large force at the end of 
the short arm by pushing down on the long arm.
But what size of force do you need to generate to lift the sword and stone?
Exert a force at the 
end of the long arm.
Fulcrum
Long arm
Short arm
Get a larger force 
at the end of the 
short arm.
Use a lever to 
exert a larger 
force than you 
could on your own.
Hint: Be careful 
with the units!
A lever’s arms 
aren’t like your 
arms - they 
always move 
together and 
can’t move 
independently.

 Q: We’ve assumed that the minimum 
force required to lift an object is equal to 
its weight.  But surely you need to use a 
larger force?
A: Newton’s 1st Law says that if the 
net force is zero, an object will move at a 
constant velocity. So the most efficient way 
to lift something is to exert a force on it that’s 
a tiny bit larger than its weight for a short 
time. This gives it a small upwards velocity. 
Then you can continue with a force equal to 
its weight, so the object continues to move 
upwards with this velocity.
Q: So you DO need a force larger than 
the object’s weight!
A: Yes, but only slightly larger and for a 
very short period of time to get it started. You 
can approximate this to a force equal to the 
object’s weight (with an extra initial ‘nudge’).
Q: We’ve called the two ends of the 
lever “arms”. But doesn’t that imply that 
they can move independently (like my 
own two arms)?
A: Talking about the “arms” of a lever is 
physics terminology. Each side of the lever is 
an arm - but they’re connected together and 
can’t move independently.
Q:The whole setup looks like a seesaw, 
with two arms and a fulcrum. But how 
can you increase the force at the other 
end? Everyone knows that to balance a 
seesaw, you need the same weight - the 
same force - at each end.
A: If you have an adult and a child on a 
seesaw, you can balance them by moving 
the adult closer to the center. The force of 
the child’s weight is smaller than the force of 
the adult’s weight, but they can still balance.
Q:OK, but the two sides of the seesaw 
are still the same length, right?
A: Yes, but the distance between the 
adult and the fulcrum has changed. So 
the child’s small weight is able to provide 
enough force to lift the adult’s larger weight 
(by balancing then doing a small initial 
‘nudge’ to get going) - just like you’d like to 
do with the sword and stone.
Q: So you mean that if you get the 
adult and child to balance, then saw 
off the ‘extra’ bit of seesaw behind the 
adult, I get a lever where the two arms 
are different lengths, like we were already 
talking about?
A: You got it! Though you may have to 
reposition the adult slightly, to compensate 
for the missing bit of seesaw.
The stone is granite. We looked it up, and 1.00 cm3 of this granite has a mass of 2.680 grams.
a. The stone is 1.0000 m by 0.8100 m by 0.6900 m. What is the mass of the stone?
Work out volume of block in cm3 then multiply that by 2.680 grams to get mass.
100.0 × 81.0 × 69.0  =  558900 cm3
Volume  =
Mass  = 560000 × 2.68  =  1500000 g  =  1498 kg (4 sd)
Minimum force will be the same size as the sword and stone’s weight.
Weight  = mg  =  1500 × 9.8  =  14700 N (3 sd)
Be careful not to 
get ‘g’ (grams) and ‘g’ 
(gravitational field 
strength) mixed up!
It’s generally 
best to give your 
answers in SI 
units - in this 
case, kg rather 
than grams.
b. The sword’s mass is 2.2 kg. What is the minimum force required to lift the sword and stone?
Total mass = 1498 + 2.2 = 1500 kg (4 sd)
Zero net force (weight + lifting 
force) means that you can lift the 
sword and stone with a constant 
velocity - Newton’s 1st Law.
520    Chapter 13
what’s the mass?

you are here 4    521
torque and work
Do an experiment to determine 
where to position the fulcrum
If we use a lever to lift the sword and stone, a small force 
applied to the long arm will be able to exert a large force at the 
short arm. A quick look on the Sieges-R-Us website reveals that 
they have ten 15 kg stackable stones in stock - giving us a total of 
10 ×15 = 150 kg we can place on the long arm.
But where should we put the fulcrum? The rules say only 
one attempt per lifetime! We need to make sure we have the 
fulcrum in the right spot before actually trying to use the lever to 
lift the sword and stone.
Time to design an experiment!
Design an experiment that will allow you to determine the relationship between the two forces required 
to balance a lever and the distance from the fulcrum to the point each force is applied at.
a. Underline the items of equipment  you will use to obtain the data: Stopwatch, Metal ruler, Scales, 
Protractor, Double-sided tape, Pipette, Triangular prism, Air track, Set of identical masses
b. On the tabletop below, sketch the setup you will use to obtain the data, labelling the fulcrum and any 
relevant forces and distances.
Table top.
Where should you put the fulcrum 
to make the lever balance?
You have 150 kg of 
stackable stones on 
the long arm.
c. Explain how you will carry out the experiment.
Don’t worry if you’re not 
sure what some of these 
items are. Just do your best!
A small force on the long 
arm can balance out a large 
force on the short arm.

Design an experiment that will allow you to determine the relationship between the two forces required 
to balance a lever and the distance from the fulcrum to the point each force is applied at.
a. Underline the items of equipment  you will use to obtain the data: Stopwatch, Metal ruler, Scales, 
Protractor, Double-sided tape, Pipette, Triangular prism, Air track, Set of identical masses
b. On the tabletop below, sketch the setup you will use to obtain the data, labelling the fulcrum and any 
relevant forces and distances.
When designing 
an experiment, 
think about what 
you can DO with 
each piece of 
equipment.
You get credit for any experimental 
setup that works.
Many ‘design an experiment’-style questions are 
open-ended. You will be provided with a range of 
equipment, and there may be more than one way 
of investigating what you’ve been asked about.
As long as you describe what you want to do and 
draw a clearly labelled diagram, you’ll get the 
points if your experiment would work.
Use the prism as the fulcrum and the ruler as the lever. Have the fulcrum in the middle of the 
ruler (so that the two halves of ruler balance), and put the masses at different distances from 
the fulcrum. Pile the masses on top of each other so that they press down on the same point, 
and use small amounts of blutac to avoid them slipping. 
 
Start with one mass at the far end, and make sure one mass an equal distance away balances it. 
Then try moving two masses up and down to find the balance point. Repeat with three and so on. 
 
Draw a table of results (mass 1, distance 1, mass 2, distance 2) and look for a pattern.
If I have a different 
experimental setup, I still get 
credit as long as it works, right?
Fulcrum (triangular prism)
Metal ruler
Mass 1
Mass 2
Weight 1
Weight 2
Distance 1
Distance 2
c. Explain how you will carry out the experiment.
522    Chapter 13
designing an experiment

you are here 4    523
torque and work
Force 1  
(coin-weights)
Force 2  
(coin-weights)
Distance 1  
(cm)
Distance 2  
(cm)
1
1
15
1
2
15
1
3
15
1
4
15
Now you can get on with doing this experiment!  Your 
job is to find the balance point of the ruler when 
different weights are applied to each arm.
Find five large coins that all have the same value - you’ll 
use these as your weights. You don’t need to know the 
force exerted by a single coin in SI units, as you can use 
your own unit, the “coin-weight”!
Stick a round pen to a tabletop to use as your fulcrum. 
Keep it in the center of the ruler, and the smaller weight 
at one end, then slide the larger pile of coins up and 
down until the two sides balance. Use the measurements 
on the ruler to read off the distances between the center 
of each stack of coins  and the fulcrum, and fill in the 
table below.
Try it!
Keep this at the 
end of the ruler
Slide this mass to 
and fro until the 
lever balances.
Keep the fulcrum in the 
center of the ruler
F1
F2
Distance 1
Use a 30 cm 
(or longer) ruler  
as your lever.
We’ve put the larger mass on the 
right in the experiment, because 
the larger mass (sword and stone) is 
on the right in the other picture. 
You can use “coin-
weights” as a unit 
because all of the 
coins have the 
same weight.
Distance 2
We chose 15 cm for Distance 1 because it’s halfway along a 30 cm ruler. If your ruler 
is a different length, then change the value in this column to halfway along your ruler. 
Do you see a pattern? Write down anything you notice about the forces and their distances from the 
fulcrum if the ruler is to balance.

Distance 1
Distance 2
Force 1  
(coin-weights)
Force 2  
(coin-weights)
Distance 1  
(cm)
Distance 2  
(cm)
1
1
15
15
1
2
15
7.5
1
3
15
5.0
1
4
15
3.8
If I double the force (e.g. by using two coins instead of one) then I need to half the distance 
between it and the fulcrum to keep the ruler balanced. 
 
I also noticed that number of coins × distance from fulcrum is the same for both sides when 
the ruler is balanced.
Now you can get on with doing this experiment!  Your 
job is to find the balance point of the ruler when 
different weights are applied to each arm.
Find five large coins that all have the same value - you’ll 
use these as your weights. You don’t need to know the 
force exerted by a single coin in SI units, as you can use 
your own unit, the “coin-weight”!
Stick a round pen to a tabletop to use as your fulcrum. 
Keep it in the center of the ruler, and the smaller weight 
at one end, then slide the larger pile of coins up and 
down until the two sides balance. Use the measurements 
on the ruler to read off the distances between the center 
of each stack of coins  and the fulcrum, and fill in the 
table below.
Tried it!
Keep this at the 
end of the ruler
Slide this to and 
fro until it balances.
Keep the fulcrum in the 
center of the ruler
F1
F2
Do you see a pattern? Write down anything you notice about the forces and their distances from the 
fulcrum if the ruler is to balance.
These are our 
results - it’s 
OK if yours 
are slightly 
different.
524    Chapter 13
double the force?

you are here 4    525
torque and work
Torque is a vector - you define clockwise as positive and 
counter-clockwise as negative. The direction of rotation 
depends on the direction of the force and the direction 
of the displacement. If two torques are the same size but 
would cause rotation in opposite directions, there’s zero 
net torque on the lever, and the lever balances.
Zero net torque causes the lever to balance
A torque is like a ‘turning force.’ The greater the 
torque, the greater the effect it has on the rotational 
motion of the object that the torque is applied to. (A 
torque can also be referred to as a turning moment.)
The experiment you just did shows that the size of a 
torque is proportional to both the size of the force and 
the distance from the fulcrum. So if you double the 
force, the torque doubles. Or if you double the distance 
from the fulcrum, the torque doubles.
In physics, the Greek letter τ (pronounced ‘tau’) is used to 
represent a torque. When you have a fulcrum, torque is 
defined as the displacement from the fulcrum a force is 
applied  at × the component of the force perpendicular to 
the lever. You can write this as an equation: τ = rF⊥
You might not have thought of the lever 
rotating - but that’s exactly what it would 
do if the ground wasn’t there, but the lever 
was still supported by its fulcrum.
F1
F2
r1
r2
τ1 = r1F1
τ2 = r2F2
τ  =  rF⊥
Torque
Force 
perpendicular 
to lever
Displacement from fulcrum to 
point where force is applied
This symbol means 
perpendicular.
If we define 
clockwise as the 
positive direction, 
this torque is 
negative.
Clockwise 
rotation, so this 
torque is positive.
Zero net torque, 
as torques are 
equal sizes in 
opposite directions.
Use torque to explain:
a. Why you can lift the sword and stone using a force smaller than their weight.
b. Why door handles are positioned far away from the hinges.
c. Why a wrench (used to undo nuts and bolts) has a long handle.

Use torque to explain:
a. Why you can lift the sword and stone using a force smaller than their weight.
If you use a lever whose arms are different lengths, a small force acting on the 
long end can produce the same torque as a large force acting on the short end, 
as torque = distance from fulcrum × force. So you can use a small force to lift 
a large weight.
To open a door, you need to produce a torque, so that the door rotates round 
its hinges (fulcrum). If the door handle is far away from the hinges, you need a 
smaller force to produce the same torque, as the same force applied a greater 
distance from the fulcrum produces a greater torque.
You use the handle of the wrench to apply a torque to a nut (the fulcrum is 
the center of the nut). The longer the handle, the smaller the force you need 
to apply to produce the same torque.
b. Why door handles are positioned far away from the hinges.
c. Why a wrench (used to undo nuts and bolts) has a long handle.
Q: Why are we calling a torque a 
“turning force” when the seesaw isn’t 
turning - it’s just swinging up and down?
A: Swinging is just turning, but not full 
circle! A seesaw swings around a fulcrum, 
and if the ground wasn’t there it would be 
able to rotate all the way round.
Q: What’s the difference between a 
force and a torque?
A: To exert a torque on an object, there 
needs to be a fulcrum that it can rotate about. 
A torque is a force applied to the object at a 
distance from the fulcrum, with a component 
that’s perpendicular to the axis of the lever.
Q: In the equation τ = rF⊥, why is the 
letter r used to represent a displacement 
instead of x, the letter we usually use?
A: A torque produces a rotation. If you 
imagine the seesaw rotating all the way 
around, it would trace out a circle with 
the fulcrum at the center. The ‘r’ stands 
for ‘radius’, as the radius of a circle is the 
distance from its centre to its edge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: It’s confusing to use different 
letters to represent displacements. Why 
are we doing that?
A: Using ‘r’ in this equation is a physics 
convention that’s followed any time circular 
motion is involved. It makes you think about 
the fact that the displacement is a radius, 
and that rotation is involved.
F
r
If the seesaw was free to rotate all 
the way around the fulcrum, it would 
trace out a circle.
Radius 
of circle.
A torque causes 
an object to rotate 
about a fulcrum.
There’s a picture of this 
on the opposite page.
526    Chapter 13
torque causes rotation

you are here 4    527
torque and work
Hey ... we’ve been talking about the 
perpendicular component of the force 
- but how do I calculate that?!
Only the force component perpendicular 
to the lever produces a torque.
In your experiment, the vertical forces you applied 
always acted perpendicular to the horizontal lever. But 
sometimes a force will be applied to a lever at an angle.
If a force is applied parallel to the lever, it won’t rotate 
at all, and the torque will be zero.
F
A parallel force 
produces no torque.
If a force, F, is applied at an angle, θ, to the lever, only the 
perpendicular component of F will produce a torque.
F
F⊥
F||
This symbol means parallel.
The perpendicular 
component produces 
a torque.
A force, F, is applied to a horizontal lever at a point displacement r from the fulcrum. The force is applied 
in such a way as to make the angle θ with the horizontal.
It’s the 
perpendicular 
component of 
a force that 
produces a 
torque.
a. Draw a large sketch showing the lever and the 
relevant components of F.
b. Use your sketch to derive an equation for the 
torque, τ = rF⊥, in terms of r, F and θ.
The sketch will be a large 
version of this one.
θ
Force applied 
at an angle.

Newton’s 1st law says that if there’s no 
net force, an object continues at the same 
velocity. Is there an equivalent for torques?
A force, F, is applied to a horizontal lever at a point displacement r from the fulcrum. The force is applied 
in such a way as to make the angle θ with the horizontal.
a. Draw a large sketch showing the lever and the 
relevant components of F.
b. Use your sketch to derive an equation for the 
torque, τ = rF⊥, in terms of r, F and θ.
Zero net force = static equilibrium
Newton’s 1st law says that if an object has zero net 
force exerted on it, then it will continue at its current 
velocity, in other words, it won’t accelerate. This is also 
known as static equilibrium.
o
a
h
Force is applied at angle θ.
Perpendicular component is opposite side.
sin(θ)   = o
h
=
F⊥
F
F
F sin(θ)  
F⊥  =
F||
F⊥
rF⊥
τ  =
F
F||
F⊥
Horizontal lever
rF sin(θ)  
τ  =
This is the equation for torque given on many equation 
sheets. However, we’d recommend working it out for 
yourself with triangles, as the equation doesn’t make 
it crystal clear how the angle θ is measured.
It doesn’t matter if the force is pointing 
“outwards” or “inwards” - the perpendicular 
component still has the same size and direction.
Zero net torque = rotational equilibrium
If the net torque on a lever (or another object) is zero, 
then its speed of rotation doesn’t change, in other 
words its rotation won’t get faster or slower. This is 
also known as rotational equilibrium.
If a lever isn’t 
rotating (or is 
spinning at a 
constant rate) 
the net torque 
must be zero.
528    Chapter 13
net torque

you are here 4    529
torque and work
You can work out the 
direction of the torque 
vector by doing a ‘thumbs 
up’ with your right hand.
I guess that if torques 
can add up to zero, then 
torque must be a vector?
Torque is a vector.
Torque has a direction as well as a 
size, since you can turn clockwise 
or counterclockwise round the 
fulcrum. A vector arrow points in 
the direction in which a screw would 
move if you applied the torque to it. 
So clockwise = into the paper and 
counterclockwise = out of the paper.
This sounds difficult to draw in only 
two dimensions, but there’s a standard 
convention that helps.
The symbol for a vector going into 
the paper is ⊗ (like the head-on view 
of a screw) and for one coming out of 
the paper is ⊙, (like the view of the 
screwpoint).
Direction of 
rotation makes 
screw come out.
Torque 
vector
Direction of 
rotation makes 
screw go in.
Torque 
vector
Force
Direction 
of rotation
Torque vector 
(into paper).
Force
Direction 
of rotation
Torque vector 
(out of paper)
If you can’t imagine which way a screw 
would move if a torque was applied, 
then do a ‘thumbs up’ with your right 
hand. If you curl your fingers in the 
direction that the object’s turning in, 
then your thumb points in the direction 
of the torque vector.
Direction 
of rotation
Torque vector

Q: Can I just memorise the equation 
τ = rFsin(θ) or look it up on my equation 
sheet rather than working it out with 
triangles each time?
A: You can if you like ... but what if you 
come across a problem where you’re given 
the angle that the force makes with the 
vertical, rather than the angle it makes with 
a horizontal lever. If you’re used to starting 
with triangles you can work that out, but if 
you just assume the equation will be the 
same, you’ll come undone. 
Q: What is equilibrium?
A: Equilibrium is another word for 
balance. Static equilibrium is when forces 
are balanced - in other words, when the net 
force is zero. Rotational equilibrium is when 
the torques are balanced - in other words the 
net torque is zero. 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: Why is there a distinction between 
static and rotational equilibrium? 
Equilibrium’s just equilibrium, right?!
A: A rocket firework that’s just been 
started off is in rotational equilibrium, as 
there’s no torque on it. But it isn’t in static 
equilibrium as it’s accelerating. 
 
A Catherine-wheel firework that’s just been 
started off isn’t in rotational equilibrium, as 
it’s spinning faster and faster due to a non-
zero net torque. But it is in static equilibrium 
- as it isn’t going anywhere, the net force on 
the firework must be zero.
Use torque to lift the sword and the stone!
The force you need to lift the sword and the stone is equal to its weight, 
which is very, very large! But you can use physics to make it easier by 
designing a lever.
A lever consists of two arms of different lengths which can rotate around a 
fulcrum. Applying a force produces a torque, which can cause the lever 
to rotate around the fulcrum.
Equilibrium is 
another word 
for balance.
The equation for torque is τ = rF⊥.
So if you make a lever and put the sword and stone (which exerts a large 
force due to its weight) at the end of a short arm then apply an equal torque 
on a long arm using stackable stones, you’ll be able to arrange a setup where 
there is zero net torque on the lever, which is therefore in rotational 
equilibrium. From there, a tiny nudge will be enough to lift the sword and 
stone. Fame and fortune beckon ... you just need to work out where to put 
the fulcrum.
Fulcrum
Long arm
Short arm
Small weight.
Large weight.
If an object will 
rotate around a 
fixed point, see if 
you can use torque 
to solve problems.
530    Chapter 13
equilibrium is balance

you are here 4    531
torque and work
A lever, length L,  has two masses on it. At one end is a sword and stone, mass m1 and displacement r1 from the 
fulcrum. At the other end of the lever is a stack of stones, mass m2 and displacement r2 from the fulcrum.
a. Write down an equation for L, the total length of 
the lever, in terms of r1 and r2. (Make left-to-right 
the positive direction, and make L a positive vector. 
r1 and r2 are also vectors - do a sketch and be VERY 
careful with signs!)
b. Write down the condition for the rotational 
equilibrium of the lever (from where a small nudge 
will allow you to lift the sword and stone).
c. Use these two equations to work out an equation 
for r1 in terms of m1, m2 and L.
d. If the lever is 10.00 m long, the sword and stone 
have a mass of 1500 kg and the stackable stones a 
mass of 150 kg, how far from the sword and stone 
end should the fulcrum be placed?

Need to make a substitution to get rid of r2. 
Rearrange equation from part a:
r2  =  L + r1
Substitute this into equation from part b:
r1m1 + (L + r1)m2  =  0
r1m1 + Lm2 + r1m2  =  0
r1m1 + r1m2  =  -Lm2
r1(m1 + m2)  =  -Lm2
r1  = (m1 + m2)
-Lm2
Use equation from part c. with values 
(m1 is stackable stones and m2 is sword and stone)
r1  = (m1 + m2)
-Lm2
r1  = (150 + 1500)
-10 × 1500
=  -9.09 m (3 sd)
r1 is the displacement from the stackable 
stones end - need to work out r2.
Displacement from sword and stone end will be:
r2  =  L + r1
r2  =  10 - 9.09  =  0.91 m (3 sd)
A lever has two masses on it. At one end is a sword and stone, mass m1 and displacement r1 from the fulcrum. 
At the other end of the lever is a stack of stones, mass m2 and displacement r2 from the fulcrum.
a. Write down an equation for L, the total length of 
the lever, in terms of r1 and r2. (Make left-to-right 
the positive direction, and make L a positive vector. 
r1 and r2 are also vectors - do a sketch and be VERY 
careful with signs!)
b. Write down the condition for the rotational 
equilibrium of the lever (from where a small nudge 
will allow you to lift the sword and stone).
c. Use these two equations to work out an equation 
for r1 in terms of m1, m2 and L.
d. If the lever is 10.00 m long, the sword and stone 
have a mass of 1500 kg and the stackable stones a 
mass of 150 kg, how far from the sword and stone 
end should the fulcrum be placed?
L
r1
r2
Make left to right the positive direction, and 
make L a vector going from left to right.
L  =  r2 - r1
m1
m2
r1
r2
F2 = m2g
F1 = m1g
This is negative as we 
made left to right 
the positive direction.
The question asks for the displacement of 
the sword and stone from the fulcrum.
Put brackets in, so 
there’s only one 
occurrence of r1 on 
the left hand side.
If you chose a different 
way of defining the positive 
direction, your answer will 
work out the same in the end, 
but some of the minus signs in 
the algebra may be different.
The net torque must be zero.
r1m1g + r2m2g  =  0
r1m1 + r2m2  =  0
Both terms are 
multiplied by g, 
so g divides out 
and cancels.
r1F1  +  r2F2  =  0
532    Chapter 13
a lever and two masses

533
Question Clinic: The “Two equations, two unknowns” Question
If you have one equation, you can use it to work out 
the value of one unknown variable as long as you know values for the 
others. If you have two equations, you can use them to work out two 
unknowns (as long as it’s the same two unknowns in both equations!) 
You can solve for two unknowns either by using a 
substitution or by setting up simultaneous equations. These 
methods are effectively the same, and it’s up to you which to choose. If 
one of your unknowns is ‘buried’ deep inside a term, it’s probably easiest 
to do a substitution. If both unknowns are terms in their own right (or 
are multiplied by just a number) then simultaneous equations will be 
quicker - but a substitution will still work.
2. A lever has two masses on it. At one end is a sword and 
stone, mass m1 and displacement r1 from the fulcrum. At 
the other end of the lever is a stack of stones, mass m2 and 
displacement r2 from the fulcrum.
Write down an equation for L in terms of r1 and r2.
Write down the condition for the rotational equilibrium of 
the lever.
Use these two equations to work out an equation for r1 in 
terms of m1, m2 and L.
a.
b.
c.
Always, always, always 
start with a sketch!
The buzzwords ‘lever’ 
and ‘fulcrum’ tell you 
that torque is involved.
If the question gives you 
variable names, make sure 
you use the same ones in 
your answer.
You may be expected 
to spot this is useful 
from your sketch, 
rather than being asked 
explicitly to do it.
‘Condition’ probably means equation in this 
context, though you should write it in words 
as well as you get points for it!
Work out what variable(s) you 
need to get rid of, and make sure 
you do what they ask you to!
In this book we’ve 
concentrated on 
making substitutions, 
but if there’s 
another way that 
makes sense for you, 
then go for it!

Time to try using a lever to lift the sword 
and stone. Hopefully, by using physics, 
you’ll be more successful than than the 
person who tried before you ...
Brute force is never 
going to work, but 
cleverness - let’s see...
The size of a torque is equal to the 
component of the force perpendicular 
to the lever × the displacement from the 
fulcrum.
You can work out the perpendicular force 
component using trigonometry.
If a problem involves something turning, 
you need to work out where the fulcrum is.



Torque is a vector - the direction you’re 
turning in matters.
If you curl the fingers of your right hand in 
the direction you’re turning in, your thumb 
points in the direction of the torque vector.
If an object is in rotational equilibrium, it 
means that vector sum of all the torques 
on the object is zero.



534    Chapter 13
bullet points

you are here 4    535
torque and work
So you lift the sword and stone with the lever ...
You’ve used what you know about torque to predict that you can lift 
a 1500 kg sword and stone by using only 150 kg of stackable stones 
to generate a force much larger than their weight with a lever.
So you set everything up, and as you lift the final stone into place, the 
sword and stone begin to move...
Although the sword and the stone get off ground, they don’t go 
high enough. The crossguard of the sword needs to be raised by 
10 cm for the lift to count, but it only went up by around 1 cm.
The stackable stones have definitely gone down by 10 cm at the 
other end of the lever - but the sword and stone haven’t gone up 
by the same amount. What’s going on?!
The stackable stones have gone down 
by 10 cm. So why haven’t the sword 
and the stone gone up by 10 cm?
... but they don’t go high enough!

Frank: Ooh, triangles!
Joe: Yeah, similar triangles! Look - the stackable stones lever 
arm is ten times longer than the sword and stone lever arm. So if 
the stackable stones side goes down 10 cm, the sword and stone end 
only goes up a tenth of that distance - 1 cm.
Jim: If the stackable stones going down by 10 cm causes the sword 
and stone to rise by 1 cm, then I guess the stackable stones need to 
go down by 100 cm to make the sword and stone rise by 10 cm.
Frank: That sounds like an awful lot of work to lift the stackable 
stones that high in the first place! Maybe it’s easier to make the 
two arms of the lever equal lengths. Then we only need to lift the 
stackable stones 10 cm - a much smaller distance.
Joe: But we’d need 1500 kg of stackable stones to lift the sword and 
stone, instead of 150 kg. That’s ten times as many stackable stones! 
Even though you only have to lift them a tenth of the distance, 
you’re lifting ten times more weight than you were before.
Jim: I’m kinda starting to think that you can’t get something for 
nothing.  We either lift a tenth of the weight ten times the distance, 
or the same weight the same distance.
Joe: Yeah, it’s hard work either way around!
Always look out 
for triangles 
- and especially 
similar triangles!
Which do you think involves more work - lifting 10 
stackable stones 1 m each, or 100 of them 10 cm each?
Long arm is 10 times 
longer than short arm.
10 cm
Sword 
and stone
Not 10 cm!
Stackable 
stones
Jim: But it didn’t reach the line!. The stone end went down by 
10 cm - why didn’t the sword and stone end go up by 10 cm?
Joe: Hang on while I do a quick sketch ...
Similar triangles don’t have 
to be right-angled. They 
just need to have the same 
angles as each other.
We were soooo close! 
No one else has ever 
lifted it before!
536    Chapter 13
look out for similar triangles

you are here 4    537
torque and work
You can’t get something for nothing. If you use 150 kg of stackable 
stones to lift a 1500 kg sword and stone, the long lever arm needs to 
be 10 times the length of the short one. But that means the sword 
and stone only get lifted a tenth of the distance that the stackable 
stones move through.
So to lift the 1500 kg sword and stone 0.10 m (10 cm)  off the ground, 
you need to lift the 150 kg of stackable stones 1.00 m off the ground 
to start off with - 10 times as high. That’s a lot of work for you!
You can’t get something for nothing
Another way of lifting the sword and stone would be to make 
the two arms of the lever the same length and use 1500 kg 
of stackable stones. You only have to lift the stacking stones 
0.100 m instead of 1.00 m - but you have to lift 10 times as 
much weight to take advantage of the smaller displacement!
150 kg
150 kg
1500 kg
1.00 m
0.10 m
Before
After
To lift the sword and the 
stone 0.100 m, you first 
of all have to lift 150 kg 
of stackable stones all 
the way up here!
The long arm is 10 times the length 
of the short arm, so the end has to 
start 10 times further from the 
ground than the distance you want 
to lift the sword and stone.
1500 kg
0.10 m
Before
After
0.100 m
1500 kg
If the fulcrum is in the 
center, you only have to 
lift the stackable stones 
0.100 m - but you need 
to use 1500 kg of them!
We’ve now redesigned the 
lever as a pan balance. This 
is so that you only have to 
lift the stackable stones the 
minimum height necessary 
(onto the pan) and not all the 
way up to the top of the lever.
To make the lever come 
down by exactly 1.00 m, you 
need to start with this pan 
1.00 m above the ground.
The 150 kg of  stacking stones 
need to go down by 1.00 m to 
lift the sword and stone 0.10 m
If you put the 
fulcrum in the 
center, the stacking 
stones don’t need 
to move down by so 
much to lift the 
sword and stone.

When you move an object against 
a force, you’re doing work
To do WORK on an 
object, you need to use a 
FORCE to DISPLACE 
the object in the 
opposite direction from 
another force that’s 
acting on the object.
F, x and the opposing force 
(the stone’s weight) are all 
parallel here, so W = F x 
You have a job to do - lift the 1500 kg sword and stone 0.100 m 
in the air by overcoming the gravitational force on it. In 
physics, if you displace an object in the opposite direction 
from a force that’s acting on the object, you’re said to be 
doing work on the object against the opposing force.
So when you lift a stackable stone, you do work on it against 
the force of gravity. And if a pile of stackable stones lifts the 
sword and stone (using a lever) then the stackable stones do 
work on the sword and stone against the force of gravity.
In physics, the word work has a very specific meaning. 
When you do work on something against a force (e.g. by 
lifting it against the force of gravity), the amount of work 
you do depends on two things:
The component of the force you exert on the object 
that’s parallel to other force you’re working against. 
When you’re lifting something against the force of gravity, 
this is the vertical component of the lifting force.
The displacement of the object in the same direction. 
When you’re lifting something against the force of gravity, 
this is the vertical component of the displacement.
The work you need to do a job = 
force x displacement
The work you do on the object is defined as the he 
parallel component of the force you use to move the 
object × its displacement. This can be written as: 
 
	
	
W  =  F|| x 
 
where W is the work, x is the displacement and F|| 
is the component of the force you’re exerting on the 
object parallel to the object’s displacement.
W  =  F| | x
Work done 
on object
Component of the force you 
exert on it that’s parallel 
to the force opposing it.
Displacement in 
same direction as F||
This symbol 
means ‘parallel’.
Before
After
F
Weight = mg
x
You’re exerting force F 
on the stacking stone to 
lift it displacement x.
Be careful - work 
begins with the same 
letter as weight!
Opposing 
force 
is the 
object’s 
weight.
538    Chapter 13
movement, force, and work

you are here 4    539
torque and work
Which method involves the least amount of work?
You’ve come up with two different 
ways of lifting the sword and stone 
using a lever and some stackable 
stones. You can either lift 150 kg 
of stones 1.00 m, or 1500 kg of 
stones 0.100 m (depending on 
where you put the fulcrum) to 
enable the stacking stones to lift 
the sword and stone.
It would make sense to choose the easier method - the one that involves you 
having to do less work on the stackable stones in order to get them from the 
ground into a position where they can lift the sword and stone.
When you lift an 
object, you do work 
on it by displacing 
it upwards with 
an upwards force 
that counters 
the downwards 
gravitational force.
You need to do work on the stackable stones before they can do work on the sword and stone. But which 
method involves doing more work? Calculate the amount of work you need to do to:
a. Lift 150 kg of stackable stones 1.00 m.
b. Lift 1500 kg of stackable stones 0.100 m.
c. Comment on the sizes and the units of your answers.
1500 kg
0.10 m
Before
After
0.100 m
1500 kg
150 kg
150 kg
1500 kg
1.00 m
0.10 m
Before
After
150 kg of stackable stones lifted 1.00 m.
1500 kg of stackable stones lifted 0.100 m.
If the fulcrum is here, 
you only need 150 kg of 
stacking stones, but you 
need to lift them 1.00 m.
If the fulcrum is here, you 
need 1500 kg of stackable 
stones, but you need to 
lift them 0.100 m.
Stackable stones 
lifted up 1 m.
Stackable stones 
lifted up 0.100 m.
Hint: Get the units of work from 
the units of the variable on the 
right hand side of the equation 
you use to calculate the work.

You need to do work on the stackable stones before they can do work on the sword and stone. But which 
method involves doing more work? Calculate the amount of work you need to do to:
a. Lift 150 kg of stackable stones 1.00 m.
b. Lift 1500 kg of stackable stones 0.100 m.
c. Comment on the sizes and the units of your answers.
Both ideas involve doing the same amount of work on the stackable stones. 
The units of work are force × displacement. Force is measured in Newtons 
and displacement in meters, so the units of work are Nm.
Work, W  =  F|| x, is a measure of how much 
energy you need to move an object using a force. The 
displacement in the equation is the displacement 
of the moved object, which is multiplied by the 
component of the force parallel to this displacement.
Work is also a scalar, as the same amount of work will 
be done by the same size of force moving something 
the same distance, regardless of direction.
Work and torque are different because 
they involve different displacements.
Even though they share the same units (Nm), torque 
and work are very different things.
Torque, τ = rF⊥, tells you how good a force is at 
turning something. The displacement in the 
equation is from the fulcrum to where the force makes 
contact, which is multiplied by the component of the 
force perpendicular to this displacement.
Torque is a vector, as the turning can be clockwise or 
counterclockwise along any axis in three dimensions.
Torque is a 
vector, work 
is a scalar.
Hey - torque and work have the same units, 
force x distance - Nm. Is that significant?!
With TORQUE, force 
and displacement are 
PERPENDICULAR.
F
r
With WORK, force 
and displacement 
are PARALLEL.
Before
After
F
Weight = mg
x
You say “Newton meters” if 
you’re saying this unit out loud.
Lifting force same size as weight, so F = mg
W  = F x  =  150 × 9.8 × 1.00
W  =  1470 Nm (3 sd)
Lifting force same size as weight, so F = mg
W  = F x  =  1500 × 9.8 × 0.100
W  =  1470 Nm (3 sd)
540    Chapter 13
work and torque

you are here 4    541
torque and work
But if I lift a stone quickly, it 
makes me more tired than if I lift 
it the same distance but more slowly. 
How can you say I’m doing the same 
amount of work both times?!
Work is 
measured in 
Joules.
Power is the 
rate at which 
you do work.
Q: I don’t like how physics steals 
words like ‘work’ and ‘power’ and 
makes them mean different things 
from usual.
A: Many words can be used in a 
variety of ways in everyday speech. 
You’re right that in physics, words 
like work, power, and force have very 
specific meanings, but they have to so 
that people know exactly what you’re 
talking about. 
Q: I can make myself tired 
without doing any work at all if I hold 
my arm out at shoulder height with 
an object in my hand. The weight’s 
not moving, so I’m not doing work 
on it. What’s that all about?!
A: The fibers in your muscles are 
continually expanding and contracting 
(moving as a result of a force) to enable 
you to do that. You are doing work, but 
on your muscle fibers, not the object! 
A table can support the object quite 
happily without doing any work on it!
Q: You said over there that “work 
is a measure of how much energy 
you need to move something with a 
force.” Is ‘energy’ another of these 
physics words with a very specific 
meaning?
A: It sure is - and you’re going to be 
doing a lot with energy in the next few 
chapters, starting now...
If you lift something in a shorter 
time, your power output is higher.
Work is measured in Joules. You do the same 
amount of work to lift the stone the same 
distance each time, regardless of the time it takes.
The difference is your power output. Power is 
the rate at which you do work and is measured 
in Joules per second (J/s).
Because of how your body functions, you get 
more tired if you do the same work in a shorter 
time with a higher power output. So how tired 
you feel won’t always correlate with the amount 
of work you’ve done.
Power’s measured 
in Joules per 
second, J/s
To avoid getting confused because torque and work 
have the same units, scientists measure work in 
something called   Joules (J) where 1 J = 1 Nm. If 
you’re answering a question about work, you should 
always give your answer in Joules.
Work has units of Joules

Lifting stones is like transferring 
energy from one store to another
Doing work is a way of 
transferring energy.
Energy is the capacity that 
something has to do work
If something has the capacity to do work, it 
means that it is able to exert a force to displace 
an object. But how much work might it be able 
to do?
Energy is the capacity that something 
has to do work. By lifting 150 kg of stackable 
stones 1.00 m, you are giving them the capacity 
to do F|| x = 150 × 9.8 × 1.00 = 1470 J of work.
Another way of putting this is that you 
have given the stackable stones 1470 J of 
gravitational potential energy.
So does that mean 
energy is conserved, like 
momentum is conserved?
Energy is 
conserved.
Energy is conserved
The total energy of everything 
in the entire universe is always 
constant. Closer to home, the 
total energy of an isolated 
system (for instance you, 
stackable stones, lever, sword 
and stone, plus surroundings) 
is always the same, or in other 
words energy is conserved.
150 kg
The gravitational potential energy that the stackable stones 
gain when you lift them doesn’t just ‘appear’ from nowhere. 
You can think of the food you eat as a store of chemical 
potential energy, which your body can tap into to do work.
You doing work 
on the stones 
leads to energy 
transfer from 
you to the stones.
If you do 1470 J of work on the stackable stones, giving 
them 1470 J of gravitational potential energy, you can think 
of the energy being transferred from one store to another, 
as your body has 1470 J less chemical potential energy than 
it had before, and the stackable stones have 1470 J more 
gravitational potential energy than they did before, so have 
the capacity to do 1470 J of work.
1.00 m
1470 J
1470 J
Chemical 
potential 
energy.
Gravitational 
potential energy.
You have 1470 J 
less chemical 
potential 
energy than 
you did before 
you lifted the 
stackable stones.
150 kg
542    Chapter 13
energy is conserved

you are here 4    543
torque and work
If the stackable stones then do 1470 J of work 
on the sword and stone (via the lever), you can 
also think of that as 1470  J of energy being 
transferred from one store to another.
1470 J
1470 J
Gravitational 
potential energy.
Gravitational 
potential 
energy.
150 kg
150 kg
1500 kg
1.00 m
0.100 m
The stackable stones doing work on 
the sword and stone leads to energy 
transfer from the stackable stones to 
the sword and stone.
The sword and stone have 
1470 J of gravitational 
potential energy as they’ve 
had 1470 J of work done 
on them (to lift 1500 kg 
a displacement of 0.100 m 
against the force of gravity.)
The stackable stones have 1470 J less 
gravitational potential energy than 
they did when they were high.
The 1470 J that started out as chemical 
potential energy in your body has ended up 
being transferred to gravitational potential 
energy in the sword and stone (via the 
stackable stones).
You can think about any 
physical process that 
involves change in terms 
of energy transfer.
The stackable stones have the 
potential to do 1470 J of 
work due to being high.
Here, we’ve used ground level as 
a reference point to measure all 
the displacements from.

Why are we doing all this stuff 
with energy, when we already 
know where to put the fulcrum?!
Need to make a substitution to get rid of r2. 
Rearrange equation from part a:
r2  =  L + r1
Substitute this into equation from part b:
r1m1 + (L + r1)m2  =  0
r1m1 + Lm2 + r1m2  =  0
r1m1 + r1m2  =  -Lm2
r1(m1 + m2)  =  -Lm2
r1  = (m1 + m2)
-Lm2
Use equation from part c. with values 
(m1 is stackable stones and m2 is sword and 
r1  = (m1 + m2)
-Lm2
r1  = (150 + 1500)
-10 × 1500
=  -9.09 m (3 sd)
r1 is the displacement from the stackable 
stones end - need to work out r2.
Displacement from sword and stone end will be:
r2  =  L + r1
r2  =  10 - 9.09  =  0.91 m (3 sd)
A lever has two masses on it, one at each end. The first is a sword and stone, mass m1 and displacement r1 from 
the fulcrum. The second is stackable stones, mass m2 and displacement r2 from the fulcrum at the other end of 
a. Write down an equation for L, the total length 
of the lever, in terms of r1 and r2. (Remember that 
r1 and r2 are vectors, so do a sketch and be VERY 
careful with signs!)
b. Write down the condition for the rotational 
equilibrium of the lever (from where a small nudge 
will allow you to lift the sword and stone).
c. Use these two equations to work out an equation 
for r1 in terms of m1, m2 and L.
d. If the lever is 10 m long, the sword and stone have 
a mass of 1500 kg and the stackable stones a mass 
of 150 kg, how far from the sword and stone end 
should the fulcrum be placed?
L
r1
r2
Make left to right the positive direction, and 
make L a vector going from left to right.
L  =  r2 - r1
m1
m2
r1
r2
F2 = m2g
F1 = m1g
This is negative as we 
made left to right 
the positive direction.
The question asks for the displacement of 
the sword and stone from the fulcrum.
Put brackets in, so 
there’s only one 
occurrence of r1 on 
the left hand side.
If you chose a different 
way of defining the positive 
direction, your answer will 
work out the same in the end, 
but some of the minus signs in 
the algebra may be different.
The net torque must be zero.
r1m1g + r2m2g  =  0
r1m1 + r2m2  =  0
Both terms are 
multiplied by g, 
so it cancels.
Energy conservation allows you to 
solve tough-looking problems quickly.
Back on page 528, you used forces, torques, similar 
triangles, substitution, etc to calculate the best way 
to lift a 1500 kg sword and stone using 150 kg of 
stackable stones and a lever.
But that was a complicated calculation where you 
had to be very careful with minus signs! And what’s 
more - it wasn’t obvious what height the stackable 
stones should start off at to lift the sword and stone 
the correct height (0.100 m off the ground) even 
when you’d worked out where to put the fulcrum.
You don’t want to 
have to go through all 
of this (and still not 
quite get the correct 
answer) when there’s 
an easier way ...
544    Chapter 13
energy conservation

you are here 4    545
torque and work
The stackable stones are able to lift the sword and stone because of 
the difference in height between them.
With the lever in place, this difference in height causes a change 
in height for both the stackable stones and the sword and stone. 
This process involves energy transfer, from the stackable stones 
to the sword and stone.
You give an object gravitational potential energy by doing work on 
it, W  =  F|| x. As the force you’re working against is the object’s 
weight, mg, and you’re lifting it to a height, h, the gravitational 
potential energy you give the object is Ug = mgh.
Energy conservation helps you to solve 
problems with differences in height
Differences drive 
changes that lead 
to energy transfer.
One of our stackable stones is missing ...
Unfortunately, in between your first attempt at lifting the sword 
and stone (where it lifted but didn’t go high enough) and this one, a 
stackable stone has gone missing. Now you only have 9 stones each 
with a mass of 15 kg instead of 10 ...
You are using a lever to lift the sword and stone (mass 1500 kg) a height of 0.100 m off the ground.
a. How much gravitational potential energy are 
you giving the sword and stone?
c. What height do you need to lift the stackable stones to?
b. You have 9 stackable stones available to put 
on the other end of the lever, each with a mass of 
15.0 kg. How much gravitational potential energy 
do you need to give the stackable stones in order 
for them to be able to lift the sword and stone to 
the required height?
Ug  =  mgh
Potential energy 
has the symbol U.
The ‘g’ subscript shows 
you it’s gravitational 
potential energy.
mg is the object’s weight 
- the force you’re doing 
work against.
Here, the 
displacement 
is a height, so 
gets symbol ‘h’ 
to remind you 
of this.

Think - what was 
the difference at 
the start, what 
change did it cause, 
and where has 
energy transfer 
taken place?
Q: Why are energy and work useful?
A: Using energy conservation and work 
to do problems is often more straightforward 
than using forces.
Q: Can you give an example of where 
using energy conservation to do a 
problem is easier than using forces?
A: If the problem involves differences 
in heights, for example if you need to lift an 
object, then using energy conservation is 
faster than using forces. 
 
Any time there are differences that 
drive change, think about using energy 
conservation to solve problems.
Q: So what IS energy? It has the same 
units as work - does that mean they’re 
both the same thing?
A: Not quite. Energy is the capacity that 
something has to do work.
Q: But I thought that energy was 
something to do with electricity? Like 
when you use a food mixer or boil a 
kettle, you’re using energy, aren’t you?!
A: Energy can be stored in a number of 
different ways - we’ve already mentioned 
gravitational potential and chemical potential 
energy. Electrical potential energy is another 
way - but we won’t be dealing with that in 
this chapter.
You are using a lever to lift the sword and stone (mass 1500 kg) a height of 0.10 m off the ground.
a. How much gravitational potential energy are 
you giving the sword and stone?
c. What height do you need to lift the stackable stones to?
b. On the other side of the lever, you have 9 
stackable stones, each with a mass of 15 kg. How 
much gravitational potential energy do you need 
to give them in order for them to be able to lift the 
sword and stone the required distance?
Ug  =  mgh
Ug  =  1500 × 9.8 × 0.10
Ug  =  1470 J (3 sd)
You need to give the sword and stone 
1470 J of gravitational potential energy.
The stackable stones need to be able to do 
1470 J of work on the sword and stone. 
Therefore you need to give them 1470 J of 
gravitational potential energy.
Mass of stacking stones  =  9 × 15  =  135 kg.
Ug  =  mgh
h  =
mg
Ug = 135 × 9.8
1470
=  1.11 m (3 sd)
This makes sense, as it’s 
more than 1.00 m (the 
height you’d have needed 
to lift 10 stones).
546    Chapter 13
energy transfer

you are here 4    547
torque and work
Will energy conservation save the day?
You’ve just calculated that lifting 135 kg of stackable stones 1.11 m 
gives them 1470 J of gravitational potential energy. This allows the 
stackable stones to do the 1470 J of work required to lift 1500 kg of 
sword and stone 0.100 m. 
You’ve done the same amount of work on the stackable 
stones as you want them to do on the sword and stone. 
So why haven’t you managed to lift the sword and stone?
Oh. The sword and stone wobble a little, but don’t go up 
in the air. They’re very close to leaving the ground, but 
haven’t quite made it.
If you can think quickly and work out what’s gone wrong 
and how much extra you need to add to the stone side of 
the lever, there’s still time to rescue the situation and claim 
your half of the kingdom!
You do 1470 J of work on the 
stackable stones to lift them 1.11 m, 
transferring 1470 J of gravitational 
potential energy to them.
The stackable stones do 1470 J 
of work on the sword and stone to 
lift them 0.100 m, transferring 
1470 J of gravitational potential 
energy to them. So you hope ...
1470 J
1470 J
Gravitational 
potential energy.
Gravitational 
potential 
energy.
135 kg
135 kg
1500 kg
1.11 m
0.100 m
The rules say that you’re allowed to 
have two attempts per lifetime, and this 
is your second attempt. Here goes ...

Jim: Might it be a rounding thing - like, we calculated the amount 
of work we’d need to do on the sword and stone then rounded 
down to 3 significant digits, so didn’t do quite enough work on the 
stackable stones?
Joe: I don’t think it’s that. We did calculate the energy at one point, 
but we didn’t use the rounded value to work out the height. We just 
used proportion - a tenth of the weight meant ten times the height.
Frank: Hang on ... you said ‘weight’ didn’t you?! Look! Now that 
the lever’s at a much bigger angle, the force of the stackable stones’ 
weight isn’t perpendicular to the lever any more - look! So we’re 
using less torque than we thought. 
 
 
Jim: But the weight vector of the sword and stone isn’t 
perpendicular to the lever either. So its torque is less too. And as 
both force vectors make the same angle with the lever, the torques 
they produce will still be the same whatever angle the lever’s at.
Frank: Hmmm. I think you’re right. There must be another reason 
that we’ve not managed to do enough work on the sword and stone 
to lift it properly.
Joe: Wait...this isn’t an ideal situation...what about friction? 
Frank: How do you mean?
Joe: Well, if there’s some friction in the fulcrum, we’d need to use 
more force to overcome it than if it’s perfectly frictionless.
Frank: Ahh ... we’d be doing work against the force of friction as 
well as doing work against the force of gravity!
Jim: But how can you tell? It’s not like the fulcrum gets lifted up.
Joe: Right...but before, we were expecting to use 100% of 
the stackable stones’ gravitational potential energy to do work 
against gravity to lift the sword and stone. But we also need to do 
work against friction in the fulcrum. So not all of the stackable 
stones’ energy is available to lift the sword and stone. Quick - find 
something else we can put on the lever ...
Weight 
vector
Stackable 
stones
Sword 
and stone
Perpendicular 
component that 
produces torque
I just don’t get it! The sword and stone 
have nearly lifted up - but not quite. Did 
we do the calculation wrong or something?
548    Chapter 13
friction, force, and work

you are here 4    549
torque and work
You need to do work against friction 
as well as against gravity
The sword and stone are teetering on the brink because it’s 
impossible to be 100% efficient.
Fortunately, the fulcrum’s well-oiled, and the 
simple act of hanging your coat on the stackable 
stones is enough to tip the lever, lift the sword and 
stone, and gain you half the kingdom!
Result!
Your calculation assumed that all of the 
gravitational potential energy in the stackable 
stones would be available to do work on the sword 
and stone, so that all the stored energy you started 
with would be transferred in this way.
But there will be friction in the fulcrum of 
the lever, and some of the stackable stones’ 
gravitational potential energy will go towards 
increasing the fulcrum’s internal energy as you 
do work against the force of friction.
But as long as there isn’t too much friction, it 
shouldn’t be too difficult to tip the balance ...

The higher something’s temperature, 
the higher its internal energy.
There you go again with all that 
‘internal energy, blah blah blah’ stuff. But 
you haven’t told us what it actually is yet!
Internal energy is about what’s going 
on with particles at a microscopic level.
Everything is made from particles (atoms, molecules, 
and so forth). These particles are never stationary - in 
a solid they vibrate and in liquids and gases they move 
around in random directions.
If something’s internal energy increases, it means 
that the atoms/molecules move more rapidly. Its 
temperature is a measure of this - objects with 
higher temperatures have higher internal energies.
Particle
Lower internal energy
Atom
‘Spring-like’ 
bond.
Lower internal energy
Velocity
Atoms vibrate 
to and fro.
Higher internal energy
Higher internal energy
If particles are moving 
faster on average, then the 
internal energy is higher.
If atoms are vibrating 
more vigorously, then the 
internal energy is higher.
Temperature is 
a measure of 
internal energy.
550    Chapter 13
internal energy

you are here 4    551
torque and work
Doing work against friction 
increases internal energy
It’s possible to increase something’s internal energy 
by doing work on it against the force of friction. 
The most obvious way of seeing this is by pushing 
something along the ground. If you push it long 
enough, its temperature will increase (and so will 
the temperature of the ground).
If you think about the particles as marbles, the 
two surfaces moving over each other is a bit like 
like jiggling and jostling a tray of marbles around 
so that the marbles end up with a greater average 
speed, and therefore a greater internal energy.
‘Jostling’ particles 
increase internal energy.
Energy transfer by doing 
work against force of friction.
The block isn’t any higher at 
the end, so hasn’t gained any 
gravitational potential energy.
Chemical 
potential 
energy.
Internal energy of 
block and surface.
Something similar happens in the fulcrum of the lever, where the 
moving parts rub together. This time, most of the gravitational 
potential energy in the stackable stones does work against gravity and 
is transferred to gravitational potential energy in the sword and stone.
But work is also done against the friction that comes from the 
moving parts of the fulcrum rubbing together. This leads to some of 
the stackable stones’ gravitational potential energy being transferred 
to the internal energy of the fulcrum.
Energy transfer by 
doing work against 
force of friction.
Energy transfer by 
doing work against 
force of gravity.
Width of arrows 
represents proportion 
of energy transferred 
in each way.
There’s slightly less gravitational 
potential energy at the end 
than there was at the start.
Gravitational 
potential energy.
Gravitational 
potential energy.
Internal 
energy
Force
Displacement

In physics, heating is defined as energy transfer caused 
by a temperature difference. If an object with a 
high temperature is placed in an insulated bucket of low 
temperature water, the internal energy of the water 
rises and the internal energy of the object falls by the same 
amount, until they are both the same temperature. (This 
process is sometimes called heat transfer.)
If you imagine the particles in each object as marbles, then 
it’s like fast-moving marbles in the high temperature object 
continually jostling slow-moving marbles in the cold water, 
until the balls in both are moving with similar average speeds.
Heating increases internal energy
Heating is energy transfer caused 
by a temperature difference.
But a kettle doesn’t heat water by 
doing work on it, right? Is there more 
than one way of heating things up?
‘Jostling’ particles
Higher temperature
Lower 
temperature
Same temperature
Energy transfer 
by heating
Internal 
energy
Internal 
energy
Here, we’ve only shown 
the energy that’s 
transferred as a ‘star’. 
The high temperature 
block still has internal 
energy. It’s just that no 
more energy transfer 
is taking place because 
the difference in 
temperature has been 
evened out.
552    Chapter 13
energy transfer and temperature difference

you are here 4    553
torque and work
It’s impossible to be 100% 
efficient when transferring 
energy from one store to another.
It’s impossible to be 100% efficient
Back with the sword and stone, you’ve realized that not all of 
the gravitational potential energy in the stackable stones will be 
available to do work against the force of gravity by lifting the 
sword and stone. You also need to do work against the force 
of friction in the fulcrum - which you’ve successfully done by 
hanging your coat on the stackable stones!
The efficiency of your lever is the fraction of energy that it 
can usefully transfer to the sword and stone. Increasing the 
internal energy of the fulcrum isn’t useful to you! The total 
energy is always conserved - some is transferred to the sword 
and stone and some to the fulcrum.
It’s like having a banking system where you’re not able to 
transfer dollar bills from one place to another without some of 
them going through a shredder! You could try not transferring 
any of your money - but then you’ll never be able to do 
anything useful with it!
Internal energy 
- disordered - can’t 
harness it to do 
work easily.
Gravitational 
potential energy 
store - can use it 
to do work.
Energy you put into 
the system.
Work done against 
the force of gravity
Work done 
against the 
force of 
friction
This figure 
is just an 
example.
Efficiency is the 
fraction of energy you 
can usefully transfer.
100%
95%
5%

Tonight’s talk: Energy and Work go head to head.
Energy:
Oh hi work, what are you up to today?  
Hey - there’s no need to get so hot under the collar! 
What’s up? 
 
 
 
 
Oh yes, I have rather hogged the limelight recently! 
 
 
Well, to be fair ... I’m in there too! 
 
But if it wasn’t for me, you wouldn’t be able to 
happen at all! 
Well, energy is the capacity that something has to 
do work. If something doesn’t have a capacity to do 
work, then it can’t do work. No me - no you! 
 
 
 
I’m the capacity that something has to do work! 
OK then - I’m always conserved, and I can’t be 
created or destroyed. How about that then?! 
 
 
 
Work: 
Whatever it is ... it’ll be more useful than what 
you’re up to, I’m sure! 
 
Well, to tell you the truth, I’m feeling a little left out. 
It was great back at the start of the chapter when I 
was the star of the show. I loved the attention. But 
now you’ve come along, people are thinking almost 
exclusively about you instead. 
Yeah, and it’s me who’s the useful one! If you want 
to get something moved by applying a force, I’m 
right in there! 
But only as a noun - not a verb. If work is done on 
something, the energy is transferred. See? 
Err ... I don’t think so. How can you say that I 
depend on you? 
 
There you go - playing with words as usual and not 
letting yourself be pinned down. At least I know 
what I am - a displacement × the component of a 
force in the same direction. But what are you? 
That’s not what you are though - that’s just words!
 
 
Well, it sounds a bit metaphysical - but is it physics?! 
And it still doesn’t tell me what you actually are! 
 
554    Chapter 13
energy and work

you are here 4    555
torque and work
Energy:
I guess that’s because you can’t pin me down 
really. You can’t measure me directly. You can only 
measure changes as I’m transferred from one thing 
to another. 
 
Meaning ... 
 
 
That’s not entirely true. Yes, doing work is one way 
of transferring energy, but I can also be transferred 
through heating, if there’s a temperature difference 
between two things. The hot one gets cooler (so its 
internal energy gets lower) and the cool thing gets 
hotter (so its internal energy gets higher, until they 
both have the same temperature 
 
 
 
Yeah, but sometimes you do transfer me to raise 
something’s internal energy as well - when there’s 
friction involved. 
 
 
Yeah ... I guess that’s something we agree on. I don’t 
get to go to such interesting places if there’s too 
much friction. 
And you still couldn’t do anything without me - so 
there!
Work: 
 
 
 
Ha! Now there’s where you can’t get on with your 
life without me!! You need me! 
Well, when work is done, energy is transferred. If it 
wasn’t for me, you’d be totally stuck in one place all 
the time. No holidays, no day trips - just stuck. 
 
 
 
 
 
But that’s all the same, isn’t it? Where’s the 
excitement?! At least when I act on something, you 
usually get transferred in a different way - like into 
something’s potential energy. I give your life variety! 
 
 
Ah yes, friction. I hate him. Y’know, the reason I 
didn’t get a bonus this year was because I wasn’t 
efficient enough. And guess whose fault that was! 
 
 
But I’m still more useful than you! 
 
Whaaatever.

Units
Falling
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Force
Special points
Experiment
Weight
Time
Pythagoras
Component
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Impulse
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Volume
Velocity
Friction
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Area
Mass
Difference in height? 
Use energy conservation!
Torque
A “turning force” equal to component of force 
perpendicular to arm × distance from the fulcrum
Work
When moving an object in the opposite direction from a 
force, work done = force × displacement parallel to force
Energy
The capacity that something has to do work.
Potential 
energy
The capacity something has to do work due to its 
increased height.
Energy 
conservation
The total energy of a system must be the same before 
and after a change to the system, as energy is conserved.
556    Chapter 13
the world of physics
Energy

you are here 4    557
torque and work
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 13 under your belt 
and added some problem-solving tools 
to your toolbox.
CHAPTER 13
Lifting an object
If you have to lift an object in a 
physics problem, you should assume 
that the minimum force you require 
is equal to the object’s weight (unless 
there is friction involved).
This is because Newton’s 1st Law says 
that with zero net force, an object 
continues with a constant velocity. So 
once you’ve got it going upwards with 
an extra little ‘nudge’, you only need 
to exert a force equal to its weight 
to maintain its velocity.
“Spot the difference”
Differences drive changes that lead 
to energy transfer.
If there’s a difference in the height 
of an object between the start and 
finish of a problem, look and see 
if you can use energy conservation 
instead of forces to solve it.
“Zero net torque”
If you have a problem where 
something could potentially rotate 
and you have to work out the force 
you need to apply to make sure it 
doesn’t, then you are being asked 
what force is required for there to 
be zero net torque.
When you’re working with torques, 
take care to make one direction of 
rotation positive and stick with it.
Doing work
Doing work is a way of transferring 
energy from one store to another.
If you do work against a gravitational 
force by lifting an object, you increase 
its gravitational potential energy.
If you do work against a frictional 
force by pushing an object, you increase 
the internal energy of the object and 
of the surface it’s in contact with.


this is a new chapter    559
energy conservation
14
Making your life easier
Why do things the hard way when there’s an easier way? 
So far, you’ve been solving problems using equations of motion, forces and component 
vectors. And that’s great - except that it sometimes takes a while to crunch through the 
math. In this chapter, you’ll learn to spot where you can use energy conservation as a 
shortcut that lets you solve complicated-looking problems with relative ease.
Seriously? He’s spent 10 minutes 
explaining how he hung up his hat using 
forces and  component vectors? Lift 
and hang man -that’s it!

The ultimate bobsled experience
The fairground has designed a unique, new, state-of-the-art 
bobsled track that’s due to open soon. But before anyone can use 
it, it has to be designated as safe to ride. That’s your job. Even 
though you’re not a bobsledder, you can still use physics to figure 
out whether or not any adjustments have to be made.
From the start to checkpoint 1, the track has a uniform slope. 
Between checkpoints 1 and 2, the track drops 30.0 m, but the 
track undulates - the bobsled’s even going uphill for a bit! Then 
the third part of the track is totally flat - where the bobsled is 
stopped by applying its brake to the ice.
Your job is to work out what the bobsled’s speed will be at each 
checkpoint, and how hard you need to brake at the end.
Start any problem with 
a sketch and by asking 
yourself “What’s it LIKE?”
Can you see any parts of the bobsled track 
that you already know how to deal with?
Killer track, can’t wait to 
rip it up - when is it going 
to be safe to try!!
First section is 
a uniform slope.
Second section drops 
30.0 m while undulating
Third section is where 
you apply a brake to 
stop within 50.0 m.
Start
Checkpoint 1
Checkpoint 2
You need to figure out what 
the bobsled’s SPEED will be 
at each checkpoint.
Then you need to work out 
the braking FORCE that’ll 
stop the bobsled before the 
end of the track.
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
560    Chapter 14
what’s it like?

Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
A bobsled, mass m, travels down a uniform slope that makes an angle of 40.0° with 
the horizontal and drops 20.0 m in height between the start and the first checkpoint.
Hey ... haven’t we seem something 
going down a uniform slope before?!
You already know how to do this!
The first section of track looks like the 
WeightBotchers machine from chapter 11 where 
the person on a set of scales slides down a slope.
Even if the later parts of the track look tough, 
you can still start with what you can already do!
a. What distance does the bobsled travel between the start and the first checkpoint?
b. What is the component of the bobsled’s weight parallel to the slope?
c. What is the bobsled’s speed at the first checkpoint?
You can already handle the 
first part of the track.
You are here.
Weight = mg
Normal 
force
θ
θ
Perpendicular 
component
Parallel 
component
Hint: You don’t know a value 
for the bobsled’s mass, so this 
answer won’t be purely numerical 
and will have ‘m’ in it
Hint: Use Newton’s 2nd Law 
to move from net force to 
acceleration, then equations of 
motion to calculate the speed.
you are here 4    561
energy conservation

v
A bobsled, mass m, travels down a uniform slope that 
makes an angle of 40.0° with the horizontal and drops 
20.0 m in height between the start and the first checkpoint.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
20 m
θ = 40.0°
o
h
a
a. What distance does the bobsled travel between the 
start and the first checkpoint?
c. What is the bobsled’s speed at the first checkpoint?
The acceleration is 0.643 g, 
so remember to put in the 9.8
x0 = 0 m
x = 31.1 m
v0 = 0 m/s
v = ?
a = 0.643 g
Fnet  =  ma
0.643 mg  =  ma
a  =  0.643 g
v2  =  v0
2 + 2a(x - x0)
v  =    0 + 2 × 0.643 × 9.8 × 31.1   =  19.8 m/s (3 sd)
20 m
θ 
31.1 m
θ 
These two angles 
add up to 90°.
These two angles 
add up to 90°.
θ 
mg
o
h
a
F||
F⊥
Bobsled’s weight = mg
F||, component down the slope is the side opposite θ.
Use similar triangles to calculate side:
F||mg = 20.0
31.1
F||  =  0.643 mg (3 sd)
b. What is the component of the bobsled’s weight 
parallel to the slope?
o
h
sin(θ)  =
20.0
sin(40.0)
h  =
31.1 m (3 sd)
h  =
Triangle Tip: sketch extreme angles
If you’re not sure which angle in your 
force vector triangle corresponds to the 
angle of your slope, sketch a slope with 
a small angle, θ.
Now draw the force triangle. Draw on 
the weight pointing straight down. Then 
draw in the parallel and perpendicular 
components. It doesn’t matter which way 
round you draw the components, as the 
triangle’s sides will still be the same length.
θ is the small angle in the slope triangle 
- so θ will also be the small angle in the 
force triangle. 
θ
θ
θ
θ
F||
F⊥
If you want the normal force, it’s usually easiest 
to draw the triangle this way round, with the 
perpendicular component below the object.
If you want the net 
force down the slope, 
it’s usually easiest 
to draw the force 
triangle this way 
round, with the parallel 
component on the slope.
F||
F⊥
mg
mg
Making this angle small 
helps you to keep track 
of similar triangles.
If your answer contains variables, 
such as ‘m’ and ‘g’, you don’t need 
to put in units at the end, as the 
variables already have units. But 
you still need units for a purely 
numerical answer.
562    Chapter 14
lots of triangles

you are here 4    563
energy conservation
Forces and component vectors 
solve the first part ...
How can you deal with an undulating 
slope when all you know is that the 
bobsled drops 30.0 meters between 
the the first and second checkpoints?
...but the second part doesn’t 
have a uniform slope
The first part of the track has a uniform slope, that 
always makes the same angle with the horizontal. This 
means that the bobsled always experiences the same 
net force down the slope, as the component of the 
bobsled’s weight parallel to the slope is constant.
And you’ve just worked out that the bobsled will have 
reached a speed of 19.8 m/s when it reaches the first 
checkpoint. So far, so good ...
However, the second part of the bobsled run 
isn’t quite as straightforward. Although the 
track drops a further 30.0 meters, the slope 
definitely isn’t uniform - it has peaks and dips 
along the way. Sometimes the bobsled’s even 
going uphill!
Any time the angle of the slope changes, the 
component of its weight parallel to the slope 
also changes. This means that the net force on 
the bobsled changes, so the size and direction 
of its acceleration changes.
This is a problem, because the equations 
of motion only work when an object’s 
acceleration is constant. So you can’t use the 
same method as you did for the uniform slope.
An object moving down a 
slope is accelerated by the 
component of its weight 
parallel to the slope.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
You want to know 
the bobsled’s speed 
at each checkpoint.
CP 1
CP 2
Weight.
Parallel component always 
has different size and 
direction and sometimes 
slows the bobsled down!
Angle of the slope 
is always changing.
mg
F||
F⊥
mg
F||
F⊥
30.0 m
Start
CP 1
Weight.
Parallel component. 
is always the same.
Slope is the same for 
the whole section.
20.0 m
40.0°
mg
40.0°
F||
F⊥

Joe: But the next section’s more difficult - the slope changes all the 
time! The bobsled’s acceleration won’t be constant.
Jim: Maybe we can split the section up into lots of tiny sections? If 
the slope is uniform for a couple of meters, we could do a calculation 
for that, and then for the next bit, and then for the next bit and so on. 
Then add together all the changes in speed to get our final answer.
Joe: That’ll take for ever! I don’t think you could do it by hand.
Frank: You could probably program a computer to do that kinda 
job ... but I’ve no idea how to do that.
Jim: Maybe we’re going about this the wrong way. We’ve been 
thinking in terms of forces so far, but what about energy?
Joe: Hmmm. The bobsled loses 30.0 m of height. So the bobsled has 
more gravitational potential energy at the start of the section 
than it does at the end because of the difference in height.
Any time you see 
a change in height, 
think about using 
energy conservation.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
Frank: But how do we do a calculation with that? I’m not sure 
where that energy’s been transferred to!
Jim: Yeah - but energy’s conserved, right?! So the energy must 
be transferred in some way when the bobsled goes down the slope!
Jim: I wonder if we can say that the bobsled has energy because it’s 
moving?! Energy’s the capacity something has to do work, right?
Frank: Yeah ... if a moving object hits another object, the first 
object will exert a force that displaces the second object. So work 
gets done. A hammer! A moving hammer exerts a force to displace 
a nail into wood. That’s doing work, isn’t it?
Joe: I think we’d better take this further!
CP 1
CP 2
30.0 m
Difference 
in height.
So, one section of track 
down - two to go.
564    Chapter 14
changes in height

you are here 4    565
energy conservation
a. Imagine a moving hammer doing work on a nail by exerting a force on it to move it a displacement into 
a piece of wood. The more kinetic energy the hammer has, the more work it can do. With this in mind, 
what variables do you think the hammer’s kinetic energy might depend on, and why?
CP 1
CP 2
30.0 m
A moving object has kinetic energy
At the top of the slope the bobsled has more gravitational 
potential energy than it does part-way down or at the bottom 
because of the difference in height.
Moving objects are said to have kinetic energy. They’re able to 
do work by exerting a force that displaces something - that’s how 
hammering in a nail works. If the hammer was stationary and didn’t 
have a velocity, you couldn’t use it to do work on the nail!!
Differences drive changes that involve energy transfer. The difference 
in height leads to a change in the velocity of the bobsled. This 
means that the bobsled gains kinetic energy as it loses potential energy. 
If the bobsled’s potential energy goes down by 1000 J due to the 
difference in height, its kinetic energy increases by 1000 J.
If you can work out an equation for the kinetic energy, you’ll be able 
to use energy conservation to calculate the bobsled’s velocity at 
checkpoint 2 due to its change in height.
The change in potential 
energy is the same size as 
the change in kinetic energy 
because energy is conserved.
This is assuming there’s 
no friction - and there 
won’t be that much on ice.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
c. Write down an equation of motion for a 
falling object that involves x, x0, v0, v and a. 
Now you can collect useful equations that will help you work out an equation for kinetic energy. In this 
“Sharpen your pencil”, you’re only writing the equations down - you’ll do the rearranging and substituting 
on the next page. If you can’t remember the equations, it’s OK to look them up in appendix $.
b. Write down an equation for the gravitational 
potential energy of the bobsled, mass m, at its 
highest point, height h.
This is doing work: 
Work = F x.
This is kinetic energy 
remaining as kinetic energy
Kinetic
Kinetic
Potential
At checkpoint 1, the 
bobsled is moving, so it has 
some kinetic energy and 
some potential energy.
This is 
energy 
transfer.

a. Imagine a moving hammer doing work on a nail by exerting a force on it to move it a displacement into 
a piece of wood. The more kinetic energy the hammer has, the more work it can do. With this in mind, 
what variables do you think the hammer’s kinetic energy might depend on, and why?
c. Write down an equation of motion for a 
falling object that involves x, x0, v0, v and a. 
Now you can collect useful equations that will help you work out an equation for kinetic energy. In this 
“Sharpen your pencil”, you’re only writing the equations down - you’ll do the rearranging and substituting 
on the next page. If you can’t remember the equations, it’s OK to look them up in appendix $.
b. Write down an equation for the gravitational 
potential energy of the bobsled, mass m, at its 
highest point, height h.
Q: If I know the difference 
in height between the start 
and end of a uniform slope, 
I can work out an object’s 
velocity at the end, right?
A: Yes. If a slope is uniform 
and always at the same angle 
(like the first part of the track 
was), you can use forces and 
component vectors to calculate 
the net force on an object, and 
therefore its acceleration and 
final velocity. 
 
 
 
Q: What about an 
undulating slope? Can I 
do the same to solve that 
problem?
A: You could in theory ... 
though not easily. You’d need 
to work out the net force on 
the object for every tiny part 
of the slope. This is practically 
impossible unless you program 
a computer do to it for you. 
 
 
 
 
Q:Does a problem with an 
undulating slope always need 
a computer to solve it?
A: No - you can use energy 
conservation. The potential 
energy that the object has at 
the top of the slope must be 
transferred to kinetic energy as 
the object goes down the slope.
Q: What’s kinetic energy?
A: The capacity that 
something has to do work due to 
its velocity. Moving things have 
kinetic energy.
Q:I know that the potential 
energy is mgh, but what’s the 
equation for kinetic energy?
A: That’s what you’re in the 
process of working out. So far, 
you’ve realized that an object’s 
kinetic energy must depend on 
its mass and velocity. And you’re 
about to do some substitutions 
to see exactly how ...
The hammer will do more work if it has a high speed.
The hammer will do more work if it has a large mass.
So kinetic energy must depend on both mass and velocity.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
v2  =  v0
2 + 2a(x - x0)
Ug  =  F∆x  =  mgh
This will help you to connect the 
difference in height with the speed.
This gives you an expression 
for the potential energy 
that will be transferred 
to kinetic energy.
The more work the hammer 
does with each hit, the 
larger the displacement of 
the nail with each hit.
566    Chapter 14
kinetic energy

you are here 4    567
energy conservation
b. By making a substitution for the change in height, show that the kinetic energy (K) of an object dropped 
straight down from a stationary start at height h which started with potential energy, Ug = mgh is K = ½mv2.
The kinetic energy is 
related to the velocity
Moving objects have kinetic energy.
As the bobsled gets lower down the track, some of 
the potential energy it had at the start will be 
transferred to kinetic energy. The kinetic energy 
the bobsled gains must be equal to the potential 
energy that it loses.
The kinetic energy must depend somehow on the 
mass and velocity of the bobsled. If you can work 
out an equation for the change in kinetic energy, 
you can use it to calculate the bobsled’s change in 
velocity between the first and second checkpoints  
- and therefore its velocity at the second checkpoint.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
a. The two equations you wrote down on the previous page, Ug = mgh and v2 = v0
2 + 2a(x - x0), are both 
written down in the form that you’ll find them on equation sheets - but they use different letters to 
represent the same quantities. If you’re dealing with an object dropped straight down and accelerated by 
gravity, write down which variables in the equations are equivalent to each other. 
CP 1
CP 2
A change in height leads 
to energy transfer.
This is kinetic 
energy remaining 
as kinetic energy
Kinetic
This is 
energy 
transfer.
Kinetic
Potential
30.0 m
v1 = 19.8 m/s
v2 = ?
At checkpoint 1, the bobsled 
has some kinetic energy and 
some potential energy.

b. By making a substitution for the change in height, show that the kinetic energy (K) of an object dropped 
straight down from a stationary start at height h which started with potential energy, Ug = mgh is K = ½mv2.
U  =  mgh
v2  =  v0
2 + 2a(x - x0)
a. The two equations you wrote down on the previous page, Ug = mgh and v2 = v0
2 + 2a(x - x0), are both 
written down in the form that you’ll find them on equation sheets - but they use different letters to 
represent the same quantities. If you’re dealing with an object dropped straight down and accelerated by 
gravity, write down which variables in the equations are equivalent to each other.
In the first equation, the displacement is h; in the second it’s x - x0.
In the first equation, the acceleration is g; in the second it’s a.
Stationary start, so v0 = 0.
The change in height, h, is x - x0 
so rearrange and substitute.
Energy is conserved, so Ustart = Kend
v2  =  2g(x - x0)
The amount of energy transferred 
only depends on the change in height.
The bobsled has a certain store of potential 
energy as a result of being at a certain height. Its 
potential energy store doesn’t depend on what path 
it took to get up there in the first place.
The same change in height always leads to the 
same change in potential energy when the bobsled’s  
going down as well as when it’s going up. So that 
change in potential energy must be transferred to 
kinetic energy, whatever path the bobsled takes 
(assuming there’s no friction). The bobsled will 
always have the same change in kinetic energy for 
the same change in height.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
The same change 
in height always 
leads to the 
same change in 
potential energy, 
regardless of path.
v2
2g
Kend  =  Ustart  =  mgh  =  mg
Kend  =  ½mv2
(x - x0)  = v2
2g
But that equation’s for something that falls straight 
down, right? The bobsled doesn’t do that!
It’s sometimes a good idea to drop the ‘g’ subscript 
from Ug, the gravitational potential energy.
This is because the subscript is only to distinguish 
gravitational potential energy from Us, the elastic 
potential energy of a spring.
In a situation where there are no springs, and there 
could be confusion with ‘g’, the gravitational field 
strength, it’s best just to use the symbol ‘U’ with no 
subscript for gravitational potential energy. This also 
allows you to write Ustart and Uend more easily.
Substitute 
‘g’ for ‘a’.
Substitute ‘h’ 
for ‘x - x0’
h  = v2
2g
Substitute 
for ‘h’
568    Chapter 14
changes in height

you are here 4    569
energy conservation
The kinetic energy of a moving object is given by the equation:
	
K = ½mv2
This means that if you know the bobsled’s mass and kinetic 
energy, you can use them to calculate the bobsled’s velocity.
A bobsled travelling down a track has just reached its 
first checkpoint (CP1). The second checkpoint (CP2) is at 
the bottom of the slope, 30.0 m lower than the first.
If the bobsled has a speed of 19.8 m/s at CP1, what is its 
speed at CP2? (The bobsled’s potential + kinetic energy 
at the start will be equal to its kinetic energy at the end.)
Calculate the velocity using energy 
conservation and the change in height
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
You’re ready to work out 
the velocity at the second 
checkpoint? Cool!
You can calculate the bobsled’s kinetic energy using 
energy conservation. The difference in its speed 
between checkpoint 1 and checkpoint 2 is because of 
the difference in height between the two checkpoints. 
So the change in potential energy and the change 
in kinetic energy must be the same size.
K  =  ½mv2
Kinetic energy
Mass
Velocity
Hint: It’s a 
good idea to 
use subscripts 
to represent 
energy at each 
checkpoint, for 
example K1, U1, 
K2, U2, etc.

We said before that work is 
a scalar, right? Does that mean 
that kinetic energy is also a scalar?
570    Chapter 14
same velocity = same kinetic energy
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
A bobsled travelling down a track has just reached its 
first checkpoint (CP1). The second checkpoint (CP2) is at 
the bottom of the slope, 30.0 m lower than the first.
If the bobsled has a speed of 19.8 m/s at CP1, what is its 
speed at CP2? (The bobsled’s potential + kinetic energy 
at the start will be equal to its kinetic energy at the end.)
CP1:   K1 + U1  =  mgh + ½mv1
2
CP2:   K2  =  ½mv2
2
½mv2
2  =  mgh + ½mv1
2
v2
2  =  2gh + v1
2
v2  =   2gh + v1
2
v2  =   (2 × 9.8 × 30) + 19.82
v2  =   31.3 m/s (3 sd)
v2 = ?
v1 = 19.8 m/s
h = 30 m
If you can use energy 
conservation to do 
a problem, it’s less 
complicated than 
using forces.
Like work, energy is a scalar quantity.
Work is a scalar, as the same amount of work will be 
done by the same size of force moving an object the 
same distance, regardless of direction.
Kinetic energy is also a scalar, as an object with 
velocity, v, will have the same quantity of kinetic energy, 
K = ½mv2, regardless of the direction of its velocity.
A change in kinetic energy can be positive or negative. 
The sign doesn’t signify a direction, just a change in the 
amount of kinetic energy. In the same way, a change 
in mass (another scalar quantity) signifies the change in 
the amount of ‘stuff’, and can be positive or negative.
Same velocity 
means same 
kinetic energy, 
regardless of 
direction.
When you have a vector, its 
direction is shown by its sign. 
But when you square a number, 
the result is always positive. 
Therefore, v2 is a scalar, 
because the information about 
the direction of v (its sign) 
has been lost. This means that 
kinetic energy must also be a 
scalar, as K = ½mv2
Each term is 
multiplied by ‘m’. 
So ‘m’ divides 
out and cancels.

you are here 4    571
energy conservation
How could you calculate the force you need to 
apply with the brake to stop the bobsled?
You’ve used energy conservation 
to solve the second part
You’ve used energy conservation to 
work out that the bobsled has a speed of 
31.3 m/s when it hits the second checkpoint, 
30.0 m below the first.
The same change in height will always 
leads to the same change in potential 
energy - and to the same change in 
kinetic energy if there’s no friction.
In the third part, you have to apply 
a force to stop a moving object
The third part of the track is flat, and is the stretch where 
the bobsled must be brought to a halt by applying a brake 
to the ice. The track design states that the 630 kg bobsled 
must be stationary by the time it’s covered 50.0 m.
How should you go about calculating the force you need 
to apply with the brake?
You need to work out the 
braking FORCE that’ll stop 
the bobsled by the end of 
the track.
So if we can work 
out the braking force 
from that velocity, I can 
get my first run in!
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
CP 1
CP 2
A change in height leads 
to energy transfer.
This is kinetic 
energy remaining 
as kinetic energy.
Kinetic
This is 
energy 
transfer.
Kinetic
Potential
30.0 m
v1 = 19.8 m/s
v2 = 31.3 m/s
CP2
Finish
50.0 m
v0 = 31.3 m/s
v = 0
630 kg is the maximum 
mass the bobsled is 
allowed to have when 
there are people in it.

CP2
Finish
50.0 m
v0 = 31.3 m/s
v = 0
Jim: Well, there’s no change in height, so we can’t do anything 
with energy. I guess we can use equations of motion to work out 
the acceleration, and then Newton’s Second Law, Fnet = ma, to 
calculate the force. That would work!
Joe: But it would be a lot of calculations. Are you sure we can’t do 
something with energy conservation? That was easier than using 
equations of motion for the previous part of the track
Jim: Well, fairly sure. There’s no change in height, so no change in 
potential energy. So how would we use energy conservation?
Joe: I was thinking - we need to stop the bobsled within a certain 
distance by applying a force. That sounds like doing work to me!
Frank: Yeah, you do work on something by applying a force. But I 
thought you actually had to displace something with the force - not 
just shove a brake down as you slide along some ice!
Any time you 
apply a force over 
a distance, think 
work and energy!
Apply a FORCE 
over a DISTANCE 
to stop the bobsled.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
Jim: Wait, he might be right. When you catch a baseball, you exert 
a force on it with your hand. And your hand moves backwards 
as you catch it, so you apply the force over a distance. And that 
changes the kinetic energy of the ball.
Joe: So can we use the same kind of principle with calculating the 
force we need to stop the bobsled? We know its mass and velocity, 
so we can calculate its kinetic energy - AND we also know the 
distance that we need to apply the force over - 50.0 m.
Frank: But where does the kinetic energy of the bobsled - or the 
baseball for that matter - go when you stop it?! It’s not like it gets 
transferred to potential energy, is it?
So, how are we gonna 
calculate the force we 
need to apply to the 
track with the brake?
572    Chapter 14
force over distance

you are here 4    573
energy conservation
Putting on the brake does work on the track
You need to stop the bobsled by applying the brake 
before it reaches the end of the course. You’ve 50.0 m to 
stop it, but you need to know what force to apply with 
the brake.
One way of doing this problem would be to calculate 
the acceleration that the bobsled experiences as is slows 
down, then use Fnet = ma to calculate the force required. 
This method is fine, and will give you the correct answer.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
BE the brake
Your job is to imagine that you’re the brake. What happens in terms of energy 
transfer from the moment that the brake is applied to the track to the moment 
that the bobsled comes to a complete stop? Write notes on the picture and 
give a written explanation below.
Braking 
force
Initial 
velocity
Kinetic
Final velocity 
is 0 m/s
Point that brake 
is first applied.
Displacement that force of brake acts for.
However, for the earlier parts of this problem, you’ve 
discovered that using energy conservation to do a 
calculation can be a lot quicker and easier than using forces. 
Work = F x, so applying a force with the brake over the 
50.0 m distance will do work.
But how is energy transferred from the moment the 
brake is applied to the moment the bobsled stops moving?
Do problems using 
energy conservation 
if possible.

When you put on the brake, you transfer some 
of the bobsled’s kinetic energy to the internal 
energy of the brake and the track by doing work 
against friction. This reduces the kinetic energy  of 
the bobsled - and therefore its speed, as K = ½mv2
Energy transfer also happens when small pieces of 
ice spray up from the track. Each individual piece 
of ice has a small amount of kinetic energy - not 
much compared with the bobsled’s kinetic energy 
- but over 50.0 m this will have an effect.
Doing work against friction 
increases the internal energy
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
When you do work 
against friction, 
you increase the 
INTERNAL ENERGY 
of the surfaces that are 
moving over each other.
Internal energy of track
Internal 
energy of 
brake
Kinetic energy 
of pieces of ice.
‘Jostling’ particles
BE the brake - SOLUTION
Your job is to imagine that you’re the brake. What happens in terms of energy 
transfer from the moment that the brake is applied to the track to the moment 
that the bobsled comes to a complete stop? Write notes on the picture and 
give a written explanation below.
Braking 
force
Kinetic
Final velocity 
is 0 m/s
Displacement that force of brake acts for.
At the start the bobsled has kinetic energy; at the end its kinetic energy is zero. 
The kinetic energy is transferred to the internal energy of the brake and the track, as the 
brake does work against friction. The movement of the brake over the track kind of ‘jostles’ 
the particles and makes them move around more vigorously inside the brake and the track.
Initial 
velocity
574    Chapter 14
increasing internal energy

you are here 4    575
energy conservation
What’s the difference between increasing an 
object’s internal energy (which increases the kinetic 
energy of its individual particles), and increasing the 
kinetic energy of the whole object?
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
Increasing mechanical energy moves 
particles together in an ordered way.
If an object’s energy store can easily be used to do work, 
then it’s said to have mechanical energy. Kinetic 
energy, gravitational potential energy and elastic 
potential energy (which is like a compressed or 
stretched spring) are all examples of mechanical energy.
Giving something mechanical energy involves moving 
all of its particles together, for example by lifting 
it, compressing it or giving it a velocity. Although the 
individual particles inside the object will continue to 
move around at random, there’s a net displacement 
on a macroscopic scale (large scale).
Particles have same 
amount of internal energy 
whatever the height or 
speed of the object.
Particles all move together 
as whole object moves - a 
net macroscopic displacement.
Increasing internal energy makes particles 
move more vigorously in a disordered way.
If you increase something’s internal energy, you make the 
random motion of its particles more pronounced.
If it’s a liquid or a gas, you can think of this as increasing the 
kinetic energy of each individual particle as they move around. 
Each individual particle has 
more kinetic energy than it 
did before.
Particles move in random directions.
Lower mechanical energy
Higher mechanical energy
x
If it’s a solid, you can think of this as increasing 
the intensity with which atoms vibrate. This is 
like giving the atoms kinetic energy and their 
bonds potential energy (like springs).
Increasing internal energy involves many tiny 
increases of kinetic or potential energy on a 
microscopic scale. But as these changes 
occur in random directions, they don’t 
lead to a change  in mechanical energy on a 
macroscopic scale, because there’s no overall 
net displacement.
Lower internal energy
Higher internal energy
With potential or 
kinetic energy, the 
whole object moves in 
an ordered way.
This is the same 
object, before and 
after it’s been lifted.

Q: So what’s the difference between 
mechanical energy and kinetic energy? 
The names sound kinda similar.
A: Mechanical energy is a catch-all term 
for kinetic energy and potential energy - the 
kinds of energy stores that can be easily 
harnessed to do work.
Q: How do I calculate the mechanical 
energy of a system?
A: The mechanical energy is the total 
potential energy plus the total kinetic energy.
Q: Why is mechanical energy useful?
A: If there’s no friction, the total 
mechanical energy is conserved. For 
example, you can work out the speed of 
an object that’s at a lower height than it 
started off at by working out the change in 
its potential energy. This must be the same 
size as its change in kinetic energy, which 
you can use to calculate its speed.
Q:What is internal energy? 
A: Every object or substance has internal 
energy due to the movement of the particles 
it’s made from. Particles in a solid vibrate; 
particles in a liquid or gas move around.
Q: Why is internal energy different 
from mechanical energy?
A: An object’s mechanical energy 
changes when all of its particles experience 
the same movement on a macroscopic 
(large) scale. 
 
For example, if an object is lifted to a new 
height, its particles all move together in 
an ordered way and its potential energy 
increases. And if an object gets faster, its 
particles all move together in an ordered 
way and its kinetic energy increases.
Q: But internal energy also involves 
the movement of particles - which 
themselves have individual stores of 
kinetic or potential energy. Why is it 
different from the movement of particles 
in mechanical energy?
A: The particles move or vibrate in 
a random, disordered way. When you 
increase the internal energy of an object, its 
particles don’t all suddenly spontaneously 
relocate all together. They do move with 
greater individual energies on a microscopic 
scale. But on a macroscopic scale, the 
object as a whole stays where it is!
Mechanical energy 
is about changes on 
a macroscopic scale.
Internal energy is 
about changes on a 
microscopic scale.
Are you ready to work out 
the braking force? I can’t 
wait to try out the ride!
576    Chapter 14
macroscopic or microscopic

you are here 4    577
energy conservation
A 630 kg bobsled going at 31.3 m/s is to be brought to a halt by a brake applied to the ice track.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
a. Describe this process in terms of energy transfer.
b. If the bobsled is to be stopped in 50.0 m, what force needs to be used?
c. Another way of helping to stop the bobsled is for the final part of the track to be slightly uphill. If the 
track goes up by 10.0 m during the final 50.0 m, what force would be required from the brake then?
d. If the bobsled is to be returned to the top of the track (50.0 m above the bottom) what is the minimum 
time it would take a 10.0 kW engine time to lift it the requisite height (assuming 90% efficiency)?
Watts (W) are a measure of power. 
1 Watt = 1 Joule per second.
This means that 
only 90% of the 
engine’s energy is 
‘usefully’ used. The 
rest goes towards 
increasing the 
internal energy of  
various moving parts.
Hint: Calculate the total energy required, 
then see how many seconds it takes the 
engine to produce that amount of energy.
Hint: Assume that there’s no friction, so the 
engine only has to do work against gravity.

Q:If energy conservation lets me do complicated questions 
this easily, what’s the point of equations of motion and force?
A:To understand energy conservation, you needed to build on top 
of a base of the other things you mention. And you can’t solve every 
problem using energy conservation! It’s another tool in your toolkit, 
but not one you’ll be able to use exclusively.
Q: But I will be using it a lot, right?
A: Yes ... but when it’s appropriate! A lot of scenarios will involve 
collisions where mechanical energy isn’t conserved, and you can’t 
directly calculate the change in internal energy. You’ll have to use 
other tools as well as energy for dealing with problems like that.
A 630 kg bobsled going at 31.3 m/s is to be brought to a halt by a brake applied to the ice track.
The moving bobsled has kinetic energy. As it slows down, energy is transferred and the internal 
energy of the brake and the track increase. When the bobsled is stationary, the brake and the 
track will be hotter than they were before due to their increase in internal energy.
Work done  =  F x         K  =  ½mv2
F x  =  ½mv2
F  = ½mv2
x
= 0.5 × 630 × 31.32
50.0
=  6170 N (3 sd)
Need to ‘get rid of’ all the bobsled’s kinetic energy by doing work against friction.
Some kinetic energy transferred to potential energy. Transfer the rest by doing work against friction.
F x + mgh  =  ½mv2
F  = ½mv2 - mgh
x
= (0.5 × 630 × 31.32) - (630 × 9.8 × 10.0)
50.0
F  =  4940 N (3 sd)
Work required to lift bobsled  =  mgh  =  630 × 9.8 × 50.0  =  309000 J (3 sd)
Engine produces 10000 Joules per second; 9000 Joules per second are useful.
Time taken  = 309000
9000
=  34.3 s (3 sd)
a. Describe this process in terms of energy transfer.
b. If the bobsled is to be stopped in 50.0 m, what force needs to be used?
c. Another way of helping to stop the bobsled is for the final part of the track to be slightly uphill. If the 
track goes up by 10.0 m during the final 50.0 m, what force would be required from the brake then?
d. If the bobsled is to be returned to the top of the track (50 m above the bottom) what is the minimum 
time it would take a 10.0 kW engine time to lift it the requisite height (assuming 90% efficiency)?
It doesn’t matter how far the bobsled 
travels horizontally - as long as it ends 
50.0 m higher than it starts, this is 
the energy required to get it up there.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
578    Chapter 14
energy conservation

you are here 4    579
energy conservation
Energy conservation helps you to do 
complicated problems in a simpler way
You’ve just used energy conservation  to solve complicated and even 
impossible-looking problems in a simpler way.
If you have something moving down or up a slope, then you can work 
out the change in its potential energy - and hence the change in its 
kinetic energy and speed - from the change in its height, no matter 
what path it takes.
And if there’s friction involved, you can think of it in terms of energy 
transfer rather than forces if you’re interested in displacement. This 
gives you the braking force of 6170 N that you need.
So the bobsled’s OK? 
Nice! I’m up first!
Look out for differences in height, velocity etc. 
between the start and end of your problem 
that may allow you to use energy conservation.
Start
Checkpoint 1
Checkpoint 2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
This is kinetic 
energy remaining 
as kinetic energy.
Kinetic
This is energy 
transfer.
This is potential 
energy remaining as 
potential energy.
This is energy 
transfer.
Kinetic
This is energy 
transfer.
Potential
Potential
Internal

Not quite. Momentum and kinetic 
energy are different.
If something is stationary, you can get it going by 
giving it a push, i.e. applying a force.
I’m not clear on the difference between momentum (mv) 
and kinetic energy (½mv2). A moving object has both, their 
equations look similar and they’re both conserved. So aren’t they 
just different ways of saying the same thing?!
You get something’s 
momentum from 
the time a force is 
applied for.
You get something’s 
kinetic energy from 
the displacement a 
force is applied for.
Force is applied for this displacement, x.
Force is applied for 
the time, t, it 
takes to get here.
Moving bobsled has both 
momentum, p, and kinetic energy, K.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
The kinetic energy equation says that 
if you do work on an object by applying 
a force for a certain displacement it 
gains kinetic energy, F x = K = ½mv2
F x = K
F x is the area under the 
force - displacement graph.
F
Force
Displacement
x
F
x
The momentum-impulse equation 
says that if you apply a net force for a 
period of time, it causes a change in 
momentum, F t = p = (mv)
F t = p
F
Force
Time
t
F t is the area under 
the force - time graph.
The graph is a 
rectangle with height 
F and width t. 
So the area of the 
rectangle is F t.
580    Chapter 14
momentum and kinetic energy

you are here 4    581
energy conservation
There’s a practical difference  
between momentum and kinetic energy
To think about pushing an object to start it off is a bit abstract. A 
more practical way of seeing the difference between momentum and 
kinetic energy is to think about stopping a moving object.
Imagine catching a ball thrown to you. The ball has a mass and 
a velocity, and you need to apply a force with your hand to stop 
it. The time you need to apply the force for depends on the ball’s 
momentum. The displacement you need to apply the force over 
depends on the ball’s kinetic energy - in stopping the ball, it does 
work on you to deform the glove and stretch your arm, which reduces 
the ball’s kinetic energy to zero.
The exercise is about the practical difference between the time and 
the displacement it takes to stop an object - which illustrates the 
difference between its momentum and its kinetic energy
b. A bullet with a mass of 3.45 g is fired at 
1500 m/s. Calculate (i)  its momentum and 
(ii) its kinetic energy
You ‘give’ your hand 
as you catch the ball, 
so it goes back this 
displacement.
You apply this 
force to stop 
the ball.
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
F
x
c. You can catch the baseball by exerting a force on it with your hand. Explain, using physics, why you 
couldn’t practically stop the bullet by exerting the same force. (Assume that by using ‘soft hands’ as 
you catch the ball, you apply the force and bring the ball to a stop over a displacement of 30 cm.)
a. A baseball with a mass of 145 g is pitched 
at 35.8 m/s. Calculate (i) its momentum and 
(ii) its kinetic energy.

The bullet has around 35 times more kinetic energy than the ball. To stop a moving object,  
you need to do the same amount of work on it as its current kinetic energy.
So you need to do 35 times more work on the bullet than on the ball.
Work  =  F x. If you exert the same size of force on the bullet, you need to apply it over a 
displacement of 30 × 30 cm = 900 cm = 9 meters for the bullet. You can’t physically do that, so 
the bullet goes through your glove (and worse). Not recommended.
Q: So even though the equations 
for  momentum and kinetic energy 
look similar, they’re different?
A: Yes. They’re different quantities with 
different units.
Q: But momentum and kinetic 
energy are both conserved?
A: Momentum is always conserved. 
Total energy is also always conserved, 
but may be transferred between potential, 
kinetic and internal energy - it won’t 
always be kinetic.
Q: If a baseball and a bullet both 
have the same momentum, how come 
a bullet does more damage?
A: Momentum depends on v, but 
kinetic energy depends on v2. If an 
object has a high velocity, then v2 really 
dominates. If the object is going 3 times 
faster, it’ll have 9 times as much kinetic 
energy! So the same force requires 9 
times as much displacement to stop it. 
That’s part of the reason that a bullet will 
embed itself a large distance into a piece 
of wood, but a baseball with the same 
momentum will only make a small dent.
The distance 
required to 
stop an object 
depends on its 
kinetic energy.
b. A bullet with a mass of 3.45 g is fired at 
1500 m/s. Calculate (i)  its momentum and 
(ii) its kinetic energy
c. You can catch the baseball by exerting a force on it with your hand. Explain, using physics, why you 
couldn’t practically stop the bullet by exerting the same force. (Assume that by using ‘soft hands’ as 
you catch the ball, you apply the force and bring the ball to a stop over a displacement of 30 cm.)
a. A baseball with a mass of 145 g is pitched 
at 35.8 m/s. Calculate (i) its momentum and 
(ii) its kinetic energy.
(i) p  =  mv  =  0.145 × 35.8 
p  =  5.19 kg.m/s (3 sd)
(i) p  =  mv  =  0.00345 × 1500
p  =  5.18 kg.m/s (3 sd)
(ii) K  =  ½mv2  =  0.5 × 0.145 × 38.52
K  =  107 J (3 sd)
(ii) K  =  ½mv2  =  0.5 × 0.00345 × 15002
K  =  3880 J (3 sd)
Start
CP1
CP2
20.0 m
40.0°
30.0 m
50.0 m
582    Chapter 14
exercise solution

you are here 4    583
energy conservation
So should I think about changes in 
energy rather than about the “total” 
energy something possesses?
I’ve kinda been wondering ... I’ve been using 
energy for a couple of chapters now, but I still 
don’t really know what it actually is.
Energy is the capacity something has 
to do work. Total energy is conserved.
The definition of energy is the capacity something 
has to do work - if all of the energy could be 
harnessed and used in this way.
You can measure changes in energy as it is 
transferred, and use energy to do calculations.
Energy conservation is a law.
Energy conservation is a law of nature. A 
law isn’t an object - you can’t pick it up and 
put it in your pocket and say “this is energy 
conservation”. But you can observe how things 
behave as a result of a law.
You can observe changes in kinetic energy, 
potential energy, internal energy, etc. When 
you  look at all the changes in energy, you find 
that they add up to zero and the total energy 
is conserved. For example a positive change 
in kinetic energy may be offset by a negative 
change in potential energy.
Even though you can’t “see energy” directly, 
you can express the law using words or math 
and use energy conservation to work things out.
You deal with changes in 
potential, kinetic, internal etc 
energy - not absolute values.

584
Question Clinic: The “Show that” Question
The “show that” question is unusual in that it gives 
you the “answer” and asks you to show how you can get 
there from a given starting point. The key is to realize that it’s OK to work 
backwards as well as forwards! Look at the equation you’re supposed to end 
up with, and figure out which variables you’ll need to make substitutions for. 
Also look back at earlier parts of the question, since you have probably already 
been asked to “do” something with the equations you’ll need to 
manipulate for the “show that” question.
If you spot a “show that” question, look carefully at the 
parts of the question that came before to see what it would like you 
to use. If you get stuck and there’s another part of the question that asks you 
to use the equation in the “show that” part, it’s OK to use the equation to 
do a calculation even if you got stuck deriving the equation.
2. A bobsled moves down a non-uniform, frictionless slope.
Using the equations U = mgh, and v2 = v0
2 + 2a(x-x0) and 
the fact that the potential energy, U,  at the top is equal to the 
kinetic energy, K, at the bottom, show that K = ½mv2
The second checkpoint is 30.0 m lower than the first. If the 
bobsled has a speed of 19.8 m/s at the first checkpoint, what 
is its speed at the second?
a.
b.
Be aware that the equations 
on your equation sheet may 
use different letters to 
represent the same thing.
This is a buzzword 
which means “mechanical 
energy conservation”.
h and (x - x0) both 
represent a change in 
displacement / position.
a and g both 
represent 
acceleration.
This means that the 
question is about algebra - 
and you need to manipulate 
the equations you already 
have to get this one.
Even if you didn’t manage the ‘show that’ 
part of the question, you’re still allowed 
to USE the equation that you were 
supposed to derive in the second part.
Part b. of a question doesn’t exist on its own - it’s usually related 
to part a. in some way. Here, you need to realize that part b. is 
about using the energy conservation equation you worked out in 
part a with some numbers included.

585
3. A 630 kg bobsled going at 31.3 m/s is to be brought to a 
halt by a brake applied to the track.
Describe this process in terms of energy transfer.
If the bobsled is to be stopped in 50.0 m, what force 
needs to be used?
Another way of helping to stop the bobsled is for the 
final part of the track to be slightly uphill. If the track 
goes up by 10.0 m during the final 50.0 m, what force 
would be required from the brake then?
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Energy transfer” Question
Any time you see forces and displacements 
mentioned, you should immediately think about whether 
you can use energy as a way of solving the problem. Look out for differences 
in height - these should immediately scream “gravitational potential energy” 
at you! And look out for a net force being applied for a certain distance. This 
may lead to an object gaining kinetic energy, or to work being done against 
friction, or both, depending on the circumstances.
Always remember that it’s the total energy 
that’s conserved. if the question gives you reason to 
believe there’s no friction , then this means the mechanical 
energy (i.e. kinetic + potential) is conserved . If there is 
friction, then energy may be transferred in more than one 
way at once, e.g. kinetic to both potential and internal.
The buzzword ‘brake’ means that 
kinetic energy will be transferred 
to internal energy when work is 
done against friction.
This means you’ve 
to use words to put 
across the physics 
concepts behind 
what happens.
You need to explain that energy is conserved, 
and where it is transferred from and to.
Any time 
you see a 
force and a 
displacement, 
think about 
whether work 
is being done.
When you see a change in 
height, think about gravitational 
potential energy.
The force will be different, as some of the 
kinetic energy is transferred to gravitational 
potential energy because of the change in height.

I’ve already used a lot of the 
physics you showed me - but there’s a big 
problem. The football players always slid together 
after a tackle, but the pool balls need to bounce when 
they collide - it’s a major part of the game!
A few weeks after your key role as physics consultant on the 
multi-million seller SimFootball game, the programmer is 
back in touch. They’re working on a SimPool game - but have 
run into a problem.
After the roaring success of 
SimFootball, it’s time for SimPool
Final momentum pf, 
is equal to total 
momentum before 
the collision.
Momentum of 
each player.
Players form one 
mass after collision.
p1
p2
ptot
Before
After
p1 = m1v1
m1
m2
p2 = m2v2
Total 
momentum
Reusing the old code makes the 
pool balls stick together!
The pool balls need to bounce when they collide, but the 
programmer doesn’t know how to work out the velocity they 
move with. His only experience is of the football players in the 
previous game - but they didn’t bounce when they collided.
Reusing the football code in the pool game makes the pool balls 
stick together when they collide - which definitely isn’t right!
m1+m2
pf = (m1+m2)vf
586    Chapter 14
on to simpool

you are here 4    587
energy conservation
The collision in the pool game is called an elastic 
collision because the pool balls bounce off of 
each other in an elastic way.
With the completely inelastic collision, you had a 
single mass moving with a single velocity after the 
collision. But with this elastic collision you have 
two masses each with their own velocity. You don’t 
know either of the velocities - so this time there 
are two unknowns that you need to calculate.
The collision in the football game is called an inelastic 
collision, because the players don’t “bounce” off of each 
other in an elastic way.
Momentum is always conserved in a collision. Since 
you know the mass and velocity of each player before the 
collision, you have one unknown (the velocity of the stuck 
together players after the collision) which you can work out 
using one equation (the momentum conservation equation).
Momentum conservation will 
solve an inelastic collision problem
Where might you get a second 
equation from, so you can solve 
for the two unknown velocities?
m1v1 + m2v2 = (m1+m2)vf
v1
m1
m2
v2
m1+m2
vf
Before
After
Momentum conservation:
vf is the only unknown, so you can use 
this one equation to calculate it.
You need a second equation 
for an elastic collision
Momentum is always conserved in a 
collision, but with two unknowns, a single 
momentum conservation equation is not enough. 
We’ll need to come up with a second equation to 
fix the pool game - if you have two equations, you 
can work out two unknowns.
You don’t know v1f or v2f. As there are two things 
you don’t know, you can’t work either of them out 
when you just have one equation.
m1v10 + m2v20  =  m1v1f + m2v2f
v10
m1
m2
v20
v2f
Before
After
Momentum conservation:
m2
m1
v1f
The football players become one mass 
with one velocity after the collision.
To solve for two 
unknowns, you need 
two equations.
v10 means ‘initial velocity of object 1’. 
v1f means ‘final velocity of object 1’. 
The subscripts help you to keep track 
of which object is which.

Jim: Yeah, but that gives us a problem that we didn’t have with 
the inelastic collision. We wind up with two velocities after 
the collision instead of only one.
Joe: We can’t use momentum conservation on its own to 
solve the problem this time - you can’t get the values of two 
unknowns from one equation.
Frank: Yeah, but momentum is still conserved in an elastic 
collision - right? So we need to think of a second equation we 
can use alongside momentum conservation to solve the problem.
Jim: What about energy conservation? That’s been useful to 
us before.
Joe: I’m not sure about that. it’s not like the pool balls’ height 
changes. We can’t do anything with potential energy.
Frank: But the pool balls are moving, right? What about their 
kinetic energy?
Jim: Yeah, the pool balls are moving before the collision, and 
they’re moving afterwards, so they must have kinetic energy 
before and after.
Joe: How do we know for sure that some of the kinetic energy 
isn’t transferred to internal energy when the pool balls collide?
Frank: Well, it’s not like the pool balls get really hot, like a brake 
would when you apply it to slow down.
Jim: And it’s not like the pool balls deform, and the arrangement 
of the particles inside them gets messed up.
Joe: Yeah, I think you might be right. The collision’s elastic, 
right? And energy must be conserved. Before, there’s kinetic 
energy. After there’s kinetic energy. if the change in internal 
energy is minimal, we can say that there’s the same amount of 
kinetic energy before and after the collision.
Frank: So, momentum is conserved - that’s one equation.
Jim: And the kinetic energy’s the same before and after because 
the collision is elastic - that’s a second equation!
Joe: And both of the equations have the pool balls’ velocities in 
them, so we can use the two equations to solve the problem!
Momentum is 
conserved in an 
inelastic collision.
Momentum and 
kinetic energy are 
conserved in an 
elastic collision.
We soooo need to fix that pool game 
- the pool balls definitely shouldn’t stick 
together - it’s an elastic collision!
588    Chapter 14
momentum is conserved

you are here 4    589
energy conservation
Energy conservation gives you 
the second equation that you need!
The pool balls hit each other in an elastic collision. This 
means that their internal energies don’t increase significantly 
as a result of the collision, because they don’t deform in any 
way (unlike the football players, whose padding deforms and 
doesn’t bounce back when they collide).
Since the internal energy doesn’t change, this means that 
the total kinetic energy of the two pool balls is the 
same before and after the collision. This gives you a second 
equation you can use.
If you have two equations (momentum conservation and 
kinetic energy before and after the collision) you can work out 
two unknowns - the final velocities of the two pool balls.
Two pool balls both have the same mass, m. A moving ball, velocity v10 hits a second, stationary, ball 
head on. After the collision, the first ball has velocity v1f and the second v2f.
a. Write down an equation showing that 
momentum is conserved.
b. Write down an equation showing that 
kinetic energy is conserved.
d. Multiply out the parentheses and simplify your new equation as much as you can. (Don’t worry if you 
can’t find a way to make it say “v1f = something” yet - we’ll do that on the next page.)
c. Eliminate the variable v2f by rearranging your equation from part a. and substituting it into your 
equation from part b, so that you only have one unknown, v1f.
½m1v1
2 + ½m2v2
2  =  ½m1v1f
2 + ½m2v2f
2
Energy conservation:
m1v1 + m2v2  =  m1v1f + m2v2f
m1
m2
Before
After
Momentum conservation:
m2
m1
This means that m1 = m2 = m
This means that v20 = 0, which 
should simplify the problem a bit.
These are just illustrations of 
what the velocities MIGHT be 
after the collision.
With two equations, 
you can solve for 
two unknowns.
v10
v20
v2f
v1f

Factoring your equation will help.
If rearranging your equation to say “v1f = something” is 
difficult, then factoring it is another way of trying to solve 
it. Factoring involves spotting where you can put in some 
parentheses - it’s basically the reverse of multiplying out 
parentheses.
If two things multiplied together = zero, then at least one 
of the things must be zero. For example, if you have xy = 0, 
then either x or y (or perhaps both) must be 0. You have a 
zero on the right hand side of your equation, v1f
2 - v10v1f = 0.
So if you can factor the left hand side of your equation so 
that it consists of two things multiplied together, you can say 
for sure that one of them must be zero. You can work out 
from the context which of them actually is zero.
If xy = 0 then 
either x or y 
(or maybe both) 
MUST be 0.
Factoring can also 
be called factorising.
Two pool balls both have the same mass, m. A moving ball, velocity v10 hits a second, stationary, ball 
head on. After the collision, the first ball has velocity v1f and the second v2f.
a. Write down an equation showing that 
momentum is conserved.
b. Write down an equation showing that 
kinetic energy is conserved.
d. Multiply out the parentheses and simplify your new equation as much as you can. (Don’t worry if you 
can’t find a way to make it say “v1f = something” yet - we’ll do that on the next page.)
mv10 + 0  =  mv1f + mv2f
½mv10
2 + 0  =  ½mv1f
2 + ½mv2f
2
c. Eliminate the variable v2f by rearranging your equation from part a. and substituting it into your 
equation from part b, so that you only have one unknown, v1f.
½mv10
2  =  ½mv1f
2 + ½mv2f
2
mv10  =  mv1f + mv2f
v10  =  v1f + v2f
v10
2  =  v1f
2 + v2f
2
(a)
(b)
v2f   =  v10 - v1f
v10
2  =  v1f
2 + (v10 - v1f)2
Substitute this into (b).
v10
2  =  v1f
2 + v10
2 - 2v10v1f + v1f 
2
0  =  2v1f
2 - 2v10v1f
v1f
2 - v10v1f  =  0
v10
2  =  v1f
2 + (v10 - v1f)2
This means that m1 = m2 = m
This means that v20 = 0, which 
should simplify the problem a bit.
v20 = 0, so it doesn’t 
appear in either equation.
The only unknown in 
this equation is v1f.
So I end up with this ... this thing 
v1f
2 - v10v1f = 0 that I’m supposed to 
rearrange to say “v1f = something”. But how 
am I gonna do that?!
There’s a v10
2 on each side, so it can be 
subtracted from both sides and canceled.
You can divide 
every term in the 
equation by 2.
This is the equation 
where all the terms 
with v1f in them are on 
the left hand side.
All terms are multiplied 
by m, so you can divide 
it out and cancel it.
All terms are multiplied 
by ½m, so you can divide 
it out and cancel it.
590    Chapter 14
factor your equations

you are here 4    591
energy conservation
If more than one term 
has the same variable 
multiplying everything 
else in the term, you can 
factor your equation.
Factoring involves putting in parentheses
The terms ab and ac both have an ‘a’ in them that everything else 
in the term is multiplied by. Because of this, the ‘a’ is called a 
common factor, because it is common to both terms.
You can factor your terms by moving the common factor outside a 
set of parentheses  So ab + ac becomes a(b + c).
ab
ac
+
+
c
b
a
=
a is the common factor that 
everything else is multiplied by.
If you have the equation a(b+c) = 0 then either a = 0 or (b+c) = 0. 
This is because if two things multiplied together = 0 then one (or 
both) of the things must be zero.
a. In your equation v1f
2 - v10v1f = 0, which variable appears in both terms, so that everything else in the 
term is multiplied by it?
b. If you have parentheses, you can multiply them out, e.g. a(b + c) = ab + ac. The terms ab and ac both 
have the common factor ‘a’ in them which everything else in the term is multiplied by.
Use this information to write your equation v1f
2 - v10v1f = 0 in a form where the left hand side is a single 
term that involves parentheses.
c. If two things multiplied together = 0 then one or both of the things must be zero. Use this fact to 
calculate two values that v1f may have, then use the context to explain which value you think is correct.

You can deal with elastic collisions now
Momentum is always conserved in any collision, 
whether it’s inelastic or elastic. Energy is always 
conserved as well - but if the collision is inelastic, some 
is transferred as internal energy. If the collision is 
elastic, then the total kinetic energy is conserved.
If you have a problem involving an elastic 
collision, you should always use momentum 
conservation. If you only have one unknown, 
then you’re done.
If you have two unknowns, you can use energy 
conservation to give you a second equation 
that helps you to work out both unknowns.
A rule of thumb is that any collision 
that involves an object being 
deformed in some way is inelastic, as 
the molecules in the  object have 
been rearranged, which increases the 
internal energy of the object.
For any collision, use 
momentum conservation first. 
If the collision is elastic and 
you have two unknowns, use 
kinetic energy as well.
a. In your equation v1f
2 - v10v1f = 0, which variable appears in both terms, so that everything else in the 
term is multiplied by it?
b. If you have parentheses, you can multiply them out, e.g. a(b + c) = ab + ac. The terms ab and ac both 
have the common factor ‘a’ in them which everything else in the term is multiplied by.
Use this information to write your equation v1f
2 - v10v1f = 0 in a form where the left hand side is a single 
term that involves parentheses.
c. If two things multiplied together = 0 then one or both of the things must be zero. Use this fact to 
calculate two values that v1f may have, then use the context to explain which value you think is correct.
v1f
2 - v10v1f  =  0
The variable v1f appears in both terms.
v1f(v1f - v10)  =  0
Either v1f = 0    or  (v1f - v10) = 0
If (v1f - v10) = 0 this means that v1f = v10 , in other words, the 1st pool ball has continued at its 
original velocity as if it hadn’t hit the other one. This is impossible.
The other possible solution is V1f = 0. This looks right, as when you hit a pool ball straight at 
another, the first ball often stops.
592    Chapter 14
elastic collisions

you are here 4    593
energy conservation
Q: If a collision is elastic, do I always 
have to use momentum conservation 
AND energy conservation?
A: Not always. Sometimes you’ll only start 
off with one unknown. Then you’d only need 
to use one equation.
Q: If I only have one unknown velocity, 
which equation is it better for me to 
use - momentum conservation or energy 
conservation?
A: It’s better to use momentum 
conservation, because direction is important. 
and the momentum conservation equation 
tells you the direction of the velocity as well 
as its size, as momentum is a vector.
Q:Does the kinetic energy equation 
tell me the direction of the velocity too?
A: No, because kinetic energy is a scalar. 
An object of a certain mass will always have 
the same kinetic energy 
Q: Can’t I get the velocity’s direction 
from the kinetic energy equation?
A: Kinetic energy, K = ½mv2. The velocity 
is squared. If you multiply two positive 
numbers together, you get a positive number. 
And if you multiply two negative numbers 
together, you also get a positive number. 
 
So whether v is positive or negative (an 
indication of direction), v2 will always be 
positive. This means that you can’t work out 
the direction of the velocity (a vector) from 
the kinetic energy (a scalar) - though you 
can work out its size.
Q: In the problem I just did over there, 
there were two possible answers at the 
end. How do I pick between them?
A: The reason there were two possible 
answers is because the kinetic energy 
conservation equation involves v2. You then 
have to pick between them by thinking about 
the ‘k’ontext of the problem. Choose the 
answer that makes the most physical sense.
Q: What if the collision happens at an 
angle, instead of along a straight line?
A: The rule of thumb is always to use 
momentum conservation first. Break down 
the velocities you’re given into components 
then apply momentum conservation for each 
component (like you did in chapter 12).
Q: Does the relative velocity always 
reverse in an elastic collision even if the 
objects have different masses?
A: Yes. For example, a rubber ball hitting 
a wall with velocity v will rebound with 
velocity -v (assuming that the collision is 
completely elastic). And any two objects with 
less extreme masses will also have their 
relative velocity reversed after a collision.
v10
m
m
v20 = 0
Before
After
m
m
v1f = 0
v2f = v10
In an elastic collision, the 
relative velocity reverses
You’ve worked out that when one pool ball hits a stationary 
pool ball head-on, the first pool ball stops and the second 
pool ball continues with the velocity that the first ball had.
Imagine sitting on top of the second pool ball. You see 
the first pool ball coming towards you with velocity v10. 
After the collision, it appears to you that the first pool ball 
is moving away from you with velocity -v10 (though it’s 
actually the second ball that is moving).
This is a special case of a general rule for elastic 
collisions - the relative velocity of the two objects 
is reversed after the collision. This is also true if 
both objects were originally moving.
Balls are moving TOWARDS each 
other with relative velocity of v10.
Balls are moving AWAY from each 
other with relative velocity of v10.
This also works in the opposite direction. 
If the relative velocity of the objects 
is reversed after the collision, then the 
collision must have been elastic.

Bucket swings up 6.00 cm 
higher than it was at the start.
Ball has 
velocity 
when it hits 
bucket.
Bucket is suspended 
from very light 
steel wire.
Padded 
bucket
Ball is only released 
if bucket is at 
exactly the right 
height at the top 
of the swing.
The pool ball collisions work!
The programmer writes the elastic pool ball collisions 
into the game, exactly like you describe - and they work!
But a few days before the game is due to be released, 
he’s back with a tricky problem ...
There’s a gravity-defying trick 
shot to sort out ...
The game also has a trick shot mode, which uses some 
odd items you wouldn’t usually see on a pool table. The 
programmer’s stuck on one particular trick shot where 
the cue ball is hit into a padded ‘bucket’, which then 
swings up and releases the cue ball - as long as it reaches 
exactly the right height at the top of its swing (6.00 cm).
I’ve nearly finished the game 
with what you’ve told me about 
elastic collisions -  but can’t work out 
what’s going wrong with this trick shot. 
D’ya think you can help?
m1
m2
h = 6.00 cm
v1
Ball and bucket have 
new combined mass.
A little hatch on the other 
side of the bucket opens up 
to release the ball when the 
height is exactly right.
594    Chapter 14
more tricky problems

you are here 4    595
energy conservation
Your job is to work out what’s going wrong. The 
programmer’s math is to the right and there’s space for 
you to write down what might be going wrong.
The ball has a mass of 165 g and the bucket is 95 g.
K of ball at (1)  =  U of ball and bucket at (2)
Use energy conservation
m1 = 0.165 kg
v1 = ?
m2 = 0.260 kg
v2 = 0 m/s
Height = 0.060 m
(1)
(2)
K  =  ½m1v1
2  =  m2gh
v1  =
v1  =  1.36 m/s (3 sd)
But the real pool player doing the trick shot 
in real life has to hit the ball with a higher 
velocity than this - and I don’t know why! Argh!
v1
2 =  2m2gh
m1
2m2gh
m1
=
2 × 0.260 × 9.8 × 0.060
0.165
Where is the problem with 
the programmer’s reasoning?
The programmer’s been using what you taught him 
about energy conservation to work out the speed 
the player should hit the ball with.
He’s assumed that the initial kinetic energy of the 
ball is being transferred to the final potential energy 
of the ball and bucket, which wind up 6.00 cm higher 
than they started (a problem that would be very very 
difficult to do using forces and equations of motion!)
However, the velocity he’s calculated is lower than 
a ‘play tester’ pool player has to hit the ball with 
to do the trick in real life. The real pool player 
needs to hit the ball with a higher velocity -  and 
the programmer doesn’t know why.
So the ball’s kinetic energy becomes 
potential energy ... and I have to allow 
for the mass of the ball + bucket being 
more than just the mass of the ball. But why’s 
the answer coming out wrong?!

Before you do any math, think: 
“Is this collision elastic or inelastic?”
The initial collision is inelastic - so 
mechanical energy isn’t conserved
When the ball hits the padded bucket, some of its 
kinetic energy is transferred to the bucket as internal 
energy. The collision is inelastic. The bucket is 
padded ,so the mechanical energy of the system is 
reduced as the internal energy of the bucket increases 
due to the padding deforming.
Therefore, the programmer’s assumption that the 
ball’s initial kinetic energy will all be transferred to 
gravitational potential energy is incorrect.
Bucket is PADDED so 
collision is INELASTIC.
Some kinetic energy 
is transferred to 
internal energy.
Mechanical energy 
isn’t conserved in an 
inelastic collision.
Only this amount of 
kinetic energy can 
be transferred to 
potential energy when 
the bucket swings up.
Your job is to work out what’s going wrong. The 
programmer’s math is to the right AND There’s space 
for you to write down what might be going wrong.
The ball has a mass of 165 g and the bucket is 95 g.
The programmer has assumed that all of the pool 
ball’s kinetic energy is transferred to potential energy.
However, the bucket is padded. This means that the 
pool ball colliding with it is an inelastic collision, so 
mechanical energy isn’t conserved.
When the pool ball hits the bucket, the padding in the 
bucket deforms and its internal energy increases. So 
not all of the ball’s kinetic energy is transferred to 
potential energy.
This is consistent with the real pool player having to 
hit the ball faster.
Kinetic
Kinetic
Internal
m1
m2
v1
v2
K of ball at (1)  =  U of ball and bucket at (2)
Use energy conservation
m1 = 0.165 kg
v1 = ?
m2 = 0.260 kg
v2 = 0 m/s
Height = 0.060 m
(1)
(2)
K  =  ½m1v1
2  =  m2gh
v1  =
v1  =  1.36 m/s (3 sd)
But the real pool player doing the trick shot 
in real life has to hit the ball with a higher 
velocity than this - and I don’t know why! Argh!
v1
2 =  2m2gh
m1
2m2gh
m1
=
2 × 0.260 × 9.8 × 0.060
0.165
596    Chapter 14
elastic or inelastic?

you are here 4    597
energy conservation
Use momentum conservation for the inelastic part
The trick with this trick shot is thinking about it in two stages.
The first stage is when the cue ball collides with the padded bucket. 
This is an inelastic collision, so momentum is conserved but mechanical 
energy isn’t. As you know the masses of the ball and bucket, you can use 
momentum conservation to calculate their new velocity (and hence their 
kinetic energy) in terms of the cue ball’s initial velocity.
The second stage is when the bucket containing the ball swings up. This 
involves the kinetic energy of the ball and bucket being transferred to 
potential energy. As you know the height that the bucket swings, you 
can work out its potential energy - and hence the kinetic energy and velocity 
of the ball and bucket - and hence the initial velocity of the cue ball.
Now it’s your turn! 
A pool ball, mass 165 g, is played into a padded bucket, which 
is arranged so it can swing upwards on the end of some light 
steel wires. For the shot to work, the ball must be struck so that 
the top of the bucket’s swing is 6.00 cm higher than it started.
Find the velocity that the ball must be struck with if the bucket 
has a mass of 95 g.
Initial 
velocity
Velocity after 
collision is smaller 
as mass is larger.
Momentum conservation: p1 = p2
Energy conservation: Ki = Uf
Hint: The quickest way of doing this is 
to calculate the velocity that the ball 
and bucket must have after the collision, 
then work backwards.
Potential
Kinetic
v1
v2
m1
m2
m2
m2
v2
v = 0
h = 6.00 cm

Q: So sometimes I can’t just use 
energy conservation to do a problem?
A: That’s right - if the internal energy 
increases in a way that’s very difficult to 
measure (like when padding is deformed) 
then you know that energy is conserved, but 
aren’t able to do calculations with it! 
 
 
Q: Does that mean there’s a way that 
the internal energy can change that is 
easy to quantify?! Surely you can’t see 
what’s going on inside an object!
A: If the internal energy increases as a 
result of work being done entirely against 
friction, then the change in internal energy 
is equal to F x, the total quantity of energy 
transferred as a result of doing work against 
friction.
Q:What do I do if I can’t calculate the 
increase in internal energy?
A: You need to use momentum 
conservation to deal with inelastic collisions. 
This will give you the velocity after the 
collision - after the inelastic deformation has 
taken place. It’s this velocity that you should 
use to calculate the kinetic energy that 
remains in the system.
That really rocks! I’ve 
finished the game now, so you 
just need to sit back and wait for 
the royalties to come in!
K of ball and bucket at (2)  =  U of ball and bucket at (3)
Use energy conservation to get v2.
A pool ball, mass 165 g, is played into a padded bucket, which 
is arranged so it can swing upwards on the end of some light 
steel wires. For the shot to work, the ball must be struck so that 
the top of the bucket’s swing is 6 cm higher than it started.
Find the velocity that the ball must be struck with if the bucket 
has a mass of 95g.
Use momentum conservation to get v1.
m1 = 0.165 kg
v1 = ?
m2 = 0.260 kg
v2 = ?
m2 = 0.260 kg
v3 = 0 m/s
Height = 0.060 m
(1)
(2)
(3)
K  =  ½m2v2
2  =  m2gh
v2  =   2gh   =   2 × 9.8 × 0.060  =  1.08 m/s (3 sd)
m1v1  =  m2v2
v1  = m2v2
m1
= 0.260 × 1.08
0.165
=  1.70 m/s (3 sd)
To get a velocity in 
m/s make sure you 
work in kg and m, 
not g and cm.
This is different from the programmer’s 
math, as the ball is already in the bucket 
before you do the energy conservation part.
598    Chapter 14
solve the problem

599
Question Clinic: The “Ballistic pendulum” Question
The pool ball trick shot is an example of the “ballistic 
pendulum” question. The name is taken from a technique used 
to find the velocity of a bullet by firing it into a wooden block suspended from 
wires, then measuring how high the block swings. The most important thing to 
remember is that if part of the process is inelastic, mechanical energy (i.e. kinetic 
+ potential) won’t be conserved as the internal energies of the block and bullet must 
increase as the bullet does work by tunnelling into the block.
The secret of doing this type of question is to ask 
yourself if an inelastic collision is involved before you go rushing 
into the math. Momentum is conserved in an inelastic collision, but the kinetic 
energy isn’t the same before and after an inelastic collision. First you need to 
use momentum conservation to calculate the velocity and therefore kinetic 
energy of the new mass (block + bullet). Then you can use mechanical 
energy conservation to work out the height.
This is a buzzword 
that may mean ‘elastic 
collision’ depending on 
what it collides with!
This is a buzzword that 
means ‘inelastic collision’.
This means that you 
don’t have to take 
the mass of the 
wires into account 
in your calculation.
3. A pool ball, mass 165 g, is played into a padded 
bucket, which is arranged so it can swing upwards on 
the end of some light steel wires. For the shot to work, 
the ball must be struck so that the top of the bucket’s 
swing is 6.00 cm higher than it started. 
Find the velocity that the ball must be struck with if 
the bucket has a mass of 95 g.
A difference in height 
should get you thinking 
about energy conservation.
You can’t use mechanical energy 
conservation for an inelastic collision, 
so you need to use momentum 
conservation for this part
Find the kinetic energy of the ball and bucket 
after the collision, since that is what is 
transferred to potential energy. And to do this, 
you must first use momentum conservation to work 
out the initial velocity of the ball.
Some of the 
ball’s initial 
kinetic 
energy will be 
transferred to 
internal energy.

Units
Falling
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Inelastic collision
Force
Special points
Experiment
Elastic collision
Weight
Time
Energy
Component
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Impulse
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Mechanical energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Volume
Velocity
Power
Friction
Kinetic energy
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Internal energy
Area
Mass
How many 
objects? What is 
conserved? Sorted!
Kinetic 
energy
The capacity something has to do work due to its speed.
Internal 
energy
The total kinetic and potential energy due to the random 
motion or vibration of particles on a microscopic scale
Mechanical 
energy
The total kinetic + potential energy of a system on a 
macroscopic scale.
Power
The rate at which energy is transferred or work is done. 
Measured in Watts (1 W = 1 Joule per second).
Inelastic 
collision
A collision where momentum is conserved but kinetic energy 
is not conserved.
Elastic 
collision
A collision where both momentum and energy are 
conserved
600    Chapter 14
the world of physics

you are here 4    601
energy conservation
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 14 under your belt and 
added some problem solving skills to your 
toolbox.
Difference in height
Any time a problem involves a 
difference in height, it’s almost 
always easier to deal with it using 
energy conservation than with 
equations of motion.
The total energy is the same at 
the start and the end, so any 
change in potential energy will be 
accompanied by an equal change in 
kinetic energy.
CHAPTER 14
Inelastic collision
A collision is inelastic if one or 
both of the objects involved 
deform in some way, or if the 
objects stick together.
Momentum is conserved, but 
kinetic energy isn’t conserved 
because the deformation of the 
object increases its internal energy.
Momentum vs 
kinetic energy
You calculate the change in 
momentum by thinking about a 
force applied for a period of time.
You calculate the change in kinetic 
energy by thinking about a force 
applied for a displacement.
Stopping an object
A quick way to determine the 
force required to stop an object 
at a certain displacement is to 
calculate its kinetic energy.
This is equal to the work you need 
to do against friction to stop it. 
As work = F x, this allows you to 
find the force quickly.
Elastic collision
A collision is elastic if neither 
object is deformed, and the 
objects bounce off of each other.
Mathematically, elastic collisions 
can be harder to deal with than 
inelastic collisions, as you still have 
two separate objects at the end.
However, both momentum and 
kinetic energy are conserved, which 
gives you two equations you can use 
to find two unknowns.


this is a new chapter    603
tension, pulleys and problem solving
15
Changing direction
So let me get this straight ... 
you pull the cord down and the 
curtains move sideways? How 
weird can you get?
I had that same 
question, but not 
about the curtains.
Sometimes you need to deal with the tension in a situation 
So far, you’ve been using forces, free body diagrams and energy conservation 
to solve problems. In this chapter, you’ll take that further as you deal with ropes, 
pulleys, and, yes, tension. Along the way, you’ll also practice looking for familiar 
signposts to help navigate your way through complicated situations.

A new high-risk sporting event has come to town. The challenge? 
Jump off an 11.0 m pier and hit a target floating in the sea 15.0 m 
from the foot of the pier. Michael, a daredevil and skateboarding 
fiend, plans to take home the first place prize.
Rope is attached to the 
stack and the skateboard.
Michael on a 
skateboard.
It’s a bird... it’s plane... 
    ...no, it’s... a guy on a skateboard?!
Michael wants to give himself a predictable 
launch velocity so he can be sure of hitting the 
target in the water. He’s attached a skateboard to 
one end of a rope, put a large stack of masses 
at the other end, and placed a pulley in between.
The problem is, Michael’s not so great at physics. 
And that’s where you come in... can you help 
Michael out?
Stack of masses ready 
to be dropped off the 
edge of the pier.
The center of 
the target is 
15.0 m from the 
foot of the pier.
Skateboard is pulled along 
the pier by the rope.
When the skateboard reaches 
the end of the pier, Michael 
continues with velocity v.
v
The mass has just 
hit the surface 
of the water.
11.0 m
15.0 m
With the correct initial 
velocity at the end of 
the pier, Michael will 
follow this trajectory 
and hit the bullseye.
The competition takes 
place when the tide is 
in and the sea is 11.0 m 
below the top of the pier.
Here’s what SHOULD happen...
604    Chapter 15
high-risk skateboarding

Always look for something familiar
This problem involves a skateboard, a person, a stack of 
masses, a rope, a pulley, gravity, the height of the pier, and the 
distance to the target. Plus it takes place in two dimensions. 
It’s a complicated problem! 
Suppose Michael is launched horizontally from the end of a pier. What velocity does he need to 
possess in order to hit a target in the water 15.0 m from the foot of the pier, which is 11.0 m high? 
Break down a 
complicated problem 
into smaller parts, 
then look for something 
that’s LIKE what 
you’ve seen before.
But you don’t have to start the 
problem in the same place as 
Michael, with the rope, pulley and 
stack of masses. The best place for 
you to start tackling a problem is 
from a point where it looks like 
something you’ve seen before....
Michael has an initial 
horizontal velocity the 
moment he leaves the 
skateboard.
Always start 
with a sketch 
to help you 
figure a 
problem out.
You’ve not seen ropes and 
pulleys before. But you 
HAVE seen a situation 
like this before!
v
You can start at the point where 
Michael flies through the air with 
velocity v. That looks kinda familiar...
you are here 4    605
tension, pulleys and problem solving

Suppose Michael is launched horizontally from the end of a pier. What velocity does he need to 
possess in order to hit a target in the water 15.0 m from the foot of the pier, which is 11.0 m high? 
When you break 
up a problem, you 
might need to 
redefine variables 
as you move from 
part to part.
Watch out for what you call 
your variables in the next part.
Breaking this problem down has made it 
easier - which is great! But if you forget 
to redraw your sketch and redefine your 
variables for the next part, you’ll just 
confuse yourself.
Your starting point this time around was 
when Michael is launched from the pier, 
where you’ve worked out that his initial 
velocity is v0h = 10.0 m/s. 
But the other part of the problem involves 
him reaching this velocity of 10.0 m/s 
from a standing start - where it’ll be his 
final velocity. So be careful!
xv = 11.0 m
xh = 15.0 m
av = 9.8 m/s2
V0h = ?
V0v = 0 m/s
Get time from vertical components:
Get horizontal velocity from horizontal components:
=  10.0 m/s (3 sd) left to right.
v0h  = xh
t
= 15
1.50
xv  =  x0v + v0vt + ½vat2 
½at2  =  xv
t  = 2xvav
=
2 × 11.0
9.8
=  1.50 s (3 sd)
These terms 
are both zero.
Here, Michael’s initial 
velocity is 0 m/s.
Michael’s velocity at this 
point must be 10.0 m/s.
This part of the problem uses equations of motion. The key 
to solving it is to realize that you can do it separately from 
the rest of the problem, before you know anything about the 
stack of masses or the pulley.
For this part of the problem, Michael’s initial 
velocity v0h = 10 m/s. But for the other part, with 
the rope etc, his initial velocity is zero, and his final 
velocity is 10 m/s. So we need to be careful, right?
Down is positive direction.
x0v = 0 m
x0h = 0 m
606    Chapter 15
look for the familiar

you are here 4    607
tension, pulleys and problem solving
 
BE the skater
Your job is to imagine you’re 
Michael on the skateboard. 
What happens to you as 
the mass at the other 
end of the rope falls? 
How will making the mass 
larger or smaller affect 
what happens to you?
Jim: Yeah, and we’ve got that stack of weights on the other end 
of the rope to accelerate him with.
Frank: Yeah, the stack is falling, so it will accelerate at 9.8 m/s2 
and drag Michael along behind it. So Michael accelerates at 
9.8 m/s2, just like the stack. This is gonna be a piece of cake!
Joe: Um, I’m not so sure about that. The stack has to pull 
Michael along, so I don’t think the stack will fall as fast as it would 
if it wasn’t attached to the skateboard. I don’t think it would 
accelerate at 9.8 m/s2.
Frank: But if something’s falling, its acceleration doesn’t depend 
on its mass. Everything falls at the same rate, no matter what its 
mass is (as long as air resistance isn’t a big factor).
Joe: But Michael isn’t falling - he’s travelling horizontally.
Jim: Oh yeah ... I guess if there was an elephant on the 
skateboard instead, the board would hardly accelerate at all.
Frank: Yeah, the force is due to the weight of the falling stack 
- but not Michael’s weight, as he isn’t falling.
Joe: This isn’t so straightforward after all. 
So if Michael’s velocity 
is 10 m/s, he hits the 
target, right?

Michael and the stack accelerate at the same rate
The stack is attached to Michael by a rope. As well as 
his weight and the normal force (which add to zero), 
he also experiences a net tension force from the 
rope, T, which accelerates him to the right.
As the stack exerts a force on Michael (via the rope) 
Michael must exert an equal-sized force on the stack 
(in this case, via the rope) . So the stack experiences 
two forces - its weight and the tension.
Weight = mg
Tension = T
Tension = T
Weight
Normal force
 
BE the skater - SOLUTION
Your job is to imagine you’re 
Michael on the skateboard. 
What happens to you as 
the mass at the other 
end of the rope falls? 
How will making the mass 
larger or smaller affect 
what happens to you?
As the mass falls vertically, I accelerate horizontally because it pulls the skateboard.
If the mass is larger, I accelerate more quickly.
If the mass is smaller, I accelerate more slowly, and if the mass is a really small I 
might not accelerate at all.
Michael and the stack are joined together by the rope, so they both 
accelerate at the same rate. This is because of the tension in 
the rope - the rope is pulled tight. If the rope wasn’t there or wasn’t 
pulled tight, there would be no tension and Michael wouldn’t 
accelerate as the stack falls.
A stack with a larger mass on it will accelerate Michael more 
rapidly, and a smaller mass will accelerate him more slowly. This is 
something you can analyze by thinking about the tension in the rope.
The mass pulls you 
in this direction.
A larger mass 
accelerates 
more rapidly.
A rope pulled tight 
can mediate a 
TENSION force.
A free body 
diagram for 
Michael.
A free body diagram 
for the stack.
If there was no mass 
here, you wouldn’t go 
anywhere at all.
Net force on 
Michael = T
Net force on 
stack = mg - T
m
608    Chapter 15
be the skater

you are here 4    609
tension, pulleys and problem solving
How can the tension act horizontally on one 
thing and vertically on the other? Doesn’t 
Newton’s 3rd Law say that pairs of forces 
need to act in opposite directions?
The pulley changes the direction that the 
tension force acts in.
If a rope experiences a pulling force at both ends that makes 
it tight (like the rope we have here) it’s said to be in tension.
But a pulley changes the direction that the tension force 
acts in. The pulley is able to do this because it’s firmly 
attached to the pier, which is able to provide a support force. 
Otherwise, the rope would just get pulled straight.
If you just draw the free body diagrams for Michael and the 
stack, it looks like you have a Newton’s 3rd Law force pair 
that isn’t acting in opposite directions. But when you include 
the free body diagram of the pulley, you can see that there 
are horizontal and vertical pairs of tension force pairs.
T
T
Weight = mg
T
T
Support 
force
This is a 
force pair.
This is a 
force pair.
With no support force, the 
pulley would accelerate in 
this direction as the rope 
pulls straight..
If there is a pulley, 
you have to include 
it when working 
out force pairs.
The forces on the 
pulley must add to 
zero, as the pulley 
isn’t accelerating.
Weight
Normal force
m
T
T
Support 
force
Because the rope is being 
pulled tight, it exerts a 
force on the pulley. But the 
pulley’s not accelerating, 
so the net force on it 
must be zero. Therefore, 
the pier that the pulley’s 
attached to must provide a 
support force.
Michael’s free 
body diagram.
Pulley’s free 
body diagram.
Stack’s free 
body diagram.

Q: Why doesn’t the stack just accelerate at 9.8 m/s2, 
like it usually would if you dropped it?
A: It’s attached to Michael (and his skateboard) by a rope. 
So the force of the stack’s weight has to accelerate Michael’s 
mass as well as the stack’s own mass.
Q: But don’t all falling objects accelerate at the same 
rate, whatever their mass?
A: Not if they’re tied on to something else that isn’t falling! 
Q: So where does tension come in?
A: Tension is the name given to the force exerted at each 
end of a rope. For example, if the stack was hanging from a 
rope attached to the ceiling, the tension would be the same 
size as the stack’s weight.
Q: Is the tension in a rope always the same size as the 
weight of the object it’s supporting?
A: If an object is hanging straight down from a rope, then 
its acceleration is zero and the net force must be zero. So 
the tension in the rope must be the same size as the object’s 
weight (in the opposite direction). 
But if the object is accelerating downwards, (like the stack is 
here), the object’s weight must be greater than the tension in 
the rope to produce a net downwards force.
Q: Is it OK to think of a tension force a bit like the 
normal force in other problems - as it’s a support force?
A: As long as you remember that the tension always acts 
in the direction of the rope, that should be OK conceptually.
Q: Do I have to take into account the mass of the rope 
as well?
A: Great question! In real life you would, but in practice 
the mass of the rope has very little effect if it’s much smaller 
than the masses it’s attached to. So we’re making the 
approximation that the rope is massless.
Q: How do you know that the two objects attached to 
the rope both accelerate at the same rate?
A: If the two objects are at either end of a rope which is 
pulled tight, they must always move with the same speed 
in order for the rope to remain tight. Therefore, they must 
also both accelerate at the same rate (though they may 
accelerate in different directions depending on how the rope 
is positioned).
When two objects are 
joined together and 
move together, they 
both accelerate at the 
SAME rate.
610    Chapter 15
objects joined together

you are here 4    611
tension, pulleys and problem solving
I guess we need to be careful about 
how we define the directions of our forces?
Think about how the rope moves.
When you’re using a pulley, with forces 
mediated by the tension in a rope, you 
have to be very careful about defining the 
direction of your force vectors.
As the objects are connected to each other 
by the rope, it’s best to define one direction 
of rope movement as the positive 
direction, draw the free body diagram for 
each object separately, and mark the positive 
direction on each free body diagram with a 
big arrow.
Weight = mg
Tension = T
Positive direction
Positive 
direction
Define one 
direction of rope 
movement as 
positive and mark 
it on your free 
body diagrams.
Use tension to tackle the problem
Because the stack and Michael are joined together by a 
rope under tension, they both accelerate at the same rate 
.You need to work out what mass the stack should have 
in order for both it and Michael to be going at 10.0 m/s 
after the stack has fallen 11.0 m from the top to the 
bottom of the pier.
If you draw separate free body diagrams for the stack 
and for Michael, showing all the forces acting on them, 
you can use these to work out the mass of the stack.
Weight
Normal 
force
10.0 m/s
Michael needs to 
have a velocity 
of 10.0 m/s at 
this point.
Make sure your 
‘positive direction’ 
arrow is a 
different style 
from your force 
vector arrows.
m
Tension = T

Michael on a skateboard, mass M, is attached 
via a rope and a pulley to a stack of masses, 
mass m, as shown in the picture. When the 
stack is allowed to accelerate downwards in 
a gravitational field, strength g, the rope has 
tension, T and Michael also accelerates.
a. Draw separate free body diagrams of Michael on the skateboard and of the stack
b. Write down the size of the net force on Michael.
c. Write down the size of the net force on the stack.
612    Chapter 15
michael’s moving

you are here 4    613
tension, pulleys and problem solving
d. Michael and the stack both accelerate with acceleration, a. Use Newton’s 2nd Law to write down a 
separate expression for each of them that relates their mass, their acceleration and the net force on them.
e. The size of the tension in the rope is the same for both Michael and the stack. Make a substitution using 
your equations from part d. and rearrange your answer so that you have an equation for m, the mass of the 
stack, in terms of M, g and a.

Michael on a skateboard, mass M, is attached 
via a rope and a pulley to a stack of masses, 
mass m, as shown in the picture. When the 
stack is allowed to accelerate downwards in 
a gravitational field, strength g, the rope has 
tension, T and the man also accelerates.
a. Draw separate free body diagrams of Michael on the skateboard and of the stack.
b. Write down the size of the net force on Michael.
c. Write down the size of the net force on the stack.
d. Michael and the stack both accelerate with acceleration, a. Use Newton’s 2nd Law to write down a 
separate expression for each of them that relates their mass, their acceleration and the net force on them.
e. The size of the tension in the rope is the same for both Michael and the stack. Make a substitution using 
your equations from part d. and rearrange your answer so that you have an equation for m, the mass of the 
stack, in terms of M, g and a.
m  =
Ma
g - a
Weight = Mg
Normal force
Tension = T
Weight = mg
Tension = T
Normal force and weight add to zero.
Fnet  =  T
Fnet  =  mg - T
Positive direction 
of rope movement.
Positive direction 
of rope movement.
Man has mass M.
Fnet  =  ma   becomes     T  =  Ma
Stack has mass m.
Fnet  =  ma   becomes     mg - T  =  ma
T  =  Ma
(1)
mg - T  =  ma
(2)
Substitute the expression for 
T in (1) into (2)
mg - Ma  =  ma
Rearrange equation to say “m  =  ... ”
mg - Ma  =  ma
mg - ma  =  Ma
m(g - a)  =  Ma
Drawing on the big arrows 
helps you get the signs 
correct in these equations.
So you can introduce some 
parentheses so that there’s only one 
instance of m on the left hand side.
Both the g and the a 
are multiplied by the m.
Then you can divide 
both sides by (g - a) 
to get “m = ...”
Make substitutions.
614    Chapter 15
free body diagrams

you are here 4    615
tension, pulleys and problem solving
So why bother with the 
tension at all, if we can 
do it that way instead?
Could we also have treated the stack 
and Michael as one ‘thing’ with mass 
(M + m)? Would that have worked too?
Treating both objects as one single 
mass works here (but NOT always).
On this occasion, you can also treat Michael and 
the stack as one object with mass (M + m) that’s 
accelerated by the force mg (the weight of the 
stack). You’d write down:
	
Force = mass × acceleration
	
mg  =  (M + m)a
When you rearrange this, you get the same 
equation as over there: m  = Ma
g - a
Thinking about the tension in the rope 
helps you to understand the physics.
If you’re able to draw free body diagrams for 
problems that involve ropes and tension, you’ll be 
able to solve any problem, not just this one.
For example, if Michael was being pulled up a ramp 
by the stack instead of being pulled horizontally, 
you’d have to think about Michael’s weight vector 
as well. The only way of using forces and Newton’s 
2nd Law to deal with that is to draw a free body 
diagram for each object attached to the rope - which 
is fine if you understand the physics.
m
M
Force = mg
Total mass 
is M + m.
Force that’s 
accelerating 
this mass = mg.
A component of 
Michael’s weight acts 
parallel to the slope.
T
Weight = mg
T
Weight = Mg
Normal 
force
Normal force and 
weight are no longer 
parallel, so they 
don’t add to zero.
If the parallel 
component of 
Michael’s weight vector 
is larger than the 
stack’s weight vector, 
he’ll roll backwards!
Free body diagram 
for the stack is 
still the same - but 
the tension will be a 
different size because 
Michael’s on a slope.
This is NOT a shortcut 
that will always work. This 
problem is a special case.
If you’re analyzing a 
problem with ropes and 
pulleys using forces, 
ALWAYS start with 
individual free body 
diagrams, have a go at 
BEING each object, and 
go on from there.

So we’ve got it! We’ve got 
an equation for the mass of 
the stack we can use.
Frank: Right. All we need to do it to put the numbers into it:
	
 
Jim: Yeah, I just asked Michael, and he says that him plus the 
skateboard come to 80.0 kg, so we can put that in instead of M. 
And we already know that g = 9.8 m/s2.
Joe: But what about a, the acceleration. We don’t know that.
Frank: Can’t we just put in a = 9.8 m/s2 like we usually do?
Joe: Not this time! The force of the stack’s weight has to accelerate 
both the stack’s mass and Michael’s mass. So the stack won’t 
accelerate as quickly as it would if it was just falling on its own.
Jim: So we gotta work out a value for the acceleration first, before 
we can get a value for the mass. How are we gonna do that?
Joe: Well, there is the sketch we did earlier ...
m  = Ma
g - a
Mass of stack.
Mass of Michael 
and skateboard.
Jim: Can we just write things like v0, v and x on it, and use 
equations of motion to calculate a?
Frank: Oh yeah! I’ve been getting so wrapped up into working 
with masses and forces that I forgot we could just look at Michael’s 
velocity, displacement and acceleration, without going into all the 
reasons behind them.
Joe: Cool, let’s do it!
If you start with a 
sketch, you can always 
look back at it for 
inspiration if you’re not 
sure what to do next.
The sketch acts as an 
anchor that reminds 
you of what you’re 
working on - and also 
of ways you might 
solve your problem.
616    Chapter 15
sketchy inspiration

you are here 4    617
tension, pulleys and problem solving
c. Use the equation m  =
Ma
g - a   that you worked out before
to calculate the mass that the stack needs to be in order to 
produce this acceleration. (The stack has mass m, Michael 
and his skateboard have mass M).
Look at the big picture as well as the parts
Right at the start, you broke down this 
complicated problem into two parts:
1. Work out the velocity Michael needs at the 
end of the pier to hit the target. You did this first 
because it involved equations of motion, and 
a scenario similar to others you’d seen before.
But now you’ve discovered that there’s another 
part to this problem! You need to work out a 
value for the acceleration of Michael and the 
stack. The important thing is not to panic, and to 
step back and look at the big picture.
Then you’ll see that you can use your equations 
of motion to calculate the acceleration. Once 
you have a value, you can calculate the mass of 
the stack, which is what you really want to know.
Michael is to be launched horizontally from the end of a 
11.0 m high pier with a velocity of 10.0 m/s. He stands on 
a skateboard, which is attached via a rope and pulley to 
a stack of masses that falls vertically downwards. Michael 
and the skateboard have a combined mass of 80.0 kg.
a. If Michael reaches the edge of the pier at the same time 
as the stack hits the water, what is his displacement?
b. Calculate Michael’s acceleration.
v = 10 m/s
m = ?
2. Work out what mass the stack needs to be 
for him to reach this velocity at the end of the 
pier. You’ve just used free body diagrams and 
Newton’s 2nd Law to come up with an equation 
for the mass of the stack, m  = Ma
g - a
Though do be careful 
with how you define 
the variables you use.

Michael is to be launched horizontally from the end of a 
11.0 m high pier with a velocity of 10.0 m/s. He stands on 
a skateboard, which is attached via a rope and pulley to 
a stack of masses that falls vertically downwards. Michael 
and the skateboard have a combined mass of 80.0 kg.
a. If Michael reaches the edge of the pier at the same time 
as the stack hits the water, what is his displacement?
b. Calculate Michael’s acceleration.
c. Use the equation m  =
Ma
g - a  that you worked out before
to calculate the mass that the stack needs to be in order to 
produce this acceleration. (The stack has mass m, Michael 
and his skateboard have mass M).
The stack has fallen 11.0 m vertically.
So Michael has travelled 11.0 m horizontally, 
towards the edge of the pier.
x0 = 0 m
x = 11.0 m
a = ?
v0 = 0 m/s v = 10.0 m/s
v2  =  v0
2 + 2a(x - x0)
But v0 = 0 and x0 = 0.
v2 =  2ax
a  = v2
2x =
10.02
2 × 11.0
a  =  4.54 m/s (3 
m  =
Ma
g - a
m  = 80.0 × 4.54
9.8 - 4.54
=  69.0 kg (3 sd)
So we should tell Michael to use a 69.0 kg 
stack - and let him know we want some of the 
credit when he wins first prize!
618    Chapter 15
go, michael, go

you are here 4    619
tension, pulleys and problem solving
But the day before the competition ...
Michael’s just been down to the venue to check it out - and he’s 
discovered that the pier slopes up towards the sea at a slight angle. 
The angle is only 5.0° ... but that might be enough to throw out your 
careful calculations. On the bright side, it levels out just at the end, 
so at least he’s still taking off horizontally, and the end of the pier is 
still 11.0 m above the water.
On top of that, Michael’s checked the skateboard website and found 
out that its wheels have a coefficient of friction, μ = 0.0500.
Your complicated problem just got a LOT more 
complicated ...
Michael on his skateboard, with a total mass M , is 
attached to a stack of masses, total mass m, via a 
rope and pulley, as shown in the picture. The wheels 
of the skateboard have coefficient of friction, μ, and 
the pier slopes up towards the sea at angle θ from 
the horizontal.
a. Draw a free body diagram, showing all of the 
forces acting on Michael.
b. Draw a free body diagram, showing all of the 
forces acting on the stack.
c. Outline what you would do to approach this problem. You don’t need to do any math - just explain the 
process you’d go through.
There’s a slope ... and friction ... 
it’s totally mind‑blowing. How are 
we gonna deal with all that?!
m
M

v
Use triangles to calculate the parallel component of Michael’s weight, F||. Also calculate 
the normal force (equal to the perpendicular component of Michael’s weight) and use it to 
calculate the friction force, as Ffric = μFnormal. The net force on Michael is parallel to the pier, 
Fnet = T - F|| + Ffric. Then do Fnet = ma for both Michael and the stack. They both have the 
same acceleration so go on from there by substituting in for the tension, etc, similar to before.
Michael on his skateboard, with a total mass M , is 
attached to a stack of masses, total mass m, via a 
rope and pulley, as shown in the picture. The wheels 
of the skateboard have coefficient of friction, μ, and 
the pier slopes up towards the sea at angle θ from 
the horizontal.
a. Draw a free body diagram, showing all of the 
forces acting on Michael.
b. Draw a free body diagram, showing all of the 
forces acting on the stack.
c. Outline what you would do to approach this problem. You don’t need to do any math - just explain the 
process you’d go through.
That looks like a LOT of work! Is 
it worth looking for an easier way 
before we do all that math?
Before you decide to use forces, think 
about using energy conservation.
Any time you see a problem that involves a 
difference in height, you should look to see if it 
might be possible to use energy conservation instead 
of forces, like you did in chapter 14.
Using energy conservation to solve a problem 
involves fewer intermediate steps and less math than 
using forces. Which can only be a good thing!
If your problem 
involves a difference 
in height, look 
to see if you can 
use ENERGY 
CONSERVATION.
Weight = mg
Tension = T
Weight = Mg
Tension = T
Friction
Normal force
m
M
620    Chapter 15
energy conservation redux

you are here 4    621
tension, pulleys and problem solving
Using energy conservation is simpler than using forces
This is the kind of problem that lends itself to using energy 
conservation instead of forces, because it involves masses 
whose heights and velocities change, and work being done 
against friction.
The total energy of the system is always constant, and 
differences drive changes that lead to energy transfer. So if 
you spot the differences between the start (when you’ve 
just dropped the stack) and the end (when Michael has just 
launched horizontally from the skateboard) you’ll know what to 
include in the energy conservation equation.
There are 
changes in 
height.
There are 
changes in 
velocity..
There’s 
friction.
c. For each term in your energy conservation equation, write down in words or equations 
how you would go about calculating it.
Spot the difference
a. Play “spot the difference” between the start and the end. Circle all the 
differences between the two pictures and write down what they are.
b. Write down an equation to show that the total energy at the start and the end is the same. 
(You can use any symbols and subscripts you like, or write out the equation in words).
v = 10.0 m/s
v = 10.0 m/s
M
m
M
m
v = 0 m/s
v = 0 m/s

1. Michael at top of incline
2. Michael’s velocity 10.0 m/s.
3. Stack at bottom of pier.
4. Stack velocity 10.0 m/s.
5. Work has been done against friction.
c. For each term in your energy conservation equation, write down in words or equations 
how you would go about calculating it.
Spot the difference - SOLUTION
a. Play “spot the difference” between the start and the end. Circle all the 
differences between the two pictures and write down what they are.
b. Write down an equation to show that the total energy at the start and the end is the same. 
(You can use any symbols and subscripts you like, or write out the equation in words).
1
Ustack  =  Uman + Kman + Kstack + Wfriction
Energy at start = energy at end
To calculate Wfriction, calculate normal force 
using angle and weight and multiply this by 
μ, the coefficient of friction. This gives you 
the frictional force, Ffriction.
Then Wfriction =  Ffriction × displacement 
U = mass × g × h
K = ½ × mass × v2
Same method for 
Michael and stack.
By playing Spot the difference, we know that the potential energy that 
the stack has as a result of being 11.0 m higher at the start than it is at 
the end is transferred to:
	
The potential energy Michael gains by going up the incline.
	
The kinetic energy of Michael and the skateboard.
	
The kinetic energy of the stack.
	
The work done against the friction of the skateboard wheels.
It’s time to put that all together  ...
≤
≤
≤
≤
1. Michael at bottom of incline.
2. Michael’s velocity 0 m/s.
3. Stack at top of pier.
4. Stack velocity 0 m/s.
5. No work done against friction.
v = 10.0 m/s
v = 10.0 m/s
M
m
M
m
v = 0 m/s
v = 0 m/s
1
3
2
2
3
4
4
5
5
The easiest way 
to do energy 
conservation is 
to play “spot the 
difference.”
622    Chapter 15
spot the difference

you are here 4    623
tension, pulleys and problem solving
Michael on his skateboard, with a total mass of 80.0 kg, is attached to a stack of masses, total mass m, via a 
rope and pulley. The wheels of the skateboard have coefficient of friction, μ = 0.0500, and the board travels 
11.0 m along a pier which slopes up towards the sea at angle θ = 5.0° from the horizontal as the stack goes 
11.0 m straight down.
a. Calculate the difference in the height of Michael on 
the skateboard at the beginning and end of the pier.
b. Calculate the normal force exerted by the pier on 
Michael, and hence the work done against friction.
c. Michael needs to have a speed of 10.0 m/s at the end of the pier. Use energy conservation to work out the 
mass that the stack needs to have in order to achieve this.
Remember that 
Ffric = μFN

a. Calculate the difference in the height of Michael on 
the skateboard at the beginning and end of the pier.
b. Calculate the normal force exerted by the pier on 
Michael, and hence the work done against friction.
Michael on his skateboard, with a total mass of 80.0 kg, is 
attached to a stack of masses, total mass m, via a rope and 
pulley. The wheels of the skateboard have coefficient of 
friction, μ = 0.0500, and the board travels 11.0 m along a 
pier which slopes up towards the sea at angle θ = 5.0° from 
the horizontal as the stack goes 11.0 m straight down.
hM (height diff for Michael)
11.0 m
5°
sin(5.0°)  =
hM
11.0
hM  =  11.0 sin(5.0°)
hM  =  0.959 m (3 sd)
Normal force is same size as 
perpendicular component of weight.
Weight 
= Mg
5°
cos(5°)  =
F⊥
Mg
F⊥  =  mg cos(5.0°)
F⊥  =  80 × 9.8 × cos(5.0°)  =  781 N
Wfriction  =  μFN x  =  0.0500 × 781 × 11.0
Wfriction  =  430 J (3 sd)
F⊥
We’re using a subscript here so 
that we don’t get mixed up 
with the height of the pier. hM 
is Michael’s change in height.
FN  =  781 N
Michael doesn’t float 
in the air or disappear 
through the ground. So the 
perpendicular components 
of the forces acting on him 
must add to zero.
Triangle Tip: sketch extreme angles
If you’re not sure which angle in your 
force vector triangle corresponds to the 
angle of your slope, sketch a slope with 
a small angle, θ.
Now draw the force triangle. Draw on 
the weight pointing straight down. Then 
draw in the parallel and perpendicular 
components. It doesn’t matter which way 
round you draw the components, as the 
triangle’s sides will still be the same length.
θ is the small angle in the slope triangle 
- so θ will also be the small angle in the 
force triangle. 
θ
θ
θ
θ
F||
F⊥
If you want the normal force, it’s usually easiest 
to draw the triangle this way round, with the 
perpendicular component below the object.
If you want the net 
force down the slope, 
it’s usually easiest 
to draw the force 
triangle this way 
round, with the parallel 
component on the slope.
F||
F⊥
mg
mg
Making this angle small 
helps you to keep track 
of similar triangles.
Use these tips 
to get your 
triangles right.
These also 
appeared in 
ch. 13.
F||
624    Chapter 15
sketch extreme angles

you are here 4    625
tension, pulleys and problem solving
m  =  89.7 kg (3 sd)
c. Michael needs to have a speed of 10.0 m/s at the end of the pier. Use energy conservation to work out the 
mass that the stack needs to have in order to achieve this.
Energy at start = energy at end
Ustack  =  Uman + Kman + Kstack + Wfriction
mgh  =  MghM + ½Mv2
 + ½mv2 + Wfriction
mgh - ½mv2  =  MghM + ½Mv2
 + Wfriction
m(gh - ½v2)  =  MghM + ½Mv2
 + Wfriction
m  =
(gh - ½v2)
MghM + ½Mv2
 + Wfriction
m  =
(9.8 × 11) - (0.5 × 102)
(80 × 9.8 × 0.959) + (0.5 × 80 × 102) + 430
Introduce parentheses to leave one 
instance of m on the left hand side.
Doing a problem a different way may 
involve different intermediate steps.
Earlier on, you used forces to work out what 
mass the stack would need to be for a flat pier with 
no friction. As this method involved Newton’s 2nd 
Law, Fnet = ma, the acceleration was important.
This time you used energy conservation. 
You didn’t need to calculate the acceleration, as 
you could get all you needed from the masses, 
differences in height and differences in velocity.
How come we didn’t 
need to calculate the 
acceleration this time? We 
did when we used forces?
This is larger then the 
mass you calculated last 
time, when there was no 
incline and no friction, 
which makes sense.

When two objects are joined 
together by a rope that’s pulled 
tight, they both accelerate at the 
same rate in the same direction 
that the rope moves in.
The tension in a rope is the 
same at both ends.
A mass won’t accelerate at 
9.8 m/s2 when it falls if it is 
attached to another mass that 
isn’t also falling with it.



If you have more than one mass, 
draw a free body diagram for 
each ...
... but do also check to see if you 
can use energy conservation 
instead!
Play “spot the difference” to make 
sure you spot all the differences 
that involve energy transfer 
before you write down any 
equations.



There goes that skateboard...
Michael’s taken your advice, and he’s off... 
let’s see how he does:
v
11.0 m
15.0 m
Success! Michael wins 
the competition - and is 
able to replace his soggy 
old skateboard with a 
sparkly new one.
626    Chapter 15
bullet points

you are here 4    627
tension, pulleys and problem solving
Problems with a punchbag
Geoff’s Gym was becoming more and more popular - so much so that 
his customers were having to queue for each piece of apparatus. But 
being that popular also has its disadvantages - and many of Geoff’s 
customers were talking of going somewhere more quiet once their 
current memberships had expired.
So Geoff brought in lots of new equipment - bikes, rowing 
machines, weights machines - some seriously complicated 
and expensive pieces of kit. But the item Geoff had the most 
problems with was the humble punchbag.
“I just don’t know what went wrong,” he explains. “The 
punchbag’s 20 kg. So its weight is 196 N - call it 200 N to be on the 
safe side. I wasn’t able to hang it straight down like I usually would 
because the girders in the roof are in the wrong place. So I decided to 
use two ropes to hang it from a couple of girders.
I thought that each rope will be supporting half of the weight. That 
must be 100 N per rope, as both ropes are at the same angle. The ropes 
I used to hang the punchbag were guaranteed to cope with a tension of 
up to 180 N ... or so the manufacturers claimed.
So I put the punchbag on top of a stepladder to set it at the right 
height, then went up and attached the ropes. But as soon as I took away 
the stepladder, one of the ropes broke! I couldn’t believe it! And then 
of course the punchbag swung sideways and the other rope broke.
Why did the first rope break?
Five Minute 
Mystery
Five Minute 
Mystery
30°
30°
Ropes.
Punchbag
m = 20 kg
Rope is attached 
to a ceiling girder.

Problems with a punchbag
Why did the first rope break?
Geoff assumed that each rope would only have to provide enough 
tension force to prevent the punchbag from falling. But 
the tension force also needs to prevent the punchbag 
from swinging. which is what would happen if the 
other rope wasn’t present.
Each rope exerts a tension force on the punchbag in 
the direction of the rope:
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
Five Minute 
Mystery 
Solved
30°
30°
As the punchbag isn’t falling, the vertical components of the tension in 
each rope plus the weight of the punchbag need to add up to zero. If 
you make up the positive direction: 
 
	
T1sin(30°) + T2sin(30°)  - 196N  =  0 
 
But for the punchbag to be stationary and not to swing, the horizontal 
components of the tension in each rope must also add up to zero. If you 
make left the positive direction: 
 
	
T1cos(30°) - T2cos(30°)  =  0 
 
This gives you two equations to work out two unknowns, T1 and T2. 
When you solve them, the tension in each rope is an enormous 196 N 
- the same as the tension you’d need to hold up the punchbag using a 
single vertical rope. As each rope can only cope with a tension of 180N, 
one of them broke just before the other one would have.
The high tension is because of the relatively small angle the ropes make 
with the horizontal - a lot of extra tension is needed to prevent the bag 
from swinging.
Punchbag is 
stationary, 
so net force 
must be zero.
Horizontal components 
must add up to zero.
30°
30°
T1
T2
Vertical components 
must add up to zero.
Weight = mg
Have a go at 
solving them 
yourself!
628    Chapter 15
did you remember swinging?

you are here 4    629
tension, pulleys and problem solving
Units
Falling
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Inelastic collision
Force
Special points
Experiment
Elastic collision
Weight
Time
Energy
Component
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Impulse
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Mechanical energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Volume
Velocity
Power
Friction
Kinetic energy
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Internal energy
Area
Mass
Tension
Pulley
Starting to learn about 
why things move, as well as 
how they move.
Tension
Tension is the force that a rope can mediate when 
it’s pulled tight. The tension force is the same at 
each end of the rope.
Pulley
A pulley allows you to “change” the direction of 
a force by providing a wheel that a rope can run 
around and providing a support force to prevent 
the rope from straightening.

Break down the 
problem into parts
When you have a complicated 
problem, try to break it down 
into parts.
Then start with the part that 
looks the easiest for you to solve!
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 15 under your belt and 
added some problem-solving skills to your 
ever-expanding toolbox.
CHAPTER 15
Spot the difference
As well as differences in height, 
look out for differences in speed 
and work done against friction.
Play “spot the difference” like this 
before you write down an energy 
conservation equation to make sure 
you don’t miss anything out.
Rope and pulley
If a problem involves a rope and a 
pulley, look to see if you’re asked 
about forces. If so, you should draw 
a separate free body diagram for 
each object attached to the rope.
The size of the tension is the same 
at each end of the rope.
Both objects must have the same 
size of acceleration, as they are 
attached together.
Can you use energy 
conservation?
If you see a difference in height, 
you should immediately think 
about using energy conservation 
- especially if you’re not asked 
about forces?
This involves less math than using 
forces - so takes you less time 
with less chance of slipping up.
630    Chapter 15
physics toolbox

this is a new chapter    631
circular motion (part 1)
16
From α to ω
You say you want a revolution?  In this chapter, you’ll learn 
how to deal with circular motion with a crash course in circle anatomy, 
including what the radius and circumference have to do with pies (or 
should that be πs). After dealing with frequency and period, you’ll need 
to switch from the linear to the angular. But once you’ve learned to use  
radians to measure angles, you’ll know it’s gonna be alright.

Limber up for the Kentucky Hamster Derby
Universally acclaimed as the most exciting two minutes in a 
wheel, the Kentucky Hamster Derby is big business! You’ve 
been called upon by one of the biggest owners in the business 
to implement an exacting training programme that’s been 
tailored for the big race.
At the moment, the hamsters aren’t following their schedule. 
Some are slacking off, and others are over-working. It’s up to 
you to make sure that the hamsters train exactly as they should.
Hey kiddo, this Kentucky Hamster 
Derby is big business, and we gotta get 
the training schedule absolutely spot on!
Billionaire 
hamster owner
Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number 
of revolutions
Motor setting 
(       )
15.00
3.00
10.00
4.00
2.00
5.50
Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number 
of revolutions
Motor setting 
(       )
15.0
3.0
10.0
4.0
2.0
5.5
The hamsters are to do three different types of run, depending 
on which day of their schedule they’re on. The hamster owner 
knows the distances he’d like the hamsters to cover and the 
speeds he’d like them to run at.
But he’s not great at physics - which is where you come in!
Hamsters like to run all night in 
their wheels. The training schedule 
is a way of honing the kinds of 
distances and speeds they typically 
run at into training for a race.
632    Chapter 16
limber up

The radius is 
the distance 
from the center 
to the edge.
You can revolutionize the hamsters’ training
It’s time to design the ultimate hamster training tool. 
The equipment you have to achieve this is:
The schedule is linear, but the 
equipment is circular. What are 
you going to do next?
Circular motion 
is different from 
linear motion.
Counter keeps track 
of the number of 
wheel revolutions.
Counter can be 
programmed to 
stop motor after 
a certain number 
of revolutions.
A standard hamster racing wheel with a 
radius of 10.0 cm. This means that it 
is 10 cm from the center of the wheel to 
the edge, where the hamster runs.
A counter that counts wheel 
revolutions. You can use this 
to start the motor, then stop 
it after a certain number of 
wheel revolutions.
The schedule involves linear distances and 
speeds, which you’d usually measure along a 
straight line or by using component vectors.
But the hamster wheel is circular, and 
the counter keeps track of the number of 
revolutions. How are we going to go from 
the linear schedule to the circular equipment?
10.0 cm
End of motor can 
be attached to 
wheel to turn it.
Motor has numbers on - 
but unfortunately the units 
have been rubbed off.
A motor which attaches to 
the wheel to make it turn. 
It has some numbers on it, 
and higher numbers make 
the motor turn faster - but 
unfortunately the units have 
been rubbed off.
0
5 10 15 20 25
Motor turns faster when 
slider moved to the right.
you are here 4    633
circular motion (part 1)

Joe: Yeah - it’s really important to get this training schedule 
automated and set up!
Jim: So I guess we use the motor to make the wheel turn at a 
certain speed, and have the timer switch it off when it’s covered 
the right distance? That sounds pretty straightforward.
Frank: We already know the wheel’s 10.0 cm all the way round ...
Jim: No - the radius of the wheel is 10.0 cm, but that’s the 
distance from its center to its edge. We need to know the distance 
the outside of the wheel travels in one revolution. 
Frank: Yeah, OK, so we need to figure out the distance a hamster 
runs for each revolution of the wheel. The counter counts the 
number of revolutions the wheel’s made. So we work out the 
number of revolutions required to cover each distance, and we’re 
fine.
Joe: But if we don’t know the circumference of the wheel, we 
can’t do anything with that.
Frank: What’s a circumference?
Joe: The circumference is the special name for the perimeter of a 
circle - the distance all the way round the outside.
Jim: OK, so we need some way of working out the circumference. 
If we know what distance the hamster covers when the wheel goes 
round once, we can use that to work out how many revolutions 
the wheel needs to do to cover each distance.
Jim: And if we know that, then we can set the counter to turn the 
motor off once the wheel’s done the correct number of revolutions.
Frank: I guess we need to work out what those numbers on the 
motor mean as well, so we can get the speed right. It’s a shame the 
units got rubbed off.
Joe: Yeah, that’s a good point.
Jim: Well, speed is distance divided by time, isn’t it? So if we get 
the distance sorted out first, we can think about setting the right 
speed later.
Frank: Cool, let’s go for it!
The circumference 
of a circle is 
the DISTANCE 
something at the 
edge travels in one 
REVOLUTION.
So, there’s big bucks 
in this hamster 
racing thing then!
Circumference is a 
word that means 
the ‘perimeter’ of 
a circle.
You can also think of the 
circumference as the distance 
around the edge of a stationary 
circle, but in physics it’s more 
useful to think about it in terms 
of a rotating circle.
634    Chapter 16
circumference and revolution

You have a hamster wheel and want to know the distance that the hamster will cover when the wheel 
goes round once - i.e., the circumference of the wheel (which has a 10.0 cm radius).
Write down as many methods as you can think of to work this out. 
You’re describing practical methods, not giving a numerical answer.
Thinking through different approaches helps
You need to work out the hamster wheel’s circumference 
(the distance all the way round the edge) so that you know 
how many revolutions are equal to each distance in the 
training schedule.
But all you know at the moment is that the wheel is a circle 
with a 10.0 cm radius (the distance from its center to its 
edge). How are you going to work out its circumference so 
that you can implement the training schedule?
radius = 10.0 cm
circumference = ?
Use the circumference (once 
you know it) to work out how 
many revolutions the wheel 
needs to do for each distance.
10.0 cm
Wheel is a circle.
you are here 4    635
circular motion (part 1)

v
You have a hamster wheel and want to know the distance that the hamster will cover when the wheel 
goes round once - i.e., the circumference of the wheel.
Write down as many methods as you can think of to work this out. 
You’re describing practical methods, not giving a numerical answer.
If you have to 
do a task more 
than once, try 
to work out an 
equation that’ll 
save you time.
Equations save you time.
You can work out the distance around the 
hamster wheel by wrapping string around 
it or rolling it. But what if you need to deal 
with other circles in the future?
It’s definitely easier to use a ruler to 
measure a linear distance (like the radius) 
than it is to measure a curved distance (like 
the circumference), so an equation linking 
the radius and circumference would be 
useful!
Get a piece of string, wrap it 
once round the wheel.
Mark where it comes to, then 
take the string off the wheel and 
measure it with a ruler.
Remove the wheel from the stand and make a mark 
on it. Line up this mark with a mark on the ground.
Then roll the wheel along until the mark is touching 
the ground again.
Measure the distance between the first mark on 
the ground and the second mark on the ground.
It’d be a shame to have to do all that again 
if we decide to use a different wheel, or if we 
have to deal with other circles in the future. Is 
there an equation we could use instead?
636    Chapter 16
equations save time

But that’s just dumb! Why not make π 
twice as big, i.e. π = 6.28... , so that the ratio is 
π instead of 2π? If I get to make up a new number, 
surely it’s easier not to have that 2 in there!
A circle’s radius and circumference are linked by π
All circles are similar. They’re exactly the same shape zoomed in or out. 
Although they don’t have ‘sides’, you can be sure that the ratio of a 
circle’s circumference to its radius will always be the same. (Just 
like the sides of similar triangles always have the same ratios.)
π was invented when the diameter 
was more interesting than the radius.
Mathematicians originally defined π as the ratio 
between a circle’s diameter (the distance across the 
circle) and its circumference. The diameter is twice 
the length of the radius, so π = 3.14 (3 sd) as the 
diameter fits round the circumference 3.14 (3 sd) 
times. Once π has been defined, you can’t really go 
changing its value.
In physics, you’re often a lot more interested in the 
radius of a circle than you are in its diameter (for 
example,  torque = radius × force), so the value 2π 
will often turn up in your equations.
A circle’s radius fits around its circumference 
approximately 6.28 times (3 sd).
The actual ratio of the lengths is a number 
with an infinite number of significant digits! 
So rather than writing “6.28 (3 sd)” as the 
ratio, there’s a special abbreviation for it - 2π, 
where π = 3.14 (3 sd).
So you can write down the equation C = 2πr, 
where C is the circumference and r is the 
radius. In other words, if a circle’s radius is 
1.00 m, its circumference is 6.28 m, and so on.
C = 2πr
Circumference
Radius
π = 3.14 (3 sd)
π = 3.14 (3 sd)
In physics, the 
RADIUS is more 
interesting than 
the diameter.
For example, 
torque = radius x force
A circle’s radius fits around 
its circumference:
Radius = r
r
r
r
r
r
r
0.28r
Once...
...twice...
...three times...
...four times...
...five times...
...six times...
...6.28 (3 sd) 
times in total.
This is another way of saying that 
whatever size the circle is, its radius 
will always fit around its circumference 
the same number of times.
you are here 4    637
circular motion (part 1)

Q: What are the units of π ?
A: π is a ratio of two lengths, the circumference and the 
diameter. It tells you the NUMBER of times the diameter fits 
into the circumference - 3.14 (3 sd) times. Length divided by 
length is dimensionless, so π is a NUMBER and doesn’t have 
any units.
Q: Do I need to remember the value of π for my exam?
A: Knowing that π = 3.14 (3 sd) is useful. If you’re doing 
AP Physics, you won’t have a calculator in the multiple choice 
section, so the approximation π = 3 (1 sd) will help you to 
choose the option that’s in the right ballpark.
Q: Can I use the [π] button on my calculator in the 
section where I’m allowed a calculator?
A: Yes, that’s be fine - though you need to round your 
answer to an appropriate number of significant digits at the end. 
Q: But why is π 3.14 (etc) in the first place, when that 
makes the ratio of a circle’s radius to its circumference 2π? 
A: π was originally coined to describe the ratio between a 
circle’s circumference and its diameter: C = πd. Nowadays, the 
ratio of a circle’s circumference to its radius is more often used 
in physics - but the value of π had already been decided. 
 
The ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter is π. As 
the radius is half the length of the diameter, the ratio of the 
circumference to the radius is 2π. So C = 2πr
Q: You said that π has an infinite number of digits? 
Surely it must end somewhere!
A:Nope! π is an irrational number, which means you can’t 
write it down exactly.
Q: Is that why there’s a symbol for it then? To avoid 
having to write more of it out than you really need to?
A: That’s right.  You can write the equation: 
circumference = 2πr and the ‘=’ sign is true because when you 
use the symbol π it implies the full irrational number! 
 
Otherwise you’d have to write circumference = 6.28r (3 sd) 
as you’d never be able to write down the exact value of the 
circumference as an equation.
Q: That all sounds a bit philosophical to me. I guess 
that in practice, I can write down circumference = 2πr 
when I’m showing my work, then at the very end I can use 
the value 3.14 (3 sd) for π when I’m actually putting the 
numbers in to work out an answer?
A: That’s a very good way of thinking about it. 
Q: So do I get to use π to design the hamster trainer 
now?
A: On you go then ...
π is the ratio of two lengths 
- it tells you the NUMBER of 
times the diameter fits into 
the circumference. Because π 
is a NUMBER, it has no units.
Radius = r
C = 2πr
Diameter, d= 2r
C = πd
638    Chapter 16
 is a ratio

a. Assume you have a hamster wheel, radius r. 
Write down an equation in terms of r that gives 
you the distance that something on the edge of 
the circle will cover if the circle rotates once.
Convert from linear distance to revolutions
The hamster training schedule contains 
distances in km. Your job is to implement the 
schedule using the wheel and a counter that 
keeps track of the number of revolutions. So 
you need to work out how many circumferences 
- and therefore how many revolutions - each 
distance is equivalent to.
c. Your hamster wheel has a radius of 10.0 cm. Fill in the 
‘total number of revolutions’ column for the distances 
shown in the hamster training schedule. There’s space 
under the table for you to show your work.
After 1 revolution, 
a hamster has run 
a distance of 1 
circumference.
b. You would like the hamster to cover distance x. 
Write down an equation that gives you x in terms 
of r. and the total number of revolutions, N.
Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number 
of revolutions
Motor setting 
(       )
15.00
3.00
10.00
4.00
2.00
5.50
Don’t worry about 
this column yet, 
you’ll fill it in later.
you are here 4    639
circular motion (part 1)

How do you get units 
of revolutions from a distance 
divided by a distance? Doesn’t that 
fly in the face of everything we’ve said 
about units up until now?
Your answer is a NUMBER of revolutions.
To work out the number of wheel revolutions in 15 
km, you divide the total distance (15000 m) by the 
circumference of the wheel (2πr = 0.628 m). This gives 
you an answer of 23900 - and there are no units, as a 
length divided by a length is dimensionless.
So be careful if you’re checking the units of an 
equation or answer. A quantity that represents 
a number (of things, for example number of 
revolutions) doesn’t have units!
a. Assume you have a hamster wheel, radius r. 
Write down an equation in terms of r that gives 
you the distance that something on the edge of 
the circle will cover if the circle rotates once.
c. Your hamster wheel has a radius of 10.0 cm. Fill in the 
‘total number of revolutions’ column for the distances 
shown in the hamster training schedule. There’s space 
under the table for you to show your work.
r
Circumference  C  =  2πr
b. You would like the hamster to cover distance x. 
Write down an equation that gives you x in terms 
of r. and the total number of revolutions, N.
Number of revolutions is the same as the number 
of circumferences in distance x:
N  =  x
C
and      C  =  2πr
N  =  x
2πr
x  =  2πrN
x  =  2πrN
r = 0.100 m
N  =  15.00 × 103
2 × π × 0.100
N  =  23900 revolutions (3 sd)
Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number 
of revolutions
Motor setting 
(       )
15.00
3.00
23900 (3 sd)
10.00
4.00
15900 (3 sd)
2.00
5.50
3180 (2 sd)
15.00 km:
N  =  x
2πr
N  =  10.00 × 103
2 × π × 0.100
N  =  15900 revolutions (3 sd)
10.00 km:
N  =  2 .00 × 103
2 × π × 0.100
N  =  3180 revolutions (3 sd)
2.00 km:
Don’t worry about 
this column yet, 
you’ll fill it in later.
15000 m
0.628 m =  23900 (3 sd)
The units divide 
out and cancel.
The final answer 
is a NUMBER 
with no units.
If you have a mixture of distance 
units, it’s usually safest to convert 
everything to meters.
640    Chapter 16
check your units

The period of the wheel is the time the wheel takes 
to do one rotation, and is given the symbol T.
You can calculate the period from the frequency. If 
something happens 5 times per second (so has a 
frequency of 5 Hz), then it happens 5 times in 1 second. 
So its period must be T  = 1
5  = 0.2 s.
Hertz is a unit of frequency that describes the number of times 
per second something regular happens. In physics, this is often 
referred to as the number of cycles per second.
 So if the wheel goes round 5 times per second, you can say that it 
has a frequency, f, of 5 Hz.
The distances slot into the training schedule brilliantly - but 
the speed the hamsters train at for each session is also vital. 
You have a motor you can use to turn the wheel ... but the 
units have been rubbed off. However, the hamster owner 
thinks that the motor might be marked in Hertz.
Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number of 
revolutions
Motor setting 
(       )
15.0
3.0
23900 (3 sd)
10.0
4.0
15900 (3 sd)
2.0
5.5
3200 (2 sd)
The distances are cool - but 
the speeds are really important 
too. I think the motor might be 
in Hertz ... can you help?
Convert the linear speeds into Hertz
f  = 1
T
T  = 1
f
Frequency
Period
Period
Frequency
Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number 
of revolutions
Motor 
frequency (Hz)
15.00
3.00
23900 (3 sd)
10.00
4.00
15900 (3 sd)
2.00
5.50
3180 (3 sd)
a. What time, in seconds,  does it take the 
hamsters to cover 15.00 km at 3.00 km/h?
b. You already worked out that this training plan 
involves the wheel doing a total number of 23900 
revolutions. Calculate the period, T, and hence the 
frequency, f, of the wheel, and fill in the table.
c. Do similar calculations to fill in the rest of the table.
The period, T, is the time for 
one rotation of the wheel.
Hertz is always 
capitalized, and can be 
abbreviated to Hz.
you are here 4    641
circular motion (part 1)

Q: What’s the difference between the 
frequency and the period?
A:The frequency is the number of cycles 
per second - the number of times a regular 
thing happens per second. 
 
The period is the number of seconds per 
cycle - the number of seconds that it takes 
for a regular thing to happen once.
Q: Why is frequency measured in 
Hz instead of however you’d write “per 
second” as a unit?
A: “Hz” is easier to write than “1/s” (which 
is the correct format) and less open to being 
misinterpreted. 
Q: I’ve seen frequency written in units 
of s-1 in other books. Is that OK?
A: Yes, that’s fine, and is another way of 
representing units using scientific notation. 
For example, other books may say ms-2 
instead of m/s2. As long as you use what 
you’re comfortable with, you’ll be fine.
Q: Why aren’t the units of frequency 
written as cycles/s? Why just “1/s”?
A: Good question. The thing to remember 
is that frequency is the number (of things) 
per second. It could be the number of 
revolutions, or the number of waves that 
break on the beach or the number of times 
a dog barks. A number is dimensionless so 
has no units.
Q: What if the regular thing happens 
less than once per second?
A: Then the frequency would be smaller 
than 1. For example, something that 
happens every 5 s has a frequency of 0.2 Hz.
Q: Why does f  = 1
T   and  T  = 1
f  ?
A: Frequency is cycles per second; 
period is seconds per cycle. “Per” means 
“divided by”, so frequency and period are the 
“opposite way up” from each other. 
 
For example, if something happens 5 times 
per second, it has a frequency of 5 Hz. 
Another way of putting it is that the thing 
happens every 0.2 s because T  = 1
f = 0.2 s.
Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number 
of revolutions
Motor 
frequency (Hz)
15.00
3.00
23900 (3 sd)
1.33 (3 sd)
10.00
4.00
15900 (3 sd)
1.77 (3 sd)
2.00
5.50
3180 (3 sd)
2.43 (3 sd)
a. What time, in seconds,  does it take the 
hamsters to cover 15.00 km at 3.00 km/h?
b. You already worked out that this training plan 
involves the wheel doing a total number of 23900 
revolutions. Calculate the period, T, and hence the 
frequency, f, of the wheel, and fill in the table.
c. Do similar calculations to fill in the rest of the table.
speed  = distance
time
time  = distance
speed
time  = 15.00 km
3.00 km/hr =  5 hr
5 hr  = 5 hr × 60 min
1 hr
×
60 s
1 min
=  18000 s (3 sd)
Period is time for 1 revolution.
23900 revolutions take 18000 s.
T  =
18000
23900 =  0.753 s (3 sd)
f  =
1
T =
1
0.753 =  1.33 Hz (3 sd)
T  =
9000
15900
f  =
1
T = 15900
9000 =  1.77 Hz (3 sd)
T  =
1310
3180
f  =
1
T = 3180
1310 =  2.43 Hz (3 sd)
2.00 km at 5.50 km/h takes
× 60 × 60 = 1310 s.
2.00
5.50
10.00 km at 4.00 km/h takes
× 60 × 60 = 9000 s.
10.00
4.00
This is a shortcut that stops you 
having to calculate a value for T 
before you calculate a value for f.
642    Chapter 16
answers and questions

... but the wheel turns too slowly!
When the billionaire hamster owner comes to inspect your work, 
there’s a problem. He says that the wheel’s turning far too 
slowly - something’s gone wrong and you need to fix it quickly 
if you’re going to stand any chance in the race!
So you set up the machine ...
You’ve used the fact that the circumference of a circle C = 2πr to convert 
the units in the training schedule (km and km/h) to units that are much 
easier for you to work with - number of revolutions and Hertz.
Motor is 
set to 1.33.
Counter is set to 
stop wheel after 
23900 revolutions.
Hey kiddo - that wheel’s 
turnin’ waaay too slow. You gotta 
work out what’s up with it!
And the wheel turns!
0
5 10 15 20 25
The motor has numbers on its dial, but the units have 
rubbed off. The hamster trainer is sure they must be Hertz, 
so you set up the machine to test the first training session on 
the schedule, using the data from your table ...
a. What do you think might have gone wrong?
b. How would you go about investigating and fixing it?
you are here 4    643
circular motion (part 1)

a. What do you think might have gone wrong?
b. How would you go about investigating and fixing it?
Always make 
sure you know 
the UNITS of 
everything you’re 
dealing with!
Jim: I already double-checked the math - and it’s fine.
Joe: Hmm. Maybe we made a mistake with some units.
Jim: I already checked the units - they all work out.
Joe: No, I mean we assumed that the numbers written on the motor 
are in Hertz when the units had rubbed off. But what if the hamster 
owner’s wrong about that?
Frank: So how are we going to work out what the numbers on the 
motor mean? I guess we could count how many times it actually 
goes round per second when it’s set to 1.33 like it is now?
Jim: Why use a clumsy number like 1.33? Why don’t we set it to 
‘1.00’ and see how long it takes to do 1 revolution like that. Then 
we’ll be able to convert the frequency in Hertz we worked out to 
whatever units the numbers are in.
Joe: Yeah, ‘1’ is an easier number to work with. I guess we could 
also move the slider to try and make the wheel go round exactly 
once per second. Then we have two values to work with.
Maybe the owner got the units of the motor wrong, 
and they’re something else instead of Hz.
Do some tests or experiments with the motor to 
count the number of revolutions it does in a certain 
time when set to a certain number, to try to work 
out what its units are and how to convert them to 
what we already know about.
So it’s running too slowly. Maybe 
we made a mistake with the math?
644    Chapter 16
speed up the wheel

If you want to try 
things out, choose 
‘nice’ numbers, like 
1 or 10, to play with.
Try some numbers to work out 
how things relate to each other
We originally assumed that the numbers on the motor 
represent revolutions per second (i.e. Hz) - but the 
wheel’s going too slowly for that. What you need to do 
is try some ‘nice’ values on the control, and count how 
many revolutions per second they correspond to.
With the motor set at 1.0, 1.0 revolution 
takes 6.3 s. And with the motor set at 
around 6.3, 1.0 revolution takes 1.0 s. 
Have you seen a number close to 6.3 
somewhere else recently? Look back 
through this chapter if you can’t remember.
What do you think the numbers on the 
motor might represent?
What if the wheel goes at 1.0 Hz?
Then you try to find the value on the motor 
where the wheel actually goes around once 
per second, i.e., with a frequency of 1.0 Hz. 
After playing a bit, you find that a setting of 
around 6.3 does the job.
0 5 10 15 20 25
1 revolution 
takes 1 s.
Motor set 
to ‘6.3.’
What if you set the motor to ‘1.0’?
When you set the control on the motor to 
1.0, the wheel takes around 6.3 seconds to 
complete exactly 1 revolution.
0 5 10 15 20 25
1 revolution 
takes 6.3 s.
Motor set 
to ‘1.00.’
Mark on wheel 
that you can 
watch go round.
you are here 4    645
circular motion (part 1)

With the motor set at 1.0, 1.0 revolution 
takes 6.3 s. And with the motor set at 
around 6.3, 1.0 revolution takes 1.0 s. 
Have you seen a number close to 6.3 
somewhere else recently? Look back 
through this chapter if you can’t remember.
What do you think the numbers on the 
motor might represent?
The units on the motor are radians per second
You’ve spotted that there are around 6.3 (2 sd) 
‘radii’ in a circumference. When the motor is set 
to 6.3, the wheel goes at 1 revolution per second 
(i.e. 6.3 ‘radii’ per second).
The numbers on the motor should have units 
of radians. A radian is a unit used to measure 
angles. If you rotate the wheel through an angle 
of 1 radian, the outside of the wheel travels a 
distance equal to the radius of the wheel.
Radians are 
a way of 
measuring 
angles.
Radians are very helpful if you’re trying to connect the 
angle a wheel’s turned through and the distance the edge 
of the wheel has covered.
The edge of a wheel that’s turned through an angle of 1 
radian has covered a distance the length of the wheel’s 
radius, r. If you turn the wheel an angle of 2 radians, 
the edge covers a distance of 2r. If you turn the wheel 
by 2.4 radians, the edge covers a distance of 2.4r. You 
multiply the angle by the radius to get the distance.
If you rotate the wheel through an angle of 2π radians, 
the outside of the wheel travels a distance of 2πr, as the 
circumference of the circle  = 2πr. Therefore, there are 2π 
radians in one revolution.
This fits with what you learned by experimenting with the 
motor. When the motor is set to 6.3 (2π) radians per second, 
the wheel goes round at a rate of 1 revolution per second.
If you turn the wheel 
through an angle of 
1 radian, the outside 
travels the same 
distance as the radius.
This angle 
is 1 radian.
Radius = r
r
θ
There are 
2π radians in 
one complete 
revolution.
The circumference of a circle is 2π - or 6.28 - times 
larger than the radius. So 1 revolution is around 6.3 
radii. If you set the motor to 1, it takes about 6.3 
seconds to do one revolution (i.e. 6.3 radii) And if you 
set the motor to 6.3, it does 1 revolution (i.e. 6.3 radii) 
in a second. 
 
So maybe the units on the motor tell you how many 
radii per second the outside of the wheel does?
646    Chapter 16
radians measure angles

But why invent another way 
of measuring angles when I’m 
perfectly happy with degrees?
Radians are particularly useful 
when you’re dealing with circles.
Degrees are only ‘familiar’ because you’re 
already used to dealing with them. As you 
practice with radians, they’ll become a whole 
lot more familiar.
Although you’ll still use degrees when working 
with triangles, radians are particularly useful 
when you’re dealing with circles, as you can 
move between angles and distances more 
quickly using the equation x = rθ, where x is 
the distance covered round the edge of the 
circle as you rotate through angle θ.
 
When you’re working with circles, radians help you to move between angles and distances 
quickly. Here’s your chance to practice working with radians and compare it with working with 
degrees before you go on to do the ‘mission-critical’ bit with the hamster wheel.
A hamster wheel with a radius of 0.100 m turns 
through an angle of 60°. What distance does the 
outside of the wheel cover?
Working with degrees
Working with radians
Hint: What 
proportion of 
the circle’s 
circumference is 
swept out by an 
angle of 60°?
Hint: Use the 
equation x = rθ 
where x is the 
distance covered 
for the angle θ.
A hamster wheel with a radius of 0.100 m turns 
through an angle of  π
3  radians. What distance does 
the outside of the wheel cover?
Linear 
distance.
Angle in 
radians
Radius
x  =  rθ
Compare the math you’ve had to do to calculate a distance from an angle using degrees and using radians.
This is 
a scalar 
equation
you are here 4    647
circular motion (part 1)

When you’re working with circles, radians help you to move between angles and distances 
quickly. Here’s your chance to practice working with radians and compare it with working with 
degrees before you go on to do the ‘mission-critical’ bit with the hamster wheel.
A hamster wheel with a radius of 0.100 m turns 
through an angle of 60°. What distance does the 
outside of the wheel cover?
Working with degrees
Working with radians
A hamster wheel with a radius of 0.100 m turns 
through an angle of  π
3  radians. What distance does 
the outside of the wheel cover?
Compare the math you’ve had to do to calculate a distance from an angle using degrees and using radians.
Angle of 60° is 60
360 or 1
6 of the circle.
Total circumference  =  2πr
Distance covered  = 1
6 × 2πr
= 1
6 × 2 × π × 0.100
Distance covered  =  0.105 m (3 sd)
The final step of the math is more or less the same both times. But it takes much longer to get there 
from an angle in degrees than it does from an angle in radians.
Q: Why would I want to use radians to 
measure angles?
A: If you’re working with circles, radians 
simplify calculations greatly. In degrees, you 
first of all have to work out what fraction of 
the circle the angle is (for example, 60° is 
a sixth of a full circle), then multiply that by 
2πr to get the distance. But in radians, this 
has already been done, and you only have 
to multiply the angle by the radius to get the 
distance. 
 
 
Q: Will I be using radians for the rest 
of this book then?
A: For anything involving circles and 
regular motion, you’ll be using radians. But 
you’ll still be using degrees for triangles.
Q: How can I get used to using 
radians when they look so weird!
A: The big thing to remember is that there 
are 2π radians in one complete rotation. 
So there are π radians in half a rotation, π
2  
radians in quarter of a rotation, π
3  radians in 
a sixth of a rotation, etc.
Q:Aren’t fractions of π very awkward 
to work with, as π is an irrational 
number?
A: As long as you keep using fractions, 
like π
3  and π
2 , then only put in the value of 
π at the end of a calculation, the fractions 
aren’t difficult to work with.
Think of angles in 
radians in terms of 
fractions of π.
x  =  rθ
x  =
π
3
0.100 ×
x  =  0.105 m (3 sd)
648    Chapter 16
radians, fractions, and 

Pool Puzzle - Radians
Your job is to take the angles 
measured in radians from the 
pool and place them into 
the boxes around the circle 
to indicate the size of each 
angle. You may not use the 
same angle more than once, 
and you won’t need to use all 
the angles. Your goal is to become 
more familiar with using radians 
to measure angles.
Note: each angle from 
the pool can only be 
used once!
0
π
3
π
π
4
π
2
π
6
3π
2
2π
π
8
2π
3
Measure the angles 
counter-clockwise 
from the horizontal.
Is thinking about radians in 
terms of fractions of π a bit like 
thinking about angles in degrees 
in terms of fractions of 360°?
Yes - it’s good to think of angles in 
terms of “fraction of a revolution.”
There are 360° in one full revolution. As you’ve 
practiced using degrees, you’ve got used to the idea 
that 90° is a right angle (quarter of a revolution), 
45° is half of a right angle (an eighth of a 
revolution), 180° is half a revolution, and so on.
Here’s the opportunity to practice thinking about 
radians in a similar way:
you are here 4    649
circular motion (part 1)

Pool Puzzle - Radians - SOLUTION
Your job is to take the angles measured in radians from the 
pool and place them into the boxes around the circle to 
indicate the size of each angle. You may not use the 
same angle more than once, and you won’t need to use 
all the angles. Your goal is to become more familiar 
with using radians to measure angles.
Note: each angle from 
the pool can only be 
used once!
π
8
2π
3
π
3
π
π
4
π
2
π
6
3π
2
2π
0
There are 2π radians 
in 1 complete revolution.
So ... are we ready to make 
progress on the hamster 
trainer now? We need to 
get the training started if we 
wanna win the Derby!
650    Chapter 16
pool puzzle

Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number 
of revolutions
Frequency (Hz)
Angular 
frequency (rad/s)
15.00
3.00
23900 (3 sd)
1.33 (3 sd)
10.00
4.00
15900 (3 sd)
1.77 (3 sd)
2.00
5.50
3180 (3 sd)
2.43 (3 sd)
ω  =  2πf
Convert frequency to angular frequency
Complete the table by calculating the angular frequency that the wheel needs to turn 
at for each training session. There’s space for your work under the table.
You’ve worked out that the units on the motor are radians per 
second. This is known as the angular frequency, and is 
given the symbol ω (pronounced “omega”). So if you set the 
motor to 1.0, it will turn at a rate of 1.0 radian per second.
There are 2π radians in one complete revolution. You already 
know the frequency, f, that the wheel needs to be set at for 
each run - this is the number of revolutions per second that 
the wheel does.
As there are 2π radians in 1 complete revolution, 
you can use the equation ω = 2πf  to calculate 
the angular frequency that the motor needs to 
turn at for each of the hamsters’ training sessions.
Angular 
frequency
The angular frequency 
is the number of 
radians per second.
Frequency
you are here 4    651
circular motion (part 1)

A circle’s circumference 
is 2π times the size of its 
radius, C = 2πr.
Frequency, f, is measured 
in cycles per second, or 
Hertz (Hz).
Period, T, is the time it 
takes for one regular thing 
to happen. Think of it as 
“seconds per cycle.”



Radians are a way of 
measuring angles that are 
especially useful for doing 
calculations with circles. 
There are 2π radians in one 
revolution.
It can sometimes be helpful 
to think about radians in 
terms of fractions of π. 


Angular frequency, ω, is 
the number of radians per 
second.
As there are 2π radians in 
one revolution, x = rθ.
As there are 2π radians in 
one revolution, ω = 2πf.



Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number 
of revolutions
Frequency (Hz)
Angular 
frequency (rad/s)
15.00
3.00
23900 (3 sd)
1.33 (3 sd)
8.35 (3 sd)
10.00
4.00
15900 (3 sd)
1.77 (3 sd)
11.3 (3 sd)
2.00
5.50
3180 (3 sd)
2.43 (3 sd)
15.3 (3 sd)
Complete the table by calculating the angular frequency that the wheel needs to turn 
at for each training session. There’s space for your work under the table.
f  =  1.33 Hz :        ω  =  2πf  =  2 × π × 1.33  =  8.35 rad/s (3 sd)
f  =  1.77 Hz :        ω  =  2πf  =  2 × π × 1.77  =  11.1 rad/s (3 sd)
f  =  2.43 Hz :      ω  =  2πf  =  2 × π × 2.43  =  15.3 rad/s (3 sd)
The hamster trainer is complete!
When you put the finishing touches to your hamster trainer 
by calculating the angular frequency, it’s brilliant! After some 
hearty congratulations from the owner, you find yourself 
with a 20% stake in the thoroughbred hamster that’s favorite 
to win next month’s Kentucky Hamster Derby!
Great work! I can hardly 
wait to get the hamsters 
started with this!
652    Chapter 16
get on, little hamster

Tonight’s talk: Degree and Radian have a barney about who 
is better at measuring angles.
Degree:
Well, hello radian. You’re pretty late to the party, 
aren’t you?! 
 
 
But I’m so easy to understand! None of those 
messy pies (or should I say πs) - just 360 degrees of 
goodness in every complete revolution. How much 
more straightforward can you get? 
 
 
 
Oh yeah?! Such as ... ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
They can do that with me as well though! Suppose a 
wheel goes round 180°. They can work out that this 
is half the circle, as 180/360 = 0.5. And they know 
what the circumference of the circle is - 2πr. So they 
just multiply those together - 0.5 × 2πr to get πr 
which is the distance the wheel’s gone. Sorted! 
 
 
But your way is sooo anti-intuitive!  
 
Whaaaaatever!
Radian: 
 
I wouldn’t quite say that. Sure, you’ve been around 
for a bit longer than I have. But that doesn’t mean 
you’re inherently better - just over the hill! 
 
 
 
OK, so I admit that the πs might take a little bit 
of getting used to. But once you’ve got your head 
around them, you have to admit that I have far 
greater superpowers than you do! 
Well, it’s really easy to calculate distances from 
angles when something’s going round in a circle 
using me. Suppose a wheel goes round an angle 
of θ radians, and they want to know the distance 
the has wheel gone? No problem! Just multiply the 
angle by the distance you are from the center of the 
circle (the radius, r) to get the distance, rθ. 
 
 
 
 
 
Um ... you mean that if you go round π radians (i.e. 
half a circle) you’ve travelled a distance of rθ = πr 
I’m sorry, but my way is just a lot lot quicker! 
I think you really mean that my way is much better 
once you’ve got used to it!
you are here 4    653
circular motion (part 1)

A couple of weeks later ...
The hamsters are ready to move into the sprint training phase 
of their program. The owner explains that he wants the 
hamsters to be able to run at 3.00 m/s - and that he also wants 
an easy way to convert from speeds in m/s to “the numbers on 
that motor”.
This means that you need to come up with a way of converting 
between meters per second (linear speed) to radians per 
second (angular frequency).
Hey! We need some help here 
with the speed training - and 
an easy way to get from m/s to the 
numbers on that motor!
Distance 
(km)
Speed 
(km/h)
Total number 
of revolutions
Frequency (Hz)
Angular 
frequency (rad/s)
15.00
3.00
23900 (3 sd)
1.33 (3 sd)
8.35 (3 sd)
10.00
4.00
15900 (3 sd)
1.77 (3 sd)
11.1 (3 sd)
2.00
5.50
3180 (3 sd)
2.43 (3 sd)
15.3 (3 sd)
Complete the table by calculating the angular frequency that the wheel needs to turn 
at for each training session. There’s space for your work under the table.
Wouldn't it be dreamy if we could convert 
between linear speed and angular frequency 
quickly. But I know it's just a fantasy… 
When you did this before, it involved several 
steps. First of all, you worked out the 
total number of revolutions for a training 
run, and the total time the run took. From 
these figures, you were able to calculate 
the frequency (revolutions per second) and 
from there the angular frequency (radians 
per second).
That’s a lot of steps!
But back then, you didn’t know that the 
numbers on the motor were radians per 
second - you didn’t know that’s what you 
were aiming at. Now you know that you’re 
aiming at radians per second ...
654    Chapter 16
more hamster training

a. Your hamster wheel has a radius of 10.0 cm. Use the equation v = rω to calculate the angular 
frequency it would need to turn with to enable the hamster to run with a speed of 3.00 m/s.
b. Your motor can spin at any angular frequency up to 25.0 rad/s.  How might you build a speed trainer 
capable of making a hamster run at 3.00 m/s if you don’t have a faster motor available?
Jim: Yeah - but that took us a loooong time before!
Joe: I’ve noticed that both the things we’re supposed to be working 
with are “per second”. Meters per second and radians per second.
Frank: So if we can convert from meters to radians, we might be 
able to do it more quickly than we did before.
Jim: We can already go between meters and radians! x = rθ.
Frank: Hmm. So multiplying the angle (in radians) by the radius 
gives you the distance in meters. x = rθ. 
Jim: I wonder if that means multiplying radians per second by the 
radius will give us meters per second.
Joe: Yeah ... maybe we can say that v = rω?
Jim: How do the units check out? If you multiply radians by the 
radius, you get meters. So if you multiply radians per second by the 
radius then you get distance per second.
Frank: And “distance per second” is just another way of saying 
velocity. Brilliant!
So we need to convert 
from meters per second 
to radians per second.
e 
g 
ul
Angular frequency, ω, is 
the number of radians per 
second.
As there are 2π radians in 
one revolution, x = rθ.
As there are 2π radians in



These are some of the things from 
earlier in the chapter that the guys 
are talking about.
you are here 4    655
circular motion (1)

a. Your hamster wheel has a radius of 10.0 cm. Use the equation v = rω to calculate the angular frequency 
it would need to turn with to enable the hamster to run with a speed of 3.00 m/s.
b. Your motor can spin at any angular frequency up to 25.0 rad/s.  How might you build a speed trainer 
capable of making a hamster run at 3.00 m/s if you don’t have a faster motor available?
Q: So radians help you to go straight from 
distance to angle, or from speed to angular 
frequency?
A: Yes - you can use the equations x = rθ and v = rω to 
move quickly between linear and angular quantities.
Q:What if I want to know the speed of a point 
that’s on the wheel,  but not at the edge?
A: When the wheel spins, that point will ‘sketch out’ a 
circle with a radius the same as the distance that the point 
is from the center. 
Q: Is it OK to use that value for the radius, even if 
it’s not the radius of the wheel?
A: Yes - in this context, the radius is the distance from 
the center of the wheel to the point you’re interested in.
Q:Will x = rθ and v = rω only work if θ and ω are in 
terms of radians not degrees?
A: Correct. If θ is in degrees, then you need to work 
out what proportion of the circle’s circumference is 
included by dividing the angle by 360°, then multiplying 
by 2π to get the distance the point’s travelled. With 
radians, that’s already been done for you.
v  =  rω
ω  = vr = 3.00
0.100
ω  =  30.0 rad/s (3 sd)
v  =  rω. The speed depends on both the radius and the angular frequency. 
 
If it’s not possible to increase the angular frequency high enough, another way to get a higher 
speed is to increase the radius. So you could use a larger wheel with the same motor.
656    Chapter 16
solve for v

Yes - ω is sometimes called the angular speed.
ω is also called the angular speed, or sometimes the angular 
velocity, as it’s the “angular equivalent” of the linear velocity.
Just as x and θ are connected by the equation x = rθ, v and ω are 
connected by the equation v = rω.
So, because of how radians work, if you have an angular quantity 
(like θ or ω) you can multiply it by r to get to its linear equivalent.
I guess that ω’s also kinda like an angular 
speed? Because it tells you the number of 
radians per second - like speed tells you the 
number of meters per second?
You have a motor capable 
of turning at 25.0 rad/s, 
and wish to train a hamster 
that runs at 3.00 m/s.
What radius of wheel do 
you need to use?
You can increase the (linear) speed 
by increasing the wheel’s radius
If you have a wheel turning at angular frequency ω, the 
whole wheel turns through the same angle in the same 
time. But parts of the wheel that are a greater radius from 
the center travel a greater distance in the same time, so 
have a greater speed, v.
This means that you can increase the maximum speed that 
your hamster trainer can cope with by increasing the radius 
of your wheel - without needing to change the angular 
frequency that it turns with.
θ
v  =  rω
x  =  rθ
Multiply the 
linear quantity 
by the radius 
to get the 
equivalent 
angular quantity.
Linear distance 
(meters).
Linear speed 
(meters per second.)
Angle (radians) -
“angular distance”
Angular speed (radians 
per second) - also called 
“angular frequency”
Radius (meters).
Radius (meters).
The object at the 
larger radius travels 
a larger distance 
than the object at 
the smaller radius 
in the same time. 
Increased radius 
means increased speed.
Wheel has turned 
through this angle.
This object is at a 
larger RADIUS than 
the other one.
Here, we’re written v as a scalar to 
indicate that it’s the size of the object’s 
velocity. The direction of the velocity 
changes all the time as the wheel rotates.
you are here 4    657
circular motion (part 1)

658    Chap
You can go from an angle, θ, to the 
distance something r from the center of 
the circle has travelled by multiplying by 
the radius: x = rθ.
You can go from the angular frequency 
to the speed that something r from 
the center of the circle is moving at by 
multiplying by the radius, v = rω.
The equation v = rω only gives you the 
size of the velocity vector, not its direction. 
That’s why v is written as a scalar.
ω is also called the angular speed. This is 
the same thing as the angular frequency 
- radians per second.




You have a motor capable 
of turning at 25.0 rad/s, 
and wish to train a hamster 
that runs at 3.00 m/s.
What radius of wheel do 
you need to use?
v  =  rω
r  = vω = 3.00
25.0
r  =  0.120 m (3 sd)
With sprint training in a larger 
wheel added to their schedule, the 
hamsters are unbeatable, and win 
all of their races - including the 
Kentucky Hamster Derby!
Hey kiddo, we won the 
Derby - with a sprint 
finish, of course!
x = rθ
v = rω
 
Multiply the 
angular quantity 
by the radius to get 
the linear quantity.
Linear 
quantity.
Angular 
quantity.
Radius.
658    Chapter 16
bullet points

When you’re thinking about the 
units of the terms in an equation, 
radians are dimensionless so 
don’t have units.
OK, so in the equation x = rθ, 
x and r are both distances, right? 
But that implies that θ doesn’t have 
any units - even though I know that θ is 
measured in radians! What gives?!
Think of radians as a clarification 
of scale rather than as a unit.
2π is the ratio of a circle’s radius to its 
circumference. This ratio is a length divided 
by a length. 2π is the answer to the question 
“how many times does the radius fit into the 
circumference?” The answer is a number of 
times. 2π is a number - it doesn’t have units.
It so happens that this ratio, 2π, is very useful as 
a measure of how far something has rotated. 
To make it clear that you’re using 2π to represent 
turning, rather than a number (of elephants, 
monkeys etc), you can append the word ‘radians’ 
to it. So turning 2π radians is the same as turning 
a complete circle. The same applies to any other 
angle measured in radians.
This means that when you’re thinking about the 
units of terms in an equation (doing dimensional 
analysis or units analysis), you should treat 
radians like a number without any units.
you are here 4    659
circular motion (part 1)

660
2. You need to arrange for a hamster wheel (diameter 20.0 cm) to 
turn so that the outside of the wheel goes at a speed of 3.00 km/h.
What angular frequency (in radians per second) does the 
wheel need to turn with to achieve this?
How many revolutions per second is this equivalent to?
If the motor driving the wheel is only capable of rotating it at 
25 rad/s, what diameter would the wheel need to have in order 
to achieve a speed of 3 km/h-?
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Angular quantities” Question
Any time something’s going in a circle, you’re almost certain 
to have to deal with quantities such as angular displacement θ, and angular 
speed, ω. The main things to remember is that there are 2π radians in one complete 
revolution and that the circumference of the circle = 2πr. This means you can work 
out that you get the linear quantity by multiplying the angular quantity (e.g. θ = 2π) by 
the radius, even if you forget the formulae x = rθ and v = rω.
One thing to bear in mind with this kind 
of question is whether it talks about the frequency 
- number of revolutions per second - or the angular frequency, 
aka angular speed which is the number of radians per second. As 
there are 2π radians in one revolution you can convert from 
one to the other easily enough - as long as you pay attention 
to which units are involved in the first place!
‘Wheel’ is a buzzword that 
should get you thinking 
about rotational motion.
This question gives you the diameter. Be 
careful - all of your equations involve 
the RADIUS, so you’ll need to use a value 
of 10.0 cm not 20.0 cm.
This is a 
LINEAR 
speed.
Angular frequency 
and angular speed 
are both to do with 
how fast something 
is rotating in radians 
per second.
Remember that there are 2π radians in exactly 
1 revolution. Ask yourself which number you’re 
expecting to be bigger when you do the conversion.
The question asks you for a diameter 
when you’ve been working with a radius 
throughout. Make sure you give them what 
they asked for!

you are here 4    661
circular motion (part 1)
Units
Falling
Circumference
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Inelastic collision
Force
Frequency
Special points
Experiment
Period
Elastic collision
Weight
Time
Angular frequency
Energy
Component
Tension
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Pulley
Radians
Impulse
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Mechanical energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Volume
Velocity
Power
Friction
Radius
Kinetic energy
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Internal energy
Area
Mass
I can deal with 
circles now!
Radius
The distance from the center to the edge of a circle.
Circumference
The distance round the outside of a circle. C = 2πr
Frequency
The number of times something regular happens 
per second.
Period
The number of seconds it takes for something 
regular to happen once.
Radians
An alternative way of measuring angles. There are 
2π radians is one complete revolution.
Angular 
frequency
The number of radians per second. 
Also known as angular speed.

Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 16 under your belt and 
added some terminology and problem-
solving skills to your tool box.
CHAPTER 16
Frequency and period
Frequency, f, is cycles per second.
Period, T, is seconds per cycle.
T  = 1
f
f  = 1
T
Linear and angular
You can get from the angle, θ, to the 
linear distance, x, with the equation: 
 
You can get from the angular speed, 
ω, to the linear speed, v, with the 
equation: 
x  =  rθ
v  =  rω
Angular frequency and 
angular speed
Angular frequency and angular speed 
both have the same size and both 
have units of radians per second. 
They’re exactly the same thing, 
You can get from the frequency, f, 
to the angular frequency, ω , with 
the equation:
ω  =  2πf
Radians
Radians are a way of measuring angles. 
They are especially useful for working 
with circles. There are 2π radians in 
1 revolution. Think of other angles in 
terms of ‘fractions of ‘2π.
π
3
0, 2π
π
π
4
π
2
π
6
3π
2
662    Chapter 16
physics toolbox

circular motion (part 2)
17
Staying on track
Well, we’ve been dating for quite a 
while ... and I guess what I’m trying 
to say ... is ... Peggy Sue, darling, will 
you mar-
WOW, A 
DANCING 
BADGER!
Ever feel like someone’s gone off at a tangent? That’s exactly what 
happens when you try to move an object along a circular path when there’s not enough 
centripetal force to enable this to happen. In this chapter, you’ll learn exactly what 
centripetal force is and how it can keep you on track. Along the way, you’ll even solve 
some pretty serious problems with a certain Head First space station. So what are you 
waiting for? Turn the page, and let’s get started.
this is a new chapter    663

664    Chapter 17
Houston ... we have a problem
Astronauts at the Head First space station are 
threatening to go on strike. They’re fed up with floating 
around all the time. The astronauts want to be able to 
walk around the station just like they can on Earth.
You’ve been called in to create artificial gravity for an 
add-on to the station... and keep those astronauts happy.
Space station
S
S
 
H
e
a
d
 
F
i
r
s
t
Astronaut
The astronauts are 
tired of floating. 
They want to feel like 
they’re walking on the 
Earth - in space!
artificial gravity

you are here 4    665
circular motion (part 2)
The space station is in FREEFALL.
The only force acting on the space station is the force of 
its weight - the gravitational attraction it experiences 
from the Earth. It’s not touching anything else, so there 
are no contact forces on it. And the lack of atmosphere 
means that there’s no friction either as it orbits the Earth.
If an object is in freefall, then the only force acting 
on the object is its own weight. So the space station is in 
freefall. The same is true for the astronauts - the only force 
acting on each astronaut is that astronaut’s weight.
But when the force of an object’s weight acts down 
towards the center of the Earth, how can the object 
possibly orbit the Earth by going around the Earth?!
How can the space station be in orbit 
around the Earth when gravity attracts it 
towards the Earth?
If an object 
is in freefall, 
the only force 
acting on the 
object is its 
own weight.
Suppose you fire a cannon. The 
cannonball is in freefall, because the 
only force acting on the cannonball is its 
own weight. So the cannonball follows 
a curved path as it falls and hits the 
Earth.In freefall - only force acting 
on cannonball is its weight.
Lands here if 
Earth is flat.
Locally, the Earth appears flat, but it’s 
really round. If the cannonball is very 
fast or starts off very high, it goes further 
before it lands because the surface of the 
Earth curves away from the cannonball 
as it falls.
Where surface of Earth 
would be if it was flat.
Earth is round, so the 
cannonball actually goes 
further and lands here.
If the cannon is high 
enough and the cannonball 
is fast enough, the surface 
of the Earth keeps on 
curving away as the 
cannonball’s flightpath 
curves down. The 
cannonball keeps on 
freefalling round the Earth - 
in orbit - just like the space 
station and astronauts.
For a tall cannon and 
high speed, cannonball 
freefalls forever - and 
orbits the Earth.
Cannonball is 
orbiting, and is 
in freefall too.
The astronaut is in freefall - the only force 
acting on him is his weight. So why does 
he feel weightless in the space station?
1
2
3

S
S
 
H
e
a
d
 
F
i
r
s
t
When you’re in freefall, objects 
appear to float beside you
Suppose you’re midway through a parachute jump, but you 
haven’t opened your chute yet. If you let go of an apple as 
you fall, the apple will fall with the same velocity as 
you. It looks like the apple’s just floating there.
Of course, if you’re doing a parachute jump, there are 
some clues that indicate that you and the apple are both 
falling. The Earth gradually looks bigger, and you can feel 
the wind rushing past you!
It’s the same for an astronaut in the space 
station. He’s continually falling around the 
Earth. So if he lets go of an apple, it floats 
around the space station rather than falling 
towards the ground.
This makes it look as though the apple is 
weightless - and as though the astronaut is 
weightless. The astronaut is used to the force 
of his weight attracting him towards the 
ground. But here, the “ground” (the wall of 
the spacestation) is falling at the same rate as 
the astronaut
This means that the astronaut can’t walk 
around the space station like he can on Earth.
You and apple are falling at 
the same rate.- so the apple 
stays beside you.
Apple’s 
velocity
Your 
velocity
But if you and the apple were in a soundproof 
windowless box, you wouldn’t have any visual or 
audible clues that you’re falling. The apple would 
appear to float next to you! And as the box is also 
falling at the same rate as you, you would appear 
to float around inside the box. If you pushed 
yourself up off the floor, you wouldn’t fall back 
down again like you would on Earth.
The space station is like a 
box that’s in freefall. So 
everything appears to float 
around in the space station 
because everything’s falling 
at the same rate as it.
This time you 
can’t see that 
you’re falling 
because of the 
box. So the apple 
appears to float 
next to you.
Apple’s 
velocity
Your 
velocity
Box’s 
velocity
The box is also 
falling with the 
same velocity 
- so you float 
around the box!
Astronaut’s 
velocity
Space station’s 
velocity
666    Chapter 17
freefall

What’s the astronaut missing, 
compared to when he’s on Earth?
If an astronaut is in freefall, then he and the objects in the space station 
will appear to float around because everything’s falling at the same rate.
But why does a dropped apple in an orbiting space station appear to act 
so differently from a dropped apple on Earth - when they’re both falling 
because of the force of their weight, as usual? And why isn’t it possible 
to walk around normally in the space station like you can on Earth?
When you’re dealing with forces, always start with a free body diagram...
For problems 
involving forces, 
always start with a 
free body diagram.
a. Draw a free body diagram of all the forces the 
astronaut would experience while standing on Earth.
b. Draw a free body diagram of all the forces an 
astronaut would experience while in freefall.
c. When you compare the free body diagrams in parts a and b, which force is missing?
e. How might you introduce a new force to compensate for the missing one you spotted in parts c and d, 
so the astronaut can walk around as he would on Earth?
d. How does a person on Earth experience their weight differently from a person in freefall?
you are here 4    667
circular motion (part 2)

a. Draw a free body diagram of all the forces the 
astronaut would experience while standing on Earth.
b. Draw a free body diagram of all the forces an 
astronaut would experience while in freefall.
c. When you compare the free body diagrams in parts a and b, which force is missing?
e. How might you introduce a new force to compensate for the missing one you spotted in parts c and d, 
so the astronaut can walk around as he would on Earth?
d. How does a person on Earth experience their weight differently from a person in freefall?
The astronaut in the space station doesn’t experience a contact force from the ground.
They don’t feel a contact force from the ground - they’re in freefall, and the only force 
they experience is their weight. This means that they can’t walk around like they can on 
Earth, as you need a normal force to have enough friction to walk like they usually do.
Newton’s 2nd law is F = ma. You could make the astronaut experience a force by 
accelerating the space station.
Q: So why do we need artificial gravity 
when the space station still feels the 
effect of the Earth’s gravity?
A: If you’re in freefall, you feel weightless 
because you - and other objects - appear to 
float around, as they’re not going anywhere 
with respect to each other. 
Q: But you still have a weight, right?
A: Yes - just like someone doing a 
parachute jump still has a weight. It’s the 
force of their weight that makes them fall! 
 
 
 
Q: So why is someone in freefall 
called “weightless” when they have a 
weight? Isn’t that confusing?
A: Yes, it is confusing! “Weightless” is 
an everyday way of saying that they aren’t 
experiencing any kind of contact force 
from a surface as a result of their weight. If 
the person had scales under their feet, the 
scales would read zero.
Go back and look at the first 
WeightBotchers machine in 
chapter 11 if you’re not sure 
why this is.
Normal / contact 
force from ground.
Weight
mg
These two forces are 
equal and in opposite 
directions, so there’s 
no net force and you 
don’t accelerate.
Weight
mg
In freefall, the only 
force acting on you 
is your weight.
668    Chapter 17
contact force

Can you mimic the contact 
force you feel on Earth?
The difference between standing on the 
ground and freefalling is the contact force 
that the ground exerts on you. This is the 
force that the astronauts want to experience.
If you can make each astronaut experience a 
contact force equal to the size of his weight, 
as he does on Earth, he should be able to 
walk around the space station just like he can 
on Earth.
But how can you make someone experience 
a contact force like this?
Imagine yourself in these scenarios. Draw the contact force you experience in each situation as a result of 
the acceleration, and write down what you FEEL. For instance, “Something’s pushing me in the back.”
Does this give you an idea about how you might make the astronaut experience a contact force from the 
inside wall of the space station that would feel similar to the one he experiences on Earth?
In freefall, the only 
force acting on you 
is your weight.
On Earth, you experience 
your weight because of 
this contact force.
Train is sitting 
still, then 
accelerates to the 
right as it pulls 
out of a station.
Train is moving 
to the right, then 
decelerates to a 
stop as it pulls 
into a station.
All passengers are 
wearing seatbelts.
On Earth, you experience 
your weight because of a 
contact force from the ground.
Weight = mg
Contact 
force
Weight = mg
The key thing is to close your 
eyes and ask “WHAT DO I 
FEEL PUSHING ON ME?”
you are here 4    669
circular motion (part 2)

Train is sitting 
still, then 
accelerates to the 
right as it pulls 
out of a station.
Train is moving 
to the right, then 
decelerates to a 
stop as it pulls 
into a station.
Does this give you an idea about how you might make the astronaut experience a contact force from the 
inside wall of the space station that would feel similar to the one he experiences on Earth?
Imagine yourself in these scenarios. Draw the contact force you experience in each situation as a result of 
the acceleration, and write down what you FEEL. For instance, “Something’s pushing me in the back.”
All passengers are 
wearing seatbelts.
Q: I can imagine the seat pushing into 
my back when a train accelerates. But 
why does that happen?
A: Newton’s 1st law says that an object 
will continue to move at a constant velocity 
unless it’s acted on by a net force. If you 
were sitting on the platform, the fact that the 
train is accelerating wouldn’t affect you, as 
there’s no contact between you and it. 
 
But because you’re sitting on the train, the 
back of your seat is able to mediate a net 
contact force that causes you to accelerate. 
You feel the seat pushing into you.
Q:  How large is the contact force?
A: Newton’s 2nd Law says that F = ma. 
You can work out the size of the contact 
force from your mass and your acceleration.
Q: How can I make the astronaut feel a 
contact force?
A: If you accelerate the space station 
upward, the astronaut will experience a 
contact force from its wall because he is 
inside it - just like you do when you’re on 
the train.
Q: Why will accelerating the space 
station mean that a dropped apple will fall 
like it does on Earth?
A: The apple will continue at the velocity it 
already had (Newton’s 1st Law), as there is 
no contact force on it while it is falling. 
 
Meanwhile, the space station will accelerate 
up to meet it at a rate of 9.8 m/s2. So if 
you’re in the space station, it feels like you’re 
on Earth (because of the contact force you 
experience), and it looks like you’re on Earth 
because objects accelerate towards the 
ground at the same rate. 
You could accelerate the space station. That would make the astronaut experience a contact 
force - like I do when a train accelerates.
The back of 
the seat is 
pushing on me.
The back of 
the seat is 
pushing on me.
The seatbelt 
is digging 
into me.
The seatbelt 
is digging 
into me.
If you accelerate it at 9.8 m/s2, then this 
contact force will be exactly the same 
size as the one he experiences on Earth.
F
F
F
F
In the context of forces, 
‘mediate’ means ‘transmit’.
670    Chapter 17
imagine yourself

Accelerating the space station allows 
you to experience a contact force
If the train pulls away from the 
station with an acceleration of 
exactly 9.8 m/s2, then you would 
feel exactly the same size of 
contact force as you do when you 
lie on the ground.
a. Einstein’s Theory of Relativity says that nothing can move 
faster than the speed of light, 3.0 × 108 m/s. If you accelerate a 
space station from rest at a rate of 9.8 m/s2, what time would it 
take it to reach a speed of 3.0 × 108 m/s (assume for a moment 
that this is possible and there are no relativistic effects)?
Don’t be intimidated 
by the first four 
words of this problem!
Train 
accelerating 
from left 
to right.
Contact 
force
Contact 
force
So if you accelerate the space 
station at a rate of 9.8 m/s2, the 
astronauts will experience the 
same size of contact force as they 
usually experience when they’re 
standing on Earth. This creates 
the artificial gravity that the 
astronauts want!
If you lie on the ground with your 
eyes shut, you can feel a contact 
force from the ground pushing 
into your back.
But how practical is this?
Contact 
force
b. What distance would the space station cover in that time?
c. The distance from the Earth to the Moon is 4 × 108 m (1 sd), 
and the distance to the edge of the Solar System is 5.7 × 1012 m. 
How does the distance you worked out in part b compare?
d. How practical do you think this idea is for creating artificial gravity 
in a space station?
Space station 
accelerating 
upwards.
you are here 4    671
circular motion (part 2)

It’s (theoretically) possible to 
make the astronaut experience 
a contact force similar to the 
one he experiences on Earth by 
accelerating the space station 
along a straight line at 9.8 m/s2.
But it’s not practical. It’s 
impossible to do this indefinitely, 
since the space station can’t go 
faster than the speed of light, 
you’d run out of fuel, and you’d 
wind up a ridiculously long way 
away from the Earth.
So if linear acceleration isn’t 
practical, what might another 
option be?
Linear means “along 
a straight line.”
1000 times further than the 
edge of the Solar System? 
That’s waaay too far!
a. Einstein’s Theory of Relativity says that nothing can move 
faster than the speed of light, 3.0 × 108 m/s. If you accelerate a 
space station from rest at a rate of 9.8 m/s2, what time would it 
take it to reach a speed of 3.0 × 108 m/s (assume for a moment 
that this is possible and there are no relativistic effects)?
b. What distance would the space station cover in that time?
c. The distance from the Earth to the Moon is 4 × 108 m (1 sd), 
and the distance to the edge of the Solar System is 5.7 × 1012 m. 
How does the distance you worked out in part b compare?
d. How practical do you think this idea is for creating artificial gravity 
in a space station?
v0 = 0 m/s
v = 3.0 × 108 m/s
a = 9.8 m/s2
Work out t: v = v0 + at
t = ?  x - x0 = ?
But v0 = 0
t  = va
3.0 × 108
9.8
=
t  =  3.1 × 107 s (2 sd)
x  =  x0 + v0t + ½at2
x  =  0 + 0 + 0.5 × 9.8 × (3.1 × 107)2
x  =  4.7 × 1015 m (2 sd)
Work out x :
It’s not practical because it’s not possible to sustain it for a 
good length of time, and you end up very far away from the 
Earth. It must take a lot of fuel too.
This distance is around 10 million times greater than the 
Earth-Moon distance and a thousand times greater than 
the edge of the Solar System.
672    Chapter 17
impractical linear acceleration

Can you imagine yourself 
in the spinning carnival 
ride and the contact force 
acting on you?
Jim: I wonder if there’s another way of experiencing a contact 
force, apart from accelerating or decelerating along a straight line?
Joe: Hmmm ... what about those carnival rides where you go 
around in a circle? You kinda feel the side of the car pushing on 
you when they spin really fast ...
Frank: You feel the side of the car pushing you, so there must be a 
contact force. But where does it come from?
Jim: Yeah, it’s not like the ride gets faster and faster. It spins at the 
same rate, so you keep going at a constant speed, yet you still feel 
this contact force from the side of the car. How can you feel a force 
if your speed is constant - doesn’t that break Newton’s 1st Law?
Joe: But the direction you’re traveling in is changing all the time. 
That means your velocity is changing, even though your speed is 
constant. Velocity is a vector. Newton’s 1st Law says that you move 
with a constant velocity unless there’s a force acting on you.
Frank: So I guess the contact force changes your direction of 
travel - which changes your velocity - so causes you to accelerate.
Jim: But where does the force come from?! It’s not like there’s a 
train engine sitting behind you making you accelerate!
Frank: Well, you’re thrown to the outside of the ride, aren’t 
you? So there must be some kind of mysterious force pushing you 
outwards that’s only there when you’re spinning.
Frank: Hang on! When you’re thinking about contact forces, 
you’re meant to shut your eyes and ask, “What do I feel pushing 
on me?” And when I do that, I feel the side of the car pushing me 
inwards, not a ‘ghost force’ pushing me outwards.
Jim: But you slide kinda outwards across your seat before you make 
contact with the side of the car. If there isn’t a force pushing you 
outwards, then why does that happen?!
Joe: If the side of the car wasn’t there, you’d go straight on and fly 
out of the car. You only go in a circle because of the contact force 
from the side of the car pushing you inwards.
Frank: Ah ... you mean that sliding outwards feeling is just you 
continuing on at your current velocity (Newton’s 1st Law) before 
you make contact with the side of the car - which exerts a force on 
you that lets you move in a circle?
If a contact force is 
acting on you, you can 
feel the direction it’s 
pushing you in.
So if we can’t accelerate the space 
station linearly, what can we do?!
you are here 4    673
circular motion (part 2)

You can only go in a circle 
because of a centripetal force
If you’re going around in a circle, your speed may be 
constant, but the direction of your velocity is certainly 
changing! This means that a force must be acting on 
you in order to make you go around in a circle - and 
stop you from going off along a straight line with the 
velocity you already have.
A force that allows you to go in a circle like this is called 
a centripetal force.
Newton’s 1st Law says that you continue with a 
constant velocity unless there’s a net force acting 
on you. In other words, you keep on going at the 
same speed in the same direction.
If there’s no net force acting on you, 
you just keep on going with this velocity.
If you’re going around in 
a circle, your speed may 
stay the same, but the 
direction of your velocity 
vector changes.
Err ... I can walk in a 
circle without needing a 
centripetal force to do it!
When you walk in a circle, the centripetal 
force is provided by friction.
Centripetal force is the name given to a net force that 
allows you to change the direction of your velocity 
so that you follow a circular path. Depending on the 
context, centripetal force can be provided by a number 
of things.
You’re able to walk because of the friction between 
your feet and the ground. Without friction, you wouldn’t 
be able to change the horizontal component of your 
velocity at all. You couldn’t speed up. You couldn’t slow 
down. And you couldn’t change direction to follow a 
circular path. So in this case, friction provides the net 
force that enables you to follow a circular path - the 
centripetal force.
If the net force 
acting on you 
changes the 
direction of your 
velocity so that 
you travel in a 
circle, it’s called a 
centripetal force.
v
Rotating 
carnival ride
v
You actually wind up here with a 
different velocity, so there must 
be a net force acting on you.
v
674    Chapter 17
centripetal force

Q: Is centripetal force another 
category of force to add to a contact 
forces and gravitational forces?
A: No, not at all! Centripetal force is the 
name given to the net force when it enables 
you to follow a circular path instead of 
continuing along a straight line.
Q: So if a force is able to change my 
direction, it might be able to provide a 
centripetal force?
A: Yes, that’s a good way to think about it.
Q: Where does a centripetal force 
come from?
A: The centripetal force required for you 
to follow a circular path may come from any 
source at all. It might be a contact force. It 
might be a frictional force. It might be a 
gravitational force. 
 
 
 
 
Q: So it’s not a “ghost force” that 
magically appears from nowhere?
A: That’s right. If you draw a free body 
diagram of an object moving around in 
a circle, then the net force will be the 
centripetal force that causes the circular 
motion.
Q: Which direction does the 
centripetal force act in?
A: You’re about to figure that out ...
a. Draw the velocity vector at each of the points marked with an 
‘x’ on the ride. Assume that the ride is rotating with a constant 
angular frequency.
b. In a different color, draw in the left‑right and up-down 
components of the velocity vectors you drew in part a.
c. Describe how the velocity components have changed from one 
‘x’  to the next. At each of the points marked ‘o’, draw in a vector 
representing a force that may have caused these changes.
d. Which direction do you think the force vector will 
point in for other positions on the ride?
e. What is the source of this centripetal force 
that enables you to move in a circle?
Tip: Draw in the radius of the 
circle, from the center ot each 
point. The velocity vector will be 
at 90° to the radius.
Hint: the 
direction of the 
force may be 
changing as the 
ride rotates.
v
you are here 4    675
circular motion (part 2)

Between the 1st and 2nd snapshots, the down 
component got much larger and the right component a 
bit smaller. So the force must be acting down and left 
(with more down)
Between the 2nd and 3rd snapshots, the right 
component has disappeared and the down component 
has got a bit larger. So the force must be acting down 
and left (with more left).
a. Draw the velocity vector at each of the points marked 
with an ‘x’ on the ride. Assume that the ride is rotating 
with a constant angular frequency.
b. In a different color, draw in the left‑right and up-down 
components of the velocity vectors you drew in part a.
c. Describe how the components have changed from one 
snapshot to the next, and draw in a vector representing 
a force that may have caused these changes.
d. Which direction do you think the force vector will 
point in for other positions on the ride?
e. What is the source of this centripetal force 
that enables you to move in a circle?
I think the force vector will always point 
towards the center of the circle.
The contact force of the outside 
wall of the car pushing in on me.
I don’t buy that. When I’m 
on a ride, I feel thrown to the 
outside, not pushed in!
Always think “what contact 
force do I feel pushing me?”
The reason you slide towards the outside 
is that you want to keep on going in the 
direction you’re already going in. That’s 
Newton’s 1st Law.
But the side of the car stops you from 
going any further and pushes you towards 
the center. This is where the centripetal 
force that makes you go round in a circle 
comes from.
Being thrown to the outside is an illusion. 
There’s no force moving you in that 
direction - just your own momentum.
Centripetal force 
acts towards the 
center of the circle.
It’s OK if you said “the 
arm that goes between the 
car and the center”, as 
that exerts the centripetal 
force that stops the car 
from flying off along a 
straight line.
v
v
v
F
F
The force needs to have a 
large down component and 
a small left component to 
have made this change.
676    Chapter 17
what contact force?

“Centrifugal force” isn’t a force.
“Centrifugal force” is the name commonly 
given to the sensation of being thrown to 
the outside when you’re in something that’s 
rotating (e.g., a centrifuge).
But as you’ve just learned, what is often 
referred to as centrifugal force isn’t a force! 
It’s just you continuing at your current 
velocity in the absence of a net force.
I’ve heard of centrifugal 
force before. Is it another 
word for centripetal force?
How can you use what you’ve figured out 
about centripetal force to help the astronauts?
Never EVER talk about 
“centrifugal force.”
Centripetal force acts towards 
the center of the circle
If you’re sitting in a rotating carnival ride, you experience a 
centripetal force, Fc, towards the center of the ride. This is the 
force that enables you to continue traveling in a circle, instead of 
continuing at a constant speed in the same direction as you would 
if there was no force (Newton’s 1st Law).
In the carnival ride, the centripetal force is provided by a 
contact force from the side of the car  - you feel the side of the 
car pushing you towards the center of the circle as you go around..
With no net force, 
you follow this path.
v
v
But on the 
ride you follow 
this path.
You experience a net 
force pointing towards 
the center of the 
circle which changes 
your velocity.
Fc
And once you’re in 
CONTACT with the 
side of the centrifuge, 
the contact force can 
provide a centripetal 
force that makes you 
follow a circular path.
Centripetal force is always 
provided by the net force on your 
free body diagram. Otherwise 
you’d just go along a straight line.
you are here 4    677
circular motion (part 2)

The astronaut experiences a contact force 
when you rotate the space station
You can rotate the space station just like you rotate the carnival 
ride. Each astronaut will experience a centripetal force acting 
towards the center of the space station. This will be mediated by the 
contact force between his feet and the side of the space station. 
This will feel similar to the contact force he experiences on Earth.
As there’s now a contact force, the astronauts will be able to walk 
around like they can on Earth -  and won’t go on strike!
If the centripetal 
force ‘disappears’, 
you’ll go off at a 
tangent to the circle.
Q: So anything that’s rotating is 
subject to a centripetal force?
A: That’s right. If the centripetal force 
wasn’t there, the thing wouldn’t rotate - it 
would travel along a straight line at its 
current speed.
Q: So why didn’t the hamster running 
in the wheel in chapter 16 experience a 
centripetal force? Or did it?
A: Was the hamster rotating?
Q: No ... the hamster stayed in the 
same place, and the wheel rotated as its 
feet pushed it along. I guess the hamster 
didn’t experience a centripetal force.
A: Yeah, that’s right.
Q: But the wheel’s rotating, so the 
wheel must experience a centripetal force 
- yes? But how? The outside of the wheel 
isn’t in contact with anything!
A: Centripetal force doesn’t always have 
to be provided by a contact force from the 
outside. All you need is a force that points 
towards the center of the circle.
Q: So I guess the struts in the hamster 
wheel are mediating the centripetal force?
A: Absolutely! If one of the struts broke, 
and part of the outside of the wheel flew 
off, then it wouldn’t be moving in a circle 
anymore. The broken part would fly off along 
a straight line at a tangent to the circle with 
whatever velocity it had when it became 
detached.
Q: That’s Newton’s 1st Law, right?
A: Yep. It’s also how hammer throwing 
works at the Olympics. The athlete spins 
round and round with the heavy ball on the 
end of a chain, then lets go. Without the 
centripetal force provided by the athlete 
pulling on the chain, the hammer flies off in 
a straight line. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: Yeah, I’ve seen that before. So are 
you saying it’s the same in the space 
station? If you rotate the space station, 
you’re giving the astronaut the potential 
to go flying off into space if a door 
suddenly opens or something?
A: That’s right. If the astronaut didn’t 
experience the centripetal contact force from 
the side of the space station acting towards 
its center, he would go along a straight line.
Q: Hmmm. I guess there must be a 
centripetal force acting on the space 
station for it to have a circular orbit 
around the Earth in the first place?
A: Great spot! You’ll be learning all about 
that in chapter 16.
Q: So I guess I need to work out how 
fast I need to rotate the space station to 
produce a centripetal force of mg, like an 
astronaut would feel on Earth?
A: Let’s look at that now...
Centripetal force 
on astronaut 
comes from wall 
of space station.
Fc
Fc
Fc
Fc
v
v
v
v
ω
Astronaut would continue 
with velocity v if the 
wall wasn’t there.
678    Chapter 17
rotate the station

The acceleration that the centripetal 
force causes is called centripetal 
acceleration. Acceleration is the rate 
of change of velocity and points in the 
direction of that change:
	
ac  =  v 
t 
What affects the size of centripetal force?
Newton’s 2nd Law tells you that the 
centripetal force the astronaut experiences 
will be equal to his mass × acceleration:
	
Fc  =  mac
You want the centripetal acceleration that the astronauts 
experience to be equal to 9.8 m/s2. This makes the contact 
force each astronaut experiences in the space station the same 
size as the contact force he experiences on Earth.
But what affects the size of the centripetal acceleration? If you 
can work that out, you can get an equation for the centripetal 
acceleration and stop the astronauts going on strike!
The centripetal force depends 
on the centripetal acceleration.
The centripetal acceleration 
depends on the rate of 
change of velocity.
You can write this because 
the centripetal force is the 
net force that causes the 
centripetal acceleration.
The sketch here could either be of a carnival ride or a 
space station - imagine it in the way that seems most 
natural to you. There are two ‘pods’ attached to the 
circle, one twice as far from the center as the other. 
a. Bearing in mind that v = rω, draw in velocity 
vectors for the two pods at each position shown.
b. Which pod experiences the larger change in its 
velocity between the two positions?
r2 is twice the 
length of r1.
r1
r2
Pod 1
Pod 2
c. Which pod experiences the greater centripetal 
acceleration between the two positions?
d. Can you think of another way of increasing the 
centripetal acceleration that the pods experience 
(assuming each pod’s radius is fixed)?
The equation 
from chapter 
16 shows you 
what happens 
to v when you 
vary r and ω.
Pods start here.
Pods 
finish 
here.
you are here 4    679
circular motion (part 2)

The sketch here could either be of a carnival ride or a 
space station - imagine it in the way that seems most 
natural to you. There are two ‘pods’ attached to the 
circle, one twice as far from the center as the other. 
a. Bearing in mind that v = rω, draw in velocity 
vectors for the two pods at each position shown.
b. Which pod experiences the larger change in its 
velocity between the two positions?
r1
r2
Pod 1
Pod 2
Acceleration is rate of change of velocity. So 
pod 2 has the greatest centripetal acceleration 
since it has the greatest change in velocity.
c. Which pod experiences the greater centripetal 
acceleration between the two positions?
d. Can you think of another way of increasing the 
centripetal acceleration that the pods experience 
(assuming each pod’s radius is fixed)?
Pod 2 (on the outside) has the bigger change in 
velocity because its velocity vectors are larger, 
but the change in direction is the same.
Spin the space station with a faster ω to 
increase all the velocities (as v = rω).
We’re not looking for an equation for the centripetal acceleration 
yet - just working out which variables it must depend on.
Twice the radius means 
double the velocity (v = rω)
v2
v2
v1
v1
Centripetal acceleration 
depends on both the radius 
and the angular velocity, as 
both of these affect the 
rate of change of velocity.
For the same angular 
velocity, a larger 
RADIUS means a larger 
centripetal acceleration.
For the same radius, a 
larger ANGULAR 
VELOCITY means a larger 
centripetal acceleration.
ω is the number of radians per second. ω can be called 
the angular frequency, or the angular speed. It 
is also sometimes referred to as the angular velocity, 
with the understanding that when the variable is 
written as a scalar, ω, it only refers to the size of the 
angular velocity, and not its direction. As we will often 
be moving between v, the size of the linear velocity and 
ω, we will often refer to ω as the angular velocity to 
make the connection clearer.
680    Chapter 17
larger radius = larger centripetal acceleration

Spot the equation for the 
centripetal acceleration
A larger centripetal acceleration is required 
to move something in a circle when the radius 
is large, and when the angular velocity is large, 
because the rate of change of velocity is larger 
in both cases.
Deriving the equation for the centripetal 
acceleration from scratch is tricky and doesn’t 
really help your understanding of the physics. 
So instead, spot the correct equation by trying 
out extreme values and looking at its units.
You’ve done 
this kind of 
thing before, 
don’t worry!
Check an 
equation by 
thinking about 
EXTREMES 
and working 
out its UNITS.
Equation ID Parade
Here are six equations that all claim to be a formula that gives you the size of the centripetal acceleration of 
something rotating with angular velocity ω at radius r.
Annotate the equations to explain what will happen if r gets much bigger, or if ω gets much bigger. Use this 
information to cross out any equations that don’t behave as you would expect them to.
For your remaining equations, check that the units on both sides are the same. This should leave you with just 
one equation. (Remember that radians are dimensionless.)
ac =
r
ω
ac = ω
r
ac = r2ω
ac = rω2
ac = ω2
r
ac =
r2
ω
These are all scalar equations as 
we’re only talking about the SIZE 
of the centripetal acceleration.
you are here 4    681
circular motion (part 2)

Equation ID Parade
SOLUTION
Here are six equations that all claim to be a formula that gives you the size of the centripetal 
acceleration of something rotating with angular velocity ω at radius r.
Annotate the equations to explain what will happen if r gets much bigger, or if ω gets much bigger. 
Use this information to cross out any equations that don’t behave as you would expect them to.
For your remaining equations, check that the units on both sides are the same. This should leave you 
with just one equation. (Remember that radians are dimensionless.)
ω is the rate 
of change of 
the angle θ.
ac =
r
ω
ac = ω
r
ac = r2ω
ac = rω2
ac = ω2
r
ac = r2
ω
ac gets smaller as ω gets 
larger. So this is wrong.
ac gets smaller as r gets 
larger. So this is wrong.
ac gets smaller as r gets 
larger. So this is wrong.
ac gets smaller as ω gets 
larger. So this is wrong.
ac gets larger as ω and r 
get larger. So check units.
ac gets larger as ω and r 
get larger. So check units.
RHS: Units = m2 × 1/s
= m2/s
Not units of acceleration.
RHS: Units = m × /s2
= m/s2
Units of acceleration!
Radians are 
dimensionless, 
the units of 
ω are 1/s.
Q: I got the equation  ‘ac = rω2’ from 
the parade. Why doesn’t the equation for 
‘ac’ have ‘v’ in it, when acceleration is rate 
of change of velocity?
A: Remember that v = rω. So you can 
make a substitution for the ‘ω’ in ‘ac = rω2’ to 
express it as an equation that involves v. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q: OK ... so I make that substitution 
and get the equation 
v2
r
ac  =
 . But that 
can’t be right! ac should get larger as r 
gets larger. But you’re dividing by r, so ac 
would get smaller as r gets larger.
A: But when r gets larger, v gets larger 
as well, because v = rω. And because the 
velocity is squared, the v2 on the top of the 
fraction gets larger more rapidly than the r 
on the bottom of the fraction. So overall, ac 
still gets larger as r gets larger. 
 
 
Q: But what if r = 0 in 
v2
r
ac  =
? I’m 
not sure I know how to divide by 0!
A: It’s easier to look at the other form of 
the equation,  ac = rω2. If r = 0 then ac = 0.
Q: Isn’ t acceleration is usually a 
vector? Why is ac = rω2 a scalar equation 
gives the size but not the direction?
A: The centripetal acceleration vector 
always points towards the center of the 
circle, so its direction is always changing. 
To avoid getting muddled up with direction, 
we’re just dealing with scalar equations for 
the size of the acceleration.
682    Chapter 17
equation id parade

We’re designing a spinning module for the existing space station, so that the astronauts can walk around. Two 
design candidates are cylinders with the same volume, but radii of 10.0 m and 100 m respectively.
a. Calculate the angular velocity required to produce a centripetal acceleration of 9.8 m/s2 for (i) the 10.0 m 
radius module and (ii) the 100 m radius module.
Give the astronauts a centripetal force
The equation for the size of the centripetal acceleration is ac = rω2. 
The vectors ac and r are always in opposite directions, but because 
the space station is spinning, we’re using a scalar equation.
ac = rω2
Fc = mrω2
Newton’s 2nd Law is Fnet = ma. The centripetal force is the 
net force that must be present for an object to follow a circular 
path. A substitution gives you the size of the centripetal force:
Size of 
centripetal 
acceleration
Radius
Angular 
velocity
Size of 
centripetal 
force
Fc = mac
Mass
b. If a door in the space station opened, and the astronaut went through, what velocity (size and 
direction) would he travel AT if he’d been in (i) 10.0 m radius module and (ii) the 100 m radius modules?
r
ω
Fc
ω
r is 
displacement 
from center 
of the circle.
Fc points 
towards the 
center of 
the circle.
It’s good to 
appreciate the 
directions of the 
vectors even though 
the equation only 
deals with the sizes.
ω can be called 
angular frequency, 
angular speed or 
angular velocity! 
It’s always radians 
per second.
Even though Fc and r are in 
opposite directions, their directions 
are always changing because the 
space station is spinning.
you are here 4    683
circular motion (part 2)

We’re designing a spinning module for the existing space station, so that the astronauts can walk around. Two 
design candidates are cylinders with the same volume, but radii of 10.0 m and 100 m respectively.
a. Calculate the angular velocity required to produce a centripetal acceleration of 9.8 m/s2 for (i) the 10.0 m 
radius module and (ii) the 100 m radius module.
The astronauts want as 
much floor space as possible
The two space station module designs have the same 
volume (90000 m3) and need to be spun at similar 
angular velocities to produce the same centripetal 
acceleration. The 10.0 m radius space station needs to 
be spun at a rate of 0.990 rad/s and the 100 m radius 
station would be spun at a rate of 0.313 rad/s.
How are you going to choose between the two competing 
designs? The astronauts can help. They want as much 
floor area to walk around on as possible. They really 
feel the need to stretch their legs and get some exercise 
when they’ve been in the space station for a while!
Which space station do you think 
will have the most floor space?
Centripetal force:      Fc  =  mrω2
r
Centripetal acceleration:     Fc  =  mac
ac  =  rω2
ω  =
acr
ω  =
For 10.0 m radius:
10.0
9.8
ω  = 0.990 rad/s (3 sd)
For 100 m radius:
ω  =
100
9.8
ω  = 0.313 rad/s (3 sd)
ω
He’ll keep on going with 
the same velocity he 
already had, at a tangent 
to the place he came out 
of the space station.
ω
v
b. If a door in the space station opened, and the astronaut went through, what velocity (size and 
direction) would he travel AT if he’d been in (i) 10.0 m radius module and (ii) the 100 m radius modules?
The velocity vector is 
always at a tangent 
to the circle.
(i)
(ii)
For 10.0 m radius:
v  =  rω  =  10.0 × 0.990
v  =  9.90 m/s (3 sd)
(i)
For 100 m radius:
v  =  rω  =  100 × 0.313
v  =  31.3 m/s (3 sd)
(ii)
684    Chapter 17
in search of floor space

Frank: Well, duh, the 100 m radius space station must have a 
bigger floor area than the 10.0 m radius one, as it’s a bigger circle!
Jim: I’m not so sure. The floor is actually the side of the cylinder, 
not the circular part at the ends. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Frank: Ohhh ... good point. So how are we gonna do that? I don’t 
think I know how to find the area of a curved surface!
Joe: Well, let’s think this out. If we unroll the cylinder into simpler 
shapes what would they be?
Jim: OK, the cylinder’s 
basically a circle at each end 
and a rectangle rolled around 
them. And we know how to find 
the area of a rectangle - job 
done!
Frank: Hold up ... how do we 
figure out the lengths of the 
rectangle’s sides? We need those 
to calculate its area.
Jim: Well, one of the sides is easy - 
it’s the same length as the circumference. 
But there’s no mention of how long the other side is for either of 
the space stations. Houston, we have a problem!
Joe: We DO know that each space station has the same volume 
- 90000 m3. When something has straight sides and identical ends 
(like a cylinder), its volume is area of base × height. So we can use 
that to work out the height?
Jim: That seems right... but the base is a circle. Which means we 
need to calculate the area of a circle. That’s gotta be tricky ...
If you’re 
calculating the 
surface area of a 
3D shape, imagine 
“unrolling” the 
shape so that the 
surfaces are flat.
Floor space is 
curved surface 
of space station.
These sides are 
same length as 
circumference.
Floor area is 
area of this 
rectangle.
So, how do we work out each 
space station’s floor area?
you are here 4    685
circular motion (part 2)

Width
Here, the floor space is the area 
of a cylinder’s curved surface
The astronauts want the design with the larger floor 
space - which means that you need to calculate the area 
of the curved surface of each cylindrical space station.
If you’re calculating a surface area, it’s best to ‘unroll’ 
the shape so that the surfaces are flat. When you do this, 
the curved surface becomes a rectangle. That’s great, 
because you already know how to work out the surface 
area of a rectangle: width × height.
One side of the rectangle is the same length as the 
circumference, and the other side is the height of 
the cylinder - so far, so good. But you don’t know the 
cylinder’s height, only its volume.
If you work out the volume, you can 
calculate the astronauts’ floor space
If you have a 3D shape - like a cube or a cylinder - where 
the base and the top are the same shape with straight sides 
in between, its volume is (area of base) × height.
You already know that both space stations are cylinders with 
volumes of 90000 m3. Which means that if you can work 
out the area of the base (i.e., the area of the circle), you can 
use the equation to determine the height of the cylinder. 
Which is great, as that’s exactly what you need to calculate 
the astronauts’ floor space. 
The area of a rectangle 
is width x height
Width is same as 
circumference.
Height 
depends on 
volume of 
cylinder.
Floor area is area 
of this rectangle.
You can work 
out height 
from volume 
of cylinder
Width is same as 
circumference.
Volume = area of base x height
Base and top are both circles.
If a 3D shape has 
two ends that are the 
same and straight 
sides between them, its 
volume is  
(area of base) x height
Width
Height
Height
Note the 
similarities 
between these 
two equations.
686    Chapter 17
work out the volume

Rearrange segments 
to make a rectangle.
1. To find a circle’s area, you can chop it up 
into tiny segments and reassemble it into 
a rectangle. In terms of the circle’s radius:
In terms of r:
a. What is the height of the rectangle?
b. What is the width of the rectangle?
c. What is the area of the rectangle (and 
therefore the area of the circle)?
2. Two cylinders each have a volume of 90000 m3.
a. The first cylinder has a radius of 10.0 m. What is the area of its circular base? What is its height?
b. The second cylinder has a radius of 100 m.  What is the area of its circular base? What is its height?
c. What is the area of the curved surface of each cylinder... and which space station has a bigger floor area?
Remember to start 
with a sketch!
you are here 4    687
circular motion (part 2)

Rearrange segments 
to make a rectangle.
1. To find a circle’s area, you can chop it up 
into tiny segments and reassemble it into 
a rectangle. In terms of the circle’s radius:
In terms of r:
a. What is the height of the rectangle?
b. What is the width of the rectangle?
c. What is the area of the rectangle (and 
therefore the area of the circle)?
2. Two cylinders each have a volume of 90000 m3.
a. The first cylinder has a radius of 10.0 m. What is the area of its circular base? What is its height?
b. The second cylinder has a radius of 100 m.  What is the area of its circular base? What is its height?
c. What is the area of the curved surface of each cylinder ... and which space station has a bigger ‘floor’ area?
Remember to start 
with a sketch!
The area of a circle = πr2
r
Half the circumference = πr
b. The width is half the circumference = ½ × 2πr = πr
a. The height is the radius = r
c. The area is   height × width  =  r × πr  = πr2
a. Area of base  =  πr2  =  3.14 × 10.02  =  314 m2 (3 sd)
b. Area of base  =  πr2  =  3.14 × 1002  =  31400 m2 (3 sd)
Get height of cylinder from volume:   volume = area of base × height
height  =
volume
area of base
90000
314
=
=  287 m (3 sd)
height  =
volume
area of base
90000
31400
=
=  2 .87 m (3 sd)
height
area of base
c. Curved surface is a rectangle:   width = circumference = 2πr    height = height of cylinder
For 10 m radius design:     Floor area  =  2 × 3.14 × 10.0 x 287  =  18000 m2 (3 sd)
For 100 m radius design:   Floor area  =  2 × 3.14 × 100 x 2 .87  =  1800 m2 (3 sd)
The 10 m radius design has 10 times the floor space of the 100 m radius one.
688    Chapter 17
area of a circle

Let’s test the space station...
As the tall narrow space station module (the one with 
the 10.0 m radius that needs to rotate at around 1 
rad/s) has the larger floor area, you go ahead and 
build a test rig for the astronaut to try out.
But weird things are happening! When the 
astronaut drops an apple, it doesn’t fall as you’d 
expect. And the astronaut’s not feeling well either.
What’s going on?!
Jot down some ideas that might help to explain why weird things are going on. 
Would using the 100 m radius space station design instead of the 10.0 m space 
station design help to lessen the weird effects?
Apples don’t do 
this when you drop 
them on Earth!
Objects are doing weird things 
when I drop them. And then there’s 
the dizziness and nausea. This 
doesn’t feel so hot, actually.
Don’t worry if you’re not 
sure why these things are 
happening - just throw some 
ideas around.
you are here 4    689
circular motion (part 2)

Jot down some ideas that might help to 
explain why weird things are going on. 
Don’t worry if you 
didn’t come up with 
all of these ideas!
- Maybe his balance or stomach can’t 
cope with high angular velocity.
- His head and feet are at different 
distances from the center. So they 
must experience different centripetal 
accelerations.
- When he drops the apple, the space 
station keeps rotating, but the apple 
doesn’t. So it looks like it follows a 
curved path.
Head and feet at different radii
Can’t cope with rotation
Apple falls straight while 
space station rotates
Your sense of balance isn’t designed to 
work well when you’re rotated. Although 
people can adapt to being spun at low 
angular velocities, close to 1 rad/s is too 
fast and will produce nasty symptoms.
The centripetal force depends on the 
radius and is larger the further away 
something is from the center. So the 
astronaut will experience a smaller 
force at his head than he does at his 
feet. Which will feel a bit weird!
Someone looking at the space station 
from outside will see the apple 
moving along a straight line. But to 
the astronaut in his rotating frame 
of reference, it looks like the apple 
follows a curved path. Which looks 
very weird!
From inside, the 
astronaut assumes 
he’s standing still, 
and the apple 
does weird things!
The apple’s 
actually 
going along a 
straight line!
Centripetal 
force = mrω2
Height of astronaut exaggerated to 
make effect clearer.
From outside, 
you see the 
apple moving 
in a straight 
line and the 
astronaut 
rotating.
When the 
astronaut lets 
go of the apple, 
it moves along 
a straight line 
with a constant 
velocity.
rhead
rfeet
690    Chapter 17
good and bad ideas

Fewer uncomfortable things happen 
with the 100 m radius space station
The space station module with the 100 m radius only needs 
to rotate at 0.313 rad/s, compared to the 0.990 rad/s of the 
module with the 10.0 m radius. This means that the astronaut 
has a much better chance of getting used to the rotation and 
feeling fewer ill effects.
The astronaut’s head and feet are still different radii from the 
center of the space station, but compared to the radius of the 
wider space station, this difference is much less.
And when you drop an apple, the 100 m radius space station 
won’t rotate through as great an angle as the 10.0 m radius 
space station, as the angular velocity is lower. Although the apple 
still won’t fall exactly like it would on Earth, the curve in its path 
will be much less than it was.
You’ve sorted out the space station design!
Success! When you spin the 100 m radius test 
rig, the astronauts are able to walk around on the 
curved surface without too many ill effects!
Not only have you worked out how to provide 
‘aritficial gravity’ in space, you’ve also managed 
to understand enough of the physics to choose 
between two competing space station designs. 
Result!
10.0 m radius 
space station
100 m radius 
space station
These are drawn 
to scale.
Smaller angular velocity 
required to produce same 
centripetal acceleration.
circular motion (part 2)
That’s it from Head First in Space for now 
... though the astronauts are starting to mutter 
something about going to infinity and beyond?!
Sound exciting? Stay tuned!
you are here 4    691

692
2. A carnival ride rotates in a horizontal circle with diameter 
20.0 m. People sit in cars on the outside of the circle.
Draw a free body diagram for someone sitting on the ride 
while it isn’t moving.
Draw a free body diagram for someone sitting on the ride 
while it is moving. Clearly mark the center of the ride on 
your diagram.
How many revolutions per minute must the ride spin with 
for the person in the car to experience a horizontal contact 
force equal to their weight?
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Centripetal force” Question
Any time an object follows a curved path, ask 
yourself whether you may need to think about centripetal force. 
This is the force required for the object to move in this way: Fc = mrω2. 
You can move between the velocity (v) and the angular velocity (ω) using 
the equation v = rω. The larger the radius and the larger the angular 
velocity, the greater the force required.
If you’re asked to draw a free body diagram, 
never EVER label an arrow “centripetal force.” The 
centripetal force is a net force toward the center of the circle 
that’s provided by the forces already on your free body diagram. Oh, 
and some questions may ask about centripetal acceleration rather 
than centripetal force. You can just use Newton’s 2nd Law, 
Fc = mac, to move between Fc and ac.
This should immediately 
get you thinking about 
centripetal force.
Be careful about whether you are being given the 
RADIUS or the DIAMETER of the circle. Make sure 
you use the correct value for the radius later on!
Make sure you 
follow the 
instructions 
exactly.!
Draw all the 
forces acting 
ON the person.
The net force  
is towards 
the center of 
the circle.
Draw all the forces 
acting ON the person. You 
know there will be a net 
centripetal force, but 
don’t label the net force 
like that. Use a label like 
“contact force from side 
of car.”
Be careful with units. 
ω is measured in 
radians per second.
Don’t worry if you don’t know the mass. 
When you say mrω2 = mg, the m will divide out.

you are here 4    693
circular motion (part 2)
Hey ... I was just 
wondering if you could 
come and help us out back 
at the bobsled track?
Q: How should I include the centripetal 
force when I’m drawing a free body 
diagram?
A: A free body diagram shows all of the 
forces acting on a single object. So far, you 
know about gravitational force (a non-contact 
force) plus a variety of contact forces - normal 
force, frictional force, and tension force 
(exerted by a rope).
Q: None of these forces are the 
centripetal force though. How do I include 
the centripetal force on my free body 
diagram?
A: If you have an object that’s moving in a 
circle, you should include all the forces acting 
on the object in your free body diagram. When 
you add these forces together by lining them 
up nose to tail, there will be a net force on 
your object that makes it follow a circular path. 
This centripetal force (the force required to 
make the object follow a circular path) may be 
provided by a gravitational force, or a normal 
force, or a support force, or a tension force.
Q: Are you saying that I shouldn’t draw 
an arrow on my free body diagram and 
label it centripetal force?
A: Spot on! Your free body diagram should 
indicate the origin of each force vector arrow 
- gravitational force, normal force, frictional 
force, tension force, etc. 
 
Centripetal force is the name given to the 
net force on an object when the net force is 
making the object follow a circular path. It’s 
not a “ghost force” that appears from nowhere 
on your free body diagram. So you’re right - 
you shouldn’t ever label an arrow on your free 
body diagram “centripetal force,” as this tells 
you nothing about the origin of the force.
Q: What if the net force doesn’t cause 
the object to follow a circular path?
A: Then it doesn’t get called “centripetal 
force,” as this its the term reserved for when 
the net force does make an object follow a 
circular path.
Your free body diagram 
should indicate the 
ORIGIN of each of the 
force vector arrows 
- gravitational force, 
normal force, frictional 
force, tension force, etc.
The net force will 
provide the centripetal 
force. There shouldn’t 
be any arrows on a free 
body diagram labelled 
‘centripetal force’.

Back to the track!
When you last checked in as the track’s safety 
consultant, you were working out the speed 
the bobsled would have as it passed through 
various checkpoints.
But they just got a whole lot more ambitious ...
The bobsled needs to turn a corner
A bobsled isn’t a train - you can’t just point the track where 
you want the bobsled to go and expect it to follow! Since 
there’s practically no friction between the bobsled and the 
ice, the bobsled would just slide straight on and demolish the 
hotdog stand!
Hey ... we want to extend the 
track, and were wondering how to get 
the bobsled to take a corner. Is that 
something you can help with?
How might you persuade the bobsled to 
take the corner instead of going straight on?
Corner is part of a circle 
with radius 80.0 m.
View of the bobsled 
and section of track 
from above.
If the bobsled 
continues at the 
same velocity, it’ll go 
straight on and take 
out the hotdog stand.
This section of track is 
flat (no difference in 
height anywhere along it).
Want the bobsled to 
go round corner, then 
continue along track.
r = 80.0 m
v
v
v
694    Chapter 17
take the corner

a. The 630 kg bobsled has dropped 50.0 m from a standing start between the beginning of the track and 
the corner. What is its current speed?
b. The radius of the corner is 80.0 m. What size of centripetal force is required for the bobsled to be able to 
make it round the corner?
c. In what direction does there need 
to be a centripetal force to make the 
bobsled turn the corner?
d. How might the track be modified to provide the force the 
bobsled needs to make the turn? Draw force vector components 
to illustrate where the required force could come from if the 
track was modified.
Hint: Think about the 
shape of a cycling 
velodrome or Indy car oval.
you are here 4    695
circular motion (part 2)

For the bobsled to go 
around a corner, you 
need a net force pointing 
towards the CENTER 
of the circle to provide a 
centripetal force.
No centripetal force at 
this part of the track, 
as the bobsled is moving 
with a constant velocity.
Centripetal force 
always points towards 
center of circle.
Centripetal force is always 
parallel to radius and 
perpendicular to. velocity
Fc
Fc
Fc
v
v
v
v
a. The 630 kg bobsled has dropped 50.0 m from a 
standing start between the beginning of the track and 
the corner. What is its current speed?
b. The radius of the corner is 80.0 m. What size of 
centripetal force is required for the bobsled to be 
able to make it round the corner?
c. In what direction does there need to be a centripetal 
force to make the bobsled turn the corner?
d. How might the track be modified to provide the 
force the bobsled needs to make the turn? Draw force 
vector components to illustrate where the required 
force could come from if the track was modified.
Use energy conservation
 Utop  =  Kbottom
50.0 m
Top
Bottom
 mgh  =  ½mv2
 v  =   2gh
=   2 × 9.8 × 50.0
 v  =   31.3 m/s (3 sd)
Calculate centripetal force, Fc
Fc  =  mrω2
r = 80.0 m
v = 31.3 m/s
Use  v  =  rω  to work out ω
31.3
80.0
ω  = v
r =
=  0.391 rad/s
Fc  =  mrω2  =  630 × 80.0 × 0.3912
Fc  =  7710 N (3 sd)
There needs to be a centripetal force towards the 
center of the corner.
Banking the track towards the 
center of the corner to redirect 
the normal force might work, as 
there would be a component pointing 
towards the center of the corner.
Normal force
Weight
Curve is part 
of a circle.
No need to 
worry about 
direction as 
you’re aked 
about SIZE 
of force.
Horizontal 
component
696    Chapter 17
more net force

There are two forces acting on the bobsled - its weight and 
the normal force. To make the bobsled turn the corner, 
you need to have a net force pointing horizontally 
towards the center of the circle, exerting a centripetal 
force on the bobsled that makes it turn.
The bobsled’s weight points vertically downwards, so 
there’s no way that any component of the weight can point 
horizontally. And if the track is horizontal, the normal force 
points verticallty upwards, with no horizontal component.
The normal force always acts 
perpendicular to the surface of 
the track. If the track is banked at 
an angle, towards the center of 
the circle, the normal force also 
points at an angle.
Weight = mg
Normal 
force
θ
Angling the track gives the normal 
force a horizontal component
Bobsled coming 
out of the page, 
towards you.
You somehow need to 
get a net horizontal 
force to provide a 
centripetal force.
Weight = mg
Normal force
Normal force 
is perpendicular 
to track.
Flat 
track
As there’s no vertical 
acceleration, these 
two vectors must be 
the same size
Horizontal component 
of normal force points 
towards the CENTER of 
the circle and can provide 
a centripetal force.
Weight = mg
Normal 
force
θ
θ
If you break the normal force down into horizontal and 
vertical components, the horizontal component points 
towards the center of the curve. This can provide the bobsled 
with the centripetal force it needs to take the corner instead of 
going straight on.
With the curve banked at the correct angle, the bobsled won’t 
accelerate vertically and the net vertical force must be zero. 
Therefore, the vertical component of the normal force must 
have the same size as the bobsled’s weight.
The normal force 
always acts 
PERPENDICULAR 
to a surface.
Angled, 
or banked, 
track.
Normal force 
is perpendicular 
to track.
you are here 4    697
circular motion (part 2)

The only two forces with components perpendicular 
to the slope are the weight and the normal 
force. Therefore, the components of the weight 
and normal force, which are perpendicular to the 
slope, must add up to zero so that the net force is 
parallel to the slope.
Hang on! Last time we were dealing with 
angles, the normal force was always a component 
of the weight.  But this time, it looks like it’s more 
than the weight - and that can’t be right!
When you slide downhill, there’s 
no perpendicular acceleration
When an object slides down a slope, it accelerates 
parallel to the slope, but doesn’t accelerate 
perpendicular to the slope. This means that the 
components of the forces perpendicular to the slope 
must add up to zero.
No acceleration 
in perpendicular 
direction, so these 
two vectors must have 
equal sizes..
Net force acts 
parallel to slope.
Weight = mg
Normal 
force
θ
θ
v
Velocity is 
parallel to 
slope.
The NET FORCE 
acts PARALLEL 
to the slope.
698    Chapter 17
perpendicular acceleration

For the bobsled to go round the corner, there must be a 
net horizontal force acting on it to provide the centripetal 
force it requires.
This means that the bobsled doesn’t accelerate 
vertically, only horizontally. So the vertical components 
of the forces acting on the bobsled must add up to zero.
When you turn a corner, there’s 
no vertical acceleration
There’s no 
acceleration in the 
direction 90° to 
the net force. 
So the forces in 
that direction must 
add to zero.
The only two forces with vertical components are the 
bobsled’s weight and the normal force. Therefore, the 
vertical component of the normal force and the weight 
must add to zero so that the net force is the horizontal 
centripetal force the bobsled requires to take the corner.
Not only does the track have to support the bobsled’s 
weight, it also has to prevent the bobsled from tunneling 
horizontally through the track, and into the hotdog stand.
This is why the normal force has a horizontal component. 
The horizontal centripetal force is provided by the 
horizontal component of the normal force.
Because the normal force is doing these two jobs 
(supporting the bobsled’s weight and preventing it from 
tunneling through the track), the size of the normal force 
must be larger than the size of the bobsled’s weight.
The NET FORCE acts 
HORIZONTALLY.
The bobsled doesn’t float 
in the air, or go down into 
the ground. We don’t want 
it to slide UP or DOWN the 
banking either.
Before it took the 
corner, the bobsled’s 
velocity was in this 
direction. If it has 
continued with this 
velocity, it would have 
hit the hotdog stand.
v
The track needs to 
provide a horizontal 
force - or else the 
bobsled would tunnel 
through the track and 
hit the hotdog stand.
Net force acts 
horizontally.
No acceleration in 
vertical direction, 
so these two 
vectors must have 
equal sizes..
Weight = mg
Normal 
force
θ
θ
Velocity is 
out of page, 
towards you.
v
you are here 4    699
circular motion (part 2)

Q: How can I work out which force 
components add to zero when an object is 
on a slope?
A: First of all, work out the direction of the 
net force. This is the direction that the object 
accelerates in. Then draw in components of 
forces parallel and perpendicular to the net 
force. The components perpendicular to the 
net force must add to zero.
Q: How can the normal force from a 
track be larger than an object’s weight?
A: This can happen if the track is banked 
so that the object can take a corner. As well 
as providing a vertical force to support the 
object’s weight, the track also needs to provide 
a horizontal force to stop the object from 
tunneling straight on through the track. So the 
total normal force - the normal force that the 
track exerts on the object - will have a vertical 
‘weight support’ component and a horizontal 
‘anti-tunneling’ component.
Q: How do you know the net force is 
horizontal for an object taking a corner?
A: The net horizontal force provides the 
centripetal acceleration required for the object 
to take the corner.
Start off with a 
free body diagram 
and work out which 
components ADD TO 
ZERO before you draw 
in the components.
Weight
Normal 
force
θ
θ
Weight
Normal 
force
1. Start with a free body diagram
θ
θ
2. Work out the direction of the net force.
θ
θ
θ
θ
3. Draw in components parallel and perpendicular to the net force.
θ
θ
θ
θ
4. The components perpendicular to the net force must add to zero.
How to deal with an object on a slope
Net force acts 
parallel to slope.
Net force acts 
horizontally.
Normal force 
already perpendicular 
to net force.
Turn weight 
into component 
vectors.
Components 
perpendicular 
to slope add 
to zero.
Vertical 
components 
add to zero.
Weight 
already 
perpendicular 
to net force.
Turn normal force into 
component vectors.
Net force is 
this component.
Net force is 
this component.
700    Chapter 17
objects on slopes

A 630 kg bobsled traveling at 31.3 m/s requires a horizontal centripetal force of 7710 N to make it go around a 
corner with a radius of 80.0 m at a constant speed. You can provide the centripetal force by banking the track.
You already worked 
this out earlier on.
a. Draw a free body diagram of the bobsled taking the corner on an angled track, showing all the forces 
acting on it.
c. What do the horizontal and vertical components of the normal force need to be for the bobsled to go 
around the corner without sliding up or down the banking?
d. What angle should the track make with the horizontal to achieve this?
b. What is the weight of the bobsled?
you are here 4    701
circular motion (part 2)

Normal 
force
Q: So - what if the bobsled was going 
faster or slower? Would the banking 
angle need to be different?
A: You originally worked out the required 
centripetal force using the bobsled’s velocity 
and the radius of the curve. If the bobsled 
was going faster or slower, it would require 
more or less centripetal force.
Q: If the bobsled has a lower mass, 
will it require a smaller centripetal force?
A: Yes, that’s right. But as the bobsled’s 
weight is less, the normal force will also be 
less, and the banking angle will work out the 
same. The banking angle doesn’t depend on 
the bobsled’s mass - only on the bobsled’s 
speed and the radius of the corner.
Q: So could the bobsled just go round 
and round forever if I closed off the curve 
to make a circle?
A: If there was no friction, then it could, 
but there’s always some friction somewhere 
to transfer kinetic energy to internal energy. 
So it couldn’t keep on going forever.
Horizontal component =  7710 N (provides centripetal force)
Vertical component    =  6180 N (must be same size as weight - no 
                                        acceleration in vertical direction)
θ
θ
7710 N
6180 N
These three 
angles add up 
to 180°.
Banking angle of track:
tan θ
o
a
7710
6180
=
=
=  1.25 (3 sd)
=  tan-1 (1.25)  = 51.3° (3 sd)
θ
a. Draw a free body 
diagram of the bobsled 
taking the corner on an 
angled track, showing all 
the forces acting on it.
c. What do the horizontal and vertical components of the normal force need to be for the bobsled to go 
around the corner without sliding up or down the banking?
d. What angle should the track make with the horizontal to achieve this?
b. What is the weight of the bobsled?
Weight = mg
Normal 
force
A 630 kg bobsled traveling at 31.3 m/s requires a horizontal centripetal force of 7710 N to make it go around a 
corner with a radius of 80.0 m at a constant speed. You can provide the centripetal force by banking the track.
Weight  =  mg
Weight  =  630 × 9.8
Weight  =  6180 N (3 sd)
These three 
angles add up 
to 180°.
See page 562 of chapter 
14 for help with setting up 
triangles like this.
702    Chapter 17
start with a diagram

Inspired by the success of your corner, 
you’ve just been asked if you can make 
the bobsled loop-the-loop at the end of 
the track!
As the bobsled is traveling in a circle 
(just like it was for the corner), the track 
designers are confident that you can 
make it work ...
... but now they want it 
to loop-the-loop!
Are horizontal and vertical circles the same? Try it! Tie an object to the end of 
a piece of string, and swing it as slowly as possible in horizontal and vertical 
circles. Feel what happens to the tension in the string as the tension provides 
a centripetal force.
How does the tension in the string vary at different points as you swing the 
object in horizontal and vertical circles? Do you need to pull harder or more 
gently when the object’s at the top or bottom of the circle?
Try it!
Banking the track at 51.3° like you calculated 
does the trick! The hotdog stand is saved, 
and everyone at the bobsled track is happy. 
Though they’ve just come up with something 
even more ambitious ...
Banking the track works ...
Does the fact it’s a vertical 
loop change which forces we 
need to think about?
Bobsled starts off 
high to build up as 
much speed.as it needs.
Top of loop is 
20.00 m above 
lowest point of 
track.
Top of loop 
has a radius 
of 7.00 m.
20.00 m
7.00 m
The radius of the 
loop is narrower 
at the top than 
it is down the 
sides of the loop. 
The corner’s awesome! Can we 
do the same kinda thing again to 
make the bobsled loop-the-loop?!
you are here 4    703
circular motion (part 2)

At the top of the circle, 
the object’s WEIGHT is 
able to provide some of the 
centripetal force, as the 
weight vector points towards 
the CENTER of the circle.
The “support force” (normal force or tension 
force) required for a vertical circle varies
For an object moving in a horizontal circle, the tension in the string 
provides the centripetal acceleration to keep the object moving. If the 
object moves at a constant speed, the tension remains constant.
At the bottom of the circle, the object’s 
weight points directly away from the center 
of the circle, so the centripetal force must all 
be provided by the tension in the string.
As the object’s weight is pointing away from 
the center of the circle, the tension in the 
string must be equal to the weight + the 
required centripetal force.
Center 
of circle.
At the top of the circle, the force of the 
object’s weight points towards the center of the 
circle, and can provide much of the centripetal 
force that the object needs to move in a circle 
(as long as the object’s going at an appropriate 
speed). If the object’s going faster than the 
minimum speed, the centripetal force will be 
provided by weight + tension in the string.
m
Weight = mg
Weight = mg
Tension 1 = T1
Tension 2 = T2
Fc = Fnet = T1 + mg
Fc = Fnet = T2 - mg
Centripetal force 
REQUIRED for this 
motion = mrω2
m
Radius = r
Centripetal force 
REQUIRED for this 
motion = mrω2
For a vertical circle, the tension in the string is less at the top of 
the circle than it is at the bottom - as long as the speed of the object 
remains the same throughout.
This is the force that you 
need to pull the string with.
This is the same as for the horizontal 
corner. The banking angle was the 
same all the way round, providing the 
same horizontal component of the 
normal force all the way round.
You might have 
observed the object 
on the string kind-of 
“falling over the top” 
as you swung it slowly.
You might have 
noticed the object 
on the string “pulling 
against you” when 
it swung round the 
bottom of the circle.
ω is the 
same 
throughout 
the circle.
704    Chapter 17
varying support force

This exercise lets you get 
the hang of dealing with 
vertical circles before you 
tackle the bobsled track.
Draw a free body diagram to work 
each of these out! Look at the ones 
on the opposite page to help you.
You want to swing a bucket of water, mass m, in a vertical circle at a constant speed, v.
a. Write down an equation that relates the 
mass of the bucket, the length of your arm 
and the size of the required centripetal force.
b. If your arm has length r, what’s the minimum speed, v, you 
need to swing it at so that you don’t get wet when the bucket 
passes over your head?
c. In terms of m and g, what force does the 
base of the bucket exert on the water at the 
top of the circle?
d. In terms of m and g, what force does the base of the bucket 
exert on the water at the bottom of the circle if you swing it at 
the same velocity round the whole circle?
I don’t agree. Surely there’s more force 
at the top - because gravity’s adding to the 
centripetal force from the string?
Centripetal force is required for circular 
motion and provided by existing forces
You mustn’t think of centripetal force as a ‘ghost force’ 
that appears from nowhere when an object moves in a 
circle. Circular motion is only possible if a force capable 
of providing the centripetal force is already present.
At the top of the circle, the centripetal force can actually 
be entirely provided by the gravitational force, as it 
points towards the center of the circle. At the minimum 
speed for circular motion, the gravitational force, mg, 
will provide all of the required centripetal force, so 
will be equal in size to mrω2.
At the top of the circle, 
the object has a horizontal 
velocity. Without the string, 
the object would follow a 
curved path anyway (just not 
a circular one).
At the minimum speed, 
the centripetal force 
is provided entirely by 
the gravitational force.
Your arm exerts a force on the 
bucket - and the base of the bucket 
transmits that force to the water.
you are here 4    705
circular motion (part 2)

I guess that with the bobsled, the normal force 
from the track does the job of supporting the 
circular motion, like the bucket does here?
Fc  =  mrω2
v  =  rω
ω  = vr
Fc  = mv2
r
Minimum force = mg = Fc
mg  = mv2
r
v2 =  gr
v  =   gr
a. Write down an equation that relates the 
mass of the bucket, the length of your arm 
and the size of the required centripetal force.
b. If your arm has length r, what’s the minimum speed, v, you 
need to swing it at so that you don’t get wet when the bucket 
passes over your head?
c. In terms of m and g, what force does the 
base of the bucket exert on the water at the 
top of the circle?
d. In terms of m and g, what force does the base of the bucket 
exert on the water at the bottom of the circle if you swing it at 
the same velocity round the whole circle?
Fc  =  mrω2
m
Weight = mg
Tension
Tension of force of string on bucket 
transmitted to water by base of bucket.
But net force is Fc = mg. 
So tension = 0.
Force exerted by base of 
bucket on water = 0
m is mass of bucket. 
r is length of arm. 
ω is angular velocity.
Your free body diagram is key
When you draw a free body diagram, take 
special note of the forces pointing towards the 
center of the circle. These have the potential 
to contribute towards a net centripetal force 
that makes an object follow a circular path.
For the bobsled, the normal force from the 
track will point towards the center of the circle.
You want to swing a bucket of water, mass m, in a vertical circle at a constant speed, v.
m
Weight = mg
Tension
Continues at same speed, so Fc = mg as 
centripetal force same for same speed.
Fc is net force, so Tension + Weight must 
be equal to Fc
Up positive direction:
T - mg  =  mg
T  =  2 mg
T - mg  =  Fc
But  Fc = mg 
make substitution
706    Chapter 17
free body diagrams

m
Weight = mg
Tension = T
Fc = Fnet = T + mg
Radius = r
Tension force provided 
by string acts towards 
center of circle.
String
Any force that acts towards the center of 
the circle can provide a centripetal force
Normal force provided 
by track acts towards 
center of circle.
Track
m
Weight = mg
Normal force = FN
Fc = Fnet = FN + mg
Radius = r
For an object on a string at the top of a circle, there 
are two forces that can point towards the center 
of the circle and, therefore, contribute towards a 
net centripetal force in that direction. One is the 
tension force from the string, and the other is the 
gravitational force - the object’s weight.
The tension force + the component of the gravitational 
force that points towards the center of the circle will 
always add up the centripetal force required to move 
the object at that speed around a circle with that radius.
The bobsled’s free body diagram is nearly identical to the 
object on the string, except that it’s the normal force from 
the (circular) track that points towards the center of the circle 
instead of a tension force.
You can think of the normal force as an “anti tunneling” 
force. If the bobsled is going upwards with a high speed and 
the track is soft and can’t provide enough normal force, the 
bobsled will tunnel into - and probably through - the track. 
The normal force provided by a solid track prevents the 
bobsled from tunneling, and provides some of the centripetal 
force that the bobsled requires to follow a circular path.
The components of 
all the forces that 
point towards the 
center of the circle 
must add up to the 
centripetal force.
Normal force ALWAYS 
acts perpendicular 
(normal) to the track.
Think of the normal 
force provided by 
the track as an “anti-
tunneling” force that 
stops the bobsled 
from tunneling 
through the track.
you are here 4    707
circular motion (part 2)

How fast does the 
bobsled need to go?
Your job is to calculate the 
minimum speed that the bobsled 
needs to be going at to make it 
around the 7.00 m radius loop.
At the top of the circle, the 
bobsled’s weight points towards 
the center and can provide all the 
centripetal force the bobsled needs 
to go in a circle - as long as it’s 
going at just the right speed.
Q: So how can the gravitational force 
provide a centripetal force?! Surely if that 
was happening, the bobsled would just 
fall straight down, off the track.
A: To make it around the loop, the 
bobsled must already be traveling very fast 
horizontally when it gets to the top of the 
circle. So it couldn’t possibly fall straight 
down - even if the track wasn’t there, it 
would move through the air like a projectile.
Q: But what if the bobsled wasn’t 
going fast enough at the top of the loop?
A: Then there wouldn’t be enough 
centripetal force to keep the bobsled on 
the track - it would curve down towards the 
ground faster than the curve of the track, 
and fall off the track. 
Q: How do I know if the bobsled’s 
going fast enough or not?
A: The size of the centripetal force is 
given by the equation Fc = mrω2, which 
can also be written Fc = mv2
r by making a 
substitution using the equation v = rω. 
 
The faster the bobsled’s going, the larger the 
centripetal force required to make it travel in 
a circle with radius t.
Q: Doesn’t that equation give you the 
value of the centripetal force?
A: Not quite. The equation gives you the 
value of the centripetal force that is required 
for the bobsled to move in that way. If the 
net force on the free body diagram isn’t large 
enough, then the bobsled won’t get round 
the loop safely.
Q: What else might the centripetal 
force be provided by, apart from gravity?
A: The normal force from the track always 
points perpendicular to the track. So when 
the bobsled is upside-down, the normal force 
points down. 
 
Think of the normal force as an “anti-
burrowing” force that prevents the bobsled 
from burrowing through the track if it’s going 
really fast.
Q: How can I work out whether the 
track is safe or not?
A: Your job is to calculate the minimum 
speed that the bobsled needs to be going at 
to get around the loop safely. Which we’re 
just getting on to now ...
The required 
centripetal force 
depends on the 
radius and speed.
Bobsled starts off 
high to build up as 
much speed.as it needs.
Top of loop is 
20.00 m above 
bottom of loop.
Top of loop 
has a radius 
of 7.00 m.
20.00 m
7.00 m
708    Chapter 17
radius, speed, and centripetal force

A 630 kg bobsled is to do a loop-the-loop. The loop has a 7.00 m radius at its top, which is 20.00 m higher 
than the bottom of the loop. The bobsled can start as high as you want it to above the bottom of the loop.
a. What is the minimum speed the bobsled needs to have at the top of the loop in order to make it around 
the loop successfully?
b. What speed does the bobsled need to have when it enters bottom of the loop in order to achieve this?
d. Now assume that the bobsled is traveling at 10.0 m/s at the top of the loop (instead of the speed you 
calculated in part a). How large is the normal force that the track exerts on it?
c. What is the minimum height the bobsled needs to start at to achieve these speeds?
The normal force 
is like an “anti-
tunneling” force 
that provides a 
centripetal force 
and makes the 
bobsled follow the 
track instead of 
tunneling straight 
through the track.
Hint: You have various 
differences in height here...
you are here 4    709
circular motion (part 2)

Weight 
= mg
A 630 kg bobsled is to do a loop-the-loop. The loop has a 7.00 m radius at its top, which is 20.00 m higher 
than the bottom of the loop. The bobsled can start as high as you want it to above the bottom of the loop.
a. What is the minimum speed the bobsled needs to have at the top of the loop in order to make it around 
the loop successfully?
b. What speed does the bobsled need to have when it enters bottom of the loop in order to achieve this?
d. Now assume that the bobsled is traveling at 10.0 m/s at the top of the loop (instead of the 
speed you calculated in part a). How large is the normal force that the track exerts on it?
c. What is the minimum height the bobsled needs to start at to achieve these speeds?
Fc  =  mrω2
v  =  rω
ω  = vr
Fc  = mv2
r
At minimum speed, all of Fc provided by weight.
Fc  = mv2
r
mg  = mv2
r
v2 =  gr
v  =   gr   =  9.8 × 7.00  =  8.28 m/s (3 sd)
h = 20.0 m
Kb
Kt + Ut
vt = 8.28 m/s
vb = ?
Energy conservation:
Kb  =  Kt + Ut
½mvb
2  =  ½mvt
2 + mgh
vb
2  =  vt
2 + 2gh
vb  =   vt
2 + 2gh   =  8.282 + 2 × 9.8 × 20.00  =  21.5 m/s (3 sd)
h = ?
Kb
U0
Energy conservation:
U0  =  Kb
mgh  =  ½mvb
2
h  = ½vb
2
g
= 0.5 × 21.52
9.8
=  23.6 m (3 sd)
Fc  = mv2
r
Normal 
force
630 × 102
7.00
=
=  9000 N (3 sd)
Fc  =  weight + normal force  =  mg + FN
FN  =  Fc  - mg  =  9000 - 630 × 9.8  =  2830 N (3 sd)
Awesome!!
We’ve used the subscripts 
‘t’ and ‘b’ to mean ‘top’ and 
‘bottom’ of the loop.
We’ve used the subscript ‘0’ 
to mean the initial conditions 
atthe start of the track.
Normal force stops bobsled 
burrowing on upwards.
710    Chapter 17
solutions

711
3. A 630 kg bobsled traveling at 31.3 m/s needs to go around 
a corner with a radius of 80.0 m at a constant speed. 
What size and direction of centripetal force is required for 
the bobsled to be able to make it round the corner?
You can provide the required centripetal force by banking 
the track. Explain, using a diagram, why this is the case.
What angle should the track make with the horizontal to 
provide the centripetal force that is required?
a.
b.
c.
Question Clinic: The “Banked curve” Question
The banked curve question tests your understanding of 
forces, free body diagrams, components, Newton’s laws, circles, and 
trigonometry - all in all, a good and varied workout! Usually, you’ll need to calculate 
the centripetal force required in order for the object to make it around the curve, 
then make this equal to the net force that points towards the center of the circle, which 
comes from the horizontal component of the normal force.
Any time you’re dealing with a slope, 
start with a free body diagram and work out 
which direction there’s no acceleration in. Then resolve 
your force vectors into components parallel and perpendicular 
to this direction. In the banked curve question, there’s no 
acceleration in the vertical direction - which helps you to 
see that it’s the horizontal component that you need to 
make equal to the centripetal force.
Keep the mass as ‘m’ for the moment, 
to avoid numerical errors. It’ll divide 
out later on, when you equate the 
centripetal force to the horizontal 
component of the normal force.
These figures give you the 
information you need to calculate the 
centripetal force, Fc = mrω2
Don’t forget to say 
that the direction is 
horizontal, towards 
the center of the 
circle that the bend 
forms part of.
This means draw a free body 
diagram and show that the vertical 
components of the forces add to zero, 
leaving a net horizontal force that 
can provide the centripetal force.
Make sure you calculate the correct 
angle! Spot similar triangles then 
think to see if your answer SUCKs.
Some questions may be about centripetal 
acceleration instead of centripetal 
force. Use Newton’s 2nd Law, F = ma 
to move between these two things.

712
Question Clinic: The “Vertical circle” Question
The vertical circle question can lead to a lot of 
confusion about what forces are in play and the direction that 
they point in. The normal force is always perpendicular to the surface - even 
if something’s upside-down! And the force of something’s weight always points 
downwards. The vertical circle also involves a change in height - so be on the 
lookout for places you can use energy conservation.
Always, always, always start with a free 
body diagram! Mark on the real forces, and work 
out which of them contribute towards the centripetal force. 
The minimum speed for a successful loop-the-loop is shorthand 
for saying that the object’s weight provides all the centripetal 
force when the thing is upside-down. If it’s going faster than 
that, then some of the centripetal force will be provided by 
the normal force from the track.
The mass will divide out when you make 
the centripetal force equal the net 
force on your free body diagram.
2. A 630 kg bobsled is to do a loop-the-loop. The loop has a 7.00 m 
radius at its top, which is 20.00 m higher than the bottom of the loop.
What is the minimum speed the bobsled needs to have at the top 
in order to make it around the loop successfully?
How fast does the bobsled need to be going when it enters the 
bottom of the loop in order to achieve this?
What is the minimum height the bobsled needs to start at to 
achieve these speeds?
Now assume that the bobsled is traveling at 10.0 m/s at the top of 
the loop (instead of the speed you calculated in part a). How large 
is the normal force that the track exerts on it?
a.
b.
c.
d.
This is the value of radius you’ll 
need to use for calculating the 
required centripetal force.
Difference in 
height - think 
potential energy!
This is when all the 
centripetal force 
is provided by the 
bobsled’s weight.
This involves 
energy 
conservation.
You need to redo 
everything as the 
required centripetal 
acceleration for 
this speed will be 
greater. Part will 
come from its 
weight, and part 
from a normal 
force exerted by 
the track.

you are here 4    713
circular motion (part 2)
Units
Falling
Circumference
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Inelastic collision
Force
Frequency
Special points
Experiment
Period
Elastic collision
Centripetal force
Weight
Time
Angular frequency
Energy
Component
Tension
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Pulley
Radians
Impulse
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Mechanical energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Angular velocity
Volume
Velocity
Power
Friction
Radius
Kinetic energy
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Internal energy
Area
Mass
Bow to my ability to make 
things move in circles!
Centripetal 
force
The net force required to make an object travel 
along a circular path. Always points towards the 
center of the circle. Size given by Fc = mrω2
Angular 
velocity
The size of the angular velocity is exactly the 
same as the angular frequency or angular speed.

Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 17 under your belt and 
added some terminology and problem-
solving skills to your tool box.
Freefall
Something is said to be in freefall 
when the only force acting on it is 
its weight.
Examples of objects in freefall 
are a parachute jumper (if there’s 
no air resistance) and an object 
orbiting the Earth.
CHAPTER 17
“What’s pushing me?”
This is the question you need to 
ask yourself in order to spot the 
contact forces that are present.
Shut your eyes and think “What’s 
pushing me?”
You can’t experience a non-
contact force (such as your 
weight) in this way.
Volumes and areas
If you have a 3D shape, try to 
unfold it into 2D shapes you know 
how to deal with.
Area of circle = πr2
For a 3D volume with straight 
sides and the same shape of flat 
base and top:
Volume = area of base × height
Centrifugal force
Don’t talk about this. Naughty!!
Centripetal force
The force required to move an 
object round a curved path.
A greater centripetal force is 
required for a higher speed or a 
larger radius.
Equation: Fc = mrω2
       with v = rω.
Solving problems 
that involve a slope
Start with a free body diagram
Work out the direction of the 
net force (the direction that the 
object accelerates in).
Draw on components parallel and 
perpendicular to the net force.
The components perpendicular to 
the net force must add up to 
zero.
Solving centripetal 
force problems
Start with a free body diagram
The centripetal force doesn’t 
appear from nowhere - it’s the 
NET FORCE on your free body 
diagram and it acts towards the 
CENTER of the circle.
714    Chapter 17
physics toolbox

this is a new chapter    715
gravitation and orbits
18
Getting away from it all
So far, you’ve been up close and personal with gravity - but what 
happens to the attraction as your feet leave the ground? In this chapter, you’ll learn that 
gravitation is an  inverse square law, and harness the power of gravitational potential 
to take a trip to infinity... and beyond. Closer to home, you’ll learn how to deal with 
orbits - and learn how they can revolutionize your communication skills.
This inverse square dancing’s great! 
Half the distance = four times as handsome.

The local party planner is in need of your help. They’re catering a big 
event, and the centerpiece is a huge, innovative globe of cheese.
But there’s more... the planner has sent over instructions.
Party planners, a big event, and lots of cheese
Once-in-a-lifetime 
cheese globe
The center of the cheese globe is 
an orange.
Cocktail sticks are inserted into 
the center of the orange, and 
radiate outwards. At the outer 
ends of the sticks are blocks of 
cheese, all around the outside 
of the globe. The cheese forms 
a “shell” around the orange.
Cheese blocks must be 2.0 cm 
by 2.0 cm x 0.50 cm, with the 
square face outwards. Each 
cheese globe should have 500 blocks.
Each stick should protrude by 2.0 cm from the end of the cheese block, 
so party-goers can easily remove a block from the cheese globe.
THERE MUST BE NO GAPS VISIBLE BETWEEN THE 
BLOCKS OF CHEESE. THIS IS CRUCIAL!
Cocktail stick
Block of cheese.
No gaps!
Orange
The notes include 
a cross-section of 
the cheese globe.
Assume you’ve 
got a machine 
to insert sticks 
into cheese 
blocks easily.
Assume you’ve 
got a machine 
that can put 
the sticks in 
the orange at 
regular intervals.
The party planner already has a machine that will put cheese 
blocks onto cocktail sticks with 2.0 cm sticking out at the end. 
The machine is also able to put all 500 cocktail sticks into the 
center of the orange so that they’re evenly spaced. You don’t 
need to worry about how to do any of that.
716    Chapter 18
cheese? really?

What length should the cocktail sticks be?
Your job is to calculate the length that the cocktail sticks should be.
If the sticks are too short, there won’t be space for you to fit on all 
500 pieces of cheese, as the sticks won’t spread out enough for the 
pieces of cheese to fit on next to each other.
But if the sticks are too long, they’ll spread out too much and 
there’ll be gaps in between the pieces of cheese.
What properties of the cheese blocks might 
be important when it comes to working out 
the length that the cocktail sticks should be?
In this diagram, the 
sticks are TOO SHORT. 
Some sticks don’t get any 
cheese because it won’t 
fit in the space.
Gaps, oh no!
The cocktail sticks 
all meet in the 
center of the orange.
Remember, this is just 
a 2D cross-section 
of the actual 3D 
cheese globe.
Each stick 
comes out 
2.0 cm from 
the cheese block.
In this diagram, the sticks are 
TOO LONG. All the sticks get 
a piece of cheese, but there 
are gaps between them.
you are here 4    717
gravitation and orbits

Frank: We already have a machine that can slam 500 cocktail 
sticks into an orange with equal spacing? Cool or what!
Jim: Yeah, the ends of the sticks all meet in the center of the 
orange. That’s not a problem. But we don’t know the length that 
each cocktail stick should be.
Frank: We could try an experiment - y’know, use really long 
sticks and slide the cheese blocks up and down the sticks by hand 
until there aren’t any gaps. Then we could measure how far the 
blocks are from the center of the orange.
Jim: That sounds like it would work, sure.
Joe: But what if the party planners change the number of cheese 
blocks or want a different size of block in the future? We’d have to 
do all of that work again! We need to future-proof our solution.
Jim: That’s true. If this is a success, the planners will want to milk 
this cheese globe for all it’s worth. There must be a butter way.
Joe: Can we come up with an equation that tells us what length of 
cocktail stick to use?
Frank: OK, let’s think about that. What’s the cheese globe like?
Jim: Well, the finished cheese globe kinda looks like the cheese has 
coated a soccer ball with a bunch of little spikes s
Start solving a 
new problem by 
asking yourself, 
“What is this 
problem LIKE?”
The cheese globe 
looks like a soccer 
ball with spikes.
The cheese globe 
is a sphere.
So we need to work out the 
way we’re gonna do this!
Joe: Right, the cheese globe’s basically a sphere.
Jim: So maybe the volume that each cheese block takes up is 
important ...
Joe: ... or maybe the surface area of the cheese blocks is 
important ...
718    Chapter 18
what is it like?

A single block of cheese has dimensions of 2.0 cm by 2.0 cm by 0.50 cm. You have 500 of them.
If a sphere has a big radius, 
then it also has a big surface 
area and a big volume.
Because you start with a spherical orange and put all the 
cocktail sticks in the same distance, the cheese also makes 
a sphere shape. The larger the radius of the sphere, 
the larger the surface area, and the larger the volume.
But is it the surface area of the sphere that’s important, 
or the volume ... or both? How are you going to figure 
that out?
The cheese looks like it’s coated 
the outside of a soccer ball.
A sphere has 
a surface area 
and a volume.
The bigger the radius, the 
bigger the surface area 
and volume of the sphere.
The cheese globe is a sphere
Radius
a. Calculate the total volume of the cheese blocks in cm3.
c. Do you think the volume of the cheese blocks or their surface area - or both - is important for working 
out how long to make the cocktail sticks? Give a reason for your answer.
b. Calculate the area in cm2 that the cheese blocks occupy when you arrange them on a flat surface with 
the square side of each block facing upwards.
d. What other information might you need to be able to solve this problem?
Orange
you are here 4    719
gravitation and orbits

If you were making a solid sphere of cheese, then the volume of the 
cheese and sphere would need to be equal.
But the cheese makes a spherical ‘shell’ - not a filled-in sphere. 
Therefore, the surface area of the cheese will be the same as the 
surface area of the sphere that it’s coating.
Your table of information gives you an equation for the surface area 
of a sphere: S = 4πr2.
The surface area of the sphere is the 
same as the surface area of the cheese
Ready Bake 
Equation
Surface area of a sphere
S = 4πr2
Surface area
Radius
 A single block of cheese has dimensions of 2.0 cm by 2.0 cm by 0.5 cm.  You have 500 of them.
a. Calculate the total volume of the cheese blocks in cm3.
c. Do you think the volume of the cheese blocks or their surface area - or both - is important for working 
out how long to make the cocktail sticks? Give a reason for your answer.
b. Calculate the area in cm2 that the cheese blocks occupy when you arrange them on a flat surface with 
the square side of each block facing upwards.
d. What other information might you need to be able to solve this problem?
Volume of 1 block  =  length × width × height  =  2.0 × 2.0 × 0.50  =  2.0 cm3 (2 sd)
Volume of 500 blocks  =  500 × 2.0  =  1000 cm3 (2 sd)
Surface area of 1 block  =  length × width  =  2.0 × 2.0  =  4.0 cm2 (2 sd)
Surface area of 500 blocks  =  500 × 4.0  =  2000 cm2 (2 sd)
I think the surface area is important, because the blocks have to cover a surface without 
any gaps in between them, not fill up a volume. The volume isn’t important.
An equation for the surface area of a sphere would be useful.
720    Chapter 18
spheres and surface area

You have 500 cheese blocks, measuring 2.0 cm by 2.0 cm by 0.50 cm, and are required to make a cheese 
sphere. You have 500 cocktail sticks, which start in the center of an orange and are equally spread across 
the orange. 2.0 cm of each stick should be visible on the outside of the sphere.
a. What length should the cocktail sticks be if the 500 pieces of cheese are to be arranged so as to leave 
no gaps in the surface of the cheese sphere?
b. Now, suppose you have 2000 pieces of cheese the same as before - 4 times as many. Without redoing 
the calculations you did above, use the equation for the surface area of a sphere to explain what radius of 
cheese globe you’d be able to make while leaving no gaps.
you are here 4    721
gravitation and orbits

S = 4πr2
Doubling 
the radius 
of a sphere 
QUADRUPLES 
the surface area 
of the sphere.
Surface area 
of sphere.
Radius of 
sphere.
You have 500 cheese blocks, measuring 2.0 cm by 2.0 cm by 0.50 cm, and are required to make a cheese 
sphere. You have 500 cocktail sticks, which start in the center of an orange and are equally spread across 
the orange. 2.0 cm of each stick should be visible on the outside of the sphere.
a. What length should the cocktail sticks be if the 500 pieces of cheese are to be arranged so as to leave 
no gaps in the surface of the cheese sphere?
The surface area is proportional to r2, as S = 4πr2. If S is 4 times 
larger, then 4πr2 will be four times larger. But 4 and π are constants. 
Thereforce r2 must be 4 times larger, so r must be 2 times larger
Inner radius = 12.6 × 2 = 25.2 cm.
b. Now, suppose you have 2000 pieces of cheese the same as before - 4 times as 
many. Without redoing the calculations you did above, use the equation for the 
surface area of a sphere to explain what radius of cheese globe you’d be able to 
make while leaving no gaps.
Inside surface of cheese coats a sphere. 
surface area of sphere  =  surface area of cheese 
4πr2   =  2.0 × 2.0 × 500 
r  = 2000
4π
=  12.6 cm (3 sd)
Length of cocktail stick: 
Need to include 2.0 cm at 
end, and thickness of cheese.
12.6 cm
0.5 cm
2.0 cm
Length = 12.6 + 0.5 + 2.0 = 15.1 cm (3 sd)
You need to 
remember the 
thickness of 
the cheese as 
well as the bit 
at the end!
Q: How can I tell whether it’s the 
volume or surface area that’s important?
A: Ask yourself - “What’s it like?” Here, 
arranging the cheese is like coating the 
surface of a soccer ball. This means that the 
surface area of the cheese is important. 
 
If you were melting the cheese and filling the 
volume of a soccer ball, then the volume of 
the cheese would be the important thing. 
Q: I thought that 3D objects have 
volumes, not surface areas?
A: Anything you can paint has a surface 
area - or else there’d be nowhere for the paint 
to go! A sphere has a surface area. It’s a 
curved surface - and one you can’t flatten out 
properly - but it’s a surface nonetheless. 
 
 
Q: How do you know what happens to 
the area when you change the radius?
A:In the equation S = 4πr2, the area is 
proportional to r2. If you double the radius, 
you quadruple the surface area, as 22 = 4 
Think about it like this: if the old radius is y 
and you double it, the new radius is 2y. 
Old:   S = 4πy2 
New: S = 4π(2y)2 = 4π4y2 = 4 × 4πy2 
So when you double the radius, the new 
surface area is four times the old surface area.
Old surface area.
722    Chapter 18
doubled radius = quadrupled surface area

Let there be cheese...
Give your solutions to the party planners, 
and let’s see what they come up with.
...but there are gaps in the globe!
There are gaps between 
the blocks of cheese.
Your solution on the opposite page is correct, but the party planners have gone wrong somewhere.
Circle the mistake in the notes that the machine programmer made and explain what went wrong.
Cheese globe notes
Set machine to put 500 sticks into orange, 
evenly-spaced with ends of sticks in center.
Machine puts 2.0 cm by 2.0 cm by 0.5 cm 
blocks on sticks, square side up, with 2.0 cm 
of stick protruding.
Set stick length so that 15.1 cm of stick is 
visible outside orange.
Press go.
you are here 4    723
gravitation and orbits

Accidentally 
working with the 
distance from the 
surface instead 
of the radius - or 
vice-versa - is a 
common mistake.
Your solution on the opposite page is correct, but the party planners have gone wrong somewhere.
Circle the mistake in the notes that the machine programmer made and explain what went wrong.
Cheese globe notes
Set machine to put 500 sticks into orange, 
evenly-spaced with ends of sticks in center.
Machine puts 2.0 cm by 2.0 cm by 0.5 cm 
blocks on sticks, square side up, with 2.0 cm 
of stick protruding.
Set stick length so that 15.1 cm of stick is 
visible outside orange.
Press go.
I worked out the the sticks need to have a 
TOTAL length of 15.1 cm.
But the party planner has made 15.1 cm of 
stick visible on the outside of the orange.
This means that the sticks will be too long, 
as they will have alength of 15.1 cm + radius 
of orange.
If the sticks are too long, there will be gaps 
between the blocks of cheese.
The party planners had programmed their 
machine incorrectly, using the distance 
from the surface of the orange.
They should have used the radius - the 
distance from the center.
Fortunately, it was only a prototype, and you 
soon have them back on track ...
Distance from 
center
Distance from 
surface
This is the dstance you calculated 
to be 15.1 cm - the length of 
the entire cocktail stick - the 
RADIUS of the sphere. to the 
tips of the sticks.
This is the distance 
that the party 
planners accidentally 
programmed their 
machine with - the 
distance from the 
surface of the orange.
724    Chapter 18
center or surface?

If you’re working with a 3D shape, think about 
whether it’s surface area or volume that’s important.
If the shape will ‘unroll’ flat, you can work out its 
surface area by turning it into 2D shapes.


If the shape won’t ‘unroll’ flat, see if you can look it 
up in a book or table of information.
On the AP course, the ‘geometry and trigonometry’ 
section of the table of information is the place to look.
The surface area of a sphere is proportional to r2.



The party’s on!
The party planners are thrilled. In fact, they’ve already 
had more orders for different size cheese globes
With an ability to churn out different sizes thanks to 
your flexible equation for working out cocktail stick 
sizes, you’re ready to turn these unique (and spiky) 
cheese globes into big business.
The equation you worked 
out handles cheese globes 
of all sizes.
You did this 
in chapter 17.
We’ve included a section 
like this in appendix ii.
you are here 4    725
gravitation and orbits

To infinity - and beyond!
The lead astronaut on the Head First space station 
has been chosen to boldly go where no man has 
gone before - to the edge of the solar system! Your 
job is to work out how to get him there.
Since you’re able to use a spaceship, this 
sounds easy at first - but you can’t accelerate 
forever, as you’d run out of fuel! Your best 
strategy is to blast off to achieve as high a 
velocity as possible - after all, the greater 
the upwards velocity, the greater the time an 
object will spend away from the Earth.
You need to calculate the escape velocity  
for the Earth - the velocity that the astronaut 
needs to reach at the start when he’s close to 
Earth so as to not fall back down again. (You 
may need to work out other things for later on 
in the mission, but the escape velocity for the 
earth is enough to be getting on with for now!)
This sketch is NOT to 
scale. If it was, Pluto 
would be 40 times as far 
away from the Sun as 
the Earth is.
The actual orbits are 
more elliptical, but 
you get the idea.
The astronaut needs to 
get as far away from 
Earth as the distance 
to Pluto’s orbit.
Surface of 
the Earth
Initial velocity 
of object
Object’s 
trajectory
Initial launch 
velocity of 
spaceship
Spaceship’s 
trajectory
When you launch an object directly upwards, 
sooner or later it comes back down. If the 
astronaut is to make it to the edge of the 
solar system, he needs to be able to keep on 
going and going - without being brought 
back down to Earth! 
The spaceship’s acceleration 
due to gravity doesn’t 
depend on its mass. So you 
don’t need to worry about 
the mass of the spaceship 
changing as it burns fuel.
Sun
Earth
Pluto
v0
v0
726    Chapter 18
buzz, buzz, buzz lightyear

So we’re sending an 
astronaut off to the edge of 
the solar system? Cool!
Jim: Yeah, we just need to run the 
spaceship’s engine as hard as possible 
for as long as possible. That gives the 
astronaut the largest possible velocity 
at the start - and the best chance of 
making it.
Joe: But how do we guarantee that’s 
going to be good enough? What if 
the astronaut falls back down to Earth 
again, like a football does when you 
throw it up in the air? 
Frank: Well, let’s work it out. I looked 
up the distance to Pluto’s orbit, and it’s 
around 6 × 1012 m... 
Jim: ...and acceleration due to the 
Earth’s gravity is 9.8 m/s2...
Frank: Wait ... you mean negative 
9.8 m/s2, right? The acceleration needs 
to be negative if we’re calling “away 
from the Earth” the positive direction.
Joe: OK, so we know the 
displacement and the acceleration, 
and let’s say that he needs to have a 
velocity of 0 m/s when he reaches 
Pluto’s orbit. That’s the smallest velocity 
he could have by that point and still 
make it.
Jim: Let’s get on with the calculation!
b. How practical does your answer feel to you?
a. Pluto’s orbit is 6 × 1012 m (1 sd) from Earth. If the acceleration 
due to the Earth’s gravity is constant throughout the journey, 
work out the velocity that a spaceship needs to have at the start 
in order to escape from Earth.
This distance is a million times 
grater than the radius of 
the Earth, and only has one 
significant digit. So it doesn’t 
really matter if this distance 
is measured from the center or 
the surface of the Earth.
you are here 4    727
gravitation and orbits

Your equations of 
motion only work if the 
acceleration is constant.
Jim: Yeah, you can’t get a spaceship - or anything else to go faster 
than the speed of light!
Frank: But real space probes have gone past Pluto and even left the 
solar system before. So it must be possible ... 
Joe: What if the effect of the Earth’s gravity gets less as you 
go further away?
Frank: How do you mean?
Joe: Well, sounds are quieter if you’re further away from their 
source. And lights are less bright. Maybe it’s the same with gravity.
Jim: You mean your acceleration due to gravity might get 
smaller as you move further away?
Frank: Oh yeah ... the equations of motion we used assumed that 
the acceleration due to gravity was constant for the whole journey
Jim: Good point. If the acceleration changes as you get further 
away, we can’t use those equations of motion - they only work for a 
situation with constant acceleration.
Joe: Let’s try to work out how the acceleration changes as you get 
further away from the Earth ...
b. How practical does your answer feel to you?
a = -9.8 m/s2
t = 0 s
v0 = ?
x0 = 0 m
x = 6 × 1012 m
v = 0 m/s
Suppose spaceship has velocity 
of 0 m/s by the time it 
reaches Pluto’s orbit:
a. Pluto’s orbit is 6 × 1012 m (1 sd) from Earth. If the acceleration 
due to the Earth’s gravity is constant throughout the journey, 
work out the velocity that a spaceship needs to have at the start 
in order to escape from Earth.
This is very, very, very fast. It’s 100000 times 
faster than the speed of light (the largest speed a 
material body can have) so is just totally impossible!
Looks like the velocity’s the 
wrong size - it’s way too high!
v2  =
v0
2 + 2a(x-x0)
v0  =
3 × 1013 m/s (1 sd)
v0
2  =
0 - 2 × (-9.8) × (6×1012 - 0)
v0
2  =
v2 - 2a(x-x0)
The speed of light 
is 3 × 108 m/s
728    Chapter 18
what about gravity?

Earth’s gravitational force on you 
becomes weaker as you go further away
When you’re near the Earth, you experience a gravitational force 
because the stuff you’re made of and the stuff the Earth’s made of 
attract each other. But as the distance between you and the Earth 
increases, the gravitational force gets weaker. In the same way, 
sounds get quieter and lights get less bright as you increase the distance 
between yourself and the source of the sound or light.
As the gravitational force on you gets smaller, your acceleration due 
to gravity also decreases (as Fnet = ma). So your acceleration isn’t 
constant. That means you can’t use your equations of motion here, as 
they only work when the acceleration is constant.
But how does the gravitational force change as you get further away? 
The brightness of a light becomes less as you get further away. In this picture, you have a spherical light 
that emits light equally in all directions, and you look at it with your eye from two different distances. 
Assume that the pupil of your eye (the bit that lets the light in) has the same area at both distances.
Explain why the light appears dimmer when you are further away.
Hint: Have you seen 
anything that looks a bit 
like this picture recently?
Here’s your 
eye at one 
distance...
Further out, 
acceleration due 
to gravity is smaller.
At Earth’s surface, 
acceleration due to 
gravity = 9.8 m/s2
And further out again, 
acceleration due to 
gravity is even smaller.
a
a
a
...and then 
at a larger 
distance.
you are here 4    729
gravitation and orbits

As the light goes away from the bulb, 
it spreads out more.
The close eye has all the light within 
the two heavy lines going into it.
The far away eye only has a part of 
this light going into it - so the bulb 
looks dimmer from further away.
The brightness of a light is something that becomes weaker as you get further away. In this picture, you have 
a spherical light that emits light equally in all directions, and you look at it with your eye from two different 
distances. Assume that the pupil of your eye (the bit that lets the light in) has the same area at both distances.
Explain why the light appears dimmer when you are further away.
Closer, your eye has all 
the light between these 
two lines going into it.
Further away, your eye 
only has some of the light 
from between the same 
two lines going into it.
These bits of light 
that went in the 
close eye don’t go 
in the far away eye.
Same amount of 
light is spread out 
over each sphere.
Light weaker 
from further 
away, as spread 
over larger 
surface area.
r2
r1
Surface area 
S2 = 4πr2
2
Surface area 
S1 = 4πr1
2
The further you 
are from a light, 
the greater the 
SURFACE AREA 
it’s spread over.
At distance r1, all of the light coming from the bulb is 
spread out over the area 4πr1
2.
At distance r2, the light is spread out over the area 4πr2
2.
The same amount of light it spread out over each 
surface. However, at a greater distance there’s less light 
available per square meter, as there are more square 
meters of surface for the light to spread out over.
So the light looks less bright from further away.
r1 and r2 are the radii 
of each sphere
730    Chapter 18
distance matters

Err ... what does light spreading out 
have to do with getting an astronaut 
to the edge of the solar system?
Light intensity and gravitational field strength 
both depend on the surface area of spheres.
Gravitational field lines 
show you the DIRECTION 
that an object will 
accelerate in.
You can represent the Earth’s 
gravitational field in a similar way by 
using gravitational field lines. The 
lines show you the direction an object 
will accelerate in if the gravitational 
force is the only force acting on it. The 
object will accelerate along a line, 
moving closer to the Earth.
As the gravitational field lines spread 
out, the surface area of a sphere at that 
radius increases. So the gravitational 
field strength decreases.
You have been representing light using rays that start in the 
center and spread out. The rays show you the direction 
that the light is traveling in.
As light rays spread out, the surface area that the light’s 
spread over increases. So the intensity of the light decreases.
r2
r1
Surface area 
S2 = 4πr2
2
Surface area 
S1 = 4πr1
2
The gravitational field strength 
is  another name for the 
acceleration due to gravity.
r1 and r2 are radius vectors pointing away 
from the center of the sphere. Most of 
the time we are interested in the distance, 
buit sometimes we will be interested in the 
direction, as r is in the opposite direction 
from the acceleration caused by the 
gravitational field.
you are here 4    731
gravitation and orbits

Q: Why is this called a gravitational 
field? Surely gravitational acceleration or 
gravitational force is a better?
A: The ‘field’ is a way of visualizing what’s 
going on with the strength of the acceleration 
due to gravity. Gravitational field strength has 
units m/s2, the same as acceleration. Close 
to the Earth, the gravitational field strength is 
9.8 m/s2, but further away it’s lower.
Q: If I’m drawing gravitational field lines 
on a picture, is there a standard number of 
lines that I should draw? Should I always 
draw 32 lines, like in these pictures?
A: There’s no strict rule - you should draw 
as many field lines as help you visualize 
what’s happening. Probably at least eight is a 
good rule of thumb.
Q: So what’s the connection between 
gravitational field and gravitational force?
A: The gravitational field represents the 
acceleration due to gravity that an object 
would experience if it was placed at that point. 
You can get from there to the gravitational 
force using Fnet = ma
Q: And the gravitational force is just the 
same as an object’s weight, right?
A: Absolutely! Though you now know that 
the force - and therefore the weight - will vary 
depending on the distance from Earth.
Q: So - what’s the equation for that?
A: Funny you should ask ...
I guess the gravitational 
field lines are imaginary - they 
don’t really exist ... right?!
The spacing between the 
lines shows you the strength 
of the gravitational field.
The closer together the field lines are, 
the stronger the gravitational field 
is. They’re close together close to 
the Earth, then they spread out - just 
like the light from the bulb you were 
thinking about a couple of pages ago.
The closer together the 
field lines, the stronger the 
field (so the greater the 
acceleration due to gravity).
Close field lines = 
stronger force.
Further apart 
field lines = 
weaker force.
Gravitational 
field has the 
same strength at 
the same radius.
The field lines themselves don’t 
physically exist. The field lines are a tool 
you can use to help you visualize what 
happens to the gravitational field.
732    Chapter 18
how close are the lines?

a. What happens to the surface area of a sphere if 
you double its radius?
FG  =
G m1m2
r2
FG  = - G m1m2 r2
FG  =
G m1m2
r
FG  =
G m1r
m2
f. Here are four equations. In each equation, G is a constant (and a conversion factor) that will make the 
numbers and units work out later on. For each equation, write down whether what happens to the size of 
the gravitational force, FG, when you change r (the distance of the object from the Earth), m1 (the mass of the 
Earth) or m2 (the mass of the object) is what you’d expect in real life. Circle the equation you think is correct.
Hint: F=ma.
You want to work out an equation for the gravitational force that a spaceship experiences at any distance  
from the Earth
b. The gravitational force depends on the distance 
something is from the Earth. If you’re further away, 
will the gravitational force be larger or smaller?
c. The gravitational field gets ‘spread out’ over the 
surface area of a sphere as you get further away, 
in the same way as light does. What do you think 
will happen to the gravitational field strength if 
you double the distance between you and the 
Earth (i.e. double the radius)?
d. What do you think would happen to the 
gravitational force if you double your mass?
e. What do you think would happen to the gravitational 
force if you doubled the mass of the Earth?
In each equation, G 
is a constant that 
makes the units work 
out. So don’t worry 
about units right now.
FG points 
towards the 
Earth and r 
points away. In 
gravitation, it’s 
conventional to 
include a minus 
sign to show 
the directions 
of FG and r 
are opposite 
even though 
this is a scalar 
equation for 
the size of FG.
-
-
-
you are here 4    733
gravitation and orbits

Wrong - if you increase r, then size 
of FG gets larger.
Wrong - if you double r, then the 
size of FG only halves.
Right - Doubling m1 or m2 doubles size 
of FG. Doubling r quarters FG.
a. What happens to the surface area of a sphere if 
you double its radius?
FG  =
G m1m2
r2
FG  = - G m1m2 r2
FG  =
G m1m2
r
FG  =
G m1r
m2
f. Here are four equations. In each equation, G is a constant (and a conversion factor) that will make the 
numbers and units work out later on. For each equation, write down whether what happens to the size of 
the gravitational force, FG, when you change r (the distance of the object from the Earth), m1 (the mass of the 
Earth) or m2 (the mass of the object) is what you’d expect in real life. Circle the equation you think is correct.
Hint: F=ma.
You want to work out an equation for the gravitational force that a spaceship experiences at any distance  
from the Earth
b. The gravitational force depends on the distance 
something is from the Earth. If you’re further away, 
will the gravitational force be larger or smaller?
c. The gravitational field gets ‘spread out’ over the 
surface area of a sphere as you get further away, 
in the same way as light does. What do you think 
will happen to the gravitational field strength if 
you double the distance between you and the 
Earth (i.e. double the radius)?
d. What do you think would happen to the 
gravitational force if you double your mass?
If you’re further away, the gravitational force 
will be smaller.
If you double the radius, you quadruple the 
surface area, as S = 4πr2 and 22 = 4.
If you double the radius, you quadruple the 
surface area that the field will be spread 
out over. So I think that the field strength 
would decrease by a factor of four.
e. What do you think would happen to the gravitational 
force if you doubled the mass of the Earth?
If you double your mass, you double the force, 
as F = ma
If you double the mass of the Earth, you 
double its gravitational attraction to you 
(F = ma). As gravitational forces exist in 
Newton’s 3rd Law pairs, the force that the 
Earth exerts on you must also double.
Wrong - if you increase m2, then size 
of FG gets smaller.
-
-
-
Look back 
at the 
No Dumb 
Questions 
on page 
718 for an 
explanation.
734    Chapter 18
which equation?

Q: But the surface of the Earth is the 
zero point for distance, right? Doesn’t that 
equation go all weird with a zero on the 
bottom when you’re at the surface?
A: r is the distance from the CENTER of the 
Earth, not the distance from the surface of the 
Earth. When you’re at the surface of the Earth, r 
is just the radius of the Earth. And when you’re 
further away, r is your distance from the center.
Q: Doesn’t the force depend on 4πr2
1  rather 
than r21 , as the surface area is 4πr2?
A: The 4π is a constant. Whatever you do to 
r (double it, half it, etc), the 4π doesn’t change. 
So it’s not right to say that the gravitational force 
‘depends’ on the 4π.
Q: What are the units of G?
A: You can work that out ...
v
You’ve realized that equation below 
does all the right things when you 
change the masses and the radius. 
Work out what SI units G must have 
to make both sides of the equation 
have the same units.
Gravitation is an inverse square law
The gravitational force between two objects depends on
r21 . If you double the distance, you decrease the force by 
a factor of 4. Something that behaves like this is said to 
follow an inverse square law.
This is because an inverse is 1 divided by something - in 
this case r21  - and the square part comes from the fact 
that the thing doing the dividing is squared.
FG  =
G m1m2
r2
Thje length of 
r2 is double the 
length of r1. So 
the gravitational 
field strength is 
4 times smaller at 
r2 than it is at r1.
The length of r3 is four times the 
length of r1. So the gravitational 
field strength is 16 times smaller at 
r2 than it is at r1, because 42 = 16
r2
r1
r3
-
Hint: Don’t use Newtons for 
force. Work out more fundamental 
units for force (based on kg, m 
and s) using F = ma
Be very careful with m for mass 
and m for meters!
you are here 4    735
gravitation and orbits

You’ve realized that equation below 
does all the right things when you 
change the masses and the radius. 
Work out what SI units G must have 
to make both sides of the equation 
have the same units.
G is the gravitational constant. 
It makes both the units and 
the numbers work out.
But what IS G?! I don’t 
get what it’s there for!
G is like a conversion factor which 
makes the units and numbers correct.
If you’re working in SI units, FG will be in Newtons, 
m1 and m2 in kg and r in meters. The first job G 
does is to give both sides of the equation the same 
units - as you’ve just worked out.
The second job that G does is to make the 
numbers correct. If you just multiply m1 and m2 
together then divide by r2, the numerical answer 
you get won’t be equal to the force in Newtons.
G is kinda like a conversion factor - a constant that 
makes the numbers correct as well. For this reason, 
G is called the gravitational constant.
FG  =
G m1m2
r2
Units of left hand side:
F = ma
[F] = [m][a] = kg.m
s2
Units of right hand side:
G m1m2
r2
Equation is
Units are [G] [m1][m2]
[r2]
[G].kg2
m2
=
Units are same on both sides, so rearrange to solve for [G]:
kg.m
s2
[G].kg2
m2
=
[G]  = kg.m.m2
s2.kg2
m3
kg.s2
=
=  m3/kg.s2
Work out the units of 
each side individually first.
Write the units out using 
fractions rather than in 
“m/s” form, as it makes 
the algebra easier.
[G] means ‘units of G’
You can rearrange 
units equations just 
like you can rearrange 
other equations.
When you’re working with 
units, it’s safest to put 
dots between them, as you 
may treat ‘kg’ like k × g, 
as if the k and the g are 
different variables.
-
736    Chapter 18
gravitational constant

Jim: Um, not quite. We don’t know what G is in the equation. Well 
I mean, we know its units, but we don’t know its size. If only we 
had a way of working that out.
Joe: Well, we’ve got one equation, and G is an unknown. As long 
as G is the only unknown, we can use the equation to calculate the 
value of G.
Frank: I guess we already know that acceleration due to 
gravity at the Earth’s surface is 9.8 m/s2. That’s gotta give us a 
few things we can use in that equation.
Joe: And I just found the radius and mass of the Earth in a 
textbook. So we know those two things as well. I think that should 
be enough to work out the value of G...
So we can calculate the force 
for any combination of masses 
and distances. That rocks!
b. Use the value for G you worked out in part a to calculate the acceleration due to the Earth’s gravity that a 
spaceship experiences at Pluto’s orbit, which is 6 × 1012 m (1 sd) from Earth. 
a. By considering the acceleration due to gravity at the 
Earth’s surface, use the equation and the ready-bake facts 
to work out the value of G, the gravitational constant.
-
Ready Bake Facts
Mass of the Earth:
5.97 × 1024 kg
FG  =
G m1m2
r2
Radius of the Earth:
6.38 × 106 m
Gravitational force between 
two masses:
-
The minus sign is just a convention to show that FG and r are 
in opposite directions. If you’re working with the SIZE of FG, 
you can leave the minus sign out of your calculations.
you are here 4    737
gravitation and orbits

Do I have to calculate the 
value of G like this every time I 
want to use it? That stinks!
G is a constant that you can 
look up when you need it.
G is a fundamental physical constant. 
It’s not a number you have to remember 
or calculate every time, and we’ve 
included its value in the appendix, so 
you can look it up if you need it.
If you’re taking an exam, the value 
of G will be given in your table of 
information - so you can just look it up 
there and use the value in your equation.
Q: How did people work out the mass of 
the Earth in the first place?
A: Historically, the mass of the Earth was 
worked out from G. G was originally worked 
out from experiments that measured the 
gravitational attraction between large masses, 
like cannonballs.
Q: You mean that it’s not just the Earth 
that attracts things gravitationally?
A: Precisely! Everything that’s made of stuff 
attracts everything else gravitationally. It’s just 
that the effect isn’t very large unless one of the 
objects you’re dealing with has a very large mass 
(like the Earth), so you don’t usually notice.
-
Ready Bake Facts
Mass of the Earth:
5.97 × 1024 kg
FG  =
G m1m2
r2
Radius of the Earth:
6.38 × 106 m
Gravitational force between 
two masses:
b. Use the value for G you worked out in part a to calculate the acceleration due to the Earth’s gravity that a 
spaceship experiences at Pluto’s orbit, which is 6 × 1012 m (1 sd) from Earth. 
G m2
r2
a  =
6.68 × 10-11 × 5.97 × 1024
(6 × 1012)2
=
=  1 × 10-11 m/s2 (1 sd)
a. By considering the acceleration due to gravity at the 
Earth’s surface, use the equation and the ready-bake facts 
to work out the value of G, the gravitational constant.
Make m1 the mass of an object and m2 the mass 
of the Earth. a = 9.8 m/s2 at Earth’s surface.
G m1m2
r2
F  =  m1a  =  
ar2
m2
G  =
9.8 × (6.38 × 106)2
5.97 × 1024
G  =
=  6.68 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2
G m2
r2
a  = 
m1 = 5.97 × 1024 kg m2 = ?
r = 6.38 × 106 m
G m1m2
r2
F  =  m1a  =  
-
The minus sign shows that FG and r are in opposite 
directions. Here, we’ve used the equation without 
the minus sign to calculate the SIZE of FG
738    Chapter 18
G is a constant

Gravitation is an inverse square law. This means that if you double the distance that an object is from 
the Earth, it will only experience a quarter of the gravitational force that it did in its previous position.
But what does an inverse square law look like? A graph will help you visualize it.
b. Draw a graph with the 
distance from the Earth on 
the horizontal axis and the 
gravitational force on the 
vertical axis.
Distance from 
Earth (m)
6.4 × 106
1.28 × 107
1.92 × 107
2.56 × 107
5.12 × 107
a  =
mE is the mass of the Earth.
a. Fill in the values of the 
gravitational field strength 
at a variety of distances from 
Earth. G, the gravitational 
constant, is 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2. 
mE, the mass of the Earth, is 
5.97 × 1024 kg. The radius of the 
Earth is 6.4 × 106 m (rounded to 
2 sd) to make the figures easier.
Hint: look at how the values 
in the table increase...
G mE
r2
G m1mE
r2
F  =  m1a  =  
The minus sign shows that FG and r are in opposite directions. 
Here, we’ve used the equation without the minus sign to 
calculate the SIZE of FG, and therefore the size of a.
you are here 4    739
gravitation and orbits

Displacement 
from 
Earth
Gravitational field strength Plot of gravitational field strength vs. displacement from Earth
(m × 106)
(m/s2)
2.0
4.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
0
0
6.4
12.8
19.2
25.6
51.2
Gravitation is an inverse square law. This means that if you double the distance that an object is from 
the Earth, it will only experience a quarter of the gravitational force that it did in its previous position.
But what does an inverse square law look like? A graph will help you visualize it.
Distance from 
Earth (m)
6.40 × 106
9.72 m/s2 (3 sd)
1.28 × 107
2.43 m/s2 (3 sd)
1.92 × 107
1.08 m/s2 (3 sd)
2.56 × 107
0.608 m/s2 (3 sd)
5.12 × 107
0.152 m/s2 (3 sd)
a  =
mE is the mass of the Earth.
G mE
r2
An inverse square 
relationship falls off rapidly 
as the distance increases.
It’s OK to do this with the scale on a graph 
if the numbers are very large or very small.
You can either calculate each of these 
values individually, or use the inverse square 
relationship (double the distance, quarter the 
force) once you’ve calculated the first value.
b. Draw a graph with the 
distance from the Earth on 
the horizontal axis and the 
gravitational force on the 
vertical axis.
a. Fill in the values of the 
gravitational field strength 
at a variety of distances from 
Earth. G, the gravitational 
constant, is 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2. 
mE, the mass of the Earth, is 
5.97 × 1024 kg. The radius of the 
Earth is 6.4 × 106 m (rounded to 
2 sd) to make the figures easier.
Hint: look at how the values 
in the table increase...
1 Earth radius
2 Earth radii
You need to 
remember to 
square r.
740    Chapter 18
inverse square relationships

You have a problem where the force acting on the 
spaceship isn’t constant - so its acceleration isn’t 
constant and you can’t use equations of motion.
Can you think of a different method you can use 
to calculate the escape velocity?
Now you can calculate the force on the 
spaceship at any distance from the Earth
An astronaut is going from the Earth to the outer reaches of the solar 
system. We’re trying to calculate his escape velocity - the speed he 
needs to be going at so as to not fall back down to Earth again.
You’ve realized that the Earth’s gravitational field must get smaller as you 
move further away from the Earth. This means that the acceleration of 
an astronaut’s spaceship due to the gravitational field isn’t constant - and, 
therefore,  the force that the spaceship experiences isn’t constant either.
The Earth’s gravitational 
field strength drops off 
rapidly with displacement.
Gravitational 
field strength
Displacement
You’ve worked out that the 
gravitational field strength 
follows an inverse square 
relationship. If you double the 
displacement, you quarter the 
strength of the gravitational 
field - and also quarter the 
gravitational force that the 
spaceship experiences.
As the force (and acceleration) 
aren’t constant, you can’t use 
equations of motion to calculate 
the escape velocity.
This is an inverse 
square relationship.
You can only use equations 
of motion when the 
acceleration is constant.
you are here 4    741
gravitation and orbits

Jim: Not so fast. We need to calculate the velocity that the 
astronaut needs to be going at to escape from the Earth.
Joe: Yeah, it’s a problem. All the equations of motion we know 
about are for an object with constant acceleration. But the 
acceleration due to gravity isn’t constant
Frank: Haven’t we dealt with a non-constant acceleration 
before? When we worked out a bobsled’s velocity at the bottom of a 
bumpy hill.
Joe: Yep - the component of the gravitational force accelerating 
the bobsled changed when the steepness of the hill changed. So the 
force wasn’t constant, and since Fnet = ma, the acceleration wasn’t 
constant. How did we fix that again?
Frank: Didn’t we use energy conservation?
Joe: Yeah, we said that the bobsled’s potential energy at the top 
of the slope was transferred to kinetic energy at the bottom of 
the slope - whatever the shape of the slope in between.
Frank: It was just the difference in height that was important.
Jim: Can we do the same for the spaceship? Can we pretend that 
it starts out very far away with lots of potential energy, then “falls” 
back down to Earth?  It’d be symmetrical, right? The velocity 
you need to escape from the Earth would be the same as 
the velocity you end up with when you fall to Earth.
Joe: The change in potential energy is the same size as the change 
in kinetic energy, so we can use K = ½mv2 to calculate the velocity!
Frank: Cool. So we just say Ug = mgh to calculate the change in 
potential energy, and we’re nearly done!
Jim: Um ... I’m not so sure. The ‘g’ in that equation is the 
acceleration due to gravity, isn’t it? But that isn’t constant here!
Joe: Hmm. The equation Ug = mgh originally comes from  
work = force × displacement, doesn’t it. And it works over 
displacements on a scale of a few hundred meters. So can we break 
down the force-displacement graph into little portions of a few 
hundred meters each, calculate the work done for each portion, 
then add them together to get the total work done?
Frank: Or can we try to look up a book to get an equation for the 
gravitational potential energy when you’re far away?
So we know the force on the astronaut’s 
spaceship whatever its displacement from 
the Earth. Sweet!
The trip is SYMMETRICAL. The 
escape velocity is the same as 
what your velocity would be it you 
fell to Earth from way out there.
The total energy 
is conserved.
Potential
Kinetic
Earth
Pluto
v = ?
START
FINISH
Potential
Kinetic
Earth
Pluto
v = ?
START
FINISH
v = 0 m/s
v = 0 m/s
742    Chapter 18
gravitational potential energy

a. According to the ready bake equation, what is the 
value of U when r is very, very large (i.e., infinite)?
b. According to the ready bake equation, what is the value of U at 
the Earth’s surface for a 10.0 kg mass? (The radius of the Earth is 
6.38 × 106 m and its mass is 5.97 × 1024 kg. G is 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2)
c. Comment on your answers.
F
Force
Displacement
x
The potential energy is the area 
under the force-displacement graph
You give an object potential energy, U, by doing work on the 
object against the force of gravity. As Work = F x, close to the 
Earth you can say U = mgh, where mg is the gravitational force 
and h is the object’s change in height.
A visual way of showing this is to say that the potential energy is 
equal to the area under the force-displacement graph.
Ready Bake 
Equation
UG  =
G m1m2
r
-
To save you having to calculate 
the area under the curved graph 
(difficult!) we’ve provided a 
ready-bake equation for the 
gravitational potential energy.
Force
Displacement
F x is work done and is 
equal to the area under the 
force-displacement graph.
If the force is a gravitational force, then 
work done = change in gravitational potential energy.
But if you’re going a long way from the Earth, 
the force changes as the displacement changes. 
This means that it’s not so easy to calculate the 
area under the force-displacement graph - and, 
therefore, not so easy to calculate the change in 
potential energy.
Force changes 
as displacement 
changes.
If you’re taking an exam, you’ll see 
this on your equation sheet.
you are here 4    743
gravitation and orbits

Potential
Kinetic
v = ?
START 
(Earth)
FINISH 
(Pluto)
v = 0 m/s
a. According to the ready bake equation, what is the 
value of U when r is very, very large (i.e., infinite)?
When r is very very large, U = 0 J, as you are dividing 
by a very very large number and r dominates.
At Earth’s surface, r is radius of Earth:
6.67 × 10-11 × 10.0 × 5.97 × 1024
6.38 × 106
G m1m2
r
U  =
=
U  =  -6.24 × 108 J (3 sd)
Weird! Last time, U = 0 at the surface, not at infinity. And 
what’s with the negative number at the Earth’s surface?!
b. According to the ready bake equation, what is the value of U at 
the Earth’s surface for a 10.0 kg mass? (The radius of the Earth is 
6.38 × 106 m and its mass is 5.97 × 1024 kg. G is 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2)
c. Comment on your answers.
You can only measure changes in energy.
If you know the change in potential energy 
between the surface of the Earth and the edge of the 
solar system, you can say that an identical amount of 
kinetic energy must be transferred to get there - then 
use this to work out the escape velocity, as K = ½mv2.
As it’s the change in potential energy that’s important, 
it doesn’t matter what the absolute values you calculate 
are - as long as the change is the same.
It’s like putting an object part-way along a ruler. If one 
end of the object is at the mark that says 2.0 cm and 
the other end is at the 4.0 cm mark, you can see that 
the object is 2.0 cm long. Same goes if your object is 
between the 28.0 cm and 30.0 cm marks. The object is 
still 2.0 cm, long, and where you choose to count from 
on your scale doesn’t affect this.
Ready Bake 
Equation
UG  =
G m1m2
r
-
Didn’t we say before that U = 0 at the 
Earth’s surface - and what’s with the negative 
numbers? The equation must be wrong!
-
-
U = 0 J
U = -6.24 × 108 J
∆U = 6.24 × 108 J
It’s the CHANGE in 
gravitational potential 
energy that allows you 
to do calculations, not 
the absolute values.
Potential
Kinetic
v = ?
v = 0 m/s
FINISH 
(Earth)
START 
(Pluto)
U = 0 J
U = -6.24 × 108 J
∆U = -6.24 × 108 J
∆U will have the same SIZE whichever 
direction you make the trip in, but in one 
direction the change will be positive (as 
you lose kinetic energy) and in the other 
direction the change will be negative (as you 
gain kinetic energy).
744    Chapter 18
measure change

So ... you have your maximum potential energy when r is 
very large. And the equation tells us that U = 0 when r is very 
large. So your maximum potential energy is zero?! Doesn’t that mean 
your potential energy will be negative if you’re not at infinity?
Your have your maximum 
possible potential energy 
when you’re at infinity.
The values you calculate for the 
potential energy will be negative.
The further away you are from the surface 
of a planet, the greater your potential energy. 
Defining U = 0 at infinity - the furthest you 
can possibly be - means that as you gain kinetic 
energy by falling towards a star or planet, your 
gravitational potential energy becomes negative.
But that’s OK - the scale hasn’t changed. The 
change in potential energy between two points 
is still the same. Where you choose to count 
from on your scale doesn’t matter. You just have 
to be careful with minus signs!
If U = 0 at infinity, the equation 
works for any star or planet
Saying that U = 0 at the Earth’s surface is great if 
you’re close to the Earth’s surface, when you can take 
g = 9.8 m/s2 to be a constant. In that context, you’d almost 
always define zero potential energy to be at ground level, 
as this is a common reference point for everything.
But if you’re moving away from the Sun or another planet, 
the Earth’s surface isn’t a good reference point!
U = 0 at infinity. 
Total energy is 
conserved, so as 
you gain kinetic 
energy by falling, 
your potential 
energy becomes 
negative.
So rather than having a different reference point for every one 
of the (estimated) 1022 stars and planets in the universe, it’s 
better to use a common reference point that is the same 
for any star or planet, regardless of its mass and the distance an 
object is from it.
That common reference point is the place where you have 
maximum gravitational potential energy. This has to be 
when you have the maximum possible displacement from 
the Earth - and the Sun - and all the other stars. We call this 
reference point “being at infinity”.
It’s a bit like temperature. On Earth, it’s 
convenient to have a scale defined by the 
freezing and boiling points of water on 
Earth, 0°C and 100°C. But that’s not a 
very universal scale, as the reference point 
depends on you being on Earth.
For temperature, scientists use the Kelvin 
scale, where “absolute zero” is defined 
as the lowest temperature theoretically 
possible. No one has ever reached absolute 
zero - just like no one has ever reached 
infinity - but defining an unchanging 
common reference point like this gives you 
a benchmark you can measure everything 
else against.
you are here 4    745
gravitation and orbits

Head First: So, potential energy, you’ve been 
accused of inconsistency. What’s the bottom line?
Potential energy: The bottom line (or zero 
potential energy) is wherever you want it to be.
Head First: Um... are you implying that even you 
don’t know when you’re equal to zero?!
Potential energy: Yes ...
Head First: And if you don’t know, how on Earth 
am I - or anyone else - supposed to know?
Potential energy: I think you’ve got the wrong 
end of the stick there. You can only measure 
changes in potential energy, not absolute values 
And that means you get to choose where zero 
potential energy is.
Head First: But why’s that useful?
Potential energy: It gives you a reference point 
to measure changes in potential energy against.
Head First: Right. But why suddenly put that 
reference point at infinity? I was perfectly happy 
before, when zero was at the surface of the Earth.
Potential energy: You have to think about the 
bigger picture. When you’re close to the Earth’s 
surface, you can use the simple form of the equation 
Ug = mgh, because the acceleration due to gravity 
- and therefore the gravitational force - is constant.
Head First: But why can’t you do the same further 
away from the Earth?
Potential energy: The gravitational force drops 
off in an inverse square way. So it’s not constant 
- and you need to do more complicated math to 
calculate the change in potential energy.
Head First: I can see that - but it still doesn’t tell 
me why you suddenly want to put zero at infinity 
instead of the Earth’s surface!
Potential energy: What if you’re launching your 
spaceship from the moon, or from Mars, not Earth?
Head First: Um, I guess I put the zero of potential 
energy at the surface of the Moon, or Mars ...
Potential energy: But that’s very inconsistent, isn’t 
it? How are you supposed to compare all these values 
when you keep on changing where your zero is?
Head First: Hmmm. You may have a point. But 
I’m finding the concept of negative potential energy 
difficult. I didn’t think energy was a vector.
Potential energy: I’m not a vector - just like 
temperature isn’t a vector. A temperature of –2°C 
doesn’t point in the opposite direction from a 
temperature of 2°C. The negative sign is just to 
indicate its position on a scale, not a direction.
Head First: What does that mean in practice?
Potential energy: OK, try thinking about it like 
this. Suppose you start at infinity with zero total 
energy, then fall towards the Earth (or another star or 
planet) What happens to your kinetic energy?
Head First: I guess your velocity increases so your 
kinetic energy increases.
Potential energy: Right! But the total energy 
needs to stay the same. So if you start off with 
zero potential energy and gain, say 100 J of kinetic 
energy, your new potential energy must be -100 J.
Head First: OK ... but all these messy negative 
numbers make the math tricker, right?!
Potential energy: I do admit, that’s the down 
side of putting zero at infinity. But as long as you’re 
careful you’ll be OK. You’re dealing with changes 
in potential energy - so going further away from a 
planet is still a positive change - like going from a 
temperature of -40°C to -2°C is a change of 38°C.
Head First: Thank you - that’s much clearer now.
Potential Energy Exposed
This week’s interview:
Potential energy answers 
charges of inconsistency.
746    Chapter 18
potential energy exposed

Use energy conservation to calculate 
the astronaut’s escape velocity
If the gravitational force on the astronaut’s spaceship 
was constant and didn’t drop off with distance, you 
could just use forces and equations of motion to work 
out his escape velocity.
But the gravitational force on the spaceship changes as 
he gets further away, so it’s difficult to do the calculation 
using forces. But you can use energy conservation, 
as the spaceship’s kinetic energy at the start must have 
been transferred to potential energy by the end.
After a spaceship blasts off from the Earth’s surface, its propulsion 
system is switched off.
What is the minimum velocity that the spaceship must have to 
successfully escape from the Earth’s gravitational field so that it can 
reach infinity without falling back down again?
The radius of the Earth is 6.38 × 106 m, and its mass is 
5.97 × 1024 kg. G, the gravitational constant, is 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2
Ready Bake 
Equation
UG  =
G m1m2
r
-
Potential
Kinetic
Earth
Pluto
v = ?
v = 0
If you can escape to infinity, you 
can definitely make it to Pluto!
Energy conservation 
allows you to do 
problems you can’t 
easily do using forces.
It doesn’t matter which 
mass is represented by 
m1 and which is m2 as 
long as you’re consistent.
you are here 4    747
gravitation and orbits

After a spaceship blasts off from the Earth’s surface, its propulsion 
system is switched off.
What is the minimum velocity that the spaceship must have to 
successfully escape from the Earth’s gravitational field so that it can 
reach infinity without falling back down again?
The radius of the Earth is 6.38 × 106 m, and its mass is 
5.97 × 1024 kg. G, the gravitational constant, is 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2
Ready Bake 
Equation
UG  =
G m1m2
r
-
Um, I was just wondering... 
doesn’t the Sun have a 
gravitational field to escape 
from too?
Kinetic at Earth’s surface transferred to potential at infinity.
U  =  Uinfinity - Uearth
U  =  0 - Uearth
G m1m2
r
 ½m1v0
2  =
v0  =  1.12 × 104 m/s  =  11.2 km/s (3 sd)
2 × 6.67 × 10-11 × 5.97 × 1024
6.38 × 106
=
2G m2
r
v0  =
K  =  U
Earth’s surface
Infinity
m1 = spaceship mass
m2 = Earth mass
v0 = ?
v = 0
G m1m2
r
Zero minus a negative number is a positive number, so  U  =
As the mass of the spaceship divides out, 
the escape velocity doesn’t depend on 
the mass.
This equation for the 
gravitational potential energy 
(with U = 0 at infinity) has 
a similar form to the equation 
for the gravitational force.
The escape velocity that ensures you won’t fall back down 
to Earth again after you switch the engine off is 11.2 km/s. 
Pretty fast - but in space there’s no kind of atmosphere, 
and no friction to slow you down!
But the astronaut’s not totally happy with this. He thinks 
that you also need to escape from the Sun’s gravitational 
field! The Sun has around 300000 times more mass than 
the Earth - which will really tell over large distances! You’ll 
have to factor in the change in potential energy due to the 
astronaut’s distance from the Sun changing, as well as his 
distance from the Earth.
John 
spotted a 
problem...
It’s OK if you used the 
value for the gravitational 
potential energy at the 
Earth’s surface that you 
calculated on page $$, but 
dividing out the mass of the 
spaceship is usually easier for 
these types of questions.
748    Chapter 18
the sun has gravity, too

Some time after a spaceship blasts off from the Earth’s surface, its propulsion system is switched off.
What is the minimum velocity that the spaceship must have to successfully escape from both the the Earth’s 
gravitational field and the Sun’s gravitational field so that it can reach infinity without falling back down again?
The radius of the Earth is 6.38 × 106 m, and the mass of the Earth is 5.97 × 1024 kg. The distance from the Earth 
to the Sun is 1.50 × 1011 m. The radius of the Sun is 6.96 × 108 m, and the mass of the Sun is 1.99 × 1030 kg. G, 
the gravitational constant, is 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2
Hint: Start with two sketches, one for the change in potential 
energy due to the Earth’s gravitational field, and the other for 
the change in potential energy due to the Sun’s gravitational field.
Be VERY careful with your variable names, as you will have 
various masses, radii and displacements floating around.
Hint: The total change in potential energy 
is equal to the changes due to the Earth’s 
gravitational field and the Sun’s gravitational 
field added together. Then you can use the 
same method as on the opposite page.
you are here 4    749
gravitation and orbits

Fantastic! Pluto, here I 
come. Oh, but one other 
thing first...
Some time after a spaceship blasts off from the Earth’s surface, its propulsion system is switched off.
What is the minimum velocity that the spaceship must have to successfully escape from both the the Earth’s 
gravitational field and the Sun’s gravitational field so that it can reach infinity without falling back down again?
The radius of the Earth is 6.38 × 106 m, and the mass of the Earth is 5.97 × 1024 kg. The distance from the Earth 
to the Sun is 1.50 × 1011 m. The radius of the Sun is 6.96 × 108 m, and the mass of the Sun is 1.99 × 1030 kg. G, 
the gravitational constant, is 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2
Kinetic at Earth’s surface transferred to potential at infinity.
U  =  Uinfinity - Uearth
U  =  0 - Uearth
v0  =   1.44 × 108  +  1.77 × 109
Earth’s surface
Infinity
m1 = spaceship mass
mE = Earth mass
U = 0
Change in potential energy due 
to Earth’s gravitational field
Change in potential energy due 
to Sun’s gravitational field
Earth’s surface
Infinity
m1 = spaceship mass
mS = Sun mass
U = 0
G m1mE
rE
U = 
rE = Radius of Earth
rfromS = Distance 
         from Sun
G m1mS
rfromS
U = 
Zero minus a negative number is a positive number, so  U  =
-
-
 ½m1v0
2  =
v0  =
K  =  U
G m1mE
rE
G m1mS
rfromS
+
2G mE
rE
2G mS
rfromS
+
G m1mE
rE
G m1mS
rfromS
+
2 × 6.67 × 10-11 × 5.97 × 1024
6.38 × 106
+ 2 × 6.67 × 10-11 × 1.99 × 1030
1.50 × 1011
v0  =
=  4.37 × 104 m/s  =  44.7 km/s (3 sd)
The radius of the sun 
is irrelevant! It’s the 
distance you are from the 
Sun that’s important.
The mass of the 
spaceship divides out.
750    Chapter 18
to infinity...

We need to keep up with our astronaut
Before sending our astronaut off to Pluto, we need to get 
some communication satellites in place to keep in contact 
with him. These satellites need to be in a certain type of 
orbit around the Earth called a geostationary orbit.
A geostationary orbit is one where the satellite always stays 
over the same point on the Earth’s surface.
Here’s the 
South Pole.
The satellite is 
above this point 
on the Earth.
Earth and 
satellite both 
rotating in the 
same direction
We’re looking up at 
the Earth from the 
bottom of the globe.
We need the period of the satellite to 
be 24 hours since that’s the time it 
takes for the Earth to rotate once.
A GEOSTATIONARY 
orbit has a period of 
24 hours, the same 
as the period of the 
Earth’s rotation.
The satellite is moving... it just remains 
above the same point on the Earth’s surface 
because the Earth is rotating with the same 
period as the satellite.
This allows you to use the satellite for Earth 
communications by aiming your transmitters 
and receivers at the same point in the sky.
If the Earth and the satellite 
both have the same period, 
the satellite stays over the 
same point.
Ground-based 
transmitters can 
send and receive 
signals via satellite.
The picture 
isn’t to scale.
you are here 4    751
gravitation and orbits

Jim: Um ... I think the moon takes longer to go around the Earth 
than that. Don’t you get a full moon only once a month?
Frank: But the moon goes round once per 24 hours, right? It’s not 
there during the day, is it?
Joe: If that’s your argument, then the sun goes round once every 
24 hours, too! And we know that’s not right - it takes a whole year 
for the Earth to go round the sun.
Frank: Hmmm, good point.
Jim: The reason the moon and the sun appear to move across the 
sky is because the Earth’s rotating around on its axis once a day. 
That’s where day and night come from.
Frank: Oh, right. That’s why we’re supposed to make the 
communication satellite have a period of 24 hours, isn’t it? So it can 
match rotation with the Earth and always be above the same point?
Joe: But we don’t know how to calculate the period of the orbit. 
Actually, we don’t know how to calculate anything for orbits!
Jim: Hmm. I’m sure that Pluto must take longer to orbit the sun 
than the Earth does. Maybe the period of the orbit depends on your 
displacement from the thing you’re orbiting.
Frank: I’m not so sure. Remember when we were working with the 
hamster wheel? Didn’t every part of the wheel rotate with the same 
angular velocity? That means every part had the same period, too, 
right? So the distance from the center of the wheel didn’t affect the 
period of the wheel.
Joe: But all the parts of the hamster wheel were joined together, so 
they have to go around with the same period. Planets and satellites 
aren’t joined together. So the period might depend on the distance 
from the center after all.
Frank: Hmm, that’s a good point, too.
Jim: I’m sure that far away objects must take longer to orbit.
Joe: But how can we work that out?
A day is the time it 
takes the Earth to spin 
once on its own axis
A year is the time it 
takes the Earth to orbit 
once round the sun.
This is easy, right? The moon goes round once 
every 24 hours. So we just need to put the comms 
satellite the same distance away from the Earth.
752    Chapter 18
days and years

Wouldn't it be dreamy if there was a 
way of connecting the distance from the 
Earth with the period of an object’s orbit. 
But I know it’s just a fantasy ...
you are here 4    753
gravitation and orbits

The centripetal force is provided by gravity
An object that travels along a circular path must have a net 
force acting on it to provide a centripetal force. This force 
must act towards the center of the circle.
In chapter 15, you learned to equate the size of the 
centripetal force, Fc = mrω2 with the net force. Here, the net 
force on the satellite is provided by the gravitational force 
from the Earth.
Equate the 
CENTRIPETAL 
FORCE with the 
GRAVITATIONAL 
FORCE to solve 
orbit problems.
FG  = -Gm1m2
r2
When you’ve equated the centripetal 
force with the gravitational force, you’ll 
have the job of making some substitutions 
so that your equation is in terms of T, the 
period instead of ω, the angular velocity.
Then you can calculate the radius of the 
satellite’s orbit for any period - including 
the 24 hour geostationary period you’re 
interested in.
There will be only one 
radius where the satellite 
has a period of 24 h and 
a geostationary orbit.
DIRECTION: Gravitational 
force acts towards the 
center of the circle. This 
means that it can provide 
a centripetal force.
Ready Bake Facts
Mass of the Earth:
5.97 × 1024 kg
Radius of the Earth:
6.38 × 106 m
Gravitational constant
G = 6.67 × 10-11
       m3/kg.s2
Use the ready-bake 
facts to help you solve 
the problem.
SIZE is given by the 
equation (remember the 
negative sign is convention).
If you make sure 
both are pointing 
towards the center 
of the circle, then 
they’ll both have 
the same sign.
754    Chapter 18
centripetal force from gravity

a. Work out a general equation for the size of r, the radius of a satellite’s orbit in terms of T, the period of 
the satellite, G the gravitational constant and me the mass of the Earth (don’t insert any values, just work 
out an equation).
b. Calculate the height that the satellite must be above the Earth’s surface to have a period of 24 hours.
d. What happens to a satellite’s kinetic and potential energy as it goes round a circular orbit?
c. If the radius of a satellite’s orbit is doubled, what happens to the period of its orbit? (Please do this 
question using proportion.)
You can look up equations 
involving T in the appendix.
you are here 4    755
gravitation and orbits

a. Work out a general equation for the size of r, the radius of a satellite’s orbit in terms of T, the period of 
the satellite, G the gravitational constant and me the mass of the Earth (don’t insert any values, just work 
out an equation).
G msme
r2
msrω2  =
6.67 × 10-11  × 5.97 × 1024 × 864002
4 × π2
=
Gravitational force provides centripetal force for orbit.
Fc  =  Fnet
G me
r3
ω2  =
b. Calculate the height that the satellite must be above the Earth’s surface to have a period of 24 hours.
Make a substitution for ω.
f  = 1
T
ω  =  2πf
and
ω  = 2π
T
G me
r3
=
2π
T
2 
G me
r3
=
4π2
T2
G meT2
4π2
r3  =
G meT2
4π2
r  = 3
3
=  4.22 × 107 m (3 sd)
Distance from surface  =  r - re  =  4.22 × 107 - 6.38 × 106  =  3.59 × 107 m (3 sd)
d. What happens to a satellite’s kinetic and potential energy as it goes round a circular orbit?
They remain constant because the satellite’s height and speed remain constant 
(even though its velocity is changing direction all the time)..
c. If the radius of a satellite’s orbit is doubled, what happens to the period of its orbit? (Please do this 
question using proportion.)
G meT2
4π2
r3  =
Everything in the equation is constant apart from r and T.
If r is doubled, left hand side of equation increases 2 × 2 × 2 = 8 times.
This means that T2 is 8 times larger than before.
So T is   8  =  2.83 (3 sd) times larger than before.
The radius in the gravitational force equation 
is always the distance from the center of 
the Earth, not the surface. So you need to 
calculate the difference at the end.
24 hours is 24 × 60 × 60 = 86400 s
This is called Kepler’s 3rd 
Law. It shows you how the 
radius and period of an 
orbit are related.
Both forces points towards the 
center of the circle, so you can 
lose the ‘conventional’ minus sign.
We’ve used 
ms for the 
saatellite’s 
mass, but the 
symbol doesn’t 
really matter, 
as the mass 
divides out!
756    Chapter 18
work it out

Q: What was that ∛ thing all about in the math bit 
over there?
A: It’s a cube root symbol. You know how a square root is 
what you do to find out what number you need to square to 
get the number you started with?
Q: Yeah ...
A: Well, a cube root is what you type into your calculator 
to work out what number you’d need to cube to get the 
number you started off with.
Q: So if I have r3 = something then I can say that 
r = ∛something
A: Yes. It works in the same way that a square root does.
Q: So ... I noticed that the mass of the satellite 
divided out when I made the centripetal force equal to 
the gravitational force. That kinda thing has happened a 
few times now.
A: Yeah, good spot. That’s because the gravitational 
force depends on the object’s mass, m. The gravitational 
force provides the centripetal force, Fc = mac. So when you 
equate them, you get an ‘m’ on each side of your equation, 
which divides out.
Q: So why can’t I just equate the gravitational field 
strength with the centripetal acceleration and skip the 
step of dividing out the mass?
A: You could ... but dealing with forces is a good habit to 
get into.
Q: Why should I deal with forces, not accelerations?
A: There are a lot of other sources of centripetal force 
- and the size of the force may not depend on the mass of 
the object.
Q: When might the size of the force not depend on 
the mass of the object?
A: Well, an electron will follow a curved path when it 
goes through a magnetic field because of its electric charge, 
not its mass. You don’t have to worry about that right now 
because it’s in the electromagnetism part of your course. 
But if you get used to equating the centripetal force with 
the source of the net force, you’ll find dealing with that a 
whole lot easier when you get there.
With the comms satellites in 
place, it’s Pluto (and beyond)
The communications satellites are in place in their 
geostationary orbits nearly 4000 km above the 
Earth’s surface.
And the astronaut it good to go.
Stand by for blasting off to Pluto - and beyond!
you are here 4    757
gravitation and orbits

758
Question Clinic: The “gravitational force = centripetal force” Question
Another classic way of getting you to do 
something with centripetal force is to give you a problem 
to do with orbits to solve. The big thing here is to equate the 
centripetal force with the gravitational force that provides it 
- then follow through with the math.
Be careful not to use the wrong 
equation! The equations for the gravitational 
force, gravitational field (i.e., acceleration due to gravity) 
and the gravitational potential energy (with 0 at infinity) 
all look very similar. Remember that gravitational force 
follows an inverse square law - and that its equation 
involves the masses of both the objects involved.
2. A communications satellite is to be put into orbit around the Earth.
Work out a general equation for T, the period of a satellite in terms 
of r the radius of its orbit, G the gravitational constant and me the 
mass of the Earth.
Work out the height that the satellite must be above the Earth’s 
surface to have a period of 24 hours.
If the radius of the satellite’s orbit is doubled, what happens to the 
period of its orbit?
a.
b.
c.
Buzzwords to get 
you thinking about 
circular motion
Make sure you use the mass of 
the Earth - not the mass of 
the sun or anything else on your 
table of information!
This tells you 
which letters you 
should include.
This means don’t 
use numbers yet.
Notice that you’ll 
have to subtract 
the radius of the 
Earth from the 
radius of the 
orbit to get the 
distance above 
the surface!
This is a typical question where you need to 
use proportion in an equation you already know 
(in this case, the equation from part a).
You’ll need 
to convert 
this time to 
seconds to make 
all the units 
work through 
correctly.

you are here 4    759
gravitation and orbits
Units
Falling
Circumference
Inverse square law
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Inelastic collision
Force
Frequency
Special points
Experiment
Period
Elastic collision
Centripetal force
Weight
Time
Angular frequency
Energy
Gravitational field
Component
Tension
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Pulley
Radians
Impulse
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Mechanical energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Angular velocity
Volume
Velocity
Power
Friction
Radius
Freefall
Kinetic energy
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Internal energy
Area
Mass
Gravitational 
field
The strength of a gravitational field at a point 
is the same as the acceleration of an object in 
freefall at that point. Gravitational field lines help 
you to visualize the gravitational field strength.
Inverse 
square law
If a quantity (for example the gravitational field 
strength) is proportional to 1
r2 then the quantity 
follows an inverse square law.
I can deal with escape 
velocity, orbits and 
gravitational potential!

Gravitational field
The gravitational field strength 
tells you the acceleration 
something would experience if it 
was allowed to freefall at that 
distance from the Earth.
The gravitational field strength 
follows an inverse square law.
Inverse square law
If a quantity follows an inverse 
square law, it drops off by 1/r2 
as you increase the distance from 
its source. This means that if you 
double the distance, there’s a 
fourfold decrease in the quantity.
Examples: light, sound, 
gravitational field strength.
CHAPTER 18
Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 18 under your belt and 
added some problem-solving concepts to 
your toolbox.
Gravitational
field lines
Gravitational field lines point in 
the direction something would move 
in if it was allowed to freefall 
from that point.
The closer together they are, the 
stronger the gravitational field is 
at that point.
Gravitational potential
Another name for gravitational 
potential energy. The term is most 
commonly used when you’ve defined 
U = 0 to be at infinity.
The gravitational potential drops off 
as 1/r  -  if you double the distance, 
you halve the gravitational potential.
Geostationary orbit
An orbit with a period of 24 
hours. So-called because if the 
satellite is over the equator and 
rotating in the same direction as 
the Earth, it stays over the same 
spot on the ground.
Calculations with 
gravitational potential
The change in potential energy is equal to 
the change in kinetic energy.
Be very, very careful with minus signs! 
Because U = 0 at infinity, all other values 
of gravitational potential will be negative. 
But the CHANGE in potential energy is the 
same wherever you define zero to be.
Calculations with orbits
The net force that provides the 
centripetal force for an orbit is the 
gravitational force.
Equate the gravitational force with the 
centripetal force, and the answers will 
drop out of your equation.
Ready Bake 
Equations
UG  =
G m1m2
r
-
FG  =
G m1m2
r2
-
760    Chapter 18
physics toolbox

this is a new chapter    761
Oscillations (part 1)
19
Round and round
Wow... everything looks so 
different since I turned these 
directions right side up.
Things can look very different when you see them from 
another angle.   So far you’ve been looking at circular motion from above - but what 
does it look like from the side? In this chapter, you’ll tie together your circular motion and 
trigonometry superpowers as you learn extended definitions of sine and cosine. Once 
you’re done, you’ll be able to deal with anything that’s moving around a circle - whichever 
way you look at it.

Welcome to the fair!
After your success at hamster training, you’ve 
got another client who needs your help. Jane’s 
opening up a new booth at the local fair, and 
wants to build a duck-shooting competition - with 
a twist.
At the moment, she’s got a duck moving around 
in a circle. But she expects the game to be 
popular, and the rotating duck takes up space that 
she could use to pack in more paying customers.
This one’s tricky, and every 
time I try it, things don’t look 
right. Can you help me out?
Jane, ready to become a 
fairground millionaire... or 
at least a hundred-aire.
There’s a duck mounted 
on a stick...
...that rotates 
around in a circle.
Jane wants to project the 
image of the duck on a screen, 
and use light guns instead of 
pellets or BBs. Much safer!
So instead, Jane wants to let players shoot at a digital version of 
the duck, displayed on a giant flat screen. Each player feels 
like they’re shooting at a real rotating duck, but Jane can just 
monitor the screen to run the game.
Jane’s got all the equipment: a duck mounted on a rotating 
stick, a screen, and light guns that can shoot at the screen. The 
screen even registers where the gun hits, and which player shot 
the duck. Your job is the hard part, though: where should the 
screen display the duck as it moves around in a circle?
This chapter builds on 
what we did in chapter 16, 
with the hamster trainer.
762    Chapter 19
ducks, guns, and circular motion

Reproduce the duck on the display
The real duck sits on a pole at eye level and 
travels around in a circle. But your job is to 
figure out where on Jane’s big screen the digital 
duck should appear. Every time Jane tries to get 
the screen working, things look funny.
We know the real duck’s moving along the 
edge of a circle, which is 3.00 meters wide. We 
also know that the duck goes around the entire 
circle once every 2.50 seconds. The duck starts 
in the middle on the far side from the player, 
and travels around the circle counter-clockwise.
Draw a player’s-eye view of 
the game, and describe what 
the player sees from their side 
perspective as the duck goes 
around in a circle.
The player is much further away 
than there was space to show 
in the picture. The player is 
actually standing somewhere 
off the left hand page!
Make sure to write down any 
important times and distances 
from the moment the game 
starts that might help you draw 
the digital duck on the screen.
Duck 
starts 
here
Wheel rotates 
counter-clockwise.
Wheel is 3 m wide.
Wheel goes round once 
every 2.50 seconds, so 
has a period of 2.50 s.
Player stands on 
this side.
The player is actually 
further away, but we’ll 
get to that in a minute.
This is where Jane’s screen will 
be. The player shoots at the 
screen with a light gun.
Space for your drawing.
3.00 m
T = 2.50 s
you are here 4    763
oscillations (part 1)

Draw a player’s-eye view of 
the game, and describe what 
the player sees from their side 
perspective as the duck goes 
around in a circle.
The player is much further away 
than there was space to show 
in the picture. The player is 
actually standing somewhere 
off the left hand page!
Make sure to write down any 
important times and distances 
from the moment the game 
starts that might help you draw 
the digital duck on the screen.
Jim: Yeah, if you’re looking at a circle from the side, you don’t really 
see the round parts at all. And the radius of the circle is 3.00 meters ...
Joe:  ... er, the radius is 1.50 meters. The diameter’s 3.00 meters.
Jim: Oops, sorry, you’re right. The diameter’s 3.00 meters. Jane’s 
screen is wider than that, so we can show the duck at its actual size.
Joe: Cool. We just have to work out how fast the duck’s going, left-right-
left-right, etc. Then we can move the duck across the screen at the 
correct velocity.
Frank: Well, we know the duck takes 2.50 seconds to go around once.
Jim: So the duck’s got a period of 2.50 s. We know the radius of the 
circle, too. So we can work out the duck’s speed, just like we did for the 
hamster trainer.
Joe: You know, I’m a bit worried about the light gun. There might be 
some problems there. Here’s what I’m thinking...
The player sees the duck starting out in the center of their view. 
Then after 0.625 s, the duck’s on their left side. After 1.25 s the 
duck is back in the center. After 1.875 s, the duck’s on the right. 
Then after 2.50 s, it’s back where it started in the center.
The player doesn’t see a circle at all. The duck just appears to move 
side to side (though the player would see different sides of the 
duck as the duck turns around the circle). 
0 s - starts 
in center, 
going left.
1.50 m
1.50 m
0.625 s
1.25 s
1.875 s
2.5 s - 
back where 
it started.
So the duck just appears to go back-
and-forth, from one side to the other.
764    Chapter 19
back and forth

Joe’s worried about registering hits on the screen. The distance from the player to the duck is smaller 
when the duck is at the front of the circle than it is when the duck is at the back of the circle. So the 
distance that the light from the light gun travels is different depending on the duck’s position.
Player
40.00 m
3.00 m
Duck on roundabout
This might mean that a hit when the real duck’s at the front of the circle may register before a hit at 
the back of the circle. But the screen for the digital duck is flat, so will register all hits at the same time. 
Do you think that’s a problem we’ll need to worry about?
Front of 
roundabout is 
3.00 m closer 
than back.
a. A duck is on the edge of a roundabout with a diameter of 3.00 meters. The roundabout goes round once 
every 2.50 seconds. What is the duck’s speed?
b. The duck is to be zapped with a light gun by a player standing 40.00 m away from the front of the 
roundabout. How much longer does it take the light to cover the 43.00 m to the back of the roundabout 
compared to the 40.00 m to the front of the roundabout? (The speed of light is 3 × 108 m/s.)
c. Do you think the player will notice this extra time that it takes for a hit to register?
Ready Bake Fact
Speed of light:
3.00 × 108 m/s
The equations you’ll need to use 
for this are in chapter 16.
you are here 4    765
oscillations (part 1)

Joe’s worried about registering hits on the screen. The distance from the player to the duck is smaller 
when the duck is at the front of the circle than it is when the duck is at the back of the circle. So the 
distance that the light from the light gun travels is different depending on the duck’s position.
Player
40.00 m
3.00 m
Duck on roundabout
This might mean that a hit when the real duck’s at the front of the circle may register before a hit at 
the back of the circle. But the screen for the digital duck is flat, so will register all hits at the same time. 
Do you think that’s a problem we’ll need to worry about?
Front of 
roundabout is 
3.00 m closer 
than back.
a. A duck is on the edge of a roundabout with a diameter of 3.00 meters. The roundabout goes round once 
every 2.50 seconds. What is the duck’s speed?
Period of circle,   T = 2.50 s
Frequency,    f  =
1
2.50 =  0.400 Hz
1
T =
Use equation v = rω; work out ω from frequency
v  =  rω  =  r × 2πf
=  1.50 × 2 × π × 0.400
=  3.77 m/s (3 sd)
Difference in distance = 43.00 - 40.00 = 3.00 m
Time it takes light to cover this:
speed  = distance
time
time  = distance
speed
=
3.00
3.00 × 108
=  1.00 × 10-8 s (3 sd)
1x10-8 s is very short - 10 nanoseconds! Players won’t notice the time difference between 
hitting the duck at the front of the circle and hitting the duck at the back of the circle. 
So we can just make the flat screen register hits instantly.
b. The duck is to be zapped with a light gun by a player standing 40.00 m away from the front of the 
roundabout. How much longer does it take the light to cover the 43.00 m to the back of the roundabout 
compared to the 40.00 m to the front of the roundabout? (The speed of light is 3 × 108 m/s.)
c. Do you think the player will notice this extra time that it takes for a hit to register?
Ready Bake Fact
Speed of light:
3.00 × 108 m/s
You can also do this by using 
C = 2πr to calculate the 
distance the duck travels 
in 1 reolution, then dividing 
the distance by the period
766    Chapter 19
where’s the duck?

The real duck that you are reproducing 
on the screen takes 2.50 seconds for 
exactly 1 revolution. That’s a total 
distance of 6.00 m from the player’s 
perspective. But we just calculated 
that the duck’s speed is 3.77 m/s.
a. How can it possibly take the duck 
2.50 s to do a round trip of 6.00 m 
from the player’s perspective when 
the duck has a speed of 3.77 m/s?
b. Describe qualitatively the speed 
that the player observes the duck 
moving at for any ‘special points’ you 
can spot on the circle. Illustrate this 
with a sketch.
Jim: So the duck starts in the center, moves 1.50 m to the left at 
3.77 m/s, goes 3.00 m to the right at 3.77 m/s and back to the left 
at 3.77 m/s. Should be pretty straightforward.
Joe: Wait... that doesn’t sound right. If the duck travels 6.00 m in 
total at a speed of 3.77 m/s, wouldn’t it take the duck  less than 
2.00 s to get back to the start?
Jim: How do you mean?
Joe: Well, we know the duck moves from the center to the left, 
1.50 m, then all the way to the right, another 3.00 m, and then 
back to the center, another 1.50 m.
Frank: Right. So that’s 6.00 m total.
Joe: But let’s say that the duck goes at 3.00 m/s. I chose that 
speed because it’s easier to do mental arithmetic with it! Anyway, 
the trip across the circle and back—6.00 m—would take exactly 
2.00 s. But 3.77 m/s is faster than 3.00 m/s, so the duck should 
take less than 2.00 s to go around once.
Jim: But the duck actually takes 2.50 s to go round once - that’s 
more than 2.00 s, not less! Something weird’s going on ...
Does your answer 
make sense? Always 
check your work!
So we know the duck’s speed is 
3.77 m/s, and the light arrives more-
or-less instantly. Great!
you are here 4    767
oscillations (part 1)

The real duck that you are reproducing 
on the screen takes 2.50 seconds for 
exactly 1 revolution. That’s a total 
distance of 6.00 m from the player’s 
perspective. But we just calculated 
that the duck’s speed is 3.77 m/s.
a. How can it possibly take the duck 
2.50 s to do a round trip of 6.00 m 
from the player’s perspective when 
the duck has a speed of 3.77 m/s?
b. Describe qualitatively the speed 
that the player observes the duck 
moving at for any ‘special points’ you 
can spot on the circle. Illustrate this 
with a sketch.
So although the duck goes at a constant speed, 
the player only sees the left-right component of its 
velocity. Because the player’s got a side-view, right?
The duck is going at 3.77 m/s round the circumference of 
the circle, not across the circle’s diameter
The player viewing the duck from a side view. When the duck’s in 
the middle, it looks like the duck is moving faster - at 3.77 m/s.
But when the duck is at the ends of the circle, most of its 
motion is along the player’s line of sight: forward or backward. 
So to the player, it looks like the duck’s speed is closer to 0 m/s 
at those points.
a.
b.
Slow
Slow
3.77 m/s
3.77 m/s
Circumference  =  2πr  =  2 × 3.14 × 1.50  =  9.42 m
The round trip is 9.42 m, not 6.00 m, and takes 2.50 s 
for a duck traveling at 3.77 m/s.
The player only sees one component of 
the duck’s position and velocity.
If you are the player, the side-on view that you have 
makes it look like the duck’s moving left and right along a 
straight line. You don’t notice the duck going forward and 
backward at all. You only sees the left-right component 
of the duck’s displacement and velocity vectors.
So from your perspective, the velocity the duck appears 
to have only depends on the left-right component of its 
velocity vector. This means that the duck appears to move 
rapidly across the center of its path, but slowly at each 
end of the circle.
768    Chapter 19
a limited view

Imagine a projector, 
right where the 
player is, facing the 
rotating duck.
Assume that when the light from 
the projector gets to the duck, 
the duck’s shadow is projected 
STRAIGHT onto the display.
‘Beam of light’ which 
duck passes through.
The duck’s shadow is 2D, 
and moves left and right 
across the screen
The screen for the game is 
TWO-DIMENSIONAL
Even though the duck is three-dimensional, a projection of 
that duck is only two-dimensional. Imagine you’re standing 
next to a projector, and you can only watch the shadow of 
the duck cast upon a screen.
As the duck moves across the center of the circle, it’s mostly 
moving  left to right (or right to left). The duck’s shadow 
moves quickly across the center of the screen.
As the duck turns around at each end of the circle, it’s 
moving mostly back-to-front (or front-to-back). But the 
screen only shows you left-to-right movement, so the duck’s 
shadow moves slowly at the ends.
The same is true for the virtual duck in your game. 
The duck is displayed on a two dimensional screen. 
You don’t notice the forward-backward component 
of the duck’s displacement, only the left-right 
component. You see a projection of the duck’s 
displacement vector.
The projector is 
just an analogy. The 
actual game would 
have a TV screen, 
not a projector.
you are here 4    769
oscillations (part 1)

Your job is to work out what the duck’s displacement vector does as time goes on, so you know where to plot the 
duck on the screen. The circle the duck’s attached to has a diameter of 3.00 m and a period of 2.50 s.
Use the pictures below, plus the fact that the angular velocity of the roundabout is constant, to sketch a graph 
of how the duck’s  left-right component (plotted on the vertical axis) varies with the angle θ (measured in radians 
and plotted on the horizontal axis) for one complete revolution (2π radians).
Mark the  values at special points in the duck’s motion on your sketch. Look for points where the duck is at an 
extreme in displacement - for instance, at zero, or at the maximum in either direction. Write the times that these 
points would occur at, too.
Player is way 
over in this 
direction.
Points on the circle 
are PROJECTED 
across onto your axes.
θ is measured counter-
clockwise from the 
horizontal, as the 
circle is rotating 
counter-clockwise.
The duck’s 
halfway 
through a 
revolution 
when it 
reaches here.
The circle is 
split up into 24 
equal segments.
Use the period of 
2.50 s to work this out.
Player’s left
Player’s right
770    Chapter 19
sketch a graph

Just draw this the best you can. Use your 
ruler to mark off the horizontal-axis in 
24 equal segments, like the circle.
You need to do the 
graph title, axis 
labels, etc. yourself.
Make the player’s 
left the positive 
direction.
Displacement 
is zero when 
θ = 0.
Radians
Radians are a way of measuring angles 
that’s especially useful for working 
with circles. There are 2π radians in 
1 revolution. Think of other angles in 
terms of ‘fractions of ‘2π.
π
3
0, 2π
π
π
4
π
2
π
6
3π
2
You’ll probably find the 
note you made in chapter 
16 helpful when you’re 
thinking about this exercise.
you are here 4    771
oscillations (part 1)

Your job is to work out what the duck’s displacement vector does as time goes on, so you know where to 
plot the duck on the screen. The circle the duck’s attached to has a diameter of 3.00 m and a period of 2.50 s.
Use the pictures below, plus the fact that the angular velocity of the roundabout is constant, to sketch 
a graph of how the duck’s  left-right component (plotted on the vertical axis) varies with the angle θ 
(measured in radians and plotted on the horizontal axis) for one complete revolution (2π radians).
Mark the  values at special points in the duck’s motion on your sketch. Look for points where the duck is at 
an extreme in displacement - for instance, at zero, or at the maximum in either direction. Write the times 
that these points would occur at, too.
2π
π
The 24 equal segments make 
a complete 2π rotation.
3π
2
π
2
θ (radians)
Displacement (m)
1.50
-1.50
0.00
Plot of left-right component of displacement vs. angle for duck-shooting game
Halfway round is 
an angle of π.
This is a special 
point because it 
is a maximum.
This is a special point 
because it is the maximum 
negative displacement
You know these values 
because the wheel has 
a radius of 1.50 m.
2.50 s
1.25 s
0.625 s
1.875 s
Period is 2.50 s so one 
cycle takes 2.50 s.
Period is 2.50 s so 
half a cycle takes 
1.25 s, quarter of a 
cycle 0.625 s, etc.
772    Chapter 19
find the special points

When you’re playing the game, you observe only the 
duck going left and right, because you see only the 
left-right component of the duck’s displacement.
So we know what the duck does...
We’re about to use right-angled triangles 
to figure out the duck’s displacement at 
any time. Can you think of how right-
angled triangles might relate to circles?
Duck 
starts 
here
The player 
sees the duck 
doing this as 
time goes on.
You know that the 
duck is back at the 
start after 2.50 s. 
So if you put time on 
the horizontal axis, 
this point is 2.50 s.
x
t
Player’s left.
Player’s right.
The extremes 
of motion are 
1.50 m from 
the center in 
each direction.
Although the shape of our graph is correct, 
the only exact values we know are at the 
extremes, when the duck is at its maximum 
left or right displacement, or when the duck 
has zero displacement.
To get the screen working, we need to know 
exactly where the duck is at any given time... 
and that means we need an equation for the 
duck’s displacement.
...but where exactly is the duck?
What the duck does will 
still be the same SHAPE, 
regardless of the period 
of the roundabout.
Duck has constant angular 
velocity, so always sweeps 
out the same angle in the 
same time.
θ = ωt
θ is the angle, ω is the angular speed.
With linear quantities, you can write: 
	
distance = speed × time
So with angular quantities, you can write 
an equivalent equation for the angle, θ: 
	
θ = ωt
Though as your graph is drawn fairly accurately, 
you can read off values from it. But it would 
be better to have an equation to give an exact 
value for the displacement at any time.
ω is radians per second.
So ω =
θ
t
θ = ω t
θ = 0 at t = 0 
so θ = ωt
you are here 4    773
oscillations (part 1)

Any time you’re dealing with a component 
vector, try to spot a right-angled triangle
The duck is always distance r away from the 
center of the circle. The duck rotates counter-
clockwise with a constant angular velocity ω.
The duck’s image on the screen is the 
projection of the component of its 
displacement parallel to the screen.
Displacement 
vector (origin is 
center of circle).
r
Duck starts 
in center of 
screen.
Display
You can say what the angle θ is at any time, 
using the equation θ = ωt. But what you really 
want to know is the duck’s displacement from 
the center at any time.
The projection of the duck’s displacement 
from the center is always vertical (the way we’ve 
drawn it here).We’ll call this displacement 
vector from the horizontal axis y, as shown 
below. Its projection on the screen is the y-
component of the radius.
θ
As time 
goes on, θ 
increases.
θ is measured 
counter-clockwise 
from the horizontal.
r
When you play the game, you see only the component 
of the duck’s displacement vector that’s parallel to the 
screen. If you also draw in a perpendicular component, 
you can form a right-angled triangle with the parallel 
component, perpendicular component, and the radius.
1
2
y
In math and physics, 
a vertical distance 
or displacement is 
sometimes called y, to 
distinguish it from x.
Here, we’re looking DOWN on the duck from 
above. The player is over to the left a long 
way away, and we’re projecting what they see 
onto this display.
Because of the way this is drawn, the screen 
looks vertical. That’s because the player’s left 
is at the “top” and the player’s right is at 
the “bottom” - just like the “sharpen your 
pencil” you did on page 771.
Player’s left
Player’s right.
This is the “angular equivalent” 
of distance = speed x time.
ω is radians per second.
So ω =
θ
t
θ = ω t
θ = 0 at t = 0 
so θ = ωt
Projection of duck on 
screen is y-component 
of the radius.
y
774    Chapter 19
look for right-angled triangles

θ
r
y
x
If we also draw in x, the x-component of the 
displacement, we can form a right-angled 
triangle using the y-component, the x-
component and the radius.
When you draw a right-angled triangle like 
this, its hypotenuse is always the radius.
θ
r
y
x
RIGHT-ANGLED 
TRIANGLE!
3
Now we can use trigonometry to calculate the 
length of y in terms of r and θ, because sin(θ)  =
y
r
And if you know what the length of y is in terms of 
θ, you can work out what y is at any time, by making 
the substitution θ = ωt. This tells you exactly where 
on the screen to draw the duck at any time.
4
When you do a projection 
by drawing a right-angled 
triangle inside a circle 
like this, the triangle’s 
HYPOTENUSE is always 
the RADIUS of the circle.
Hypotenuse = r
So you can use sin(θ) to work out 
the length of the y-component.
The y-component is 
opposite θ and r is 
the hypotenuse.
The sine function outputs a scalar, 
not a vector, so the equation gives 
you the length of y
you are here 4    775
oscillations (part 1)

a. The roundabout’s diameter is 3.00 m and the 
duck’s velocity is 3.77 m/s.
What is the duck’s angular velocity, ω?
Your job is to use the right-angled triangle 
you’ve spotted to calculate the size of the 
y-component of the duck’s displacement 
at any time. This gives you the position of 
the duck on the screen at any time.
b. Assume that at t = 0 s, θ = 0. Write down an equation for θ in terms of ω and t (where θ is measured in radians). 
Use this to fill in the ‘t’ column of the table on the opposite page.
c. Write down an equation for the length of the y-component of the duck’s displacement with respect to the 
angle θ, where θ is measured in radians.
Use this equation and your answer to part b. to write down an equation for the length of y with respect to t.
θ
r
y
x
So you can use sin(θ) to work out 
the length of the y-component.
The y-component is 
opposite θ and r is 
the hypotenuse.
776    Chapter 19
use the triangles

e. Use your table to draw a graph of the 
y‑component of the duck’s displacement vs. time.
Angle, θ 
(radians)
Time, t 
(s)
Length of duck’s 
y-component (m)
0
π
12
π
6
π
4
π
3
π
2
π
8
You should give your graph 
a title and label its axes.
You should choose a suitable 
scale for each axis.
d. Fill in the table with values for t and the 
y‑component of the duck’s displacement 
for the given angles, where θ is in radians.
θ is in radians. This means your calculator 
should be in radians mode too.
you are here 4    777
oscillations (part 1)

Your job is to use the right-angled triangle you’ve 
spotted to calculate the y-component of the duck’s 
displacement at any time. This gives you the position 
of the duck on the screen at any time.
a. The roundabout’s diameter is 3.00 m and the 
duck’s velocity is 3.77 m/s. What is the duck’s angular 
velocity, ω?
b. Assume that at t = 0 s, θ = 0. Write down an 
equation for θ in terms of ω and t (where θ is 
measured in radians). Use this to fill in the ‘t’ column 
of the table.
c. Write down an equation for y, the y-component 
of the duck’s displacement with respect to the 
angle θ, where θ is measured in radians. Use this 
equation and your answer to part b. to write down 
an equation for y with respect to t.
d. Fill in the table with values for t and the 
y‑component of the duck’s displacement for the 
given angles, where θ is in radians.
e. Use your table to draw a graph of the 
y‑component of the duck’s displacement vs. time.
Angle, θ 
(radians)
Time, t 
(s)
Length of duck’s 
y-component (m)
0
0
0
0.104
0.388
0.156
0.574
0.208
0.750
0.313
1.06
0.417
1.30
0.625
1.50
π
12
π
6
π
4
π
3
π
2
π
8
v  =  rω
a.
ω  = vr = 3.77
1.50 =  2.51 rad/s (3 sd)
o
h
=
sin(θ) =
y
r
y  =  r sin(θ)    and substitute in θ  =  ωt  
c.
y  =  r sin(ωt)
b.
Graph of length of y-component vs. time for duck
y-component of 
displacement (m)
Time (s)
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
0.00
ω is radians per second. So ω = ∆θ
∆t
∆θ = ω∆t
θ = 0 at t = 0 so θ = ωt
778    Chapter 19
solutions

OK, so the duck’s position is y = rsin(ωt). But 
we’ve only drawn quarter of the graph! What about 
bigger angles further round the circle? They can’t be 
part of a right-angled triangle!
The method for calculating the length of y hasn’t changed. You still 
form a right-angled triangle using the y-component, x-component and 
length of the radius. Then you can calculate the length of y using the 
new definition of sin(θ) - which tells you the duck’s position on the 
screen for any angle.
We need wider definitions 
for sine and cosine.
Up until now, we’ve thought of sine 
and cosine applying only to angles 
that are part of a right-angled 
triangle. Now we need to extend their 
definitions to cover all the angles that 
can be swept out inside a circle.
The definition of sin(θ) is the 
RATIO of y and r, even if θ isn’t 
part of a right-angled triangle.
θ
r
y
x
θ
r
y
x
New definition:
sin(θ) = y
r
For angles smaller than a right-angle, we 
formed a right-angled triangle using r, the 
radius of the circle y, the y-component of the 
radius and x, the x-component of the radius.
Then we projected the radius vector onto a 
line parallel to the y-axis and used the equation 
sin(θ)=
y
r  as usual to calculate y, the duck’s 
distance from the center of the screen,
But now we need to deal with the other 
angles further round the circle, which are 
larger than 2
π radians (90°). If we can’t deal 
with these angles, we don’t know where to 
draw the duck on the screen.
The definition of sine still comes from the 
ratio of the y-component to the length of the 
radius, and is the same equation as before:
	
sin(θ) =
y
r
This works for ANY 
angle in a circle, not 
just an angle that’s 
part of a right-angled 
triangle.
Our original definition of sin(θ) 
lets us deal with only this quarter 
of the duck’s circle.
The new 
definition lets 
us handle the 
rest of the 
circle as well.
Because θ = ωt
you are here 4    779
oscillations (part 1)

θ
y
r
x
θ
r
x
y
I guess that when the 
y-component is negative, sin(θ) 
is negative as well. That fits in 
with the graph we drew, right?
2π
π
The 24 equal segments make 
a complete 2π rotation.
3π
2
π
2
θ (radians)
Displacement (m)
1.50
-1.50
0.00
Plot of left-right component of displacement vs. angle for Lucky Ducky game
For angles larger than π (larger than 180°), the 
y-component of the displacement points in the 
other direction, so has a negative sign. This 
means that sin(θ) is also negative.
To make sure the signs work out OK, r is 
always treated as positive because it’s pointing 
away from the center of the circle. This is why r 
is in italics - in the context of this definition it’s 
a scalar with a (positive) size and no direction.
If the y-component 
is negative, sin(θ) is 
also negative.
r is always taken to be 
positive as it’s pointing 
away from the center 
of the circle.
These values of the 
y-component are 
all negative. That’s 
because we defined 
the player’s left 
as the positive 
direction, and their 
right as negative.
If θ is more than 
halfway around, then 
the y-component will 
be negative.
This is our graph 
from page 768.
sin(θ) is negative when the y-component is negative.
The sines of these two angles 
have the same value, as the 
y-components have the same 
size and sign.
r is still a vector that you 
can draw on your circle 
diagram - but only its size is 
used in the definition of sine.
780    Chapter 19
negative y-component = negative sin(θ)

Q: So an angle doesn’t need to be in a 
right-angled triangle for it to have a sine?
A: That’s right. Our new extended 
definition of sine says that if you have a 
vector that starts at the origin, and you 
measure the angle θ that it makes with the x-
axis, sin(θ) is the y-component of the vector 
divided by the radius. 
Q: But why is it useful to be able to 
calculate the sine of any angle? Isn’t the 
sine only interesting when there’s a right-
angled triangle involved?
A: The sine of larger angles is crucial 
when you have circular motion, like in the 
duck-shooting game. In the game, we 
need to know the y-component of the 
duck’s displacement vector. So we need to 
calculate the sine of the angle that the duck 
makes with the x-axis. 
Q: So how did you decide which way 
around to put the axes?
A: It was just the way it came out when 
we drew the aerial view of the player and 
the duck on the circle. We made the player’s 
left the positive direction, and their right the 
negative direction. You could have done it 
the other way, and the effect would be the 
same. You’d just have positive values for the 
player’s right, instead of their left.
Q: I’ve heard people talking about a 
“sine wave” before, but never knew what 
they meant. Did I just draw a sine wave?
A: Yes, you did! And it’s called a wave 
because the pattern repeats itself again 
and again if you keep on going around and 
around for more than one revolution. 
 
Q: In the “Sharpen your pencil” on 
page 771, I didn’t have to calculate any 
sines for angles larger than a right-angle, 
because I just projected across from the 
points on the circle. How would I actually 
calculate values for the y-components?
A: Your calculator is able to work out the 
sine of any angle you give it. Just make sure 
the calculator’s measuring the angle the 
same way as you are (in degrees or radians)
Is there any way to think 
about the sine of a large angle 
using a right-angled triangle?
For every large angle, you can find 
a new right-angled triangle.
If you have a radius vector and a y-component 
vector, you can form a right-angled triangle 
using the x-axis as the third side.
One of the angles in this new right-angled 
triangle will have a sine of y
r , which is the 
same size as the sine of your angle, θ.
Then you can work out the value of the angle 
in the right-angled triangle. Look out for the 
angle in the right-angled triangle and the large 
angle θ adding up to a “nice” angle, like π 
(180°) or 2π (360°).
θ
y
r
x
This angle is 
2π - θ.
The sine of this angle = y
r
which is the same 
SIZE as sin(θ).
Look at the direction of the y-component 
to work out the SIGN of your answer.
you are here 4    781
oscillations (part 1)

Duck 
starts 
here
The wheel 
still rotates 
counter-
clockwise.
Wheel goes round once 
every 2.50 seconds.
Here’s the first player. 
This is the part we 
already worked out.
Jane wants the second 
player on this side, so 
they won’t distract 
the first player.
Let’s show Jane the display
We’re all set to give Jane our equation, 
y = r sin(ωt) and help her get her screen 
working. Time to start raking in the profits...
...but Jane’s got a new idea, and it’s going to 
take some more work.
The second player sees the 
duck start here. But what 
does the duck do then?
The second player sees 
the duck projected on 
this second screen.
Looks great. But I forgot to 
mention something... I think we 
need to allow two players per game. 
Twice the money, right?
Remember that the 
players are actually much 
further away from the 
game than this.
Player 1
Player 2
3.00 m
y = r sin(ωt)
782    Chapter 19
display the display

The second player is facing in a different direction. 
They’re standing π
2 radians (90°) further around 
the circle, clockwise, than the first player.
The second player sees the x-component 
of the duck’s displacement
θ
r
y
x
Player 2 sees 
the x-component 
of the duck’s 
displacement.
Player 2 is looking in 
this direction.
Player 2’s left
Player 2’s right
Center of screen 2.
This means that the second player 
doesn’t see the y-component of 
the duck’s displacement. Instead, 
the second player only sees the 
x-component of the duck’s 
displacement.
The first player only saw 
the y-component of the 
duck’s displacement.
Duck is here.
a. This time, you’re interested in x, the length of the x-
component of the duck’s displacement. Write down 
an equation for x in terms of r and θ. (The duck starts 
at θ = 0).
Make Player 2’s left the positive 
direction, like we did for Player 1.
c. Sketch a graph that shows how y, the length of the y-component of the duck’s displacement varies with θ. 
Compare and contrast this graph with the one you drew in part b, and note any similarities and differences.
You may find 
it helpful to 
draw a sketch.
b. Sketch a graph of how x varies with θ for one 
complete revolution of the circle, radius r. Be sure 
to mark any special points.
Sketch these 
two graphs 
one above the 
other with 
the same scale.
Use this space to explain the similarities and differences.
This is the projection that player 1 sees.
you are here 4    783
oscillations (part 1)

c. Sketch a graph that shows how y, the length of the y-component of the duck’s displacement varies with θ. 
Compare and contrast this graph with the one you drew in part b, and note any similarities and differences.
We need a wider definition 
of cosine, too
Just like there’s a wider definition of sine, 
there’s also a wider definition of cosine, which 
you’ve just worked out. It’s very similar to the 
wider definition of sine, except that it involves 
the x-component: cos(θ)  = x
r
The sign of cos(θ) is the same as the sign of 
the x-component.
New definition:
cos(θ) = x
r
The definition 
of cos(θ) is 
the ratio of x 
and r, even if 
θ isn’t part of 
a right-angled 
triangle.
θ
r
y
x
cos(θ) has the same sign 
as the x-component.
a. This time, you’re interested in x, the length of the x-
component of the duck’s displacement. Write down 
an equation for x in terms of r and θ. (The duck starts 
at θ = 0).
Make Player 2’s left the positive 
direction, like we did for Player 1.
b. Sketch a graph of how x varies with θ for one 
complete revolution of the circle, radius r. Be sure 
to mark any special points.
θ
y
x
r
a
h
=
cos(θ) =
x
r
x  =  rcos(θ)
The graphs are similar, except that player 2’s is 
shifted along by π
2 because they are further round 
the circle by an angle of π
2.
The duck starts in the center for the first player, 
but at a maximum for the second player.
Sine and cosine are related because they both involve 
one component and the hypotenuse.
r
-r
x
θ
2π
π
3π
2
π
2
Sketch these two 
graphs one above 
the other with 
the same scale.
r
-r
y
θ
2π
π
3π
2
π
2
784    Chapter 19
redefining cosine

Sine starts at zero.
Cosine starts at 
its maximum value.
sine and cosine are related to each other
The second player sees the x-component of the duck’s 
displacement, x = r cos(ωt), as the duck moves round the circle, 
while the first player sees the y-component: y = r sin(ωt).
The graphs of sine and cosine are closely related. They’re 
exactly the same shape, in fact, except that cosine is “ahead” 
of sine by π
2 . In our game, that’s because the second player’s 
vantage point is π
2  ahead of the first player’s.
A cosine graph starts with the maximum value of the variable 
at the origin, and a sine graph has a value of 0 at the origin.
Displacement
time
x = r cos(ωt)
y = r sin(ωt)
2π
π
2
3π
2
π
r
-r
θ = ωt
cosine is ahead 
of sine by π
2
Values of θ at 
these ‘special points’.
2.50 s
Sine and cosine 
have the same wave 
shape, but start in 
different places.
Maximum value of 
displacement is r.
1.25 s
you are here 4    785
oscillations (part 1)

The maximum value of your 
graph is called the amplitude.
The maximum deviation from the center 
that your variable can have is called the 
amplitude of the graph or equation.
Looks like the sine and cosine 
graphs are both the same height when 
you draw them next to each other.
The AMPLITUDE 
is the maximum 
deviation from the 
center of your sine 
or cosine graph.
Here, you know that the amplitude of the 
displacement-time graph is r, the radius of 
the circle. So you know that the extremes of 
the graph have to be +r and -r.
You can also use the amplitude to work out 
an equation for your graph. The maximum 
value that sine or cosine can have is 1. So to 
have a graph where the maximum value is r, 
you have to multiply the sine or cosine by r.
That’s why your equations have the form 
y = r sin(ωt) and x = r cos(ωt).
This is the amplitude 
of your graph.
Maximum value of 1.
Maximum value of r.
This also means that your two graphs both 
have the same height - because they have the 
same amplitude.
786    Chapter 19
amplitude

Head First: So, sine, it’s been a while since we first 
met back in chapter 9, but it’s good to have you back 
today to discuss these latest revelations. Or should 
that be revolutions?!
sine: Ha, that’s right. I do cover far more angles 
than you thought I could... but I don’t see why that’s 
such a big deal.
Head First: It’s not a big deal, not really, just a bit... 
unexpected! I’d never have thought that an angle 
larger than a right angle could even have a sine.
sine: Yeah, I kinda understand how you feel. It’s 
like finding out that an old friend has a whole other 
secret life. Though my extended definition isn’t really 
all that different from the one you had before.
Head First: Hmm... before, I thought of you as 
having to do with the ratio of particular sides in a 
right-angled triangle. But now I guess we know that 
angles that can’t possibly be in a right-angled triangle 
can still have a sine.
sine: Well, I’m still the ratio of two lengths. That 
part of your definition hasn’t changed.
Head First: But those lengths aren’t part of a right-
angled triangle, anymore.
sine: But they are very well-defined lengths, and 
you can use them to form a right-angled triangle! If 
you’re dealing with an angle in a circle, t: a vector 
going from the center to the edge of the circle. Then 
the x-component is one side, and the y-component is 
the other side.
Head First: That’s all fine, I suppose... but how do 
I work out which side is the opposite and which is the 
adjacent?
sine: Well, angles in physics are always measured 
counter-clockwise from the horizontal. If your 
angle’s smaller than a right angle, sine is the ratio 
of the y-component and the radius. And my friend 
cosine is the ratio of the x-component and the radius.
Head First: Well, sure, that’s what we already knew. 
But when you start having the sine of angles larger 
than a right angle... that’s when it gets a bit hairy.
sine: But I’m still the same! I’m still the ratio of the  
y-component and the radius.
Head First: I guess you are... though that means 
you’re not as exclusive as you once were, doesn’t it?
sine: Yeah, sadly, there will always be two different 
angles that have the same value of sine.
Head First: And that can be a downer, can’t it? I 
mean, we’ve seen you looking negative recently.
sine: That’s true. I’ll be negative for any angle 
larger than halfway around, as the y-component of 
the radius vector will point down, not up.
Head First: And then there’s your friend cosine. 
He’s negative at different times from you, isn’t he? 
Doesn’t that make it difficult for you to work together 
sometimes?
sine: Not really. We’re both aware of when 
the other is going to be positive or negative. Just 
remember that in the top-right quadrant (where the 
angle is less than a right angle) we’re both positive. 
Then you can work out which direction is positive for 
each of us and take it from there.
Head First: Thank you, sine. I think we already 
knew more about you than we thought we did.
Sine Exposed
This week’s interview:
Sine revisits our studio.
Sine Exposed
This week’s interview:
Sine revisits our studio.
you are here 4    787
oscillations (part 1)

Let the games begin!
The equations y = r sin(ωt) and x = r cos(ωt) 
work perfectly. Jane plugs them into her screens, 
and the customers are already lining up. Who 
doesn’t love rotating ducks and light guns?
Even better, you’ve come up with general 
equations. If Jane ever wants to change the 
game, maybe by using a different size of wheel 
that spins at a different rate, the equations will 
still work. She can just change the values for r  
and ω, and she’s good to go.
y
t
r
-r
2.50 s
x
t
r
-r
2.50 s
x
t
r
-r
2.50 s
Player 2: x = r cos(ωt)
Player 1: y = r sin(ωt)
Amplitude = r
θ = ωt
This is what the player 
2 sees, projected from 
their perspective.
Here, we’ve turned round 
the player 2’s graph so you 
can compare the sine and 
cosine graphs.
This is what player 1 
sees, projected from 
their perspective.
788    Chapter 19
general equations rock!

How would you sketch a velocity-time graph 
and calculate the value of the duck’s velocity 
from each player’s point of view?
Jane’s got another request: 
What’s the duck’s velocity from 
each player’s point of view?
Hey, I wanna be able to track the 
duck better. Can we have its current 
velocity from each player’s point of 
view displayed on their screens?
Just when you thought the duck-shooting odyssey was 
over, Jane’s come up with another feature request. Now 
she wants to show the value of the duck’s velocity from 
each player’s point of view on the display.
Looks like it’s time to get out our calculators and 
pencils again.
Before, you calculated that 
the duck’s linear velocity as 
it travels round the circle is 
3.77 m/s. So that’s got to 
some into it somewhere.
you are here 4    789
oscillations (part 1)

You can get an equation for 
the velocity by thinking about 
component vectors - right?
Get the shape of the velocity-time graph 
from the slope of the displacement-time graph
The easiest way to draw a sketch of the velocity-
time graph is to use the slope of the displacement-
time graph.
This works because velocity is rate of change of 
displacement, v  = dx
dt .
Therefore:
A large positive slope on the displacement-time 
graph corresponds to a large positive velocity.
Zero slope on the displacement-time graph 
corresponds to zero velocity.
A small negative slope on the displacement-time 
graph corresponds to a small negative velocity.
And so on.
v
t
Increasing 
value. 
Increasing 
gradient.
x
t
Graphs for a falling object 
(constant acceleration)
v
t
x
t
Constant 
gradient.
Constant 
value.
Velocity is constant 
at all times, so always 
has the same value. 
So the velocity-time 
graph is a flat line.
Graphs for Alex the cyclist 
(constant velocity)
Displacement-time
Displacement-time
Velocity-time
Velocity-time
You already moved between the displacement and 
velocity in chapter 6, for graphs of an object 
with a constant velocity, and an object with 
constant acceleration.
Component vectors are fine here...
You could work out an equation for the duck’s 
velocity using component vectors. Each player sees 
only one component of the duck’s velocity. If the 
duck is moving directly towards you or away from 
you, you don’t notice its velocity at all. And if the 
duck is in the center, you see it moving with its 
linear velocity, v.
...but it’s quicker to get an equation for 
the velocity directly from your graph!
If your velocity-time graph has a “standard shape” 
and you know its period, you’ll be able to work out 
an equation for the velocity using the amplitude of 
the graph...
We talked about 
this at the end of 
chapter 6.
790    Chapter 19
shape from slope

a. The displacement-time graph for player 1 is shown on the top graph. Use the slope of this displacement-
time graph to sketch the duck’s velocity-time graph underneath it. Add extreme values to both graphs where 
appropriate (the circle’s diameter is 3.00 m, its period is 2.50 s, and the duck’s linear velocity is 3.77 m/s).
b. Annotate any special points on your graphs to explain why these points occur where they do.
c. What kind of graph does your velocity-time graph resemble in terms of its shape? Use this to write down 
an equation for vy, the y-component of the velocity in terms of v (the duck’s linear velocity), ω, and t.
vy (m/s)
t (s)
y (m)
t (s)
You’ll need 
to express θ 
in terms of 
ω and t.
You’ll need to 
think about 
the amplitude 
of your graph 
(see page 786).
d. What is the value of the duck’s velocity from player 1’s point of view at t = 0.90 s?
Look back at how 
we worked out the 
equation for r earlier 
in this chapter if you 
get stuck.
you are here 4    791
oscillations (part 1)

a. The displacement-time graph for player 1 is shown on the top graph. Use the slope of this displacement-
time graph to sketch the duck’s velocity-time graph underneath it. Add extreme values to both graphs where 
appropriate (the circle’s diameter is 3.00 m, its period is 2.50 s, and the duck’s linear velocity is 3.77 m/s).
b. Annotate any special points on your graphs to explain why these points occur where they do.
vy (m/s)
t (s)
y (m)
t (s)
Zero slope on displacement-
time graph means zero velocity.
Maximum positive slope on 
displacement-time graph means 
maximum positive velocity.
Maximum negative slope on 
displacement-time graph means 
maximum negative velocity.
1.5
-1.5
2.5
1.25
0.625
1.875
3.77
-3.77
c. What kind of graph does your velocity-time graph resemble in terms of its shape? Use this to write down 
an equation for vy, the y-component of the velocity in terms of v (the duck’s linear velocity), ω, and t.
The shape looks like a graph of cos(θ), because the graph starts at the maximum value.
The maximum value of cosine is 1, but the maximum value of my graph is v = 3.77 m/s. 
So my graph has an amplitude of v.
And also, θ = ωt, which I can substitute into my equation:
vy  =  v cos(θ)
vy  =  v cos(ωt)
d. What is the value of the duck’s velocity from player 1’s point of view at t = 0.90 s?
vy  =  v cos(ωt)  =  3.77 × cos (2.51 × 0.90)  =  -2.39 m/s (3 sd)
v  =  rω
ω  = vr = 3.77
1.50 =  2.51 rad/s (3 sd)
This equation only 
works when θ is in 
radians, so make sure 
your calculator is in 
the correct mode.
792    Chapter 19
find the special points

But didn’t we say before that the 
definition of sine involved the y-component? 
How come we’ve ended up with a cosine graph 
from the y-component of the velocity?
The velocity vector is part of 
a different triangle.
If you work out the value of vy, the y-
component of the velocity vector, using 
a right-angled triangle, you get the 
answer vy = v cos(θ). That works out the 
same as vy = v cos(ωt), as θ = ωt. 
θ
r
y
x
In circular motion, 
the velocity vector is 
PERPENDICULAR to 
the displacement vector.
θ
r
vy
θ
vx
v
vy is part of a 
triangle with 
hypotenuse v.
y is part of a 
triangle with 
hypotenuse r.
vy
vx
v
θ
The velocity vector 
triangle has been spun 
so that you measure 
θ counter-clockwise 
from the horizontal.
Now, cos(θ) involves 
the x-component, 
which it always will 
when θ is measured in 
this way.
cos (θ) = x
r
sin(θ) = y
r
only apply when θ is 
measured counter-clockwise 
from the horizontal.
The wider definitions of sine and cosine only hold 
true if the angle θ is measured counter-clockwise 
from the horizontal. So to check the velocity 
component vector triangle, we have to rotate it 
so that θ is measured counter-clockwise from the 
horizontal.
This makes vy lie along the x-axis as the side adjacent 
to θ. As cosine involves the ratio of the side that lies 
along the x-axis and the hypotenuse, the equation 
vy = v cos(ωt) makes sense.
you are here 4    793
oscillations (part 1)

794    Chapter 19
success
2.39 m/s
Player 1
Player 1
2.91 m/s
Player 2
Sweet! Business is pouring in. I’m 
cutting you in on 10 percent of the 
profits... we’re gonna be rich together!
The game is complete!
This time, the duck-shooting odyssey really is over. The 
game is an overnight fairground success, and Jane’s 
even starting to opening franchises around the country, 
with thousands and thousands of people playing the 
game every day!
Queue 
Here To 
Play!

Units
Falling
Circumference
Inverse square law
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Inelastic collision
Force
Frequency
Special points
Experiment
Period
Elastic collision
Centripetal force
Weight
Time
Angular frequency
Energy
Gravitational field
Component
Tension
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Pulley
Radians
Impulse
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Mechanical energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Amplitude
Angular velocity
Volume
Velocity
Power
Friction
Radius
Freefall
Kinetic energy
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Internal energy
Area
Mass
Now I can deal 
with circular motion 
- from any angle!
Amplitude
The maximum deviation from the center that 
your variable can have is called the amplitude 
of your graph or equation.
you are here 4    795
oscillations (part 1)

Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 19 under your belt and 
added some problem-solving concepts to 
your toolbox.
CHAPTER 19
New definitions for 
sine and cosine
If you measure θ counter-
clockwise from the horizontal:
sin(θ)  = y
r
cos(θ)  = xr
Equation of a sine 
or cosine graph
General form is:
	
x = A sin(θ)
	
x = A cos(θ)
where A is the amplitude (the 
maximum value that x can have). 
Working out an 
equation or graph
The amplitude is the maximum 
value that the variable can have.
Use the substitution θ = ωt.
The thing returns to the start 
after 2π radians, or 1 period.
Sine graph
Value is 0 at θ = 0.
θ
Amplitude
x
x
t
A
Period, T
2π
π
x = A sin(θ)
x = A sin(ωt)
A
Amplitude
Cosine graph
Value is maximum at θ = 0.
θ
x
x
t
Amplitude
Period, T
2π
π
x = A cos(ωt)
Amplitude
A
A
x = A sin(θ)
You can plot 
sine and cosine 
graphs againt 
θ or against t.
796    Chapter 19
physics toolbox

this is a new chapter    797
Oscillations (part 2)
20
Springs ‘n’ swings
Yes, it’s lovely to be here, 
but I’ve heard all his stories a 
thousand times over. I wish he wasn’t 
quite so repetitive.
What do you do when something just happens over 
and over?   This chapter is about dealing with oscillations, and helps 
you see the big picture. You’ll put together what you know about graphs, 
equations, forces, energy conservation and periodic motion as you tackle 
springs and pendulums that move with simple harmonic motion to get the 
ultimate “I rule” experience ... without having to repeat yourself too much.

Get rocking, not talking
You’ve heard of talking to your plants, but you ain’t seen 
nothing yet! Anne’s been in touch to tell you about the 
latest sensation that’s rocking the gardening world - her 
newly-patented Plant Rocker.
Anne has only patented the idea - the design is up to you!
Patent number 910 - Plant Rocker
A spring-operated horticultural device.
Removes the need to talk to plants.
Rocks the plant gently with a frequency of 0.750 Hz.
Direction of rocking motion doesn’t matter.
Amplitude / size of rocking motion doesn’t matter.
Here’s the patent - d’ya 
think you can help?
Anne’s three 
favorite plants have 
different masses.
The plant rocker needs to work for 
three different masses of plant
Anne has three favorite plants that she wants to rock, but 
they’re all different sizes (and different masses).
Your design will need to work for all three plants - and Anne 
insists that each of the plants needs its very own rocker.
The plants must be 
rocked individually 
in three separate 
plant rockers.
798    Chapter 20
plant rockers

Anne would like to use a spring to make the plant rocker. 
She’d start it rocking by pulling back the spring then letting 
go so that it oscillates. The direction that the plant rocks 
in doesn’t matter and the amplitude of the rocking (the 
maximum displacement of the plant from the equilibrium 
position in the center) isn’t important either.
However, Anne is very insistent that the plant rocker must have 
a frequency of 0.750 Hz.
Time to imagine what it’s like to ...
A spring will produce regular oscillations
Once you pull back 
and let go, the 
spring moves the 
plant to and fro.
Spring 
attached to 
wall and cart.
Cart with low-
friction wheels.
 
BE the plant
Your job is to imagine 
you’re the plant, to 
get an ‘inside 
perspective’ 
on how the 
spring-powered 
plant rocker 
works. Each picture 
is taken from a 
different part of the 
plant rocker’s ‘cycle’. 
 
Draw the force and 
velocity vectors in 
the boxes and write 
a brief description of 
what’s going on beside 
each picture.
Maximum 
displacement in 
either direction.
Equilibrium 
position
Plant 
starts 
here.
Once the plant 
returns to here, it’s 
completed one cycle.
Spring is 
stretched.
Spring is 
compressed.
Spring is at its 
‘natural length’.
Plant has just 
changed direction.
Force
Velocity
Force
Velocity
Force
Velocity
Force
Velocity
Force
Velocity
2
5
4
1
3
Brief description
Brief description
Brief description
Brief description
Brief description
If the force or 
velocity is zero, 
write ‘zero’ in 
the box.
you are here 4    799
oscillations (part 2)

Any time you stretch or compress a spring away 
from its equilibrium position, the spring exerts 
a force in the opposite direction from the 
displacement. 
When you pull the plant to the left and let go, the 
force that the spring exerts on it accelerates 
the plant to the right. As the spring becomes less 
stretched, it exerts a smaller force. This continues 
until the spring is back at its equilibrium position. 
There is no net force on the plant when the spring is 
in the equilibrium position.
 
BE the plant - SOLUTION
Your job is to imagine 
you’re the plant, to 
get an ‘inside 
perspective’ 
on how the 
spring-powered 
plant rocker 
works. Each picture 
is taken from a 
different part of the 
plant rocker’s ‘cycle’. 
 
Draw the force and 
velocity vectors in 
the boxes and write 
a brief description of 
what’s going on beside 
each picture.
Maximum 
displacement in 
either direction.
Equilibrium 
position.
Plant 
starts 
here.
Once the plant 
returns to here, it’s 
completed one cycle.
Spring is 
stretched.
Spring is 
compressed.
Spring is at its 
‘natural length’.
Plant has just 
changed direction.
Force
Velocity
Force
Velocity
Force
Velocity
Force
Velocity
Force
Velocity
2
5
4
1
3
Brief description
Brief description
Brief description
Brief description
Brief description
Zero.
Zero.
Zero.
Zero.
Zero.
If the force or 
velocity is zero, 
write ‘zero’ in 
the box.
Spring exerts force 
to right. Plant not 
moving yet.
No force from 
spring when plant in 
equilibrium position.
Spring exerts 
force to left. 
Plant not moving.
No force from 
spring when plant in 
equilibrium position.
Spring exerts 
force to right. 
Plant not moving.
With no net force, the plant continues with the 
same velocity, overshoots the equilibrium 
position and begins to compress the spring. As 
the spring gets shorter and shorter, it exerts a 
larger and larger leftwards force on the plant, 
slowing the plant down. The plant is briefly 
stationary at the maximum displacement.
 Then the plant accelerates to the left, passes 
through the equilibrium position, overshoots 
and ends up back where it started - a complete 
cycle of motion.
800    Chapter 20
be the plant

Displacement from equilibrium and strength of spring affect the force
You know how the plant rocker works qualitatively. Now it’s 
time to be quantitative and start working out some values.
The force that the spring exerts depends on:
a. Use the equation Fs = -kx to work out the 
units of k, the spring constant (in kg, m, s, etc).
d. Do you think there are any other variables that would change the period?
c. Use the equation Fs = -kx to explain whether you think using a stronger spring (with a larger spring 
constant) will have an effect on the period.
b. The plant rocker is to have a frequency of 
0.750 Hz. What is its period?
This is summed up by the equation Fs = -kx, 
where F is the force exerted by the spring, x is 
the displacement from the equilibrium position 
and k is the spring constant, a measure of the 
strength of the spring. There’s a minus sign 
in the equation because the force is in the 
opposite direction from the displacement. This 
relationship is known as Hooke’s Law.
Fs = -kx
Use a minus sign to show that the force 
the spring exerts in in the opposite 
direction from the displacement.
The change in the spring’s length. 
The greater the displacement from 
equilibrium, the greater the force. 
The strength of the spring. 
The stronger the spring, 
the greater the force.
If you double the 
displacement from 
equilibrium, you 
double the force.
F
x
F
x
F
x
Force exerted 
by spring.
Spring constant
Displacement 
from equilibrium 
position.
Kinetic energy is a capital K; the spring 
constant is a small k. Take care not to 
mix them up.
you are here 4    801
oscillations (part 2)

a. Use the equation Fs = -kx to work out the 
units of k, the spring constant (in kg, m, s, etc).
If you have a strong spring and a weaker spring and pull them both back the same displacement at the 
start, the strong spring will accelerate the plant more rapidly, because a large k means a large force.. 
Onvce the plant’s moved through the equilibrium position, it’ll also decelerate the plant and then pull it 
back in the opposite direction more quickly. So I think a stronger spring will lead to a shorter period.
F = ma, so if the plant is more massive it’ll accelerate less when you pull it back. So it won’t move so 
quickly and the period will be shorter. The amount you pull the plant back may also affect the period?
d. Do you think there are any other variables that would change the period?
c. Use the equation Fs = -kx to explain whether you think using a stronger spring (with a larger spring 
constant) will have an effect on the period.
b. The plant rocker is to have a frequency of 
0.750 Hz. What is its period?
F  =  -kx
ma  =  -kx
k  =  - max
[k]  =  [x]
[m][a]
[k]  =  
m
kg.m/s2
[k]  =  kg/s2
Period, T, is number of seconds per cycle. 
Frequency, f, is number of cycles per second.
T  = 1
f =
1
0.750=  1.33 s (3 sd)
Q: Why do we want to calculate the 
force that the spring exerts on the plant? 
A: Any time you’re dealing with forces, it’s 
good to start with a free body diagram and 
work out the net force (like you did when you 
were ‘being’ the plant).
Q: How do you know that doubling the 
spring’s displacement from equilibrium 
doubles the force?
A: By experimenting with springs! There 
was a bit of this back in chapter 11 when we 
were dealing with how scales measure your 
weight.
Q: So how would you measure a 
spring constant? Surely springs don’t 
come with one written on?
A: A strong spring with a large spring 
constant will stretch less than a weaker 
spring when you apply the same force to it 
by hanging the same mass from it. 
 
So if you measure the spring’s displacement 
from equilibrium (i.e. its change in length) 
for a variety of masses, you can plot a graph. 
You can use the graph to calculate the spring 
constant. You’ll calculate a spring constant 
later on in this chapter. 
 
Q: Are the extremes and the 
equilibrium position ‘special points’?
A: Yes. When the displacement is at its 
maximum, the force is also at its maximum 
(though they’re in opposite directions). The 
velocity is zero at the extremes when the 
plant is changing direction. 
 
In the equilibrium position, there’s no net 
force on the plant, so it continues at its 
current (and maximum) velocity).
Q: Will thinking about the force help 
us with the frequency of the oscillations?
A: We’re just getting on to that ...
802    Chapter 20
anything else?

Graphs of the plant rocker’s motion will help you to work out an equation that connects the spring 
constant with the frequency of oscillations. The plant starts off at x = x0.
Sketch graphs of the plant’s displacement, velocity and acceleration vs time for one cycle of its motion with 
a period of 1.33 s (same as a frequency of 0.750 Hz). Start off by marking the ‘special points’ where you’d 
find the maximum of each variable, and sketch on from there. We’ve already put some of them on for you.
v
t
x
t
a
t
1.33 s
0.67 s
x0
Plant 
starts 
here.
Cycle ends with 
plant back here.
Halfway 
through cycle
Hint: Work out 
what time the 
plant will reach 
equilibrium position.
Hint: Does the plant 
get slower or faster 
as it approaches its 
maximum displacement?
Hint: use F = ma 
and F = -kx 
to work out the 
maximum value for 
the acceleration.
Hint: Use the slopes 
and values of bits of 
the graphs you know 
to work out what 
the other graphs 
must be doing.
Hint: Does the plant 
turn around suddenly 
or slowly at the ends?
Use the 
‘special points’ 
mentioned 
here to help.
Just call the 
maximum velocity 
vmax for the 
moment. You’ll 
calculate it later.
Plant’s maximum 
displacement in 
other direction.
you are here 4    803
oscillations (part 2)

Graphs of the plant rocker’s motion will help you to work out an equation that connects the spring 
constant with the frequency of oscillations. The plant starts off at x = x0.
Sketch graphs of the plant’s displacement, velocity and acceleration vs time for one cycle of its motion with 
a period of 1.33 s (same as a frequency of 0.750 Hz). Start off by marking the ‘special points’ where you’d 
find the maximum of each variable, and sketch on from there. We’ve already put some of them on for you.
v
t
x
t
a
t
1.33 s
0.67 s
x0
Plant 
starts 
here.
Cycle 
ends here.
Halfway 
through cycle
Haven’t we seen something 
like this before ...
Maximum velocity is in 
the equilibrium position, 
when x and a are both 0.
v = 0 when plant 
is turning around.
Everything happens smoothly 
rather than suddenly.
Acceleration graph mirrors 
displacement graph as F = -kx so 
x and a are in opposite directions.
Acceleration at maximum when 
dislacement is at maximum 
(though in opposite direction).
a = 0 at 
equilibrium 
position.
amax = kx0m
Plant’s maximum 
displacement in 
other direction.
F  =  ma  =  -kx
Maximum acceleration calculation:
ma  =  -kx
a  = -kxm
Maximum acceleration when there’s 
maximum displacement.
amax  = -kx0m
See maximum 
acceleration 
calculation.
804    Chapter 20
graphs always help

Turn your head to 
the right to see this 
like the graph on 
the opposite page!
The displacement, 
velocity and 
acceleration-time 
graphs of a mass 
on a spring are all 
sinusoids.
A mass on a spring moves like a 
side-on view of circular motion
Looking at the plant rocker - a mass on a 
spring - from side on is identical to looking at 
circular motion from side on.
x
t
r
-r
x
t
x0
-x0
Equilibrium 
position.
Extremes of displacement.
The displacement-time 
graphs are both the 
same SHAPE.
Extremes of 
displacement.
Center
This means that the graphs for the plant’s 
displacement, velocity and acceleration 
are the same shapes as the equivalent graphs 
for circular motion viewed from side on.
So the plant rocker must use the same types 
of equations as the side-on view of circular 
motion. This means that the equations for 
the plant rocker’s displacement, velocity and 
acceleration will involve sines and cosines.
you are here 4    805
oscillations (part 2)

You get simple harmonic 
motion when the 
restoring force is 
directly proportional to 
the displacement, but in 
the opposite direction.
A ‘sinusoidal’ 
graph can be 
produced by 
a sine or a 
cosine - it’s a 
name for the 
wave shape.
A mass on a spring moves with 
simple harmonic motion
The plant rocker oscillates to-and-fro because of a ‘restoring 
force’ from the spring, Fs = -kx.
The force is directly proportional to the spring’s displacement 
from the equilibrium position and acts in the opposite direction 
from the displacement. The graphs you sketched of the plant 
rocker confirm that the acceleration - and therefore the force - is 
always in the opposite direction from the displacement.
x
t
a
t
1.33 s
0.67 s
x0
This kind of situation, where the restoring force is 
proportional to the displacement from the equlibrium 
position, is common enough in physics for it to be given its 
own name, simple harmonic motion, or SHM.
SHM always produces these kinds of sinusoidal 
displacement-time, velocity - time and acceleration-time 
graphs. A “simple harmonic” is another name for a sinusoid.
Fnet = ma, so the 
force is always in 
the same direction 
as the acceleration - 
which is the opposite 
direction from the 
displacement.
When displacement 
is large and 
positive, force is 
large and negative.
When displacement is 
zero,, force is zero.
806    Chapter 20
simple harmonic motion

Q: It seems like a big jump from a mass on a spring to three 
sinusoidal graphs. Can you run some of that by me again?
A: The key thing is that you have a situation where the force is 
directly proportional to the displacement from the equilibrium position, 
and in the opposite direction from the displacement. Any time this 
is the case - whether the force is provided by a spring or something 
else - you have simple harmonic motion.
Q: What does simple harmonic motion look like? 
A: If you watch the mass on the spring from side-on, you’ll see 
that the mass moves quickly through the equilibrium position but 
slowly at each end of the motion, and transitions smoothly between 
these velocitites. 
Q:Is simple harmonic motion exactly like looking at circular 
motion from side on?
A: Yes! If you have simple harmonic motion (SHM) and circular 
motion with the same period and look at them from side-on, they 
appear identical.
Q:With SHM there’s an acceleration produced by the force of 
the spring which I can plot on a graph. Where’s the acceleration 
in circular motion?
A: If an object’s moving around a circle, there must be a 
centripetal acceleration provided by something in order for the 
circular motion to be possible. So the acceleration-time graph of 
circular motion viewed from side on would be the component of the 
centripetal acceleration that you can see from your vantage point.
Can I use the equations for 
frequency and period that I learned 
for side-on circular motion with simple 
harmonic motion?
Yes - the equations for the frequency, 
period, maximum speed, etc are the same
If you set up a mass on a spring and a side-on circular 
motion on a turntable next to each other, they look 
identical. The shapes of their displacement-time, velocity-
time and acceleration-time graphs are identical.
This means you can use all the equations you already know 
for the frequency, period and angular frequency of circular 
motion for simple harmonic motion.
Frequency and period
Frequency, f, is cycles per second.
Period, T, is seconds per cycle. 
Because they’re related like this:
T  = 1
f
f  = 1
T
Angular frequency 
and angular speed
Angular frequency and angular speed 
both have the same size and both 
have units of radians per second. 
They’re exactly the same thing, 
You can get from the frequency, f, 
to the angular frequency, ω , with 
the equation:
ω  =  2πf
SHM has a 
frequency and 
a period, so you 
can use all the 
equations you 
already know from 
circular motion.
You can do 
all sorts of 
combining and 
rearranging 
equations with 
these two postit 
notes.
you are here 4    807
oscillations (part 2)

But how can you be sure that the graphs for 
the spring are sines and cosines? What if they 
look similar, but aren’t exactly the same?
Actually proving this requires calculus
You did a substitution to work out the maximum value 
of the acceleration to put on your graph: F = -kx and 
also F = ma, so if you do a substitution for F you get 
-kx = ma ; rearranged, this is  a  =  - k
m x
At the moment, this is an equation containing two 
quantities that are constant throughout the plant’s 
motion (k and m) and two that vary (a and x). You 
can’t use one equation to work out two unknowns.
However, acceleration is rate of change of 
displacement,  a  = dv
dt . You can substitute this in the 
equation a  =  - k
m x  to get 
=  - k
m x
dv
dt
This doesn’t 
appear to help, as there are still two unknowns (v 
and x) in the equation. But as displacement is rate of 
change of velocity, v  = dx
dt , you can make another 
substitution to get 
=  - k
m x
dx
dt
d
dt
.
This equation only has one unknown, x, but you need 
calculus to solve it. Don’t worry - we’ve given you the 
ready-bake solution on the opposite page
	
	
     You don’t have to do 
calculus!
You don’t need to be able to go line by 
line from the nasty-looking equation 
=  - k
m x
dx
dt
d
dt
 to the ready-bake 
equation on the opposite page. On a 
non-calculus course, you’ll only need to apply 
the ready-bake equation to solve problems.
808    Chapter 20
no calculus required

How can you use the equation for SHM to 
work out the frequency of the plant rocker?
Simple harmonic motion is sinusoidal
The mass starts off with its maximum displacement at 
t = 0. This means that the equation must be some kind 
of cosine, as cosine is also at its maximum when t = 0.
The exact form of the equation is x = x0cos
k
m t .
It looks like you don’t need to 
have an angle to have a sinusoid 
shape, even though sine and cosine 
usually involve angles?
The value you ‘put into’ the cosine 
function is equal to the angle in an 
equivalent side-on circular set-up.
If you set up a plant on a spring and a duck on a 
turntable next to each other so that they both have 
the same amplitude and frequency, their motion 
looks identical from side on.
You can describe circular motion viewed from side 
on in terms of the angle θ that the turntable has 
moved through, using the equation x = x0cos(θ). 
You can describe circular motion in terms of time 
using the same equation with the substitution 
θ = ωt to get x = x0cos(ωt).
As the circular and simple harmonic motion look 
identical from side on, the equation for SHM has 
the same form as the equation for side-on circular 
motion, despite the fact that there are no physical 
angles involved with the plant on the spring.
Hey ... are you close 
to working out how to 
rock my plants at the 
right frequency?
Ready Bake 
Equation
x  = x0cos
k
m t
Mass on spring starts at x = x0:
cosine is at a 
maximum when t = 0
x0 is the maximum value 
of x, and therefore the 
amplitude of the motion.
Here, θ and ω are 
“mathematical tools” 
rather than  actual 
physical angles.
you are here 4    809
oscillations (part 2)

Here, the variable ω is a tool you 
can use to get what you want.
The ‘standard’ equation could also be written 
x = x0cos(2πft) (as ω = 2πf) which doesn’t 
involve ω at all, only f.
The mass on a spring has a frequency 
(number of cycles per second). You want to 
know how to produce oscillations with this 
frequency, and can use ω as a mathematical 
tool to get there.
Hang on! Surely you can only use 
ω when you have a circle, as it’s 
radians per second?! We don’t have a 
circle, or any other angles!
Work out constants by comparing a situation-
specific equation with a standard equation
The ‘standard’ equation for simple harmonic 
motion (and circular motion from side on) that 
starts at a maximum is x = Acos(ωt).
The equation for the plant’s displacement is 
x = x0cos
k
m t  .
If you ‘line up’ these two equations, you can see 
that they’re identical in ‘form’ but that there are 
different variables in ‘important places’.
Compare your 
equation with 
the ‘standard’ 
one to work out 
the amplitude 
and frequency 
of your SHM.
Both equations consist of a cosine multiplied 
by something. In the ‘standard’ equation, that 
something is A, the amplitude, which gives 
you the maximum value that the equation can 
have (since the maximum value of cosine is 1).
In your displacement equation, the amplitude 
is x0, which is how far you pulled the plant 
rocker back at the start - it’s the maximum 
value the displacement can have.
Look at the amplitude
Both equations contain the cosine of a quantity. In 
the ‘standard’ equation, this quantity is ωt, the angular 
frequency multiplied by the time. As the definition of 
angular frequency is ω = 2πf, you can work out the 
frequency and period if you know the value of ω.
In your equation, you have the cosine of k
m t . So k
m t  in 
this equation is equivalent to ωt in the ‘standard equation. 
You can write down the new equation ωt =  k
m t  and use 
this to calculate the frequency of the plant rocker.
Look at the argument of the cosine
x  =  A cos(ωt)
x  = x0cos
k
m t
x and t are 
variables.
x0, k and m are 
constants for any one 
‘run’ of the plant rocker.
You met this 
equation in ch 19.
810    Chapter 20
work out the constants

You have three plants with masses of 100, 250 and 500 grams respectively. You wish to attach each of 
them to an individual spring so that they can be rocked horizontally with a frequency of 0.750 Hz.
b. Check your equation over by imagining what 
would happen if k and m were altered one at a 
time. Jot down your  thoughts about whether your 
equation behaves as the plant would in real life.
a. Compare the equation 
k
m t
x = x0cos
 with the 
standard equation for simple harmonic motion to work 
out an equation for the frequency of the plant rocker.
c. Calculate the spring constant required to rock each plant with a frequency of 0.750 Hz when the plant 
rocker is pulled back to x0 = 10.0 cm at t = 0 to start off with.
d. Would it be possible to use the same strength of spring for all three plants if you pulled the plants back 
different distances to start off the plant rocker? Why / why not?
Hint: You’ll need to work 
out its units as well.
you are here 4    811
oscillations (part 2)

You have three plants with masses of 100, 250 and 500 grams respectively. You wish to attach each of 
them to an individual spring so that they can be rocked horizontally with a frequency of 0.750 Hz.
x  =  A cos(ωt)
‘Standard’ equation:
Mass on a spring:
x  =  x0
 cos km t
ω  =
km
2πf  =
km
f  =
km
2π
1
a. Compare the equation 
k
m t
x = x0cos
 with the 
standard equation for simple harmonic motion to work 
out an equation for the frequency of the plant rocker.
If k is bigger, the equation says that the 
frequency gets higher. This makes sense, as 
the force would be larger so the plant would 
accelerate more and move more quickly.
If m is bigger, the equation says that the 
frequency gets lower. This makes sense as the 
force would be the same but the mass would be 
larger, so the plant wouldn’t accelerate as much 
and would move more slowly.
b. Check your equation over by imagining what 
would happen if k and m were altered one at a 
time. Jot down your  thoughts about whether your 
equation behaves as the plant would in real life.
f  =
km
2π
1
f2  =
km
4π2
1
k  =  4π2mf2
100 g plant: k  =  4π2 × 0.100 × 0.7502  =  2.22 kg/s2 (3 sd)
250 g plant: k  =  4π2 × 0.250 × 0.7502  =  5.55 kg/s2 (3 sd)
500 g plant: k  =  4π2 × 0.500 × 0.7502  =  11.1 kg/s2 (3 sd)
c. Calculate the spring constant required to rock each plant with a frequency of 0.750 Hz when the plant 
rocker is pulled back to x0 = 10.0 cm at t = 0 to start off with.
d. Would it be possible to use the same strength of spring for all three plants if you pulled the plants back 
different distances to start off the plant rocker? Why / why not?
No, because the frequency doesn’t depend on the amplitude, only the spring constant and the mass. 
So the frequency will be the same however far back you pull the plant at the start.
This works because 
ω = 2πf
You can get the units of the spring 
constant from the units of the 
right hand side of your equation.
x  =  A cos(ωt)
is the standard equation for any 
SHM. For a mass on a spring, ω  =
k
m
Use this equation to 
solve ANY SHM problem.
ω is a tool 
that gives you 
what you want 
to find out.
You need the 
masses to be 
in kilograms, 
not grams.
812    Chapter 20
solution

813
You can solve 
problems by 
spotting that an 
equation is like 
one you already 
know about, 
and making 
substitutions.
12. The displacement of a mass, m, oscillating on a 
spring with spring constant k, after time, t, is given 
by the equation  x  =  x0cos
t
k
m
By comparing this equation with the standard 
equation for simple harmonic motion, work out 
an equation for f, the frequency of the oscillator.
Calculate the spring constant required to rock a 
100 gram plant with a frequency of 0.750 Hz.
a.
b.
Question Clinic: The “This equation is like that one” Question
In physics, you sometimes come across specific 
instances of general equations. One example of this is the 
general equation for simple harmonic motion, x = Acos(ωt). ANY object moving 
with simple harmonic motion will have an equation of this form (or an equation of 
the form x = Asin(ωt) if the motion starts at x = 0. In the equation, A represents 
the amplitude - the maximum value of x. And the argument of the cosine is always 
equal to ωt. This means that you can calculate ω, and from it f and T.
The key thing in a question like this 
is keeping track of what is plotted on each 
axis in each equation, especially if they use different 
letters for the things plotted on the horizontal and 
vertical axes. Do a sketch of each graph and write 
the letters on to help you keep track.
Each of the variables in 
the equation is defined here. 
This is the 
amplitude
This is the 
angular 
frequency, ω
This means that you compare it 
with the equation x = Acos(ωt) 
to get the amplitude and angular 
frequency.
Here, ω = 2πf
You will often have to use the equation you 
work out to do a calculation. Don’t worry - if 
you get the equation wrong then work the 
numbers through OK, you’ll get partial credit.
See also the equation 
y = mx + c, covered in 
appendix i.
k
ω  =
m
So
So 2πf = km

The frequency of SHM is the same, 
whatever the amplitude.
SHM and circular motion viewed from side-
on look exactly the same. If you follow two 
objects at different radii on a rotating disc, they 
have the same period but the outer object 
moves more rapidly and appears to ‘overtake’ 
the inner one before shooting out to a larger 
amplitude. Because it’s travelling more rapidly, 
the outer object requires a larger centripetal 
force to maintain its circular motion.
The frequency and 
period of SHM 
don’t depend on 
the amplitude.
Looks like the frequency 
and period don’t depend 
on the amplitude?
Unless you damage 
the spring by over-
stretching it when you 
pull it back - then you 
won’t get SHM at all, 
just a repair bill!
It’s the same with a mass on a spring. If you 
pull the spring further back at the start, a 
larger force acts on the mass, and the mass 
achieves a higher velocity through the 
equilibrium position. But this means that the 
mass has more momentum, so it ‘overshoots’ 
further than an oscillation with the same mass 
and a smaller amplitude.
However large the amplitude of the mass’s 
oscillations, the SHM will always have the 
same period, and the same frequency.
x
t
Each of these oscillators 
has the same period but 
a different amplitude.
The period, T, is the time it 
takes for one complete cycle
T
The frequency, f, is the 
number of cycles per second, 1
T
You can calculate ω from T. 
This then opens up being able 
to calculate k and m, as 
k
ω  =
m
The angular frequency 
depends only on k and m. 
Therefore, the frequency and 
period depend only on k and 
m, but not on the amplitude.
814    Chapter 20
frequency and shm

Simple harmonic motion 
is sinusoidal. This lets you 
calculate the frequency, 
period, amplitude, etc, 
as the equation has a 
standard format.
What might the maximum velocity of a 
mass on a spring depend on?
You rock! Or at least Anne’s plants do
You’ve designed Anne’s patented horticultural talk-free device 
- and it rocks! First of all, you worked out how the spring makes 
the plant oscillate and found out about Hooke’s Law, F = -kx.
Then you sketched graphs of the plant’s displacement, 
velocity and acceleration and spotted that they have similar 
shapes to graphs of circular motion when the motion is viewed 
from side on. This is simple harmonic motion - and you 
always get these shapes of graphs when the restoring force is 
proportional to the displacement from the equilibrium position.
But Anne forgot to mention someting ...
After getting the ready-bake (calculus-derived) equation for the 
displacment, x = x0cos
k
m t , you compared it with the ‘standard’ 
equation for simple harmonic motion x = Acos(ωt). Comparing 
the arguments of the cosines in the equations let you write down 
the equation ωt =  k
m t  and then ω =  k
m  , which enabled you to 
calculate the spring constant each plant would need.
And it doesn’t matter how far back you pull the plant to start it 
off, as the frequency and period of SHM don’t depend on the 
amplitude of the motion.
That’s great! But I forgot to 
say before - I’d like the plant to 
have a maximum velocity of exactly 
1.50 m/s. I hope that’s OK ...
F
x
F
x
If the force is proportional to the 
displacement (but in the opposite 
direction) then you have SHM.
you are here 4    815
oscillations (part 2)

Jim: I guess that the maximum velocity’s gonna depend on how far 
back we pull the plant at the start.
Frank: Yeah, the larger the displacement from equilibrium, the 
larger the force from the spring and the larger the acceleration. 
The plant has its maximum velocity as it goes through the 
equilibrium position, before the spring starts to slow it down again.
Joe: But if the initial displacement is too large, the plant will go too 
fast. We need to calculate exactly how far back we need to pull the 
plant to give it a velocity of 1.50 m/s in the center.
Frank: I guess we could go take a calculus class then come back 
and have a go at solving those sinusoidal equations. NOT!!
Jim: I’m sure there must be another way - if we draw enough free 
body diagrams and force vectors, maybe we’ll spot something.
Joe: Hey ... we’re only thinking about using forces. But isn’t it 
usually easier to use energy in problems where that’s possible?
Frank: Perhaps ... differences drive change that lead to energy 
transfer. Well, the velocity of the plant is changing all the time.
Joe: And so’s the length of the spring. You start off with elastic 
potential energy in the stretched spring, then have entirely 
kinetic energy in the equilibrium position, and then entirely 
potential again at the other extreme.
Jim: Yeah when the velocity is at its maximum, all of the potential 
energy the spring had at the start is now kinetic energy K = ½mv2.
Frank: Which has v in it! If we know how large the spring’s 
potential energy store is at the start, we can use energy conservation 
to calculate the plant’s velocity in the center, when the elastic 
potential energy is zero. That works!
Joe: So we give the spring potential energy at the start ...
Jim: Yeah, we do work on the spring, to do that, right? And 
work = force × displacement. Sorted!
Joe: Um ... but which force do we use? As you stretch the spring, 
the force we’re doing work against gets larger and larger.
Frank: The work is the area under the force-displacement 
graph. Can we calculate that?
A compressed or 
stretched spring 
has elastic potential 
energy. You can use 
energy conservation 
to solve problems 
that involve springs.
To use force, acceleration, 
velocity and displacement 
here, you’d have to go and 
take a calculus course first. 
Best to use energy ...
Our design’s brilliant - but Anne 
wants the plant’s maximum velocity 
to be exactly 1.50 m/s.
816    Chapter 20
elastic potential energy

a. Use the axes below to sketch a graph of force applied vs displacement as you stretch a spring with 
spring constant k to displacement x0. As your graph is of the force you need to apply to extend the 
spring, rather than the force that the spring exerts on you, the force and displacement lie in the same 
direction, and the value of the force is F = kx.
This is a hard exercise. Take time to 
get your head around it, and don’t 
be worried if it takes you a while.
b. Mark on the value of F when the displacement = x0.
c. The total work done is the total area between your graph and the horizontal axis. Calculate this area 
and hence write down an equation for the work done in stretching the spring to displacement x0.
F
x
x0
d. How much elastic potential energy, Us, is transferred to a spring with spring constant k by stretching 
it displacement x0 from its equilibrium position?
The subscript ‘s’ indicates 
that a spring is involved.
you are here 4    817
oscillations (part 2)

a. Use the axes below to sketch a graph of force applied vs displacement as you stretch a spring with 
spring constant k to displacement x0. As your graph is of the force you need to apply to extend the 
spring, rather than the force that the spring exerts on you, the force and displacement lie in the same 
direction, and the value of the force is F = kx.
b. Mark on the value of F when the displacement = x0.
c. The total work done is the total area between your graph and the horizontal axis. Calculate this area 
and hence write down an equation for the work done in stretching the spring to displacement x0.
F
x
x0
The work done against a force 
is equal to the area under the 
force - displacement graph.
kx0
Work done = area under F-x graph.
Work done = area of triangle
The area of the triangle is half the area of a 
rectangle with the same horizontal and vertical sides.
Work done = Area  =  ½ × base × height
=  ½  ×  x0  ×  kx0
Work done  =  ½kx0
2
d. How much elastic potential energy, Us, is transferred to a spring with spring 
constant k by stretching it displacement x0 from its equilibrium position?
Us  =  ½kx0
2
The area under the graph is 
a triangle. This has half the 
area that a rectangle with 
the same side lengths would.
Kinetic
818    Chapter 20
transfer of energy

But how can the plant’s 
total energy be ½kx0
2 when 
it’s hardly ever at x0?
The total energy of a mass on a spring 
depends on the spring constant and amplitude.
When you pull the plant back, you do work on the spring by 
extending it. Doing work involves energy transfer and the 
elastic potential energy of the spring increases.
When you let go, this potential energy is gradually transferred 
to kinetic energy as the plant’s velocity increases. In the 
equilibrium position, there’s only kinetic energy. As the plant 
moves past the equilibrium position, the kinetic energy is 
transferred to elastic potential energy once again ... etc!
The potential energy at any displacement is ½kx2 and the 
kinetic energy is ½mv2. But the total energy of the system is 
always ½kx0
2.
a. Sketch graphs of K, the kinetic energy and U, 
the potential energy, for one complete cycle of 
the plant rocker.
Kinetic
Potential
Potential
Potential
Kinetic
b. Use conservation of energy to come up with 
an equation for vmax, the maximum velocity of 
the plant, in terms of k, m and x0, the initial (and 
maximum) displacement.
c. A plant, mass 100 g, is attached to a horizontal 
spring, spring constant 2.22 Nm. What should 
its initial displacement, x0, be if the plant’s 
maximum velocity is to be 1.50 m/s?
x
t
K
t
U
t
Potential
you are here 4    819
oscillations (part 2)

x0  =
b. Use conservation of energy to come up with 
an equation for vmax, the maximum velocity of 
the plant, in terms of k, m and x0, the initial (and 
maximum) displacement.
Q:  But what about the mass of the spring? We 
didn’t include that in the energy calculation, just 
the mass of the plant.
A: We made an approximation that the spring 
is massless - both here and before, when we were 
dealing with forces. If the mass of the spring is 
negligible compared to the mass of the plant, this is 
a reasonable simplifying assumption to make. If the 
mass of the spring wasn’t negligible, we’d have to take 
into account the fact that different parts of the spring 
have different displacements - which is hard!
a. Sketch graphs of K, the kinetic energy and U, 
the potential energy, for one complete cycle of 
the plant rocker.
c. A plant, mass 100 g, is attached to a horizontal 
spring, spring constant 2.22 Nm. What should 
its initial displacement, x0, be if the plant’s 
maximum velocity is to be 1.50 m/s?
x
t
K
t
U
t
Maximum K  =  Maximum U
½kx0
2  =  ½mvmax
2
vmax =
km x0
vmax =
km x0
x0  =
m
k vmax
0.100
2.22 × 1.50
x0  =  0.318 m (3 sd)
Energy is a scalar, so is positive even 
when the displacement is negative.
Us = ½kx2
The elastic potential 
energy of a spring 
depends on the 
amplitude and the 
spring constant.
Maximum U at maximum 
size of displacement
Maximum K at zero 
displacement
820    Chapter 20
the spring constant

When you combine 
superpowers like this, 
you’re really thinking 
like a physicist!
The plants rock - and you rule!
You’ve tied together your knowledge from lots of 
different areas of physics to give the plant rocker a 
known frequency and maximum velocity. Excellent!
	Forces - analysing a problem using a free body diagram.
	Displacement, velocity and acceleration - using the 
relationships between them.	
	Graphs - showing what the motion’s like visually.
	Circular motion - spotting that the motion is like circular motion 
viewed from side on.
	Equations - showing what the motion’s like symbolically.
	‘Standard’ equations - spotting that your equation is like an 
equation that you already know.
	Angular quantities - using the analogy with the standard 
equation to move from ω to f, and also to k and m.
	Energy conservation - spotting that there are potential and 
kinetic energy stores and energy is continually transferred 
between them.
	Work - calculating the work done on the spring.
	Area - calculating the area under the force - displacement graph
	Algebra and substitution - calculating the velocity from the 
maximum potential and kinetic energy.











Physics Superpowers
Awesome!
You’ve also been using 
these graph shapes.
x
t
A
Period, T
x = A sin(ωt)
Amplitude
x
t
Amplitude
Period, T
x = A cos(ωt)
A
you are here 4    821
oscillations (part 2)

But now the plant rocker’s 
frequency has changed ...
Although Anne is initially pleased with your 
solution, she’s soon back in touch with a problem 
- the plant rocker’s frequency has changed. Each 
cycle’s taking longer than it did before, so the 
frequency is lower than it should be.
It was working fine before 
- but now each cycle’s taking 
longer than it should.
What could have changed the 
frequency of the plant rocker?
822    Chapter 20
what is it, kenneth?

Jim: Anne’s been watering the plants, right? Maybe the spring got 
rusty or something, and its spring constant changed.
Joe: Actually - if she’s watered the plants, then their masses will 
have changed.
Frank: Oh yeah - the frequency depends on the mass, doen’t it.
Jim: Yeah, a more massive plant won’t accelerate so rapidly. The 
force on it is still the same, but F = ma so the acceleration will be 
smaller if m is larger. The plant will take longer to do one oscillation. 
That’s why the frequency’s gone down and the period’s gone up.
Joe: This is a pretty serious design flaw - the plant’s mass is going to 
change anyway as it grows, even if it doesn’t get watered that often. 
I wonder what we can do to fix it.
Frank: So the problem is the mass, yeah?!
Jim: Yeah - if the mass was constant, then the frequency would be 
constant (as long as the spring didn’t weaken or anything).
Frank: So can we make the mass divide out somehow? We’ve 
worked with equations before where that happened.
Joe: Ooh, I think I see what you mean. When we’ve done 
calculations involving gravity, like orbits and stuff, then the mass 
has sometimes divided out completely because it appeared on both 
sides of the equation.
Jim: Maybe if we hang the spring vertically, it’ll be OK. Then 
gravity will be acting on the plant as well.
Joe: If the mass did divide out, we wouldn’t need a different spring 
for each plant. Actually, this feels a bit wrong. Surely an elephant 
bouncing vertically on a spring would have a different frequency of 
oscillation from a mouse on the same spring?
Frank: We might as well test it out with math before we try 
building it. That shouldn’t take too long ...
Think about the 
physics behind what’s 
going on - either 
by ‘being’ the thing 
in the problem, or 
by seeing what its 
equation would do 
if you changed the 
values of the variables.
I wonder what’s gone wrong. 
The plant rockers were working 
fine at first ...
you are here 4    823
oscillations (part 2)

The frequency of a horizontal 
spring depends on the mass
The equation for the frequency of the plant attached 
to the horizontal spring is f = 
k
m
1
2π
. If you increase the 
mass of the plant, the frequency becomes smaller, as 
you are dividing by the m on the right hand side of the 
equatuon. So the plant takes longer to do one cycle.
This is because F = ma. If the plant’s mass is larger it 
accelerates less when acted on by the same force of 
the stretched spring. Watering the plants increases the 
mass. Anne is adamant that the plant rocker should 
always have a frequency of 0.750 Hz. So this design 
with a horizontal spring won’t work, as the frequency 
changes when the mass changes.
Watering a plant 
increases its mass.
Will using a vertical spring make a difference?
When gravity is the only force acting on an object, 
the object’s acceleration doesn’t depend on its mass.
In chapter 18, you worked out that the frequency 
and period of a satellite’s orbit are completely 
independent of its mass.
The guys have had the idea 
that perhaps by hanging 
the plant from a vertical 
spring, where gravity has 
an influence, the physics 
will work out differently 
from the horizontal spring.
You need to work out 
whether they’re right!
The frequency and a period 
of a satellite in orbit don’t 
depend on its mass.
Perhaps this is also the case for 
a vertical spring ... perhaps not.
824    Chapter 20
vertical springs

a. A spring hangs from the ceiling. When you attach 
a plant to it, it extends to an new equilibrium 
position where the plant is at rest. Draw a free 
body diagram showing all of the forces acting on 
the plant in this new equilibrium position.
b. If the plant has a mass of 0.100 kg and the spring 
extends by 44.1 cm, what is the spring constant?
c. You pull the plant down a further 4.00 cm and let go. Draw 
a free body diagram of the forces acting on the plant at the 
moment you let go, and calculate the net force on the plant.
d. What would be the net force on a plant attached to 
a horizontal spring that was extended 4.00 cm from its 
equilibrium position at the moment it’s released?
e. Do you think that the spring being vertical 
will affect the frequency and period of 
the plant’s oscillations compared with the 
horizontal spring? Why / why not?
Hint: Look 
back at page 
807 for an 
equation for 
the force 
from a spring.
you are here 4    825
oscillations (part 2)

a. A spring hangs from the ceiling. When you attach 
a plant to it, it extends to an new equilibrium 
position where the plant is at rest. Draw a free 
body diagram showing all of the forces acting on 
the plant in this new equilibrium position.
Force from spring =  -kx
Weight = mg
There’s no net 
force on the plant.
m = 0.100 kg
x = 0.441 m
F = -kx
F = mg
No net force, so: mg - kx  =  0
kx  =  mg
k  = mg
x
= 0.100 × 9.8
0.441
k  =  2.22 kg/s2 (3 sd)
Force from spring =  -kx
Weight = mg
There’s a net force 
upwards.
Fnet  =  mg - kx
Fnet  =  0.100 × 9.8  -  2.22 × 0.481
Fnet  =  -0.878 N (3 sd)
x = 0.0400 m
F = -kx
Fnet  =  - kx
Fnet  =   -  2.22 × 0.0400
Fnet  =  -0.888 N (3 sd)
When you pull the plant the same distance from its equlibrium, the force on it is 
the same. All that’s changed by hanging it vertically is the equilibrium position.
I think the frequency will be the same as for the horizontal spring, as the 
restoring force is unchanged.
b. If the plant has a mass of 0.100 kg and the spring 
extends by 44.1 cm, what is the spring constant?
c. You pull the plant down a further 4.00 cm and let go. Draw a free body 
diagram of the forces acting on the plant at the moment you let go, and 
calculate the net force on the plant.
d. What would be the net force on a plant attached to a horizontal spring that 
was extended 4.00 cm from its equilibrium position at the moment it’s released?
e. Do you think that the spring being vertical will affect the frequency and period of 
the plant’s oscillations compared with the horizontal spring? Why / why not?
Looks like my spring idea 
doesn’t work out. What else can 
I use to rock my plants? Having to 
do it myself really stinks!
This is 44.1 cm 
+ 4.00 cm.
The small difference 
between these two 
values is because of 
rounding. They’re 
basically the same 
net force.
826    Chapter 20
springs stink

A pendulum swings 
to and fro with a 
regular frequency 
and period.
Jim: But at least the spring wasn’t our idea originally. It was Anne 
who suggested we use a spring right at the start!
Joe: So we gotta think of something else that goes to and fro like 
clockwork, but that doesn’t depend on the mass of the plant.
Frank: Like clockwork you say, hmmm. Springs get used to run 
some watches and clocks, don’t they?
Jim: Yes, but in the clocks, the mass of the thing the spring’s 
attached to inside the clock doesn’t keep changing. Our problem is 
that the mass of the plant does change.
Frank: But some clocks use pendulums instead of springs. I wonder 
if we can use a pendulum for the plant rocker.
Joe: Yeah ... a pendulum goes to and fro regularly. That’s how a 
Grandfather clock works, isn’t it? And a pendulum must only have a 
gravitational force acting on it, so the mass might divide out!
Jim: But the Grandfather clock pendulum goes to and fro with a 
period of 1 s (or 2 s if it’s one tick at each end of the swing - I’m 
not sure!). That’s too short! We need the plant rocker to have a 
frequency of 0.750 Hz, which we already said is a period of 1.33 s.
Frank: Maybe giving a pendulum plant rocker a larger 
amplitude by pulling it back further at the start will change the 
period. The plant will have more distance to cover for each swing.
Joe: And maybe we could change the length of the pendulum 
- the distance from the ceiling to the plant. That might affect the 
frequency and period too.
Jim: And we’re still not sure if the frequency and period of the 
pendulum depend on the mass of the plant. Though gravity is the 
only force acting on the plant (apart from the tension in the string 
it’s attached to) so it could be more promising than the spring.
Frank: Yeah ... I’m just trying to imagine whether an adult will 
swing slower or faster or just the same as a child if they’re sitting on 
a swing. I’m not sure.
Joe: I guess we ought to do an experiment to work out whether 
the mass, length or amplitude affect the period of the 
pendulum - and if so, how they affect them.
So using a spring doesn’t work 
out - however you hang it!
you are here 4    827
oscillations (part 2)

Your job is to work out which variables (mass of 
pendulum bob, length of string, amplitude of swing) 
affect the frequency and period of a pendulum. This 
is a completely open-ended investigation - you can 
go about it however you like, designing and doing 
your own experiments, drawing your own graphs and 
writing up your conclusions.
There’ll be a competition page on the Head First 
Physics website where you can submit your write-up, 
with prizes for the best entries.
Try it!
The frequency 
might depend on 
the mass of the 
pendulum bob.
The frequency 
might depend on 
the length of 
the pendulum
The frequency 
might depend on 
the amplitude 
of the pendulum
828    Chapter 20
experiment yourself

you are here 4    829
oscillations (part 2)

No net force in the 
equilibrium position, so 
T - mg = 0
Tension = T
Weight = mg
Tension and 
parallel 
component are 
equal in size.
Parallel 
component
Weight = mg
Tension
Perpendicular component
Perpendicular component provides a net force 
that restores towards equilibrium position.
θ
θ
A pendulum swings with 
simple harmonic motion
A pendulum’s equilibrium position is when 
the bob is hanging straight down. When the 
bob hangs straight down, its weight (due to 
gravitational force) and the tension in the 
string are both vertical. As the bob doesn’t 
accelerate vertically, there must be no net 
force on the bob.
If the bob is pulled back a short displacement, through 
the angle θ, the bob’s weight vector is no longer 
parallel to the tension in the string. A component 
of the bob’s weight is perpendicular to the string, 
and provides a net force that causes the bob to 
accelerate towards the equilibrium position. As the 
bob nears equilibirum, the angle becomes smaller and 
the net force also becomes smaller.
Through the equilibrium position, the net force is zero, 
so the bob continues with a constant velocity. And as 
the bob swings the other way, the net force becomes 
larger again, slowing the bob down until it reaches the 
top of its swing on the other side.
Just like the mass on the spring, the net force 
is proportional to the displacement 
of the mass from the equilibrium position 
(as long as the angle it’s moved through 
is less than around 10°). This satisfies the 
requirement for simple harmonic motion, 
The equation for the displacement of a 
pendulum is given to the right.
Ready Bake 
Equation
x  = x0cos
g
l t
Pendulum starts at x = x0:
x0 is the maximum value 
of x, and therefore the 
amplitude of the motion.
g is the acceleration 
due to gravity.
l (the letter ‘l’, not the 
number ‘1’) is the length 
of the pendulum
(for angles less 
than 10°.)
The bob isn’t accelerating 
vertically in the equilibrium 
position. So there must be 
no net force on the bob.
Weight and tension 
forces are no longer 
parallel, so there’s a 
net perpendicular force.
You can compare this equation 
with the ‘standard’ SHM 
equation to work out what 
you want to know.
x  =  x0
 cos(ωt)
830    Chapter 20
pendulums and shm

The frequency 
and period of a 
pendulum depend 
on its length, but 
not on its mass.
What does the frequency of a pendulum depend on?
The equation for the displacement of a simple pendulum (a pendulum 
that moves with SHM) that starts at a maximum is x = x0cos
g
l t . Like the 
equation for the period of the mass on a spring, this equation is derived using 
calculus, but is provided here as a ready-bake equation.
Your experiment and the ready bake equation both tell you the same thing: 
the period of the pendulum depends on the length of the string that 
attaches the bob to the celing, but not on the mass or the amplitude.
As well as this, the equation says that the period of the pendulum depends 
on the acceleration due to gravity. Practically speaking, this isn’t something 
you have to worry about with the plant rocker, but it does mean that your 
favorite Grandfather clock won’t keep time on the moon!
It’s time to work out the length of the pendulum you’ll need for the plant rocker.
a. Use the ready-bake equation for the plant’s 
displacement, 
g
l t
x = x0cos
, to get an equation 
for the frequency of the plant rocker.
b. Calculate the length of pendulum you require for 
the plant rocker to have a frequency of 0.750 Hz.
c. Use the equation you worked out in part a. to 
explain what will happen to the period of the plant 
rocker if you double the length of the pendulum.
d. If you took the pendulum to the moon, where 
acceleration due to gravity is a sixth of its value on 
earth, what effect would this have on the period 
of the pendulum?
Hint: Use the equations 
on the post-its on page 
807.
Hint: Compare 
the equation 
with the 
“standard” 
equation 
for SHM.
you are here 4    831
oscillations (part 2)

It’s time to work out the length of the pendulum you’ll need for the plant rocker.
x  =  A cos(ωt)
‘Standard’ equation:
Simple pendulum:
x  =  x0
 cos g
l t
ω  =
g
l
2πf  =
g
l
f  =
g
l
2π
1
a. Use the ready-bake equation for the plant’s 
displacement, 
g
l t
x = x0cos
, to get an equation 
for the frequency of the plant rocker.
f  =
g
l
2π
1
f2  =
g
l
4π2
1
l  =  
g
f2
4π2
1
=
9.8
0.7502
4π2
1
l  =  0.442 m (3 sd)
b. Calculate the length of pendulum you require for 
the plant rocker to have a frequency of 0.750 Hz.
c. Use the equation you worked out in part a. to 
explain what will happen to the period of the plant 
rocker if you double the length of the pendulum.
d. If you took the pendulum to the moon, where 
acceleration due to gravity is a sixth of its value on 
earth, what effect would this have on the period 
of the pendulum?
T  = 1
f
f  =
g
l
2π
1
and
T  =
lg
2π
If you double the length of the pendulum, the part 
under the square root becomes twice as large as it was 
before., so T becomes  2 larger than it was before.
T  =
lg
2π
If you make g a sixth of its value, the part 
under the square root becomes six times larger 
(since g is on the bottom). So T becomes  6 
larger than it was before.
It’s really important to 
be able to move between 
f, T and Ʒ quickly 
and comfortably - so 
practise doing that!
Frequency and period
Frequency, f, is cycles per second.
Period, T, is seconds per cycle. 
Because they’re related like this:
T  = 1
f
f  = 1
T
Angular frequency 
and angular speed
Angular frequency and angular speed 
both have the same size and both 
have units of radians per second. 
They’re exactly the same thing, 
You can get from the frequency, f, 
to the angular frequency, ω , with 
the equation:
ω  =  2πf
x
t
A
Period, T
x = A sin(ωt)
Amplitude
x
t
Amplitude
Period, T
x = A cos(ωt)
A
832    Chapter 20
solutions

Thanks - it ROCKS!!
The pendulum design works!
You use your answers to make a pendulum plant 
rocker for Anne - and it works perfectly.
Even better, the frequency doesn’t depend on 
the mass of the plant, so you can use the same 
design for all three of Anne’s favorites!
If the restoring force 
is proportional to the 
displacement, you have 
simple harmonic motion 
(abbreviated to SHM)
SHM looks like circular 
motion from side on, and 
the equations for the 
displacement, velocity 
and acceleration are all 
sinusoidal (shaped like a 
sine or cosine graph).
For a spring, the period 
depends on the mass and 
the spring constant, but not 
the amplitude. 
 
 



For a pendulum with small 
amplitudes, the period 
depends on the length 
and the gravitational field 
strength, but not on the 
mass.
It’s fine to use forces to 
analyse SHM - but you 
reach a point where you 
require calculus. So use 
energy to solve SHM 
problems where you can.
The kinetic energy in the 
equilibrium position (where 
the force and displacement 
are zero) is equal to the 
potential energy at an 
extreme.



Length of each 
pendulum is 0.442 m
You can use this to solve 
problems with pendulums 
as well as with springs.
you are here 4    833
oscillations (part 2)

I was just wondering... if SHM is like side-on 
circular motion, can we use something like 
v = rω to work out the maximum speed instead 
of using energy conservation?
Yes, you can apply your circular 
motion equations here too!
Simple harmonic motion looks like side-on 
circular motion. This means that if you 
have SHM and circular motion that both 
have the same amplitude and frequency, the 
maximum speed of the SHM will be the 
same as the speed of the circular motion.
Thuis means that you can adapt the 
equation v = rω to give you the maximum 
speed of the SHM.
The equation would become vmax = x0ω
The MAXIMUM 
speed is the same 
for circular motion 
and SHM if they 
both have the 
same amplitude 
and frequency.
vmax depends on the 
amplitude and the frequency.
This equation has angular 
frequency in it - just use 
ω = 2πf to calculate it.
Same amplitude.
vmax
v
r
x0
Same maximum 
velocity parallel 
to amplitude.
Circular motion 
equation:
         v = rω
SHM equation:
         vmax = x0ω
834    Chapter 20
circular motion applied

835
Question Clinic: The “Vertical spring” Question
The vertical spring question is a common way of testing 
your understanding of simple harmonic motion. First of all, something is 
hung from the spring to stretch it to a new equilibrium position. Then the 
spring is stretched or compressed further and released. The question asks you 
to work out the frequency or period of the oscillations
The key thing in this question is defining the 
displacement correctly. The initial displacement creates a new 
equlibrium position, and also allows you to calculate the spring constant. 
When you do the SHM calculation, you should redefine the new equilibrium 
position as x = 0 and use the value for the spring constant that you 
calculated earltier to work out the frequency or period.
54. A spring hangs downwards from the ceiling.
When you attach a plant to the spring, it extends until the 
plant is at rest. Draw a free body diagram showing all of the 
forces acting on the plant at this point.
If the plant has a mass of 0.100 kg and the spring extends by 
44.1 cm, what is the spring constant, k?
You pull the plant down a further 4.00 cm and let go. 
Calculate the period of the plant’s oscillations.
What distance does the plant cover in one complete cycle?
a.
b.
c.
d.
If you see a spring, think 
‘simple harmonic motion’.
This wording indicates that 
the spring is vertical, so you 
need to take the object’s 
weight into account.
If the spring extends, 
it must be exerting a 
force as F = -kx.
So the force 
from the spring 
should be on 
your free body 
diagram.
This indicates 
that the plant 
is in equilibrium, 
with no net force 
acting on it.
Use the diagram you 
drew in part a. with 
these values.
Make sure you use the displacement 
from the NEW equilibrium position 
when you do the SHM calculation.
The forces should 
add to zero.
Note the word distance, and the 
complete cycle. It’ll travel 4.00 cm 
to the center, another 4.00 cm to 
the far side, then the same again: a 
total of 16.00 cm.

836
55. A mass, m, on a spring oscillates with amplitude A and period 
T. Starting from this set-up each time:
What happens to the period if you double the amplitude to 2A?
What happens to the total energy of the oscillator if you double 
the amplitude to 2A?
What happens to the maximum speed of the mass if you 
double the amplitude to 2A?
What happens to the period if you double the mass to 2m?
a.
b.
c.
d.
Question Clinic: The “How does this depend on that” Question
Many questions have no numbers in them at all, and are 
designed to test how well you understand the physics, and the language 
of equations that can be used to describe it. You’re told what the original 
situation is, then asked what would happen if a variable became larger or 
smaller, for example by doubling or halving.
Make sure you write down the relevant equation so you can 
see how changing one variable will affect the other variables. Then 
‘insert’ the factor the variable has changed by next to it (for example, m 
might become 2m) and look to see how this affects the size of the other 
variable you’re asked about. If your equation has m2 in it, then inserting  
’2m’ instead of ‘m’ gives you (2m)2, or 4m 2, so the answer will be four 
times larger than it was before. Try it with the question above!
This question doesn’t contain any 
numbers, only letters to represent 
each quantity.
a. You can do this part 
without an equation 
- the period of SHM 
doesn’t depend on its 
amplitude.
b. You need the equation for the 
total energy, E = ½kA2 As the 
‘A’ is squared, if you double A, E 
becomes four times as large.
c. You need the equation 
½mv2 = ½kA2 to see that if you 
double A, then v will also double.
d. You need the equation 
m
T  = 2π k  to see that 
the period becomes √2T.

you are here 4    837
oscillations (part 2)
Units
Falling
Circumference
Inverse square law
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Inelastic collision
Force
Frequency
Special points
Experiment
Period
Elastic collision
Centripetal force
Weight
Pendulum
Simple Harmonic Motion
Time
Angular frequency
Spring
Energy
Gravitational field
Component
Tension
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Pulley
Radians
Impulse
Elastic potential energy
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Mechanical energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Amplitude
Angular velocity
Volume
Velocity
Power
Friction
Radius
Freefall
Kinetic energy
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Internal energy
Area
Mass
Simple harmonic 
motion
Motion where a restoring force to an equilibrium 
position is directly proportional to the displacement 
from the equilibrium position.
Spring
A spring exerts a restoring force proportional to 
the displacement from its equilibrium position.
Pendulum
For small angles, something swinging undergoes 
a restoring force proportional to the displacement 
from its equilibrium position.
Everything just 
came together ... and 
it makes sense!

Your Physics Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 20 under your belt 
and you’ve added some problem-solving 
concepts to your toolbox.
CHAPTER 20
Hooke’s Law
Hooke’s Law says that the force a 
spring exerts is proportional to its 
displacement from equilibrium, and 
in the opposite direction to the 
displacement.
	
F = -kx
(k is the spring constant)
Simple harmonic motion
Oscillation you get when the restoring force 
is directly proportional to the displacement 
from the equilibrium position.
Abbreviated to SHM.
Mass on a spring
Frequency and period depend on 
the mass and the spring constant.
Frequency and period are 
independent of the amplitude.
Frequency and period independent 
of the gravitational field 
strength (horizontal and vertical 
springs have the same frequency).
SHM graphs
Displacement, velocity and acceleration-
time graphs are all sinusoidal.
Start by drawing the displacement-
time graph, starting at x0.
Acceleration-time graph exactly 
mirrors displacement-time graph.
Get velocity - time graph from slope 
of displacement-time graph
Comparing equations
If your equation has the same form as 
a ‘standard’ equation, you can write 
them one above each other and say 
that terms are equivalent.
This is how you can get the equation 
for the frequency of an oscillator 
- by comparing its equation with the 
‘standard’ equation that describes SHM.
Simple pendulum
Moves with SHM for small angles only (θ less than 
around 10°).
Frequency and period depend on the length of the 
pendulum and the gravitational field strength.
Frequency and period are independent of mass.
Frequency and period are independent of 
amplitude for small angles.
ω is your FRIEND!
The most simple form of the SHM 
equation uses ω.
ω is the “link” between simple 
harmonic morion and circular motion.
Circular motion and SHM
Try thinking of SHM in terms of circular motion 
to see which equations you can adapt or reuse.
838    Chapter 20
physics toolbox

this is a new chapter    839
think like a physicist
21
It’s the final chapter
Hit the road Jack! (That’s 
x = x0 + v0t + ½at2, by the way.)
It’s time to hit the ground running. Throughout this book, you’ve been 
learning to relate physics to everyday life and have absorbed problem solving skills 
along the way. In this final chapter, you’ll use your new set of physics tools to dig into the 
problem we started off with - the bottomless pit through the center of the Earth. The key is 
the question: “How can I use what I know to work out what I don’t know (yet)?”

You’ve come a long way!
Back in chapter 1, the words on the globe 
looked like random jargon that didn’t make 
sense. But as you’ve gone through the book 
learning to relate physics to everyday life, 
your confidence has grown and the words 
have become less like an alien language.
“How can I use 
what I know 
to work out 
what I don’t 
know (yet)?”
Now you’re in chapter 21 - and you’re able to use these same words to 
help you think through and solve problems. You’ve learned to ask 
“How can I use what I know to work out what I don’t know (yet)?”
Units
Falling
Circumference
Inverse square law
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Inelastic collision
Force
Frequency
Special points
Experiment
Period
Elastic collision
Centripetal force
Weight
Pendulum
Simple Harmonic Motion
Time
Angular frequency
Spring
Energy
Gravitational field
Component
Tension
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Pulley
Radians
Impulse
Elastic potential energy
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Mechanical energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Amplitude
Angular velocity
Volume
Velocity
Power
Friction
Radius
Freefall
Kinetic energy
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Internal energy
Area
Mass
840    Chapter 21
a wonderful physics world

Now you can finish off the globe
What better way to use your physics superpowers than to 
revisit the tunnel through the center of the Earth and really 
get to grips with what happens there.
Back in chapter 1, you learned to be part of it by putting 
yourself at the heart of the problem and asking “What 
happens next?” and “What’s it like?” Now you can also 
describe what happens using physics terms and concepts.
You can use physics 
terms and concepts 
to describe what 
happens next.
a. Use your increased physics knowledge to revisit 
the question “What’s it like?” What does the trip 
through the Earth now remind you of? Be sure to 
mention all the parallels you can see.
You spotted that there’s a special point in 
the center where there’s no net force on you 
because everything is symmetrical - you’re 
equally attracted in all directions, and as 
gravity is a non-contact force, you don’t feel 
crushed. You also realized that you’re always 
attracted towards the center unless you’re 
already in the center.
Be part of it
This means that you initially accelerate as 
you fall due to the net force on you at the top 
of the tunnel, briefly move with a constant 
velocity through the center, then decelerate as 
the gravitational force continues to attract you 
towards the center. After briefly emerging at the 
other end, you do the same thing again in reverse.
Acceleration
Force
Velocity
b. Are there any requirements that need to be met 
in order for your answer to part a to make sense?
Symmetry
Newton’s Laws
Newton’s 
1st Law
Newton’s 
2nd Law
you are here 4    841
think like a physicist
Special points

a. Use your increased physics knowledge to revisit 
the question “What’s it like?” What does the trip 
through the Earth now remind you of? Be sure to 
mention all the parallels you can see.
b. Are there any requirements that need to be met 
in order for your answer to part a to make sense?
Simple Harmonic Motion
It looks like simple harmonic motion.
There’s an equilibrium point in the center where 
there’s no net force on you.
The force on you always acts towards the 
equilibrium position in the center, so is in the 
opposite direction from the displacement.
You move slowly at the edges and quickly 
through the center.
The restoring force would have to be 
proportional to your displacement from 
the equilibrium position, and in the opposite 
direction from the displacement.
That’s the requirement for simple harmonic 
motion.
The round-trip looks like simple harmonic motion
Force
Way back in chapter 1, you figured out that 
you’d fall into the tunnel, travel through the 
Earth, and appear at the other end of the 
tunnel. Then you’d fall back in again, go 
through the tunnel in the opposite direction, 
and end up where you started... and so on.
What’s it LIKE?
If you come across a situation you 
haven’t seen before, think about 
whether you’ve seen something 
similar in the past by asking 
yourself: “What’s it like?”
x
t
That sounds a lot like simple harmonic motion, 
something you learned about in chapter 20. Now 
that you know how to tackle simple harmonic motion 
problems, we can add a lot of detail to what we 
figured out before.
Tunnel entrance
Center of Earth
Other side 
of Earth
Equilibrium 
position
Displacement
842    Chapter 21
shm revisited

A trip through the center of the Earth 
can be pretty tiring. Suppose you want to 
place a pizza order so that once you’ve 
gone through the Earth and come back 
again, you can have a nice snack.
But what time does the round-trip take?
Yeah - are you gonna 
get back before I 
arrive with your pizza?
45
Break Neck Pizza promises delivery in 
45 minutes... but will you be able to get 
through the Earth and then back again 
in time to meet Alex the delivery guy?
What time does your journey through 
the Earth take?
First of all, you’ll have to work out if your journey through the 
Earth IS simple harmonic motion. The journey might only look 
like simple harmonic motion without actually being simple 
harmonic motion.
Then, if your journey is simple harmonic motion, you can use the 
equations you worked out in chapter 20 to calculate the time that 
the round-trip takes - and whether you’ll be back in time for pizza.
Who arrives first 
- you or Alex the 
delivery guy?
Back in time for pizza?
Trip through Earth looks like SHM.
If it’s SHM, can use SHM equations 
to calculate time that trip takes.
Is it SHM? Is the restoring force 
proportional to the displacement?
you are here 4    843
think like a physicist

Anytime you want 
to use an equation, 
think about the 
CONTEXT. Is 
it OK to use the 
equation here?
Joe: Hang on. It’s only SHM if the restoring force is directly 
proportional to the displacement from the equilibrium position 
of the object that’s moving to and fro. We don’t know whether the 
restoring force follows that pattern or not yet.
Frank: Yeah, if the trip through the Earth isn’t SHM, we can’t use our 
SHM equations to calculate the time it takes.
Joe: The gravitational force is an inverse square law, isn’t it? 
FG =  – Gm1m2
r2
. So if you double the displacement, the force is only a 
quarter of what it was before. The force isn’t directly proportional to the 
displacement. The force gets smaller as the displacement gets larger!
Frank: Oh yeah. For SHM, the restoring force needs to get larger as 
the displacement gets larger. 
Jim: Hey - didn’t we say before that the force is zero in the center of 
the Earth?! If the equation FG =  – Gm1m2
r2
 works at the center of the 
Earth (where r = 0), you’re dividing by zero. If you divide by a very 
small number, you get a very large answer. And if you divide by zero, 
you get an answer of infinity! Computer says no!
Joe: Yes ... maybe FG =  – Gm1m2
r2
only works when you’re outside the 
Earth. When you’re outside, all of the Earth is below you.
Frank: But when you’re inside the tunnel, some of the Earth is below 
you and attracts you downwards. The rest of the Earth is above you 
and attracts you upwards.
Jim: So the net force on you in the center is zero, as there are equal 
masses of Earth above and below you. And the net force on you 
somewhere else in the tunnel depends on how much Earth is above you 
and how much Earth is below you.
Joe: Looks like we need to work out a different equation for when 
you’re inside the Earth then, if FG =  – Gm1m2
r2
 isn’t going to work.
Calculating the net force on you when you’re inside the Earth is a complicated 
problem. How might you break the problem down into smaller parts?
Equation
Does it SUCK?
Inverse square
So that’s that! Going through 
the Earth and back again is 
simple harmonic motion.
simple harmonic motion
The net force on the 
object that always points 
in the direction of the 
equilibrium position.
You can only 
use your simple 
harmonic motion 
equations from 
chapter 20 if the 
restoring force is 
proportional to 
the displacement. 
844    Chapter 21
context matters

The gravitational force between two spheres is FG =  – Gm1m2
r2
. You 
can treat each sphere as if its entire mass was concentrated at a single 
point in the center of the sphere. 
If you treat the human body like a very small sphere, you can use this 
equation to calculate the gravitational force that the Earth exerts 
on you - as long as you’re outside the Earth.
But when you’re inside the tunnel, there’s Earth above you and 
below you. Calculating the gravitational force that the Earth exerts on 
you when you’re inside it is a complicated problem!
Try to break 
down complicated 
problems into 
smaller parts.
You can treat the Earth like a sphere and a shell
The rest of the Earth forms 
a ‘shell.’ Some of the shell 
is below you and some of the 
shell is above you.
If you can work out an 
equation for the force exerted 
on you by the shell, you can 
add it to the force exerted 
on you by the sphere. This 
gives you the net force that 
the Earth exerts on you while 
you’re inside the tunnel.
But you can break down this problem into two parts by 
thinking of the Earth in two parts. Anytime you’re inside the 
Earth, you’re a certain distance (let’s call this distance r) from 
the equilibrium position in the center of the Earth.
So beneath you, there’s a sphere with radius r. You already 
know how to calculate the gravitational force exerted on you 
by a sphere if you know its radius and mass: FG =  – Gm1m2
r2
r
Sphere with 
radius r.
You are here.
r
RE
You are here.
Radius of the 
Earth is RE.
‘Shell’
You already know an equation 
for the gravitational force 
from a sphere!
Back in time for pizza?
Trip through Earth looks like SHM.
If it’s SHM, can use SHM equations 
to calculate time that trip takes.
Is it SHM? Is the restoring force 
proportional to the displacement?
Force from shell?
Force from sphere?
We’re defining the radius as the displacement away from 
the center of the Earth. The force acts towards the 
center of the Earth - hence the minus sign.
you are here 4    845
think like a physicist

You can deal with the sphere - but what about the shell?
Use the magnets to work out the force from the shell. Annotate the diagrams as you go.
There’s more shell                  you than there 
is                  you, so there’s more                    
                you than there is                  you. But 
the shell                  you is (on average) a much larger 
              away from you than the shell                you.
above
below
mass
distance
mass
volume
surface area
thickness
The shell above you is totally                  . So for every small piece of Earth 
to the                   of you there’s an equivalent piece to the                  . 
The                   components of the gravitational force from these two pieces 
of Earth are equal but in                   directions, so they                  . 
The                   components add together, so the net force on you from 
the shell above you is                  . The same argument applies to the 
shell below you, which exerts a net                   force on you once the                   
components                  . So the part of the shell                  you attracts 
you                   and the part                   you attracts you                  
horizontal
right
symmetrical
left
add to zero
downwards
upwards
opposite
vertical
If you take a piece of very thin shell, its                  will be 
its                 multiplied by its                 . So the 
                  of the very thin shell will depend on its surface area.
You are here.
above
below
846    Chapter 21
what about the shell?

b
a
If you take a small slice of thin shell from                   
and the equivalent from                  , you can 
think of them as being tiny slices from spheres with 
radius                  and                  with surface 
areas                  and                  respectively. 
And as the                  of a thin shell depends on its 
surface area, the masses of the slices are proportional 
to                  and                  
volume
above
below
b
a
b2
inverse square
a2
b2
1
a2
1
Gravitation is an                  law. The slice of Earth 
above you is distance                  away, so the force from 
1 kg of it is proportional to                   The slice of 
Earth below you is distance                  away, so the force 
from 1 kg of it is proportional to                  Therefore, 
the force from the slice at distance ‘a’ is proportional to   
               ×                  and the force from the slice 
at distance ‘b’ is proportional to                  ×          
So the force from the slice above you is                  to 
the force from the slice below you. And the net force from 
the whole thin shell is                  If you’re further 
inside the Earth, you can think of the thick shell being 
made up of many many thin shells. So the net force from the 
thick shell is also                  
volume
equal
zero
Use this space to sum up 
what you’ve discovered:
This thin shell is like a tiny layer on the outside.
a is this 
short 
distance
b is this 
long 
distance
You’re 
mapping 
every 
point on 
the top to 
every point 
on the 
bottom.
Now we’ve filled 
in the shell with 
many tiny thin 
shells like the one 
in the box above.
you are here 4    847
think like a physicist

Magnets Solution
There’s more shell below you than 
there is above you, so there’s more 
mass below you than there is above 
you. But the shell below you is (on 
average) a much larger distance away 
from you than the shell above you.
You are here.
Shell below you.
Shell 
above 
you.
The shell above you is totally symmetrical. So for every small piece of 
Earth to the left of you, there’s an equivalent piece to the right. The 
horizontal components of the gravitational force from these two pieces 
of Earth are equal but in opposite directions, so they add to zero. 
 
 
 
The vertical components add together, so the net force on you from the 
shell above you is upwards. The same argument applies to the shell below 
you, which exerts a net downwards force on you once the horizontal 
components add to zero. So the part of the shell above you attracts you 
upwards, and the part below you attracts you downwards.
Vertical components add 
to produce a net force.
Horizontal components add to zero.
If you take a piece of very thin shell, 
its volume will be its surface area 
multiplied by its thickness. So the 
mass of the very thin shell will 
depend on its surface area.
Surface area
Thickness
Mass depends 
on surface area.
In problems 
that involve 
SYMMETRY, 
there are often 
force components 
that add to zero.
848    Chapter 21
pay attention to symmetry

The net force from the shell is zero!
If you take a small slice of thin shell from above and the 
equivalent from below, you can think of them as being tiny slices 
from spheres with radius a and b with surface areas a2 and b2 
respectively. And as the mass of a thin shell depends on its surface 
area, the masses of the slices are proportional to a2 and b2.
Gravitation is an inverse square law. The slice of Earth above you 
is distance a away, so the force from 1 kg of it is proportional to
a21 . The slice of Earth below you is distance b away, so the force 
from 1 kg of it is proportional to b21 .Therefore, the force from the 
slice at distance ‘a’ is proportional to a2 × a21 and the force from 
the slice at distance ‘b’ is proportional to b2 × b21 .
b
a
Larger mass - but 
also larger distance.
Small mass, 
very close 
to you.
Forces are equal and 
opposite, so net force 
from shell is zero.
So the force from the slice above you is equal to 
the force from the slice below you. And the net force 
from the whole thin shell is zero. If you’re further 
inside the Earth, you can think of the thick shell 
being made up of many many thin shells. So the net 
force from the thick shell is also zero.
Force from 
slice above you.
Force from 
slice below you.
Use this space to sum up 
what you’ve discovered:
The net force from the shell is zero. This is because the forces from the small, close mass 
above you and the large, far away mass below you are the same size, but in opposite directions.
Here, we’re using bold to show you where the magnets 
went. The distances a and b are both scalars.
you are here 4    849
think like a physicist

Q: Do I need to understand and 
reproduce all of that?!
A: Don’t worry - you won’t be asked to 
do something that difficult in an exam. The 
big take-away is that the net force from the 
shell is zero because the forces from a small 
mass close by and a large mass far away 
added to zero. If you got that, you’re great!
Q: But the Earth isn’t a sphere and a 
shell ... is it?!
A: Treating the Earth like a sphere and a 
shell is a mathematical tool. In the same 
way, moving objects don’t have velocity 
vector arrows and components drawn on 
them in real life, but vector arrows are very 
useful tools in physics. 
Q: What’s so special about a shell?
A: You’ve worked out that the force the 
shell exerts on you is zero. So the net force 
on you must come entirely from the sphere.
Q: What’s so special about a sphere?
A: You already know how to calculate the 
gravitational force an object experiences as 
a result of being outside a sphere.
Q: Doesn’t the equation for the 
gravitational force exerted by a sphere 
only work if I’m outside the sphere?
A: When your displacement is r from the 
center of the Earth, then you’re outside the 
sphere with radius r.
Q: Why choose that particular radius, 
r, as the place to draw the boundary 
between the sphere and shell?
A: r is your displacement from the 
equilibrium position in the center of the Earth. 
When we did SHM in chapter 18, we called 
this displacement x. Here it’s better to use r 
so that you remember that the displacement 
from the equilibrium position is also a radius. 
 
If, when your displacement is r, the force 
exerted on you by the Earth is proportional 
to r, then your trip through the Earth is SHM. 
The period of the SHM is the same as the 
time it takes you to get back to where you 
started - the time you want to calculate!
The net force from the shell is zero
This means that the net force that the shell exerts on you is 
zero. So the net force exerted on you when you’re inside the 
tunnel must come entirely from the sphere, radius r.
If that force is proportional to r, then you’ll move through 
the Earth with simple harmonic motion and can use the 
equations you already know to calculate the time you take to 
get back home again.
Back in time for pizza?
Trip through Earth looks like SHM.
If it’s SHM, can use SHM equations 
to calculate time that trip takes.
Is it SHM? Is the restoring force 
proportional to the displacement?
Force from shell?
Force from sphere?
This is zero!!
r
Net force on you at 
position r comes from 
sphere with radius r.
You are here.
Net force 
from shell 
is zero.
850    Chapter 21
zero net force

Your job is to work out whether you move through the Earth with simple harmonic motion. For it to 
be simple harmonic motion, the force on you must be proportional to your displacement from the 
equilibrium position in the center of the Earth.
So is the net force on you proportional to r or not?
a. Use the ready bake equation for the volume of a sphere to 
write down equations for VE , the volume of the Earth, and Vs , the 
volume of the sphere inside the Earth, radius r. (Use the symbol RE 
for the radius of the Earth.)
b. Use the fact that the small sphere, radius r, is part of the 
Earth to work out an equation for the mass of the sphere. (Use 
the symbols ME and ms for the mass of the Earth and sphere, 
respectively.)
c. Use the mass of the small sphere from part b to work out an equation for the gravitational force, FG, 
that the small sphere of radius r exerts on you (your mass is m). Is FG proportional to r?
Ready Bake 
Equation
Volume of a sphere:
V =
πr3
4
3
r
RE
You are here.
Radius of the 
Earth is RE.
‘Shell’.
Hint: The mass 
of each sphere 
is proportional 
to its volume.
Hint: Think about which 
quantities in your equation are 
variables and which are constants.
you are here 4    851
think like a physicist

Your job is to work out whether you move through the Earth with simple harmonic motion. For it to 
be simple harmonic motion, the force on you must be proportional to your displacement from the 
equilibrium position in the center of the Earth.
So is the net force on you proportional to r or not?
a. Use the ready bake equation for the volume of a sphere to 
write down equations for VE , the volume of the Earth, and Vs , the 
volume of the sphere inside the Earth, radius r. (Use the symbol RE 
for the radius of the Earth.)
b. Use the fact that the small sphere, radius r, is part of the 
Earth to work out an equation for the mass of the sphere. (Use 
the symbols ME and ms for the mass of the Earth and sphere 
respectively.)
c. Use the mass of the small sphere from part b to work out an equation for the gravitational force, FG, 
that the small sphere of radius r exerts on you (you have mass m). Is FG proportional to r?
Ready Bake 
Equation
Volume of a sphere:
V =
πr3
4
3
VE  =
πRE
3
4
3
Volume of Earth:
Vs  =
πr3
4
3
Volume of sphere:
Mass is proportional to volume.
msVs
MEVE
=
ms
MEVs
VE
=
πRE
3
4
3
πr3
4
3
ms
ME.
=
MEr3
RE
3
=
FG  =
Gmsm
r2
=
GMEr3m
RE
3 r2
FG  =  -constant × r
But G, ME, RE and m are all constants, so
-
-
GMEr m
RE
3
= -
FG is directly proportional to r and in the opposite direction. 
So it’s simple harmonic motion.
r
RE
You are here.
Radius of the 
Earth is RE.
‘Shell’.
Hint: The mass 
of each sphere 
is proportional 
to its volume.
Volume
Mass
GMEm r
RE
3
= -
There are a lot of 
letters multiplying or 
dividing the ‘r,’ but 
they’re all constants. 
So the entire circle 
thing is a constant.
852    Chapter 21
solutions

Now you can use what you already know 
about simple harmonic motion to fill in some 
of the details. The period of the SHM is 
the time it takes you to go through the Earth 
and back again.
Alex also wants to know your average speed 
- which you can calculate as well ...
The force is proportional to the 
displacement, so your trip is SHM
You just worked out that FG, the force from the sphere, is 
proportional to r, your displacement from the center of the 
Earth. As FG always points towards the equilibrium position 
in the center, your trip through the Earth is definitely 
simple harmonic motion!
Force
Displacement
Simple Harmonic Motion
Time
Speed
Yeah, but are you gonna 
arrive before I do? And are 
you faster than I am?
Period
Speed cycling legend, 
Alex, wants to know 
how fast you are as well 
as the time you take. 
Let’s impress him...
You’ll do this 
on the next 
page
Back in time for pizza?
Trip through Earth looks like SHM.
If it’s SHM, can use SHM equations 
to calculate time that trip takes
Is it SHM? Is the restoring force 
proportional to the displacement?
Force from shell?
Force from sphere?
This is zero!!
Proportional to r - it’s SHM!
- and average speed (to impress Alex).
you are here 4    853
think like a physicist

Simple harmonic motion can be described using the equation a = -ω2x, where the symbols have their 
usual meanings.
a. Use Newton’s 2nd Law to rewrite your equation for the force you experience 
as you pass through the Earth in terms of a instead of FG. Hence compare your 
equation with the a = -ω2x form, and rearrange to give an expression for ω.
b. The mass of the Earth is 5.97 × 1024 kg, the radius of the Earth is 6.38 × 106 m, and G, the gravitational 
constant, is 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2. Calculate the time (in minutes and seconds) that it would take for you to 
return to your starting point after stepping into a tunnel that goes through the center of the Earth. Does 
this take you less than 45 minutes?
c. What is your average speed during your trip through the Earth? What is your average velocity?
Hint: Use the question clinic to 
help you answer this question!
FG  =
GMEm r
RE
3
-
This is the equation you worked 
out on the previous page.
The time that Alex takes to arrive with your pizza.
Hint: Use the question clinic to 
help you answer this question!
854    Chapter 21
rearrange the equation

855
Question Clinic: The “Equation you’ve never seen before” Question
Sometimes, a question will present you with an equation 
you’ve never ever seen before. But don’t just assume you can’t 
do it just because it’s unfamiliar. Answering a question like this is sometimes 
a case of combining the equation you’re given with another you already know so 
that you can solve a problem. And sometimes it’s a case of interpreting some 
other new information you’re given in the question as well.
In a question like this, you need to be 
especially clear about what each variable represents. 
There are several different letters that are conventionally used to 
represent length in physics equations depending on the context - x 
(displacement), r (radius), l (length), and h (height). When you look 
at equations, think about what each variable means, as you may be 
able to make a substitution that isn’t immediately obvious.
4. Simple harmonic motion can be described using the equation 
a = -ω2x, where the symbols have their usual meanings.
Rewrite your equation for the force you experience as you pass 
through the Earth using this form, and rearrange it to give an 
expression for ω.
The mass of the Earth is 5.97 × 1024 kg and the radius of the 
Earth is 6.38 × 106 m. Calculate the time (in minutes and 
seconds) it would take for you to return to your starting point after 
stepping into a tunnel that goes through the center of the Earth.
What is your average speed during your trip through the Earth? 
And what is your average velocity?
a.
b.
c.
Make sure you look up any symbols you’re not familiar with. 
In an exam, you’ll have an equation sheet you can use. Also 
remember that the same quantity (e.g., displacement) may be 
represented by more than one symbol (r, x, ... etc)
If the equation is unfamiliar, don’t 
panic! Write it down and annotate it 
with what each symbol represents.
This jargon means 
you’ll have to do 
substituting and 
rearranging.
This indicates that 
you’ll need to use an 
answer from an earlier 
part of the problem.
If you found 
part a difficult, 
look at part 
b. It gives you 
some hints about 
some values you’re 
expected to have 
in your part a 
answer. You might 
be able to work 
backwards!
Make sure you use the correct units 
and the correct start and end 
points when you do the calculation.
Note the difference between speed 
(which involves distance) and velocity 
(which involves displacement).
In this exam 
version of 
the question, 
the value 
for G isn’t 
given. You’d be 
expected to 
look it up in 
your table of 
information.

Simple harmonic motion can be described using the equation a = -ω2x, where the symbols have their 
usual meanings.
I’ve been using r as displacement from equilibrium, this equation uses x. 
I’ll continue to use r to be consistent.
FG  =
GMEr m
RE
3
and FG = ma
ma  =
GMEr m
RE
3
-
-
This is of the form:   a  =  -ω2r except that ω2 = GME
 
RE
3
ω  = GME
 
RE
3
b. The mass of the Earth is 5.97 × 1024 kg, the radius of the Earth is 6.38 × 106 m and G, the gravitational 
constant, is 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2. Calculate the time (in minutes and seconds) that it would take for you to 
return to your starting point after stepping into a tunnel that goes through the center of the Earth. Does 
this take you less than 45 minutes?
Time it takes is equal to the period, T. Need to get from ω to T.
ω  =  2πf     and
f  =
1
T
ω  = 2π
T
T  = 2π
ω
=
GME
 
RE
3
2π
=
6.67 × 10-11 × 5.97 × 1024
(6.38 × 106)3
2 × π
=  5070 s (3 sd)
Need time in minutes and seconds.
5070 s  = 5070 s  ×
60 s
1 min
=  84.5 min  =  84 min 30 s.
c. What is your average speed during your trip through the Earth? What is your average velocity?
RE
RE
Average speed  = Total distance
Total time
Total distance  =  4RE
Average speed  = 4RE
T
= 4 × 6.38 × 106
5070
=  5030 m/s (3 sd)
Average speed
Average velocity  = Total displacement
Total time
But the total displacement is zero, as you 
start and finish in the same place.
Average velocity  =  0 m/s
FG  =
GMEr m
RE
3
-
This is the equation you worked 
out on the previous page.
a. Use Newton’s 2nd Law to rewrite your equation for the force you experience 
as you pass through the Earth in terms of a instead of FG. Hence compare your 
equation with the a = -ω2x form, and rearrange to give an expression for ω.
This is more than 45 minutes, so Alex gets there first.
856    Chapter 21
solutions

You know your average speed 
- but what’s your top speed?
Wow, an average speed of over 
5 km per second?! That totally 
rocks! What’s your top speed?
Joe: Not necessarily - there’s something I’ve been thinking about for 
the last few pages. When we said, “What’s it like?” right at the start, 
I said I thought it looked like circular motion from side on.
Frank: Oh yeah. Circular motion from side on and simple 
harmonic motion both use the same type of equations.
Jim: How does that help us?
Joe: I was thinking that if we looked at an orbit from side on, it 
might look like the trip through the Earth and back. We know how 
to calculate the velocity of an object that’s in orbit around the 
Earth. That velocity will be the same as the maximum velocity when 
you look at the orbit from side on.
Joe: Yeah, I was thinking that the amplitude of an orbit just over 
the Earth’s surface and the amplitude of the trip through the Earth 
would be the same.
Frank: But what if the orbit and the simple harmonic motion don’t  
have the same period?
Jim: We know how to calculate the period of an orbit as well. If 
the orbit and the SHM have the same period as well as the same 
amplitude, then they must look identical from side on...
So we gotta calculate the gravitational 
potential energy inside the Earth?! Man, 
that was tough enough from outside!
OK, he’s 
impressed!
You already know one 
way of calculating 
the maximum speed. 
But can you use the 
same way here?
You just used what you know about simple harmonic motion to 
work out that your round-trip time is 84 mins 30 s, and your average 
speed on your trip through the Earth is over 5 km per second!
Even though you won’t beat Alex to your house, he is really 
impressed and wants to know what your maximum speed is.
A mass on a spring moves with SHM. 
When you worked out the maximum 
speed of a mass on a spring, you used 
energy conservation. But working out 
the potential energy of an object inside 
the Earth is going to be tough ...
you are here 4    857
think like a physicist

There’s often 
more than one 
way of looking 
at a problem.
If you could orbit the Earth close to its surface, you’d 
follow a circular path. When you look at an circular 
motion from side on, you only observe one component 
of the displacement, velocity and acceleration.
Circular motion from side on and simple harmonic 
motion both use the same type of equation, so their 
graphs are the same shape.
Radius
Amplitude
Component
Trigonometry
Angle
Circular motion from side on 
looks like simple harmonic motion
If the circular orbit has the same amplitude and 
the same period as the simple harmonic motion trip 
through the Earth, then the two journeys will look 
identical from side on.
This means that the maximum speed of the trip 
through the Earth will be the same as the linear speed 
of the orbit (as long as the periods are the same). And 
you can already calculate the linear speed of an orbit...
Displacement
Time
RE
-RE
84 min 30 s
42 min 15 s
The SHM and the orbit both 
have the same AMPLITUDE 
- the radius of the Earth.
If the SHM and the orbit also 
have the same PERIOD, then 
they’re identical from side on.
This is the period 
of the SHM.
Here, you’re on 
the other side 
of the Earth.
You can project this component of 
the orbit’s radius onto the tunnel.
RE
We drew the displacement-time graph up 
there, but the two velocity-time graphs 
would also be identical.
858    Chapter 21
side-on circular motion

Q: But surely an orbit at the surface 
of the Earth wouldn’t work because of 
air resistance?
A: That’s absolutely right ... but then 
again, we made some assumptions about 
oscillating to and fro through the center of 
the Earth already! Originally, we said that 
we’d ignore air resistance (which would 
slow you down) and the Earth’s rotation 
(which would make you hit the sides of 
the tunnel) - so we can safely ignore them 
both for the orbit as well!
Q: But how do you know that the 
period of the orbit and the period of 
the SHM are the same? They might be 
different even though the amplitudes 
are the same.
A: That’s right - we don’t know that the 
periods are the same ... yet. But as you’ve 
dealt with orbits before, you’ll be able to 
work out whether they are soon enough ...
If the orbit has the same period as the SHM, then 
they look identical from side on.
a. Calculate the period of a circular orbit at 
the Earth’s surface. (The mass of the Earth is 
5.97 × 1024 kg, and its radius is 6.38 × 106 m.) 
How does this compare to the period of SHM 
through the center of the Earth?
b. What is the maximum velocity of something 
(or someone) falling through the Earth?
Hint: Think about what the 
centripetal force is provided 
by. You can use your equation 
appendix, if you like!
you are here 4    859
think like a physicist

If the orbit has the same period as the SHM, then 
they look identical from side on.
a. Calculate the period of a circular orbit at 
the Earth’s surface. (The mass of the Earth is 
5.97 × 1024 kg, and its radius is 6.38 × 106 m.) 
How does this compare to the period of SHM 
through the center of the Earth?
b. What is the maximum velocity of something 
(or someone) falling through the Earth?
Fc  =  mrω2  =  G MEm
r2
ω  = GME
 
R3
ω  =  2πf     and
f  =
1
T
ω  = 2π
T
T  = 2π
ω
=
GME
 
RE
3
2π
=
6.67 × 10-11 × 5.97 × 1024
(6.38 × 106)3
2 × π
ME
m
r
Maximum velocity is same as velocity of circular motion.
v  =  rω
ω  = 2π
T
and
v  = 2πr
T
= 2 × π × 6.38 × 106
5070
v  =  7900 m/s (3 sd)
T  =  5070 s (3 sd)
This is the same period as you oscillating through the 
center of the Earth.
Your top speed is a blistering pace of 
just under 8 km per SECOND!
Wow!!! 
Super-quick!
As long as you send your Break Neck 
Pizza order when you pop out on the 
other side of the world (with 42 min 
and 15 s still to go), you arrive home 
just before Alex does!
Start here.
Send order.
Arrive back.
860    Chapter 21
just-in-time pizza

Units
Falling
Circumference
Inverse square law
Energy Conservation
Graph
Acceleration
Scalar
Inelastic collision
Force
Frequency
Special points
Experiment
Period
Elastic collision
Centripetal force
Weight
Pendulum
Simple Harmonic Motion
Time
Angular frequency
Spring
Energy
Gravitational field
Component
Tension
Pythagoras
Momentum conservation
Substitution
Equations of motion
Torque
Pulley
Radians
Impulse
Elastic potential energy
Be part of it
Equation
Constant acceleration
Vector
Normal force
Speed
Scientific notation
Distance
Gravitational potential energy
Mechanical energy
Displacement
Trigonometry
Amplitude
Angular velocity
Volume
Velocity
Power
Friction
Radius
Freefall
Kinetic energy
Free body diagram
Symmetry
Slope
Newton’s Laws
Work
Does it SUCK?
Internal energy
Area
Mass
You can do (just about) anything!
You’ve finished your trip through the Earth - and 
your trip through this book. You’ve learned how 
physics works in the real world and absorbed 
problem solving strategies that you can use (just 
about) anywhere.
Think like a physicist!
Think like 
a physicist.
I can use what I know to work 
out what I don’t know (yet).
you are here 4    861
think like a physicist


this is a new chapter    863
appendix i: leftovers
The top 6 things (that we didn’t 
cover before, but are covering now) 
No book can ever tell you everything about everything.    
We’ve covered a lot of ground, and given you some great thinking skills and physics 
knowledge that will help you in the future, whether you’re taking an exam or are just 
curious about how the world works. We had to make some really tough choices about 
what to include and what to leave out. Here are some topics that we didn’t look at as we 
went along, but are still important and useful.
What?! No GUTs or TOEs? 
Can I have a refund?
GUT = grand unified theory. 
TOE = theory of everything.

x  =  A cos(ωt)
x  = x0cos
k
m t
#1 Equation of a straight line graph, y = mx + c
Equation
Vertical 
axis
Horizontal 
axis
Slope
Intercept
 y = mx + c
y
x
m
c
 x = x0 + vt
x
t
v
x0
 v = v0 + at
v
t
a
v0
In chapter 20, you learned to compare the equation for a 
specific case of simple harmonic motion (for example, a 
mass on a spring or a simple pendulum) with a standard 
equation for simple harmonic motion, x = Acos(ωt).
When you line up your SHM equation with this standard 
equation, you can use it to work out the amplitude and 
angular frequency of your system.
The amplitude is x0, because 
the x0 in the specific equation 
corresponds to A in the 
standard equation.
The angular frequency is km
because      in the specific 
equation corresponds to ω 
in the standard equation.
km
There’s an even more fundamental 
equation you can do this with - the 
standard equation for a straight 
line. This is given by  y = mx + c, which 
you can plot on a graph of y vs x.
y
x
c
Slope = m
c is the intercept, where the 
graph cuts the horizontal axis.
m is the slope 
of the graph
When x = 0, the equation y = mx + c becomes y = 0 + c , 
which is just y = c.
Therefore, c is the intercept - the value of y when x = 0.
If you increase the value of x by 1, then value of y 
increases by m, because of the y = mx part of the 
equation. This means that the slope of the graph = m.
Every equation 
for a straight 
line graph 
follows the 
pattern 
y = mx + c
Every equation for a straight line graph follows this pattern, or 
form. It means that if you work out which variable to plot on 
which axis, you can work out the values of the other variables in 
your equation from the slope and the intercept.
Plot a graph of v against t and calculate the 
acceleration from the slope of the graph.
y  =  mx + c
Vertical axis
Slope
Intercept
Horizontal axis
864    Appendix i
straight line graph

you are here 4    865
leftovers
Why would I want to compare an 
equation to the graph y = mx + c when I 
can just plot a straight line graph anyway, 
using the variables I already measured?
You can turn ANY equation into a 
straight line graph and measure its slope
Suppose you’re doing an experiment to calculate 
the acceleration of a block down a slope (perhaps to 
eventually work out the coefficient of friction).
You’d expect your graph of displacement vs time to be of 
the form  x = x0 + v0t + ½at2.
If you set things up so that x0 = 0 and v0 = 0, the 
equation becomes x = 0 + 0 + ½at2, or just x = ½at2
You know from experience that x = ½at2 will produce a 
curved graph... so what does it have to do with y = mx + c, 
which is the equation for a straight line graph?
(just about)
Equation
Vertical 
axis
Horizontal 
axis
Slope
Intercept
 y = mx + c
y
x
m
c
 x = ½at2
x
t2
½a
0
If you work out the value of t2 for each of your data 
points and plot t2 along the horizontal axis and x along the 
vertical axis, you’ll end up with a straight line graph with a 
slope of ½a. Draw the graph, measure the slope, and you 
get the value for a, which is what you want!
Another way of thinking about it is to say “Let z = t2” and 
substitute that in to your equation x = ½at2. You then 
have the equation x = ½az. So if you plot a graph with x 
on the vertical axis and z on the horizontal axis, the slope 
of the graph will be ½a.
If you already know the form of the equation you 
expect your experimental results to take, this can be a very 
powerful tool.
Arrange things so 
that the quantity 
you want to know 
winds up as the slope 
or intercept of a 
straight line graph.
x
t2
Slope = ½a
The intercept is zero because 
x = 0 when t2 = 0
Line up the 
variables in 
your equation 
with the 
variables in 
the standard 
equation so 
that you 
keep track of 
which is which.

#2 Displacement is the area under the velocity-time graph
F
Force
Displacement
x
You’ve already learned that the work done is the area under 
the force-displacement graph, and used this several times to 
calculate energy transfer.
This is possible because the quantity of work done = F∆x. 
This equation has the same form as the equation for the area 
of a rectangle: area = height × width. If you have a rectangle 
on a graph where the height is F and the width is ∆x, then the 
area of the rectangle will be equal to the work done.
If you have any equation of the form A = bc, then A will be 
the area under a graph of b plotted against c.
The graph is a 
rectangle with height 
F and width x. 
So the area of the 
rectangle is F x., 
equal to the work done
The most common example of this kind of 
graph is a velocity-time graph.
This is because v  = ∆x
∆t , and so ∆x = v∆t.
Therefore, if you plot a graph of v against t, the 
area under the graph will be equal to ∆x
If A = bc then A will be 
the area under a graph of b 
plotted againt c.
For example, x = vt, so x is 
the area under a v-t graph.
v
Velocity
Time
t
The graph is a 
rectangle with height v 
and width t. So the 
area of the rectangle 
is v t., equal to the 
displacement.
This even works for graphs that aren’t rectangles. For 
any shape of graph, you could theoretically split 
up the area between the graph and the horizontal axis 
into lots and lots of tiny rectangles. Then you can add 
up the areas of the rectangles - to get the total area 
under the graph, and the total displacement.
v
Velocity
Time
t
Practically, you’d calculate 
the displacement by 
working out the area of 
the rectangle and the 
areas of the two triangles.
The graph is a 
rectangle with height v 
and width t. So the 
area of the rectangle 
is v t., equal to the 
displacement.
You can think of this triangle as being made 
up of lots of tiny rectangles, each like the 
large rectangle in the picture above.
866    Appendix i
displacement is the area

you are here 4    867
leftovers
I guess that if the velocity is negative, 
then you rack up the area underneath the 
horizontal axis instead of above it?
Graph of displacement vs. time for an 
object which goes up then down again
Time (s)
Displacement   
(m)
Velocity  (m/s)
Time (s)
Graph of velocity vs time for an object 
which goes up then down again
Yes - if the velocity is negative, the displacement 
is changing in the opposite direction.
The area between the velocity-time graph and the x-axis tells you 
the total displacement so far. If the velocity has only ever been 
positive, the total displacement must also be positive.
However, if the velocity later becomes negative, the object must 
be retracing its steps and traveling in the opposite direction. This 
corresponds to the velocity-time graph being below the horizontal 
axis, and a change of displacement in the negative direction.
If there are equal areas above and below the horizontal axis of the 
velocity-time graph, the net displacement must be zero.
Area above 
horizontal 
axis is positive 
displacement.
Area below 
horizontal axis 
is negative 
displacement.
The area is cumulative. 
So this area (so 
far) is equal to this 
displacement.
At this point, you have 
equal areas above and 
below the horizontal axis, 
so the overall cumulative 
displacement is zero.

#3 Torque on a bridge
We’ve previously defined torque as a “turning 
force.” When you identify a fulcrum, torque is 
defined as the displacement from the fulcrum 
a force is applied  at × the component of the 
force perpendicular to the lever, τ = rF⊥
Torque is a vector - you define clockwise as 
positive and counter-clockwise as negative.
F1
F2
r1
r2
τ1 = r1F1
τ2 = r2F2
If we define 
clockwise as the 
positive direction, 
this torque is 
negative.
Clockwise 
rotation, so this 
torque is positive.
Zero net torque, 
as torques are 
equal sizes in 
opposite directions.
In some problems, you’re asked to calculate 
the force that a pillar or string exerts on a 
bridge to support it. For example:
“Imhotep, mass 80 kg, is standing 5.0 m from 
the end of a bridge that’s 20.0 m wide and has 
a mass of 200 kg. The bridge is horizontal and 
in equilibrium What force will the support at 
the far end of the bridge exert on the bridge?”
The key to solving a problem like this is 
recognizing that it’s actually about torque
In any problem that asks 
you about forces, look to see 
if all the forces act through 
the center of the object. If 
they don’t, then a TORQUE 
must be present.
20.0 m
5.0 m
F = ?
m = 80 kg
m = 200 kg
What force does 
this pillar exert 
on the bridge?
868    Appendix i
recognizing torque 

you are here 4    869
leftovers
If you want to know the 
force that a pillar (or string) 
exerts on a bridge, ask 
yourself “where would the 
FULCRUM be if that pillar 
(or string) wasn’t there?”
The key question in working this out is to ask yourself: “if the pillar wasn’t 
there, where would the fulcrum be?
In this case, the bridge would rotate around the pillar that supports it at the 
other end. So the force that our pillar provides must provide a torque that 
makes the total torque on the bridge around the fulcrum add to zero.
As well as the torque provided by our pillar, we need to think about the 
torque from Imhotep and the torque from the bridge itself. The second key 
is realizing that the bridge acts like all its mass is concentrated in the 
center. Even if Imhotep was invisible, there would still be a torque.
20.0 m
5.0 m
F = ?
m = 80 kg
m = 200 kg
10.0 m
F1 = 80g
F2 = 200g
Call clockwise the positive direction:
r1F1 + r2F2 - r3F  =  0
F  =
r1F1 + r2F2
r3
F  =
5.0 × 80 × 9.8  +  10.0 × 200 × 9.8
20.0
F  =  1176 N
If this pillar wasn’t here, 
the fulcrum would be at 
the other pillar.
Fulcrum
Finally, check to see if your answer SUCKs. The units are 
correct, but what about the size? The total weight of the bridge 
plus Imhotep is (200 + 80) × 9.8 = 2744 N. But the mass is 
mostly concentrated at the other end of the bridge, so this pillar 
should support less than half the combined weight.
1176 N is less than half of 2744 N, so the answer is plausible.
Bridge acts like its 
mass is all concentrated 
at its center when you 
pivot it at one end.

Work is 
measured in 
Joules.
Power is the 
rate at which 
you do work.
Power’s measured 
in Joules per 
second, J/s
#4 Power
#5 Lots of practice questions
Power is the rate at which you do work, and is measured in 
Joules per second. Sometimes you’re asked to calculate the 
time it takes a machine with a certain power to transfer a 
certain amount of energy.
So for example, a 1.0 kW engine produces 1.0 kJ per 
second, and would do a job requiring 10 kJ of energy 
transfer in 10 seconds.
This book is fundamentally a learning book, not 
a textbook or a question bank. The questions and 
exercises have been carefully chosen to help you 
grasp the physics concepts you’re learning about.
This is because to fully understand physics, 
you need to do physics, not just read about it. 
You need to be able to use the concepts to do 
calculations as well being able to explain them.
You can’t get good at tennis just by reading a 
book about it - and in a similar way, you need to 
practice lots of exercises, problems and questions 
to get good at physics.
You can never do enough practice questions - but page 
count had to kick in somewhere, so you’ll have to find 
more elsewhere. A good source is your exam board, which 
will have past papers, or the kind of revision guide that 
contains practice exams.
If you’re taking AP Physics, you can download the past 
papers from their website - together with sample worked 
answers and marking schemes!
Do as many practice 
questions as you can - 
especially using past exam 
papers from your course.
Learn
Practice
Practice
Practice
Practice
Learn
Learn
Learn
Learn
Start
Finish
Better at 
physics
Practicing 
physics means 
that you learn 
and understand 
more.
Learning more physics means you 
can do harder practice questions.
If you never 
practice, you 
never get past 
this stage.
As you master more and 
more physics, you start to 
enjoy it more, and getting 
this good becomes really fun!
Power  = ∆W
∆t
Power  =
∆(F||x)
∆t
∆x
∆t
= F||
Power  = F||v
There’s also another equation you 
can use as a shortcut, which involves 
the velocity that the object you’re 
doing work on moves at:
This is rate 
of change of 
displacement, 
or velocity.
Power = Fv
(Remember, we’re using the component of 
the force parallel to the displacement. 
So the velocity must also be parallel to 
the force and displacement)
⇒
⇒
870    Appendix i
practice, practice, practice

#6 Exam tips
Although not everyone reading this book will be studying 
for an exam, a lot of people probably will be! We’ve 
based the content of this book on the mechanics and 
experimental parts of the AP Physics B course (an 
American College course). The syllabus is also largely the 
same as the mechanics content of an English A-Level 
exam (also taken internationally). But these exam tips 
apply right across the board!
Arrive at your exam fresh 
so that you’re ready to be 
inventive and solve problems. 
Trying to cram tires out the 
creative parts of your brain.
 Find a procrastination-free place 
to work. If necessary, hide your 
internet cable or wireless card!
Remember that different people 
structure their work in different 
ways. Some are happier with a 
timetable written out in advance, 
and some with writing down what 
they have revised and how long 
they spent on it as they go along.
Don’t be psyched out by what 
other people on your course claim 
they are or aren’t doing. Just get 
on with what you’re doing.
Start off with a mixture of reading 
through your notes or this book 
to make sure you understand the 
concepts, while doing (or redoing) 
exercises from the book.
Read through your homework 
from each section of your course 
to remind yourself of how you 
did problems before. If you’ve 
forgotten how to do any, redo them 
to remind yourself of the method. 





Get a good stock of previous 
exam questions. Once you’ve 
been through your notes and your 
homework, do all the questions in 
two or three papers “open book” 
(referring to your notes when 
you need them), then do all the 
questions in the most recent paper 
or two without using your notes. 
Do as many past papers as is 
physically possible!
In the exam, find out whether 
you are allowed a calculator in 
advance, and make sure you 
have spare batteries. Download or 
photocopy the equation table you’ll 
have in your exam, and make sure 
you use it when doing past papers.
Get a good night’s sleep and don’t 
cram – physics exams test how 
you can think on your feet, not 
what you have learned by rote.
Read the question. Underline the 
important parts. Read the question 
again. You get zero credit for 
answering a question you’ve not 
been asked!




Start with a sketch, and by asking 
yourself what it’s LIKE.
Try to give an explanation of what 
you’re doing at each stage of the 
problem. This helps you get things 
straight in your head - and helps 
your examiner give you points for 
showing that you understand.
Show your work! A numerical 
answer with no work usually only 
scores half points even if it’s 
correct.
Never cross anything out. If 
you change your mind part-way 
through, only cross out your first 
answer when you’ve completed 
your second.
If you have a multiple choice 
exam, find out if it is negatively 
marked. In the AP Physics B 
multiple choice paper, you lose 
quarter of a mark for every 
question you get wrong. So if you 
can reduce the possibilities to two 
or three answers, it’s worth taking 
a guess. But not if you’re guessing 
between four or five answers.





you are here 4    871
leftovers


this is a new chapter    873
appendix ii: equation table
Point of Reference
It’s difficult to remember something when you’ve only seen it once.    
Equations are a major way of describing what’s going on in physics. Every time you use equations 
to help solve a problem, you naturally start to become familiar with them without the need to 
spend time doing rote memorization. But before you get to that stage, it’s good to have a place you 
can look up the equation you want to use. That’s what this equation table appendix is for - it’s a 
point of reference that you can turn to at any time.
So, was the getaway 
car blue or green... two 
guys or three... was its 
velocity v or v0?

“No displacement”
v  = v0 + at
“No final velocity”
x  = x0 + v0t + ½at2
“No time”
v2  = v0
2 + 2a(x - x0)
Equations of motion
Simple Harmonic Motion
Force and spring constant
Fs  = -kxv
Elastic potential energy 
of a spring
Us  = ½kx2
Standard SHM equations 
take one of these forms for x, 
v and a (depending on ititial 
conditions)
x  =
x  =
x0sin(ωt)
x0cos(ωt)
Angular frequency for 
mass on a spring
ω  =
k
m
Angular frequency for 
simple pendulum
ω  =
g
l
Mechanics equation table
Power is the 
rate at which 
work is done. 
These are all scalar equations 
because when you multiply a 
vector by a vector parallel to 
it, the result is a scalar.
Work done on a system
W  = F||∆x
Gravitational potential 
energy
Ug  = mgh
Kinetic energy
K  = ½mv2
Average power
Pavg  = ∆W
∆t
Power used to do work on 
a system
P  = F||∆v
Work and energy
If the force varies with time, you need to use 
the area under the force-time graph on the 
left hand side of the equation.
This is a scalar equation. 
Even though Ffric and FN are 
perpendicular, the direction of Ffric 
depends on the direction an object 
is being moved in, not on FN.
τ is perpendicular to 
r and F⊥. Clockwise 
is positive, counter-
clockwise is negative.
Momentum
p  = mv
Newton’s 2nd Law - 
momentum version 
(Fnet∆t is also called impulse)
Fnet∆t  = ∆p
Newton’s 2nd Law - 
acceleration version
Fnet  = ma
Friction
Ffric  = μFN
Torque
τ  = rF⊥
Forces
Gravitation
Gravitational force 
between two spheres
FG  =
Gm1m2
r2
–
Gravitational potential 
between two spheres
UG  =
Gm1m2
r
–
Although this is a scalar equation, 
it is useful to put in the minus 
sign to remember that F and r 
are in opposite directions.
There’s a minus sign in 
this equation because 
UG is defined as zero 
when r is infinite.
Period and frequency
T  =
f
1
Angular frequency 
(aka angular speed or 
size of angular velocity)
ω  = 2πf
Linear and angular distance
x  = rθ
Linear and angular velocity
v  = rω
Centripetal acceleration 
(using angluar frequency)
ac  = rω2
Centripetal acceleration 
(using linear speed)
ac  = v2
r
Circular Motion
These equations also work 
for simple harmonic motion.
In simple harmonic motion, 
these give you the maximum 
values of x and v.
874    Appendix ii

you are here 4    875
equation table
Acceleration due to gravity 
near the Earth’s surface
g  = 9.8 m/s2
Gravitational constant
G  = 6.67 × 10-11 m3/kg.s2
Speed of light
c  = 3.00 × 108 m/s
Constants
Trigonometry
Pythagoras
hyp2  = opp2 + adj2
Sine
sin (θ)  = opp
hyp
Cosine
cos (θ)  =
adj
hyp
Tangent
tan (θ)  = opp
adj
hyp
opp
adj
θ
Geometry
Area of a rectangle
A  = base × height
Area of a triangle
A  = ½ × base × height
Circumference of a circle
C  = 2πr
Area of a circle
A  = πr2
Surface area of a sphere
S  = 4πr2
Volume of a sphere
V  = 4
3πr3
Volume of a prism (3D shape 
with same shape of base and 
top, and straight sides)
V  = area of base × height
Other useful values, such as the radius of the Earth and 
the mass of the Earth, are given in some equation tables 
but not others. The AP Physice B table omits them.
If you have a 3D shape, try “unrolling” or 
“unfolding” it flat to see which 2D shapes 
it’s constructed from.
The extended definitions of sine, cosine and 
tangent for angles greater than 90° aren’t given 
in the AP Physics B equation table.
Prefixes
Length
meter
m
Mass
kilogram
kg
Time
second
s
Frequency
Hertz
Hz
Force
Newton
N
Energy
Joule
J
Power
Watt
W
Units
These are all “base” SI units - you can rewrite the other units 
in this table in terms of them. For example, F = ma, so in base 
units, force has units of kg.m/s2
Also called gravitational 
field strength.
109
giga
G
10-3
milli
m
106
mega
M
10-6
micro
μ
103
kilo
k
10-9
nano
n
10-2
centi
c
10-12
pico
p
Distance
x, r, l
Displacement
x, r
Velocity
v
Acceleration
a
Time
t
Mass
m
Momentum
p
Force
F
Torque
τ
Work
W
Potential energy
U
Kinetic energy
K
Power
P
Period
T
Frequency
f
Angle
θ
Angular frequency
ω
Spring constant
k
Letters used in equations
Bold means a 
vector quantity.
Italic means a 
scalar quantity.
If an equation 
contains a 
variable that is 
usually a vector 
but is written in 
italics, then you 
just use the size 
of the variable in 
the equation.
r always 
means radius.
r always 
means radius.


this is the index    877
Index
Symbols
π  637–638
fractions of  648
A
acceleration  187, 210–211, 226, 841
centripetal  680–682
constant (see constant acceleration)
defined  191
due to gravity  231–232, 236, 286–287, 728–729
at the Earth’s surface  737
graphing  293–294
impulse  502
net force  447
opposite direction of  288–289
perpendicular  461, 698
support force  453
trajectories  369
units of  227–228
weight  447
(see also slope, velocity-time graph)
acceleration-time graphs  805–806
amplitude  786, 810, 857–858
defined  795
elastic potential energy  820
frequency of SHM  814
angles  168, 187
direction  169
measuring  170, 646
angular frequency  651–652, 661, 680
defined  661
equation  807
angular speed  657, 680
equation  807
angular velocity
centripetal acceleration  680
defined  713
answers and significant digits  50
approximations  10
area  72, 91
converting units of volume  84–87
defined  91
arrows  157
assumptions  10
average  104, 106, 110
graphs  116
of inaccurate results  113
speed  140
average velocity  213, 245–247
constant acceleration  252
equation  246
B
balance point of ruler  523–524
banked curve  711
bias  106
blueprints
conversion factor  33–35
units  22
bobsledding example  560–580, 694–714
banked curve  711
centripetal force  696
force acting towards center of circle  707
horizontal centripetal force  699
loop-the-loop  703–710
how fast  708–710
normal force  697
perpendicular acceleration  698

878    Index
the index
bobsledding example  (continued)
tension force  704
vertical circle  712
breaking down problems  170, 845
Break Neck Pizza example  96–148
Bullet Points
angular frequency  652, 658
angular speed  658
circumference  652
cosine  385
design an experiment question  201
displacement  163
distance  163
energy conservation  626
equipment  201
free body diagram  512
Hertz (Hz)  652
impulse  512
negative numbers  302
pendulum  833
Pythagoras’ Theorem  347, 385
radians  652
right-angled triangles  347
rotational equilibrium  534
scalars  163
similar triangles  385
simple harmonic motion  833
sine  385
sketching  302
springs  833
surface area or volume  725
tangent  385
torque  534
vectors  163
buzzwords  194–195
C
calculations  79–80
with large and small numbers  76
calculators
cosine  360
playing with  362
power button  61
scientific notation  63
sine  360
tangent  360
trigonometric inverse functions  360
understanding answers  62
cannonball example  391–436
calculating range  430–433
lab experiment  410–412
large objects and velocity  402
mass  400
inertia  404–407
maximum range  395–398
Newton’s 1st Law  403
Newton’s 3rd Law  423
recoil velocity  409, 424, 427
stone cannonball  400
stone versus iron cannonball  428
symmetry  398
(see also castle defense system example, cannon, firing)
castle defense system example  336–390
cannon, firing  348–390
firing angle  351
trajectories (see trajectories)
trigonometric functions  363
moat, building  339–346
scale drawing  342
centrifugal force  677
centripetal acceleration  680–682
centripetal force  674
bobsledding example  696
defined  713
disappearing  678
equating with gravitational force  754–758
free body diagram  693
horizontal  699
what affects size of  679
cheese globe example  716–725

you are here 4    879
the index
circular motion  632–662, 664–714
angular frequency  651–652, 680
angular speed  680
centripetal acceleration  680–682
centripetal force  674, 692
disappearing  678
free body diagram  693
velocity vector  684
what affects size of  679
circumference  634–636
contact force  668–673
degrees and radians  653
force acting towards center of circle  707
free body diagram  667–668
freefall  665–666
gravitational attraction  665
Hertz (Hz)  641–642
linear distance, converting to revolutions  639–640
linear speed, converting to angular frequency   
654–658
normal force  697, 704
perimeter of a circle  634
perpendicular acceleration  698
radians  646–648
radius  633–634
revolutions  633–634
fraction of  649
tension force  704
units  644–648
circumference  634–636, 661
defined  661
π  637–638
coefficient of friction  488
colliding objects
elastic collisions  587–597
inelastic collision  588, 596–597
momentum conservation  476–477
communicating principles  128
component  388
component vectors  480–483
constant acceleration  728
average velocity  252
defined  235
equations  286, 318
constant velocity  236, 245, 403
slope of velocity-time graph  226
contact force  454–456, 668
conversion factor  29–31
changing units  34
fraction  30
updating blueprint  33–35
cosine  354
graphs  796
new definition  779–781, 784
oscillations  810
relationship with sine  785
SOH CAH TOA mnemonic  357
cubic meters  71
curved line, point on  218
D
decimal places, versus significant digits  40–41
definitions (see glossary)
degrees  168
radians and  653
working with  648
designing experiments  194–199
devices, understanding how they work  441
digits, significant (see significant digits)
dimensions  84–87
Dingo and Emu example
ACME cage launcher  284–334
acceleration-time graph  293
displacement-time graph  295–296
launch velocity  321–324
ACME rocket-powered hovercraft  305–320
cage
calculating displacement  253–254
velocity-time graph  249

880    Index
the index
crane  204–236, 238–282
start and end points  241
direction  169, 190, 211
vectors  288–289
displacement  210–211
average velocity  245–247
calculating  253–254
defined  191
from equilibrium  801
horizontal  374
pendulum  831
proportional to force  853
using force to displace object  538–541
velocity  174, 212
versus distance  155–156, 188
Displacement, Velocity, and Acceleration Up Close  211
displacement-time graph  248–249, 297, 790–792
slope  222–224, 295
working out displacement  234
working out velocity  217, 231
displacement vector  157, 769–774
right-angled triangles  774–778
x-component  783–784
distance  101, 108, 155, 156, 163, 190
defined  147
scalar  157
speed  174
total  140
versus displacement  155–156, 188
versus time  122
distance-time graph  120–124
slope  124
equals zero  138
duck-shooting competition example  762–796
displacement vector  769–774
right-angled triangles  774–778
x-component  783–784
two players  782
velocity from each player’s view  789–793
E
Earth
being at center  12
calculating force on spaceship at any distance from  
741
gravity  231–232, 235
mass  737
radius  737
treating as shell  845–850
treating as sphere  845
efficiency  553
elastic collisions  587–589, 592–594, 596–597
defined  600
elastic potential energy  575, 816
springs  820
electromagnet  198
energy
defined  556
internal (see internal energy)
energy conservation  559–602, 620–626
calculating velocity  569
complicated problems  579
defined  556
elastic potential energy  575
escape velocity  747–750
gravitational potential energy  575
height difference  545, 564
internal energy  574, 576, 596
kinetic energy (see kinetic energy)
law of nature  583
macroscopic scale  575
mechanical energy  575
versus kinetic energy  576
microscopic scale  575
momentum conservation  587–594
elastic collisions  592–594
momentum versus kinetic energy  580–581
potential energy  567–570
height difference  568
springs  816

you are here 4    881
the index
stopping an object  571–574
distance required  582
torque and work  544–551
uniform slope  560, 563, 566
versus forces  570
work against friction  574
energy transfer  542–543, 573, 585
temperature difference  552
equations
angular frequency and angular speed  807
checking  300
constant acceleration  286, 318
defined  147
equal sign  100
factoring  590–591
frequency and period  807
general  307
graphs (see graphs)
grouping terms  315
kinetic energy  580
letters with subscripts  98
momentum-impulse  580
momentum conservation  421
parentheses  311–314
predictions  128
rearranging  126, 148
representing the real world  240
simplest form  310
size of frictional force experienced by object  488
slope  122
solving for two unknowns  587
speed  111, 122
symmetry  327–329
testing  251–252
time = something  126–127
variables  99
vectorizing  211
verifying that equations are correct  264–273
equations of motion  237–282, 283–334
acceleration-time graph  293
average velocity  245–247
constant acceleration  252
constant acceleration  252, 318
constant velocity  245
defined  333
displacement - time graph  248–249, 295
final velocity  243
general equations  259
grouping terms  315
GUT, checking equations  273
initial velocity  243
launching object straight up  297
parentheses  311–314
substitutions  256–263, 308
symmetry  327–329
testing equations  251–252
velocity  244
acceleration in opposite directions  288–289
velocity - time graph  241–242, 248–250
verifying that equations are correct  264–273
Equations Up Close
equal sign  100
term  100
equilibrium  530
errors  43, 54, 148
rounding converted  44
zeros  52
escape velocity  726, 747–750
estimating scientific notation  70
experiments  108, 148
changing variables  414
designing  105, 194–199
setup  411
extrapolating  115, 118
graphs  220–221
extremes  101, 102
F
factoring equations  590–591
falling  235
falling object  236

882    Index
the index
Fireside Chats
degrees and radians  653
energy and work go head to head  554–555
graph versus equation  144–145
normal number versus scientific notation  88–89
Five Minute Mystery
Honest Harry has a problem  277
Solved  278
Problems with a punchbag  627
Solved  628
The giant who came for breakfast  90
Solved  93
football (see SimFootball example)
force  841
centrifugal  677
centripetal (see centripetal force)
coefficient of  497
components that add to zero  848–849
contact (see contact force)
defined  435
frictional  487–490
gravitational  455, 845
exerted by a sphere  850
impulse  502
net (see net force)
normal (see normal force)
pairs (see Newton’s 3rd Law pairs of forces)
perpendicular  458–460, 527
proportional to displacement  853
related to mass and velocity  411–417
relationship between force and mass  443–444
restoring  844
static equilibrium  528
stopping an object  571–574
support  449–450
using to displace object  538–541
vector angles  462
vectors  467
versus energy conservation  570
versus torque  526
working out problems  512
force-displacement graph  816, 818
potential energy  743
fractions  30–31
free body diagram  451, 454, 456, 466, 512, 667–668
centripetal force  693
defined  468
SimFootball example  491
freefall  665–666
free body diagram  667–668
frequency  661
angular  651–652
converting to linear speed  654–658
defined  661
Hertz (Hz)  641
period  807
simple harmonic motion  814
versus period  642
friction  403
coefficient of  488
defined  513
energy conservation  574
internal energy  551
kinetic  487
normal force  488
calculating  489
SimFootball example  484–492
static  487
torque and work  549–551
frictional force  487–490
calculating  497
dependencies  490
Friction Exposed  498
fulcrum, positioning  521–522
full revolution  168
G
Galileo’s Law of Inertia  403
general equations  259

you are here 4    883
the index
general physics principles  142
geostationary orbit  751
glossary
acceleration  191
amplitude  795
angular frequency  661
angular velocity  713
area  91
centripetal force  713
circumference  661
component  388
constant acceleration  235
displacement  191
distance  147
elastic collision  600
energy  556
energy conservation  556
equation  147
equations of motion  333
falling  235
force  435
free body diagram  468
frequency  661
friction  513
graph  147
gravitational field  759
impulse  513
inelastic collision  600
internal energy  600
inverse square law  759
kinetic energy  600
mass  435
mechanical energy  600
momentum conservation  435
Newton’s Laws  435
normal force  468
pendulum  837
period  661
potential energy  556
power  600
pulley  629
Pythagoras  388
radians  661
radius  661
scalar  191
scientific notation  91
simple harmonic motion  837
slope  147
speed  147
spring  837
substitution  280
symmetry  333
tension  629
time  147
torque  556
trigonometry  388
units  53
vector  191
velocity  191
volume  91
weight  468
work  556
gradient  120
graph-drawing tips  116
graphing results  114
graphs
acceleration-time  805–806
acceleration versus time  293–294
amplitude  786
average speed  140
calculating slope  121
checking equations  300
cosine  796
defined  147
displacement-time (see displacement-time graph)
distance  120
distance-time (see distance-time graph)
distance versus time  122
equations  114–115
estimates  118–119
extrapolating  220–221
force-displacement graph  743, 816, 818
line on  117–119

884    Index
the index
graphs (continued)
outlying points  119
plotting distance versus time  137–140
reducing random errors  116
representing the real world  240
sine  796
slopes (see slopes)
‘something’-time  225
straight line  122
velocity-time (see velocity-time graph)
velocity versus time  293–294
Graph Up Close
average  115
extrapolating  115
interpolating  115
straight line  115
gravitational attraction  8, 665
gravitational constant  736
gravitational field  442, 443
defined  759
lines  731
moon’s  506
strength  447, 731–732
gravitational force  447–448, 455, 729, 732, 845
between two masses  737
equating centripetal force with gravitational force  
754–758
exerted by a sphere  850
gravitational potential energy  542–543, 565, 575
gravitation and orbits  715–760
acceleration due to gravity  728–729
amplitude of orbit  858
calculating force on spaceship at any distance from 
Earth  741
constant acceleration  728
equating centripetal force with gravitational force  
754–758
escape velocity  726, 747–750
force-displacement graph  743
geostationary orbit  751
gravitational field lines  731
gravitational force between two masses  737
inverse square law  735, 739–741
light intensity  730–731
mass of the Earth  737
maximum gravitational potential energy  745
period of orbit  857–859
potential energy  744
radius of the Earth  737
spheres  719
radius  724
radius versus surface area  722
volume versus surface area  722
surface area of a sphere  720
U = 0 at infinity  745
gravity  7–12
acceleration due to  231–232, 236, 286–287, 728–729
cannon, firing  367
torque and work  549–551
trajectories  370–371
GUT, checking equations  273
H
heating  552
heavy objects, lifting (see torque and work)
height difference  545, 546, 564
potential energy  568
Hooke’s Law  801, 838
hypotenuse  775
I
impulse  500–505
acceleration  502
defined  513
force  502
momentum  502
index  61
minus sign  69
powers of 10, separating  81
scientific notation  70

you are here 4    885
the index
inelastic collision  588, 596–597
defined  600
inertia  404
mass  404–407
instantaneous velocity  213, 233
slope  213
internal energy  574, 576, 596
defined  600
friction  551
temperature  550
interpolating  115
inverse square law  735, 739–741, 844
defined  759
J
Joules  541
K
Kentucky Hamster Derby example  632–662
kicking football  473–474, 500–505
kinetic energy  565–585
defined  600
equation  580
velocity  567, 570
versus mechanical energy  576
versus momentum  580–581
kinetic friction  487
L
launching object straight up  297
length  25, 26, 82
letters with subscripts  98
lever  519–520
lifting heavy objects (see torque and work)
light
intensity  730–731
speed of  765
linear distance, converting to revolutions  639–640
linear speed
converting into Hertz  641–642
converting to angular frequency  654–658
line on graphs  117–119
M
macroscopic scale  575–576
mass  25, 26, 400, 442–443
calculating with momentum conservation  429
defined  435
Earth  737
gravitational force between two masses  737
inertia  404–407
large objects and velocity  402
on a spring  805–806
equation  809
total energy  819
proportional to volume  852
related to force and velocity  411–417
relationship between force and mass  443–444
maximum gravitational potential energy  745
measurements
discarding  110
inconsistent  110
that don’t fit  110
mechanical energy  575
defined  600
versus kinetic energy  576
memorizing versus understanding  142
meters per second  175
microscopic scale  575–576
momentum  444–445
change in  422
change of  420
impulse  502
total  418, 421
versus kinetic energy  580–581
momentum-impulse equation  580

886    Index
the index
momentum conservation  391–436, 512, 587–594
as equation  421
colliding objects  476–477
defined  435
elastic collisions  592–594, 596–597
inelastic collisions  596–597
lab experiment  410–412
mass  429
inertia  404–407
maximum range  395–398
Newton’s 1st Law  403
Newton’s 3rd Law  422
recoil velocity  409
SimFootball example  475–476
symmetry  398
velocity  429
moon’s gravitational field  506
multiple measurements  104–106
myPod example  18–54
converting units  34
significant digits  45–46
N
negative index  69
net force  447, 465, 845, 849–850
acceleration  447
calculating  844
Newton’s 1st Law  403
Newton’s Second Law  445
perpendicular force equal to zero  489
Newton’s 1st Law  403, 484, 520, 670, 678
Newton’s 2nd Law  444–447, 469
centripetal force  679
Newton’s 3rd Law pairs of forces  453, 469
SimFootball example  476–477
Newton’s Laws  512, 841
defined  435
No Dumb Questions
acceleration  182
due to gravity  232
acceleration-time graph  227, 297
adding two vectors  418
air resistance  859
angle  169
angular frequency and linear speed  656
average  119
bobsledding example  702, 708
calculator  81, 362
cannon vehicle  417
centripetal acceleration  
centripetal force  675, 678
free body diagram  693
checking equations  267
coefficient of force  497
colliding objects  477
component vectors  483
constant velocity  403
contact force  456, 668, 670
conversion factor  31
displacement  156, 159, 182
displacement-time graph  217, 297
distance  119, 156
Earth’s mass  738
elastic collisions  593
energy conservation  546, 578, 593
equating centripetal force with gravitational force  757
equations  99
equilibrium  530
error  43
final velocity  243
force versus torque  526
free body diagram  456
freefall  668
frequency versus period  642
friction  486
frictional force  497
full rotation  169
Galileo’s Law of Inertia  403
graph  119
gravitational field  732
gravitational field line  732
gravitational force  732
exerted by a sphere  850

you are here 4    887
the index
gravity  12
height difference  546
impulse  505
inertia  404
initial velocity  243
internal energy  576, 598
inverse square law  735
kinetic energy  566
letters in the equation  99
lever  520
mass  417
of a spring  820
mechanical energy
versus kinetic energy  576
memorizing equations  319, 329
momentum conservation  424, 477, 483, 593, 598
momentum versus kinetic energy  582
net force  403
Newton’s 1st law  403, 520, 670, 678
Newton’s 2nd Law  447
Newton’s 3rd Law  456, 477
normal force  460, 497
obviousness of problem  5
outlying points  119
period of orbit  859
period of SHM  859
potential energy  566
precision  113
prefixes  74
Pythagoras’ Theorem  344
radians  648
random errors  113
right-angled triangles  346
rotational equilibrium  530
scalar  169
scales  453
scientific notation  66, 74, 81
seesaw  520
showing work  303
significant digits  51
similar triangles  432
simple harmonic motion  807
sine  781
sine wave  781
SI units  26
abbreviations  27
prefix  27
slope of the graph  125
springs  802
static equilibrium  530
substitutions  257–258
support force  453, 460
symmetry  399
tangent  219
tension force  610
torque  526
trigonometric functions  359
undulating slope  566
uniform slope  566
units and equations  267
vectors  159, 169, 178
adding  163
in opposite directions  290
velocity  178, 182
versus displacement  217
velocity-time graph  297
volume versus surface area  722
non-contact forces  455
normal force  458–461, 704
bobsledding example  697
calculating  489
defined  468
friction  488
perpendicular components  489
normal number versus scientific notation  88–89
O
orbits (see gravitation and orbits)
oscillations  762–796
amplitude  786, 810
angular frequency and angular speed  807
cosine  810
displacement-time graph  790–792

888    Index
the index
oscillations  (continued)
displacement vector  769–774
right-angled triangles  774–778
x-component  783–784
force - displacement graph  818
frequency and period  807
frequency of SHM  814
Hooke’s Law  801
mass on a spring  819
pendulum (see pendulum)
radians  771
right-angled triangle
inside circle  775
simple harmonic motion  806
sine and cosine  779–781, 785
sine wave  781
sinusoids  805
springs (see springs)
velocity-time graph  790–792
velocity vector  793
P
pairs of forces (see Newton’s 3rd Law)
parallel component  563
parallel force component  461–467
patterns  109
pendulum  827–834
defined  837
displacement  831
frequency dependencies  831
simple harmonic motion  830
perimeter of a circle  634
period  661
defined  661
of an orbit  857–859
of a wheel  641
of SHM  853
versus frequency  642
perpendicular
acceleration  461, 698
component of a force  527
components  462
force  458–460
force component  461–467
physicist, thinking like  1–16, 839–862
approximations  10
assumptions  10
being part of the problem  2–5
intuition  6
special points  6–12
what happens next?  11
physics terminology (see glossary)
Physics Toolbox
Acceleration due to gravity  236
A fundamental equation of motion  281
Angular frequency and angular speed  662
Another fundamental equation of motion  281
Be Part of It  16
Be visual!  16
Break down the problem into parts  630
Calculating friction  514
Calculations using scientific notation  92
Calculations with gravitational potential  760
Calculations with orbits  760
Calculators  389
Can you use energy conservation  630
Centrifugal force  714
Centripetal force  714
Choosing component directions  469
Circular motion and SHM  838
Comparing equations  838
Component vectors  389
Constant acceleration  236
Constant velocity  236, 514
Converting units of area and volume  92
Cosine graph  796
Difference in height  601
Direction of velocity and acceleration vectors  192
Dividing powers of 10 by each other  92
Do an experiment  148
Does it SUCK?  54
Doing work  557

you are here 4    889
the index
Draw a graph  148
Elastic collision  601
Equation of a graph  281
Equation of a sine or cosine graph  796
Equations of motion  334
Experiment -> graph -> equation  236
Falling object  236
First what, then how  192
Free body diagram  469
Freefall  714
Frequency and period  662
Geostationary orbit  760
Gravitational field  760
Gravitational field lines  760
Gravitational potential  760
GUT check  281
Hooke’s Law  838
How many objects?  514
Inelastic collision  601
Inverse square law  760
Is direction important?  192
Lifting an object  557
Linear and angular  662
Mass on a spring  838
Math with vectors  192
Measuring angles  192
Momentum conservation  436
Momentum vs kinetic energy  601
Multiplying powers of 10 by each other  92
Net force  469
New definitions for sine and cosine  796
Newton’s 1st Law  436
Newton’s 2nd Law  469
Newton’s 3rd Law  436
Newton’s 3rd Law pairs of forces  469
Object on a slope  469
Parentheses  334
Power notation  92
Proportion  436
Pythagoras’ Theorem  389
Radians  662
Rates and slopes  148
Rearrange your equation  148
Right-angled triangle facts  389
Rope and pulley  630
Scientific notation  92
SHM graphs  838
Simple harmonic motion  838
Simple pendulum  838
Sine, cosine and tangent  389
Sine graph  796
Slope of a graph  236
Solving centripetal force problems  714
Solving problems that involve a slope  714
Special points  16, 334
Spot the difference  557, 630
Spot the triangle  389
Start with a sketch  192
Stopping an object  601
Substitution  281
Symmetry  334
The normal force  514
The slope of a graph  148
Think about errors  148
Vary one thing at a time  436
Vectors: positive direction  334
Volumes and areas  714
What’s it LIKE?  16
What’s pushing me?  714
Which equation of motion should I use  334
Working out an equation or graph  796
Working with forces and equations of motion  514
Work out an equation  148
You already know more than you think you do  16
Zero net torque  557
ω is your FRIEND!  838
Plant Rocker example  798–838
connecting spring constant with the frequency of 
oscillations  803–804
displacement from equilibrium  801
frequency change  822
mass on a spring  805–806
pendulum  831–833
vertical spring  824–826

890    Index
the index
point on a curved line  218–219
Pool Puzzle
Powers of 10  77
Solution  78
Radians  649–650
Solution  650
potential energy  566, 567–570
changes  744
defined  556
elastic  575
force-displacement graph  743
gravitational  542–543, 565, 575
height difference  568
maximum gravitational  745
Potential Energy Exposed  746
power
button, calculator  61
defined  600
Joules  541
notation  61, 92
powers of 10  64, 78, 92
calculations  81
precision  113
predictions  128–129
proportion  430–433, 434
protractor  168, 170, 348
pulleys (see ropes and pulleys)
Pythagoras’ Theorem  343–344, 347, 388
Q
qualitative  121
quantitative  121
Question Clinic
Angular quantities  660
Ballistic pendulum  599
Banked curve  711
Centripetal force  692
Converting units of area or volume  87
Design an experiment  194–199
Did you do what they asked you  146
Energy transfer  585
Equation you’ve never seen before  855
Free body diagram  466
Friction  499
Gravitational force = centripetal force  758
How does this depend on that  836
Missing steps  387
Projectile  376–377
Proportion  434
Show that  584
Sketch a graph or Match a graph  331
Substitution  275
Symmetry and Special points  332
Thing on a slope  467
This equation is like that  813
Two equations, two unknowns  533
Units or Dimensional analysis  276
Vertical circle  712
Vertical spring  835
Wheat from the chaff  166
R
radians  646–648, 661, 771
angles in  648
defined  661
per second  651
units  659
working with  648
radius  633–634, 661, 724
centripetal acceleration  680
defined  661
Earth  737
right-angled triangle  775
versus surface area  722
random errors  106, 108, 113
reducing  113
graphs  116
range, calculating  430–433
maximum  395–398

you are here 4    891
the index
Ready Bake Equation
mass on a spring  809
pendulum  830
surface area of a sphere  720
volume of a sphere  851–852
Ready Bake Facts
gravitational force between two masses  737
mass of the Earth  737
radius of the Earth  737
speed of light  765
recoil velocity  409, 424, 427
relative velocity, reversing  593
restoring force  844
results
graphing  114
precise without being accurate  113
revolutions  633–634
converting from linear distance  639–640
fraction of  649
right-angle  168
right-angled triangles  340, 346
adding interior angles  350
displacement vector  774–778
inside circle  775
solving problems  364
ropes and pulleys  604–630
direction of rope movement  611
energy conservation  620–626, 626
pulley, defined  629
slope and friction  619–623
rotational equilibrium  528, 530, 534
rotations  168
rounding answers  39
scientific notation  65
significant digits and  42
rounding converted errors  44
S
scalars  157, 163
defined  191
speed  174
scale drawing  342
scales  453
compressing spring  440
producing measurement  439–442
stretching spring  440
support force  450
scatter  110
scientific notation  79–80, 91
and small numbers  68–70
calculations  81, 92
with large and small numbers  76
cubic meters  71
defined  91
estimating  70
index  70
large numbers  63–66
powers of 10  64
rounding answers  65
significant digits  63
square meters  71
versus normal number  88–89
seesaw  520
shell, treating earth as  845–850
significant digits  36–41, 50–51, 54
right number of  51
rounding  39
rounding answers and  42
scientific notation  63
versus decimal places  40–41
SimFootball example  472–514
calculating normal force  489
coefficient of force  497
component vectors  480–483
free body diagram  491
friction  484–492

892    Index
the index
SimFootball example  (continued)
impulse  500–505
kicking football  473–474, 500–505
kinetic friction  487
momentum conservation  475–476
Newton’s 1st Law  484
Newton’s 3rd Law pair of forces  476–477
passing  473–474
players slipping  509–511
playing on moon  506–510
static friction  487
tackling  473–474, 481–482
tire drag  473–474, 493–497
triangle with no right angles  479
similar triangles  432, 462, 536
angles  352–355
classifying  353–355
ratios  354
trigonomic functions (see sine; cosine; tangent)
simple harmonic motion  806, 807, 842–845, 853–860
defined  837
frequency of SHM  814
pendulum  830
SimPool example  586–599
sine  354
graphs  796
new definition  779–781
relationship with cosine  785
SOH CAH TOA mnemonic  357
Sine Exposed  358, 787
sine wave  781
sinusoids  805–806, 809
SI prefixes  74
SI units  25, 26
skateboarding example  604–630
sketching out problems
castle defense system example  345–346
graphs (see graphs)
scale drawings  342
slope  120, 122
‘something’-time graph  225
calculating  121
defined  147
displacement-time graph  222–224, 295, 790–792
equations  122
graph  236
instantaneous velocity  213
negative  292
object moving down  563
positive  292
straight line  218
straight line graph  122
tangent  218
undulating  563, 566
uniform  560, 563, 566
velocity-time graph  226, 231, 291–294
zero  138
slope-calculating tips  122
Slope Up Close  292
small numbers and scientific notation  68–70
smooth line  217
SOH CAH TOA mnemonic  357
‘something’-time graph  225
space station example  664–693, 726–760
calculating force on spaceship at any distance from 
Earth  741
centripetal force  674
disappearing  678
what affects size of  679
constant acceleration  728
contact force  668–673
escape velocity  726, 747–750
floor space  684–689
freefall  665–666
geostationary orbit  751
gravitational attraction  665
gravitational field lines  731
gravitational field strength  731–732
gravitational force  729
inverse square law  735

you are here 4    893
the index
light intensity  730–731
rotating space station  678
special points  841
speed  101, 111, 190
angular (see angular speed)
average  140
defined  147
equations  122
of light  765
speedometer  179
spheres  719
radius  724
versus surface area  722
surface area  720
treating Earth as  845
volume  851–852
versus surface area  722
spread  106, 110, 112, 113
springs  799–826
connecting spring constant with the frequency of 
oscillations  803–804
defined  837
displacement from equilibrium  801
elastic potential energy  816, 820
energy conservation  816
force - displacement graph  818
mass on a spring  805–806
equation  809
total energy  819
stretching or compressing  800
vertical  824–826
square meters  71
static equilibrium  528, 530
static friction  487
steel ball-bearing  198
stopping an object  571–574
distance required  582
straight line  115
graph  122
slope of  218
substitutions  256–263, 308
defined  280
SUCK (mnemonic)  47, 53, 131–132
support force  449–453, 609
acceleration  453
scales  450
sword in the stone example  516–558
symmetry  398, 841, 848
defined  333
systematic errors  106, 113
T
tables  73, 109
headings  109
tangent  218–219, 354
SOH CAH TOA mnemonic  357
velocity vector  684
tape measure  198
temperature
difference  552
internal energy  550
tension, defined  629
tension force  608–615, 704
terminology (see glossary)
testing equations  251–252
time  25, 26, 101, 108
defined  147
displacement - time graph  248–249
total  140
velocity - time graph  241–242, 248–250
versus distance  122
tire drag  473–474, 493–497
torque and work  515–558
direction of torque vector  529
efficiency  553
energy conservation  544–551
height difference  545

894    Index
the index
torque and work  (continued)
energy transfer  542–543 
temperature difference  552
force to displace object  538–541
force versus torque  526
friction  549–551
fulcrum, positioning  521–522
gravitational potential energy  542–543
gravity  549–551
internal energy
friction  551
temperature  550
Joules  541
lever  519–520
perpendicular component of a force  527
power output  541
rotational equilibrium  528, 530, 534
seesaw  520
similar triangles  536
static equilibrium  528, 530
torque, defined  556
work, defined  556
zero net torque  525, 528, 530
total momentum  418, 421
trajectories  367–390
velocity
horizontal components  371–379
vertical components  371–379
velocity and acceleration vectors  369
treasure hunt example  150–192
triangles
adding interior angles  349–350
classifying  353–355
equal angles  352
hypotenuse  775
multiples ways of solving problems  379–381
Pythagoras’ Theorem  343–344
ratios  354
right-angled  340, 346–347
adding interior angles  350
displacement vector  774–778
inside circle  775
solving problems  364
similar (see similar triangles)
standard  386
trigonometric functions (see sine; cosine; tangent)
velocity vector  793
with no right angles  479
Triangle Tip, sketch extreme angles  562, 624
trigonometric functions (see sine; cosine; tangent)
trigonometry, defined  388
Try it!
finding balance point of ruler  523–524
horizontal and vertical circles  703–704
throw ball straight up in the air  371–372
U
U = 0 at infinity  745
uncertainty  43
undulating slope  563, 566
uniform slope  560, 563, 566
units  22, 53, 54, 109, 111, 198
acceleration  227–228
changing during problem  34
checking equations using  265–273
circular motion  644–648
conversion factors  29
converting  130–131
defined  53
radians  659
shorthand  175
(see also SI units)
V
variables  99
experimental setup  411
vectorizing equation  211
vectors  157, 163, 187
adding  159, 162–163, 418
adding arrows nose-to-tail  157–158

you are here 4    895
the index
defined  191
direction  288–289
displacement  769–774
right-angled triangles  774–778
x-component  783–784
velocity  174
versus scalars  188
velocity  174–179, 187, 210–211, 227–228, 841
acceleration  180–182
angular velocity (see angular velocity)
average (see average velocity)
calculating using energy conservation and height dif-
ference  569
calculating with momentum conservation  429
centripetal force  684
constant (see constant velocity)
defined  191
duck-shooting competition example  789–793
equation  244, 246
freefall  666
graphing  293–294
instantaneous  213, 233
kinetic energy  567, 570
large objects  402
launch  321–324
launching object straight up  297
opposite direction of  288–289
recoil  409
related to force and mass  411–417
relative, reversing  593
trajectories  369
horizontal components  371–379
vertical components  371–379
vector  684
versus displacement  212, 217
velocity-time graph  230–231, 241–242, 248–250, 297, 
790–792
slope  226, 231, 291–294
volume  71, 72, 82
defined  91
proportional to mass  852
sphere  851–852
W
weight  438, 442–443, 455
acceleration  447
defined  468
gravitational field  442
mass  442
vector components  462
zero perpendicular acceleration  461
WeightBotchers example  438–470
weightlessness  668
work (see torque and work)
Z
zero net force  528
zero net torque  525, 528, 530
zero perpendicular acceleration  461
Zeros Exposed  52
zero slope  138

